==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Energy assXrance in SoZer systems 
Zith stochastic and energyconstrained 
resoXrces
$Xthor
Thomas $nthony 0ortimer
DTU Wind-M-0742
January 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0742
January 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Lesia Marie-Jeanne M Mitridati
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Robert Mieth
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
$Xthor:
Thomas Anthony Mortimer 
Title:
Energy assurance in power 
systems with stochastic and 
energy-constrained resources 
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
Robert Mieth
Rutgers University
==PAGE:3==
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained re-
sources
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Thomas Anthony Mortimer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, DTU Wind & Energy Systems, Frederiksborgvej 399, 4000
Roskilde Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Energy Markets and An-
alytics, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of operations research
and power systems.
Thomas Anthony Mortimer - s212493
6LJQDWXUH
'DWH
ii
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The increasing share of variable renewable energy in power systems is complicating the
security of supply due to their weather-based generational dependencies. This master
thesis investigates the sequential decision-making problem of operating energy storages
in a stochastic and energy-constrained environment. A parameter-modified cost function
approximation policy is investigated to certify resource adequacy by optimally operating
battery storage and fuel-based storage. With uncertainty from weather-dependent re-
newable energy sources, an energy storage problem with a rolling forecast is formulated.
To capture the updating of a rolling forecast for wind power and increase the reliabil-
ity of planning decisions a parameter is tuned to internalize the mitigation of worst-case
events and their magnitude by including the risk measures Conditional Value at Risk and
Buffered Probability of Exceedance. Using simulation, the parameters of the policy are
tuned with the Stochastic Averaging Numerical Gradient method, which is a simulation-
based stochastic approximation algorithm based on numerical derivatives. The results
show that a parametrization of the wind power forecast can increase cost-effectiveness,
reduce worst-case cost outcomes, and increase the probability of sustaining energy short-
fall events. The results generally suggest underestimating a given wind forecast and in-
creasing energy storage levels for both electricity and fuel helps mitigate the probability
of load-shedding events and reduce expected cost.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
BPoE
Buffered Probability of Exceedance
CVaR
Conditional Value at Risk
EC
Expected Cost
EENS
Expected Energy Not Served
ENS
Energy Not Served
ENTSO-E
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity
EUE
Expected Unserved Energy
LOLD
Loss of Load Days
LOLEV
Loss of Load Events
LOLE
Loss of Load Expectation
LOLH
Loss of Load Hours
LOLP
Loss of Load Probability
NEENS
Normalized Expected Energy Not Served
NERC
North American Electric Reliability Corporation
PoE
Probability of Exceedance
PRM
Planning reserve margin
PV
Photovoltaic
RA
Resource Adequacy
VaR
Value at Risk
Sequential decision-making terminology
Π
Set of admissible policies
π
Policy index carrying information about what type of policy is taken
θ
Tunable parameter influencing the policy function
Ct(St, xt)
Value of cost function given decision xt made in state St
SM(St, xt, Wt+1)
Transition function describing how every element of the state variable
changes given decision xt and exogenous information Wt+1
St
State variable capturing the knowledge at time t
Wt+1
Exogenous information, which is the knowledge gained after taking
decision xt
Xπ(St)
Policy that is a function or rules determining what decision xt is taken
iv
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:7==
Sets
T
Set of time periods, indexed by t
T g
t
Set of time periods indicating if fuel can be acquired at time t
Ω
Set of sample scenarios, indexed by ω
Ωin
Set of in-sample/training scenarios, indexed by ω
Ωout
Set of out-of-sample/test scenarios, indexed by ω
Decision variables
xgd
t
The amount of electricity generated from the fuel-based power plant to
satisfy the load at time t
xgr
t
The amount of electricity generated from the fuel-based power plant
that is stored in the energy storage at time t
xg
t
The fuel amount purchased at time t
xrd
t
The allocated energy from the storage used to satisfy load at time t
xwd
t
The energy from wind used to satisfy load at time t
xwr
t
The allocated energy from wind transferred to storage at time t
xwx
t
The energy from wind that is spilt at time t
Parameters
βc
Charging efficiency of the battery affecting the energy flowing into the
battery
βd
Discharging efficiency of the battery affecting the energy flowing out of
the battery
βg
Efficiency of gas power plants affecting the energy flowing out of the
gas storage
γc
Maximum amount of energy that can be charged into the battery in a
time step
γd
Maximum amount of energy that can be discharged out of the battery
in a time step
γg
Maximum amount of energy that can be discharged from the gas stor-
age in a time step
CP
Penalty cost for not satisfying load or spilling wind power
Dt
The load at time t
Et
The level of energy from wind at time t
fE
t,t′
The forecast of energy from wind at time t′ > t made at time t, where
the current energy Et = fE
t,t′
P g
t
The cost of fuel at time t
RE
t
The level of energy in storage at time t satisfying RE
t ∈[0, RE−max],
where RE−max > 0 represents the storage capacity
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
v
==PAGE:8==
RG
t
The level of energy in fuel-storage at time t satisfying RG
t ∈[0, RG−max],
where RG−max > 0 represents the storage capacity
H
Length of look-ahead decision horizon
Stochastic Averaging Numerical Gradient method parameters
δ
Parameter setting the error between the original objective function and
its smooth approximation
ηk
Smoothing parameter in iteration k
ιk
Learning rate in iteration k
φk
Smoothing parameter in iteration k
ψk
Smoothing parameter in iteration k
υ
Random Gaussian vector in iteration k
a
SANG input parameter
b
SANG input parameter
d
Dimension of parameter θ
Gk
Gradient of iteration k
mk
Mini batch size in iteration k
N
Stochastic averaging numerical gradient method iteration limit
y
SANG input parameter
vi
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Contributions and Impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Resource Adequacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Risk Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Rolling forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Energy Storage Model
13
2.1
Model Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Policy Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Parametrization - Stochastic Search Algorithm
21
3.1
Algorithm: Stochastic Averaging Numerical Gradient Method
. . . . . . . . 22
4
Case Study
25
4.1
Case Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Expected Cost - Parametrization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Expected Cost Risk adjusted - Parametrization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4
Buffered Probability of Exceedance - Parametrization
. . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5
Conclusion
45
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A Appendix
51
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Countries and regions around the world are developing and deploying renewable en-
ergy technologies, like photovoltaic (PV), onshore and offshore wind turbines and battery
storage technologies in greater numbers every year [1]. This is leading to energy sys-
tems becoming less dependent on fuel-based power plants and more on variable renew-
able energy. The increasing share of variable renewable energy generation complicates
ensuring the security of electric power supply. The traditional metric for certifying re-
source adequacy ’installed generation capacity’ used for energy systems dominated by
fuel-based power plants is less meaningful for variable renewable energy sources, which
are weather-dependent generation resources [2, 3]. At the same time, energy storage
solutions can help balance available generation and electric load in the short-term and
long-term [4,5]. This leads to future power systems being governed by multi-stage time-
coupled processes, whose complexities obstruct a straightforward assessment of whether
the available portfolio of resources can reliably supply the required energy for a given fu-
ture time horizon. Historic resource adequacy assessments provide an inadequate picture
of energy systems with a large share of variable renewable energy and energy storage
solutions due to neglecting the fluctuations and impact of insufficient weather-dependent
resources [3,5,6]. This study addresses this shortcoming by proposing a new approach
to assure resource adequacy using recent advancements from dynamic programming
that suggest linear policy approximations as a tractable means to describe such sequen-
tial time-coupled processes. The inclusion of risk measures in the development of linear
policy approximations can create easily handled policies that increase the reliability of
planning decisions dependent on them.
1.1
Contributions and Impact
The goal of this thesis is to assess the suitability of a parameter-modified cost policy ap-
proximation to certify energy sufficiency in renewable-dominant power systems with en-
ergy storage and a rolling forecast. Ghadimi and Powell [7] present a parameter-modified
cost function approximation for the sequential decision-making problem of an energy stor-
age model with a rolling forecast. This novel method of solving a complex stochastic
model tunes a robust charging policy in a stochastic simulator giving a parameter-modified
deterministic look-ahead model to make energy storage decisions. This reduces the de-
cision complexity caused by the uncertainty of the changes in the rolling forecast and the
time-coupled nature of the multi-stage decision-making problem. It also allows the cre-
ation of an approximate stochastic policy and gives the ability to consider a rolling power
forecast in the system model without suffering from the curse of dimensionality [8]. The
power forecast is assumed known under perfect foresight in many energy storage models,
distorting the true complexity of energy storage decisions [9,10]. It also gives the ability to
postpone or alter a decision when possible given an update in the information. In [7] the
parameter modification effectively reduces the expected cost of the operator compared to
a deterministic look-ahead model. Yet, an energy system operator certifying energy suffi-
ciency with weather-dependent and energy-limited resources is interested in reducing the
risk of load-shedding events. This includes both the likelihood of events and their magni-
tude. The contribution of this thesis is the inclusion of risk measures Conditional Value at
Risk and Buffered Probability of Exceedance in the tuning of a parameter-modified cost
function approximation to certify resource adequacy. This can be of interest to energy
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
1
==PAGE:12==
system operators certifying resource adequacy and policymakers designing resource ad-
equacy frameworks for weather-dependent and energy-limited power systems.
1.2
Report Structure
The report is structured into five chapter. Chapter 1 introduces the topic, general defini-
tions, and the literature review. In section 1.3 the term resource adequacy is explained
and commonly used resource adequacy metrics are discussed and clarified. The im-
portant factors to consider when conducting resource adequacy assessments are stated.
Section 1.4 introduces the risk measures, that are essential to the main contribution of this
thesis: Value at Risk, Conditional Value at Risk, Probability of Exceedance, and Buffered
Probability of Exceedance. Section 1.5 presents the rolling forecast model and argues the
choice of using it and Section 1.6 presents the literature review. In Chapter 2 a generalized
energy storage model with renewable energy production, an electric battery storage and
a fuel-based power plant with storage is presented. Section 2.2 presents the parameter-
modified cost function approximation, parametrization choices, and the model‘s objective,
which is a modification of the model’s objective as in [7]. For the parameter-modified cost
function approximation under certain parametrization choices, an algorithm is required to
solve the considered model under non-convex and non-smooth conditions. The search
algorithm is explained in Chapter 3. The application of a method in a case study is pre-
sented with the numerical results and discussed in Chapter 4. The data and various
assumptions are introduced and the approach is assessed based on is economic cost for
a system operator and its ability to improve resource adequacy. The introduced method
and the findings are concluded in Chapter 5.
1.3
Resource Adequacy
Resource adequacy (RA) is a term and measure used in power system reliability assess-
ments that quantifies the ability of the power system to match the supply of energy and
load. A power system with resource adequacy has sufficient resources to ensure that the
power system can maintain operation with a low risk of load-shedding events caused by
unavailable resources or transmission constraints [6]. In other words, the power system
can reliably operate and satisfy the load at any given instance under various conditions.
This work will focus on the risk of load-shedding events caused by unavailable resources
while leaving transmission and distribution constraints for future analysis.
1.3.1
Traditional Resource Adequacy Assessment
Traditionally, the ”installed generation capacity” was the measure to fulfil resource ade-
quacy. A planning reserve margin (PRM) was set to fulfil the load reliably [11].
PRM = FirmCapacity −PeakDemand
PeakDemand
(1.1)
PRM is defined as the percentage of projected capacity resources called firm capacity
above the projected peak demand (1.1). Firm capacity is the total sum of each genera-
tor’s installed capacity multiplied by coefficients to weigh their unequal availability. These
weights are known as the effective load-carrying capabilities or capacity credits of in-
stalled generation capacity [12]. PRM is used in capacity expansion problems as a lower
bound to ensure sufficient capacity in future scenarios. The North American Electric Re-
liability Corporation (NERC) recommends PRM to be in the range of 13%-17% [13]. The
issue with PRM is that it focuses on the peak demand under the assumption that resource
adequacy is only in danger during peak demand periods. This fails to account for the se-
quential operations characteristics of resources like battery storage systems and variable
2
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:13==
renewable energy [14]. There have been several studies showing that the effective load-
carrying capability of variable renewable energy sources and storage systems can differ if
investigated individually, together or depending on their operational strategy [4,12,15,16].
1.3.2
Modern Resource Adequacy Assessment
Modern methods to assess resource adequacy are models using Monte Carlo-style prob-
abilistic assessments. The assessment can vary in their granularity of detail and informa-
tion over several dimensions [3,10]. The dimensions are:
• Objective function of the model
• Reliability criteria
• Level of operational detail
• Length of the assessment period
• System structure and size
• Quality of input data
• Consideration of uncertainties
The objective function sets the aim of the problem, which is minimized or maximized. RA
assessments fundamentally set the objective function to minimize load-shedding events.
A step forward is also to consider the cost of resources, where the objective is to mini-
mize the cost of resources that minimize load-shedding events. Taking cost into account
ensures that no unnecessary capacity resources are installed.
Reliability criteria are measures that have been defined by regional entities and system
operators. The definitions given by the North American Electric Reliability Corporation
(NERC) and the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity
(ENTSO-E) are considered [17–20]. Reliability criteria are used to quantify resource ad-
equacy by duration, magnitude, and frequency:
• Expected Unserved Energy (EUE) in [MWh] per NERC’s definition or per ENTSO-E’s
definition and used in this report as Expected Energy Not Served (EENS) is a mea-
sure of the resource availability to continuously serve all loads at all delivery points
while satisfying all planning criteria [18] [20]. The EENS is energy-centric and an-
alyzes all hours of a particular year. Energy not served (ENS) [MWh] is the total
number of megawatt hours of load that is not served. The EENS is the summation
of the expected number of megawatt hours of load that will not be served in a given
year as a result of load exceeding the available capacity across all hours. Normal-
ized Expected Energy Not Served (NEENS) is EENS divided by the total system
load to create a normalized metric.
• Loss of Load Probability (LOLP) in [%] is defined as the probability of a system’s
daily peak or hourly demand exceeding the available generational capacity during
a given period [17].
• Loss of Load Events (LOLEV) is defined as the number of events in which some
system load is not served in a given year. LOLEV counts the number of individual
events without considering the magnitude and length of these events [17].
• Loss of Load Expectation (LOLE) in [days] is the expected number of days per
year for which the available generational capacity is insufficient to serve the daily
peak demand [17]. This is the original metric that is calculated using only the peak
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
3
==PAGE:14==
load of the day. ENTSO-E calculates LOLE as the expected number of hours in
which resources are insufficient to meet the load in the corresponding hour, which is
then also referred to as Loss of Load Hours (LOLH) in [hours] [20]. The ENTSO-E
definition of LOLE is used in this study.
NERC’s definition of LOLP and LOLE has received criticism because they assume the
highest risk period occurs only during peak load and that there are no sequential operat-
ing characteristics of resources that can limit availability [2–4]. These two assumptions do
not hold when considering a significant share of variable renewable energy, energy-limited
and hybrid resources, and the increase of demand-side flexibility. Variable renewable en-
ergies are uncertain in their production which influences their contribution to satisfying the
load reliably and with consistency. Energy-limited resources and demand-side flexibility
can shift supply from excess periods to periods in need, therefore spreading the risk of
unserved load [10].
The level of operational detail and system complexity in resource adequacy assessments
is a key contributor to the quality, but also complexity, of the assessment [3,21]. A thermal
power plant can be modelled on various levels of detail, e.g. including power output,
maintenance-induced outages, ramping constraints, fuel limitations, minimum generation
requirements, or forced outages. The studies [3, 21] have found that a higher level of
operational detail shows a decline in resource adequacy performance.
Different considerations need to be taken into account based on the size and length of
the system assessed, which can influence the computational complexity of the model.
The length of the assessment period can also differ depending on the context and meth-
ods used for the resource adequacy assessment. Long-term resource adequacy studies
consider a year with hourly resolution and opt-out of considering multiple years because
of increased computational complexities [22–24].
If only specific cases like extreme-
weather events are assessed or operational strategies or methodologies are compared
then shorter periods of weeks or months are assessed with a more granular resolution of
down to minutes [4,5].
The quality of input data can influence the results of a resource adequacy assessment.
Sampling or averaging historical solar and wind data can distort resource adequacy as-
sessments [25]. If more years of concurrent renewable energy data and load are available,
then it is possible to use a single year to approximate system characteristics depending
on the year chosen. The most representative year can distort the results compared to
sampling the year with the largest and most frequent resource shortfalls [25].
Another key consideration is the handling of uncertainty in information. Weather-dependent
resources are uncertain in their supply and vary daily and seasonally. Load can fluctuate
and fuel-based power plants can unexpectedly fail and require repairs. If any uncertain-
ties are assumed to be deterministic or if an average scenario is calculated from a set
of forecasts, then the correlation between the uncertainties could be lost for example the
correlation of high load periods and power plant failures and worst-case outcomes might
be lost through averaging [3,10,25].
1.3.3
Industry Standards
An industry standard for the resource adequacy assessment in Europe is set by ENTSO-E
and is regulated by European law [19]. It assesses the overall adequacy of the electric-
ity system to supply current and projected demand for electricity at the European Union
level, each member state level, and the level of individual bidding zones. Every year it
is updated for ten years into the future. It uses a market model using a flow-based ap-
4
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:15==
proach, where power plants are dispatched based on their marginal production cost. The
model assumes perfect foresight, therefore ancillary services are irrelevant and the model
considers an energy-only market. The time granularity is hourly. It projects demand using
deterministic forecast scenarios including uncertainties in temperature and deterministic
forecast scenarios for generation with planned outages of power plants and uncertainties
in wind, solar, and hydro generation. The uncertainties from the weather on the demand
side and on the supply side from renewable energy sources are represented in a set of
climate years. Forced outages for generational units are generated for each climate year.
Monte-Carlo simulations are run across the climate years and each forced outage sce-
nario for the climate years. Resource adequacy measures EENS and LOLE are assessed
with set national LOLE targets between 3h per year (Belgium, France, Great Britain, Italy,
Poland), 4h per year (the Netherlands, and Germany) 8h per year (Ireland, Portugal) [13].
In North America, the NERC summarizes the long-term reliability assessments of inde-
pendent regional entities that are each obligated to evaluate the resource adequacy ability
of their responsible area over a 10-year period. The 6 regional entities do not have a na-
tional standard set on how resource adequacy is investigated and planned, so it can differ
between regions. Reliability standards exist, which are chosen by authorities on local and
regional levels. Some are based on LOLP, but most are based on limiting shortfall events
to no more than one day every 10 years based on LOLE, which is 2.4h per year [10].
Taking the shift towards energy-limited and renewable resources in the power system
into account, resource adequacy assessments need to consider the complete opera-
tional horizon, as well as the various sources of uncertainty and in particular worst-case
load-shedding events [2, 10, 25]. A key stand that industry standards take are sole tar-
gets based on LOLE and EENS, which are expected value measures that fail to consider
worst-case scenarios. The risk measures described in the following section help to con-
sider worst-case outcomes, which can be effectively implemented in resource adequacy
assessments.
1.4
Risk Measures
The general risk measures introduced in this section can be effectively used to reduce the
worst-case outcomes of the resource adequacy reliability criteria. Throughout this section
E[·] is the expectation and P[·] is the probability measure of a random variable.
1.4.1
Conditional Value at Risk
The first risk measure is Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR). It is also referred to as su-
perquantile and denoted with ¯q [26, 27]. CVaR is a commonly used risk metric in power
system modelling, as it can be rewritten in a linear programming form [28–31]. CVaR is
related to Value at Risk (VaR) and CVaR requires the definition of VaR. As in (1.2), VaR is
given an input parameter α ∈[0, 1] and it finds the minimum value d that a random variable
X will not exceed with probability α. VaR is known as the quantile or more precisely also
referred to as the α-quantile of the distribution of X [32,33]. In Figure 1.1 VaR is shown
as qα(X) on the probability density function of a continuous random variable X.
V aRα(X) := qα(X) = min
!
d|P(X ≤d) ≥α
"
(1.2)
CVaR on the other hand calculates the expected value of random variable X past the given
probability threshold α [32]. Compared to VaR, CVaR takes all events and their magnitude
beyond threshold α into account. In Figure 1.1 CVaR is the expected value beyond the
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
5
==PAGE:16==
quantile qα(X), corresponding to the point ¯qα(X) = ζ. CVaR for a non-continuous case
is defined as
CV aRα(X) := ¯qα(X) = E
#
X|X > qα(X)
$
.
(1.3)
It can be reformulated into a function by adding an auxiliary variable z and [·]+ = max{·, 0}
as given in [26,32]
¯qα(X) = min
z∈R
!
z +
1
1 −αE[X −z]+"
.
(1.4)
ℙ[X]
"
q!(X) 
p"(X) = 1 - #
p"(X) = ℙ[X > "]
_
" = q!(X) = $[X | X > q!(X)]
_
Figure 1.1: A probability density of function of continuous random variable X. For a
threshold ζ ∈R, px(X) equals P(X > z), which is the cumulative density marked in blue
with white strips. For the same threshold ζ, ¯pζ(X) is the cumulative density in blue. The
expectation of the worst-case 1−α = ¯pζ(X) outcomes equals ζ = ¯qα(X). These worst-
case outcomes are those that are larger than the quantile qα(X) [26].
Furthermore, CVaR can be expressed as a minimization problem. Let Ωbe the set of
outcomes of a non-continuous random variable X with equiprobable outcomes Xω and
c(x, Xω) be the cost function dependent on X and a decision vector x ∈Rn. Decision vec-
tor x then tuned to minimize CVaR of events exceeding confidence level α as expressed
as [33]
min
x∈W
¯qα(X) =
min
x∈W,z∈R
!
z +
1
1 −αE
#
c(x, Xω) −z
$+"
.
(1.5)
This can be rewritten in linear programming form by adding the auxiliary variables yω
min
x∈W,z∈R,yω≥0
z +
1
1 −α
Ω
%
ω=1
1
Ωyω
(1.6)
s.t.
c(x, Xω) −z −yω ≤0
∀ω ∈Ω.
(1.7)
6
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:17==
With this, it is possible to find the minimal CVaR. In the context of a power system op-
erator that takes a risk-averse perspective, CVaR can be used to assess the worst-case
outcomes. In combination with the resource adequacy metric EENS the formulation of
CVaR can be utilized to reduce the worst instances of resource inadequacy. A downside
of CVaR for risk considerations is that a confidence level α needs to be set, which in
the case of resource adequacy can be the regulator LOLE or EENS targets. Still, these
might be arbitrarily set, insufficient or too small under the consideration of stochastic and
energy-limited resources. Secondly, once a confidence level is set it only considers the
1-α % worst-case outcomes. An alternative measure to CVaR is presented next.
1.4.2
Buffered Probability of Exceedance
The Probability of Exceedance (PoE) is the inverse of VaR. PoE returns the probability
mass of a random variable X exceeding the given threshold ζ ∈R, while the VaR returns
the threshold that equals the 1 −α quantile of X [34].
PoEζ := pζ(X) = P
#
X > ζ
$
(1.8)
PoE is also referred to as exceedance or reliability function [34]. Figure 1.1 shows pζ(X)
for a probability density function of a random variable X, as the area below the curve
beyond the given threshold ζ.
In relation to PoE is the Buffered Probability of Exceedance (BPoE), which was first intro-
duced as the buffered probability of failure by Rockafellar and Royset [27]. It was extended
by Mafusalov and Uryasev in [34] that BPoE equals one minus the inverse of CVaR, simi-
lar to the relationship of PoE to VaR. BPoE calculates the complement probability level at
which the CVaR is equal to the threshold ζ. For random variable X, BPoE given threshold
ζ ∈R is defined as:
BPoEζ(X) := ¯pζ(X) =





0
for
ζ ≥supX;
1 −¯q−1
α (X)
for
E[X] < ζ < supX;
1
otherwise
(1.9)
Figure 1.1 shows ¯pζ(X) for a probability density function of a random variable X given the
threshold ζ, as the area below the curve beyond qα(X). Another interpretation of BPoE
is that it calculates the proportion of worst-case outcomes which average to ζ. As in [26]
BPoE can also be defined as a minimization problem with the added auxiliary variable γ:
¯pζ(X) = min
γ≥0
E
#
γ(X −ζ) + 1
$+
.
(1.10)
Instead of solving the optimization problem, [34] presents a direct calculation of BPoE in
the case of a discretely distributed random variable X since the optimal solution coincides
with an outcome of X. With X being a discretely distributed random variable with out-
comes Xω ∈Ω, and probabilities Pω, where Xω ≤Xω+1, ω = 1, .., |Ω|−1, and |Ω| is either
finite or |Ω| = ∞. For ¯qα(Xj) < ζ < ¯q(Xj+1), where j = 0, ..., |Ω|−1 and ζ on (−∞, supX)
¯pζ(X) = E[X −Xj+1]+
ζ −Xj+1
=
*Ω
ω=j+1 Pω[Xω −Xj+1]+
ζ −Xj+1
.
(1.11)
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
7
==PAGE:18==
Within the context of a power system operator, BPoE can be used to minimize the prob-
ability of load-shedding events, while also considering the magnitude of these events.
PoE would also be effective, since it could be added as a constraint, to limit the proba-
bility of load-shedding events given a threshold, but similar to the difference in VaR and
CVaR, PoE does not consider the magnitude of the events beyond the set threshold. In
addition, the threshold ζ can represent a safety budget for unserved energy and the cal-
culation would return the probability that the safety budget holds. This is a key benefit
since a technical limitation can be used as a threshold for BPoE, instead of an arbitrarily
set confidence level as for CVaR.
1.5
Rolling forecast
Another component of this work is the use of a rolling forecast for the underlying vari-
able renewable energy. In resource adequacy assessments and power system modelling
generally, it is common to assume the variable renewable energy output is fixed over the
considered horizon given the initial forecast, turning the system into a deterministic model
and neglecting any variance in the renewable energy output [9]. A standard way to include
a level of uncertainty in the variable renewable energy is to generate a set of scenarios
with probabilities and optimize for a policy across the uncertainty set, which is a solution
strategy of stochastic optimization [6]. This approach returns a policy that commonly gives
better results under uncertainty compared to assuming a deterministic forecast, but nei-
ther makes use of the ability to defer or change a decision with the knowledge of having
a more accurate forecast closer to the point of decision [35]. Using a rolling forecast for
the variable renewable energy enables the power system operator to readjust previously
made decisions when possible or postpone a decision with the knowledge that one has
a more accurate prediction with the next iteration of the forecast. However, considering
a rolling forecast and re-optimizing with each update of the forecast over a new set of
scenarios, leads to a computationally difficult stochastic dynamic program, which is the
reason most models neglect rolling forecasts under uncertainty.
The alternative is fixing the forecast at a time t over a specific horizon and re-optimizing
with each update of the forecast. The variable renewable energy production in this work
is updated in a rolling fashion. The forecast is generated in the following way, which is
known as the martingale model of forecast evolution [36,37] given an initial level fE
0,t′:
fE
t+1,t′ = fE
t,t′ + ϵt+1,t′
∀t = 0, ...T −1
(1.12)
The forecast of energy is calculated for each step t′ = t + 1, ..., min(t + H, T), by hav-
ing the initial energy level or the previous forecast for the energy level and the error
ϵt+1,t′ ∼N(0, σ2
ϵ ) into account. The deviation of the error term σϵ depends on the pa-
rameter ρE and the energy level σϵ = ρEfE
t,t′. The structure of the rolling forecast means
for any time step t the best prediction for the following time step t+1 is the energy level of
the previous step. The forecast is less accurate the further ahead into the time horizon a
forecast is made for. This is shown in Figure 1.2 across a time horizon, where the forecast
can deviate more the further ahead it tries to predict. Figure 1.2 also visualizes how the
rolling forecast is newly generated as soon as a new time step is reached and the real
power output is realized.
8
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:19==
0
5
10
15
20
0
50
100
150
200
Realized
Forecast
Rolling forecast
Time step
[MW]
Figure 1.2: A rolling forecast using equation (1.12) to forecast the load. The realized load
is in red, and in each time step a forecast is generated shown in blue.
1.6
Literature Review
Several studies have criticized traditional resource adequacy assessments and devel-
oped various frameworks to better assess RA with current energy systems that include
energy-limited and stochastic resources [2–4, 21, 25]. A portion of these resource ade-
quacy studies focuses on the impact of operational details in the model on the resource
adequacy assessment [3, 21, 25]. Reference [21] analyzes what operational details are
significant to incorporate in modern resource adequacy assessments to distinguish what
power system details can be safely neglected in resource adequacy assessments. A prob-
abilistic resource adequacy framework using a two-stage decision-making model with the
first stage being a merit order model and the second a real-time decision-making stage.
An economic dispatch formulation is used and several non-economic dispatch rules are
also investigated, e.g. minimizing loss of load events. Results highlight the importance of
using detailed chronological operations of thermal generators and storage units and as-
sessing resource adequacy over multiple years with seasonal variations. It also highlights
that event-specific load-shedding characteristics should be analyzed beyond standard
metrics like LOLE and EENS. Operational details and their impact on assessing resource
adequacy are compared in [3]. The results suggest that multi-stage probabilistic assess-
ments may provide a more robust evaluation of resource adequacy by capturing a wider
range of operational and system interactions. Single metrics like LOLE are not represen-
tative enough when assessing resource adequacy, instead, a range of metrics should be
assessed and taken into account. The quantity of look-ahead and accuracy of forecast
data can significantly impact resource adequacy. This work found that longer operational
horizons are not necessarily better, depending on the accuracy of forecasts for later in-
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
9
==PAGE:20==
tervals. Chronological operations and multi-year assessments are also confirmed in [25]
where the problem is discussed how sampling and averaging variable renewable energy
data can affect resource adequacy in capacity planning models. Investment decisions are
shown to differ depending on what historical year of data is used or how many years are
included in the analysis. Results suggest to use of concurrent time series data and that
using too few years of data distorts decisions. Aggregating years and using the long-term
averages show the most significant distortions in investment decisions. To correctly sam-
ple years of time series data, capacity factors of renewables should match their long-run
values, the number of critical hours in the sample should match the average number in a
larger sample, and appropriate renewable penetration levels need to be used.
Energy system studies [29–31,38] include risk-aware and robust decision-making steps,
which are commonly two-stage or multi-stage stochastic risk assessment models with the
initial stage being a unit commitment problem and the following stage a real-time eco-
nomic dispatch. In [30] a risk assessment of load-shedding events is assessed including
a constraint on the Conditional Value at Risk to minimize the worst-case outcome of the
cost incurred through energy shortfalls caused by uncertainties in the variable renewable
energy forecast. Implementing a CVaR constraint or optimizing CVaR is common prac-
tice in decision-making problems under uncertainty in the energy system modelling field,
for example, a demand side response auction in [31], a generation expansion problem
in [29], and a risk-averse market-clearing model in [38]. These models will capture the
error in the forecast, yet neglect the ability to update the forecast within the look-ahead
period. The review has also shown that the Buffered Probability of Exceedance has not
been implemented in any energy modelling context even though it has similar properties
to CVaR.
Besides the model-specific operational details, storage-specific charging and discharging
policies are also influential. As in [4,5,39] specifically the impact of the operational strat-
egy of energy storage on resource adequacy is considered. In [39] the storage dispatch
assumptions are a predetermined long-run dispatch schedule to adjust the net load pro-
file based on average stochastic outcomes, a load-shedding minimizing strategy and a
limited-horizon economic dispatch strategy. All are compared regarding the effect these
assumptions have on NEENS and storage capacity credits. The limited-look-ahead eco-
nomic dispatch strategy provides a more realistic model for diurnal storage, but they be-
come limiting for seasonal shifts since the storage is only optimized for the limited horizon.
The effect of storage operation on adequacy indicators and capacity credits is noted in [4].
The results show LOLE decreasing with increasing storage duration, suggesting that the
LOLE differences occur when storage is energy-limited. This difference increased with
storage penetration and shorter, larger scarcity events. Different methods to calculate
capacity credits resulted in differences of approximately 30% in the capacity credit as-
signed to storage suggesting that capacity credit calculations of storage systems need to
be clearly defined. In conclusion, charging policies have been investigated in their impact
on resource adequacy assessments, but tuning a parameter-modified look-ahead policy
to improve resource adequacy in an energy-limited and stochastic energy model has not
been conducted.
Lastly, utilizing a rolling forecast for the variable renewable energy is uncommon in re-
source adequacy assessments and energy storage models in general since it requires
the model to be re-optimized for each forecast update. Due to this complexity perfect
foresight is commonly assumed, which poorly reflects real-world conditions. Ghadimi and
Powell [7] present the idea of the pre-tuned parameter-modified look-ahead policy and
implement it for an energy storage problem with storage and rolling forecast. A parame-
10
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:21==
ter is tuned based on a simulator to internalize the uncertainties in the forecast thereby
reducing complexity during operation. This can be considered as a risk-neutral parame-
terization and worst-case outcomes are not assessed. In [40], a parametric cost function
approximation for an energy management problem is utilized, but the parameter is tuned
using an online optimization strategy instead of a simulator as in [7]. The approach of [15]
is to implement a transfer learning-based cost function approximation for a look-ahead
dispatch problem. It can effectively map states to actions by using a transfer function
trained on giving an approximation of the expected cost of future time periods based on
the underlying uncertainties of renewable energy sources. It reduces computational time
compared to stochastic optimization alternatives, yet it isn‘t straightforward to implement
and does not create a tractable policy. An alternative approach to handle the uncertainty
in a rolling forecast is presented in [41]. An approach is taken using an online dynamic
rolling horizon framework to schedule the charging and discharging of a battery system in
an energy management problem with a rolling forecast. They focus on the issue of assum-
ing equal spacing between time steps since for example PV uncertainties are not spread
equally throughout the day but are limited to daytime only. The algorithm improves perfor-
mance by adjusting its decision-making intervals once a determined uncertainty threshold
is surpassed.
The parameter-modified cost function approximation policy is continued in the following
chapter by the implementation of a risk-aware parametrization. This inclusion of a risk-
aware parameterization is a key contribution of this work building upon the foundation
of [7]. The next chapter will introduce a generalized energy storage model and will also
present how the rolling forecast is utilized in the parameter-modified look-ahead policy.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:23==
2
Energy Storage Model
This chapter describes the energy storage problem and will introduce the policy. The
term policy in dynamic programming means a rule or function Xπ(St) that determines a
decision given the available information in the current state St with π denoting the type of
function from the set of admissible policies Π [8]. This study takes the perspective of a
system operator that has stochastic and energy-constrained resources aiming to assure
cost-effective resource adequacy. A system operator has a given load that needs to be
fulfilled in each time step t over a horizon T. The main supply source of electricity is wind
power and it is uncertain and limited. The operator has an electric battery offering flexibility
to the operator by storing electricity when excess is available and supplying it again at a
later point in time. Lastly, the operator has another resource at its disposal, a fuel-based
generator with fuel storage. The required fuel can only be acquired at certain time steps
forcing the operator to plan ahead and purchase the estimated required amount. This can
for example represent a gas or hydrogen storage, where the fuel is shipped or transported
via trucks to the power plant given a schedule.
2.1
Model Introduction
Following [42] system model for a sequential decision-making problem the components
state variables, decision variables, exogenous information, transition function, and the
objective function are presented. Initially, the sets and parameters are listed.
Sets:
• T: Set of time periods indexed by t.
• T g: Set of time periods indexed by t indicating if gas can be acquired.
• Ω: Set of sample scenarios indexed by ω with Ωin representing the in-sample set
and Ωout the out-of-sample set.
Parameters:
• βc: Charging efficiency of the battery affecting the energy flowing into the battery.
• βd: Discharging efficiency of the battery affecting the energy flowing out of the bat-
tery.
• βg: Efficiency of fuel-based power plants affecting the energy flowing out of the fuel
storage.
• γc: Maximum amount of energy that can be charged into the battery in a time step.
• γd: Maximum amount of energy that can be discharged out of the battery in a time
step.
• γg: Maximum amount of energy that can be generated from the fuel-based generator
in a time step.
• CP : Penalty cost for not satisfying load and spilling wind power.
• H: Length of decision horizon
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
13
==PAGE:24==
State variables: The state variable contains all the information needed to solve for the
cost function, the constraints and the transition function. The initial state variable is given
by S0. The state variable St at time t includes the following:
• RE
t : The level of energy in storage satisfying RE
t ∈[0, RE−max], where RE−max > 0
represents the storage capacity.
• {fE
t,t′}t′≥t: The forecast of energy from wind at time t′ > t made at time t, where the
current energy Et = fE
t,t
• P g
t : The cost of fuel at time t.
• Dt: The load at time t.
• RG
t : The level of energy in fuel-storage satisfying RG
t ∈[0, RG−max], where RG−max > 0
represents the storage capacity.
Decision variables in each given time step t:
• xwd
t : The energy from wind used to satisfy the load.
• xwr
t : The allocated energy from wind transferred to storage.
• xwx
t : The energy from wind that is spilt.
• xrd
t : The allocated energy from the storage used to satisfy the load.
• xgd
t : The amount of electricity generated from the fuel-based power plant to satisfy
the load.
• xgr
t : The amount of electricity generated from the fuel-based power plant, that is
stored in the energy storage.
• xg
t : The fuel amount purchased.
The decision variables need to fulfil the following constraints in a time step t
xwd
t
+ βdxrd
t + xgd
t
≤Dt
(2.1)
xrd
t
≤RE
t
(2.2)
xgr
t + xgd
t
≤RG
t
(2.3)
xwr
t
+ xwd
t
+ xwx
t
≤Et
(2.4)
xg
t + RG
t ≤RG−max
(2.5)
xg
t ≤RG−maxT g
(2.6)
βc(xwr
t
+ xgr
t ) −xrd
t + RE
t ≤RE−max
(2.7)
xwr
t
+ xgr
t
≤γc
(2.8)
xrd
t
≤γd
(2.9)
xgr
t + xgd
t
≤γg
(2.10)
xt = (xwd
t , xrd
t , xgd
t , xwr
t , xgr
t , xg
t , xwx
t )⊤≥0.
(2.11)
The constraint (2.1) is the energy balance constraint. The sum of energy from wind,
the net energy from the battery and the energy from the fuel-based generator needs to be
smaller or equal to the load, which matches the goal of serving the load and any difference
is penalized. In (2.2) the energy flowing from the electric battery storage to cover the
load is limited by the current state of charge of the battery. The energy from the electric
14
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:25==
battery storage is also limited by the discharge capacity in (2.9). Constraint (2.3) limits
the energy produced from the fuel-based generator, which can fulfil the load or be stored
in the electric battery storage, by the current amount of fuel stored in the fuel storage.
Energy from the fuel-based generator is also limited by the output power capacity of the
generator in (2.10). Energy from wind limits the amount of energy flowing from the wind
resource to the electric battery storage, to fulfil the load and any wind energy that is spilt
in (2.4). The current level of fuel in the storage and the total storage capacity limits the
amount of fuel that can be acquired in (2.5). In (2.6) the acquired fuel is limited to the time
steps, when fuel acquisition is allowed by T g, which is represented as a binary vector,
being 1 when fuel can be acquired and 0 when not. Any energy that is used to charge the
electric battery storage is subject to the charging efficiency βc and limited by the difference
between the maximum storage capacity RE−max and the current state of charge RE
t while
considering any out-flowing energy to fulfil the load (2.7). Charging of the battery storage
is also limited by the charging capacity (2.8). (2.11) is the non-negativity constraint for all
decision variables. A visual representation of the energy storage model is in Figure 2.1
Wind Power
Et
Load
Dt
El. Storage
RE
t
Fuel Storage
RG
t
Conventional 
Power
xwd
t
xrd
t
xgd
t
xgr
t
xwr
t
xg
t
xwx
t
Figure 2.1: Energy storage model with components and decision variables.
Transition function: The transition function S(·) explains the connection of the state of
the model at time step t and t + 1. The state of the model at time step t, decisions made
at time step t and the exogenous information becoming available at time step t + 1 are
taken into account so that St+1 = SM(St, xt, Wt+1). In this model, the relationship from
one time step to the next is the state of charge of both the fuel storage and the electric
battery storage. The relationship between time steps is defined as the following:
RG
t −βg(xgd
t + xgr
t ) + xg
t = RG
t+1
(2.12)
RE
t −xrd
t + βc(xwr
t
+ xgr
t ) = RE
t+1
(2.13)
As per the rolling forecast, the wind forecast is updated in each time step as described
in 1.12, so it also describes the relationship of the model from one step to the next. The
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
15
==PAGE:26==
load and fuel prices are assumed to be known over the time horizon.
Exogenous information: Exogenous information is the information only known in time
step t. The wind forecast is updated in each time step and is only known then in step
t. The load and the prices to purchase gas are assumed to be known but can still be
included in the exogenous information for completeness Wt = (P g
t , Dt, f E
t,t′).
Objective function: The cost function is given as:
Ct(St(ω), xt) = CP (Dt + xwx
t
−xwd
t
−βdxrd
t −xgd
t ) + P g
t xg
t .
Cost CP are incurred when the energy balance between the load Dt and the supply
xwd
t ,xrd
t , and xgd
t
is not satisfied. Any wind energy spilt is also penalized. The energy
can be supplied directly from the wind power xwd
t , from the stored energy in the energy
storage xrd
t
including the discharging efficiency βd, or from the energy generated from
through the gas/hydrogen resource xgd
t . Cost also incur by acquiring additional fuel re-
sources at price P g
t multiplied by the amount xg
t .
The basic economic objective is to minimize the expected cost over the complete time
horizon T. This is considered a risk-neutral approach. The aim is to find a policy π with
the given initial state S0 that solves:
min
π∈Π
E
#
T
%
t
Ct(St, Xπ
t (St))|S0
$
(2.14)
2.2
Policy Design
This section explains the structure of the parameter-modified cost function approximation,
which is a combination of a direct look-ahead policy and a cost function approximation.
Following the definition in [43] to design a policy there are two overarching classes called
the ”policy search” class and the ”look-ahead” class.
The ”policy search” class searches over a set of functions, which make decisions, to find a
function that works best. This can mean that one needs to evaluate different parametriza-
tions or search for the best value for a set of parameters which characterize a parameter-
modified policy. In this class are policy function approximations and cost function ap-
proximations. Policy function approximations are analytical functions that directly map a
state to an action. This can be for example, buy-low sell-high policies, linear functions, or
neural networks. Cost function approximations are policies which solve a parametrized
optimization model. The objective function or the constraints of the mathematical model
can be parametrized.
”Look-ahead” policies make decisions now by explicitly optimizing over some horizon by
combining some approximation of future information, with some approximation of future
actions and the current cost or reward of the decision [8]. The first are value function ap-
proximations. These are the approach based on Bellman’s equation where one computes
or approximates the value of being in a downstream state produced by a decision now.
The second are direct look-ahead approximations based on direct look-aheads where one
optimizes over a decision horizon. The challenge with them is how to handle uncertainty
as one optimizes over the horizon [7].
16
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:27==
2.2.1
Parametric cost function approximation
The policy π chosen to solve the model presented in Section 2.1 is a combination of a
cost function approximation and a direct look-ahead policy. First, a look-ahead decision
horizon H ≤T is defined. Instead of minimizing the expected cost over the complete
horizon T, a decision horizon H limits how far into the future the expected cost are con-
sidered. The look-ahead horizon is assumed to be deterministic given the forecast for
the uncertainty wind supply by (1.12). A deterministic look-ahead policy aims to find a
decision now that minimizes cost at the current time step t and the expected cost for the
considered look-ahead portion H. Any decision variables with a tilde are variables within
the look-ahead portion and the policy can be defined as
XD−LA
t
(St) = arg min
xt,˜xt
Ct(St, xt) +
min(t+H,T )
%
t′=t+1
Ct′(St′, ˜xt,t′).
(2.15)
The variables in the look-ahead portion need to take the following constraints into account
∀t′ ∈{t + 1, ..., min(t + H, T)}:
˜xwd
t,t′ + βd˜xrd
t,t′ + ˜xgd
t,t′ ≤Dt′
(2.16)
˜xrd
t,t′ ≤RE
t′
(2.17)
˜xgr
t,t′ + ˜xgd
t,t′ ≤RG
t
(2.18)
˜xwr
t,t′ + ˜xwd
t,t′ + ˜xwx
t,t′ ≤bt′(fE
t,t′, θ)
(2.19)
˜xg
t,t′ + RG
t′ ≤RG−max
(2.20)
˜xg
t,t′ ≤RG−max ∗Tg
(2.21)
βc(˜xwr
t,t′ + ˜xgr
t,t′) −˜xrd
t,t′ + RE
t′ ≤RE−max
(2.22)
˜xwr
t,t′ + ˜xgr
t,t′ ≤γc
(2.23)
˜xrd
t,t′ ≤γd
(2.24)
˜xgr
t,t′ + ˜xgd
t,t′ ≤γg
(2.25)
RG
t′ −βg(˜xgd
t,t′ + ˜xgr
t,t′) + ˜xg
t,t′ = RG
t′+1
(2.26)
RE
t′ −˜xrd
t,t′ + βc(˜xwr
t,t′ + ˜xgr
t,t′) = RE
t′+1
(2.27)
˜xt = (˜xwd
t,t′, ˜xrd
t,t′, ˜xgd
t,t′, ˜xwr
t,t′, ˜xgr
t,t′, ˜xg
t,t′, ˜xwx
t,t′)⊤≥0
(2.28)
The constraints are the same in the period t and for all periods t′, except (2.19) differs
from (2.4). Additionally, the transition functions (2.12) and (2.13) need be to considered
as constraints (2.26) and (2.27), since they link the look-ahead time steps. The wind
production is uncertain and is observed as in (1.12), therefore constraint (2.19) is limiting
future decisions on the usage of wind power by the function bt′, which is a real value
function with θ being the set of constraint parameters and fE
t,t′ the wind power forecast.
This is the parameter-modified portion of the cost function approximation policy Xπ
t (St|θ)
defined as the decision variables that return a solution to model (2.16)-(2.17) in which the
wind power constraint is updated in (2.19).
Wind power is the main source of energy for the model presented in Section 2.1. It does
not carry any cost in this model compared to the fuel-based power plant which requires fuel
to be acquired before use. Due to the value wind power holds of satisfying the load without
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
17
==PAGE:28==
any cost and the underlying uncertainty in the wind forecast, the wind power availability
constraint is parameterized. This best reflects the study of assessing resource adequacy
under uncertain and energy-constrained resources with the assumption that the load and
fuel prices are more certain compared to weather-dependent wind power.
The investigated parametrization options in which way θ influences the wind power fore-
cast are:
• Constant: bt′(fE
t,t′, θ) = θfE
t,t′ All values of the wind forecast are multiplied by a
single parameter
• Look-up table: bt′(fE
t,t′, θ) = θt′−tfE
t,t′ where t′ ∈[t + 1, min(t + H, T)] and different
θτ for each lookahead period τ = 0, 1, 2, ... with τ = t′ −t. All values of the wind
forecast are multiplied with a step-specific parameter.
Parameterization options could also be exponential decay functions as in [7]. It is up to
the modeller to decide in what form they are included and which constraint or objective
function is parameterized. A constant parametrization is considered since it is a simple
method to influence a forecast with inherent uncertainty. To find an ideal parameter only a
single value needs to be adjusted. The parameter is independent of the length of the look-
ahead horizon and a solution for θ can be found with a grid search. A constant parameter
can also be easily replicated. The downside is that a single parameter will influence the
wind forecast value with the same weight no matter the distance of the forecast time step.
This is why a look-up table form is also assessed so that θ could be more risk-averse
for a forecast further away from the current point of decision. A downside of the look-up
table parametrization is that more values need to be tuned and it is not straightforward
how to tune all values of the parameter. The larger the look-ahead horizon is, the more
computationally difficult the tuning of θ gets.
Next, the ideal parameter θ needs to be optimized for a given policy π. The parameter
θ can be tuned with a specific objective in mind. For example, θ can be tuned to mini-
mize cost across training scenarios or to minimize the risk of unmet load across training
scenarios. Three different parametrization goals are defined to be tested in the numerical
experiments of the case study.
• Expected cost: The goal is to tune θ so that it minimizes the cost of the system
under the given policy π
min
θ
+
F π−EC(θ) := Eω
#
¯F π(θ, ω)
$
= E
#
T
%
t=0
Ct(St(ω), Xπ
t (St(ω)
,,θ))
,,,S0
$-
(2.29)
This is a risk-neutral approach to tuning θ. For a reference case, θ is set equal
to 1, which represents a decision-maker taking a rolling wind power forecast into
account without any parameter adjustment. The reference case aims to minimize
the expected cost as in (2.29) with a look-ahead policy and θ = 1.
• Risk adjusted expected cost: In this case, the aim is to tune θ to minimize the
expected cost of the system under the given policy π for the worst-case scenarios
18
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:29==
beyond the quantile α. This is equivalent to tuning θ to minimize the α-CVaR:
min
θ
+
F π−ECR(θ) : = ¯qα,ω
#
¯F π(θ, ω)
$
= E
#
F π(θ, ω)
,,,F π(θ, ω) > qα(F π(θ, ω))
$-
(2.30)
• Resource adequacy: The aim is to minimize the risk of load-shedding events and
the magnitude of load-shedding events, which is satisfied when minimizing the nor-
malized expected energy not served (2.31). NEENS and EENS are introduced in
1.3. The risk measure Buffered Probability of Exceedance is implemented as de-
scribed in Chapter 1.4.2. The look-ahead policy (2.15) is still used in a given sce-
nario ω as the objective function, but the parameter θ is minimizing the buffered
probability of exceedance of expected energy not served across scenarios:
Rt(St(ω), xt) = Dt −(xwd
t
+ βdxrd
t + xgd
t )
(2.31)
RAt(θ, ω) = E
#
T
%
t=0
Rt(St(ω), Xπ
t (St(ω)
,,ω))
,,,S0
$
(2.32)
The parameter θ is tuned to minimize the buffered probability of exceedance given
the threshold ζ.
min
θ
+
F π−RA(θ) : = ¯pζ,ω
#
RAπ(θ, ω)
$
= P
#
RAπ(θ, ω) > z
,,,E
.
RAπ(θ, ω)
,,RAπ(θ, ω) > z
/
= ζ
$-
(2.33)
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
19
==PAGE:30==
20
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:31==
3
Parametrization - Stochastic Search
Algorithm
The problems (2.29), (2.30) and (2.30) from Section 2.2.1 are based on a parameter-
modified cost function approximation policy and have a parameter θ that needs to be
tuned to fulfil its set aim. In this case, θ represents a parameter influencing the constraint
on the energy forecast of wind, which is uncertain in its evolution over time (1.12). Param-
eter θ is therefore set to interpret the wind forecast evolution to improve effectiveness in
solving the problem. Under the consideration of parameter θ being a constant parameter,
a grid search can be used to find a well-performing value of θ for the given policy π. The
alternative parametrization is the look-up table parametrization with θ as a vector of length
H equivalent to the look-ahead decision horizon. Each look-ahead decision period can
have a different value influencing the wind power forecast. This can be more effective
by valuing the uncertainty of a forecast closer to the point of decision differently than the
forecast uncertainty further away. The difficulty arises in tuning such a parameter θ, since
the objective functions F π−EC(θ) in (2.29), F π−ECR(θ) in (2.30) and F π−RA(θ) in (2.30)
are possibly non-convex and non-smooth in θ making the optimization problem hard to
solve. For the remaining part of this chapter, the additional notation on the superscript of
F π(θ) referring to a specific objective function is dropped for simplification. An alternative
is to use stochastic approximation algorithms, which require the computation of gradients
like stochastic gradient descent. If F π(θ) is not differentiable its subgradient could be
computed, but since F π(θ) is non-convex its subgradient may not exist. Therefore the
gradient needs to be estimated. The suggested method by [7] is to use noisy evaluations
of F π(θ) obtained by simulation, which is a simulation-based optimization technique as
in [44]. A smooth approximation of F π(θ) is assumed as:
F π
η (θ) =
1
(2π)
d
2
0
F(θ + ηυ)e−1
2 ||υ||2 dυ = E[F(θ + ηυ)]
(3.1)
with η > 0 a smoothing parameter and υ a random Gaussian vector with mean zero and
the identity matrix as covariance. Under the assumption that the objective function is
Lipschitz continuous with regards to θ for any scenario ω ∈Ωand constant L0 > 0 as
in [45] the smooth approximation F π
η (θ) is differentiable and the gradient is given by:
∇F π
η (θ) =
1
(2π)
d
2
0 F(θ + ηυ) −F(θ)
η
υe−1
2 ||v||2 dυ = Eυ[F(θ + ηυ) −F(θ)
η
υ].
(3.2)
With this approximation and method to compute gradient estimates the Stochastic Aver-
aging Numerical Gradient (SANG) is defined in [7] and can be used to tune a look-ahead
parameter θ. In each iteration k, the gradient estimate needs a random Gaussian vector
υk to compute noisy objective values at current θk and its perturbation θk+ηkυk. A detailed
description of the SANG algorithm is presented in the next section with all parameters.
The convergence of the algorithm to a stationary point of the problem at a finite-time rate
is shown in [7].
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
21
==PAGE:32==
3.1
Algorithm: Stochastic Averaging Numerical Gradient
Method
Algorithm 1 Algorithm: The Stochastic Averaging Numerical Gradient method (SANG)
1:
Input:
θ0
∈
Rd, ¯G0
=
0,
an iteration limit N,
positive sequences
{ηk}k≥1, {ψk}k≥1, {φk}k≥1
∈
(0, 1), and a probability mass function (PMF) PR(·)
supported on {1,...,N}.
2: Generate a random number R according to PR(·)
For k = 1, ...; R:
3: Update policy parameters as
θk
y = θk−1 −ιk ¯Gk−1,
(3.3)
θk = (1 −φk)θk−1 + φkθk
y
(3.4)
4: Generate a trajectory ωk where Sk
t+1(ωk)=SM(Sk
t (ωk), Xπ
t (Sk
t (ωk)|θk), Wt+1(ωk)),
using mini-batches of size mk, and a random Gaussian vector υk to compute the
gradient estimator as
Gηk(θk, ωk,i) = F(θk + ηkυk, ωk,i) −F(θk, ωk,i)
ηk
υk
(3.5)
and set
¯Gk = (1 −φk) ¯Gk−1 + φkGηk(θk, ωk)
(3.6)
End For
In the first step of the SANG algorithm, the input parameters are defined. The parame-
ter θ that is being tuned is a real value vector with dimension d, which equals the num-
ber of time steps in the look-ahead horizon H.
An initial θ0 is assumed.
The initial
Gradient ¯G0 is set to 0. The algorithm is given an iteration limit N and the sequences
{ηk}k≥1, {ψk}k≥1, {φk}k≥1 ∈(0, 1).
The smoothing parameter ηk is used in the calculation of the gradient estimator (3.5). The
parameter ηk gradually decreases with each iteration and y ∈(0, 1) is an adjustable input
parameter to smooth the performance of the algorithm.
ηk = 1
ky
(3.7)
The smoothing parameter ψk for the Root Mean Square Propagation (3.12) balances the
weight between previous gradient weights ¯gk and the latest.
ψk = 1
ky
(3.8)
The learning rate φk influences the updating of the policy parameter by balancing how
much θk is influenced by the previous θk−1 and perturbation θk−1
y
. The parameter δ is set to
1 and it is the error between the original objective function and its smooth approximations.
22
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:33==
A control parameter a set to 2 is used to adjust the size of α.
φk =
a
1
δ(d + 4) + N
(3.9)
In step 2 the random number R is drawn from probability mass function PR(·) to limit the
iterations. The probability mass function is defined as
PR(R = k) =
φkιk
*N
k=1 φkιk
.
(3.10)
Since PR(·) is based on ιk, which is gradient Gk dependent (3.12), it cannot be computed
before the iterations start, therefore the iteration limit N is used to limit the For-loop instead
of R. The For-loop runs until k equals N. In each iteration k the policy parameters are
updated as in (3.4) and (3.3). The learning rate ιk is calculated per iteration using the
Root Mean Square Propagation (RMSProp), which is an adaptive step-size policy used
in machine learning for stochastic optimization [46]. It is based on a running average of
the previously observed gradients to scale the current step size. The tunable parameter
b is set to 2, and Gk is the gradient estimate at iteration k
ιk =
b
√¯gk
(3.11)
gk = (1 −ψk)gk−1 + ψk||Gk||2
(3.12)
Next, the gradient estimate is calculated with (3.5) where υk is a random Gaussian vector
as an input for (3.6). Equation (3.5) can use mini-batches of scenario samples of size mk
to reduce the variance of gradient estimates and it is calculated as
Gηk(θk, ωk) =
1
mk
mk
%
i=1
Gηk(θk, ωk,i).
(3.13)
As presented in [7], the effectiveness of SANG varies based on the input parameters
a,b,y and mini-batch sizes mk. The parameters need to be adjusted based on the model
at hand. Chapter 4 will introduce the case study and numerical results to assess the
suitability of the parameter-modified cost policy approximation to certify energy sufficiency.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
23
==PAGE:34==
24
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:35==
4
Case Study
4.1
Case Description
This chapter focuses on the introduction of the case study to assess the aforementioned
robust policy to make energy storage decisions from the perspective of a system oper-
ator. The operator aims to certify resource adequacy in a stochastic and energy-limited
energy system using a parametric-modified cost function approximation. The assumed
energy system has wind power, electric battery storage, and an emergency fuel-based
power plant with limited fuel supply. The fuel can only be replenished at discrete time
steps. The fuel-based power plant can represent a natural gas-fired power plant or hy-
drogen fuel cell, with the fuel being shipped to the location. A gas-fired power plant is
considered with a gas storage facility limiting its total energy capacity. The model finds
the optimal parameter θ to interpret the wind forecast influencing the decisions of the bat-
tery and gas storage. The amount of gas purchased needs to cover the load that cannot
be satisfied by the wind power or from the stored energy in the electric battery throughout
the decision horizon. Any demand that cannot be met is penalized and any wind that is
spilt is penalized. Different parameterization options for the wind forecast are discussed
and analyzed on their suitability in certifying resource adequacy.
4.1.1
Operational Parameters
The parameters for the various components of the energy system are set in this section.
The modelling horizon T is 365. A time step therefore represents a single day and the
modelling horizon represents a complete year. Load data is retrieved from the ENTSO-E
transparency platform for Denmark’s bidding zone DK2 [47]. The peak load over the con-
sidered year DMax is 1913 MW, which is used to dimension the size of other components.
The interval when gas can be acquired is set to every 7 days, starting with day 1 followed
by day 8, day 15,... and so forth. Gas prices are determined on a monthly basis using his-
torical gas prices in Denmark available from [48]. Gas is assumed available in the same
time step it is acquired. The penalty cost CP of unserved load or wind power spilt is set
to 1000 €/MW so that it is always greater than the cost of gas serving the same amount
of load. Parameters surrounding the wind power plant, battery storage, gas storage and
gas power plant are summarized in Table 4.1.
Wind farm
Initial power output
E0
0.8 · DMax
MW
Battery storage
Storage capacity
RMax
4 · DMax
MW
Initial state of charge
R0
1
2 · RMax
MW
Charging efficiency
βc
98
%
Discharging efficiency
βd
98
%
Maximum charging capacity
γc
DMax
MW
Maximum discharging capacity
γd
DMax
MW
Gas storage
Storage capacity
GMax
6 · 1
βg · DMax
MW
Initial state of charge
G0
1
2 · GMax
MW
Gas power plant
Maximum discharging capacity
γg
DMax
MW
Power plant efficiency
βg
60
%
Table 4.1: Parameters for wind farm, battery storage, gas storage, and gas power plant
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
25
==PAGE:36==
The wind power forecast and realized outputs are generated with the martingale model
of forecast evolution (1.12). It only requires an initial input level for the wind power and
the uncertainty level ρE. The initial wind power is set relative to the load data with 80 %
of the largest load level DMax. Various uncertainty levels given by ρE are investigated.
The maximum storage capacity for the battery storage is also set relative 2 · DMax. The
charging and discharging efficiencies of the battery are based on current specifications
for industrial-sized battery storage systems [9,49]. The gas storage is set to 6· 1
βg ·DMax.
The efficiency of the gas turbine is assumed to be 60 % based on modern combined cycle
gas power plants [50]. The size of the gas storage gives the model the option to acquire
enough gas to be able to sustain six peak load days in cases without any wind energy
available. The output capacity of the gas power plant is the maximum load DMax, which
resembles a set of gas power plants. The gas turbine and storage parameters are set so
that the model does not shed load based on inadequate generational capacity but based
on inadequately acquired resources, which resembles the aim of the case study to certify
resource adequacy in an energy-limited and stochastic energy system. An initial state S0
is also required as input to the model. The initial state of charge of the battery storage R0
and gas storage G0 is equal to half of the total storage capacity. The spot price of gas P g
t
is described in Section 4.1.3 and the load Dt is described in Section 4.1.2. The forecast
of wind energy fE
t,t′ is given in the initial state.
4.1.2
Load
Hourly load data for Denmark´s bidding zone DK2 is used from the year 2019, which is
obtained from ENTSO-E Transparency platform [47]. The year 2019 is used since it is
the latest available complete year without any COVID-19 pandemic abnormalities. Fig-
ure 4.1 shows the daily average load. The maximum mean load in 2019 was 1913 MW
on January 24, 2019. The load shows clear seasonal differences between summer and
winter demands with the winter load being higher than the summer months. There are
differences between weekdays and weekends shown in Figure 4.2. Weekdays have a
lower mean load than weekends independent of the month.
26
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:37==
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
360
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2019 daily mean load in DK2
Day
Load in [MW]
Figure 4.1: Daily load in DK2 in 2019
2
4
6
8
10
12
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Weekday Mean
Weekend Mean
2019 monthly mean load in DK2
Month
Load in [MW]
Figure 4.2: Average load on a weekday and weekend in DK2 in each month of the year
2019
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
27
==PAGE:38==
4.1.3
Gas Price
The fuel-based power plant in the case study is assumed to be a gas-fired power plant.
The assumption is that fuel cannot be drawn from a gas grid at any given time. Instead,
the fuel can only be acquired at discrete time steps. The time between acquisition time
periods is equal to the decision look-ahead horizon H. The fuel is available in the same
time step when it is acquired. The amount of fuel that is required to cover the unserved
load needs to be estimated before the wind power production is realized. Following the
load from DK2 the monthly gas prices are from Denmark for the year 2019. The gas
prices are independent of the electric bidding zones of Denmark, so there is a single price
for all of Denmark. The historical data is obtained from Energienet, the gas and electric
transmission system operator for the whole of Denmark [48]. Figure 4.3 visualizes the
gas prices for each month of 2019. The gas price shows seasonal similarities to the load
with higher prices in the winter months compared to the summer months.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
5
10
15
20
25
2019 gas prices in DK2
Month
Price in [EUR/MWh]
Figure 4.3: Gas price in each month of the year 2019
28
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:39==
4.2
Expected Cost - Parametrization
The numerical results of the case study are presented and discussed in the following
sections. The model in Chapter 2 is solved with a parameter-modified cost function ap-
proximation policy solving problems (2.29),(2.30), and (2.33) by using a grid search to
find an effective constant parameter θ and Algorithm 1 to find a look-up table formulation
of parameter θ. The effectiveness of the different parametrization policies is presented
based on the cost benefits and resource adequacy metrics. All results are run on a 2020
Apple Macbook Air M1 chip with 8G RAM and solved using the Gurobi Optimizer Version
10.0.2.
To visualize the influence a parameter θ can have on the operations of the energy storage
model Figure 4.4 presents the various operations over a shortened time horizon. In this
exemplary scenario, a constant parameter θ = 0.2 influences the storage levels of the
battery and the gas storage and mitigates all unserved load instances. The parameter
θ < 1 influences the decision to underestimate the given wind forecast and keep storage
battery levels and gas storage levels high instead of relying on the given forecast to satisfy
the load. Over time the accumulated cost is lower with θ = 0.2.
1
8
15
22
29
36
43
0
1k
2k
1
8
15
22
29
36
43
0
500
1k
1.5k
1
8
15
22
29
36
43
0
2k
4k
1
8
15
22
29
36
43
0
5k
10k
1
8
15
22
29
36
43
0
400
800
1
8
15
22
29
36
43
0
10M
20M
Load
Wind power
Battery SoC - θ = 1
Battery SoC - θ = 0.2
Gas level - θ = 1
Gas level - θ = 0.2
Curtailed load - θ = 1
Curtailed Load- θ = 0.2
Acc. Cost - θ = 1
Acc. Cost - θ = 0.2
Load in [MW]
Wind Power in [MW]
Battery SoC in [MW]
Gas level in [MW]
Curtailed load in [MW]
Cost in [€]
Figure 4.4: Influence of changing θ = 1 to θ = 0.2 in an example scenario with ρE = 0.1
4.2.1
Constant Parameter
The policy π −EC in problem (2.29) tunes θ to minimize the expected cost. First, it
is investigated with a constant parametrization. A set Ωin of 1000 sample scenarios is
generated to train the parameterization. The objective values are calculated with various
θ values. An additional set Ωout of 1000 out-of-sample scenarios is used to assess the
results in an out-of-sample test.
Five levels of forecasts noise (ρE ∈{0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4}) are investigated. The parameter
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
29
==PAGE:40==
ρE influences the variance of the forecast evolution as described in Section 1.5. The con-
stant parameterization values θ ∈{0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0, 1.1} are each
used to solve (2.29). The results are shown in Figure 4.5. The normalized change is
calculated using the reference case with θ = 1. This represents a case, where the rolling
forecast values are taken at face value instead of being multiplied by a parameter. The
normalized objective values are averaged over the scenario set with
∆F π−EC(θ) =
Ω
%
i=1
1
|Ω|
F π−EC(θ, ωi) −F π−EC(θ = 1, ωi)
|F π−EC(θ = 1, ωi)|
.
(4.1)
A negative normalized change is desired, because the expected cost are minimized across
the considered scenarios. As seen in Figure 4.5 there is a benefit of adjusting θ < 1 for all
values of ρE except when ρE = 0. In the case of ρE = 0, the wind power stays constant
at the initial input level. The ideal value for θ differs for each value of ρE. Overall, this can
be interpreted that the operator benefits from taking a risk-averse approach since θ < 1
means that the wind power forecast should be underestimated rather than taken plain as
it is.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
pE
0
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.4
Performance of constant forecast parametrization
θ
Normalized Change in Expected Cost
Figure 4.5: Normalized changes in objective value for various uncertainty levels in the
rolling forecast using training sample set Ωin.
30
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:41==
Expected Cost [M€]
NEENS [%]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
1
128.4
200.9
221.1
231.5
2.52
3.49
4.05
4.45
0.2
121.6
193.2
215.3
226.1
0.42
0.95
1.18
1.25
LOLEV
LOLD [days]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
1
27.32
38.0
41.0
42.0
47.7
64.0
70.0
73.0
0.2
3.88
8.0
9.0
9.0
3.9
8.0
9.0
9.0
Table 4.2: Average measures and quantiles for training scenarios with ρE = 0.1
Expected Cost [M€]
NEENS [%]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
1
131.6
201.3
220.3
233.9
2.54
3.49
3.97
4.36
0.2
124.8
194.2
214.4
229.1
0.44
1.00
1.21
1.25
LOLEV
LOLD [days]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
1
27.45
38.0
41.0
43.0
47.8
65.0
70.0
76.0
0.2
4.02
8.0
9.0
9.0
4.04
9.0
9.0
9.0
Table 4.3: Average measures and quantiles for out-of-sample scenarios with ρE = 0.1
Table 4.2 shows the influence of parameter θ = 0.2 on expected cost, NEENS, LOLEV
and LOLD for the training set Ωin compared to the benchmark θ = 1. Table 4.3 shows the
changes in an out-of-sample set Ωout. Changing the θ by its best-normalized improve-
ment of the expected cost also reduces all resource adequacy measures. The results are
confirmed in the out-of-sample test.
Figure 4.6 shows NENS on the x-axis and cost per scenario on the y-axis with the colour
scale showing the LOLEV for θ = 1 and θ = 0.2 under uncertainty level ρE = 0.1 con-
sidering the out-of-sample set Ωout. By changing parameter θ, NENS decreases in all
scenarios and more scenarios have no unserved load events. The scenario with the
largest NENS values reduces in magnitude from 7.3% to under 1.8%. Instances with the
largest cost are still around 250 M€. Figure 4.6a with θ = 1 shows that the scenarios with
the largest cost also have shortfall events, yet there are scenarios with lower cost but up
to double the amount of energy not served. A risk-averse approach with θ = 0.2 towards
the wind forecast reduces the expected cost, LOLEV and NEENS. By finding the optimal
parameter θ via a simple grid search the quality of decisions can be significantly improved
at almost no additional cost due to the simplicity of implementation for the system opera-
tor. These results indicate the benefit of taking a risk-averse approach to interpreting the
uncertainty in the rolling forecast.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
31
==PAGE:42==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
0
10
20
30
40
50
LOLEV
Results of θ = 1
NENS in [%]
Cost in [€]
(a) θ = 1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
0
10
20
30
40
50
LOLEV
Results of θ = 0.2
NENS in [%]
Cost in [€]
(b) θ = 0.2
Figure 4.6: Comparison of expected cost, NEENS and LOLEV for θ = 1 and θ = 0.2
32
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:43==
4.2.2
Look-up Table
The alternative parametrization method assessed is the look-up table formulation de-
scribed in Section 2.2. A look-up table parameter has for each time step in the look-ahead
horizon a different value. If the look-ahead horizon H equals 7, then the parameter θ
is a vector with length 7 and each value can be different. With this parametrization θ
can be more risk-averse for a forecast value further away from the current time step or
more risk-accepting for a forecast value closer to the current time step. The look-up table
parametrization form is expected to perform better in reducing expected cost than the con-
stant parameter due to the ability to adapt the parameter more accurately to the evolution
of forecast uncertainty over the look-ahead horizon. Using the Algorithm 1 described in
Chapter 3 with an iteration limit N = 2000, mini-batches of size mk = 10, and ρE = 0.1
a look-up table parameter is tuned. Figure 4.7 shows the iterative improvements of the
parameter over all training samples in Ωin and not only over the mini-batches per itera-
tion as in the SANG algorithm. The initial parameter input is the best-performing constant
parameter with all positions equalling 0.2, which is the same as a constant parameter of
0.2.
Table 4.4 shows the results of the look-up table parameter θ-EC compared to the bench-
mark θ = 1 and the best-performing constant parameter θ = 0.2 considering in-sample set
Ωin and uncertainty level ρE = 0.1. A look-up table can return a better-expected cost im-
provement than a single parameter, but the cost in the 95%-quantile is lower for a constant
parameter. Resource adequacy measures NEENS, LOLEV, and LOLD are higher for the
look-up table parameter compared to the constant parameter results. The magnitude of
shortfall events given by NENS increases slightly and the number of shortfall events given
by LOLEV doubles on average. The findings are confirmed in the out-of-sample test in
Table 4.5
0
500
1000
1500
2000
120M
120.2M
120.4M
120.6M
120.8M
121M
121.2M
121.4M
121.6M
Performance of look-up-table parametrization
Iterations
Objective value in [€]
Figure 4.7: Objective value improvement for look-up table parameter θ considering the
training set Ωin using SANG algorithm. The best-performing look-up table parameter is
θ-EC= [2.976, 0.000, 0.717, 0.000, 0.082, 0.000, 1.305] rounded to 3 decimal spaces.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
33
==PAGE:44==
Expected Cost [M€]
NEENS [%]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
1
128.4
200.9
221.1
231.5
2.52
3.49
3.97
4.36
0.2
121.6
193.2
215.3
226.0
0.42
0.95
1.18
1.25
EC
119.9
192.0
215.3
226.2
0.49
0.97
1.27
1.40
LOLEV
LOLD [days]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
1
27.32
38.0
41.0
42.0
47.7
64.0
70.0
73.0
0.2
3.88
8.0
9.0
9.0
3.9
8.0
9.0
9.0
EC
8.36
16.0
19.0
21.0
9.84
19.0
23.0
26.0
Table 4.4: Average measures and quantiles for in-sample set Ωin with ρE = 0.1
Expected Cost [M€]
NEENS [%]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
1
131.6
201.3
220.3
233.9
2.54
3.49
3.97
4.36
0.2
124.8
194.2
214.4
229.1
0.44
1.00
1.21
1.25
EC
123.1
193.4
213.9
229.2
0.5
1.03
1.25
1.36
LOLEV
LOLD [days]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
1
27.45
38.0
41.0
42.0
47.8
64.0
70.0
73.0
0.2
4.02
8.0
9.0
9.0
4.04
9.0
9.0
9.0
EC
8.54
16.0
19.0
21.0
10.06
19.0
23.0
26.0
Table 4.5: Average measures and quantiles for out-of-sample set Ωout with ρE = 0.1
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Theta
1
EC
0.2
Comparison of θ = 1, θ = 0.2, and θ - EC
LOLEV in [#]
NENS in [%]
Figure 4.8: NENS and LOLEV across out of sample scenario set Ωout with ρE = 0.1
34
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.8 presents the NENS on the y-axis and the LOLEV on the x-axis for the out-of-
sample set Ωout for the benchmark θ = 1, the constant-value parameter θ = 0.2 and the
look-up table parametrization θ-EC. The look-up table policy and θ = 0.2 have less LOLEV
and NENS compared to the benchmark. The look-up table has more LOLEV compared
to the constant θ = 0.2 and the look-up table has more outlier cases with larger NENS or
more LOLEV. A parameter modification of the wind energy constraint is shown to have
a great effect in reducing the expected cost for the system operator, while a constant
parameter performs better in reducing resource adequacy measures.
4.3
Expected Cost Risk adjusted - Parametrization
A system operator will be interested in not only a cost-effective and risk-neutral solution but
also in a risk-averse solution limiting the risk of extreme scenario outcomes. Compared to
the previous section a risk-averse approach is taken by minimizing the tail end of scenarios
with the highest cost per scenario. This is done by tuning parameter θ to optimally solve
problem (2.30). The following results show θ reducing the expected value of worst-case
outcomes beyond a given probability threshold α.
4.3.1
Constant Parameter
The function for Conditional Value at Risk (1.3) requires an input value, which is the confi-
dence level α ∈[0, 1]. A CVaR with α = 0.9 computes the expected value of the 1-α%, so
the 10% worst-case outcomes. In the following Figure 4.9 for α ∈{0.8, 0.9} the normal-
ized improvement in the Conditional Value at Risk is shown over set Ωin. The normalized
improvement is calculated with (4.2) comparing the θ to the benchmark θ = 1.
∆F π−ECR(θ) = F π−ECR(θ) −F π−ECR(θ = 1)
|F π−ECR(θ = 1)|
(4.2)
A constant parametrization for different values of α all suggest the same θ for the same
level of uncertainty ρE as the best-performing expected cost reducing θ shown in Figure
4.5. As an example for ρE = 0.1 the ideal θ value is 0.2 to reduce the expected cost, 80%-
CVaR and 90%-CVaR. In this case, a constant parameter to best minimize expected cost
is also reducing the α-CVaR for α ∈{0.8, 0.9}. The next subsection will investigate if a
look-up table parametrization can specifically reduce α-CVaR.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
35
==PAGE:46==
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
pE
0
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.4
Performance of constant forecast parametrization with α = 0.8
θ
Normalized Change in CVAR
(a) α = 0.80
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
pE
0
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.4
Performance of constant forecast parametrization with α = 0.9
θ
Normalized Change in CVAR
(b) α = 0.90
Figure 4.9: Normalized changes in objective value for various uncertainty levels in the
rolling forecast with CVaR as objective function
36
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:47==
4.3.2
Look-up Table
A constant parameter tuning CVaR of outcomes does not suggest a different value com-
pared to the constant parameter tuned to minimize the expected cost. A look-up table
parametrization that optimizes (2.30) is analyzed next under the assumption that a vector
representation of θ gives more leeway in tuning the parameter. The size of mini-batches
used in the SANG algorithm is mk = 10 and an iteration limit N = 1000 is set. Threshold
values α ∈{0.8, 0.9} are used to tune θ to minimize the α-CVaR. The initial input for θ is a
constant parameter equalling 0.2. The iterative improvements for using SANG are in the
Appendix in Figure A.1. Table 4.6 shows the look-up table θ tuned for various α-CVaR.
The parameters show similarities with the first look-ahead period having a value greater
than 1, and all other look-ahead periods having a value smaller than 1. For the CVaR-
tuned parameters, the first look-ahead period value is below 2, while it is close to 3 for
θ −EC. The values for the look-ahead periods all decrease from periods 2 to 5, and then
increase in periods 6 and 7 for CVaR-tuned parameters and only in period 7 for θ −EC.
Look-ahead period
θ
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
EC
2.976
0.000
0.717
0.000
0.082
0.000
1.305
80%-CVaR
1.992
0.247
0.158
0.000
0.000
0.447
0.703
90%-CVaR
1.698
0.214
0.180
0.085
0.101
0.288
0.648
Table 4.6: Look-up table formulation of θ for α-CVaR with α ∈{0.8, 0.9} and Expected
Cost (EC) rounded to three decimal spaces
Expected Cost [M€]
θ
Mean
80% −CV aR
90% −CV aR
EC
119.9
217.3
229.8
80%-CVaR
120.1
216.7
229.2
90%-CVaR
120.2
216.8
229.1
Table 4.7: Results for in-sample set Ωin with ρE = 0.1
Expected Cost [M€]
θ
Mean
80% −CV aR
90% −CV aR
EC
123.1
217.5
231.5
80%-CVaR
123.3
217.0
230.9
90%-CVaR
123.4
216.9
230.9
Table 4.8: Results for out-of-sample set Ωout with ρE = 0.1
Table 4.8 shows the average expected cost and α-CVaR values for the three differently
tuned parameters. Each parameter outperforms the others in its given aim in the in-
sample set, while in the out-of-sample test, the 90%-CVaR parameter has the lowest 80%-
CVaR. From now on the 80%-CVaR tuned parameter is neglected and the 90%-CVaR
value is further analyzed. Figure 4.10 presents the NENS on the x-axis and cost per
scenario on the y-axis with the colour scale showing the number of LOLEV for θ −EC
and θ −90%-CVaR. The risk-aware approach decreases the number of scenarios with
load shedding and the load-shedding amount, while slightly reducing the cost of worst-
case outcomes.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
37
==PAGE:48==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
0
10
20
30
40
50
LOLEV
Results of θ - EC
NENS in [%]
Cost in [€]
(a) θ −EC
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
0
10
20
30
40
50
LOLEV
Results of θ - CVaR
NENS in [%]
Cost in [€]
(b) θ −90%-CVaR
Figure 4.10: Comparison of expected cost, NEENS and LOLEV for θ −EC and θ-90%-
CVaR
38
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:49==
Expected Cost [M€]
NEENS [%]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
0.2
124.8
194.2
214.4
229.1
0.44
1.00
1.21
1.25
EC
123.1
193.5
213.9
229.2
0.5
1.03
1.25
1.36
90%-CVaR
123.4
193.2
213.8
228.4
0.37
0.89
1.15
1.23
LOLEV
LOLD [days]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
0.2
4.02
8.0
9.0
9.0
4.04
9.0
9.0
9.0
EC
8.54
16.0
19.0
21.0
10.06
19.0
23.0
26.0
90%-CVaR
4.18
9.0
10.0
11.0
4.98
10.0
13.0
16.0
Table 4.9: Average measures and quantiles for out-of-sample set Ωout with ρE = 0.1
Table 4.9 presents the performance comparing θ = 0.2, θ −EC and θ −90%-CVaR for
cost and resource adequacy measures. Taking CVaR into account during tuning of the
look-up table formulation decreases worst-case cost outcomes and reduces the NEENS
on average and for the considered quantiles. For LOLEV and LOLD the constant param-
eter θ = 0.2 outperforms the look-up table formulations. With the aim to focus on load-
shedding events and their magnitude, the following section will include a parametrization
that is not influenced by cost but by energy shortfall events using the buffered probability
of exceedance to limit the expected value of load that is not served.
4.4
Buffered Probability of Exceedance - Parametrization
System operators are required to ensure the security of supply. To certify resource ade-
quacy beyond reducing the cost incurred by load shedding, the probability of load shed-
ding can be minimized directly. To limit the probability of load-shedding events and their
magnitude the risk measure BPoE is used. The term BPoE is introduced in Section 1.4.
Now, the parameter θ is tuned to solve problem (2.33), which minimizes the probability of
the expected unserved load being greater than threshold ζ without considering any cost.
The parameter θ internalizes the resource adequacy goal, while in a given instance the
model still tries to satisfy the load with minimum cost. A threshold ζ is an input that needs
to be determined. The parameter ζ can represent a buffer reserve of fuel resources that
are acquired at the beginning of the year and are only used to satisfy the unserved load.
This case study aims to determine a buffer reserve size that has a high probability of cov-
ering any energy shortfall events. The security can be based on the common industry
standard for shortfall events of 1 day in 10 years, which would be a > 99.97% probability
of security. The 1 day in 10 years is solely based on LOLE and neglects the magnitude of
the shortfall events. This case study will focus on how much the security can be improved
using parametrization instead of reaching a fixed target.
4.4.1
Constant Parameter
The ability of a constant parameter to reduce the BPoE of unserved load is investigated
first. Figure 4.11 presents different ζ thresholds and the influence of θ in decreasing BPoE
considering various forecast uncertainties ρE. Independent of the uncertainty ρE and ζ
the expected value of the unserved load is 2000 MW, which indicates an overall lack of
generational capacity in the system. With increasing uncertainty ρE the larger ζ has to be
for any of the considered values of θ to reduce the BPoE. As seen in Figure 4.11a and
Figure 4.11b the smallest θ does reduce the BPoE of unserved load the most for the same
given ζ. Given a desired BPoE value under uncertainty ρE the threshold ζ is lowered for
the same outcome by adjusting parameter θ. The results show a clear improvement in
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
39
==PAGE:50==
the reduction of load-shedding by adding additional capacity, but in combination with an
adapted storage operation policy less reserve capacity is necessary to certify resource
adequacy.
2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
0
20
40
60
80
100
θ = 0.1
θ = 0.2
θ = 0.3
θ = 0.4
θ = 0.5
θ = 0.6
θ = 0.7
θ = 0.8
θ = 0.9
θ = 1
Influence of threshold ζ and parameter θ on the BPoE of unsatisfied load
ζ representing additional reserves in [MW]
Buffered Probability of Exceedance in [%]
(a) ρE = 0.05
2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
0
20
40
60
80
100
θ = 0.1
θ = 0.2
θ = 0.3
θ = 0.4
θ = 0.5
θ = 0.6
θ = 0.7
θ = 0.8
θ = 0.9
θ = 1
Influence of threshold ζ and parameter θ on the BPoE of unsatisfied load
ζ representing additional reserves in [MW]
Buffered Probability of Exceedance in [%]
(b) ρE = 0.1
40
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:51==
2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
0
20
40
60
80
100
θ = 0.1
θ = 0.2
θ = 0.3
θ = 0.4
θ = 0.5
θ = 0.6
θ = 0.7
θ = 0.8
θ = 0.9
θ = 1
Influence of threshold ζ and parameter θ on the BPoE of unsatisfied load
ζ representing additional reserves in [MW]
Buffered Probability of Exceedance in [%]
(c) ρE = 0.2
2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
0
20
40
60
80
100
θ = 0.1
θ = 0.2
θ = 0.3
θ = 0.4
θ = 0.5
θ = 0.6
θ = 0.7
θ = 0.8
θ = 0.9
θ = 1
Influence of threshold ζ and parameter θ on the BPoE of unsatisfied load
ζ representing additional reserves in [MW]
Buffered Probability of Exceedance in [%]
(d) ρE = 0.4
Figure 4.11: Influence of a constant θ on the Buffered Probability of Exceedance of short-
fall events for different values of ρE
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
41
==PAGE:52==
4.4.2
Look-up Table
This subsection investigates a look-up table formulation solving problem (2.33) to reduce
the BPoE with a given threshold ζ. As in the previous sections, an uncertainty level ρE =
0.1 is considered. A threshold ζ = 7000 is investigated for an uncertainty level ρE = 0.1.
Mini-batches of size mk = 10 and an iteration limit N = 2000 are used. The iterative
improvements using SANG are in the appendix in Figure A.2. Table 4.10 compares the
look-up table formulation tuned from the previous section to the newly obtained variation.
The new variation has more positions that are close to zero. The first look-ahead period
is 1.079 and is lower compared to the other two variations’ first look-ahead period values.
The fifth time period ahead deviates from the other two variations with a value greater
than 1, while the others have a value of around 0.1.
Look-ahead period
θ
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
BPoE
EC
2.976
0.000
0.717
0.000
0.082
0.000
1.305
20.00 %
90%-CVaR
1.698
0.214
0.180
0.085
0.101
0.288
0.648
7.47 %
7000-BPoE
1.079
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.319
0.267
0.000
7.09%
Table 4.10: Look-up table formulation of θ tuned to minimize BPoE with ζ = 7000, 90%-
CVaR and Expected Cost (EC) rounded to three decimal spaces
The best performing constant parameter for ζ = 7000 is θ = 0.4 with a BPoE of 9.01%.
The look-up table parameter for the same ζ achieved a BPoE of 7.09% for the same
in-sample set. Figure 4.12a shows the look-up table variations and the best-performing
constant parameters in the in-sample test to reduce the BPoE of unserved load. For
ζ ∈[2000, 6010] the CVaR-tuned look-up table variation outperforms the BPoE-tuned look-
up table version and for ζ ∈(6010, 7220] the BPoE-tuned version outperforms the CVaR-
tuned version. For all ζ > 7220 the CVaR-tuned version performs the best in reducing
the BPoE of unserved load. The out-of-sample test shows similar results in Figure 4.12b,
where the CVaR-tuned parameter reduces the BPoE more for ζ ∈[2000, 5680] and then
the BPoE-tuned parameter outperforms for ζ > 5680. The BPoE in the out-of-sample test
is lower for ζ = 7000 with 5.88% outperforming the CVaR-tuned parameter achieving a
BPoE of 7.34%.
Expected Cost [M€]
NEENS [%]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
EC
123.1
193.5
213.9
229.2
0.5
1.03
1.25
1.36
90%-CVaR
123.4
193.2
213.8
228.4
0.37
0.89
1.15
1.23
7000-BPoE
124.7
193.9
214.9
229.1
0.37
0.83
1.09
1.21
LOLEV
LOLD [days]
θ
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
Mean
q80%
q90%
q95%
EC
8.54
16.0
19.0
21.0
10.06
19.0
23.0
26.0
90%-CVaR
4.18
9.0
10.0
11.0
4.98
10.0
13.0
16.0
7000-BPoE
4.06
8.0
9.0
10.0
4.4
9.0
11.0
12.0
Table 4.11: Average measures and quantiles for out-of-sample set Ωout with ρE = 0.1
Table 4.11 presents the average measures and quantiles for the expected cost, NEENS,
LOLEV, and LOLD for the various look-up table formulation for the parameter θ. Each θ
42
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:53==
outperforms the others in their given goal with θ-EC returning the lowest expected cost,
θ-CVaR returning the lowest cost for 80%-, 90%-, and 95%-quantiles and the θ-BPoE
reducing the resource adequacy measures the most.
2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
0
20
40
60
80
100
θ - CVaR
θ - EC
θ - BPoE
Influence of threshold ζ and parameter θ on the BPoE of unsatisfied load - In-Sample
ζ representing additional reserves in [MW]
Buffered Probability of Exceedance in [%]
(a) In-sample set Ωin
2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
0
20
40
60
80
100
θ - CVaR
θ - EC
θ - BPoE
Influence of threshold ζ and parameter θ on the BPoE of unsatisfied load - Out-of-sample
ζ representing additional reserves in [MW]
Buffered Probability of Exceedance in [%]
(b) Out-of-sample set Ωout
Figure 4.12: Influence of threshold ζ and parameter θ on the BPoE of unserved load
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
43
==PAGE:54==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
0
10
20
30
40
50
LOLEV
Results of θ - BPoE
NENS in [%]
Cost in [€]
Figure 4.13: θ-BPoE
Figure 4.14: Comparison of expected cost, NEENS and LOLEV for θ-BPoE
Figure 4.14 presents the performance of θ-BPoE with Cost on the y-axis, NENS on the x-
axis and LOLEV with the color scale. Cost per scenario increases compared to the other
look-up table variations, while all risk metrics are reduced using the BPoE formulation in
the tuning of parameter θ.
44
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:55==
5
Conclusion
In this study, a parameter-modified cost function approximation policy is investigated
based on its ability to certify resource adequacy in an energy-limited and stochastic energy
storage model with a rolling forecast. The constraint on the rolling wind power forecast
is parameterized with a constant and a look-up table formulation. The parameters are
tuned with three different goals, firstly to minimize the expected cost, secondly minimise
the Conditional Value at Risk of cost past confidence level α, and thirdly to reduce the
Buffered Probability of Exceedance of expected unserved load surpassing a threshold
ζ. The parametrization shows a significant benefit with the simple implementation of a
constant parameter value compared to a standard look-ahead policy without a parame-
ter modification. A look-up formulation consistently outperforms a constant parameter in
each chosen problem for its given aim and policy, but considering certain resource ade-
quacy measures a constant parameter can outperform the look-up table formulations. For
tuning a parameter to minimize the expected cost, a look-up table parameter improved
the expected cost but did not improve NEENS, LOLEV and LOLD. Considering a more
complex aim which is minimizing the α-CVaR of cost, a constant parametrization does
not show improvement compared to the expected cost parameter, since it suggests the
same parameter value. Improvements can be gained when considering a look-up table
parametrization to reduce the α-CVaR, in particular for resource adequacy measures.
With the third aim of reducing the BPoE of unserved load surpassing a threshold ζ, a
parametrization can help to reduce BPoE at threshold ζ and thereby increase resource
adequacy by adjusting the policy for making storage decisions instead of purchasing ad-
ditional reserve capacity.
If the method is used in energy management operations, then certain considerations
should be taken into account. The method does reduce the complexity of decision mod-
els that try to solve realistic but computationally difficult look-ahead models by creating a
parameter-modified deterministic look-ahead model. Although it requires re-optimization
with each time step due to the updating of the forecast, it is straightforward and com-
putationally easy due to the deterministic look-ahead and the pre-tuned parameter. The
method does require effort to tune the more complex parameters and potentially needs to
be re-tuned or supported by an online learning framework if the considered energy model
is not stationary. Seasonal differences in the model may also play an effect on the effec-
tiveness of the parameter. Seasonal patterns should either be included in the training data
or separate parameters should be tuned for different seasons of the year. Additionally,
a more representative forecasting model can be used instead of the martingale model of
forecast evolution.
The time granularity of the case study can also be investigated following the results of re-
source adequacy studies suggesting that averaging data can lead to distorted results [25].
Same with the studied look-ahead horizon, which was set to seven time steps. Different
lengths of the look-ahead horizon should be tested to get an ideal length depending on the
problem at hand. In addition, the look-up table parametrization takes longer to compute
the larger the look-ahead horizon is. An investigation may be relevant considering other
parametrization options like an exponential decay parametrization, which can be formu-
lated with two variables thereby being more scalable for a larger look-ahead horizon.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
45
==PAGE:56==
46
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:57==
%LEOLRJUDSK\
>@ , , ( $JHQF\ ³5HQHZDEOH HQHUJ\ PDUNHW XSGDWH  MXQH ´ 
>@ ' 6WHQFOLN $ %ORRP : &ROH * 6WHSKHQ $ ) $FHYHGR 5 *UDPOLFK & 'HQW
1 6FKODJ DQG 0 0LOOLJDQ ³4XDQWLI\LQJ ULVN LQ DQ XQFHUWDLQ IXWXUH 7KH HYROXWLRQ RI
UHVRXUFH DGHTXDF\´ ,((( 3RZHU DQG (QHUJ\ 0DJD]LQH YRO  SS ± 
>@ < 6XQ % )UHZ 6 'DOYL DQG 6 & 'KXOLSDOD ³,QVLJKWV LQWR PHWKRGRORJLHV DQG
RSHUDWLRQDO GHWDLOV RI UHVRXUFH DGHTXDF\ DVVHVVPHQW $ FDVH VWXG\ ZLWK DSSOLFDWLRQ
WR D EURDGHU IOH[LELOLW\ IUDPHZRUN´ $SSOLHG (QHUJ\ YRO   
>@ 6 *RQ]DWR . %UXQLQ[ DQG ( 'HODUXH ³7KH HIIHFW RI VKRUW WHUP VWRUDJH RSHUDWLRQ
RQ UHVRXUFH DGHTXDF\´ 6XVWDLQDEOH (QHUJ\ *ULGV DQG 1HWZRUNV YRO   
>@ 7 . 6KUHVWKD DQG 5 .DUNL ³8WLOL]LQJ HQHUJ\ VWRUDJH IRU RSHUDWLRQDO DGHTXDF\ RI
ZLQGLQWHJUDWHG EXON SRZHU V\VWHPV´ $SSOLHG 6FLHQFHV 6ZLW]HUODQG YRO  

>@ * 6WHSKHQ ³1UHO 3UREDELOLVWLF UHVRXUFH DGHTXDF\ VXLWH SUDV Y PRGHO GRFX
PHQWDWLRQ´
>@ 6 *KDGLPL DQG : % 3RZHOO ³6WRFKDVWLF VHDUFK IRU D SDUDPHWULF FRVW IXQFWLRQ DS
SUR[LPDWLRQ (QHUJ\ VWRUDJH ZLWK UROOLQJ IRUHFDVWV´  
>@ : 3RZHOO ³$SSUR[LPDWH G\QDPLF SURJUDPPLQJ VROYLQJ WKH FXUVHV RI GLPHQVLRQDO
LW\´ 
>@ $ +DDV * ,RWWL 0 3HW] DQG . 0LVDN ³0HWKRGRORJLFDO GHYHORSPHQWV IRU HXURSHDQ
UHVRXUFH DGHTXDF\ DVVHVVPHQWV´ 
>@ $ %XUGLFN 1 6FKODJ $ $X 5 *R = 0LQJ DQG $ 2OVRQ ³/LJKWLQJ D UHOLDEOH SDWK
WR 
>@ $ 5HLPHUV : &ROH DQG % )UHZ ³7KH LPSDFW RI SODQQLQJ UHVHUYH PDUJLQV LQ ORQJ
WHUP SODQQLQJ PRGHOV RI WKH HOHFWULFLW\ VHFWRU´ (QHUJ\ 3ROLF\ YRO  SS ± 

>@ $ + 6FKOHLIHU & $ 0XUSK\ : - &ROH DQG 3 / 'HQKROP ³7KH HYROYLQJ HQHUJ\
DQG FDSDFLW\ YDOXHV RI XWLOLW\VFDOH SYSOXVEDWWHU\ K\EULG V\VWHP DUFKLWHFWXUHV´ $G
YDQFHV LQ $SSOLHG (QHUJ\ YRO   
>@ 1 $VWLHU DQG 0 2YDHUH ³5HOLDELOLW\ VWDQGDUGV DQG JHQHUDWLRQ DGHTXDF\ DVVHVV
PHQWV IRU LQWHUFRQQHFWHG HOHFWULFLW\ V\VWHPV´ (QHUJ\ 3ROLF\ YRO   
>@ ' 6WHQFOLN % $DURQ DQG & :HVOH\ ³5HGHILQLQJ UHVRXUFH DGHTXDF\ IRU PRGHUQ
SRZHU V\VWHPV D UHSRUW RI WKH UHGHILQLQJ UHVRXUFH DGHTXDF\ WDVN IRUFH   HV
HQHUJ\ V\VWHPV LQWHJUDWLRQ JURXS´ 
>@ 6 :DQJ 1 =KHQJ & ' %RWKZHOO 4 ;X 6 .DVLQD DQG % ) +REEV ³&UHGLWLQJ
YDULDEOH UHQHZDEOH HQHUJ\ DQG HQHUJ\ VWRUDJH LQ FDSDFLW\ PDUNHWV (IIHFWV RI XQLW
FRPPLWPHQW DQG VWRUDJH RSHUDWLRQ´ ,((( 7UDQVDFWLRQV RQ 3RZHU 6\VWHPV YRO 
SS ±  
>@ 6 -XQODNDUQ 5 'LHZYLODL DQG . $XGRPYRQJVHUHH ³6WRFKDVWLF PRGHOLQJ RI UHQHZ
DEOH HQHUJ\ VRXUFHV IRU FDSDFLW\ FUHGLW HYDOXDWLRQ´ (QHUJLHV YRO   
(QHUJ\ DVVXUDQFH LQ SRZHU V\VWHPV ZLWK VWRFKDVWLF DQG HQHUJ\FRQVWUDLQHG UHVRXUFHV

References     
==PAGE:58==
[17] NERC, “Probabilistic assessment - technical guideline document,” 2016.
[18] NERC, “2018 long-term reliability assessment,” 2018.
[19] Entso-e, “Eraa 2022 edition european network of transmission system operators for
electricity annex 2-methodology.”
[20] Entso-e, “Eraa 2022 edition european network of transmission system operators for
electricity annex 5-definitions and glossary.”
[21] B. D. Leibowicz, N. Zhang, J. P. Carvallo, P. H. Larsen, T. Carr, and S. Baik, “The
importance of capturing power system operational details in resource adequacy as-
sessments,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 228, 3 2024.
[22] J. Kwon, Z. Zhou, T. Levin, and A. Botterud, “Resource adequacy in electricity mar-
kets with renewable energy,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 35, pp. 773–
781, 1 2020.
[23] M. J. Bagen B. and J. K., 2014 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods
Applied to Power Systems (PMAPS) 7-10 July 2014, Durham, UK.
[24] J. Zhu and Y. Zhang, “A frequency and duration method for adequacy assessment of
generation systems with wind farms,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 34,
pp. 1151–1160, 3 2019.
[25] C. Bothwell and B. F. Hobbs, “How sampling and averaging historical solar and wind
data can distort resource adequacy,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy, 7
2022.
[26] M. Norton, V. Khokhlov, and S. Uryasev, “Calculating cvar and bpoe for common
probability distributions with application to portfolio optimization and density estima-
tion,” 11 2018.
[27] R. T. Rockafellar and J. O. Royset, “On buffered failure probability in design and op-
timization of structures,” Reliability Engineering and System Safety, vol. 95, pp. 499–
510, 5 2010.
[28] J. Mays and J. D. Jenkins, “Financial risk and resource adequacy in markets with high
renewable penetration,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Markets, Policy and Regula-
tion, pp. 1–13, 10 2023.
[29] F. Pourahmadi and J. Kazempour, “Distributionally robust generation expansion
planning with unimodality and risk constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Power Sys-
tems, vol. 36, pp. 4281–4295, 9 2021.
[30] J. D. Lara, O. Dowson, K. Doubleday, B. M. Hodge, and D. S. Callaway, “A
multi-stage stochastic risk assessment with markovian representation of renewable
power,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy, vol. 13, pp. 414–426, 1 2022.
[31] M. Roveto, R. Mieth, and Y. Dvorkin, “Co-optimization of var and cvar for data-driven
stochastic demand response auction,” IEEE Control Systems Letters, vol. 4, pp. 940–
945, 10 2020.
[32] A. Mafusalov and S. Uryasev, “Cvar (superquantile) norm: Stochastic case,” Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research, vol. 249, pp. 200–208, 2 2016.
[33] J. Kisiala, “Conditional value-at-risk: Theory and applications,” 10 2015.
48
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:59==
[34] A. Mafusalov and S. Uryasev, “Buffered probability of exceedance: Mathematical
properties and optimization,” SIAM Journal on Optimization, vol. 28, pp. 1077–1103,
2018.
[35] W. B. Powell, “Reinforcement learning and stochastic optimization a unified frame-
work for sequential decisions,” 2019.
[36] A. Sapra and P. L. Jackson, “The martingale evolution of price forecasts in a supply
chain market for capacity: Technical report,” 2004.
[37] D. HEATH and P. JACKSON, “Modeling the evolution of demand forecasts with ap-
plication to safety stock analysis in production distribution-systems,” Iie Transactions,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 17–30, 1994.
[38] S. J. Kazempour and P. Pinson, “Effects of risk aversion on market outcomes: A
stochastic two-stage equilibrium model,” Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-
neers Inc., 12 2016.
[39] G. Stephen, T. Joswig-Jones, S. Awara, and D. Kirschen, “Impact of storage dispatch
assumptions on resource adequacy and capacity credit,” Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., 2022.
[40] H. Shuai, J. Fang, X. Ai, W. Yao, J. Wen, and H. He, “On-line energy management of
microgrid via parametric cost function approximation,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 34, pp. 3300–3302, 7 2019.
[41] J. Hönen, J. L. Hurink, and B. Zwart, “Threshold-based algorithms for an online rolling
horizon framework under uncertainty – with an application to energy management,”
11 2023.
[42] W. B. Powell and S. Meisel, “Tutorial on stochastic optimization in energy - part ii: An
energy storage illustration,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, pp. 1468–
1475, 3 2016.
[43] W. B. Powell and B. Delft, “Foundations and trends ® in technology, information and
operations management sequential decision analytics and modeling: Modeling with
python,” 2022.
[44] M. C. Fu, “Handbook of simulation optimization,” 2015.
[45] Y. Nesterov and V. Spokoiny, “Random gradient-free minimization of convex func-
tions,” Foundations of Computational Mathematics, vol. 17, pp. 527–566, 4 2017.
[46] T. Tieleman, G. Hinton, et al., “Lecture 6.5-rmsprop: Divide the gradient by a run-
ning average of its recent magnitude,” COURSERA: Neural networks for machine
learning, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 26–31, 2012.
[47] “Entso-e transparency platform, load.” https://transparency.entsoe.eu/dashboard/
show. Accessed: 2023-10-15.
[48] “Energienet, energi data service, gas monthly neutral price dkk/kwh.” https://www.
energidataservice.dk/tso-gas/GasMonthlyNeutralPrice. Accessed: 2023-10-15.
[49] J. Figgener, C. Hecht, and D. Haberschusz, “The development of battery storage
systems in germany: A market review (status 2023),” 2022.
[50] O. P. S. Data, “Data platform - conventional power plants.” https://doi.org/10.25832/
conventional_power_plants/2020-10-01. Accessed: 2024-01-13.
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:61==
A
Appendix
0
200
400
600
800
1000
216.7M
216.8M
216.9M
217M
217.1M
217.2M
Performance of look-up-table parametrization - 80%-CVaR
Iterations
80%-CVaR in [€]
(a) α = 0.80
0
200
400
600
800
1000
229.1M
229.15M
229.2M
229.25M
229.3M
229.35M
229.4M
229.45M
229.5M
Performance of look-up-table parametrization - 90%-CVaR
Iterations
90%-CVaR in [€]
(b) α = 0.90
Figure A.1: Changes in objective value α-CVaR for uncertainty level ρE = 0.1
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
51
==PAGE:62==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0.07
0.075
0.08
0.085
0.09
0.095
0.1
0.105
0.11
Performance of look-up-table parametrization - BPOE
Iterations
Objective value
Figure A.2: Changes in objective value BPoE for unserved load with ζ = 7000 for uncer-
tainty level ρE = 0.1
52
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
==PAGE:63==
Energy assurance in power systems with stochastic and energy-constrained resources
53
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Department of Wind Energy
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
