==PAGE:1==
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform reso-
lution
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Bogumil Zimon
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5 months at the Section for Bioinformatics, Depart-
ment of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfill-
ment for the degree Master of Science in Pharmaceutical design and Engineering, MSc
Eng.
Bogumil Zimon - s213032
Signature
Date
ii
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
   27.01.2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Alternative splicing stands as a critical phenomenon in biomedical sciences. By enabling
one gene to generate multiple mRNA isoforms, each yielding distinct protein variants, this
process intricately shapes cellular functionalities and tissue-specific behaviors. Its mul-
tifaceted nature significantly influences both normal physiology and disease pathology,
offering insights into potential therapeutic targets and personalized medical approaches.
In the realm of modern biomedical research, alternative splicing occupies a central role,
driving advancements with its intricate molecular orchestration. In the realm of biomed-
ical sciences, single-cell sequencing stands as a pivotal advancement. By allowing the
exploration of intricate cellular compositions and behaviors, this technology offers unpar-
alleled insights into health and disease. Departing from conventional bulk sequencing,
single-cell analysis enables the unraveling of cellular heterogeneity, dynamic states, and
spatial organization, promising transformative contributions to personalized medicine and
therapeutic strategies. Despite this importance of protein isoforms, they are severely un-
derstudied in the single-cell field. Therefore, this project will develop an analysis approach
that clarify the importance of isoforms in single cell sequencing. The approach will be im-
plemented in an R package and applied to several datasets.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Bogumil Zimon, MSc Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup, Assistant Professor, DTU
Project supervisor
Lars Rønn Olsen, Associate Professor, DTU
Group leader
iv
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Overview of Single-Cell Sequencing Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Data Analysis in Single-Cell Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Gene and isoform quantification - Counts matrix generation . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Standard processing of scRNA expression matrices . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Multimodal data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.4
Study significance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2
Methods
17
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2
Data sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3
Quality control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.4
Data integration and low-quality cells removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.5
Modality clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.6
Modality weights analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.7
Novel cluster discovery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.8
Identification of marker genes using different modalities . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.9
Normalization and scaling optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.10 Principal components number optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.11 Clustering resolution optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3
Results
31
3.1
Overview of scIsoExploreR package workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.1.1
Unimodal scRNA-seq workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.1.2
Multimodal scRNA-seq workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.1.3
Normalization and scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.2
Isoform impact on scRNA-seq analysis - GSE176509 dataset . . . . . . . . 35
3.2.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.2.2
Quality control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.2.3
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.2.4
Modality weights analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.2.5
Novel cluster discovery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.2.6
Discovery of modality-specific marker genes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.3
Isoform impact on scRNA-seq analysis - multiple datasets . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.3.1
Modality weights analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.3.2
Novel cluster discovery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.3.3
Discovery of modality-specific marker genes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4
Discussion
67
Bibliography
70
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Alternative splicing is a process by which multiple transcripts are generated from a single
gene, with subsequent translation yielding protein isoforms. This process is crucial in
various biomedical applications. Protein isoforms are critical in diseases such as Spinal
muscular atrophy that can induce paralysis [1]. Differential transcript isoform expression
also occurs in cancer cells and it is crucial in understanding the mechanism of the disease
and developing novel therapeutics [2].
Knowing the role of the isoform expression in certain diseases it is worth investigating,
their impact on determining cell types and their states which is a common step in single-cell
sequencing (scRNA) studies. Discrimination of the cell states in scRNA studies is often
conducted through clustering, which becomes more challenging with increasing similarity
of cell types especially when cells in question belong to a rare type.
To improve the clustering discriminatory power multi-modal single-cell data analysis strate-
gies can be employed. The standardized workflow was developed in the past to combine
multiple modalities, such as transcriptome and surface protein expression data, and en-
closed in the Seurat package. Multimodal approach was shown to be more effective in
the clustering of rare cell types than gene expression analysis alone [3].
Differential expression of isoforms conveys information about functional diversity within
the same cell type that can be due to environmental or developmental factors. Moreover,
it provides insight into tissue-specific expression which can be beneficial in the clustering
stage of the scRNA workflow. The goal of the current study is to investigate whether anal-
ysis of isoform and gene expression analyzed in a combined fashion improves clustering
results and helps uncover hidden diversity in the cell populations, that would be missed
utilizing gene counts alone.
1.1
Overview of Single-Cell Sequencing Technologies
The implementation of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) offered an unprece-
dented opportunity to uncover the diversity and intricacy of RNA molecules within indi-
vidual cells. Consequently, this technology has enabled researchers to better understand
the functional composition of tissues.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
1
==PAGE:10==
Almost all cells in the human body have the same set of genetic materials, but the tran-
scriptome information in each cell reflects the unique activity of a subset of genes. Analyz-
ing the gene expression patterns in cells is regarded as one of the most reliable methods
to investigate cell identity, condition, functionality, and reaction. To understand which pro-
tocols can be used to obtain transcript reads appropriate for isoform detection one has to
look at the general scRNA-seq procedure.
Single-cell sequencing procedure is composed of the following main stages [4, 5]:
1. Single-cell isolation and capture
2. Reverse transcription
3. cDNA amplification
4. Library preparation and sequencing
Emphasis will be put on the first three steps due to their impact on read coverage which
affects the ability to detect alternative splicing events. Certain platforms and cDNA ampli-
fication strategies show bias toward one end of the transcript, which prevents such data
from being used for isoform detection.
Single-cell isolation and capture
Single-cell isolation and capture entails extracting
high-quality single cells from a tissue sample. The goal is to isolate a single cell in a sep-
arate reaction mix and identify all transcripts from that cell with barcodes once they are
turned into complementary DNAs (cDNA). It is noteworthy that dissociation of the cells
from the tissues may introduce changes in the transcription. It was shown that protease
dissociation at 37 has the potential to activate stress genes, which may cause misidenti-
fication of cell type. One of the strategies to overcome it is utilizing single-nucleus RNA
sequencing. Capturing single cells can be accomplished using various methods, such as
limiting dilution for smaller cell quantities, and fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
in cases of higher cell densities. FACS due to its mechanism may introduce strain and
potential damage to the cells. To prevent that several microfluidic platforms developed
in which cells are captured in reaction wells or in droplets where they are subjected to a
series of automated reactions, that limit cellular damage and cost. The major microfluidic
platforms are: Fluidigm C1 system, the 10X Genomics Chromium and Illumina Biorad
SureCell [6].
2
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:11==
Reverse transcription
RNA capture is followed by reverse transcription, a process by
which RNA is converted to cDNA. The most common protocol used for reverse tran-
scription involves oligodT priming that selects for polyadenylated mRNAs and 40% of
lncRNAs [7]. While this approach prevents from capturing of ribosomal RNA it also pre-
cludes non-polyadenylated RNA including the majority of non-coding and circular RNA
molecules. To accommodate for transcript bias SUPeR-seq [8] protocol was introduced.
This strategy is based on random primers with fixed anchor sequences (AnchorX-T15N6)
that enable sequencing of both polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated RNAs in single
cells while significantly reducing contamination from ribosomal RNAs and genomic DNA.
Lastly, MASTQ-seq protocol was shown to have high reverse transcription efficacy. It is
based on MALBAC (multiple annealing and looping-based amplification cycles) primers
that are composed of 27 shared sequences, each trailed by five random nucleotides.
Their distinction lies at the 3’ end, which is either T20 or a combination of G3, A3, or T3.
This unique configuration significantly enhances the efficiency of reverse transcription and
boosts the generation of PCR amplicons [9, 6].
cDNA amplification
Reverse transcription is followed by amplification of the first-strand
cDNA using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or in vitro transcription (IVT). PCR ap-
proach can be divided into two main strategies: SMART and adaptor ligation-based. The
former one utilizes transferase and strand switch properties of Moloney Murine Leukemia
Virus Reverse Transcriptase (M-MLV) to insert template-switching oligonucleotides as
PCR adaptors. The technologies based on SMART include STRT, Smart-seq, and Smart-
seq2 (Table 1.1). In adaptor-based protocol, ligase is utilized to combine 5’ end of cDNA
and poly(A) or poly(C) creating a common adaptor for PCR amplification. While PCR
is efficient in generating high concentrations of cDNA from a limited amount of starting
material it can skew the gene expression towards shorter amplicons that have low G-C
content. The template switching step provides full transcript length reads retrieval and
isoform detection, which would be not feasible with 3’ or 5’ end-biased reads ([6]).
To avoid the need for template switching in vitro transcription (IVT) based CEL-seq (Cell
Expression by Linear amplification and Sequencing) protocol was developed. Where the
second DNA strand is synthesized followed by IVT providing sufficient rRNA concentration
([6]). Subsequently, transcripts are fragmented and 3’ adaptor is ligated (CEL-seq) (Table
1.1). The method provides linear amplification and simplified protocol it does not yield full-
length transcript reading and it cannot be used to determine alternative splicing events.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
3
==PAGE:12==
The MALBAC-RNA technology employs the Multiple Annealing and Looping-Based Am-
plification Cycles (MALBAC) strategy, which was initially developed to amplify whole
genomes from single cells [10]. This approach uses quasi-linear rather than exponential
amplification. MALBAC primers generate amplicons with matching ends that create loops,
preventing DNA from being exponentially replicated. This strategy helps to decrease the
biases that are commonly associated with amplification and covers whole transcript length
so it can also be used for isoform detection (Table 1.1).
Table 1.1: Single cell sequencing methods overview
Method
cDNA coverage
Strategy
Isoform de-
tection
Tang [11]
Full-length with 3’-bias
PCR after polyA tailing
No
Smart-seq2 [12]
Nearly full-length
Template switching-based PCR
Yes
Cel-seq2 [13]
3’ tag UTR
IVT and random primer
No
MALBAC-RNA [9]
Full-length
Quasilinear PCR with 7 random
MALBAC
Yes
Isoform specific scRNA-seq methods
Discovery of novel and known splicing vari-
ants is often low throughput and a tendency to mislabel artifacts as potential unknown
isoforms. HIT-scISOseq protocol is a novel splicing variant detection strategy that tackles
the issue of poor read throughput through long-read single-cell RNA isoform sequencing
(scISO-Seq). It uses an elimination method that removes unwanted artifact fragments
before combining numerous cDNAs for PacBio circular consensus sequencing (CCS).
This approach dramatically improves the throughput and accuracy of single-cell isoform
sequencing, resulting in over 10 million high-accuracy long-reads from a single PacBio Se-
quel II SMRT cell. Combined with a computational tool called scISA-Tools that performs
demultiplexing the system allows for efficient novel and known isoform identification [14].
Another strategy to accommodate for throughput increase, while retaining the advan-
tage of having long reads is combining nanopore sequencing with short-read methods.
Chromium 10x droplet-based procedure provides instructions for simultaneous short-read
and long-read sequencing. This approach can be used for isoform identification, splicing
analysis, and mutation detection at the single-cell level and it has been shown to identify
thousands of unannotated isoforms. This methodology can be combined with other tech-
niques such as scATAC-seq and correlates well with protein expression data, offering a
full view of the molecular cell states [15].
4
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Data Analysis in Single-Cell Sequencing
Raw sequencing data requires further quality control and preprocessing before it can be
used to generate relevant biological insight. One of the first analysis stages in scRNA-seq
is quality control of the reads, that are most commonly stored in FASTQ or BCL formats.
Removing the low-quality data is followed by mapping and annotation of the transcript
variants. This section will provide an overview of strategies used to identify and quantify
isoforms, quality control, and additional general preprocessing steps required to obtain
high-quality isoform and gene count matrices.
1.2.1
Gene and isoform quantification - Counts matrix generation
Isoform detection varies depending on the presence of the reference genome and the
interest of the researcher in determining isoforms de novo.
'H QRYR isoform quantification
In case of de novo isoform discovery raw data used
should consist of both long and short reads. The strategy consists of three phases: as-
sembly, annotation, and quantification stages. Firstly, short reads are assembled to form
scaffolds to which long reads are aligned - finalizing the assembly stage. In the annota-
tion step unaligned long reads are clustered and combined with the short reads scaffolds,
using a multiple-sequence alignment algorithm to produce a reference transcript pseudo
assembly. Each potential transcript variant has to have appropriate coverage in both ex-
onic sites and junctions [16]. Quantification of resulting transcript variants is done using
probabilistic statistical models [17].
Reference-based isoform quantification
Having the reference genome with known
splicing variants the standard pipeline for isoform discovery and quantification can be
divided into three steps. First, the reads are aligned to the reference genome. Candidate
isoforms are then detected or submitted directly by the user as an annotation file. Lastly,
correct isoforms are found and quantified [18].
In the alignment stage, appropriate coverage of exon-exon reads is critical to the correct
transcript identification- Reads containing exon junctions indicate order in the splicing
variant allowing the connection of respective exons into a single transcript.
Accurate mapping of the reads has to be performed using splice-aware aligners that can
handle gaps that may indicate a potential splicing site. Some of the tools designed for
this purpose are Tophat [19], STAR [20], and HISAT [21]. The performance of isoform
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
5
==PAGE:14==
detection significantly changes depending on the available annotation. Complete or par-
tial annotations can be used to detect most expressed isoforms, but there are often many
false positives. The complexity of gene structures and the number of similar splicing vari-
ants present challenges in accurately assigning reads to their true origins [18].
Several programs have been created to quantify transcript expression levels.
RSEM
assigns the reads to their respective isoforms by applying rounds of EM (Expectation-
Maximization) algorithms [22].
A more recent tool, eXpress uses a faster online EM
algorithm [23]. TIGAR2 improves accuracy for longer readings by employing Bayesian
inference [24]. One of the commonly used tools for novel transcript discovery and quan-
tification is Cufflinks, it uses the strategy of explaining reads observed with a minimum
isoform number [25]. High-speed alignment-free methods such as Kallisto [26], Salmon
[27] and Sailfish [28] are based on the idea of non-exact alignments. Kallisto proposed
a de bruji graph strategy to achieve efficient pseudo-alignment between short reads and
transcripts, this strategy is intrinsically used to quantify isoforms from which gene counts
can be established [29]. Salmon, kallisto, RSEM, and Cufflinks have been shown to have
high accuracy in transcript quantification although the length and complexity of the tran-
script may decrease their discovery strength [30].
The alignment step is often computationally intensive and the results may vary depending
on the tool used. To address this challenge ARCHS4 web resource was developed, where
RNA-seq experiments are retrieved from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and undergo
standard uniform isoform and gene quantification using Kallisto.
Using the ARCHS4
database isoform and gene count matrices can be easily retrieved from HDF5 files that in
addition contain sample and condition information [31].
1.2.2
Standard processing of scRNA expression matrices
In the previous subsection methods to obtain counts matrices were described. In the
count matrix each column represents a single cell and each row represents a feature that
can be a gene or a transcript isoform. Every entry in the matrix indicates the number of
reads that came from the respective feature in a given cell.
Standard scRNA workflow can be divided into following steps:
1. Quality control and filtering of cells.
2. Data integration.
6
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:15==
3. Normalization and scaling.
4. Dimensional reduction.
5. Clustering.
6. Specialized downstream analysis steps.
One of the popular R packages Seurat can be very useful for both preprocessing stages
and specialized downstream analysis steps. In the following paragraphs, I will refer to
some of the Seurat package functions and parameters related to standard scRNA pro-
cessing workflow.
Quality control and filtering of cells
Dissociating tissues and suspending single cells
subject them to different forces and environmental conditions, that will lead to cell death,
cell membrane damage, or multi-cellular adhesion in a fraction of the sample. Several
indicators can point to the low-quality cells mainly: a high percentage of mitochondrial or
ribosomal genes, a low number of expressed features, and a low library size [32, 33].
• Library size is the sum of counts for all genes in each cell. Low library size points
to RNA loss in the library preparation process.
• The number of Features Per Cell is the total number of genes or isoforms of pos-
itive values. A low value suggests that the transcript population was not fully cap-
tured.
• Mitochondrial content is the percentage of reads mapped to mitochondrial genes.
High value indicates that cytoplasmic RNA was lost as a result of cell membrane
perforation, resulting in mitochondrial RNA enrichment. Common thresholds for
mitochondrial RNA abundance are above 5% mitochondrial reads in mice, or greater
than 10% in human cells [34].
• Outlier detection A quality control metric employed in some investigations is the
ratio of spike-in readings to total counts. One would anticipate a constant percent-
age in all samples. However, in other experiments increase in the expression of
stimulated cells may be anticipated and correct.
Quality criteria are frequently established by researchers depending on how each quality
control measure deviates from its median value. A variety of factors, including the size of
the library, the quantity of expressed reads, and the percentage of mitochondrial reads that
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
7
==PAGE:16==
deviate by a specific number of median absolute deviations (MADs) are used to identify
outliers. Applying quality thresholds to each sample separately is a frequent strategy when
several samples are available. In the Seurat package function, PercentageFeatureSet
can help establish quality metric values. Another R package scutter provides a set of
useful functions for detecting cells that do not satisfy quality control thresholds such as:
perCellQCMetrics, isOutlier and perCellQCFilters. For scuttle default number of deviation
from MAD is 5.
Data integration
Uncovering variation between conditional samples (e.g. diseased vs
healthy) is essential for defining gene signatures for diagnostics and prognostics and for
identification of potential drug targets. This process is usually done through the identi-
fication of relevant biological features genes, isoforms, and proteins, that characterize
sample populations. This process requires distinguishing real signals from a technically
introduced inter and intra-sample variation.
Biologically irrelevant variation is contained in the term ”batch effects” and arises from
different experiments, times, handlers, reagents, and instruments.
Seurat package contains workflow that minimizes batch effects by first identifying highly
variable genes for each group (subsets of features that show high variation between cells)
and then utilizing those features to harmonize/integrate the groups, overlaying cells having
similar sets of biologically relevant signals.
Initial canonical correlation analysis (CCA) or reciprocal PCA (RPCA) [35] is performed
on normalized and scaled data to identify shared sources of variation. This step roughly
aligns the cells. Next mutual nearest neighbours (MNNs) or anchors are identified. The
cells in two different conditions having the most similar expression in both directions are
considered anchors. Simultaneously difference in expression between anchors provides
an estimate of the batch effect from which the correction vector can be obtained. The es-
timate becomes more precise by averaging across many anchor pairs [36]. The anchors
are analyzed for overlaps in their local neighborhoods. Low scores indicate an incorrect
selection of MNNs that are removed. Lastly using anchor pairs and their scores cell ex-
pression values are modified by integrating various samples and conditions. A weighted
average of the two cells in each anchor over complete dataset anchors is used to trans-
form each cell. Cells in the same neighborhood should have comparable correction values
since weights are calculated by anchor scores and cell similarity scores (distance between
8
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:17==
cell and k nearest anchors).
Importantly depending on the source of variation different tools might be more appropriate.
Another tool useful for complex integrative tasks is harmony [37].
Normalization and scaling
The integration step mentioned in the previous paragraph
is applied when multiple samples or conditions are analyzed. In that case, normalization
is applied to specific groups individually. When dealing with a single sample normalization
should also be performed to accommodate for systemic errors or technical noises, such
as differences in sequencing depth and transcriptome capture rate for each cell. The goal
of normalization is to accommodate for technical differences and make the expression
between cells comparable.
Three metrics have been commonly employed for data normalization in the field of RNA
sequencing: TPM (Transcripts Per Kilobase Million), FPKM (Fragments Per Kilobase Mil-
lion), and RPKM (Reads Per Kilobase Million). In order to ensure comparability between
samples, these measures are intended to standardize data for both sequencing depth
and gene length [38].
To compute RPKM, one must first count all of the reads in a sample and divide the result
by 1,000,000 to get a scaling factor. After that, reads per million (RPM) are calculated
by dividing the read counts by this scaling factor. RPKM values are obtained by further
dividing these RPM values by the gene length in kilobases. Though it is designed for
paired-end RNA-seq data, FPKM is comparable to RPKM. A single fragment may be
represented by two reads in paired-end sequencing. This is explained by FPKM, which
avoids double-counting a fragment that is represented by two reads. The equation for
calculating gene i value using RPKM or FPKM:
RPKMi Q` FPKMi =
qi
li
103 ∗
!
j qj
106
=
qi
li ∗!
j qj
∗109
• qi - fragment counts
• ls - feature length
• !
j
qj - total number of mapped reads
To compute TPM, reads per kilobase (RPK) are obtained by first dividing the read counts
by the gene length in kilobases. The RPK values for every gene in a sample are then
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
9
==PAGE:18==
added up, and the resulting sum is divided by 1,000,000 to get a scaling factor. TPM
values are obtained by dividing the RPK readings by this scaling factor[38].
TPMi =
qi/li
!
j (qj/lj) ∗106
• qi - reads mapped to transcript
• ls - feature length
• !
j
(qj/lj) - sum of mapped reads to transcript normalized by transcript length
Seurat contains its own set of normalization strategies: logarithmic normalization (Log-
Normalize), centered log-ratio transformation (CLR), and relative counts (RC). The former
strategy is applied by default, the feature expression value for each cell is normalized by
the total expression, multiplied by a scale factor of 10000, and log-transformed. In CLR
expression values are divided by the geometric mean of the given feature across all cells
and log-transformed centering the resulting values around zero. Lastly, the RC algorithm
divides expression value by the total counts for a given cell and multiplies by a scale factor
if specified. After performing normalization transformed data is stored in the data slot of
Seurat Object.
Once the data is normalized it should be standardized which consists of scaling and cen-
tering. Standardization is an important preprocessing step for the principal components
analysis stage where features with a larger scale would have higher variance not nec-
essarily conveying a more significant signal, which could lead to the selection of wrong
principal components. Moreover, due to largely different scales of the features, calcula-
tion of distances in methods such as K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN) would be biased due
to some features having expression values in larger ranges than others, which could im-
pact for instance integration stage. In the centering mean of a feature is subtracted from
it assuring that each feature will have a mean of 0. Each centered feature divided by its
standard deviation results facilitates scaling.
Dimensional reduction
Single-cell RNA sequencing data often contains thousands of
cells and features (genes or transcripts). Many of those features belong to housekeeping
genes whose expression may not vary significantly between the cells of the same class.
The presence of thousands of non-informative features may obscure the analysis and lead
to longer computation time. To select only the most informative features two approaches
10
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:19==
are often combined - highly variable feature selection and dimensionality reduction such
as principal components analysis (PCA), uniform manifold approximation and projection
(UMAP), or t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE). The subset of features
with high variation between cells helps distinguish cell types and improves clustering re-
sults [39]. In Seurat, the selection of highly variable features can be performed using the
FindVariableFeatures function, where the features’ logarithmic variance is higher than the
expected variance based on the logarithmic mean of the dataset.
PCA dimensionality reduction is a linear strategy, based on finding the axes (principal
components), across which the variance is maximized. The first principal component (PC)
captures the greatest proportion of variance. Subsequent components, orthogonal to the
first PC, describe the remaining variance. The number of PCs can be as high as the num-
ber of features. However, the goal of dimensionality reduction is to explain the greatest
variance with the least components necessary. One of the strategies to select the optimal
component numbers is utilizing the elbow method, which involves plotting the cumulative
variance as a function of principal components. The point at which increasing the number
of the components does not result in a substantial gain in the cumulative variance should
be selected as the last principal component included in the analysis. PCA performed in
this manner balances variance preservation and dimensionality reduction[32].
In comparison to PCA, UMAP utilizes non-linear dimensionality reduction. The underlying
assumption of the strategy is a uniform distribution of points on the Riemannian manifold.
In the UMAP approach likelihood of two points being connected is reflected by weights
in the high-dimensionality graph. Specific radius is extended from each point and when
the radii of two points overlap they are considered to be connected. The size of the
radius determines the resulting cluster number. Low radius size yields a higher number
of isolated clusters, highlighting local similarities. A greater radius results in a low cluster
number, with many data points captured by each cluster. UMAP method contains two
additional corrective measures. The first one is based on decreasing the likelihood that
two points are connected the greatest radius size. Additional data points that are not
connected to at least one closest neighbor are removed. UMAP strategy aims at keeping
a balance between global and local similarity of the data points[32].
A common alternative to UMAP is the t-SNE method, which is also based on non-linearized
dimensionality reduction. In this approach distances between points in a are transformed
in high-dimensionality space to probabilities of points being connected. This strategy is
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
11
==PAGE:20==
computationally intensive and not very efficient in preserving global relationships between
data points.
In the study made by Wu (2019) UMAP and t-SNE were profiled based on their perfor-
mance in high-dimensional cytology and single-cell sequencing [40]. The results indicated
that UMAP is significantly faster, and exceeds in preserving local and global environment.
Despite the results, t-SNE is a still common method applied in scRNA-seq analysis due
to visually pleasing results.
In the Seurat package dimensionality is used in multiple workflows including data, and in-
tegration, where a fast reciprocal PCA strategy is applied to remove batch effects. More-
over, PCA is applied for the construction of the nearest neighbors graph, as a clustering
prerequisite, helping differentiate cell states and types. UMAP and t-SNE are commonly
applied for the visualization of the resulting clusters.
Clustering
The advancement of single-cell RNA sequencing data has resulted in the
development of several clustering algorithms. A recent study evaluated 14 of these ap-
proaches on 12 distinct datasets, focusing on their ability to detect known subpopulations,
stability, runtime, and scalability. SC3 and Seurat stood out, with Seurat being noticeably
faster. When the number of clusters matched, Seurat performed best, however, Flow-
SOM performed better when the number of clusters surpassed the actual count.
Following clustering, the next crucial step in the analysis is to give biological labels to each
cluster. The usual process for cell annotation in scRNA-seq data consists of three phases:
automated annotation, human refining, and experimental confirmation. Automatic anno-
tation categorizes clusters by comparing their gene expression patterns to those of rec-
ognized cell types.
1.3
Multimodal data analysis
RNA sequencing alone fails in distinguishing molecularly similar cells that facilitate differ-
ent functions such as T cells, effector T cells, and mucosal-associated invariant T cells[3].
This is caused by technical challenges including minimal RNA content in T-cells coupled
with high RNases expression. Multimodal single-cell techniques represent a novel field
that combines RNA sequencing with other modality that could be surface protein quantifi-
cation such as CITE-seq, combing RNA and single-cell chromatin accessibility quantifica-
tion (SHARE-seq) or single-cell chromatin accessibility combined with epitope sequenc-
12
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:21==
ing (ASAP-seq). To accommodate for the combined analysis of different modalities novel
computational method weighted nearest neighbor was developed as a part of the Seurat
package.
The WNN method requires each of the modalities to go through a standard single-cell pro-
cessing pipeline individually. Each modality has to be quality-controlled and low-quality
cells should be removed, samples and conditions should be integrated, and the count
matrices subjected to normalization, scaling, feature selection, dimensionality reduction,
and clustering. Following standard processing KNN graph, where k equals 20 is con-
structed for each modality. Averaged low-dimensional profiles for each neighbor set are
calculated and serve as a prediction of molecular content for a given cell based on their
local neighborhoods. This process is repeated within modality and between modalities.
Suppose we have a dataset where two modalities consist of gene and isoform expression
measured in each cell:
gi L2-normalized low-dimensional vector describing gene expression profile for cell i
ti L2-normalized low-dimensional vector describing isoform (transcript) expression profile
for cell i
{knng,i,1, . . . , knng,i,k} k-nearest gene neighbour set for cell i
{knnt,i,1, . . . , knnt,i,k} k-nearest isoform neighbour set for cell i
Prediction within modalities:
ˆgi,knng =
!k
j=1 gknng,i,j
k
prediction of gene profile for cell i, based on gene modality defined
neighbors
ˆti,knnt =
!k
j=1 tknnt,i,j
k
: prediction of transcript profile for cell i, based on transcript modality
defined neighbors
Cross-modality prediction:
ˆgi,knnt =
!k
j=1 gknnt,i,j
k
prediction of gene profile for cell i, based on transcript modality
defined neighbors
ˆti,knng =
!k
j=1 tknng,i,j
k
prediction of transcript profile for cell i, based on gene modality
defined neighbours
From similarities between predicted and observed values affinities are calculated. Firstly
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
13
==PAGE:22==
Euclidian distance between predicted and actual values is calculated and then trans-
formed using exponential kernel utilized in UMAP to affinities.
Affinity between gi and predicted gene profile based on gene KNN:
θgene(gi, ˆgi,knng) = exp
"
−max(d(gi,ˆgi,knng )−d(gi,gknng,i,1),0)
σg,i−d(gi,gknng,i,1)
#
Using the same strategy remaining affinities are calculated:
θgene(gi, ˆgi,knnt) - affinity between ri and predicted gene profile based on isoform KNN
θisoform(ti, ˆti,knnt) - affinity between ti and predicted isoform profile based on isoform KNN
θisoform(ti, ˆti,knng) - affinity between ti and predicted isoform profile based on gene KNN
In the expressions above d represents the Euclidian distance metric and σg,i and σt,i
represents bandwidth of the gene and isoform kernels for cell i. The closest 20 cells in
the dataset are identified using the lowest non-zero Jaccard similarity to the i −th cell.
This approach is applied to identify closely related, but functionally different cells that are
a common trait when rare scale states are present. The average of Euclidian distance
from cell i to the 20 selected cells is calculated and used as a bandwidth.
The ratio of affinities between the modalities is calculated. A large ratio for sgene indicates
that a cell’s molecular state is better defined using its gene modality. The opposite signi-
fies better identification through isoform modality. In both cases ε(10−4) is added to the
denominator to avoid division by zero.
sgene(i) =
θgene(gi,ˆgi,knng )
θgene(gi,ˆgi,knnt)+ε , sisoform(i) =
θisoform(ti,ˆti,knnt)
θisoform(ti,ˆti,knng )+ε
Values are normalized using softmax transformation yielding two non-negative numbers
that together sum to 1, those are referred to as modality weights.
wgene(i) =
esgene(i)
esgene(i)+esisoform(i) ,
wisoform(i) =
esisoform(i)
esgene(i)+esisoform(i)
Cell-specific modality weights calculated are used to define a new similarity metric that
will be used for any two cells and reflect a weighted combination of weights between two
modalities.
θweighted(i, j) = wgene(i)θgene(gi, gj) + wisoform(i)θisoform(ti, tj)
This expression represents the calculation of a weighted affinity (θweighted) between two
cells indexed by i and j.
The affinity is a combination of gene-based affinity (θgene)
14
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:23==
and isoform-based affinity (θisoform), each weighted by their respective modality weights
(wgene(i) for gene and wisoform(i) for isoform).
Finally WNN graph is constructed, which is a KNN graph built using modality weights. For
each cell the set {knng,i,1 . . . knng,i,200 ∪knnt,i,1 . . . knnt,i,200} and identify k-most similar
cells based on the weighted similarity metric as weighted nearest neighbors.
1.4
Study significance
Weighted Nearest Neighbor (WNN) method greatly improves the discrimination of rare
cell types. This method has been applied to gene and protein sets, but not yet to gene
and isoform data. The study of isoforms is crucial, as it can provide insights into the
diagnostic, prognostic and finding new potential drug targets. Isoforms carry specific,
biological functions, and their expression might be biologically more informative than at
the gene level. Utilization of isoform can potentially reveal previously omitted marker
features and aid in the detection of rare cell types
Despite the importance of isoforms, the tools for researchers to assess the importance
of isoform expression matrices at the clustering stage and subsequent analysis steps
are not readily available. This signifies a need to determine whether isoform expression,
combined with gene expression, is crucial at the clustering stage and provides novel bio-
logical insights. WNN strategy although readily available in the Seurat package requires
additional optimization and adjustment to be able to accurately utilize isoform-based data.
In the current study, an R package named scIsoExploreR has been developed to facilitate
such analysis and explore the isoform potential for improved clustering. Additionally, the
importance of utilizing isoform and gene count matrices for scRNA analysis is assessed
on multiple datasets through modality weight comparisons, novel cluster discovery, and
markers identification.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:25==
2
Methods
2.1
Overview
The importance of isoform in determining the molecular state of the cells requires utiliz-
ing a specialized set of computational methods. One of the goals of the current study
was to elucidate whether isoform expression provides additional biologically relevant in-
sight into the initial general analysis of scRNA-seq data. This process was performed in
a comparative manner where gene count matrix (GCM), isoform count matrix (ICM), and
isoform-gene fraction matrix (isoFrac), from a given dataset, were cross-profiled. The
analysis includes three main stages: modality weights comparison, novel cluster gener-
ation, and marker genes comparison. The analysis strategy was repeated on multiple
publicly available datasets, indicating a need to standardize it, which was done through
the development of the scIsoExploreR R package in combination with vignettes and a
script that serves as a standard operating procedure for this study. The following section
contains information on data sources and data availability, followed by a detailed descrip-
tion of the analytical approach developed. The functions and workflows indicated are
found in the package repository (https://github.com/bzimon/transClust).
2.2
Data sources
Input data was extracted using GEO accession numbers [41], from the human transcript
file v2.1.2 downloaded from the ARCHS4 database [31]. Additionally, a gene-transcript
file serving as a translation between the ENSEMBL gene id and transcript id was extracted
using FTP service from ENSEMBL online resources [42]. On top of the feature ids the file
contained also transcript length (bp). The file is based on the ENSEMBL release version
107.
Datasets were selected based on the technology used, all of the Smart-seq2 datasets are
characterized by the full-read length that made possible isoform counts on the side of the
ARCHS4 database through Kallisto. Additionally, datasets containing multiple samples
and conditions were selected to make sure the analytical method developed can perform
the data integration step.
Having a ICM matrix extracted. The GCM was generated through left-join between ICM
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
17
==PAGE:26==
Table 2.1: Data sources with their respective GSE accession numbers, cell number, pres-
ence of multiple samples or conditions, number of conditions-sample combinations, the
technology used to generate the data and authors.
GEO
Cells No.
Cond.
Cond. No.
Technology
Authors
GSE176509
1559
Yes
4
Smart-seq2
Nakimazo et al., 2021 [43]
GSE84465
3578
Yes
4
Smart-seq2
Darmanis et al., 2017 [44]
GSE132149
3964
Yes
16
Smart-seq2
Hu et al., 2020 [45]
GSE177616,
GSE177689
2675
Yes
9
Smart-seq2
Kagawa et al., 2022 [46]
and gene-transript translation file. The isoform counts were summed by ENSEMBL gene
id.
To generate isoFrac matrix, firstly ICM was converted to RPKM values using the equation
below.
ICMRPKMi =
qi
li ∗!
j qj
∗109
• qi - isoform counts
• ls - isoform length
• !
j
qj - total number of mapped reads
Next each of the ICMRPKM features were divided by the total count of the gene to which
this transcript belongs, generating an isoform-gene fraction matrix (isoFrac).
isoFraci =
ICMRPKMi
!
t∈G
ICMRPKMt
Where:
- isoFraci is the isoform-gene fraction for a specific isoform i.
- ICMRPKMi is the initial RPKM-based isoform count matrix for isoform i.
- !
t∈G
ICMRPKMt is the sum of RPKM-based isoform count matrix values for all isoforms
t that belong to the same gene G as isoform i.
Finally, the sample and condition information were extracted from the same ARCHS4
human transcript. The count matrices used and conditions for each dataset can be found
18
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:27==
in the supplementary file attached.
2.3
Quality control
The goal of the quality control step was to generate a data frame that indicates which cells
can be defined as outliers in terms of a high percentage of mitochondrial RNA, a low library
size, a low number of features, or a low number of cells per sample-condition combination.
The metric used to assess the magnitude of the effect was mean absolute deviation, cells
that were either 3 times greater or 3 times lower, depending on the measured property,
were marked as low-quality and discarded.
Quality control was performed using an adaptive threshold instead of a fixed one, which
was motivated by the challenging nature of establishing fixed thresholds for multiple di-
verse datasets without expert insight into each of them. Adaptive threshold allows the
workflow to be more flexible when novel datasets are analyzed because there is no need
to adjust the quality control parameters with each new dataset manually. The strategy
limitation is that the majority of cells have to be of high quality for the MAD-based thresh-
olding to appropriately select low-quality cells as outliers.
For each dataset, the quality control was done using a generate_qc_map wrapper func-
tion, from the developed scIsoExploreR package, with the conditions argument set to true,
which assures that each cell’s quality metric is evaluated in comparison with the cells be-
longing to the same batch (sample-condition combination).
There are several operations taking place inside the generate_qc_map functions. The
process starts with converting the GCM data frame into a Seurat Objects using the func-
tion called counts2seurat. The conditions are inserted into the meta data slot of the newly
generated Seurat object using the cond2seurat function. Seurat object generation simpli-
fies processing in the downstream functions.
The newly generated Seurat object is provided to a filter_map function responsible for the
following operations: identifying indices of mitochondrial genes, calculating per-cell QC
metrics, and generating a data frame with cells as indices and QC metrics as columns.
In detail, cell quality metrics were generated using perCellQCMetrics from the scuttle
package with a subset argument equal to a list of mitochondrial gene indices, that were
extracted with the getMT_idx function. QC data frame generation was done using per-
CellQCFilters function from the scuttle package with ”sub.fields” argument set to ”sub-
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
19
==PAGE:28==
sets_MT_percent”, to filter out potentially dead cells that would have greater mitochon-
drial genes content, and batch argument set to conditions to avoid inflated MADs due to
batch effects.
Finally number of cells per batch was evaluated and batches with less than 50 cells were
marked as not satisfying quality thresholds. This step is necessary because at the data
integration stage PCA optimization is performed in the later stages, which requires at least
50 cells per condition to provide accurate selection of the principal components.
The output of the quality control stage is a data frame with boolean columns representing
quality metrics and a discard column, indicating whether a cell should be removed. This
data frame is used in the following stages to remove low quality cells and as an input to
a qc_plot function, which draws a bar plot indicating how many cells have to be removed
and which qc-checks the cells failed.
2.4
Data integration and low-quality cells removal
Analyzed datasets are multi-sample and multi-condition, data integration assures that
technical variation arising from differences in experimental procedure, sampling proce-
dure, and other factors is removed. In general, the process is based on finding batch-
specific genes and then utilizing them to minimize batch effects between the groups.
Function filter_and_integrate was designed to filter low quality cells and integrate batches
returning ready for subsequent clustering Seurat object. This function was applied indi-
vidually to each type of matrix: GCM, ICM, and isoFrac.
Batch integration is computationally intensive the greater the number of cells and condi-
tions, which is why additional positional arguments (save and rerun) were added to this
function and to other computationally demanding functions called clustering_workflow and
weights_per_combination. The scIsoExploreR package was designed with this heavy
computation and need for object storage in mind. That is why all compute-heavy func-
tions can save output objects, when the save argument is set to true, and read them
automatically skipping the computation step. Loading behavior can be overridden setting
the rerun argument to true. The major function arguments are the quality control data
frame generated in the previous step, count matrix or count matrix path, matrix type (ICM,
isoFrac, or GCM), data frame containing conditions, normalization method, and additional
positional arguments.
20
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:29==
Low-quality cells removal
The count matrix from each dataset was converted to Seurat
object using the counts2seurat function. The conditions were inserted into meta data slot
using the cond2seurat function. Finally, low quality cells were removed based on the
discard column of the quality control data frame generated in the previous step.
Data integration
Seurat object was passed to sample_condition_integration function.
The count matrix was split according to the condition data frame, each batch was normal-
ized using logarithmic normalization for GCM, ICM, and isoFrac. The logarithmic normal-
ization was selected for isoFrac because because it was shown to increase the modality
weights, which was verified in the normalization optimization step, described in a section
below. Following normalization 2000 highly variable features were selected using Seu-
rat’s FindVariableFeatures function. From those variable features integration features
were identified using Seurat’s SelectIntegrationFeatures function, the function ranks fea-
tures by the number of datasets in which it is deemed highly variable and then selects the
features with the highest median rank.
Next batches were prepared for unsupervised anchor identification between batch pairs.
Anchors represent two cells (one from each batch), which are predicted to share a com-
mon biological state. Anchor identification was performed using reciprocal PCA accord-
ing to Seurat’s vignette (https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/integration_rpca.html). Fast
reciprocal PCA was selected to accommodate for scalability of the workflow, fast rPCA is
optimized to handle a large number of cells to integrate.
The process started with scaling batches using Seurat’s ScaleData function which scales
and centers the data preparing it for dimensional reduction using Seurat’s RunPCA. For
both functions, the features argument was set to the previously found integration features
list. Importantly the number of PC components in the RunPCA function was selected
based on the elbow_opt function, described in the following PC component optimization
section, with a Z-score set to 10. In general, the function aims to select the optimal number
of PC components maximizing the variance explained. The PC component selection was
performed per batch and stored in a list, from which the maximum PC component number
was used as input for the dimension arguments (dims) of Seurat’s FindIntegrationAnchors
function. This ensured that batches that require a larger number of components to explain
the same variation levels wouldn’t be negatively affected.
Integration anchors were found using Seurat’s FindIntegrationAnchors function. The neigh-
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
21
==PAGE:30==
borhood size (k-anchor parameter) was initially set to 5, according to Seurat’s protocol and
the reduction argument was set to rPCA. Dimensions size (dims argument) was defined
based on the elbow_opt function. The batches were integrated using Seurat’s Integrate-
Data function with the k.weight argument initially set to 100 - Seurat’s default. The func-
tion was responsible for the generation of a transformation matrix based on differences
between expression matrices for every pair of anchor cells. This correction matrix was
applied to the original data to accommodate for batch effects.
If the number of anchor cells (k.anchor parameter) identified were lower than the number
of neighbors used when weighing the anchors (k.weight parameter), which might occur
due to a low number of cells per batch and integrating low cell number batch into high
cell number batch, IntegrateData function would fail. Error handling capability was added
to the sample_condition_integration function, which adds 10 to the initial value of the
k-anchor parameter in the FindIntegrationAnchors. Additionally, the error handling capa-
bility divides the k-weight parameter by 2. The modification is applied to both parameres
until the error subsides and the integration continues.
Finally, each modality was returned with the integrated assay and project name field re-
flecting the matrix type used (ICM, GCM, or isoFrac).
2.5
Modality clustering
The clustering of the integrated data is a necessary step before each modality: ICM, GCM,
and isoFrac from a given dataset can be combined into multi-modal objects and subjected
to WNN strategy.
The clustering is managed by a wrapper function called clustering_workflow that calls clus-
ter_and_save function, which either performs clustering through run_standard_pipeline
function or loads pre-computed clustered Seurat object. The wrapper function cluster-
ing_workflow returns a list of clustered modalities, a UMAP-based plot with color-coded
conditions, and a UMAP plot indicating clusters assignment. clustering_workflow function
takes a list of integrated modalities as input alongside additional positional arguments in-
cluding resolution_grid that is used to select appropriate clustering resolution based on
the SC3 metric optimization described in the later section.
Each modality was individually scaled and centered using Seurat’s ScaleData, this step
although performed at the integration stage was repeated due to the scaled matrix being
22
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:31==
removed from the integrated assay in Seurat object after batches merger. PCA was done
using the PC component number selected based on elbow_opt method automatically for
each modality. This step was followed by UMAP for visualization purposes. Based on
the PCA reduction nearest-neighbour graph was constructed through the Jaccard index
calculation (neighborhood overlap) between every cell and its 20 nearest neighbors. This
was done using Seurat’s FindNeighbors function. Clustering was done using Seurat’s
FindClusters with optimal resolution parameters selected for each modality based on the
SC3 metric optimization using the developed sc3_per_resolution function.
2.6
Modality weights analysis
Using ICM, GCM and isoFrac clustered modalities multimodal objects were generated to
assess the impact of modality weights on defining cell neighborhood in the WNN method.
Multimodal objects generated in this step were:
• GCM + ICM
• GCM + isoFrac
• ICM + isoFrac
• GCM + ICM + isoFrac
The generation of multimodal objects and clustering is managed by the function called
get_mm_and_cluster, which was used to perform the steps described in this section.
Each multimodal object was generated using the generate_multimodal_object function
that transferred RNA (original normalized count matrix) and integrated assay from clus-
tered modality to the newly created Seurat object. The assays were renamed according
to the matrix type for instance GCM modality assays were renamed from RNA and inte-
grated to gcm_RNA and gcm. The assay name assigned to PCA reductions was changed
to the name of the matrix that was used for the reduction. This operation ensured that
appropriate reductions corresponded to renamed assays and that assays were not over-
written since each of the modalities before renaming shared the same name regardless
of the modality used.
Seurat’s FindMultiModalNeighbors function was given a multimodal object (MM), a re-
duction list, and the reduction dimensions of the clustered modes. Nearest neighbors
were identified for each cell based on the weighted combination of the provided modal-
ities and a WNN graph was constructed. This graph was subjected to UMAP (Seurat’s
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
23
==PAGE:32==
RunUMAP) reduction for future visualization. Clusters were identified using Seurat’s Find-
Clusters provided WSNN graph, using the SLM algorithm analogous to Seurat’s proto-
col (https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/weighted_nearest_neighbor_analysis). The reso-
lution of clustering was determined based on the SC3 metric using the sc3_per_resolution
function.
The resulting modality weights per cell were saved to an RDS file containing details on
the multimodal object name they were associated with, dataset GSE accession number,
and cluster assignment of the cell. An additional file was saved that contained the cluster
number per MM object.
Modality weights per cluster for each MM object were visualized using a box plot.
2.7
Novel cluster discovery
In the modality weght analysis number of cluster per modality combination was deter-
mined.
Finding which clusters are most often split into subclusters when multimodal
aproach is used is the goal of the novel cluster discovery step. Subcluster populations
may have important biological significance that is uncovered when gene and isoform res-
olutions are combined through WNN method.
Firstly combination of modalities containing GCM and any other isoform-based matrix
that yields the highest cluster number in the weights analysis step was identified using
high_cluster_combination function. Identification of this modality combination is based
on the data frame generated in the weights analysis stage that indicates cluster numbers
per MM object.
A multimodal object containing GCM and isoform-based modality is generated, subjected
to clustering based on the WNN graph (multimodal) and KNN graph (GCM only) and
returned using sm_vs_mm function. The number of clusters is compared between a single
gene modality (GCM) and a multimodal object containing gene and isoform information.
If the number of clusters increased when isoform expression data was combined with the
gene expression data, cluster split analysis was performed next. Otherwise, novel cluster
discovery is terminated.
Cluster split analysis started by combining cluster assignment of cells based on uni-
modal and multimodal approaches into a single data frame using cells_per_cluster func-
tion. A contingency table indicating differences in relative cell abundance per cluster
24
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:33==
was constructed using the make_contingency_table function and passed to the contin-
gency2pheatmap function that was used to visualize cluster splits.
Subclusters that contained at least 25% of cells from the original GCM-based cluster as-
signment were treated as significant and subjected to the marker genes analysis. This
threshold was selected, because major cluster splits suggest that resulting subclusters
are likely to contain cells molecularly distinct from each other, while a low number of cells
in the resulting subcluster indicates that the assignment may be caused by the heuristic
of the clustering algorithms. Moreover, with little cells per cluster following analysis of
markers would not yield statistically confident results.
To evaluate the biological relevance of the subclusters they were subjected to marker
genes analysis managed by markers_per_split wrapper. In the subclusters, there are
cells originating from cluster splits and additional cells, GCM matrix was subsetted to rep-
resent only the cells originating from the split using subset_cells_asign_ident. Marker
genest were found based on the normalized but non-integrated count matrix using Seu-
rat’s FindMarkers function with the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test. Only genes differentially
expressed in at least 25 % of cells, characterized by a Bonferroni correction adjusted
p-value lower than 0.05, and minimum average logarithmic fold change in expression
(avg_log2FC argument) of 0.25 were considered significant. Based on the sign of aver-
age logarithmic fold change genes were assigned to subclusters. Positive fold change
was used as an indication of high gene expression in the first subcluster, negative value
was used to assign the marker gene to the second group where it is upregulated. Sub-
clusters where each group contains marker genes were considered biologically relevant.
The limitation of the novel cluster analysis is that it can be used to see whether the com-
bination of gene and isoform leads to the discovery of previously unseen relationships
between cells, but it does not take into account that isoform expression may be superior
to the gene expression-based method. If that is the case then GCM data combined with
ICM data may introduce noise that would not be present using ICM data alone.
2.8
Identification of marker genes using different modalities
Different marker genes identified using isoform count matrix in comparison with GCM can
indicate that differential expression of alternatively spliced transcript may carry additional
information that could be missed when GCM is only considered. Additionally, the num-
ber of markers identified can suggest which of the modalities is most informative when it
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
25
==PAGE:34==
comes to describing molecular profiles of a given cluster.
Identification of marker genes was managed by a wrapper function markers_by_modalities,
which was used to initiate the construction of WNN graph based on ICM, GCM, and
isoFrac expression data and clustering through calling of get_mm_and_cluster function,
which is detailed in the multimodal analysis of weights section. Non-integrated count ma-
trices were used for finding marker genes using markers_per_cluster function that uses
Seurat’s FindMarkers and filters statistically significant genes. To identify differentially
expressed genes for each cluster, only genes characterized by a Bonferroni correction
adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 and positive logarithmic fold change for a given cluster
were considered. This step was repeated for each type of count matrix. For the isoform-
based matrices, the resulting transcript IDs of markers were translated to gene IDs. For
a given cluster relationships between marker genes identified using different modalities
were visualized using a Venn diagram using ggvenn function.
2.9
Normalization and scaling optimization
The normalization step assures that the expression values are comparable between cells,
even though the library size might differ between cells and experiments. In the current
study, normalization was applied during the data integration step. For the GCM and ICM
the defaults seurat normalization method logarithmic normalization was applied, which
divides feature counts by the total number of cell features. This was followed by adding 1
to the resulting value and transforming using a natural logarithm. The addition of one as-
sured that logarithmic transformation works for expression values equal to or approaching
zero. Moreover, logarithmic transformation is helpful in the assessment of fold changes
in expression which can be more informative than absolute change in expression.
The isoFrac modality is prenormalized using transcript length normalized RPKM values
before calculating isoform fractions. To verify if isoFrac modality should be additionally
normalized or scaled impact of those methods on modality weight changes was evalu-
ated. Alternative normalization and standardization combinations listed in the table 2.2
account for all the available normalization strategies in Seurat. Scaling and centering
are evaluated concerning the modality clustering step, during data integration scaling and
centering were applied every time. The assessment of modality weights was performed
based on the data extracted from the GSE176509 dataset.
To verify modality weight changes isoFrac was normalization and standardization using
26
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:35==
Table 2.2: Summary of the normalization and standardization experiments to which
isoFrac matrix was subjected. The columns represent normalization strategies: None
- no normalization, LogNorm - logarithmic normalization, CLR - centered log ratio, RC -
Relative Counts. Standardization is represented by the rows where the data was scaled,
centered, scaled and centered (sc & ct) or no standardization was applied (None).
Normalization
None
LogNorm
CLR
RC
Scaling
scale
None scale
LogNorm scale
CLR scale
RC scale
center
None center
LogNorm center
CLR center
RC center
scale & center
None sc & ct
LogNorm sc & ct
CLR sc & ct
RC sc & center
None
None None
LogNorm None
CLR None
RC None
different methods (table 2.2), multimodal objects were generated using as the second
modality:
• isoFrac modality that was neither normalized nor standardized
• log normalized, scaled and centered GCM
• log normalized, scaled and centered ICM
Based on those comparisons isoFrac normalization and standardization strategy with the
highest modality weight in majority of the comparisons was selected.
2.10
Principal components number optimization
The principal components number optimization function (elbow_opt) was used to calcu-
late a stepwise change in the standard deviation of PCA components indicating a rate
of change in variance. Z-Score for each step was calculated by subtracting the median
from the stepwise change and division by MAD. The principal component where the Z-
score was greater than the threshold value of 10 was the last PC component kept. This
approach allows for tracking the rate of change in variance, translating this change to an
estimate of how much information adds to each component. This function was applied
before every PCA in the scIsoExploreR. The limitation of the method is the need for at
least 50 cells for the selection of the component numbers. Moreover, if none of the vari-
ance changes is greater than the Z-Score, which can happen if the first 50 components
do not show large changes in variance, the optimal number of PCs cannot be established.
In that case, 50 PC components are returned.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
27
==PAGE:36==
2.11
Clustering resolution optimization
The resolution parameter has to be selected depending on the biological context and
number of cells. Generally the greater the resulting value the higher the number of clus-
ters discovered FindCluster function. In the current study, SC3 optimization was applied
to select the most stable resolution for SLM and Louvain algorithms used by Seurat’s
FindClusters function. SC3 metric was introduced for clustering of scRNA-seq data in the
SC3 package. The general strategy applied is based on rewarding clusters that contain
the same cells at different clustering resolutions, with additional penalization at greater
resolutions [47].
Every FindClusters function from Seurat’s package in the scIsoExploreR package was
provided with a resolution grid ranging from 0 to 2 with a step of 0.2. This range was
chosen according to the general Seurat’s guidelines that recommend resolutions between
0.4 and 1.4 for datasets containing around 3000 cells (https://hbctraining.github.io/scRNA-
seq/lessons/07_SC_clustering_cells_SCT.html), which is the range of cells encountered
in the current study. Clustering results were passed to the sc3_per_resolution function that
generates stability scores for each cluster at all the resolutions tested. This was done by
by calling the sc3_all_clusters function which was responsible for aggregating the results
from all the clusters for a resolution range. SC3 score per cluster was calculated within
the sc3_per_cluster function utilizing the following equation for stability calculations:
SC3 score =
1
ks∗(N2)
!
ks
!
N
shared cells
shared cells+extra cells
The scored cluster is split into smaller clusters with the resolution increased, and the num-
ber of clusters resulting from the split sharing cells with the original cluster is represented
by N. The size of the resolution grid is described by ks. Shared cells represent the inter-
section of cells from the scored cluster and another cluster, while extra cells stand for the
difference between cell sets. Correction for the range of resolutions is provided through
the division of the sum by ks. Additional penalty for cluster number and cluster splits was
represented by N2. The value of SC3 score ranges from 0 to 1, where 1 is the highest
and 0 the lowest cluster stability.
After performing the SC3 score calculations using sc3_per_resolution, data frame was
returned containing average SC3 score per resolution. The resolution showing the highest
average SC3 stability was selected using the find_best_resolution function. Clustering
results were evaluated according to cell cluster assignment based on this resolution. The
28
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:37==
motivation for applying optimization of this parameter was to compare clustering results
at the resolution that provides the highest cluster stability, which should translate to the
greatest biological relevance of the clusters. Additionally, scIsoExploreR was designed
to be versatile for various types of datasets which is why the usage of fixed resolution
parameter would not be flexible enough in changing biological contexts, due to differences
in the similarity of molecular profiles of cell types sequenced.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:39==
3
Results
The results chapter consists of an overview of the scIsoExploreR package (fig. 3.1), a
detailed description of the isoform impact on the scRNA-seq analysis of an experiment
(GSE176509) focused on the inflammatory responses in human skin cells in patients suf-
fering from atopic dermatitis and psoriasis, and combined analysis of multiple datasets
(GSE176509, GSE202695, GSE132149, GSE177616-GSE177689, GSE84465).
The
analysis of the individual dataset aims to highlight the detailed impact of isoform data
on scRNA-seq workflow on this dataset. The combined dataset analysis was performed
to establish whether the impact of combined GCM and ICM-based analysis can be gen-
eralized independent of the dataset of choice.
3.1
Overview of scIsoExploreR package workflow
The scIsoExploreR R package was built to streamline the combined analysis of isoform
and gene expression data. The gene modality tested consists of a gene count matrix
(GCM). In contrast, the isoform modalities are represented by the isoform count matrix
(ICM) and isoform-gene fraction matrix (isoFrac), designed to represent a ratio of alter-
native transcripts expressed from a given gene. In detail, the isoFrac ratio represents
transcript length normalized RPKM values divided by the total transcript expression for a
given gene.
3.1.1
Unimodal scRNA-seq workflow
Before the modalities can be combined using WNN method they were subjected to sev-
eral preprocessing steps visualized as unimodal part of the workflow in the fig. 3.1. The
preprocessing begins with the generation of the quality control data frame based on the
GCM, which lists low-quality cells based on their mitochondrial RNA content indicating
potential cell death, lower library size or lower number of features. The quality control is
performed on a batch basis, meaning the cells marked as low quality are compared to
the cells from the same batch. Moreover, batches containing less than 50 cells are also
marked as low quality, which is motivated by a PCA optimization strategy that requires at
least 50 cells to appropriately select the number of PC components optimal to explain the
variation in the dataset.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
31
==PAGE:40==
Unimodal scRNA-seq workflow
GCM
ICM
GCM-based QC map
generate_qc_map()
1. Library Size
2. Number of features
3. Mitochondrial RNA content
4. Number of cells per condition
nmad = 3
Integrated GCM
Integrated isoFrac
Data integration &
QC filtering
filter_and_integrate()
Integrated ICM
Data integration &
QC filtering
filter_and_integrate()
Clustered GCM
Clustering
clustering_workflow()
Clustered ICM
Clustering
clustering_workflow()
Clustered isoFrac
Clustering
clustering_workflow()
Modality weights
comparison
weigths_per_combination()
Novel clusters
detected
Novel cluster analysis
compare_cluster_number()
Biological relevance
of novel clusters
marker_all_splits()
Modality-specyfic
markers
markers_by_modalities()
Multi-modal objects generation
GCM + isoFrac
GCM + ICM
ICM + isoFrac
GCM + ICM +
isoFrac
No novel
clusters
Data integration &
QC filtering
filter_and_integrate()
isoFrac
Figure 3.1: Overview of the scIsoExploreR package workflow
32
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:41==
The quality control data frame obtained in the previous step is then used as an input to the
data integration and quality control step alongside each of the count matrices (GCM, ICM,
isoFrac). Low-quality cells are removed and sample-condition integration is performed
on the remaining high quality cells. During the sample condition integration, each count
matrix is log normalized, scaled, and centered per batch. Highly variable features from
the batches are selected and passed to the anchor searching function which identifies
cells that can be used to harmonize molecularly equivalent cell profiles across batches.
Integrated data matrices of each modality are then subjected to a clustering managed
by the clustering_workflow function, which begins with scaling and centering, followed
by PCA, UMAP, and building of nearest-neighbor graph that is used to cluster the cells.
Clustered modalities prepared in this fashion are ready to be utilized in multimodal object
generation stage.
3.1.2
Multimodal scRNA-seq workflow
Three modalities prepared can be used to generate four multi-modal objects: GCM + ICM,
GCM + isoFrac, ICM + isoFrac, and GCM + ICM + isoFrac. Multimodal object generation
consists of defining multimodal neighbors based on the PCA reduction from the clustering
step, which results in WNN graph construction that can be used to define which modality
is the most accurate in predicting cell assignment to a cluster. The cells are subjected
to UMAP reduction and clustering according to the WNN graph. Each of the multimodal
objects generated can be used to assess the impact of modalities on cell-to-cluster as-
signment highlighting the importance of the modalities for determining cell’s molecular
profiles and cell types.
The novel cluster discovery step was designed to determine whether any of the isoform
modalities can be used in combination with GCM to uncover previously unseen hetero-
geneity in cell populations. The number of clusters discovered using any GCM-containing
multimodal object is compared with the number of clusters generated based on the GCM
modality alone. If novel clusters are discovered using multimodal objects, cluster splits
analysis is performed, which is based on marker identification in the resulting subclusters.
Modality-specific marker gene discovery utilizes multimodal objects containing all three
modalities. Based on the WNN graph the clusters are defined and marker genes for
each cluster are identified based on the non-integrated matrix of each modality. This
approach allows for the identification of marker features common and unique for each of
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
33
==PAGE:42==
the modalities. It also provides a means for marker feature quantification.
3.1.3
Normalization and scaling
When dealing with the GCM and ICM modalities logarithmic normalization, scaling, and
centering were applied during data integration and clustering. However, the isoFrac ma-
trix intrinsically has a different numerical representation than the count matrices GCM and
ICM, it is normalized using transcript length normalized RPKM values before the calcula-
tion of isoform fractions. To ensure that a combination of normalization, scaling, and cen-
tering selected is adjusted to isoFrac modality, different normalization and standardization
methods were tested using modality weight comparison as a metric for the selection of
the most optimal strategy. A combination of 16 different normalization and standardiza-
tion approaches (table 2.2) were compared against not normalized, not scaled and not
centered isoFrac, log normalized and standardized GCM, and ICM.
Logarithmic transformation of the isoFrac matrix accompanied by scaling and centering
ranks among the top 3 tested normalization methods. Looking at the second panel isoFrac
and GCM-based WNN graph indicates the highest modality weights for isoFrac when log
normalization and standardization is applied (fig. 3.2 panel 2). The same tendency is
observed for ICM and isoFrac multimodal object (fig. 3.2 panel 3). In contrast, when two
isoFrac modalities are subjected to different normalization and standardization methods
relative count normalization seems to be most robust in determining cell states (fig. 3.2
panel 1). Interestingly lack of additional normalization and standardization of the isoFrac
matrix seems to negatively affect its importance during the WNN analysis, even though
isoFrac modality is based on transcript length normalized RPKM values. The reason
for this might be lack of logarithmic transformation, that was applied to the remaining
modalities. Logarithmic transformation might be beneficial for highlighting fold changes
in expression levels.
The majority of multimodal objects generated during the optimization step indicated im-
proved modality weights when logarithmic transformation, scaling and centering is applied
to isoFrac matrix, this method was applied to the experiments performed in the current
study.
34
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.2: Overview of normalization and standardization methods for isoFrac modality
extracted from the GSE176509, that indicates top 3 modality weights when WNN graph
is constructed with not normalized and not standardized isoFrac (first panel), log normal-
ized and standardized GCM (second panel), log normalized and standardized ICM (third
panel).
3.2
Isoform impact on scRNA-seq analysis - GSE176509
dataset
3.2.1
Overview
The impact of isoform-aided analysis on the single-cell sequencing analysis was first
established on the GSE176509 dataset, which was generated to explore dendritic cell-
mediated T-cell responses in inflammatory skin diseases mainly: atopic dermatitis (AD)
and psoriasis (PSO) [43]. This study is based on 4 skin biopsies that were obtained from
two patients with AT and two with PSO, from both non-lesional and lesional locations. Sin-
gle cell suspensions were produced using enzymatic digestion. The experiment contains
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
35
==PAGE:44==
1559 cells.
3.2.2
Quality control
The quality control map generated (fig. 3.3) indicates that nearly 10 % of cells should be
removed from the analysis. The majority of cells are discarded due to high mitochon-
drial RNA content (around 6%), indicating potential cell death during sample preparation.
Around 2.5% of cells are characterized by a low number of features and more than 1% of
the discarded cells shows low sequencing depth. Reduced sequencing depth captured
by the low library size metric can be caused by RNA loss during cell lysis, inefficient cDNA
capture or amplification. There are more than 50 cells in each sample, satisfying the PC
component optimization requirement.
Figure 3.3: Number of cells identified as low quality based on mitochondrial RNA content,
a low library size, a low number of features, or a low number of cells per sample-condition
combination. Cells that did not satisfy any of the quality control measurements are marked
in the discard bar.
3.2.3
Clustering
Each modality was subjected to the removal of low quality cells, data integration, and
clustering. The highest cluster number was found using ICM, followed by isoFrac and
GCM (fig. 3.4a). ICM-based clustering resulted in more than double the GCM clusters,
keeping average cluster stability slightly higher than GCM-based clustering (fig. 3.4b).
Noteworthy isoFrac is characterized by the second highest number of clusters, but the
resulting clusters show lower stability in comparison with ICM and GCM.
36
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.4: Number of clusters identified using for each modality (A) and average stability
of the clusters measured using SC3 stability score (B).
Figure 3.5: Clustering results for GCM (A), ICM (B), and isoFrac (C) visualized using
UMAP reduction with labeled cluster numbers. Average cluster stability per resolution
based on the SC3 score was plotted for each of the modalities: GCM (D), ICM (E), isoFrac
(F).
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
37
==PAGE:46==
Based on the cluster number isoform modality seems to uncover cell heterogeneity missed
by GCM-based clustering while retaining the highest cluster stability among the tested
modalities. It is important to note that the higher the resolution selected the greater the
granularity of the clustering. Although the resolution selected for each of the modalities
assures the highest cluster stability according to the average SC3 score, it will also affect
the number of clusters - GCM modality was clustered with a substantially lower resolution
of 0.4 (fig. 3.5D), while both ICM and isoFrac were clustered using a greater resolution of
1.6 and 1.4 respectively (fig. 3.5EF). The higher resolution explains much larger cluster
numbers uncovered using ICM and isoFrac modalities. It is important to state that purely
looking at the 2d projection of the high dimensionality space cannot be used alone to gen-
erate conclusions on the global organization of the clusters without additional biological
insight. However observing certain general tendencies, UMAP projection of the GCM and
ICM modalities show a more rigid organization of cells (fig. 3.5AB). GCM cluster 7 shows
a great distance from the remaining clusters, a similar tendency can be observed for clus-
ters 13 and 17 on the ICM-based UMAP reduction. The projection of the isoFrac matrix
locates the majority of clusters within each other neighborhood with clusters 10 and 11
slightly distant (fig. 3.5C). However, the magnitude of the effect seems to be greatly dimin-
ished compared to GCM and ICM projections. Generally, ICM-based projection seems to
show the greatest complexity in cluster organization slightly resembling the GCM projec-
tion, but with additional clusters protruding from the central part of the plot.
3.2.4
Modality weights analysis
Modality weights distribution among all cells
The median modality weight analysis revealed that GCM and ICM modalities show greater
median modality weights than isoFrac modality independently of multimodal object type
(fig. 3.6). None of the modalities show a median weight of 0 indicating that they all con-
tribute to the prediction of cell-to-cell relationships. In each multimodal object ICM modal-
ity has a slightly higher median weight than GCM modality. However, both GCM and ICM
matrices seem to contribute significantly to predicting cell molecular profiles. Additionally,
it is worth noting that the distribution of modality weights per cell contains outlier cells. In
the GCM + ICM multimodal object, the median contribution of ICM is greater than GCM,
but there are several outlier cells where the opposite tendency can be observed. This
signifies the need for both modalities combined to describe cell profiles accurately.
The median isoFrac modality weight in the GCM + isoFrac multimodal object is signifi-
38
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:47==
cantly lower then GCM weight (fig. 3.6). However, the distribution of weights is quite wide
- several cells show modality weights for isoFrac above 0.5 while for GCM below 0.5.
Even though the majority of cellular profiles could be defined using GCM there seems to
be the contribution of isoFrac for a portion of cells.
Similarly to the previous comparison isoFrac matrix shows a lower contribution to the ICM
+ isoFrac multimodal object, with greater separation. More than 75 % of modality weights
per cell are lower for isoFrac (fig. 3.6).
Multimodal object based on ICM, GCM and isoFrac shows that GCM and ICM modal-
ity weights contribute similarly to defining cells molecular profiles with median weight of
around 0.3, while the median weight for isoFrac is slightly above 0.1.
The weight analysis for the GSE176509 dataset indicates that ICM and GCM both con-
tribute to identifying cell neighborhoods with the former being slightly more significant.
The IsoFrac matrix shows a significantly lower contribution, but there are groups of cells
that show a high contribution of isoFrac, those cells are outliers indicated on the ICM +
GCM + isoFrac comparison.
Figure 3.6: Modality weight distribution among all cells in different multimodal objects.
Each panel represents individual multimodal objects either: GCM + ICM, GCM + isoFrac,
ICM + isoFrac, or all modalities combined (GCM + ICM + isoFrac). Each modality contri-
bution is the modality weight assigned to a cell.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
39
==PAGE:48==
Modality contribution per cluster
The median contribution of weights was combined with assessing the contribution of each
modality to specific clusters. The cluster was assumed to be defined by modality if the
median modality weight is greater than the median modality weight of the accompanying
modality contributing to the same multimodal object.
The median modality weight per cluster is high for ICM modality in every multimodal object
that contains it: GCM + ICM, ICM + isoFrac and GCM + ICM + isoFrac. Moreover, isoFrac
median modality weight is lower than the accompanying modality in every cluster, which
means the contribution of this modality can be only partial (fig. 3.7).
Figure 3.7: Number of clusters defined the most by a given modality. Each panel repre-
sents the number of clusters identified by contributing modalities within multimodal objects
that are: GCM + ICM, GCM + isoFrac, ICM + isoFrac, or all modalities combined (GCM
+ ICM + isoFrac).
Focusing on the GMC + ICM object, 7 out of 9 clusters show greater median modal-
ity weight for ICM than GCM (fig. 3.7). This tendency is in agreement with the median
modality weight visualized in the fig. 3.6 where the median modality weight for all clusters
was slightly greater for ICM than GCM. There are two clusters where ICM shows signifi-
cantly greater median modality weight - clusters 1 and 7 (fig. 3.8A). However, GCM is the
most significant modality in defining two clusters which indicates that certain properties
of cells can be better captured by GCM, those clusters labeled as 6 and 8 show signifi-
40
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:49==
cantly higher GCM weights (fig. 3.8A). In another scenario where all three modalities are
combined, equal contribution of ICM and GCM can be observed, because both modalities
define an identical number of clusters, while isoFrac modality does not dominate for any
of the clusters (fig. 3.7).
isoFrac modality does not have a greater median modality weight than any other modality
in all tested multimodal objects. In the case of GCM + isoFrac, all the clusters have
a median modality weight higher for GCM. When ICM and isoFrac are used the same
tendency can be observed - all the clusters are defined in majority by ICM. However,
looking at the distribution of isoFrac modality weights it is quite widespread in the GCM
+ ICM + isoFrac approach. Several outlying cells with high isoFrac can be found in the
majority of the clusters. Moreover, in cluster 1 median weight of each modality and their
distribution are comparable, which suggests that each modality contributes in part to the
classification of cell profiles (fig. 3.8D).
Figure 3.8: Contribution of weights for individual clusters for different multimodal ap-
proaches.
GCM and ICM modalities combined contribute to the majority of the clusters in part, which
is indicated by similar distribution of modality weights in all cells (fig. 3.6), while specific
clusters are more defined by either ICM or GCM suggesting that the analysis of scRNA
with both isoform and gene data improves the definition of cell profiles (fig. 3.7). isoFrac
modality does not show a dominant contribution in any of the multimodal objects, but its
median modality weight for different multimodal objects is between 0.1 and 0.3 indicating
partial contribution.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
41
==PAGE:50==
Clusters number for different multimodal objects
Multimodal approaches show lower cluster numbers on average than unimodal ones.
Contributing to this is adaptive resolution selection using SC3 metric. The lower the reso-
lution selected using SC3 optimization the lower the number of clusters generated using
different strategies. The highest resolution of 0.8 was selected for GCM + ICM, followed
by 0.4 for ICM + isoFrac, 0.2 for GCM + ICM + isoFrac, and 0 for ICM + isoFrac. The
resolution selected for GCM + ICM was greater than 0.4 selected for GCM clustering in
unimodal analysis. This most likely facilitated the discovery of additional clusters fig. 3.9.
SC3 optimization accounts for clustering stability, but it also makes the comparison be-
tween cluster numbers more challenging, when different modalities are used for cluster-
ing. Additionally, often local maximum is found for low resolutions, this was observed for
ICM + isoFrac multimodal clustering that yields only 2 clusters (fig. 3.8B).
To evaluate whether the additional cluster discovered based on combined GCM and ICM,
carries biological significance, a comparison between cell cluster assignments was per-
formed between GCM and GCM + ICM strategies which is described in the novel cluster
discovery section.
Figure 3.9: Number of clusters identified using single modalities (red y-axis labels) and
multimodal objects (black y-axis labels). The dotted line indicates the threshold above
which isoform-based multimodal objects yield a greater number of clusters than gene
modality (GCM)
42
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:51==
3.2.5
Novel cluster discovery
In the previous section, the additional cluster was identified using the GCM + ICM multi-
modal approach. The novel cluster analysis revealed that several of the gcm base clus-
ters were reorganized after WNN graph based on gene-isoform modality was subjected
to clustering (fig. 3.10).
Figure 3.10: Heatmap indicating cell to cluster assignment based on the GCM modality
(rows) and GCM + ICM based multimodal object (columns). Cluster splits where both
subclusters contain at least 20 % of the original cluster are indicated with rectangular
boxes and labeled.
Several GCM based clusters (4, 5, 6, 7) can be considered stable, meaning 90 to 100 % of
cell-to-cluster assignment remains the same when the clustering is performed using GCM
+ ICM multimodal approach. However, for several clusters (0, 1, 2, 3) there is a significant
proportion of cells resigned to different clusters. This reassignment is partial for clusters 0,
2, 3 and full for cluster 1, where only 1 % of cells remain in the cluster with equivalent label.
Restructuring of clusters is a result of isoform information introduction in the multimodal
approach that redefines local and global relationships between the cells, which is formally
defined in the WNN graph used for clustering. The need for this restructuring suggests
that additional isoform data redefines the distance between cell profiles, potentially leading
to a more accurate representation of inter and intra-cluster relationships. On top of that
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
43
==PAGE:52==
additional cluster discovery could suggest that unseen heterogeneity within the dataset
has been uncovered. However, the significant impact of higher clustering resolution in the
multimodal approach has to be taken into account. The important observation is that cells
do not simply change the cluster label, but GCM-based clusters are split into subclusters
when the GCM + ICM strategy is applied. In order to asses the biological significance
of resulting subclusters, an analysis of the cluster split was performed. Subclusters that
contained at least 20 % of the total number of cells from the original cluster, were taken into
consideration. If there were more than two subclusters, the first two largest were taken
into account. Analysis performed in this manner captures only significant changes in the
distance between cells in the WNN graph. There were 4 pairs of subclusters identified in
this manner named split: 1, 2, 3, and 4 (fig. 3.10).
All the identified cluster splits are supported by the discovery of differentially expressed
genes, supporting the biological relevance of the resulting subclusters (fig. 3.11). More-
over, when cells from the subclusters are subjected to random cluster assignment no
marker genes with adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 are found. The most differentially ex-
pressed genes have been identified for subclusters 3 and 0 resulting from the split of GCM
cluster 0 (fig. 3.11A). There were more than 50 genes found for subcluster 3 and more
than 40 genes for subcluster 0 (fig. 3.11A). In combined GCM + ICM clustering cluster 0
and cluster 3 are characterized by median modality weights greater for ICM than GCM,
which suggests that the contribution of isoform information facilitated cluster split into two
distinct biologically relevant clusters. The other cluster splits have several DEGs varying
from 50 to 60 per subcluster, suggesting that they all have sufficient levels of homogeneity
and that the split correctly occurred.
In all tested cluster splits there are slightly more marker genes found for one of the sub-
clusters. This tendency does not seem to be directly proportional to the cell abundance
in the cluster for instance in the fig. 3.11D subcluster 3 contains 28 % of cells and more
than 30 DEGs while subcluster 4 contains 47 % of cells and only 28 % of DEGs. The
remaining subclusters have a relatively similar cell abundance per subcluster, though the
number of marker genes varies. This might suggest that subclusters with a lower number
of overexpressed genes are more homogenous, while subclusters with a higher num-
ber of overexpressed genes contain a more diverse cell population. A greater number
of overexpressed genes could be also indicative of cell stimulation, the dataset analyzed
contains DC and T-cells. Activated T-cell may respond with the overexpression of a variety
44
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:53==
of genes in response to activation.
Figure 3.11: Analysis of differentially expressed genes in the subclusters identified in the
cluster split analysis. The number of identified marker genes is compared to random
assignment of cells to cluster
All of the analyzed subclusters show greater median isoform modality weights and a suf-
ficient number of DEGs was found this suggests that combined gene and isoform expres-
sion can promote improved clustering of cells (fig. 3.11).
3.2.6
Discovery of modality-specific marker genes
A multimodal approach based on three modalities provides means to compare how each
of the information gene, isoform and gene-isoforms fractions can be used to identify
cluster-specific features. Those features in the current analysis represent transcript vari-
ants resulting from alternative splicing in the case of ICM and isoFrac and genes when
GCM is used to perform differential gene analysis. There are approximately 20,000 hu-
man protein-coding genes, resulting in 150,000 isoforms, which results in 7 transcript
isoforms per gene on average [48]. However, considering both coding and noncoding
genes around 3.5 transcript isoforms can be identified per gene on average [49]. The
number of transcripts per gene varies with some of the genes containing a single isoform
while others multiple. In a recent study, based on GTEx dataset containing healthy tissue
RNA expression, researchers found that the number of genes containing a single iso-
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
45
==PAGE:54==
form is greater than the genes with multiple transcript isoforms. Moreover, single-isoform
genes are more highly expressed than multiple-isoform genes [49]. This informs that the
estimation of the number of transcripts per gene cannot be directly applied.
To establish whether isoform expression matrices can be used to more comprehensively
describe cell types and their metabolism, the proportion of differentially expressed fea-
tures per cluster was determined (fig. 3.12). The features represent genes for GCM and
transcript isoforms for ICM and isoFrac. This approach does not account for different tran-
script isoforms originating from the same gene. To accommodate for this phenomenon
intersection between genes to which transcript isoforms from ICM and isoFrac point with
the genes identified based on GCM was performed for each of the clusters and summa-
rized for all clusters (fig. 3.13).
Figure 3.12: Proportion of marker features (genes or transcripts) found for each of the
clusters generated using three modalities combined: GCM, ICM, and isoFrac.
In each cluster on average 60% of all differentially expressed features (DEFs) were identi-
fied based on the isoFrac modality followed by transcript isoform (around 30%) and gene
modality (10 %) shown in the fig. 3.12. There are around 3 times more DEFs identified
using ICM than GCM, which corresponds to the average number of transcripts per coding
and non-coding genes in the human genome. For isoFrac there are 6 times more features
identified, this could relate to the average number of transcripts per coding genes set in the
human genome. To verify whether differentially expressed transcript isoforms are point-
46
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:55==
ing the the genes identified using GCM intersection was performed between gene IDs of
transcript isoforms identified using ICM and isoFrac and gene IDs found using GCM.
Around 19% (787) of genes identified using ICM or isoFrac are the same as genes iden-
tified using GCM, showing a level of agreement between modalities (fig. 3.13). However,
1958 genes found using both ICM and isoFrac were not identified using GCM, this stands
for more than 47% of marker genes identified among all clusters. ICM and isoFrac discov-
ered DEGs are largely in agreement, but there are novel markers previously missed when
GCM-based differential expression analysis is performed. Interestingly, around 30% of
DEGs (1230 genes) identified using isoFrac are not identified using any other modality.
It is unclear why the contribution of the isoFrac modality is so large in this case, as it was
the modality showing the lowest median modality weights in the previous analysis. How-
ever, the isoFrac matrix was normalized both for sequencing depth and transcript length,
while ICM and GCM were normalized only for sequencing depth which could contribute to
the bias in the discovery of differentially expressed genes. There are around 2% (81) of
genes identified by GCM, not found by any other modality, and around 1 % (43) of unique
genes found using ICM.
Figure 3.13: Intersection between marker genes identified using three modalities: GCM,
ICM and isoFrac.
The number of DEFs identified using each modality remains below 200 for clusters 0, 2
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
47
==PAGE:56==
and 4 (fig. 3.14). There is a slight increase in features found for cluster 1 and cluster 3
of up to 1000 DEFs found using isoFrac. The largest number of marker features was
found in cluster 5 where it reached 600 for GCM above 2500 for ICM and over 3500
for isoFrac. While the proportions of the features identified per cluster remain similar
in different clusters the absolute number of DEFs changes. Data used for clustering is
integrated, but the differential genes analysis uses normalized and not integrated data,
which is the currently recommended strategy. Cluster 5 may contain cells representing
two batches of cells because normalized, but not integrated data is used differential gene
analysis, which might lead to the detection of signal originating from technical variation
that is not necessarily biologically relevant.
Figure 3.14: Number of marker features found using three modalities: GCM, ICM and
isoFrac.
To focus more in-depth on modalities impact on DEFs search, each cluster has to be ana-
lyzed individually as the overall intersection can be misleading due to transcript isoforms
identified in one cluster overlapping with genes identified in a different cluster. The highest
number of DEGs was identified using isoFrac for clusters 0, 1, and 2, which means that in
50% of clusters majority of found DEGs can be attributed to the isoFrac matrix (fig. 3.15).
In the remaining clusters, the majority of DEGs identified were identical between ICM and
isoFrac, but distinct from GCM-based marker search. Overall in all the clusters, the most
markers were identified by either both ICM and isoFrac combined or isoFrac alone. This
48
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:57==
strengthens the previously noticed trend of isoform-based data identifying novel marker
genes missed when GCM-based cluster search is applied. Interestingly, in clusters 1, 2,
3, and 4 marker genes found at the intersection of all modalities are the third highest set,
while in cluster 5 second highest set. It is also worth noting that for each cluster there are
marker genes identified by each modality individually and are not shared with any other
modality.
Figure 3.15: Intersection between marker genes identified using three modalities: GCM,
ICM, and isoFrac for individual clusters.
Gene intersection sizes vary from cluster to cluster, but they are in general agreement with
combined differential gene expression analysis (fig. 3.13). Isoforme-based marker search
leads to the discovery of a large number of marker genes that are often distinct from GCM-
based search. One potential interpretation is that while overall gene expression within
the cell population does not seem to fluctuate, individual transcript isoform expression
varies between the cell populations. Certain transcripts may be expressed in response to
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
49
==PAGE:58==
stimulation or due to intrinsic differences in cell types. It has been shown that differences
between highly similar cell types are missed when only gene expression data is utilized,
which could explain the large difference in marker gene results [3].
Several DEGs can be identified only using GCM, ICM, or isoFrac, without any overlap
between modalities. Focusing on how largely overlapping the sets of markers identified
using ICM and isoFrac are one might assume that unique markers identified by ICM and
missed by isoFrac could represent false positives. If the research need is to identify only
very certain markers one could utilize only the genes overlapping between all modalities,
assuring stringent analysis. On the other hand, unique marker genes can point to specific
metabolic processes occurring within the cell missed by other modalities. The relevance
of identified markers should be then verified according to the research needs, with the
context of cell types used and the conditions that those cells were subjected to.
3.3
Isoform impact on scRNA-seq analysis - multiple
datasets
3.3.1
Modality weights analysis
Modality weights distribution among all cells
The contribution of modality to determining cell molecular profiles was assessed based on
modality weight distribution among 4 multimodal objects analyzing all clusters in combina-
tion, and visualized in the fig. 3.16. In most datasets specific order of modality importance
can be observed. In the fig. 3.16 GCM + ICM panel, for the majority of datasets median
modality weight of ICM is similar to or slightly greater than the median GCM weight. Fig-
ure 3.16 GCM + isoFrac panel, informs that GCM modality on average shows greater
importance in the WNN graph than isoFrac. The greater importance of ICM then isoFrac
in defining cell-to-cell relationships is in agreement among all datasets shown in fig. 3.16
ICM + isoFrac panel. When all three modalities are combined in 3 out of 5 datasets GCM
shows superior median modality weight to ICM. The lowest median modality weight is
observed for isoFrac which is in agreement with the previously described trend.
GSE132149 dataset opposes the greater importance of the ICM modality. Both in GCM +
ICM object and when all three modalities are combined in the GSE132149 dataset higher
modality weight is attributed to GCM. The weights per cell are not uniformly distributed for
this dataset in the majority of objects including ICM + isoFrac, GCM + isoFrac, and when
all three modalities are combined. Multiple outliers are present for GCM combinations with
50
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:59==
isoFrac and for GCM + ICM + isoFrac objects, which makes the analysis challenging.
Figure 3.16: Comparison between modality weights assigned to cells in different multi-
modal objects. Modality weights distribution was obtained from 4 datasets: GSE132149,
GSE176509, GSE177616-GSE177689, and GSE84465.
This dataset contains sequencing results from the healthy fallopian tube epithelial cells.
The GSE132149 dataset contains sequencing results from multiple patients, that in the
original study were integrated based on an in-house differentially-expressed-based clus-
tering algorithm to accommodate for batch effect, which suggests that the standard in-
tegration strategy was not sufficient to accommodate for batch effects [45]. Batch ef-
fects could negatively affect calculations of distance between cells and as a result modal-
ity weights stability. The wide distribution of weights for isoFrac-containing objects was
also observed in the dataset GSE84465 containing glioblastoma sequencing results [44],
pointing to the challenging nature of cancer cell analysis and its effect on isoform-based
clustering in a multimodal approach.
Modality contribution per cluster
In three multimodal objects number of clusters clusters containing cells with median modal-
ity weight greater for GCM is the highest. However, the discrepancy between GCM and
ICM weight contribution is multimodal object and dataset dependent for instance in the
GCM + ICM object (fig. 3.17) ICM defines a similar number of clusters to GCM with the
exception of previously discussed GSE132149 fallopian tube dataset. This dataset shows
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
51
==PAGE:60==
over 20 clusters with cells containing high GCM modality weights, which shifts the distri-
bution showing exceedingly high median modality for GCM.
Figure 3.17: Number of clusters identified by modality for each multimodal object. Cluster
is considered to be identified by modality if its median modality weight per cluster in the
multimodal object is the highest. The analysis was performed on 4 datasets: GSE132149,
GSE176509, GSE177616-GSE177689, and GSE84465.
An interesting trend can be seen in the GCM, ICM, and isoFrac multimodal object, where
a median number of clusters defined using GMC is around 6, for ICM 4 and for isoFrac 1.
While neither isoFrac nor ICM defines the higher number of clusters individually both of
those modalities combined define a similar number of clusters to GCM, indicating partial
contribution of isoform and gene modalities to cluster definition. Interestingly in the dataset
GSE132149 there are no clusters defined using ICM, although it is worth noting that the
resolution selected using SC3 metric for this cluster was set to 0, which means there
are only two clusters defined, whereas in the first cluster GCM has the highest median
modality weight and in the second cluster isoFrac. The first cluster defined by GCM in
this multimodal object contains cells showing an exceedingly high wide spread of modality
weights.
Datasets GSE177616-GSE177689 and GSE176509 do not contain any clusters defined
using isoFrac in the GCM + ICM + isoFrac object, out of 6 clusters for the former dataset
and 12 for the latter. This suggests that isoFrac contribution to cell-to-cell distance cal-
culation can only be considered partial and may only show value for specific cell types or
52
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:61==
conditions, indicated by the absence of isoFrac contribution to cluster definition in 50 %
of the tested datasets (fig. 3.17).
Only partial contribution of isoFrac to the WNN graph can also be seen in the GCM +
isoFrac and ICM + isoFrac objects, where in both cases significantly higher number of
clusters is identified using GCM or ICM.
Overall analysis of the dominant modality effect on specific clusters shows a similar order
of significance to the modality weight analysis. A similar modality weights ratio was at-
tributed to both GCM and ICM, which translates to almost the same distribution of cluster
numbers defined on average by each modality, keeping in mind the unusual GSE132149
dataset that holds an opposing trend. Combined analysis of isoFrac with either GCM or
ICM does not seem to show extremely high benefits as a low number of clusters is defined
by isoFrac and its median modality is much lower than accompanying modalities. In the
case of multimodal objects combining three modalities isoFrac impact seems to be highly
dataset-dependent.
Cluster number of uni and multimodal objects
The highest cluster number (18) was identified for GCM modality, while the lowest for
isoFrac, and three modalities combined (9) (fig. 3.18). ICM median cluster number was
the greatest with a median of 17.5 only similar to the median of ICM + isoFrac objects.
The distribution of cluster numbers for most multi and unimodal objects is quite wide and
dataset-dependent. The only object showing a similar cluster number across datasets
was GCM + ICM. Cluster number shifts in different datasets can be expected as each of
them contains different cell types, samples, and conditions. Some datasets show excep-
tionally high cluster numbers in 70% objects such as GSE84465, which is a glioblastoma
dataset. There are datasets where the GCM cluster number is lower than gene and iso-
form modalities combined including the GSE176509 dataset, which was highlighted in
a single dataset analysis section, or the GSE132149 dataset. In the remaining datasets
clusters number generated using GCM is greater than in any gene and isoform containing
multimodal object.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 3.18: Number of clusters for single modalities: GCM, ICM and isoFrac compared to
multimodal approach: GCM + ICM, GCM + isoFrac, GCM + ICM + isoFrac. The analysis
was performed on 4 datasets: GSE132149, GSE176509, GSE177616-GSE177689, and
GSE84465, where each object is distinguished by different point shape
The cluster number is highly dependent on the resolution selected. The correlation be-
tween cluster number and resolution is shown to be dataset-dependent, the linear model
shows a high fit indicated by R2 greater than 0.9 for the majority of the datasets. For
some datasets including GSE132149 and GSE84465 the increase in resolution results
in a steep increase of the cluster number indicated by a slope coefficient of around 14.
Those datasets include multisample data and cancer cells with more intricate expression
patterns. For the remaining datasets, the slope is between 8 and 9 showing a lower in-
crease rate (fig. 3.19).
54
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:63==
Figure 3.19: Cluster number shown as a function of resolution grouped by datasets
Cluster number as a function of resolution grouped by different uni and multimodal object
shows overall lower linear fit then dataset aggregation, with the R2 of 0.75 on average
with several object having R2 value lower than 0.6 such as ICM and ICM + isoFrac, while
other objects such as GCM and GCM + IsoFrac showing values of over 0.95 (fig. 3.20).
Figure 3.20: Cluster number shown as a function of resolution grouped by different modal-
ities
To conclude there is a significant impact of a dataset on the rate at which the number of
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
55
==PAGE:64==
clusters increases with the resolution, while the impact of uni or multimodal object used
seems to be less clear because the tendency is inconsistent across all objects. Gene
and isoform modalities combined can provide potential additional information for certain
datasets, which is reflected by a greater number of clusters discovered when the modali-
ties are used in combination. Biological relevance of novel clusters has to be evaluated,
which was done using cluster split and differential gene expression strategy in the follow-
ing section.
3.3.2
Novel cluster discovery
Additional clusters were found in 50% of analyzed datasets after isoform data was com-
bined with gene data (fig. 3.21), including dataset GSE17609 described in the previous
section, and GSE132149 dataset containing fallopian tube epithelial cells. From all mul-
timodal objects containing gene and isoform expression data GCM + ICM was shown to
have the highest cluster number in comparison with GCM clustering alone, which is why
cell-to-cluster assignment for both datasets was compared between GCM and GCM +
ICM.
Both GSE177616-GSE177689 and GSE84465 show lower cluster numbers for GCM +
ICM than GCM. Cell reassignment to different clusters likely took place without additional
clusters being identified. The median modality weights of datasets with and without novel
clusters for GCM + ICM multimodal object are similar, meaning that weight distribution
did not contribute to the lack of novel clusters. For GSE177616-GSE177689 GCM and
ICM clustering individually yields a higher cluster number than when both modalities are
combined, the same is observed for GSE84465. It is possible that for some datasets using
either GCM or ICM modality leads to clustering with greater granularity. Whether this
granularity corresponds to greater accuracy of clustering can’t be assessed purely based
on the cluster numbers and modality weights. Although knowing that with the increased
resolutions cluster stability is greater for those objects, based on the SC3 optimization, it
suggests that resulting clusters can reflect biologically relevant cell types and states. The
selection of modalities or their combination might be dependent on the dataset of choice,
in certain cases, isoform unimodal objects can be more beneficial, in terms of the number
of stable clusters discovered, than isoform and gene modalities combined such as it was
most likely the case in the GSE84465 dataset. Other scenarios may favor gene modality
(GSE177616-GSE177689), or both modalities combined (GSE132149 and GSE176509).
56
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:65==
Figure 3.21: Number of cluster splits for tested datasets. If none of the gene and isoform
containing multimodal objects contains a greater number of clusters than gene modality
alone 0 cluster splits are noted.
For the GSE132149 dataset, the cell-to-cluster assignment shows 14 cluster splits, de-
fined as at least two GCM + ICM subclusters containing more than 20% of cells from the
source GCM cluster (fig. 3.22). This accounts for around 64% of GCM clusters being
reorganized when isoform data is introduced, exceeding the number of clusters modified
in the GSE17609 dataset, where it was only half (fig. 3.10). In both datasets, we can also
observe stable clusters, where regardless of isoform expression data introduction major-
ity of cells remain aggregated, those clusters were labeled by rectangles in the fig. 3.22.
Stable clusters contain from 60% to 90% of cells aggregated in the same manner when
GCM is compared to GCM + ICM. Apart from discrete subcluster formation, the decompo-
sition of GCM cluster 9 into almost all GCM + ICM clusters can be seen (fig. 3.22). Cluster
decomposition suggests that original aggregation was not robust enough when isoform
resolution was taken into account.
More than half of the clusters were reorganized when isoform expression data was intro-
duced even though the median modality weight for ICM was close to 0 in the GCM + ICM
multimodal object (fig. 3.16). On top of that number of clusters thought to be defined by
the modality was equal to 2 (fig. 3.17). Most likely ICM was showing high modality weight
for a small fraction of cells. However, this proved to be enough to redefine the WNN graph
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
57
==PAGE:66==
and provide means for different clustering, which is manifested by the cluster splits and
reorganizations (fig. 3.22).
Figure 3.22: Visualization of cluster reorganization in the GSE132149 dataset based on
GCM + ICM and GCM approaches. GCM clusters are represented by rows, and GCM
+ ICM by columns. Cluster split is registered when there are at least two GCM + ICM
subclusters containing more than 20% of cells from the original GCM cluster. GCM clus-
ter 9 contains an almost complete cell-to-cluster assignment shift, based on a multimodal
approach, and it is denoted by a dashed rectangle surrounding the cluster label. The
remaining GCM clusters are considered stable, as noted by a non-dashed rectangle sur-
rounding the cluster number.
Both datasets contain marker genes in the subclusters resulting from marker splits. The
first 11 GCM cluster in the GSE132149 is characterized by around 100 genes on average
in both subclusters, with several having a similar marker gene count to the GSE176509
dataset (fig. 3.23). Split of clusters 18,19 and 20 resulted in subclusters containing up
to 390 marker genes. Those resulting subclusters show a high abundance of cells from
42% to 71% in at least one subcluster, though it does not fully explain the high marker
gene count because in the GCM cluster 2 resulting subcluster 5 also contains 65% cells
with significantly lower marker gene count of below 100. In that case, a high marker count
might reflect the diverse molecular profiles of the resulting subclusters.
58
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:67==
It is worth focusing on the low-count subclusters as well, those originating from GCM
clusters 3, 11, and 15. There is high cell abundance in at least one subcluster between
44% to 51% with significantly lower marker gene count. Lower differentially expressed
genes count suggest higher homogeneity of those clusters in comparison with high marker
gene clusters. However, the assignment of cell type and conditions to the subcluster
would have to be performed to accurately assess their relevance.
Overall indication of marker genes in both datasets suggests that gene and isoform infor-
mation combined can result in biologically relevant reorganization of clusters.
Figure 3.23: Marker genes number for cells participating in the cluster splits.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
59
==PAGE:68==
3.3.3
Discovery of modality-specific marker genes
Multimodal object consisting of gene, isoform, and isoform-fraction modalities was gener-
ated for each dataset and subjected to differential gene expression analysis. For dataset
GSE132149 no marker genes were found, because the resolution, selected by SC3 op-
timization, was set to 0, which led to the separation of cells into two clusters. One of
the clusters contained less than 3 cells which is too low to perform a marker search. The
remaining dataset yields different proportions of marker features by modality, with the ma-
jority of features found being represented by isoform-fractions (isoFrac) and isoform (ICM)
modalities. Gene modality was shown to find the least marker features in most datasets,
which could be expected as both ICM and isoFrac represent transcript isoforms, while
gene modality represents genes only.
Figure 3.24: Proportion of marker features found in all clusters based on different count
matrices.
Although gene modality overall facilitated finding the least features in comparison to other
modalities, for some datasets it contributed slightly more for instance in the GSE177616-
GSE177689 it facilitated finding around 12% of all the features (fig. 3.24). This is the high-
est contribution of gene modality across datasets and it correlates well with the analysis of
modality weights, where the GCM median modality weight for this dataset exceeded the
GCM weights of the remaining datasets for the GCM + ICM + isoFrac multimodal object.
60
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:69==
The highest contribution of ICM can be noted in the GSE176509 dataset, which is also
in agreement with the modality weight analysis as the ICM modality for GCM + ICM +
isoFrac object was shown to have the highest median modality weight, in comparison
with ICM weights in other datasets.
The highest proportion of marker features found based on isoFrac belongs to the GSE84465
dataset, which is surprising as the isoFrac median modality weight for this dataset was
close to 0. The reason for this could be that ICM weight for this multimodal object was
also the lowest across datasets, which could shift the proportions for isoFrac advantage.
The proportion of marker genes found in all the clusters shows a general trend indicating
that isoform modalities overall can find more features than gene modalities. It is important
to also note how each modality contributes to specific clusters
In the GSE176509 dataset modalities contribution to specific clusters (fig. 3.25) is follow-
ing the trend seen in the fig. 3.24.
In the GSE177616-GSE177689 dataset clusters 1, 5, 8, 9, and 11 show a significantly
higher number of markers found using gene modality - over 12% of all features (fig. 3.25).
There are 2 clusters - 3 and 4 where 90% of marker features are found using isoFrac,
which is the highest proportion per cluster seen among all datasets for isoFrac modality.
For the majority of the clusters in the GSE84465 dataset, isoFrac modality contributes the
most in terms of the number of features found, but clusters 9, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 19
show the greater proportion of features found using ICM modality, in some of the clusters
also increase in the number of genes found using GCM.
Figure 3.25: Proportion of marker features found in each cluster based on different count
matrices.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 3.26: Number of differentially expressed features normalized by the number of
clusters for each modality and dataset
In terms of the absolute number of features found normalized by the number of clusters
GSE84465 marker search revealed the highest feature count for ICM and isoFrac. The
highest number of markers found using gene modality was found for the GSE177616-
GSE177689 dataset, which also took overall second place in terms of absolute differen-
tially expressed features count. Although the proportion of marker features found using
GSE176509 isoform modality was the highest among datasets, in terms of the absolute
count this dataset had the lowest number of markers found by isoform modality (fig. 3.26).
The number of differentially expressed features is increasing with the number of clusters,
which suggests that greater granularity of clustering leads to grouping of more specialized
cell types, that contain a variety of gene or isoform features distinct from other groups.
Whether this grouping is based on the biological state and morphological features of the
cells is not certain and would require study-specific data and domain knowledge on the
markers characteristic for cells being used in the experiments.
62
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:71==
Figure 3.27: Intersection of marker genes found using gene (GCM), isoform (ICM), and
isoform-fraction (isoFrac) modalities based on the GSE177616-GSE177689 dataset
Figure 3.28: Intersection of marker genes found using gene (GCM), isoform (ICM), and
isoform-fraction (isoFrac) modalities based on the GSE84465 dataset
Gene intersection shows which marker genes found by each of the modalities are equiv-
alent. Knowing the number of common genes across modalities can highlight, whether
novel marker genes were discovered using the isoform information or if differentially ex-
pressed isoform transcripts are pointing to marker genes already discovered using gene
modality.
The highest proportion of identified marker genes are unique genes identi-
fied using isoFrac for both GSE177616-GSE177689 (fig. 3.27) and GSE84465 datasets
(fig. 3.28), and the intersection of isoFrac and ICM in the GSE176509 dataset (fig. 3.13).
The second-highest marker genes set is represented by the intersection of isoFrac and
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
63
==PAGE:72==
ICM for the GSE177616-GSE177689 and GSE84465 datasets, while for the GSE176509
dataset, it is unique genes identified using the isoFrac set. The third largest intersection
of genes was found to represent marker genes identified using all three modalities and it
is the third largest intersection size across all datasets. The high contribution of isoFrac
modality is surprising considering its low modality weight in the weights analysis and its
absence in the cluster number comparison.
IsoFrac modality reflects the proportion of transcript isoforms expressed from a given
gene. This means that even though two cells may differ in the level of this gene ex-
pression they can share an equivalent proportion of isoforms expressed. As a result,
this matrix informs on which isoforms were the most commonly found for a specific cell
but does describe what is the expression level of a given transcript. Based on the novel
cluster analysis and weights analysis proportion of isoforms expressed is not the most in-
formative in predicting cell-to-cell distance. Multiple differentially expressed features are
identified using this matrix, in reality, those do not directly represent differential expres-
sion between the cells, this is impossible to capture as each transcript is normalized by
a total number of transcripts expressed for a given gene. The IsoFrac matrix rather rep-
resents the proportion of transcript isoforms found in each cell, this proportion seems to
differ between the clusters resulting in multiple differentially expressed genes found. Part
of isoFrac identified genes are in agreement with ICM and GCM and those genes are
most likely accurately found. It is unclear whether the proportion of isoForm expressed
can reflect actual biological differences between the clusters helping to identify cell types
and states as this modality does not show high significance in other profiling performed
in the current study.
It is important to also look at unique genes found by other modalities. Even though dataset
GSE177616-GSE177689 does not contain the highest number of marker genes identi-
fied across all datasets it shows the greatest number of marker genes that are identi-
fied uniquely by ICM and GCM modalities individually, meaning the genes that are not
shared with any other modality set. For ICM 411 and for GCM 716 marker genes different
from other sets have been identified (fig. 3.27). GSE84465 (fig. 3.28) and GSE176509
(fig. 3.13) datasets also contain unique ICM and GCM genes, but in a much lower quantity
of less than 300 for the former and slightly above 100 for the latter. The presence of unique
genes not supported by other modalities should be carefully evaluated, because they may
represent false positive results. On the other hand, they can highlight differences between
64
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:73==
cell states that can be only detected by looking broadly at gene expression levels or more
precisely at isoform expression. Those results would have to be evaluated by correlating
the marker genes with cell types to determine whether they reflect markers typically found
in a specific tissue or as a response to a certain condition.
Overall high number of marker genes is identified using isoform modalities across all
datasets. Those marker genes are in large proportion different from the GCM discovered
differentially expressed features. This signifies that even though gene-level expression
differences between the cells are often not detected, at the isoform resolution they can
be noted. Having a larger proportion of differentially expressed features can be beneficial
especially when rare cell types have to be detected. Moreover, when molecularly similar
but functionally different cells have to be distinguished isoform modalities could be very
beneficial due to large number of differentially expressed genes that can be identified
using them.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:75==
4
Discussion
The current project aimed to evaluate the impact of isoform expression data on single-cell
sequencing analysis. Computational workflow was developed to facilitate the analysis
and apply it to multiple datasets. The standardized analytical pipeline was enclosed in
the R package scIsoExploreR, facilitating replicability of the results and providing tools for
the research community to evaluate isoform impact in their line of research.
The developed scIsoExploreR package combined with the standard analytical workflow
presented in the current project provides the toolset needed for streamlined analysis of
single-cell expression data including gene and isoform resolutions. Several library prepa-
ration methods, sequencing technologies, and computational approaches to transcript
isoform generations were developed [50, 51, 52], but their main focus differs from the cur-
rent analytical framework, which provides means for profiling gene and isoform expression
data on their cluster-wise significance, cluster discovery and impact on differential gene
expression analysis.
The goal of the developed computational strategy was to perform generalized and ap-
plicable to multiple datasets profiling of isoform impact, which involved adaptive quality
control metrics and integration strategy. However, in each of the source studies from
which the data originated additional quality metrics were taken into account. Often clus-
ters without expected marker genes were removed [45], hierarchical clustering based on
housekeeping genes was applied [44], or in-house data integration strategies were used
to accommodate for batch effects [45]. Usage of the computational approaches tailored
to the dataset, tissue, and experiment performed is limited in the current study, due to the
generalization needed when the package is applied to various datasets. However, the
lack of those additional custom steps may have resulted in lower biological significance
of resulting clusters, due to potential remaining batch effects.
Alternative splicing events leading to the generation of transcript isoforms were shown to
be significant in predicting molecular profiles of the cells, based on equivalent or greater
median modality weight when gene and isoform modalities are combined using the WNN
method, which was found in the majority of the datasets. Moreover, gene and isoform
modalities combined were shown to significantly impact the organization of the clusters,
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
67
==PAGE:76==
facilitating the discovery of novel clusters in some of the datasets. Subclusters were
shown to be biologically distinct indicating that initial aggregation of the cells into a single
cluster using gene modality lacked granularity. It is important to note that while clustering
is performed on batch-corrected data, marker search is done using normalized, but not
integrated data, which is motivated by diminishing bias resulting from the harmonization
of expression features among batches. The portion of marker genes found in the resulting
subclusters may represent technical variation between the batches. One of the strategies
to accommodate this challenge could be a separation of resulting subclusters into groups
each representing a given condition, followed by marker search and intersection of marker
genes found in each group. This was not applied in the current study, because splitting
low-quantity subcluster into even smaller populations would prohibit finding high-quality
markers, due to insufficient cell per condition number.
Isoform expression data was shown to highlight a greater quantity of differentially ex-
pressed features between the clusters, with the majority of identified features being missed
when a marker search was performed using gene modality alone. A high proportion of
unique marker genes found using the isoform modality can be useful in single-cell anal-
ysis where rare and highly similar cell types are in question. This result is in agreement
with research pointing to cell-type specific splicing occurring in various cell types includ-
ing pluripotent stem cells undergoing differentiation [50], bone marrow dendritic cells [53]
and peripheral blood mononuclear cells [54]. In the Volden (2022) study [54], LMNA gene
was found to be expressed in the majority of cells, featuring multiple unique isoforms in
different cell types, which indicates that heterogeneity of cell states can be missed when
gene expression is only taken into consideration.
Multiple practical applications of the current analysis can be derived including greater
stratification of cells when molecularly similar, but functionally distinct cells are studied
such as effector and regulatory T cells. Additionally, disease mechanism is often driven
by differential transcript isoform expression [1], having access to isoform-level expression
can help elucidate the pathology of disease state and provide means for the development
of novel therapeutic agents. One of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase isoforms plays a
crucial role in particular tumor types, prompting the development of PI3K isoform-selective
inhibitors [55]. Such therapeutics could be developed for other isoform-specific diseases
that could be uncovered when greater importance is placed on alternative splicing events
in analyzing disease pathology.
68
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:77==
Having a greater time frame for the isoform impact analysis, one could apply the analytical
workflow to a larger number of datasets further establishing how generalized is the impact
of isoform expression. Moreover when it comes to the discovery of novel clusters, vali-
dating whether the discovered cluster splits match a known cell type, through labeling of
the resulting clusters using identified differentially expressed genes, could be performed.
The impact of isoform-gene fractions should be further investigated due to its extremely
high number of identified marker genes for all studied datasets. Isofrac contribution to the
high number of differentially expressed genes in combination with its low impact on WNN
weights and novel clusters is surprising and requires further investigation. Additionally,
different metrics for selecting optimal resolution should be tested as the stability of the
clusters may not be relevant for all studies performed, often low resolution selected in this
approach prevented the thorough analysis of the isoform impact.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
69
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[1]
Natalia N Singh et al. “A multi-exon-skipping detection assay reveals surprising di-
versity of splice isoforms of spinal muscular atrophy genes”. In: PLoS One 7.11
(2012), e49595.
[2]
Jen-Hsiang Tsai et al. “Alteration in the expression of protein kinase C isoforms in
human hepatocellular carcinoma”. In: Cancer letters 161.2 (2000), pp. 171–175.
[3]
Yuhan Hao et al. “Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data”. In: Cell 184.13
(2021), pp. 3573–3587.
[4]
Michael J Hawrylycz et al. “An anatomically comprehensive atlas of the adult human
brain transcriptome”. In: Nature 489.7416 (2012), pp. 391–399.
[5]
Christoph Ziegenhain et al. “Comparative analysis of single-cell RNA sequencing
methods”. In: Molecular cell 65.4 (2017), pp. 631–643.
[6]
Eva Hedlund and Qiaolin Deng. “Single-cell RNA sequencing: technical advance-
ments and biological applications”. In: Molecular aspects of medicine 59 (2018),
pp. 36–46.
[7]
Li Yang et al. “Genomewide characterization of non-polyadenylated RNAs”. In: Genome
biology 12.2 (2011), pp. 1–14.
[8]
Xiaoying Fan et al. “Single-cell RNA-seq transcriptome analysis of linear and cir-
cular RNAs in mouse preimplantation embryos”. In: Genome biology 16.1 (2015),
pp. 1–17.
[9]
Alec R Chapman et al. “Single cell transcriptome amplification with MALBAC”. In:
PloS one 10.3 (2015), e0120889.
[10]
Chenghang Zong et al. “Genome-wide detection of single-nucleotide and copy-
number variations of a single human cell”. In: Science 338.6114 (2012), pp. 1622–
1626.
[11]
Fuchou Tang et al. “mRNA-Seq whole-transcriptome analysis of a single cell”. In:
Nature methods 6.5 (2009), pp. 377–382.
[12]
Simone Picelli et al. “Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2”. In:
Nature protocols 9.1 (2014), pp. 171–181.
[13]
Tamar Hashimshony et al. “CEL-Seq2: sensitive highly-multiplexed single-cell RNA-
Seq”. In: Genome biology 17.1 (2016), pp. 1–7.
70
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:79==
[14]
Zhuo-Xing Shi et al. “High-throughput and high-accuracy single-cell RNA isoform
analysis using PacBio circular consensus sequencing”. In: Nature Communications
14.1 (2023), p. 2631.
[15]
Luyi Tian et al. “Comprehensive characterization of single-cell full-length isoforms
in human and mouse with long-read sequencing”. In: Genome biology 22 (2021),
pp. 1–24.
[16]
Shuhua Fu et al. “IDP-denovo: de novo transcriptome assembly and isoform anno-
tation by hybrid sequencing”. In: Bioinformatics 34.13 (Feb. 2018), pp. 2168–2176.
ISSN: 1367-4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty098. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/34/13/2168/50315826/bioinformatics\_34\_13\
_2168\_s1.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty098.
[17]
Hui Jiang and Wing Hung Wong. “Statistical inferences for isoform expression in
RNA-Seq”. In: Bioinformatics 25.8 (2009), pp. 1026–1032.
[18]
Claudia Angelini, Daniela De Canditiis, and Italia De Feis. “Computational approaches
for isoform detection and estimation: good and bad news”. In: BMC bioinformatics
15.1 (2014), pp. 1–25.
[19]
Cole Trapnell, Lior Pachter, and Steven L Salzberg. “TopHat: discovering splice
junctions with RNA-Seq”. In: Bioinformatics 25.9 (2009), pp. 1105–1111.
[20]
Alexander Dobin et al. “STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner”. In: Bioinformat-
ics 29.1 (2013), pp. 15–21.
[21]
Daehwan Kim, Ben Langmead, and Steven L Salzberg. “HISAT: a fast spliced
aligner with low memory requirements”. In: Nature methods 12.4 (2015), pp. 357–
360.
[22]
Bo Li and Colin N Dewey. “RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq
data with or without a reference genome”. In: BMC bioinformatics 12 (2011), pp. 1–
16.
[23]
Adam Roberts and Lior Pachter. “Streaming fragment assignment for real-time anal-
ysis of sequencing experiments”. In: Nature methods 10.1 (2013), pp. 71–73.
[24]
Naoki Nariai et al. “TIGAR2: sensitive and accurate estimation of transcript isoform
expression with longer RNA-Seq reads”. In: BMC genomics 15 (2014), pp. 1–9.
[25]
Cole Trapnell et al. “Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals
unannotated transcripts and isoform switching during cell differentiation”. In: Nature
biotechnology 28.5 (2010), pp. 511–515.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
71
==PAGE:80==
[26]
Nicolas L Bray et al. “Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq quantification”. In: Nature
biotechnology 34.5 (2016), pp. 525–527.
[27]
Rob Patro et al. “Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript
expression”. In: Nature methods 14.4 (2017), pp. 417–419.
[28]
Rob Patro, Stephen M Mount, and Carl Kingsford. “Sailfish enables alignment-free
isoform quantification from RNA-seq reads using lightweight algorithms”. In: Nature
biotechnology 32.5 (2014), pp. 462–464.
[29]
Chi Zhang et al. “Evaluation and comparison of computational tools for RNA-seq
isoform quantification”. In: BMC genomics 18.1 (2017), pp. 1–11.
[30]
Dimitra Sarantopoulou et al. “Comparative evaluation of full-length isoform quantifi-
cation from RNA-Seq”. In: BMC bioinformatics 22.1 (2021), pp. 1–24.
[31]
Alexander Lachmann et al. “Massive mining of publicly available RNA-seq data from
human and mouse”. In: Nature communications 9.1 (2018), p. 1366.
[32]
Dragomirka Jovic et al. “Single-cell RNA sequencing technologies and applications:
A brief overview”. In: Clinical and Translational Medicine 12.3 (2022), e694.
[33]
Will Macnair and Mark Robinson. “SampleQC: robust multivariate, multi-cell type,
multi-sample quality control for single-cell data”. In: Genome Biology 24.1 (2023),
p. 23.
[34]
Daniel Osorio and James J Cai. “Systematic determination of the mitochondrial pro-
portion in human and mice tissues for single-cell RNA-sequencing data quality con-
trol”. In: Bioinformatics 37.7 (2021), pp. 963–967.
[35]
Yuhan Hao et al. “Dictionary learning for integrative, multimodal and scalable single-
cell analysis”. In: Nature Biotechnology (2023), pp. 1–12.
[36]
Tim Stuart et al. “Comprehensive integration of single cell data”. In: bioRxiv (2018).
DOI: 10.1101/460147. eprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/11/02/
460147.full.pdf. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/11/02/460147.
[37]
Hoa Thi Nhu Tran et al. “A benchmark of batch-effect correction methods for single-
cell RNA sequencing data”. In: Genome biology 21 (2020), pp. 1–32.
[38]
Yingdong Zhao et al. “TPM, FPKM, or normalized counts? A comparative study
of quantification measures for the analysis of RNA-seq data from the NCI patient-
derived models repository”. In: Journal of translational medicine 19.1 (2021), pp. 1–
15.
72
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:81==
[39]
Shun H Yip, Pak Chung Sham, and Junwen Wang. “Evaluation of tools for highly
variable gene discovery from single-cell RNA-seq data”. In: Briefings in bioinformat-
ics 20.4 (2019), pp. 1583–1589.
[40]
Duoduo Wu et al. “Comparison between UMAP and t-SNE for multiplex-immunofluorescence
derived single-cell data from tissue sections”. In: BioRxiv (2019), p. 549659.
[41]
Emily Clough and Tanya Barrett. “The gene expression omnibus database”. In: Sta-
tistical Genomics: Methods and Protocols (2016), pp. 93–110.
[42]
Tim Hubbard et al. “The Ensembl genome database project”. In: Nucleic acids re-
search 30.1 (2002), pp. 38–41.
[43]
Satoshi Nakamizo et al. “Single-cell analysis of human skin identifies CD14+ type 3
dendritic cells co-producing IL1B and IL23A in psoriasis”. In: Journal of Experimen-
tal Medicine 218.9 (2021), e20202345.
[44]
Spyros Darmanis et al. “Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of infiltrating neoplastic cells
at the migrating front of human glioblastoma”. In: Cell reports 21.5 (2017), pp. 1399–
1410.
[45]
Zhiyuan Hu et al. “The repertoire of serous ovarian cancer non-genetic heterogene-
ity revealed by single-cell sequencing of normal fallopian tube epithelial cells”. In:
Cancer cell 37.2 (2020), pp. 226–242.
[46]
Harunobu Kagawa et al. “Human blastoids model blastocyst development and im-
plantation”. In: Nature 601.7894 (2022), pp. 600–605.
[47]
Vladimir Yu Kiselev et al. “SC3: consensus clustering of single-cell RNA-seq data”.
In: Nature methods 14.5 (2017), pp. 483–486.
[48]
Wei Jiang and Liang Chen. “Alternative splicing: Human disease and quantita-
tive analysis from high-throughput sequencing”. In: Computational and structural
biotechnology journal 19 (2021), pp. 183–195.
[49]
Kuo-Feng Tung et al. “Top-ranked expressed gene transcripts of human protein-
coding genes investigated with GTEx dataset”. In: Scientific Reports 10.1 (2020),
p. 16245.
[50]
Yan Song et al. “Single-cell alternative splicing analysis with expedition reveals
splicing dynamics during neuron differentiation”. In: Molecular cell 67.1 (2017), pp. 148–
161.
[51]
Joshua D Welch, Yin Hu, and Jan F Prins. “Robust detection of alternative splicing
in a population of single cells”. In: Nucleic acids research 44.8 (2016), e73–e73.
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
73
==PAGE:82==
[52]
Yuanhua Huang and Guido Sanguinetti. “BRIE: transcriptome-wide splicing quan-
tification in single cells”. In: Genome biology 18 (2017), pp. 1–11.
[53]
Alex K Shalek et al. “Single-cell transcriptomics reveals bimodality in expression
and splicing in immune cells”. In: Nature 498.7453 (2013), pp. 236–240.
[54]
Roger Volden and Christopher Vollmers. “Single-cell isoform analysis in human im-
mune cells”. In: Genome Biology 23.1 (2022), pp. 1–21.
[55]
Xiang Wang, Jian Ding, and Ling-hua Meng. “PI3K isoform-selective inhibitors: next-
generation targeted cancer therapies”. In: Acta Pharmacologica Sinica 36.10 (2015),
pp. 1170–1176.
74
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
==PAGE:83==
Analyzing single-cell data with isoform resolution
75
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
