==PAGE:1==
Multimodal
Reinforcement
Learning
of
Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­
Hole Assembly
Master Thesis
DTU Electro Technology Automation and Control
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­
in­Hole Assembly
Master Thesis
December 16th, 2023
By
Xinyu Liu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Brovej, Build­
ing 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis is based on peg­in­hole work from the TAMS group at Universität Hamburg in
2022. Further improvement is conducted for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng, advised by the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Deep Reinforcement
Learning and robot arm control theory.
Xinyu Liu ­ s212632
Signature
Date
ii
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Robotic assembly is important in industries, contributing significantly to enhancing produc­
tion efficiency. Most of the industrial operations could be abstracted as the peg­in­hole
assembly. Therefore, flexible peg­in­hole assembly in unstructured or dynamic environ­
ments will significantly advance smart manufacturing. Existing research has predomi­
nantly focused on reinforcement learning (RL) to improve the performance of single peg­
in­hole assembly tasks. Still, the multiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks remain challenging
due to more complicated contact states. This thesis aims to use RL methods to train three
sequential control policies—pick, align, and insert—enabling the implementation of mul­
tiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks. One challenging environment for multiple peg­in­hole
assemblies is established within Isaac Gym, incorporating state uncertainties and domain
randomization for policy learning. Generalization test results demonstrate the capability
of the trained policies to successfully implement multiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks and
transferability to similar scenarios with varying object geometries. An ablation experiment
is conducted to assess the importance of different modalities, revealing the importance of
pose information in enhancing control policies’ adaptability. However, the pose informa­
tion is hard to collect in general scenarios. Consequently, the visual image, characterized
by easy collecting and including geometric and semantic information about objects, is
used to learn a compact representation encoding objects’ pose information. This visual
representation is fused with proprioception and force signal, forming the observation input
for policy learning. In the experiment of aligning the sub­task, the trained control policy
can align the peg with the hole successfully with the multimodal observation.
Keywords: Multi­modal fusion, Multiple Peg­in­hole assembly, Deep reinforcement learn­
ing, Self­supervised learning.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Xinyu Liu, MSc Autonomous System, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Evangelos Boukas, Associate Professor, DTU Electro
Supervisor
Jianwei Zhang, Full Professor, TAMS group at Hamburg University
Co­Supervisor
Chao Zeng, Research Associate, TAMS group at Hamburg University
Co­Supervisor
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the following people:
I would like to thank my supervisors, Professor Evangelos Boukas, Professor Zhang
Jianwei, and Dr. Zeng Chao, for their invaluable guidance and support throughout my
graduate studies. Their immense knowledge and plentiful experience have encouraged
my academic pursuits. I appreciate their dedication and patience in advising me on this
project.
I would like to thank my family, my friends, Yichen Wang, Professor Tian Xiaoyu, Dr.Tang
Zhenrong, and all the members of the TAMS group. For their unconditional love and for
supporting me to pursue further education abroad. Their unwavering belief in me has
been a bedrock I can always rely on. I would not have made it this far without them.
With all your help and support, I could thoroughly enjoy my learning journey.
iv
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Self­supervised Representation Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Multimodal Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
Part I
Physical Simulation and Task Definition
9
3
Simulation Environment
11
3.1
Comparison of Simulator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Environment Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Interaction Functionalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Sequential Control Policies for the Long­horizon Task
17
4.1
Task Separation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Task Definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Part II
Reinforcement Learning and Control Policy
21
5
Controller and Agent
23
5.1
Impedance Control and Operational Space Controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6
Deep Reinforcement Learning
25
6.1
A2C: Advantage Actor­Critic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.2
PPO: Proximal Policy Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.3
SAC: Soft Actor­Critic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.4
Tricks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.5
Policy Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
7
Generalization Test
39
7.1
Experiment Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.2
Experiment Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Part III
Multimodal Observation and Fusion
41
8
Multimodal Observation
43
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
v
==PAGE:8==
8.1
Pose: Position and Orientation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
8.2
Vision: RGB Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
8.3
Proprioception: Joints’ Angle and Speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
8.4
Force Signal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
8.5
Modality Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
9
Multimodal Fusion
49
9.1
Representation Learning with Contrastive Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
9.2
Fusion with Visual Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Part IV
Conclusion and Future Work
57
10 Conclusion and Future Work
58
10.1 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
10.2 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Bibliography
61
A VGG16 Structure
65
B Simulation parameters
66
vi
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
Robotic assembly is important in industries, which leads to enhancements in the speed
of production by automatizing the production assembly, the integral operation in manu­
facturing [1]. Peg­in­hole assembly is the core task in robotic assembly, as most of the
assembly operation can be abstracted as the peg­in­hole task [2]. For example, inserting
the bolt into the gearbox’s body can be seen as a single peg­in­hole task. More generally,
furniture splicing, hydraulic pump assembly, and tube insertion can be seen as multiple
peg­in­hole tasks.
The conventional assembling methods used in manufacturing require numerous param­
eters to be tediously tuned before deployment, and it is hard to transfer these parameters
to other scenarios due to environmental variations. To improve assembly performance
and generalization ability, reinforcement learning (RL) is applied to learn the assembly
skills to implement assembly tasks [3].
In single peg­in­hole assembly tasks, many studies have achieved excellent results. In
some work, the researchers train the control policy with the different neural networks like
LSTM (long short­term memory) by deep reinforcement learning methods to implement
high precision fitting tasks and have applied to different applications including timber joint
and USB plugin [4, 5, 6, 7]. With the uncertainty of state observations in various en­
vironments, the transferability of control policy is improved using sim2real methods with
domain randomization and fuzzy configure parameters [8, 9]. Multiple peg­in­hole assem­
bly with wider applications are challenging because of more complicated geometric and
physical interactions than single peg­in­hole assembly. Pre­defining the contact model
is a method to implement the task with high precision [10, 11, 12]. Based on the model,
force/torque sensors estimate the assembly process and adjust the manipulator using a
controller or RL­based control policy. These methods improve the assembly accuracy and
could transfer to objects with different shapes of cross­sections. However, these methods
rely heavily on the prior model, which is very hard to generalize to other scenarios with
various mechanical design parameters and uncertainties are not considered, such as the
grasping point over the peg. Instead of pre­designing the physical model, multimodal fu­
sion methods are applied to fuse heterogeneous modality data, including visual, tactile,
and proprioception data, to generate the representations as the observation to understand
the state in reinforcement learning. The control policy trained by these methods is more
robust to the uncertainties in an unstructured environment [13, 14, 15]. These policies are
usually applied on a limited scale and introduce many sensor data fused using complex
fusion methods or neural networks. It increases the cost and complexity of the system
and makes the policy hard to deploy into other scenarios quickly.
1.2
Thesis Overview
This thesis aims to implement the multiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks with three control
policies, pick, align, and insert, instead of only one control policy, and propose a simple
multimodal fusion strategy with the best modality combinations found by ablation experi­
ments.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2.1
Problem Statement
The scenario contains a robot arm with a two­finger gripper as the end effector. It will
interact with the objects in the simulation environment in finite episodes over discrete
steps. The objects are a three­pillars­peg and a corresponding three­circle­hole as shown
in Figure 1.1 on a flat desktop and the success criteria is inserting the peg into the hole as
shown in Figure 1.2. There are three different initial states, as three control policies need
to be trained, and they are discussed in chapter chapter 6. Unlike the previous states in
[15], the working setup is only used for small­scale assembly. This study’s working space
could be larger and smaller, which could be adjusted in the simulation environment. To
collect multimodal data, joint sensors, force sensors, and a camera sensor are set in the
simulation environment.
Figure 1.1: This picture illustrates the 3d model of the used peg and hole.
(a) Picking the peg.
(b) Aligning the peg.
(c) Inserting the peg.
Figure 1.2: The task needs to be done in this thesis.
1.2.2
Methodology
To implement the multiple peg­in­hole assembly task flexibly, this long­horizon task has
been divided into three sub­tasks: pick, align, and insert. With the sequential task, the
intermediate states can be controlled to satisfy specific requirements, like lifting height,
2
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:11==
when transferring to different scenarios. With the simulation environment in Isaac Gym,
these three policies have been trained using deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods,
including Advantage Actor­Critic (A2C), Proximal Policy Gradient (PPO), and Soft Actor­
Critic (SAC). Observations have a significant influence on control policies’ adaptability.
Great observations could provide useful information to control policy in an unstructured
environment. In the generalization test, the control policies are tested with different initial
randomizations and peg shapes. The pipeline is shown in the Figure B.1. Using ablation
experiments, the modality combinations are tested and the pose information is found to
play a significant role in the assembly task. Therefore, the representation mainly includes
pose information extracted from the visual data, containing semantic and geometry infor­
mation that is ubiquitous to fuse with other modalities.
Operational
Space
Controller
Action
Environment
Actuation
Multimodal
Observation
Sequential Control Policies
Force
Signal
Proprioception
Pose 
or 
Visual Data
Figure 1.3: The pipeline of implementing the multiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks.
1.2.3
Contributions
The primary contributions of this thesis are:
1. Introduce the sequential tasks to flexibly implement the peg­in­hole assembly task and
enable the user to control the intermediate states, which could be quickly transferred into
various scenarios with specific requirements, like lifting height and the peg’s orientation
before inserting.
2. The importance of modalities(pose, proprioception, and tactile) in this task has been
tested. Based on this, fewer sensors are used to provide informative observations to
implement the peg­in­three­hole task. It simplifies the perception system while keeping
the adaptability of control policy.
3. A multimodal fusion method is proposed to fuse data in a simple structure. The visual
representations generated by the Siamese­CNN network containing pose information,
contributing to the adaptable observation.
1.3
Thesis Outline
Simulation environment, state observations, and control policy are the core concepts and
the thesis is divided into four parts based on them. The first part introduces the simulation
environment and the specific setup of this task. The second part introduces the training
control policy with deep reinforcement learning and the controller. The third part discusses
multimodal observation and multimodal methods.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1 & 2. The thesis overview from perspectives of background, motivation, contri­
bution, and related work of the methods and tools have been used in this thesis.
Chapter 3. This chapter compares the popular simulators and discusses the details of
building the simulation environment for reinforcement learning. In this thesis, the sim­
ulation engine is the Isaac Gym, which supports parallel environments. Then, a chal­
lenging simulation environment for the multiple peg­in­hole assemblies is built with setup
uncertainty and domain randomization. The functions of how the robot interacts with the
environment are also introduced.
Chapter 4. This chapter focuses on sequential control policy. Instead of implementing
the long­horizontal task with one control policy, dividing the task into sequential sub­tasks
implemented by sequential control policies is flexible as the intermediate states can be
controlled to satisfy special requirements. In addition, defining the sub­tasks is easier
than defining the whole task, and convergence is quicker. The reward functions are also
listed in this chapter.
Chapter 5. This chapter focuses on the agent and controller. In reinforcement learning,
the agent collects the sensor data and executes actions from the control policy. The data
process in the agent is also introduced. The controller used in this thesis is an impedance
controller, a compliant controller that transfers the action from Cartesian space into joint
space, specifically the actuation of joint motors, which is suitable for the robot to execute.
Chapter 6. This chapter introduces reinforcement learning algorithms A2C, PPO, and
SAC. The policy training experiments with these three algorithms are also conducted to
train control policies to implement three sub­tasks: pick, align, and insert. Their perfor­
mance is also demonstrated and discussed.
Chapter 7. The generalization test is conducted in this chapter. The trained policy for
the insertion task in chapter six is transferred to the scenarios with objects in a different
geometry. The experiment results demonstrate that the trained policy has the ability to
generalize to other assembly scenarios with various objects’ geometry.
Chapter 8. This chapter focuses on task­relevant modalities and sensors. The different
modalities and how to collect them using sensors in the simulation environment and real
experiments are introduced. One ablation experiment is conducted here to choose the
modality combinations that provide informative observation with fewer sensors.
Chapter 9. This chapter focuses on multimodal fusion methods. Contrastive learning
methods are applied to generate the representation containing the pose information from
visual images. One fusion method uses the visual representation to estimate the hole’s
position which is then combined with other modalities. The other one is fusing the repre­
sentation with other modalities directly. Two experiments are conducted to train control
policy for the aligning task with the multimodal observation.
4
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Work
The peg­in­hole assembly has been researched for many years. This section introduces
related works in control strategy and representation learning.
2.1
Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
The peg­in­hole (PiH) assembly has been researched over several years, aiming to en­
hance manufacturing efficiency. The conventional strategies employing contact models
have been used to solve diverse peg­in­hole assembly challenges with specific require­
ments and high complexity within autonomous industrial manufacturing. However, these
methods relying on pre­programming and predefined physical models encounter chal­
lenges when transferred to more generalized scenarios. Recently, reinforcement learn­
ing has emerged as a promising approach to train control policies robust to the variety of
objects’ geometry and configuration in other assembly tasks conducted in unstructured
environments.
RL­based Control Policy
Reinforcement learning has been extensively applied in robotic control tasks. This method
trains a control policy to implement the tasks by learning from observations. Before in­
troducing the neural network into reinforcement learning, the Q­learning [16] is a popular
model­free algorithm that constructs a Q­table where states and actions are organized to
store corresponding Q­values and the actions are selected based on these Q­values to
maximize the expected return. However, in real problems, creating a Q­table with a large
action space and observation space is impossible. To solve it, the authors in Deep Q
Network (DQN) [17] introduce the neural network for function approximation instead of Q­
table. After that, many model­free deep reinforcement learning has been proposed, such
as Double DQN [18] and Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) [19]. Actor­critic [20]
is a popular architecture including an actor network to output actions and a critic network
to evaluate the output actions. This architecture combines value­based and policy­based
reinforcement learning methods to leverage their advantages and address shortcomings.
Many popular algorithms are developed based on it, like Advantage Actor­Critic and Asyn­
chronous Advantage Actor­critic (A2C/A3C) [21], Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [22]
which is based on Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) but has the less computa­
tional complexity and Soft Actor­Critic(SAC) [23].
The authors in [7] have trained the control policies using a DDPG­based algorithm to
insert a timber part into the mating element with the observation of force/torque and pose
data. In [6], the team also applied the DDPG algorithm in peg­in­hole assembly tasks
with hole­position uncertainty. The trained policy could be transferred to other contact­
rich insertion tasks including electric outlet and WLAN port insertion. Other people in [4,
12, 24] also applied deep reinforcement learning to the peg­in­hole assembly task using
pose and force/torque information as observations, especially the work in [12] conduct the
peg­in­two­holes assembly experiments. To estimate the peg’s position and orientation,
the parallel gripper used in [25] is equipped with capacitive­based tactile sensors on both
fingers to estimate the peg’s in­hand orientation and current position, which is not rigidly
connected to the gripper. The trained control policy achieved a high success rate 38/40
with a 0.1 mm clearance between the peg and hole. This work trains the control policies
to output the desired position, orientation, or the distance between the desired poses as
the input for position or impedance controllers for joint controlling. This thesis also uses
this pipeline instead of the end­to­end training, directly outputting joint motors’ actuation.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
5
==PAGE:14==
This thesis uses reinforcement learning algorithms to train the three sequential control
policies, pick, align, and insert to implement the peg­in­hole assembly under the uncer­
tainty of grasping place, pose information, and sensor noise. The performance of control
policies trained by different algorithms is compared. In the following part of this thesis,
deep reinforcement learning and reinforcement learning are not distinguished.
Long­horizontal Tasks
Many complex manipulation tasks consist of a sequence of basic sub­tasks. Take the
peg­in­hole assembly as an example; it can be divided into pick, align, and insert three
sub­tasks as shown in Figure 1.2. The pick is an optional action, as in many previous
research setups, the peg is already grasped in the gripper in the initial state. After picking
and lifting the peg, the peg should be aligned with the hole before inserting, especially for
multiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks with more complex geometry requirements. Such a
task demands flexible and versatile control policies to adapt and switch between different
functionalities, especially when there are specific requirements like lifting height and in­
serting a horizontal axis instead of a vertical axis, which is very hard for a single control
policy to achieve.
The previous work in robotic manipulation has succeeded in many applications like door
opening, multi­finger grasp, and polishing [26, 27, 28]. However, they mainly focus on
single control policies and ignore the potential of sequencing multiple control policies for
these long­horizontal tasks. A simple way to implement the long­horizon task is to com­
bine the needed control policies together and execute the basic actions in sequence. The
simple strategy has succeeded in some scenarios, such as dressing cloth and block as­
sembly [29, 30]. Transition policy or function learning is another method to chain the
sequencing of multiple control policies. With the transition policy, the agent can connect
the primitive skills together to perform sequential tasks without handcrafted rewards or
intervention. This method has been tested in bipedal locomotion and robotic arm ma­
nipulation [30, 31]. Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) is another technique to
compose multiple control policies by adding the sub­goals into the reward function. The
author in [32] has applied it to carrying box between two places and dribble, while the
peg­in­hole assembly task was also implemented with HRL [33] in both simulation and
real­world experiments, the used peg in this work has two pillars.
Based on these successful explorations, this thesis also uses sequencing control poli­
cies to implement the multiple peg­in­hole tasks. The strategy used is simply manually
separating the assembly task into three primitive skills, pick, align, and insert, and then
combing them together to implement the assembly task.
2.2
Self­supervised Representation Learning
Most reinforcement learning can be treated as the Partial Observable Markov Decision
Process (POMDP). Therefore, suitable observation for states is important for control pol­
icy. Representation learning is a useful technique to extract low­dimensional feature rep­
resentation from high­dimensional data, including task­related information. High­quality
representation could provide the essential information of the state to the control policy
to output the suitable action for the RL­agent to execute in a given task [34]. The com­
pact and informative state representation is helpful for reinforcement learning to exploit
samples efficiently and improve trained policies’ adaptability to other scenarios. Self­
supervised learning is a useful neural network technique to generate the desired repre­
sentation. Contrastive learning and generative learning both belong to it.
6
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:15==
Generative Learning
The learning objective of the generative learning method is reconstruction, it has been
used in many applications. A popular representation learning method is reconstructing
the raw sensory input through variational autoencoders [35, 36, 34]. When learning the
control policies, the action­conditional predictive representations can provide the action­
relevant information during reinforcement learning. The researchers used the VAE to
encode the input images to represent containing action conditional transformation infor­
mation as the observation to play the Atari games [37]. Inspired by the predictive re­
construction methods, the authors in [14] predict the action­conditional optical flow with
the representation from trained encoders. The trained control policy has successfully im­
plemented the single peg insertion task and transferred it to different scenarios. In the
multiple peg­in­hole task, generative learning and VAE are also used to generate repre­
sentations mainly containing objects’ geometry and train the policy to be transferred to
various cross­sectional shapes [15].
Contrastive Learning
The contrastive learning method aims to generate the specific representations contain­
ing desired features with minimum distance among similar inputs and maximum distance
among different inputs [38]. Siamese networks, including two similar neural networks,
are widely used for comparing inputs. Combined with contrastive learning, this network
has been used in some pre­training work [39, 40, 41] and the conventional application
with images as input, including long­term navigation [42] and so on. Popular work like
MoCo and SimCLR have successfully classified downstream tasks with useful tricks like
momentum encoder and linear connections.
Except for learning action­conditional representations, this methodology is widely applied
to pose estimation. The authors in [43] use contrastive learning methods to generate
invariant and transformative representation estimates of the 3D hand pose estimation.
PoseContrast is proposed in the work of [44] to estimate the 3D pose of arbitrary objects.
This method uses representations learned on seen objects to estimate the 3D pose of un­
seen objects sharing similar geometries. The contrastive learning method provides a way
to generate a representation that mainly contains objects’ pose information in unstructured
environments. The contrastive learning method and Siamese network can also be used
for the representation learning of policy learning in peg­in­hole tasks. The authors in [45]
have integrated the contrastive learning methods with a nonlinear prediction task to learn
state representations that are Markovian, linearly predictive, and transformation invariant
to improve the generalization of representations and sample efficiency of reinforcement
learning.
Instead of learning action­condition representations, this thesis aims to generate pose­
related representation based on the results of ablation experiments with modality combi­
nations in chapter 8. The representation is learned using contrastive learning methods,
which is more suitable for generating representation with specific information than gener­
ative learning methods.
2.3
Multimodal Fusion
Multimodal data has been previously explored for policy learning[15, 14]. The heteroge­
neous data from different sensors are complementary, which could provide more compre­
hensive information for the control policies to understand the state. The commonly used
observations in the peg­in­hole assembly are the data of force/torque, objects’ pose, and
proprioception. The modalities used in the work of [7, 4] are force/torque and objects’
pose to implement the single peg­in­hole assembly. The contact model has been pre­
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
7
==PAGE:16==
defined in these works, and the force and torque are used to estimate the insertion state.
They can implement high­precision assembly and narrow the assembly clearance to 0.1
mm; however, the trained control policies are rigid to transfer to other similar scenarios.
Inspired by human intuition in assembly where visual and tactile modalities are enough for
most assembly scenarios, the visual modality has been important in peg­in­hole assem­
bly. The position and orientation of objects are very hard to collect, limiting the transfer and
adaptable ability of control policies in unstructured environments. Visual images, such as
RGB images, are low­cost and easy to collect, and they can provide semantic and geom­
etry information, which is an alternative to reflecting the pose of objects. Therefore, the
fusion methods, including the visual modality, have been researched to train adaptable
and transferable control policies in unstructured environments [15, 14, 46].
The authors in [46] use PPO and imitation learning methods to train the control policies to
implement basic tasks, like block lifting. The observation includes RGB images and pro­
prioceptive data, encoded by the convolutional network (CNN) and a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) separately. The encoded representations are then concatenated and passed to a
recurrent long short­term memory (LSTM) layer to output the robot’s joint velocities (con­
trol commands). The control policies have been deployed with a high success rate in the
real experiment. After that, more visual sensor data are introduced to the assembly task
[14]. The observation contains RGB images, depth images, force/torque, and propriocep­
tions. It encodes images with CNN and others with MLP to generate the representations
which will then be fused into a multimodal representation using a VAE. The representation
is used for policy training. Recently, transformer­structured neural networks have been
used to fuse multimodal observation and solve multiple peg­in­hole problems. The control
policy can be applied to similar scenarios with different cross­sectional shapes [15]. This
work uses VAE to encode the RGB images, and the visual representation is then sent
to the transformer with other modalities. With the attention mechanism, the transformer
outputs a final representation for further policy learning.
The thesis uses RGB images, force signals, and proprioception data to provide multimodal
observations for policy training. Unlike previous research that introduces more modalities
or sensors, an ablation experiment is conducted in this thesis to explore the importance of
different modalities, and based on the result, fewer sensors are fused in a simple strategy
to simplify the perception system.
8
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:17==
Part I
Physical Simulation and Task
Definition
==PAGE:18==
10
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:19==
3
Simulation Environment
In the field of robotics and reinforcement learning, simulators become a standard com­
ponent for training and testing the algorithms before deployment into real robots. In the
early design stage, simulation is an important technology to capture the principal dynam­
ics of the real system and detect possible errors that could lead to delays and failures,
which may cause costly damage. A real­world similar simulation can also improve the
adaptability of control policies, which contribute to Sim2Real transfer.
Isaac Gym, Brax, Mujoco, and Gazebo are popular simulation simulators, and their prop­
erties are compared as follows. In this project, the simulation environment is built in Isaac
Gym.
3.1
Comparison of Simulator
Isaac Gym, Brax, Mujoco and Gazebo are four popular simulators used for simulation,
and their properties have been listed in the following part. Isaac Gym has been used in
this project.
3.1.1
Isaacgym
Isaac Gym[47], developed by NVIDIA in 2021, is a physics environment designed for re­
inforcement learning research. Distinguished from competitors, it is capable of running
environment simulations using GPUs and storing data as GPU tensors can be directly
processed within the neural network. This property allows Isaac Gym to eliminate the
traditional data transition between CPU for the simulation environment and GPU for net­
work training, ultimately accelerating the entire training process. In addition, by utilizing
GPUs for simulation, Isaac Gym can parallelly run thousands of simulation environments,
rapidly providing massive training samples. The example of the simulation environment
is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Simulation demo from Isaac Gym­ preview release[48].
3.1.2
Brax
Brax[49] is a fast and differentiable physics simulator for large­scale rigid body simulation
developed by Google in 2021, which could be applied to the fields of robotics, materials
science, and reinforcement learning. It is written in JAX and is designed for parallelism
acceleration. It could be used for single­device and parallel simulations on multiple de­
vices without relying on data centers. It is similar to Isaac Gym but supports TPU mostly.
The example of the simulation environment is shown in Figure 3.2.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.2: Simulation demo in Brax.
3.1.3
Mujoco
MuJoCo[50], is a physics engine that aims to facilitate research and development in ar­
eas that demand fast and accurate simulation of articulated structures interacting with
their environment. It has high­accuracy simulation, especially in the complex soft contact
and friction with a distinctive soft contact model. Initially developed by Roboti LLC, but
then acquired by DeepMind in 2021 and open­source in May 2022. The example of the
simulation environment is shown in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Simulation demo from Mujoco[50].
3.1.4
Gazebo
Gazebo[51] is a popular simulation environment integrated tightly with ROS[52]. This
close connection achieves wide application in the deployment of industrial robot applica­
tions. However, Gazebo lacks a direct API tailored for control in the reinforcement learning
domain. The example of the environment is shown in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Simulation demo for Gazebo.
Considering the task complexity, training speed, the property of on­policy RL algorithms,
and software support, Isaac Gym is much more suitable for this task. ‘rl­games’ is one
package containing popular reinforcement learning algorithms, supporting the RL research
in Isaac Gym with a full training process in various scenarios. Therefore, Isaac Gym and
‘rl­games’ are used as the framework of this pipeline.
12
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:21==
3.2
Environment Components
This environment involves one Franka Pandas robot arm, one pair of peg and three­hole,
one 1.2m x 1.2m x 0.05m square table, and one table stand to install the robot arm. The
descriptions of the robot and objects are listed below.
3.2.1
Robot Model
In this project, the Franka Emika Pandas 7­DOF robot is used, and its D­H parameters
are shown in Figure 3.5 and Table 3.1.
Figure 3.5: The kinematic chain for the Franka Emika Panda robot[53].
Joint
a(m)
d(m)
α(rad)
θ(rad)
joint 1
0
0.333
0
θ1
joint 2
0
0
−π
2
θ1
joint 3
0
0.316
π
2
θ1
joint 4
0.0825
0
π
2
θ1
joint 5
­0.0825
0.384
−π
2
θ1
joint 6
0
0.333
π
2
θ1
joint 7
0.088
0.333
π
2
θ1
Table 3.1: The DH parameters for the Franka Emika Panda robot.
3.2.2
Peg & Hole
In this multiple peg­in­hole assembly task, the peg has three pillars, and the hole has three
corresponding slots for the peg. The cross­section shape is the circle. The mechanical
drawing model of the objects is shown in Figure 3.6.
3.3
Interaction Functionalities
The pipeline is based on the interaction between environments and agents. The interac­
tion functionalities are described in this part.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
13
==PAGE:22==
80
120
90
Ø18
Ø18
Ø18
50
35
90
40
50
60
20
16
16
16
16
Figure 3.6: This picture shows the 2d mechanical drawing of the used peg and hole. The
unit is a millimeter.
3.3.1
Environment and Task
‘Environment’ is the main class for simulation interaction. It simulates the dynamic inter­
action process with the agents and returns new states and the corresponding rewards.
The contained functions are listed below:
Environment.create() This function is used for creating the vectorized environments.
In Isaac Gym, multiple independent parallel environments are created into a single­task
environment. The number of parallel environments is customized but also depends on
the GPU’s memory.
Environment.reset() It initializes the environments with the configured initial state of ob­
jects and robots. This function is usually used when the success criteria are achieved,
exceeding the maximum episodes, or the first environment initialization.
Environment.step() ‘Step’ is the commonly used function. It infers and renders the next
state. After entering the next step, the corresponding reward and next observation are
returned. In Isaac Gym and ‘rl­games’ the process of step is defined by the ‘pre­step’ and
‘post­step.’
‘Task’ is defined based on a specific task’s reward function and observation collection. It
usually contains the following functions:
Task.compute_observation() This function collects the desired observations from the
environment or the sensors and returns them to the agent. Usually, it is used with the
function of ‘Task.post_step’.
Task.compute_reward() It calculates the reward of the current state based on the defined
reward function. The reward is returned to the agent.
Task.pre_step() This function is defined by the user, to apply the actions from the agent
and update the state in the environment.
Task.post_step() After applying the actions and updating the environment, the reward of
the new state and new observation are rendered and returned to the agent. The ‘Envi­
ronment.step()’ is combined with this function and the ‘pre_step().’
14
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:23==
3.3.2
Observation
Observation is the data that the agent gathers from the environment. There are two ways
to collect the data: one uses the API to acquire the data in the environment, and the other
acquires the data from the sensors added to the environment. Below are some examples
of APIs that can be used for collecting data.
gymapi.get_dof_state() This function returns the joint angle and joint speed.
gymapi.get_rigid_body_state() This function returns the rigid body’s position and orien­
tation.
The data collection in the simulation environment and real world will be discussed in the
chapter 8.
3.3.3
Action
Action is the set of all valid actions or choices available for an agent to interact with an
environment. In this thesis, the action has seven dimensions, including the distance be­
tween the desired position ∆X and orientation ∆q and the current position and orientation,
as shown below:
Action = [∆X, ∆q]
(3.1)
Where X includes the three­dimensional Cartesian coordinate [x, y, z] and q means the
quaternion [α, γ, β, ω].
3.3.4
Control Mode
In Isaac Gym, the control mode has two types: effort and position. The effort mode is to
apply the actuation, such as force or torque, to the rigid body. Position mode is to appoint
the desired position of the rigid body, which means the rigid body will directly move to
the desired position. In this thesis, based on the control type in the real experiment, the
control mode of the robot’s joints is effort, while the control mode for the fingers of the
gripper is position.
3.3.5
Domain Randomization
Domain randomization [54] is an important technique for Sim2Real transfer. It provides
dynamic environments like the real world during policy learning without collecting expen­
sive real­world data. The core idea is to randomize the simulation environment to learn
a robust control policy under a wide range of physical situations to be quickly transferred
to the real world. There are two common ways for domain randomization: changing dy­
namics and physical parameters like damping coefficient or objects’ color and introducing
noise to the sensors. Isaac Gym supports domain randomization, allowing changing dy­
namics when resetting the environment without reloading the assets. There are two inter­
faces to add domain randomization in the tasks, adding with the task’s YAML configuration
file or directly calling the class method ‘apply_randomizations‘.
The sensors are not ideal in the real world. They are affected by various factors. There­
fore, collected data, like joints’ speed and torque, are not as precise as the data in a sim­
ulation environment. The Gaussian noise is introduced to the data collected from Isaac
Gym to train a robust control policy. The environment, the source of observations, also
influences the agent, such as the objects’ color and material. Therefore, the environment
parameters are also set randomly to improve the trained policy’s generalization ability.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
15
==PAGE:24==
3.3.6
Interaction Overview
The interaction between environment and agent is shown in Figure 3.7. At the beginning
of each epoch, all the environments with components in Isaac Gym are reset into the initial
state. The observations will be sent to the agent, and the control policy outputs the actions
for the agent to execute. After applying the actions, Isaac Gym calculates the next state
based on physical principles and renders the environment for the next step. The reward
and observation are updated and returned to the agent. This process continues until
success criteria are met or exceed the maximum episodes. If the training epoch does not
exceed the maximum value, the environment will be initialized and enter another recycle.
Start
Environment 
Initialization
Compute
Observation
Success 
Criteria
Yes
No
End
Maximum
Episode
No
Output
Action
Compute
Reward
Apply
Action
Environment 
Update
Maximum
Training Epoch
Yes
Yes
Save
Best Policy
No
Environment 
Creation
Figure 3.7: The interaction between agent and environment during the policy training.
16
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:25==
4
Sequential Control Policies for the
Long­horizon Task
Training a single policy to implement the long­horizon task is challenging due to the com­
plex compositional dynamics. However, long­horizon tasks can usually be divided into
sequential sub­tasks that primitive skills can implement [30]. The definition of sub­tasks
is clearer and more straightforward, which could contribute to fast policy learning. Ad­
ditionally, the intermediate states can be controlled using sequential control policies to
meet the special requirements in industrial applications. Still, policy transition methods
are needed to choose suitable policies for different states. The comparison is listed in
Table 4.1.
Policy
Task Definition
Training Speed
Intermediate State
Policy Transition
Single
Complex
Slow
Uncontrolled
x
Sequential
Simple
Fast
Controlled
Needed
Table 4.1: Comparison between single and sequential policies for the long­horizon task.
Therefore, this thesis trains several control policies to implement the sub­tasks by se­
quence to implement the whole task. This chapter introduces the implementation of mul­
tiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks with sequential control policies and the definition of sub­
tasks.
4.1
Task Separation
The peg­in­hole assembly can be divided into three basic actions: picking the peg, align­
ing the peg with the hole, and inserting the peg into the hole. The implementation is shown
in Figure 4.1. Picking is an optional action, as lots of research was conducted assuming
that the end effector has already grasped the peg. This study contains the picking action
for a more comprehensive pipeline of peg­in­hole assembly.
Initial State
Sequential Control Policies
Figure 4.1: This picture shows the implementation of multiple peg­in­hole assembly with
sequential control policies.
The policy transition condition is based on the state of objects that could be manually set.
4.2
Task Definition
The reward function is a crucial component of reinforcement learning, and task definition
is based on it, where the experience of specific tasks is important. A clear and com­
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
17
==PAGE:26==
prehensive reward function defines the task and the goal clearly, contributing to a fast
convergence and the trained control policy could implement the task straightforwardly
and efficiently.
Based on tens of researchers’ experience, reward function can be divided into three types:
sparse, dense, and hybrid reward function [55]. Sparse reward is robust and consistent,
with the only consideration of the task’s success criteria, but it is very challenging for
agents to explore and discover successful rewards in the early exploration. Especially for
complex tasks, the agent is easily stuck in the sub­optimal solution. The reward shaping
technique could provide a dense reward, which is set manually to guide the agent to
achieve a high­value state in a desired way quickly. However, its disadvantage of being
difficult to design a well­shaped function and susceptible to noise. Usually, the shaped
reward will unexpectedly guide the agent. Therefore, some researchers explore the hybrid
reward function, after learning with a dense reward for a certain period, directly replacing
the reward function with a sparse one [56].
In this thesis, the dense reward and sparse reward are simply combined. The dense
reward guides the agent while the sparse reward decides the success criteria. All the re­
ward functions are defined using Euclidean distance. Because the sub­tasks are already
simple, the reward function is easy to define, so the reward function will not be discussed
deeply.
4.2.1
Picking
In this sub­task, the peg and hole are randomly set on the table. This sub­task aims to
grasp and lift the peg for further assembly steps. The expected gripping point could be
set, and the peg’s final position and orientation are adjusted as the best initial state for
subsequent sub­task.
Reward Function
The first goal is to shorten the distance between the peg and the end effector. After that,
lift the peg, and adjust the peg’s orientation to the expected orientation, where the peg is
heading straight down.
(1) Distance DGP between the gripper’s center and gripping points in the peg.
DGP =
√
(qgripper −qpeg)2 + (Xgripper −Xpeg)2
(4.1)
qgripper and qpeg are the four­dimension quaternion of the gripper and peg separately, while
Xgripper and Xpeg are the x, y, z Cartesian coordinate of gripper center and peg.
rGP = 1 −tanh(DGP )
(4.2)
The reward rGP increases while the distance DGP decreases.
(2) Distance Dheight between peg’s height and expected lifting height.
Dheight = |Hpeg −Hexpect|
(4.3)
where HP and Hexpected are the peg’s height and target height.
(3) Distance Dq between peg’s orientation and expected orientation.
18
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:27==
Dq =
√
(qexpect −qpeg)2
(4.4)
The reward function for the pick sub­task is defined below:
rpick =
{
5 × rGP
if Hpeg = 0
10 × (1 −tanh(0.6 × Dheight + 0.4 × Dq)) + rGP
otherwise
(4.5)
where the reward is mainly based on rGP before grasping. The larger reward of lifting is
beneficial for the agent to grasp the peg tightly and lift the peg instead of pulling the peg
along the desk.
4.2.2
Aligning
After lifting the peg over the top surface of the hole, the peg should be aligned to the hole
where the peg heading vertical to the hole and their center is closed.
Reward Function
(1) Distance Dq between peg and hole’s orientation.
Dq′ =
√
(qhole −qpeg)2
(4.6)
(2) Distance Dcenter between the peg’s aligning center and the hole’s insertion center, only
the x and y coordinate is used.
Dcenter =
√
(xhole −xpeg)2 + (yhole −ypeg)2
(4.7)
The reward function for the pick sub­task is defined below:
ralign = 10 × (1 −tanh(Dq + Dcenter))
(4.8)
with less distance of Dq′ and Dcenter, the reward increases.
4.2.3
Insertion
When the peg is aligned with the hole, the robot should push the peg downward and insert
the peg into the hole to finish the assembly task.
Reward Function
(1) Distance Dz of position between the peg’s center and the hole’s center.
Dz = |zpeg −zhole|
(4.9)
The reward function for the insertion sub­task is defined below:
rinsert =
{
1 −tanh Dz
if Dcenter < 0.01&Dq′ < 0.02
0
otherwise
(4.10)
where the reward increases when shorting the distance Dz under the alignment condition.
The coefficients in the reward function are based on the commonly used coefficients from
open­source projects. All the reward functions are used in the policy learning in chapter 6.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:29==
Part II
Reinforcement Learning and
Control Policy
==PAGE:30==
22
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:31==
5
Controller and Agent
There are two control strategies with reinforcement learning. The end­to­end method
trains one policy to perceive the environment and output each joint’s torque directly. The
other one uses the policy to output the end effector’s trajectory, which serves as the input
to the controller where the action in Cartesian space is transferred into the motor actuation
in joint space.
With the development of machine learning, the end­to­end method has been used for
robotic control to implement complex tasks. However, the neural networks can not be
explained thoroughly, which may bring unseen safety problems in practical applications.
Instead, the risk will be lower if reinforcement learning is used as the trajectory planner
to output the following desired action, which is transferred to the controller. Impedance
control is one type of compliant control, and the impedance controller is used in this thesis
to avoid damage to objects and robots.
5.1
Impedance Control and Operational Space Controller
Position control is a straightforward, precise control type but lacks feedback from external
forces and the external environment. In regular position control, the objective is to move
the end effector to a specified location in a deterministic manner. If it can not easily reach
the position, it will apply high forces, which might cause damage. Take whipping glass as
an example. It is hard to collect the glass’s precise location, and minor errors in position
can lead to significant contact forces that could break the glass. The impedance control,
one type of compliant control, could solve this problem by indirectly controlling the force
and avoiding such damaging high forces. Therefore, it performs great in uncertain envi­
ronments. In impedance control, the input is the distance between the desired joint angle
qd and current joint angle q, and the output is the torque τ. It can be written as:
τ = K(qd −q) + D( ˙qd −˙q) + Mq(¨qd −¨q)
(5.1)
where K is the stiffness matrix, D is the damping matrix and Mq is the mass matrix.
Therefore, impedance control is suitable for peg­in­hole tasks where precise pose infor­
mation is hard to collect. Complaint control could also avoid damage when the policy
outputs outlier actions. In this thesis, the operational space controller (OSC) [57] trans­
fers the end effector’s trajectory in Cartesian space to the control signal in joint space.
The entire equation is written as Equation 5.2.
u = J⊤
eeMee[Kp · ∆X + Kd · ∆˙X]
(5.2)
The output u is the control signal of joints. The Jee is the Jacobian matrix of the end
effector, Mee is the end­effector inertia matrix, and ∆X is the distance between the desired
position and the current position. Kp and Kd are the customized coefficients.
5.2
Agents
The agent is the entity, Franka Panda robot in this thesis, that interacts with the environ­
ment, and the control policy trained with the algorithms in the last section chapter 6 is used
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
23
==PAGE:32==
Observation
A2C Agent
Environment
Force Signal
Proprioception
Pose
Input
normalization
Control
Policy
Action
limitation
Figure 5.1: This picture shows the data process of the agent by normalizing the input
observation and limiting the output action.
to output the desired action given the state observation to guide the agent to maximum
the reward.
As shown in Figure 5.1, the agent in this thesis is the Franka Panda robot. It will collect the
observations using a sensor as the input to the policy and execute the action transferred
in joint space with the OSC controller to implement the task. The data process in the
agent is introduced following.
Action Space Limitation
Considering the practical application, the robot is expected to execute the actions at a
stable and suitable speed. The output actions from the control policy are clipped into a
limited interval by the agent to avoid extreme shaking and high torque/force.
action ∈[−1, 1]
In this thesis, the action space is limited to the range from ­1 to 1. As the activation function
is used for µ and σ, this range is the same as the output from the actor neural network
and the step of action scaling could be omitted.
Observation Normalization
In different environments, some sensors are highly affected and output outlier data. To
eliminate the influence, the prior knowledge of different sensors is introduced to set one
reasonable interval to delete the obvious wrong data. When intensive unhealthy data
appears, the robot will stop work immediately for further checking. Considering the phys­
ical properties of the peg and hole, the maximum absolute value is five when using the
modality of the pose, force signal, and proprioception.
ˆxi = xi −µB
√
σ2
B + ϵ
(5.3)
where ˆxi is the normalized input, µB and σB are the mean and variance of this training
batch. The ϵ is an arbitrarily small constant for numerical stability. In this thesis, ϵ is set
to be 0.001.
24
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:33==
6
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is a useful technique that enables robotic systems
to efficiently learn high­dimensional control policies to plan the trajectory and implement
complex tasks.
The actor­critic is a popular architecture that combines value­based and policy­based
methods that help stabilize the reinforcement learning training by reducing the variance.
Three applied DRL algorithms in this paper are based on it and explained in this chapter.
6.1
A2C: Advantage Actor­Critic
Advantage Actor­Critic is an on­policy algorithm that introduces the state value V (S) as
the baseline to solve the high variance problem in policy gradient methods.
Unlike value­based reinforcement learning methods, policy gradient methods aim to push
up the probabilities of actions that lead to higher returns and push down the probabilities
of actions that lead to lower returns until they find the optimal policy. πθ is the policy with
parameters θ, and J(πθ) denotes the expected finite­horizon undiscounted return of the
policy, the gradient of J(πθ) can be written as:
∇θJ(πθ) = E
[ T
∑
t=0
∇θ log πθ(at|st)Aπθ(st, at)
]
(6.1)
Aπθ(s, a) = Qπθ(s, a) −b
(6.2)
where the Aπθ is the advantage function for the current policy, which is the reward return
in the original AC algorithms, and b is the constant belonging to reward space that can be
chosen arbitrarily.
The reward variance has been reduced by introducing the advantage function, and how
much better a specific action a in state s than others on average is described. It contributes
to enhancing optimal actions’ probability and stabilizing the training process.
In A2C and the following used algorithms, the state value V (s) is used as the baseline,
which is the most suitable parameter. It is shown in Equation 6.3.
A(s, a) = Q(s, a) −V (s)
(6.3)
6.1.1
Optimization process
In the actor­critic architecture, actor πθ(s, a) and critic ˆqw(s, a) are two approximations for
policy and value function separately.
At each timestep t, the current state St is collected as input through the actor and critic.
The actor policy outputs an action At based on the state, and the critic will evaluate the
action value ˆqw(s, a) by taking the action at this state. Instead of estimating the action
value, Temporal Difference (TD), shown in Equation 6.4 where γ is the reward discount
coefficient, can be used to estimate the action value with next state value V (st+1) and
instant reward rt at the current state, which could implement the advantage function with
only one value function.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
25
==PAGE:34==
Q(st, at) = rt + γV (st+1)
(6.4)
The actor parameterized by θ : πθ(s, a) and the critic parameterized by ω : Vω(s, a) will
update its policy parameters using the advantage value. The update equation is shown
in Equation 6.5 and Equation 6.6.
θ ←θ + α∇θ log πθ(s, a)(rt + γVω(st+1) −Vω(st))
(6.5)
ω ←ω + β(rt + γVω(st+1) −Vω(st))∇ωVω(st)
(6.6)
Below is the pseudocode of the whole process.
Algorithm 1 Advantage Actor­Critic
Input: γ, α, β, θ, ω
Output: optimized θ, ω
1: initialize:θ, ω; s from environment
2: for each update step do
3:
output action a using policy π(a|s, θ)
4:
observe next state s′, collect reward r from environment
5:
δ = r + γVω(s′) −Vω(s)
6:
θ = θ + α∇θ log πθ(s, a)δ
7:
ω = ω + β∇ωVωδ
8:
s ←s′
9: end for maximum steps reached
6.1.2
Implementation
The A2C algorithm is implemented using Pytorch and the structure is shown in Figure 6.1.
Actor
Critic
Environment
state
advantage value
reward 
action
Figure 6.1: Implementation structure of Advantage Actor­Critic.
The actor and critic are constructed with two same­structured multilayer perceptron (MLP)
neural networks. The actor network works as the policy πθ, outputting the probability of all
26
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:35==
the actions in action space. The critic network Vω will predict the state value and update
parameters with the MSE loss between the predicted value and TD target value. Their
loss functions Lπθ and LVω are listed below, and the parameters are updated with the
optimizer Adma.
Lπθ = −log πθ(s, a)Aw
(6.7)
LVω = MSE(rt + γVω(st+1) −Vω(st))
(6.8)
6.2
PPO: Proximal Policy Optimization
The Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) is another on­policy reinforcement learning al­
gorithm based on the actor­critic architecture. Compared with A2C, it introduced gradient
clipping and generalized advantage estimation (GAE) [58], which makes it robust during
the training.
Generalized advantage estimation
The GAE is a technique used in reinforcement learning to estimate the advantage function
with a trade­off between bias and variance. The GAE(λ) is calculated using λ­return,
which is calculated as an exponentially­weighted average of n­step returns with decay
parameter λ:
Rt(λ) = (1 −λ)
∞
∑
n=1
λn−1Rn
t
(6.9)
AGAE(γ,λ)
t
= Rt(λ) −V (st)
(6.10)
When λ = 0, the return reduces to the single­step return, which introduces low variance
but high bias. While λ = 1 recovers the Monte­Carlo return Gt, bringing non­bias but high
variance. The intermediate values of λ ∈(0, 1) produce an interpolate that can be used
to balance the bias and variance of the value estimator.
Empirically, the λ­return has been shown to benefit the advantage function and has been
generally used in reinforcement learning algorithms.
Gradient clipping
The gradient clipping (clip) is a technique to avoid gradient explosion by clipping the gra­
dient in a reasonable bound to ensure the training remains stable and the convergence of
training loss to a minimum. In deep reinforcement learning with AC architecture, the critic
network probably overestimates the state value, resulting in value estimate divergence.
Therefore, a specialized clipping is applied to prevent the new policy from getting far from
the old policy. With clip, the network update parameters via:
arg max
θ
Ea,s∈πθk
[
min( πθ(a|s)
πθk(a|s)Aπθk(s|a), clip( πθ(a|s)
πθk(a|s), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Aπθk(s|a))
]
(6.11)
ϵ is a small hyperparameter that roughly decides how far away the new policy can go from
the old.
However, gradient clipping is not without limitations. It introduces an additional hyperpa­
rameter that needs to be carefully selected. If the threshold is set too low, it may hinder
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
27
==PAGE:36==
the network’s ability to learn effectively by restricting the gradient updates too much. Con­
versely, if set too high, it may fail to prevent the instability caused by exploding gradients.
6.2.1
Optimization process
In the optimization process, PPO uses the GAE(λ) as the advantage function and gradient
clipping to control the gradient in a cap. The pseudocode is shown below:
Algorithm 2 Proximal Policy Optimization
Input: γ, α, β, θ, ω, ϵ, λ
Output: optimized θ, ω
1: initialize:θ, ω; s from environment
2: for each update step do
3:
Collect the trajectories τ by running policy πθ in the environment
4:
Compute TD(λ) return, Rt
5:
Compute generalized advantage estimates, At
6:
Update the policy network parameters by maximizing the objective:
θ = arg max 1
T
∑T
t=0 min( πθ(a|s)
πθk(a|s)Aπθk(s|a), clip(πθ(a|s)
πθk
, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Aπθk(s|a))
7:
Update the critic network parameters:
ω = arg min 1
T
∑T
t=0(Vω(st) −Rt)
8: end for maximum steps reached
6.2.2
Implementation
The PPO algorithm is implemented using Pytorch and the structure is shown in Figure 6.2
Actor
Critic
Environment
state
advantage value
GAE reward 
action
Figure 6.2: Implementation structure of Proximal Policy Optimization.
The actor and critic networks are also constructed with MLP neural networks. Unlike the
A2C algorithm, the reward used in PPO is the GAE reward and the actor’s policy gradient
is clipped. Their loss functions Lπθ and LVω are listed below, and the parameters are
updated with the optimizer Adma.
Lπθ = −min( πθ(a|s)
πθk(a|s)AGAE, clip( πθ(a|s)
πθk(a|s)), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)AGAE)
(6.12)
28
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:37==
LVω = MSE(Rt(λ) −Vω(st))
(6.13)
6.3
SAC: Soft Actor­Critic
The Soft Actor­Critic (SAC) is also an actor­critic architecture reinforcement learning al­
gorithm, but it optimizes policy in an off­policy way. The highlight feature of SAC is the
max entropy, training the policy to maximize the trade­off between expected return and
entropy, which is connected to the exploration­exploitation trade­off. The entropy is a
measure of the policy’s randomness. Higher entropy results in more exploration, which
can accelerate learning and prevent the policy from prematurely converging to a bad local
optimum.
6.3.1
Maximum entropy reinforcement learning
Entropy is used to measure the randomness of a random variable. Specifically, let x be
a random variable with probability mass or density function P. The entropy H of x is
computed from its distribution P according to
H(P) = E
x∼P [−log P(x)]
(6.14)
The idea behind maximum entropy reinforcement learning is not only to maximize the
cumulative reward but also to make the policy more stochastic. In this way, an entropy
regularization term is introduced into the objective of policy­based reinforcement learning.
π∗= arg max
π
Eπ
[ ∞
∑
t=0
γt
(
r(st, at) + αH (π(·|st))
)]
(6.15)
where α > 0 is the regularization coefficient, which controls the impact of the entropy.
Greater α encourages a more diverse and exploratory policy. The difference between
traditional reinforcement learning and maximum entropy reinforcement learning is shown
in Figure 6.3:
Figure 6.3: Difference between traditional RL(left) and maximum entropy RL(right).
With the new objective, the Bellman equations are also redefined in Equation 6.16 and
Equation 6.17, including the entropy term.
V π(st) = E [Qπ(st, at)] + αH (π(·|st))
(6.16)
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
29
==PAGE:38==
Qπ(st, at) = r(st, at) + γE [V (st+1)]
(6.17)
6.3.2
Optimization process
According to the soft Bellman equations, the expectation can be approximated with sam­
ples:
Qπ(st, at) = r(st, at) + γ (Qπ(st+1, at+1) −α log π(a|s))
(6.18)
θ ←θ + ∇θ(Qπ(s, a) −α log π(a|s))
(6.19)
6.3.3
Experience Replay
Experience replay is an important technique for offline reinforcement learning algorithms.
The agent’s experience at each time step is stored in the replay buffer. Usually, the agent’s
experience is defined as the tuple shown below:
et = (st, at, r(st, at), st+1)
(6.20)
where st and at is the state and applied action, the reward r(st, at) is return and the next
state st+1 also collected.
Consecutive experience samples probably lead to inefficient learning as the samples oc­
curred sequentially and highly correlated. Taking random samples from replay memory
could break this correlation.
6.3.4
Implementation
According to the Double DQN algorithm, one actor network, two Q­value critic networks,
and two V­value critic networks are constructed to implement SAC. The minimum Q value
will be used to avoid action value overestimation. The structure is shown in Figure 6.4.
The network Vw and V ′
w estimate the state value, and V ′
w is used in the TD target to avoid
bootstrapping. Vθ1 and Vθ2 estimate the state action value.
6.4
Tricks
To improve the sample efficient and speed up the convergence, some tricks are used
during the training. The tricks of the reward function are already introduced in section 4.2,
the hybrid reward function is used in this thesis. Observation normalization and action
limitation are introduced in section 5.2.
6.4.1
Reparameterization
In a separate action space, the actor neural network can output the separate action value.
However, in continuous space, the actor neural network is expected to learn the distribu­
tion of each action in the action space, and the action will be sampled from the distribution.
This method could keep exploitation and exploration without the ϵ parameter. In back­
propagation, the gradient can not be calculated from a random sample. Therefore, the
reparameterization trick is used to learn the distribution’s parameters, mean, and standard
deviation, as shown in Figure 6.5. These parameters are then used to sample from the
distribution and determine the action. The mean and standard deviation are two values
that can be learned. The output z could be calculated using Equation 6.21.
30
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:39==
Actor
Target
V Critic
V Critic
Q0 Critic
Q1 Critic
State value
Action
Environment
State Action value 1
State Action value 2
Figure 6.4: Implementation structure of Soft Actor­Critic.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
31
==PAGE:40==
z = µ + ϕ · ϵ
(6.21)
where the ϵ is sampled from normal distribution N(0, 1) and the parameter µ and ϕ are
differentiable and can be learnt during back propagation.
Figure 6.5: This figure compares the function of reparameterization. After reparameteri­
zation the output z becomes differentiable.
The distribution is usually the normal distribution, also used in the thesis.
6.5
Policy Learning
The introduced deep reinforcement learning algorithms in the last sector will be used to
train the control policies. In this sector, each control policy is trained in different algorithms
for comparison.
6.5.1
Experiment setup
In this experiment, the twenty­dimensional observation contains position X and orienta­
tion q of the peg and end effector, hole’s position Xhole, and hand joint force Fhand.
Observation = [Xpeg, Xhole, Xeef, qpeg, qeef, Fhand]
The output action is the distance between the desired pose and the current pose of the
gripper, which is also introduced in chapter 3.
Action = [δX, δq]
Hyperparameters
The general training parameters are listed in Table 6.1 for all the experiments in this sec­
tor. Isaac Gym supports parallel simulation, and 8192 parallel environments are created
for training. More environments will bring comprehensive samples which speed up the
training significantly. The data is collected within four simulation time steps from all the
environments. The replay buffer is used only for the SAC algorithm, the only offline rein­
forcement learning algorithm. The reward scale keeps 1 in this thesis without narrowing
the scale into the range [0, 1].
In order to improve the policy’s adaptability, uncertainty parameters are also introduced,
including the position of the grasp point, the initial position, and the orientation of the peg
and hole, as shown in Table 6.2.
Initialization state
In the pick task, the peg and hole will be put on the table randomly with the uncertainty
parameters but within the robot’s operating space. The initial state of align and insert
tasks are similar; the peg is already grasped in the end effector, and the hole’s position
32
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:41==
Parameters
Value
environments
8196
image size
128 × 128 × 3
batch size
16384
learning rate
5e­4
replay buffer size
1e6
reward scaling
1
episode
300 steps
temperature coefficient(SAC)
0.2
Table 6.1: Training parameters.
Parameters
Value
direction
Grasp site
0.03 m
XYZ
Initial position
0.18 m
XY
Initial rotation
0.22 radian
Z
Table 6.2: Uncertainty parameters.
and rotation are still in randomization like the pick. The tiny difference between the align
and insert tasks is that in align, the peg is far away from the hole, while during the insert,
the alignment is nearly done with the peg close to the hole.
6.5.2
Training Results
The performance of these three algorithms in different sub­tasks is evaluated based on
the reward and success rate. The loss of the actor and critic network can partly reflect
the performance, but it is not the determining factor. They are only shown in the sub­task
of pick to explore the failure training with A2C.
Pick
The initial state is shown in Figure 6.6, where the initial state of the peg and hole is random
within the table.
Figure 6.6: The initial state of the pick task, the objects’ position, and orientation are
random.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
33
==PAGE:42==
A2C fails to train a policy to implement the task, while the PPO succeeds. Figure 6.7
shows the reward curve during the training, and the loss of actor, critic, and entropy.
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0M
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
350M
400M
450M
50
(a) Actor loss
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0M
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
350M
400M
450M
50
(b) Critic loss
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0M
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
350M
400M
450M
500
(c) Entropy loss
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0M
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
350M
400M
450M
50
(d) Reward
A2C
PPO
Figure 6.7: The actor, critic, and entropy loss of A2C and PPO algorithms in training the
control policy for the task of picking peg.
According to the Figure 6.7d, after 100M steps, the control policy trained by PPO could
achieve a satisfied reward, and the success rate is 83.2%. In contrast, the trained control
policy only achieved a reward lower than 10 and the success rate is lower than 1%. The
actor loss of A2C in Figure 6.7a is unstable and bigger and the entropy loss of A2C in
Figure 6.7c keeps a high value, which means the action’s probability is still small. The
trained control policy cannot output a suitable action in the states. On the contrary, in PPO,
the actor loss curve is very stable, and the entropy loss is stably decreasing. This means
that policy learning is heading the right way, and suitable actions have been found and
given a high probability. The loss curve of the critic network in Figure 6.7b is similar, the
critic networks have the same performance. The success rate is shown in the Table 6.3.
Algorithms
Success rate(%)
PPO
83.2
A2C
0.002
Table 6.3: The success rate of control policies trained by A2C and PPO in the pick task.
The success rate is calculated based on 8192 environments.
Pick is a complex sub­task, as the chance of opening and closing the gripper is hard to
find. PPO is a very robust algorithm, and it can find a way to solve it, especially with
thousands of parallel environments. However, the update of A2C is unstable without the
trick of gradient clip. Therefore, it can easily delve into local optimization or pass the
optimal solution, which makes it very hard to train a control policy to implement the pick
task.
34
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:43==
Align
The initial state of the align sub­task is shown in Figure 6.8.
Figure 6.8: The initial state of the align task, the peg is already grasped in the gripper, but
the hole’s position and rotation are random.
Align is the simplest task among these three sub­tasks. All these three algorithms train a
control policy to implement the task successfully, the reward curve and entropy loss are
shown in Figure 6.9, the success rate is shown in Table 6.4.
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
0M
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
350M
400M
450M
500M
550M
600
(a) Reward learning curve
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
0M
0
50M
100M
150M
200M
250M
300M
350M
400M
450M
500M
550M
600
(b) Entropy loss
A2C
PPO
SAC
Figure 6.9: The training reward and entropy loss of A2C, PPO, and SAC algorithms in
training the control policy for aligning the peg with the hole.
The PPO algorithm’s training speed is much faster than that of A2C and SAC, which
quickly converge with around 150M steps and stabilize the high reward. Still, the policy
learning process of A2C is unstable, there is a dramatic drop in the reward curve around
the 160M step, but it heads back quickly. The learning curve of SAC is the slowest, but
policy learning heads on the convergence path, as the reward is growing steadily. The
policy trained by PPO achieves the highest reward for the reward. The policies trained by
SAC and A2C achieve similar rewards, about half that of PPO. According to the entropy
loss in Figure 6.9b, the exploration in PPO is nearly done with the lowest entropy loss, and
the actions are nearly deterministic. The SAC keeps the entropy loss around the target
entropy loss and has a stronger exploration ability.
The policy learning of SAC runs on a slower server from PPO and A2C. In the same
training time, the update steps are less than that of PPO and A2C.
Insert
The initial state is shown in Figure 6.10, where the peg has already aligned with the hole.
The policies trained by A2C, PPO, and SAC all implement the insertion task successfully.
The reward return during the training is shown in Figure 6.11. It is found that the PPO
algorithm’s performance is much better than that of A2C and SAC, which quickly con­
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
35
==PAGE:44==
Algorithms
Success rate(%)
PPO
97.8
A2C
78.8
SAC
69.4
Table 6.4: The success rate of control policies trained by A2C, PPO and SAC in the align
task. The success rate is calculated based on 8192 environments.
Figure 6.10: The initial state of the insert task, the grasping place over the peg, is uncer­
tain.
verge with around 10M steps and keep the high reward stable. The reward curve of A2C
fluctuates heavily, which reflects the unstable policy learning process, but the training is
heading to convergence and achieves a high reward, although it is not as stable as PPO.
The learning curve of SAC is the slowest; it fluctuates around the low reward and begins
to converge after 700M steps. As mentioned, the SAC introduced the entropy loss into
the policy gradient. Therefore, it had a stronger exploration tendency at the beginning
and had a slower convergence. A2C does not use GAE and gradient clip like PPO, which
probably makes it over­updated and brings high variance, which makes the learning curve
fluctuate very heavily and converge slowly.
Figure 6.11: The reward curve during the policy learning by three algorithms.
Another experiment explores the influence of temperature parameters and batch size.
The batch size of SAC is increased to 16384, and the temperature is decreased to 0.1.
According to the Figure 6.12a, the performance of training with smaller temperature pa­
rameters and larger batch size is better. The control policy achieves a high reward, around
100M steps, much quicker than that with small batch size and bigger α, and maintains
36
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:45==
high reward stability. The loss of the actor network is shown in Figure 6.12b and the loss
of two critic networks is shown in Figure 6.12c and Figure 6.12d. Although the actor and
critics have lower losses in training with smaller batch size and bigger α, these networks
do not learn the effective approximation and keep the lower reward.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1e+3
0M
0
100M
200M
300M
400M
500M
600M
700M
800M
90
(a) Reward learning curve
-180
-160
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
0M
0
100M
200M
300M
400M
500M
600M
700M
800M
90
(b) Actor loss curve
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0M
0
100M
200M
300M
400M
500M
600M
700M
800M
900
(c) First critic loss curve
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0M
0
100M
200M
300M
400M
500M
600M
700M
800M
900
(d) Second critic loss curve
Batch size: 16384 
temperature: 0.1
Batch size: 4096 
temperature: 0.2
Figure 6.12: SAC learning curve with different batch size and temperature parameters(α).
With thousands of parallel environments in Isaac Gym, PPO achieves the best perfor­
mance by achieving a higher reward quickly, but its exploration ability is weaker than that
of SAC. The updated scale of A2C is unstable without gradient clip or penalty, which
makes the training process unstable and easily goes into local optimization, resulting in
slow or failed convergence. The control policy trained by SAC can achieve satisfactory
rewards and success rates. The larger temperature coefficient makes the training slower
and can not achieve the same reward as that of PPO in similar training steps. But in more
complex task, the SAC algorithm will more suitable with strong exploration ability.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:47==
7
Generalization Test
In this chapter, the generalization test is conducted to test the adaptable ability of trained
policies in other multiple peg­in­hole assembly scenarios.
7.1
Experiment Setup
The policy used in the experiment is trained with the objects with three holes in the shape
of a circle as shown in Figure 1.1. The objects used in the generalization test have two
holes with square, circle, and ellipse cross­section shapes as shown in Figure 7.1.
(a) Hole with the shape of ellipse
(b) Peg with the shape of ellipse
(c) Hole with the shape of square
(d) Peg with the shape of square
(e) Hole with the shape of triangle
(f) Peg with the shape of triangle
Figure 7.1: The 3D model of pegs and holes with the shapes of ellipse, square, and
triangle used in the generalization test.
7.2
Experiment Results
The success rate is shown in Table 7.1. Each test experiment has a high success rate of
over 90%. Therefore, it is proved that the trained control policy can transfer to other insert
scenarios with varying object geometry.
The screenshot of the implementation process is shown in Figure 7.2.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
39
==PAGE:48==
Shape
Success Rate
ellipse
0.972
square
0.94
triangle
0.968
Table 7.1: The success rate is the mean value of three episodes calculated based on 64
environments.
(a) Inserting peg into the hole in the shape of ellipse
(b) Inserting peg into the hole in the shape of square
(c) Inserting peg into the hole in the shape of triangle
Figure 7.2: The screenshot of inserting the peg into the hole with different shapes of
ellipse, square, and triangle.
40
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:49==
Part III
Multimodal Observation and
Fusion
==PAGE:50==
42
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:51==
8
Multimodal Observation
Most of the process can be seen as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process(POMDP).
The agent will perceive the environment using different sensors, and the collected data
is the observations that will be used to understand the state and output actions. In this
chapter, related modalities and collection methods have been listed and introduced.
8.1
Pose: Position and Orientation
Pose information is important for robotic manipulation. It describes an object’s six­dimensional
spatial pose using Cartesian coordinates and quaternion. The Cartesian coordinates rep­
resent the object’s position, and the quaternion represents the object’s orientation. The
precise pose information is vital in the peg­in­hole task. By using this modality as obser­
vation, the training loss converges efficiently. The trained policy could be transferred to
different situations and guide the robot to implement the peg­in­hole task efficiently. The
following ablation experiment has proven it.
Apriltag [59] is a visual fiducial system that could be used for pose estimation. The AprilTag
detection software can detect the tags on the objects and then the objects’ 3D position
and orientation will be computed, but the system deployment is complex. Therefore, some
research focuses on using monocular cameras to estimate pose directly, which is simpler
and suitable for general scenarios.
8.2
Vision: RGB Images
Visual images play a crucial role in robot perception by offering valuable semantic and
geometric information. Among various digital image types, RGB images stand out as a
widely used and low­cost choice. In this thesis, RGB images are selected as the visual
data. As the pose modality section mentioned, collecting accurate pose information in
diverse scenarios is challenging. RGB images contain pose information and present a
practical alternative due to their ease of acquisition. Vision modality is not used in the
ablation experiment, as visual data is not concluded in the previous experiment.
RGB Images Collection
RGB images are collected from the camera sensor, which is added to every parallel en­
vironment in the Isaac Gym. Some examples are shown in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: The images captured from the camera on the top view(left) and side view(right)
of the environment.
To express the spatial pose, 2D images in multi­view are collected. Meanwhile, the Carte­
sian coordinates and orientations of the hole and peg in the corresponding images are
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
43
==PAGE:52==
also stored as the dataset to train the network to extract representations mainly containing
the pose information. It will be discussed in the chapter 9.
In the real experiment, a camera, such as Realsense435, can be deployed in the desired
location to collect the RGB images.
8.3
Proprioception: Joints’ Angle and Speed
Proprioception is the perception of internal internal states of a robot, which is different from
the perception from outside sensors. Proprioception includes awareness of the robot’s
joint angles, joint speeds, torques, and forces. In the robot arm, it is a helpful modality
that could implicitly estimate the end effector’s pose and then the peg’s pose if the rigid
connection between the peg and the gripper is assumed. Although its performance is not
as perfect as the explicit pose information, proprioception still can be seen as an important
modality in the peg­in­hole assembly.
Proprioception Data Collection
Sensors are added to all the robot’s joints in the Isaac Gym simulation environment to
provide real­time angles and speed. What’s more, the information can also be collected
using an API interface.
Unlike objects’ position and orientation, proprioception data is easy to collect in real ex­
periments with real robots, as each robot joint already has connected sensors to output
the real­time data of each joint’s situation, including angle, speed around the rotation axis,
and force from three axes.
8.4
Force Signal
The force signal is important in peg­in­hole assembly, a contact­rich manipulation task.
Serving as an assistive modality, it plays a crucial role in both picking up the peg and
facilitating the insertion process, particularly in scenarios where sensor data is affected
by noise. For example, during the insertion phase, when the three pillars are not perfectly
aligned simultaneously and hit the top surface of the hole, the force signal becomes helpful
for the robot to adjust the orientation of the end effector, ensuring successful insertion.
Additionally, the presence of friction force during insertion is reflected in the force signal,
aiding the robot in comprehending its situation, especially in cases where pose estimation
is not precise.
Force Signal Collection
Only one force sensor is added in the hand’s joint in the Isaac Gym simulation environ­
ment, connecting the end effector and the Franka Pandas robot. The sensor will return a
three­dimensional vector that indicates the force along the X, Y, and Z axis in Cartesian
space.
Like proprioception, force signal is also easy to collect in real experiments with embedded
sensors in real robots and outputs real­time force data along and around the XYZ axis.
8.5
Modality Combinations
Unlike the previous research, combining as much data as possible in order to improve the
performance. The chapter 7 has proven the adaptability of control policies. Based on the
previous experiment, this sector aims to explore the importance of each modality using
ablation experiments and find the most compact and informative observation with fewer
sensors. With a simpler system, the deployment is more effortless.
All the modalities are listed in the Table 8.1, and the observation with combined modalities
are listed in Table 8.2.
44
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:53==
Pose
Signal force
Proprioception
Peg and hole position and orientation
Gripper contact force
Joint angles
End effector(eef) position and orientation
Hand joint force
Joint speeds
Table 8.1: This tab shows the data can be used in different modalities.
Observation
peg pose, eef pose, peg­hole position distance, hand force
peg pose, hole position
eef pose, hole position
joint angle, hole position
joint angle, hole position, hand force
joint angle, hand force
Table 8.2: The observation combinations in the ablation experiment.
The first observation is used in previous training, and it is used as a comparison. The
hole’s position is combined with other modalities in the other combinations. One combi­
nation without pose information is also included in the experiment.
8.5.1
Ablation Experiment
In this ablation experiment, the PPO algorithm is used to train a control policy that aligns
the peg with the hole and then inserts the peg into the hole using different observations.
The initial state is shown in Figure 8.2.
Figure 8.2: The initial state of ablation experiments.
Similar to the state randomization in chapter 6. The hole’s position and orientation are ran­
dom in the initial state. Based on the value of parameters, it can be divided into large­scale
randomization and small­scale randomization. The randomization parameter is shown in
Table 8.3.
Position
Orientation
large scale
0.28
0.30
small scale
0.16
0.16
Table 8.3: This tab shows the random parameters for the hole’s initial state.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
45
==PAGE:54==
The random parameter means the uncertainty of position and orientation. The position
uncertainty value affects the hole’s position in the X and Y directions. The orientation
uncertainty value affects the hole’s rotation around the Z axes.
The performance is the mean of the success rate in the last three training epochs. The
success rate Psuccess is calculated based on the number of successful environments Nsuccess
in 256 environments, it can be written as:
Psuccess = Nsuccess
256
(8.1)
The success rate is shown in Table 8.4 and Table 8.5.
Observation
Success Rate
peg pose, eef pose, peg­hole pos distance, hand force
0.96
peg pose, hole position
0.92
eef pose, hole position
0.903
joint angle, hole position
0.828
joint angle, hole position, hand force
0.836
joint angle, hand force
0.356
Table 8.4: This table shows the success rate in the experiment with the small­scale ran­
dom initial state, the uncertainty value of rotation is 0.16 radian and position is 0.16 m.
In the small­scale initial randomization experiment, the trained policies all perform well.
The control policy trained by the observation without pose information performs worst, the
success rate is only 0.356.
Observation
Success Rate
peg pose, eef pose, peg­hole pos distance, hand force
0.942
peg pose, hole position
0.878
eef pose, hole position
0.497
joint angle, hole position
0.514
joint angle, hole position, hand force
0.782
joint angle, hand force
0.012
Table 8.5: This table shows the success rate in the experiment with the large­scale random
initial state, the uncertainty value of rotation is 0.30 radian and position is 0.28 m.
In the large­scale initial randomization experiment, the policy trained with observation,
including peg and hole’s pose, still achieved a high success rate, around 0.9, while the
others performed much worse. Especially for the policy trained by observation excluding
pose information, the success rate is nearly zero. Hand joint force signal is an assistive
modality. The policy trained with joint angle, hole position, and hand joint force, achieving
a 0.782 success rate, performs better than without hand joint force.
According to the results, the pose information is an essential modality for the peg­in­hole
assembly. In the small­scale initial randomization, the hole is near the gripper. There­
fore, with the policy’s exploration ability, the agent can find the hole coincidentally and
successfully insert the peg into the hole. While in the large­scale initial randomization
experiment, finding the hole by coincidence is hard. The joint angle can implicitly reflect
46
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:55==
the peg’s pose and hand force can reflect the insertion state. Therefore, even without
the peg’s pose, the control policy can successfully implement the task sometimes. In the
proprioception and force signal modality, the data of joints’ angle and hand joint force is
enough. In the next chapter, the RGB images are used to provide pose information, and
different fusion methods are introduced.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
47
==PAGE:56==
48
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:57==
9
Multimodal Fusion
As discussed in chapter chapter 8, the RGB images, which are low­cost and easy to
collect can be used to represent the pose information. Representation learning is a valu­
able technique for learning low­dimensional representation from high­dimensional data.
Therefore, instead of using raw RGB images as input, the visual representation contain­
ing pose information is fused with other modality data to provide informative observation
for control policy. The representation learning methods and multimodal fusion methods
are introduced
9.1
Representation Learning with Contrastive Learning
The representation with pose information is learned by contrastive learning methods using
the Siamese­CNN network based on the SimCLR framework.
9.1.1
Siamese network
Siamese networks are general architecture for comparing inputs, as shown in Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1: This picture [60] shows the architecture of siamese network. The encoder f
includes a customized backbone network and a projection MLP, and it is used to process
the input and output representation h. The model aims to maximize the similarity between
positive pairs and the dissimilarity of negative pairs. The synchronization methods of
encoders’ weights are various, such as momentum and memory bank.
In this thesis, the backbone of the Siamese network is designed based on VGG architec­
ture [61], one of the classical neural network architectures in the field of computer vision.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
49
==PAGE:58==
Backbone: VGG
Based on the VGG architecture, it derives networks with various depths; VGG16 as shown
in Figure 9.2, is one of the most popular networks with 16 hidden layers separately. The
only distinction with other networks lies in the depth of the network.
Figure 9.2: This picture [62] illustrates the process of VGG16 dealing the input images.
It contains sixteen hidden layers, thirteen convolution layers, and three fully connected
(FC) layers.
One improvement in VGG16 compared to AlexNet [63] is using consecutive 3x3 convo­
lutional kernels instead of larger kernels such as 11x11 in AlexNet. For a given receptive
field, stacking small convolutional kernels is better than using larger ones. This is be­
cause multiple layers of non­linear transformations can increase the depth of the network
to facilitate the learning of more complex patterns, with a relatively small cost with fewer
parameters. The detailed structure of VGG16 is shown in appendix Table A.1.
VGG networks have a concise architecture with the same size of convolutional layers and
max­pooling dimensions, and the combination of several small filters (3x3) in convolu­
tional layers is found to be more effective than a single large filter (7x7). However, VGG
networks, such as VGG16 and VGG19, are computationally heavy and utilize numerous
parameters, resulting in increased memory usage (over 140M). Therefore, the backbone
used in the thesis is based on the architecture of VGG but with only five layers.
Projection MLP
Projection MLP is a useful trick discovered in the work of SimCLR [64]. It has been empir­
ically proven that it is helpful to improve the performance of downstream tasks. Usually,
the project MLP has two dense layers and an activation layer, it can be written as:
z = W (2) · α(W (1) · h)
(9.1)
where z is the output and h is the input representation, W (1) and W (2) are the weights of
50
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:59==
two dense layers. The activation function α is usually the ReLU activation function.
9.1.2
SimCLR
SimCLR, shown in Figure 9.3 is a popular and simple contrastive learning framework with­
out specific Siamese architecture and memory bank. It aims to maximize the consistency
between different augmented views of the same data instance to learn representations,
specifically by maximizing the similarity, i.e., maxsimilar(zi, zj).
Figure 9.3: This picture shows the framework of SimCLR. The input x is processed by
data augmentation operator τ from augmentation sets T. f(·) is the encoder that output
the representation h and g(·) is the projection MLP which could improve the performance.
Random data augmentation, projection head and normalized cross entropy loss with ad­
justable temperature are the three useful techniques proposed in SimCLR to improve the
performance.
Random data augmentation:
Randomly transforms any given data instance to generate two correlated views of the
same data, denoted as xi and xj, representing positive pairs. In the SimCLR, the data
augmentation includes crop (with flip and resize), color distortion, Gaussian blur, cutout,
rotate and sobel filtering, as illustrated in Figure 9.4.
Figure 9.4: This picture [64] illustrates different data augementation techniques. Crop,
color distortion and Gaussian are much more effective.
Projection head
The projection head maps the representations to the space where contrastive loss is ap­
plied. In SimCLR, the structure of projection g(·) head is an MLP with a hidden layer which
can be written as:
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
51
==PAGE:60==
zi = g(hi) = w(2)σ(w(1)hi)
(9.2)
where σ is the ReLU non­linear function. The projection head has been empricial proved
to be beneficial to improve the representations’ performance in downstream tasks.
Adjust temperature in loss function
The temperature coefficient is an hyperparameter added in the loss function to balance
the similarity measurements between samples, controlling the sensitivity of network. It is
written in Equation 9.3.
ℓ(xi, xj) = −log
[
exp (si,j/τ)
∑
k̸=i,j exp (si,k/τ) + exp (si,j/τ)
]
(9.3)
Given a set of pairs {xk} in a batch, including a positive pair xi and xj, with the similarity
s, the loss function aims to identify xj from {xk}k̸=i.
In the contrastive loss function, the introduction of a temperature coefficient allows for the
adjustment of the distribution of similarity scores for pairs of samples. A higher temper­
ature leads to a smoother distribution, making the differences between similar samples
less pronounced. Conversely, a lower temperature places more attention on separating
the current sample from the most similar others.
The pipeline of SimCLR shows in 9.1.2.
Algorithm 3 SimCLR
Input: batchsize N, temperature parameter τ, encoder f, projection MLP g.
Output: network f
1: for sampled minibatch XN
k
do
2:
for all xk, k ∈N do
3:
Apply two data augmentation t, t′ into the dataset
4:
˜x2k−1 = t(xK), h2k−1 = f(˜x2k−1), z2k−1 = g(h2k−1)
5:
˜x2k = t′(xK), h2k = f(˜x2k), z2k = g(h2k)
6:
end for
7:
for all i, j ∈2N do
8:
si,j = similarity operator(xi, xj)
9:
end for
10:
calculate L =
1
2N
∑N
k=1 [ℓ(2k −1, 2k) + ℓ(2k, 2k −1)], where ℓis
ℓ(xi, xj) = −log
[
exp(si,j/τ)
∑
k̸=i,j exp(si,k/τ)+exp(si,j/τ)
]
update parameters in fandg to minmu­
mize the L
11: end for
9.1.3
Loss function
Loss function is important for the training, except for the normalized temperature­scaled
cross entropy loss function in SimCLR, there are some other loss functions.
infoNCE loss
Lq = −log
( K
∑
i=0
exp(q · ki/τ)
∑K
j=0 exp(q · kj/τ)
)
(9.4)
52
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:61==
contrastive loss
The contrastive loss is an early loss function employed in contrastive learning. It accepts
a pair of positve or negative samples and minimize the distance between similar samples
or maximum the distance between dissimilar ones.
L = (1 −Y ) · ||xi −xj||2 + Y · max(0, m −||xi −xj||2)
(9.5)
When the sample pair (xi, yj) are positive, Y equals to 0, otherwise, Y is 1. m is the
margin, set to avoid trivial solution.
triplet loss
Triplet loss is composed of a triplet a, p, n, requiring three images as input, a represents the
anchor, signifying the reference sample; p denotes the positive sample; and n represents
the negative sample.
The objective of triplet loss is to separate positive pairs and negative pairs by a certain
distance (margin), ensuring that in the embedding space, the distance between samples
of the same category is sufficiently close, while the distance between samples of different
categories is significantly distant. Compared with contrastive loss, triplet loss could help
models effectively learn the tiny but distinguish details.
L = max (d(a, p) −d(a, n) + m, 0)
(9.6)
MSE loss
The Mean Squared Error (MSE) is a simple and most common loss function. It is used
for the downstream task, pose estimation.
L = 1
N
N
∑
i
(yi −˜yi)
(9.7)
9.2
Fusion with Visual Representation
This section introduces a fusion method to fuse visual representation and other modali­
ties (proprioception, force signal). The visual representation is learned with the Siamese
network, and the performance of the visual representation is tested with the pose estima­
tion. In the experiment with the align sub­task, the 128­dimension visual representation
is fused directly with other modalities.
9.2.1
Dataset Preparation
To pretrain the representation, collecting the dataset is the first step. This thesis collects all
the data from the simulation environment with the Gaussian noise. The collection process
is shown in Figure 9.5. Considering the purpose of estimating the pose, crop, rotate, and
cutout is unsuitable for this project. Therefore, only the color augmentation technique is
used in this thesis.
This dataset is used to train the neural network to predict the objects’ pose with RGB
images. Therefore, the camera sensor is added in Isaac Gym to extract the RGB images
of the objects and record the corresponding pose. The dataset used in training contains
4000 instances. The camera view and image size are hyperparameters chosen based on
the previous papers.
The fusion pipeline is shown in Figure 9.6. Considering the pose estimation of the hole’s
position is not a complex downstream task, the momentum is unnecessary. Therefore, the
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
53
==PAGE:62==
SimCLR framework, which is simpler than MoCo, is used in this thesis. And the encoder’s
architecture is based on VGG.
Figure 9.5: Collected data including images and the corresponding objects’ pose. The
image has 128 pixels in both height and width. The pose is a seven­dimensional array
containing position and orientation.
Fused observation
Force Signal
Proprioception
Estimate 
Position
Representation
RGB Images
Downstream
MLP
Siamese
CNN
Figure 9.6: The representation from the RGB images is used to estimate the hole’s po­
sition. Then, the hole’s position is combined with the force signal and the proprioception
data as the observation for the control policy.
9.2.2
Pose Estimation Experiment with Visual Representation
The downstream task experiment of pose estimation is conducted to test the performance
of the trained visual representation.
Pretrain Representation
The encoder in this thesis is based on the VGG structure, shown in Table 9.1. The pre­
trained representation has 128 dimensions, and its performance is tested by estimating
the dissimilarity between two images with different object poses. The samples are shown
in Figure 9.7. The shown images have been processed, so the resolution is very low.
54
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:63==
Input (128 × 128 × 3 RGB images)
Layer
Output size([c, h, w])
Conv3­64
[64,128,128]
Conv3­64
[64,128,128]
Maxpool
[64,64,64]
Conv3­128
[128,64,64]
Conv3­128
[128,64,64]
Maxpool
[128,32,32]
Conv3­256
[256,16,16]
Conv3­256
[256,16,16]
Maxpool
[256,8,8]
FC­128
[1,128]
Table 9.1: This table shows the encoder structure used in this thesis. The convolutional
layer parameters are denoted as Conv<kernel­size>­<number of channels>, FC means
the fully connected layer and the default stride of maximum pooling is two. The output
representation is 128 dimensions.
Figure 9.7: The 128×128 RGB images are firstly processed into grey images, which are
then passed to the neural network to output representation. The dissimilarity is calculated
based on two representations and the original grey images are shown for visualization.
Pose Estimation
The representation is then used for the downstream task: pose estimation to test its per­
formance. Based on the ablation experiment, the hole’s position is enough to achieve a
high success rate. Therefore, only the hole’s position is estimated instead of complete
pose information of the peg and the hole.
According to the loss shown in Figure 9.8, although the loss curve fluctuates during the
training, the training loss decreases to a small value. In the test dataset, the test loss also
fluctuates heavily, but the test loss is in a decreasing trend.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
55
==PAGE:64==
-5e-3
0
5e-3
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
5k
0
5k
10k
15k
20k
25k
30k
35k
40k
45
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
5k
0
5k
10k
15k
20k
25k
30k
35k
40k
45
Figure 9.8: This picture shows the training loss(left) and test loss(right) of using the rep­
resentation to estimate the hole’s position.
9.2.3
Experiment of Aligning Sub­Task
Training control policy with high­dimensional visual data is a challenging task. Therefore,
the experiment is based on the align sub­task, which is the simplest task. In this experi­
ment, the PPO algorithm is used to train a control policy to align the peg with the hole with
the visual representation from the Siamese network. The Siamese network has been de­
ployed into the policy learning pipeline to generate visual representation from image input.
Then, the representation is combined with force signal and proprioception data as obser­
vation for policy training. The reward curve is shown in Figure 9.9, and the success rate
is shown in Table 9.2. According to the reward curve and success rate, the performance
of the control policy trained by multimodal observation is satisfied.
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
210
5M
20M
25M
30M
35M
40M
45M
50M
55M
60M
65M
70M
75M
80M
85
Figure 9.9: The Y­axis shows the returning word, and the X­axis shows the training steps.
Observation
Algorithm
Success Rate
joint angle, hole position(estimated), hand force
PPO
0.56
Table 9.2: In this experiment, the control policy is trained with the PPO algorithm using
the estimated hole position. The success rate is calculated based on 2048 environments.
56
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:65==
Part IV
Conclusion and Future Work
==PAGE:66==
10
Conclusion and Future Work
10.1
Conclusion
To bridge the gap in the multiple peg­in­hole assembly, this thesis focuses on implement­
ing the multiple peg­in­hole assembly task with the reinforcement learning­based control
policy, which can also be transferred to scenarios with varying object geometry. To im­
prove the control policies’ adaptability, the uncertainties of grasping place and initializa­
tion states and domain randomization, including sensor noise and friction coefficients, are
added into the simulation environments.
With deep reinforcement learning algorithms, three sequential control policies are suc­
cessfully trained within 100M steps, which makes convergence much quicker than train­
ing a policy to implement all the tasks. With three control policies, the intermediate states,
like lifting height, can be controlled, which enables flexible deployment with specific re­
quirements. With the generalization test, the trained policies are proven to be transferred
to other scenarios with varying objects’ geometry. An ablation experiment is conducted to
rank the importance of commonly used modalities in peg­in­hole assembly, where pose in­
formation is significant. However, the position information is complex to collect in unstruc­
tured environments. The visual images, including geometry and semantic information, are
easy to collect in unstructured environments and, therefore, used to provide pose informa­
tion. Visual images are usually high­dimensional, and self­supervised learning methods
could be used to extract compact low­dimensional representations from the raw images
for policy learning. Contrastive learning methods and Siamese neural networks are ap­
plied to learn specific representations with pose information. The experiment results in
chapter 9 have shown that the performance of learned representation could identify the
objects’ pose and can also be used for estimating the objects’ position. It is a way to
provide general observations in unstructured environments, which could further improve
the adaptability of control policies. The multimodal fusion methods are also based on vi­
sual representations with other modalities to provide informative observation. Multimodal
observation has been used in policy learning in the align sub­task. The trained policies
implement the task, and the success rate is 0.56.
Although the transition methods among sequential control policies are simple, the visual
representation is only leaned in simple industrial environments. The proposed solution
in this thesis has implemented the multiple peg­in­hole assembly task with quick conver­
gence.
10.2
Future Work
Because of the unstable international situation, my thesis has been influenced by many
unexpected accidents. The program my thesis is based on has been shut down, and my
co­supervisor has been absent from my thesis because of the sensitive field. His visa has
been processed for eight months, from May 2023 to January 2024. With these negative
influences, I must hurry up to implement the whole pipeline and can not focus on many
details. More comprehensive experiments can be conducted to improve the work. Below
are some aspects that could further improve the work.
Visual Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
This thesis explores the potential of visual data and the newly published reinforcement
learning algorithms, such as Dreamer, for visual data that could be used to train better
control policy.
58
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:67==
Multimodal Fusion and Visual Representation
With self­supervised learning and Siamese neural networks, the visual representation is
learned. Many famous network structures like Transformer can be applied to learn a better
representation. There are many other multimodal fusion methods that can be explored,
like the Perceiver network, to fuse the different modalities and output a comprehensive
representation instead of fusing the visual representation with other modalities directly.
Additionally, pose estimation with representation is a promising way to provide object
pose directly in general scenarios, which can be further explored.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Morteza Daneshmand et al. “Industry 4.0 and prospects of circular economy: a
survey of robotic assembly and disassembly”. In: The International Journal of Ad­
vanced Manufacturing Technology 124.9 (2023), pp. 2973–3000.
[2]
Yuze Jiang et al. “A review of robotic assembly strategies for the full operation pro­
cedure: Planning, execution and evaluation”. In: Robotics and Computer­Integrated
Manufacturing 78 (2022), p. 102366.
[3]
Íñigo Elguea­Aguinaco et al. “A review on reinforcement learning for contact­rich
robotic manipulation tasks”. In: Robotics and Computer­Integrated Manufacturing
81 (2023), p. 102517.
[4]
Tadanobu Inoue et al. “Deep reinforcement learning for high precision assembly
tasks”. In: 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys­
tems (IROS). IEEE. 2017, pp. 819–825.
[5]
Fengming Li et al. “Robot skill acquisition in assembly process using deep reinforce­
ment learning”. In: Neurocomputing 345 (2019), pp. 92–102.
[6]
Cristian C Beltran­Hernandez et al. “Variable compliance control for robotic peg­
in­hole assembly: A deep­reinforcement­learning approach”. In: Applied Sciences
10.19 (2020), p. 6923.
[7]
Aleksandra Anna Apolinarska et al. “Robotic assembly of timber joints using rein­
forcement learning”. In: Automation in Construction 125 (2021), p. 103569.
[8]
Marius Hebecker, Jens Lambrecht, and Markus Schmitz. “Towards real­world force­
sensitive robotic assembly through deep reinforcement learning in simulations”. In:
2021 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics
(AIM). IEEE. 2021, pp. 1045–1051.
[9]
Yevgen Chebotar et al. “Closing the sim­to­real loop: Adapting simulation random­
ization with real world experience”. In: 2019 International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2019, pp. 8973–8979.
[10]
Jing Xu et al. “Compare contact model­based control and contact model­free learn­
ing: A survey of robotic peg­in­hole assembly strategies”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05240
(2019).
[11]
Jing Xu et al. “Feedback deep deterministic policy gradient with fuzzy reward for
robotic multiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics 15.3 (2018), pp. 1658–1667.
[12]
Zhimin Hou et al. “Knowledge­driven deep deterministic policy gradient for robotic
multiple peg­in­hole assembly tasks”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO). IEEE. 2018, pp. 256–261.
[13]
Hyeonjun Park et al. “Compliance­based robotic peg­in­hole assembly strategy with­
out force feedback”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 64.8 (2017),
pp. 6299–6309.
[14]
Michelle A Lee et al. “Making sense of vision and touch: Learning multimodal rep­
resentations for contact­rich tasks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Robotics 36.3 (2020),
pp. 582–596.
[15]
Wenkai Chen et al. “Multimodality Driven Impedance­Based Sim2Real Transfer
Learning for Robotic Multiple Peg­in­Hole Assembly”. In: IEEE Transactions on Cy­
bernetics (2023).
[16]
Christopher John Cornish Hellaby Watkins. “Learning from delayed rewards”. In:
(1989).
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
61
==PAGE:70==
[17]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[18]
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. “Deep reinforcement learning with
double q­learning”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence.
Vol. 30. 1. 2016.
[19]
Timothy P Lillicrap et al. “Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971 (2015).
[20]
Richard S Sutton et al. “Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with
function approximation”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 12
(1999).
[21]
Volodymyr Mnih et al. “Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning”. In:
International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2016, pp. 1928–1937.
[22]
John Schulman et al. “Proximal policy optimization algorithms”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347 (2017).
[23]
Tuomas Haarnoja et al. “Soft actor­critic: Off­policy maximum entropy deep rein­
forcement learning with a stochastic actor”. In: International conference on machine
learning. PMLR. 2018, pp. 1861–1870.
[24]
Yuhang Gai et al. “Piecewise strategy and decoupling control method for high pose
precision robotic peg­in­hole assembly”. In: Robotics and Computer­Integrated Man­
ufacturing 79 (2023), p. 102451.
[25]
Oliver Gibbons, Alessandro Albini, and Perla Maiolino. “A Tactile Feedback Inser­
tion Strategy for Peg­in­Hole Tasks”. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE. 2023, pp. 10415–10421.
[26]
Hongzhuo Liang et al. “Multifingered grasping based on multimodal reinforcement
learning”. In: IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7.2 (2021), pp. 1174–1181.
[27]
Bojan Nemec, Leon Žlajpah, and Aleš Ude. “Door opening by joining reinforce­
ment learning and intelligent control”. In: 2017 18th International Conference on
Advanced Robotics (ICAR). IEEE. 2017, pp. 222–228.
[28]
Gbenga Abiodun Odesanmia et al. “Q learning based trajectory generation for robotic
grinding and polishing”. In: 2018 International Symposium on Advances in Abrasive
Technology, ISAAT2018. 2018.
[29]
Alexander Clegg et al. “Learning to dress: Synthesizing human dressing motion
via deep reinforcement learning”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37.6
(2018), pp. 1–10.
[30]
Yuanpei Chen et al. “Sequential Dexterity: Chaining Dexterous Policies for Long­
Horizon Manipulation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00987 (2023).
[31]
Youngwoon Lee et al. “Composing complex skills by learning transition policies”. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations. 2018.
[32]
Xue Bin Peng et al. “Mcp: Learning composable hierarchical control with multiplica­
tive compositional policies”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
32 (2019).
[33]
Shaohua Yan, De Xu, and Xian Tao. “Hierarchical Policy Learning with Demonstra­
tion Learning for Robotic Multiple Peg­in­Hole Assembly Tasks”. In: IEEE Transac­
tions on Industrial Informatics (2023).
[34]
Timothée Lesort et al. “State representation learning for control: An overview”. In:
Neural Networks 108 (2018), pp. 379–392.
[35]
Tim De Bruin et al. “Integrating state representation learning into deep reinforcement
learning”. In: IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 3.3 (2018), pp. 1394–1401.
62
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:71==
[36]
Herke Van Hoof et al. “Stable reinforcement learning with autoencoders for tactile
and visual data”. In: 2016 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots
and systems (IROS). IEEE. 2016, pp. 3928–3934.
[37]
Junhyuk Oh et al. “Action­conditional video prediction using deep networks in atari
games”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 28 (2015).
[38]
Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. “Dimensionality reduction by learn­
ing an invariant mapping”. In: 2006 IEEE computer society conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition (CVPR’06). Vol. 2. IEEE. 2006, pp. 1735–1742.
[39]
Kaiming He et al. “Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation learn­
ing”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[40]
Ting Chen et al. “A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Represen­
tations”. In: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning.
2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[41]
RCNN Faster. “Towards real­time object detection with region proposal networks”.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems 9199.10.5555 (2015), pp. 2969239–
2969250.
[42]
Xinyu Liu, Zdeněk Rozsypálek, and Tomáš Krajnı́k. “Self­Supervised Learning for
Fusion of IR and RGB Images in Visual Teach and Repeat Navigation”. In: 2023
European Conference on Mobile Robots (ECMR). IEEE. 2023, pp. 1–7.
[43]
Adrian Spurr et al. “Self­Supervised 3D Hand Pose Estimation From Monocular
RGB via Contrastive Learning”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con­
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV). Oct. 2021, pp. 11230–11239.
[44]
Yang Xiao, Yuming Du, and Renaud Marlet. “PoseContrast: Class­agnostic object
viewpoint estimation in the wild with pose­aware contrastive learning”. In: 2021 In­
ternational Conference on 3D Vision (3DV). IEEE. 2021, pp. 74–84.
[45]
Bang You et al. “Integrating contrastive learning with dynamic models for reinforce­
ment learning from images”. In: Neurocomputing 476 (2022), pp. 102–114.
[46]
Yuke Zhu et al. “Reinforcement and imitation learning for diverse visuomotor skills”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09564 (2018).
[47]
Viktor Makoviychuk et al. Isaac Gym: High Performance GPU­Based Physics Sim­
ulation For Robot Learning. 2021.
[48]
nvidia Developer. Isaac Gym ­ Preview Release. URL: https://developer.nvidia.com/
isaac-gym.
[49]
C. Daniel Freeman et al. Brax ­ A Differentiable Physics Engine for Large Scale
Rigid Body Simulation. Version 0.9.4. 2021. URL: http://github.com/google/brax.
[50]
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. “MuJoCo: A physics engine for
model­based control”. In: 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems. IEEE. 2012, pp. 5026–5033. DOI: 10 . 1109 / IROS . 2012 .
6386109.
[51]
“Design and use paradigms for gazebo, an open­source multi­robot simulator”. In:
2004 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS)(IEEE
Cat. No. 04CH37566). Vol. 3. IEEE. 2004, pp. 2149–2154.
[52]
Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory et al. Robotic Operating System. Ver­
sion ROS Melodic Morenia. May 23, 2018. URL: https://www.ros.org.
[53]
Franka Emika GmbH. Denavit–Hartenberg parameters. URL: https://frankaemika.
github.io/docs/control_parameters.html.
[54]
Josh Tobin et al. “Domain randomization for transferring deep neural networks from
simulation to the real world”. In: 2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelli­
gent robots and systems (IROS). IEEE. 2017, pp. 23–30.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
63
==PAGE:72==
[55]
Yongle Luo et al. “D2SR: Transferring Dense Reward Function to Sparse by Net­
work Resetting”. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Real­time Computing
and Robotics (RCAR). IEEE. 2023, pp. 906–911.
[56]
Kun Dong et al. “Balance Between Efficient and Effective Learning: Dense2Sparse
Reward Shaping for Robot Manipulation with Environment Uncertainty”. In: 2022
IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM).
IEEE. 2022, pp. 1192–1198.
[57]
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. “Learning to control in operational space”. In: The
International Journal of Robotics Research 27.2 (2008), pp. 197–212.
[58]
John Schulman et al. “High­dimensional continuous control using generalized ad­
vantage estimation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438 (2015).
[59]
Edwin Olson. “AprilTag: A robust and flexible visual fiducial system”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
May 2011, pp. 3400–3407.
[60]
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. “Exploring Simple Siamese Representation Learning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10566 (2020).
[61]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very deep convolutional networks for
large­scale image recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014).
[62]
Tanmay Thaker. VGG16. 2021. URL: https://medium.com/nerd-for-tech/vgg-16-
easiest-explanation-12453b599526.
[63]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks”. In: Advances in neural information pro­
cessing systems 25 (2012).
[64]
Ting Chen et al. “A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representa­
tions”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2020, pp. 1597–
1607.
64
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:73==
A
VGG16 Structure
Input (224 × 224 × 3 RGB images)
Layer
Output size([c, h, w])
Conv3­64
[64,224,224]
Conv3­64
[64,224,224]
Maxpool
[64,112,112]
Conv3­128
[128,112,112]
Conv3­128
[128,112,112]
Maxpool
[128,56,56]
Conv3­256
[256,56,56]
Conv3­256
[256,56,56]
Maxpool
[256,28,28]
Conv3­512
[512,28,28]
Conv3­512
[512,28,28]
Maxpool
[512,14,14]
Conv3­512
[512,14,14]
Conv3­512
[512,14,14]
Maxpool
[512,7,7]
FC­4096
[1,4096]
FC­4096
[1,4096]
FC­1000
[1,1000]
Softmax
[1,1000]
Table A.1: Configurations of VGG16 in ImageNet. The convolutional layer parameters are
denoted as Conv<kernel­size>­<number of channels>, FC means the fully connected
layer and the default stride of maximum pooling is two. The 1000 is the class number in
ImageNet, which varies in different tasks.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
65
==PAGE:74==
B
Simulation parameters
Figure B.1: Parameters for the simulation in Isaac Gym.
66
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
==PAGE:75==
Figure B.2: Parameters for the parallel environments in Isaac Gym.
Multimodal Reinforcement Learning of Impedance Control Policy for Robotic Peg­in­Hole Assembly
67
