==PAGE:1==
Security­responsibles’
and
top
manage­
ment’s perceptions of their IT security
An exploratory mixed­method approach
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
An exploratory mixed­method approach
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Erik Krabbe Bjørnholt
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Center for Digital
Security, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in En­
gineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of the areas of IT security.
Erik Krabbe Bjørnholt ­ s210522
Signature
Date
ii
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
28-01-2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Cybercriminals are on the loose and successfully breaching organisations to an ever
greater extent. In 2023, IBM reported that the average cost of a data breach reached
a record high of USD 4.45 million. Many organisations try to find appropriate measures to
secure their IT, but the trend of attacks is going in the wrong direction. Risk management
has been a go­to tool to develop an adequate defence against malicious actors. However,
it is affected by the involved parties’ perceptions, and when their perceptions do not agree
with reality it can lead to poor prioritising and increased threats.
The thesis aims to explore the perception of top management and employees responsible
for IT security ­ specifically their perception of their organisations’ IT security and mutual
communication. Additionally, their perceptions are compared to see if any differences can
be found within organisations and across the roles on a wider scale. To do this, a mixed­
method approach is employed utilising both qualitative and quantitative methods. These
include interviews and a questionnaire as well as a thematic and a descriptive analysis.
Eight people participated as part of the qualitative analysis and 47 people as part of the
quantitative analysis.
It was found that the two groups of employees generally agree when assessing their or­
ganisations’ IT security. No discrepancies within the organisation could be generalised
across the organisations. The main difference between the two groups was their percep­
tions of their organisations’ culture, though most of them perceived it as a challenge. The
managers were the least concerned, however, among the questionnaires’ respondents
both groups found it to be important. Regarding the two groups’ mutual communication,
the issues seem limited. They generally see themselves as well­equipped to communi­
cate IT security.
Though the sample size of the thesis is relatively small, it highlights two possible issues.
The first one is that the organisational culture among the organisations is challenged.
Their IT security can suffer from this because a poor culture negatively influences the
employee’s behaviour and awareness. Secondly, the difference in the two groups’ per­
ceptions influences prioritising negatively. They might focus on the wrong security mea­
sures and thereby leave their organisation at risk of getting breached.
As this is an exploratory study, I recommend that future studies investigate the above­
mentioned issues and their implications further. This includes collecting a suitable sample
population to study what domains the two groups perceive as important and how differ­
ences in their perceptions can influence an organisation.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Erik Krabbe Bjørnholt, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
I am the author of the thesis and want to thank all the participants of the thesis ­ especially
those who set aside time for letting me interview them. Also, I would like to thank my two
supervisors:
[Nicola Dragoni], [Deputy director, Professor], [Technical University of Denmark]
I would like to thank Nicola Dragoni for his guidance throughout the entire project to en­
sure this project would succeed. In particular, I thank him for his help in streamlining the
methodology and for helping me stay on track.
[Thomas Lyngkær Boe], [CISO], [Unit IT A/S]
I would like to thank Thomas Lyngkær Boe for helping me get participants and ensuring
that I had a proper data set. His input throughout the project has been invaluable and his
optimistic attitude has been encouraging.
iv
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:7==
Glossary
Below are two tables the first one comprises the most frequently used terms and the
second comprises acronyms used in the report. They are ordered alphabetically.
Term
Description
Collaborating company
Unit IT who have assisted in the process of gathering
participants.
Category
One of the three categories: human, organisational, and
technological. See Section 2.4 for an elaboration.
Cybersecurity Taxonomy
The JRC Cybersecurity Taxonomy.
Domains
One of the 4 dimensions in the JRC Cybersecurity Taxonomy.
Factor
A concept that influences a domain. It can be a domain itself.
See Section 3.2.7 for an elaboration.
Informant
An individual who has been part of an interview in the thesis.
IT security
An organisation’s effort to protect its employees, customers,
systems, and assets digitally and physically. See
Section 1.1.1 for a discussion on related terms.
Managers
Refers to members of top management, e.g. members of
a board, CEO, CFO, COO.
Participants
An individual who has participated in the thesis either as an
informant or a respondent.
Respondent
An individual who has responded to the thesis’ questionnaire
Security­Responsible
A person who is responsible for an organisation’s IT security.
Subject
Resembles a code or a collection of similar codes. See
Section 3.2.7 for an elaboration.
Acronym
Description
CCO
Chief Commercial Officer
CEO
Chief Executive Officer
CFO
Chief Financial Officer
CIO
Chief Information Officer
CISO
Chief Information Security Officer
CMO
Chief Marketing Officer
COO
Chief Operation Officer
CTO
Chief Technology Officer
EU
European Union
ENISA
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity
ISO
International Organisation for Standardisation
IT
Information Technology
JRC
(European Commission) Joint Research Centre
NIS 3
Network and Information Security
NIST
National Institute for Standards and Technology
TA
Thematic Analysis
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Glossary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Organisations’ IT security is threatened
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
The collaborating company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Organisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
A literature review to find essential domains and factors
11
2.1
The course of the literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
Essential domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Essential factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.5
Contributions to data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3
An analysis of the participants’ perceptions
29
3.1
The course of the interviews and following analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.2
Developing themes and comparing perception
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.3
The course of the questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.4
Comparing respondents’ perceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4
A discussion of the findings and employed methods
67
4.1
Addressing the problem using the findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.2
A look­back on the employed methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
4.3
Suggestions for future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
5
Conclusion
83
Bibliography
85
A JRC Cybersecurity Taxonomy
93
B Domains Mentioned in the Reviewed Literature
94
C Factors Discovered in the Reviewed Literature
96
D Interview Guide
98
E
Questionnaire
102
F
Declaration of Consent and Info Sheet
106
G Comparison of Codes
107
H Data for graphs
110
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Before diving into the findings of the thesis, it will be introduced. The introduction com­
prises five sections: (1) a motivation for the project and an outlining of what security
means in the thesis, (2) a description of the thesis contribution, (3) an elaboration of the
employed theory, (4) a description of the collaborating company, and (5) an outlining of
the remaining part of the thesis. The latter also includes an overview of the entire thesis.
After having introduced the thesis, the performed literature review will be described.
1.1
Organisations’ IT security is threatened
Organisations are formed to achieve a goal. Some have the sole purpose of earning the
largest amount of money while others work towards improving people’s lives. Regard­
less of their purpose, they all live in diverse and changing environments. To better cope
with external factors, they can analyse them, e.g. by performing a PESTLE analysis [1].
It comprises six factors, one of them being technological factors. Over the years, this
has led to the prevalence of Information Technology (IT), and organisations are becoming
increasingly dependent on IT. An organisation’s managers work to ensure that its oper­
ations are running. They do so by examining what makes it thrive and what can halt its
operations, e.g. using a SWOT analysis [2]. Combining it with an increased dependence
on IT, a rising threat is IT security breaches. However, this threat is only relevant if an
organisation’s IT is vulnerable which leads to the next.
Recent reports show that malicious actors’ attacks on organisations are successful [3,
4]. Every year the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) publishes a re­
port on the Cybersecurity Threat Landscape, and in 2023 the most frequently reported
threat among incidents analysed was ransomware (above 31%) [5]. In Sophos’ 2023 re­
port on ransomware, they found that 66% of the respondents’ organisations had been hit
by ransomware in 2022 [4]. IBM found in their 2023 report 1 that the average cost of a
breach was USD 4.45 million [3]. It is important to note, that the organisations which are
part of their report are relatively big, compared to those which are part of Sophos’ report
where one­third employ 100–250 people. Still, Sophos found that the average cost of
a ransomware breach was USD 1.82 million among their participants. In both reports,
the average cost is higher than the previous year. What makes it even worse is that it
attracts criminals to conduct organised crime. This can be seen in ENISA’s report as
the majority of threat actors are motivated by financial gain. Unfortunately, these security
breaches can threaten human lives, and ENISA found that the healthcare sector is among
the sectors that receive the highest number of compromises. One of the more well­known
breaches in the healthcare sector is the 2017 ransomware attack on the United Kingdom’s
National Health Service [6]. This was a severe attack, but fortunately, there was no re­
ported increase in mortality [7]. However, a healthcare entity might not be as fortunate
next time. Organisations need to take action to protect themselves and the well­being of
others.
The above emphasises the need for better IT security among organisations. The Euro­
pean Union (EU) have recognised this and updated its legislation on Network and Infor­
mation Security (NIS) in 2023 with a new directive (NIS 2) [8]. It aims to build IT security
capabilities, mitigate threats, and ensure the continuity of organisations’ services across
1Reported breaches happened between March 2022 and March 2023
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
1
==PAGE:12==
the EU. To achieve this, they suggest conducting risk management among other things.
Other national and international entities recognise the importance and have published
standards on risk management in recent years [9, 10]. Some are the National Institute for
Standards and Technology (NIST) and the International Organisation for Standardisation
(ISO). However, this is not a new phenomenon to them as ISO published its first standard
on information security risk management in 2008 though guidelines for the management
of IT security date back to 1998 [11, 12].
Organisations’ IT security is continuously getting breached even though the standards
have been around for several years. One issue could be that the standards are inade­
quate, and researchers have criticised them for this [13]. Another reason could be the
vast number of domains within IT security, cf. European Commission’s Joint Research
Centre (JRC) Cybersecurity Taxonomy [14]. It can be difficult for employees to obtain
knowledge about all the domains relevant to their organisations. Also, individuals have
different perceptions and may perceive risk differently from one another. This can result
in them acting differently when faced with the same threat, and this is relevant to address
in an organisation.
Organisations have a varying number of employees, though often they have a top man­
agement of one or more individuals responsible for steering it. The members of top man­
agement will be referred to as managers in the remainder of the thesis. Nowadays, a lot
of organisations also have an employee responsible for managing IT security and advis­
ing their managers on related matters. This employee responsible for IT security will be
referred to as security­responsible in the remainder of the thesis. The managers and the
security­responsibles need to be able to communicate with each other, and Carder [15]
argues that their communication should not go through any intermediary. He states that
information is lost when it has to be passed on by several managers and this can increase
the gap in the managers’ and the security­responsibles’ understanding of threats to their
IT security. One way to overcome this is to move the security­responsible into the top
management as Chief Information Security Officer (CISO). Burke [16] supports this and
emphasises that a CISO should report directly to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). But
this is no silver bullet. Researchers have found, that executive management has been
too optimistic about their organisations’ IT security level, and it influences the priorities of
their organisations [17]. To prioritise, risk management frameworks have been developed
to help organisations choose the appropriate security measures. Since managers are an
important part of risk management, it is influenced by their perceptions, and when their
perceptions do not agree with reality, it can lead to a flawed organisational strategy and
increased threats [18].
The motivation for the thesis is that when an organisation’s managers and security­responsible
have different perceptions its IT security can be inhibited because they will drag the organ­
isation in different directions [15]. Several studies have studied employees’ perceptions.
Some study how an organisation’s IT security level is compared to how its employees
perceive it. [17, 19], while others examine how employees’ perceptions of IT security in­
fluence and are influenced by other components [20, 21, 22]. Only a few of them include
both managers and security­responsibles in their studies, and they have limited focus on
how their perceptions differ. Thus, I will explore how managers and security­responsible
perceive their organisations’ IT security and whether their perceptions differ. Furthermore,
I will study their perception of their mutual communication to see if they find it adequate.
In the thesis, IT security is used as the term for protecting IT. Before moving on to the
thesis contributions, how IT security is understood will be described.
2
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:13==
1.1.1
How IT security is used
One can find security to be many things, and the Merriam­Webster dictionary defines it
in several contexts such as safety, surety, and protection [23]. As mentioned in Sec­
tion 1.1, security in the thesis is concerned with protection, and Merriam­Webster defines
this as ”measures taken to guard against espionage or sabotage, crime, attack, or es­
cape”2. While other contexts of security are relevant to research, the choice of focusing
on protection is made to narrow the scope of the thesis.
IT is the use of technology to create, manipulate, store, and exchange information. Tech­
nologies can be computers, networks, and small electronic devices. Securing information
and associated technology has seen several definitions and has evolved. In the early days
of computers, their functions were to store and manipulate information virtually. When
security came about in the digital age, it was focused on data security and information
security, and with the introduction of the internet came network security [24]. Later, com­
puters became an integrated part of physical objects and today many of these objects are
connected to the Internet. Aslan et al. [24] describe cybersecurity as securing information
digitally and physically thereby covering the previously mentioned terms. Another term, IT
security, has been used extensively in academic research and some authors use both IT
security interchangeably with information security or cybersecurity [25, 26]. Uchendu et
al. [27] found that regarding culture, the terminology has changed from ’information secu­
rity culture’ to ’cybersecurity culture’ while also referring to it as ’IT security culture’. Thus,
the term IT security is used in the thesis to describe an organisation’s effort to protect its
employees, customers, systems, and assets digitally and physically.
There are several ways to describe IT security and large national and international entities
have done so in standards and other publications. In 1977, NIST3 came up with a defini­
tion for computer security: ”The protection of system data and resources from accidental
and deliberate threats to confidentiality, integrity, and availability” [28]. Many have agreed
with these goals and ISO goes on to add authenticity, accountability, non­repudiation and
reliability as possible goals [29, 30]. With the introduction of standards comes the need for
a common language, a taxonomy. Björnsdóttir et al. [13] researched ISO standards con­
cerned with risk management which is part of IT security. They found that some standards
are not aligned with scientific research and use different terminologies.
JRC under the European Commission has published the Cybersecurity Taxonomy which
will be used in the rest of the thesis [14]. Appendix A shows an example of how a selected
IT security topic can be illustrated using the taxonomy. Other national and international or­
ganisations as well as researchers have proposed taxonomies for IT security. NIST in the
United States has created a framework for improving critical infrastructure cybersecurity
which also serves a taxonomy [31]. ENISA has collected several taxonomies on incident
classification in one publication [32]. Regarding academic research, contributions have
been made in the areas of measuring the strength of cybersecurity [33], attacks on the
Internet of things (IoT) [34], and risk assessment [35] to name a few.
The Cybersecurity Taxonomy is chosen as it has the most extensive coverage of IT se­
curity. It enables a user to specify an IT security topic using four dimensions, namely,
knowledge domain, sector, technology and use case. The other taxonomies cover a sin­
gle dimension: the taxonomy proposed by NIST is only concerned with one use case
Critical Infrastructure Protection, ENISA’s taxonomy is concerned with a single domain
Incident Handling and Digital Forensic, and the research papers are either concerned
2www.merriam­webster.com/dictionary/security
3Back then they were the National Bureau of Standards
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
3
==PAGE:14==
with one technology or one domain described. Even though a more extensive taxonomy
is not always preferable, it is the case for the thesis as the aim is to explore leaders’ per­
ception of IT security in a broad sense. This includes multiple knowledge domains and
not being limited by a single sector, technology, or use case. The Cybersecurity Taxon­
omy also has substantial validity as more than 160 partners from 26 European Member
States have reviewed it before publishing the second enhanced version [36]. NIST has
released a draft of a new version of their framework called ’Cybersecurity Framework 2.0’
[37]. This is meant to have a broader scope than the previous version, but as it is an initial
draft it has not been considered in this work.
1.2
Research contribution
The purpose of this mixed­method study is to explore CISOs’ and CEOs’ perceptions
of their organisations’ IT security level, and how they communicate IT security with each
other. The literature describes that a discrepancy in perception is harmful to organisations,
but does not focus on what discrepancies might be present. This exploratory study aims to
increase the understanding of this subject by answering the following research question:
What are security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of IT security in and
related communication within their organisations, and how do their perceptions
compare?
The literature will be reviewed to identify important topics of IT security and ground the
following processes in contemporary research. Data is collected through semi­structured
interviews and a questionnaire. The participants of the interviews are sampled in col­
laboration with a company, whereas the participants of the questionnaire are sampled
through several mediums. The data analysis is conducted using thematic analysis (TA)
and descriptive statistics, respectively. The themes identified are compared using an
organisation­centric and a role­centric approach. The former is for each organisation
comparing their employees’ perception of IT security and the latter is for each role com­
paring the informants’ perception of IT security, e.g. comparing managers’ perception.
The quantitative analysis will be a role­centric comparison in addition to examining the
frequency distribution of all respondents. By doing this, it is possible to see if findings in
the qualitative data can be seen in a larger population.
The contributions of the thesis are the literature review and the two analyses. In addition,
a discussion of the findings will contribute to getting a better understanding of the outcome
of the analysis. All this will be used to answer the research question.
1.2.1
Scope
The following two points clarify the scope of the thesis:
1. Regarding the participants’ perceptions of IT security, the thesis is concerned with
their perceptions of their organisations’ performance within IT security areas and
what areas they find important.
2. Regarding who is participating, CEOs are members of top management (including
the board) and CISOs are employees responsible for IT security in their organisa­
tion. As mentioned Section 1.1, they will be referred to as managers and security­
responsibles, respectively, in the thesis.
1.3
Methodology
A scientific understanding of why organisations fail to secure their IT is not yet complete.
Researchers in this field [13, 38, 39] propose methods and models to discover and de­
4
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:15==
scribe key issues with and explanations of how organisations work with IT security, cf.
Section 2.2. In their research, they use quantitative methods, e.g. to quantitatively mea­
sure key performance indicators of IT security. All this contributes to a common under­
standing that it is hard, if not impossible, for an organisation to ensure they work with all
relevant aspects of IT security.
Instead of using a purely quantitative method, the thesis will make use of a mixed­method
approach. It is a qualitatively driven design where data is collected concurrently, referred
to as QUAL + quan by Johnson and Christensen [40]. In the thesis, an emphasis is put
on the qualitative method, and quantitative data is added to support the results. This
is done following Brinkmann and Tanggaard [41] suggestion to use complementary re­
search methods to support findings in an interview. A resulting approach is a Multidata­
multianalysis approach in which qualitative data is analysed using a qualitative method
and quantitative data is analysed using a quantitative method [40]. Because of this hier­
archy, the qualitative method will be elaborated the most.
1.3.1
A multidata­multianalysis approach
When doing qualitative research, there are two schools of thought concerning the ap­
proach [40]. Bernard G. Glaser [42] advocates that a researcher should be as little knowl­
edgeable about current research as possible, whereas Strauss and Corbin [43] present
several ways in which a literature review conducted before data collection can provide
value. The latter school of thought is chosen as literature can assist in ”deriving an initial
list of pertinent questions to ask” [40][p. 88].
Even though literature will be reviewed before data collection, it will be exploratory re­
search where the phenomenon of how organisations do IT security will be studied. It will
be grounded in phenomenology founded by Edmund Husserl which is concerned with
how a person experiences the world ­ the so­called life­world of a person [40]. Thus,
the thesis will centre around employees’ descriptions of their behaviours and opinions,
instead of assuming them. Kvale and Brinkmann [44] describe the semi­structured life­
world interview as a method to understand themes from the lived world from the subject’s
perspective. It is semi­structured to enable the researcher to explore the interviewees’
life­world while still following an interview guide as it helps to make the data comparable.
The goal of a phenomenological analysis is to investigate essences [41]. An essence is
a commonality of an experience, i.e. ”part of the experience that is common or consistent
across the research participants” [40][p. 446]. To find such essences, the collected data
is analysed using thematic analysis (TA), described by Braun and Clarke [45]. Their re­
flexive TA is widely adopted and one of the most cited academic papers in recent times
[46]. The methodology fits the thesis well, as it is concerned with ”people’s perceptions,
understandings, views, needs or motivations in relation to a particular phenomenon...[,
and] people’s behaviours or practices in relation to a particular phenomenon” [47][p. 23].
1.3.2
Literature review
Existing literature is explored to increase the quality of the thesis. Having a good under­
standing of what has already been researched helps identify gaps and design a novel
study. This is done by designing a completely new study or using an existing study’s
methodology with a new angle. The thesis will make use of an interview guide to collect
qualitative data, and getting acquainted with contemporary research helps ground the in­
terview guide in relevant topics. The same benefit is yielded when findings from a review
are used to develop a questionnaire. It is used to collect quantitative data.
There are many ways of conducting a literature review. Some are structured, and others
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
5
==PAGE:16==
are not, though most of them follow several steps. In the thesis, the five­step framework
proposed by Brocke et al. [48] will be used. Other notable procedures are a three­step
Systematic Literature Review (SLR) by Kitchenham [49] and the guidelines named Pre­
ferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta­Analysis (PRISMA) by Moher et
al. [50]. The latter is extensive and rigorous in its design and is thus more fit for a study
with the sole purpose of reviewing literature. Brocke et al.’s and Kitchenham’s suggested
review processes are similar. They are both structured into phases, but SLR gives more
guidance as to how each phase can be conducted. This, and I being more familiar with
the framework, is the reason for using it when reviewing literature in the thesis.
1.3.3
Data collection
After reviewing the literature, the process of collecting data is initiated. As this is a mixed­
method study, both qualitative and quantitative data are collected. Participants for the
two analyses have been invited individually though both using nonrandom sampling tech­
niques. The main benefit is, that it is easier to gather participants, but it comes with
the downside that data collected cannot be generalised to a population [40]. Purposive
sampling is used where participants are invited based on a set of criteria ­ in this case,
sampling employees who are managers or responsible for security in their organisation.
Alternative sampling methods are convenience sampling or quota among others [40]. The
former gives no control over characteristics and is thus not useful in the thesis. The lat­
ter requires a researcher to decide how a certain characteristic is distributed in a target
population and then try to match that in a sample population. As this is an exploratory
study, the focus is on gathering participants and not matching the distribution of a target
population. Thus, the latter technique is disregarded.
Individuals who are interviewed are referred to as informants, and individuals who have
filled out the questionnaire are referred to as respondents. When both informants and
respondents are mentioned, they are referred to as participants. Below can be found an
elaboration of the methodological considerations of each.
Qualitative data
Many qualitative methods are available, and some of the most commonly used are ques­
tionnaires, physical or online interviews, and observations. The method of choice in the
thesis is physical interviews. A questionnaire is well­suited for reaching a large group of
people and people spread out over a large geographical area. It is very rigid in its structure
which can make it easier to compare results but impossible for a researcher to prompt a
participant to elaborate when answering it. This leaves little room for a researcher to ex­
plore newly discovered angles. On the contrary, an interview can enable a researcher to
ask follow­up questions (disregarding the structured interview). This equips a researcher
with more control over the results but makes data collected influenced by their subjectivity.
This control is lost if a researcher chooses to collect data through observations, though it
reduces bias from a researcher. Perceptions are by their nature in the mind of an individ­
ual, thus it is hard to get a good understanding of an individual’s perception of a specific
topic by observing them for a short amount of time. This is even more prevalent for man­
agers who perform many activities not relevant to IT security. From this, the interview is
the most suitable method for the thesis. This is supported by Kvale and Brinkmann [44]
who highlight it as good for inductive studies which use a phenomenological approach.
The process of interviewing several individuals can be speeded up using a focus group
interview, where a researcher gathers several informants for a joint interview. One major
hurdle of this method is that informants need to be willing to share how they perceive
the IT security level and related communication with employees of other organisations.
Researchers have found it to be a challenge to get organisations to share knowledge on
6
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:17==
IT security [51]. This issue can be decreased if interviews are conducted using a one­on­
one approach. Additionally using the approach in a physical setting helps an informant
oppose a question and tell their own story [41]. The downside is that their answers can be
inhibited if they feel shame talking about a topic in the presence of others. It is expected to
have limited influence because the thesis’ research area does not cover topics related to
shame, like disabilities and chronic illness. Physical interviews have the highest response
rate according to Johnson and Christensen [40]. This is an important factor due to the
target audience which is elaborated below. Arguments so far indicate that the physical
interview is the best method for capturing an informant’s life­world in the context of IT
security.
A qualitative interview can fall into three categories: informal conversational interview,
interview guide approach, and standardised open­ended interview [40]. This thesis will
use the similar categories outlined by Brinkmann and Tanggaard [41]: loosely structured
/ unstructured interview, semi­structured interview, and structured interview. The latter
is closely related to a questionnaire and is thus not considered, cf. the previous expla­
nation. The semi­structured interview requires a researcher to have basic knowledge of
their study’s subject as they need to prepare an interview guide. This is not the case
for the unstructured or loosely structured interview, but this type of method is at risk of
having data pointing in many different directions [41]. Both types of interviews enable
a researcher to investigate new areas discovered during an interview. This is especially
useful since this is an exploratory study. Kvale and Brinkmann [44] argue that interviewing
is a craftsmanship which is learned by experience. Thus, it can be difficult for a researcher
who is new to the method to conduct an unstructured interview and get results that can
address the research question. To solve this issue an interview guide can be used as it
helps a researcher structure data collection and keep the interview questions relevant to
the thesis. Summing up, collecting qualitative data in the thesis is best done with physical
semi­structured interviews.
The target audience of this research is managers and security­responsibles. When inter­
viewing this category of people, Kvale and Brinkmann [44] refer to it as elite interviews.
This audience is hard to get access to, and thus the interviews must be properly prepared.
To achieve symmetry in the relationship between the interviewer and the interviewee, they
suggest the interviewer gets well­acquainted with the topic of research. This allows a re­
searcher to challenge the opinion of an informant which in one interview came to be in
the question: then I will dare to ask you whether you think you are at the point where
(IT security) does not need to be talk of town (Appendix I, #Int, 156­157). As described
earlier, a literature review is conducted to gain a deeper understanding of topics which
are part of contemporary research.
To further improve the quality of the interviews, a pilot interview has been conducted. Due
to limited access to the target audience, the interview was conducted with an adult who is
employed as a manager or responsible for IT security in an organisation. Still, feedback
from the interview helped identify unclear questions. It led to small changes and only
twice an informant needed clarification during the interviews: I do not think I understand
the question (Appendix I, #6, 301).
Quantitative data
Several methods are also available for collecting quantitative data, e.g. questionnaires,
interviews, and tests. The method for collecting quantitative data in the thesis is a ques­
tionnaire. In tests and experiments, one or more variables are examined to find rela­
tionships or measure their levels [40]. The aim of the thesis is not to find relationships
between variables but rather to explore the perception of individuals not using predefined
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
7
==PAGE:18==
variables. As elaborated above, an interview is well­suited to examine individuals’ per­
ceptions. One of its downsides is, that it requires a person to conduct the interview, and
is thus resource­intensive. This is solved using a questionnaire which can be sent out
to many individuals. One disadvantage of using it is that it does not allow for probing,
i.e. asking follow­up questions [40]. Thus, using a questionnaire results in the loss of the
nuances of a respondent’s answers. As the main focus of collecting quantitative data is
to support findings in the qualitative analysis, nuances in the respondents’ answers are
less of a priority. Thus, the questionnaire is chosen to collect quantitative data.
Collecting data using a questionnaire can be conducted in different ways, e.g. in­person,
via mail, or using the Internet. In­person questionnaires require a researcher and a re­
spondent to be in the same place. This put unnecessary constraints on the respondent,
which as argued above is hard to get to participate. This is solved by mailing the ques­
tionnaire to respondents, but this process is slow and has a low response rate [40]. Using
an online questionnaire, the response rate can be improved, and it can be sent out via
several mediums (social media, e­mail, etc.). Thus, the online questionnaire is the best
fit for collecting quantitative data in the thesis.
Similarly to the interviews, the questionnaire has been reviewed in two small pilot tests.
The first test included two people who thoroughly went through the questionnaire to single
out double negatives, double­barreled questions, and loaded/leading questions. Johnson
and Christensen [40] suggest avoiding these in a questionnaire. They can influence a re­
spondent to give a specific answer or confuse them, resulting in answers not representing
their actual opinion. Also, the first reviewers looked examined the overall flow. After the
questionnaire was adapted to their feedback, it went through a second pilot test with two
other people. This test was focused on comprehensibility and duration. The former is an
important focus, as not all in the target audience are IT specialists. Thus, one of the sec­
ond reviewers does not have a background in IT. The latter is assessed as the audience
is also very busy.
1.4
The collaborating company
The thesis is conducted in collaboration with the company Unit IT A/S4. They have 150
employees and 550 customers at the time of writing. Their work is in the IT industry and
they comprise several units one of which is IT security. Their security unit is respon­
sible for monitoring organisations’ IT security with a Security Operations Center (SOC),
testing organisations’ IT security through vulnerability assessments, as well as helping
organisations improve their IT security level. A major component of the latter is perform­
ing maturity assessments. This includes measuring how well an organisation performs in
different areas of IT security and comparing it to reference levels.
As mentioned in the previous section, it is difficult to get individuals in the target population
to set aside time for research interviews. Unit IT will contribute to the thesis by facilitating
contact with security­responsibles in organisations. After they have established contact
with a security­responsible, I will reach out to the person and we will try to find a manager in
their organisation who also has time for an interview. The process is described in greater
detail in Section 3.1. In addition, they also help gather respondents for the questionnaire
which is elaborated in Section 3.3.
For the remainder of the thesis Unit IT will be referred to as the collaborating company.
4www.unit­it.dk/
8
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:19==
1.5
Organisation
The remaining part of the thesis is divided into four chapters. The literature review and
how it has contributed to data collection is described in Chapter 2. The two analyses
constitute Chapter 3. Chapter 4 is a discussion of the findings from the previous two
chapters. In addition includes a discussion of the thesis methodology, biases and lim­
itations of the collected data, and suggested future studies. Chapter 5 zooms out and
relates the research question to the process and outcome of the thesis. An overview of
the entire thesis can be seen in Figure 1.1.
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
The literature review
- State of the Art
- Essential domains and factors
- How domains and factors are part of data collection
The qualitative and quantitative analysis
- Thematic analysis of the informants' answers
- Descriptive analysis of the respondents' answers
The discussion of contributions
- A discussion of findings
- A discussion of the methodology, biases and
 limitations, and future studies
- Future studies
The conclusion to the thesis
- What was researched?
- What was found?
- How can future studies continue the work?
The introduction
- Motivation and contribution
- Theory behind methodology
- The collaborating company
Figure 1.1: The organisation of the thesis.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
9
==PAGE:20==
10
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:21==
2
A literature review to find essential
domains and factors
To initiate the thesis, many articles have been reviewed. The review is conducted in
two searches. The first search aims to review State­of­the­Art research on employees’
perception of IT security in organisations. By reviewing this area of research, it is possible
to show the novelty of the thesis. In the second search, the focus is on identifying essential
domains of IT security and the factors influencing them. Essential, in the sense that they
are referenced in many of the articles reviewed. The goal is to collect a set of domains
and factors which a deemed important in contemporary research. Using these in the
interview guide and questionnaire will make it much shorter compared to incorporating all
the aspects of the Cybersecurity Taxonomy.
The content of this chapter is first, an elaboration of how the review is conducted, then a
presentation of State­of­the­Art research, the following two sections are a description of
the essential domains and factors found, and lastly, the contributions to the interview guide
and questionnaire are emphasised. In Sections 2.2 to 2.4, the reviewed papers/literature
refers to the papers which are part of the search in question. After presenting the reviewed
literature and its contribution, the data collection and analyses are elaborated.
2.1
The course of the literature review
In the thesis, a dual literature review will be performed. Dual in the sense that one ap­
proach is used to explore the same topics from two angles. The review is conducted in
two searches, each with its own set of keywords. The aim of the first search is to get
familiarised with related studies and ensure the thesis’ novelty. The second search aims
at finding domains, as defined in Cybersecurity Taxonomy, which are part of contempo­
rary research and the factors influencing them. Factors are concepts, which researchers
describe as influencing a domain. The latter search is done following Brinkmann and
Tanggaard [41]. They suggest reviewing the literature to find new angles on a topic and
identify areas which a researcher needs to be extra aware of before conducting interviews.
The output of the second search will be used in the interview guide and the questionnaire
to ground the data collection in academic research. As mentioned in Section 1.3.2, the
searches will follow the five phases described by Brocke et al.’s [48], and each phase will
be explained in more detail below. An overview can be found in Figure 2.1.
Define the scope
Define scope
Conceptualise
Search for literature
Analyse and synthesise
Research agenda
Figure 2.1: A flow diagram of the five phases, as described by Brocke et al. [48], which
comprises the review process.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
11
==PAGE:22==
Characteristic
Categories
Focus
Research Outcomes
Research Methods
Theories
Applications
Goal
Integration
Criticism
Central Issues
Perspective
Neutral Representation
Espousal of Position
Coverage
Exhaustive
Exhaustive and Selective
Representative
Central/Pivotal
Organisation
Historical
Conceptual
Methodological
Audience
Specialised Researchers
General Researchers
Practitioners/Politicians
General Public
Characteristic
Categories
Focus
Research Outcomes
Research Methods
Theories
Applications
Goal
Integration
Criticism
Central Issues
Perspective
Neutral Representation
Espousal of Position
Coverage
Exhaustive
Exhaustive and Selective
Representative
Central/Pivotal
Organisation
Historical
Conceptual
Methodological
Audience
Specialised Researchers
General Researchers
Practitioners/Politicians
General Public
Table 2.1: The scope of the searches using Cooper’s taxonomy for literature reviews [52].
The upper and lower table shows the scope for the first and second searches, respectively.
They are characterised by the highlighted categories (light purple) as done in Vom Brocke
et al. [48]
In addition to having different aims, the two searches have slightly different scopes. These
scopes are defined using Cooper’s taxonomy [52] to make sure they are topics relevant to
the research question. Table 2.1 contains an overview of the scopes described in terms of
the taxonomy. Terms not highlighted are still relevant to the searches, but not emphasised
throughout the process.
There is some commonality regarding scoping across the two searches. The first one is
a neutral representation of studied literature. Because the thesis approach is exploratory,
the review is open to all findings and presents them equally. The second is a concep­
tual organisation of the searches where literature is presented with other literature on the
same topic. Lastly, the thesis aims to find discrepancies in perception, if any, for further
investigation. Thus, the review is meant for general researchers to study.
The focus, of the first search, is on research outcomes and research methods. Theories
and applications are relevant, but not the primary focus. The goal is to identify central
issues discussed in the literature and ensure the novelty of the thesis. The latter falls
under the term integration, where literature is synthesised into topics based on similarities.
To strengthen the completeness and novelty of the review, the coverage is exhaustive with
selective citations.
In the second search, the focus is on research outcomes, theories, and applications. The
main goal of this review is to integrate literature to identify essential domains and factors.
Essential in the sense that several authors are mentioning or actively investigating them in
their research. Issues, central to the field, are also relevant but not the goal of this review.
The reviewed literature will be representative in its coverage, as the main objective is to
find the most essential domains and factors, present them, and incorporate them in the
interview guide.
Conceptualise
Questions are formed to conceptualise the angles of each search. Each search aims to
answer these questions. To explore related studies (search one), the following questions
12
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:23==
are answered:
• How do a CISO and a CEO perceive their organisation’s level of IT security?
• How do a CISO and a CEO perceive communication of IT security needs?
To discover domains and factors relevant to IT security in an organisation (search two),
the following questions are answered
• What makes an organisation’s IT security vulnerable?
• How can an organisation assess its level of IT security?
• How can an organisation improve its IT security?
The questions are used in the next phase as eligibility criteria and for choosing keywords.
Search for literature
Each literature search comprises three components: sources, keywords, and eligibility cri­
teria. The first component defines which databases are searched, the second limits which
papers inside the databases are reviewed, and the third limits which of the found papers
will be part of the actual review. The components for literature searches are elaborated
below.
• Information sources: Both searches use the databases IEEE Xplore [53] and ACM
Digital Library [54]. Uchendu et al. [27] describe these as covering a wide body of
research on computer science and specifically IT security.
• Keywords: They have their own search string. Only abstracts of papers have been
searched with the search strings.
– First search: (IT security OR cybersecurity) AND organisations AND (perceive OR
perception)
– Second search: (IT security OR cybersecurity) AND organisations AND factors
• Eligibility criteria: The question from the previous phase constitutes the eligibility
criteria for each search. Both searches go through the same screening process
where found papers are excluded if they cannot be tied to any of the criteria. The
process is conducted in two stages where specific parts of each paper are screened.
1. Stage one: title and abstract are screened
2. Stage two: introduction and conclusion are screened
If a paper passes both evaluations, they are accepted.
In the first search, the databases were accessed on September 7, and in the second
search, they were accessed on September 12. The process of identifying papers and
screening them can be seen in Figure 2.2. As can be seen in the figure, some papers
were inaccessible and one paper was in Spanish. These were excluded and the rest was
included in the literature analysis.
Analyse and synthesise literature
Analysing and synthesising literature requires a full­text review of each paper. After read­
ing each paper, a summary is written about it. When reviewing papers of the first search,
subjects are synthesised from key points of the summaries. As part of the second search,
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
13
==PAGE:24==
Sources: IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital Library
(IT security OR cybersecurity)
AND organisations AND 
(perceive OR perception)
(IT security OR cybersecurity)
AND organisations
AND factors
100 papers identified
89 papers identified
0 duplicate papers
removed
1 duplicate paper
removed
99 papers in stage
one screening
79 papers removed
20 papers in stage
two screening
7 papers removed
13 papers accepted
2 inaccessible
papers removed
11 papers included
37 papers removed
15 papers removed
8 inaccessible
papers removed
89 papers in stage
one screening
52 papers in stage
two screening
37 papers accepted
28 papers included
1 spanish
paper removed
First search
Second search
Figure 2.2: The diagram shows the process of selecting papers for the literature review.
the findings are synthesised using both tables and a concept matrix [55]. They help illus­
trate which domains and factors are the most essential.
Research agenda
In conclusion of the first search (2.2), the thesis’ research question is compared to find­
ings in the literature to ensure its novelty. The findings illustrate a gap in current research
to which the thesis contributes. To conclude the second search (2.3 & 2.4), essential do­
mains are presented alongside the most mentioned factors. They will be incorporated into
the interview guide and questionnaire as part of the questions as described in Section 2.5.
2.2
State of the Art
Much research has dived into the topic of IT security. There are many topics in IT security,
cf. the Cybersecurity Taxonomy [14]. Factoring in all the technologies, sectors and use
cases in the taxonomy provides an endless number of angles which could be taken to
research IT security 1. the thesis focuses on the human perception of IT security, which
is a narrow topic under the domain Human aspects. Other domains are referenced in the
thesis, but more on that in Section 2.3. To narrow down the topic of the thesis further, it
is about the difference in perception between an organisation’s managers and security­
responsible. In the remaining part of this section, the papers found in the first search
will be described. They focus on how individuals perceive topics related to IT security
in organisations and what influences this perception. By describing these studies, the
novelty of the thesis should be clear.
1In theory the number of combinations of technologies, sectors, use cases, and all narrow topics under
the domains is not infinite. It is just a very large number: 17 ∗15 ∗6 ∗150 = 229.000.
14
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:25==
It would be ignorant to expect all employees in an organisation to have the same per­
ception of IT security. Varying perceptions is not an issue in itself, but it can complicate
processes. To accommodate this, an organisation can use several tools. One such tool is
policymaking, which falls under the category of governance. Having a security policy can
help an organisation align its employees’ actions. Unfortunately, issues can arise in the
process of creating policies, and often it is a matter of different perceptions on the subject
[56]. An example is the process of making a security policy. This requires security experts,
managers, and sometimes people from the financial and legal departments who due to
their different backgrounds often have a different perception of IT security. Another more
high­level challenge is related to top management and the financial department. They
are driven by numbers and quantifiable results. Unfortunately, the value of compliance is
hard to quantify [57]. This makes it challenging for the security­responsible in an organ­
isation to convey the importance of exercising IT security governance and implementing
an appropriate security policy. For this reason, Axon et al. [57] decided to research what
security controls are most widely used and which are perceived as the most effective. The
findings of this research can assist security professionals when proposing security mea­
sures. Additionally, Baldwin et al. [56] contribute to the area of reaching consensus when
making policies. They propose a modelling and simulation method to help stakeholders
convey consistent explanations at the right level of abstraction. With this, all stakeholders
should get an increased understanding of each other’s reasoning.
Hussain et al. [58] looked into what challenges IT security. They divided their findings into
a set of main challenges, the first one being Adequate Cybersecurity Governance. This
was the most frequently mentioned challenge among the articles they reviewed. A part of
governance is risk management, the next challenge. If an organisation lacks proper risk
management, it can contribute to significant financial loss. However, it can be improved
if an organisation has proper policies in place [58]. The last challenge they identified is
instilling a culture and awareness which is the topic of the following.
Having a culture that understands the importance of IT security is very important [58].
Unfortunately, in many standards, the culture of an organisation is not considered [59].
This is especially an issue when conducting IT governance as creating a security policy
often involves the use of standards. Hussain et al. [58] report that issues in the cultural
domains can be scepticism, disregard, ignorance and being too trusting. These issues
can initially stem from a single individual who then shares it with others and in the end the
culture ends up adopting it. Scepticism towards a security policy is part of the next topic,
compliance.
The main reason for implementing a security policy is to see a behaviour change. Un­
fortunately, this is not always the case. Also, complying with policies does not guarantee
security, but the opposite will in many cases create new vulnerabilities [60]. One thing that
plays a key role when the employee relates to a policy is their perception of the policy and
the topic it is related to, e.g. IT security. These factors are what affect the perceived cost.
Karim et al. [61] found that the perceived cost of both compliance and noncompliance
influences the employee’s attitude towards complying with a security policy. For exam­
ple, the employee might be aware of the threat caused by not complying with a security
policy, but choose to do so because they find it time­consuming and thus less beneficial
to comply. Perceived cost is further conceptualised as a part of the compliance budget.
Beautement et al. [62] describe the compliance budget as the relationship between an
individual’s perception and their attitude and behaviour. Furthermore, they found that an
individual’s perceived cost of compliance influences their actual compliance and the com­
pliance budget has a threshold which influences the perceived cost of compliance. If the
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
15
==PAGE:26==
compliance budget of an individual has been used up to the point where it has crossed the
threshold, that individual’s perceived cost of compliance will increase dramatically. Beris
et al. [60] explains why the perceived cost can vary. If an organisation’s employees don’t
understand how complying with its security policy is part of its goals, complying will distract
them from their main productive task and thus cost more. They go on to describe why
this can happen. Often a security manager only considers a lack of knowledge and tailors
their education program to explain their organisation’s security policy and rules. Then, the
employee never gets taught the severity of security risks which could make them perceive
IT security as being a more serious matter. Tariq et al. [63] explain another unfortunate
scenario. Sometimes, the employee is not trusted by their organisation’s security staff.
Security information is only shared with them on a need­to­know basis which often is not
enough to change their perception and compliance behaviour. This is an evil spiral as
the employee continues to lack awareness and security­related knowledge and likewise
continues to behave insecurely. Another unwanted spiral is when the employee sees their
organisation’s security policy failing. Then they lose faith in its effect which affects their
perception negatively [61]. Luckily, it is possible to influence the compliance budget ­ both
the perceived cost of complying and the threshold [62]. However, it is an organisation’s
managers who need to take action. Beris et al. [60] argue that targeted actions are an
effective way of increasing compliance, i.e. not treating employees as a homogeneous
group. They propose a framework that allows an organisation to map the heterogeneity of
its employees. Each employee is mapped based on their emotional response to security
and how accurately they perceive the existence and severity of risks associated with their
actions. Using this framework, an organisation is not only able to assess its employees’
attitude towards IT security and risks but also able to identify potential problems and how
some employees can help others by using their expertise.
Several of the previously mentioned topics are related to humans. Ifinedo [64] underlines
the relevancy of this domain. He cites that 79% of the participants of a recent survey
said that the human factor is the root cause of security failures. Two aspects of this topic,
not fully covered in the above, are behaviour and awareness. One challenge with be­
haviour is that it is hard to predict, and the implications of unwanted behaviour challenge
organisations. Parkin et al. propose a framework to investigate the relationship between
the behavioural implications of implementing security measures (e.g., enforcing password
renewal yearly) and security needs. The benefit of using this tool is twofold; It can sup­
port managers when they create a security policy or implement a security control, and
it increases managers’ awareness of possible risks associated thus reducing the over­
all risk. In sum, it helps an organisation to address its security needs with appropriate
security measures. The second aspect is awareness. Several authors argue that an or­
ganisation’s IT security is affected by its employees’ awareness [58, 63]. It is hard for
employees to act securely if they are not aware of IT security and related threats. The
employee’s awareness of security is closely related to their perception of it which leads
to the last topic, perception.
Human perception has been a part of all the studies reviewed, but it has only been the
focus for some of them. Tariq et al. [63] researched an organisation’s IT security staff’s
perception of its employees’ awareness, knowledge and skills related to security. They
found that the security staff did not trust their employees’ security­related decision­making.
This resulted in them choosing technical measures like monitoring and detection solutions
to ensure security instead of prioritising organisational changes like implementing a secu­
rity policy. Having this practice, an organisation keeps its employees out of the security
loop. It does not remediate human­related threats and keeps the organisation insecure.
16
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:27==
Another factor which can influence an individual’s perception of security is employment
status. Anwar et al. [65] found it to be true that full­time employees have a stronger
security posture than part­time employees. One possible explanation they propose is
that full­time employees perceive vulnerabilities as being more severe than those of part­
time employees. As written above, secure behaviour is an important part of IT security.
Chongrui et al. [66] researched this area and found that an employee’s perception of vul­
nerability and severity of threats can be used to predict behaviour. They found that an
organisation’s environment and training affect the aforementioned perception of the em­
ployee. This knowledge can help an organisation increase secure behaviour and thereby
its overall IT security. Related to an organisation’s environment is its culture which Ifinedo
[64] studied. He researched whether socio­economic and cultural factors influence indi­
viduals’ perceptions of security and privacy. The individuals were employees of financial
service institutions across the world. He concluded that there was no significant influence
from national culture. This contradicted other findings, but he argued that individuals’ per­
ceptions can be more affected by internal and industry considerations than the culture of
the nation they are working in, i.e. he suggests that globalisation and the type of busi­
ness are possible causes for it. Also, he found that socio­economic factors do not matter.
One explanation, he suggested, is that regardless of the location this type of organisation
always needs the same type of employees.
In sum, many factors influence an individual’s perception of IT security, and the individ­
ual’s perception affects several aspects of IT security. The factors researched includes
environment [66], training [66], employment status [65], culture [64], and socio­economic
factors [64]. According to the studies, an organisation’s employees’ perception of IT se­
curity affects their behaviour [65, 66], whether they comply [59, 60, 62], their attitude [61],
policymaking [56, 58], risk management [58], the quality of education and training [58,
63], and whether they share knowledge on IT security internally [63]. A number of the
reviewed papers are specifically focused on technical managers’ perception of IT security
[57, 63, 64]. Aside from them, a couple of papers, exploring employees’ perception of IT
security, had managers as part of their study population [61, 66]. Two papers touched
on how communication of IT security and related needs can be supported either through
the process of modelling and simulation [56] or the use of an ontology [59]. No study re­
searched whether there exists a difference in perception of IT security among an organisa­
tion’s managers and security­responsible and where such a difference can lie. Likewise,
they did not research how this population perceive the communication of security needs.
These findings underline the novelty of the thesis’ research focus.
2.3
Essential domains
The Cybersecurity Taxonomy identifies 15 knowledge domains. Each domain has a broad
topic and a list of subtopics, called narrow topics. Out of all the domains, eight are men­
tioned in the reviewed literature. These can be seen in Table 2.2.
Table 2.3 presents each paper reviewed and what domains are referenced. The domains
are referenced under their broad topic (BT) or a narrow topic (NT) [14]. Some authors
reference multiple topics under the same domain. The table only shows the domains
which have been referenced by five or more authors. A table including all domains and
who referenced them can be found in Appendix B.
The number of times each domain topic is mentioned is summed up in Table 2.4. Three
domains are mentioned in more than half of the papers, either under their broad topic
or one of their narrow topics. These are Education and Training, Human Aspect, and
Security Management and Governance. The limit for being an essential domain topic is
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
17
==PAGE:28==
Acronym
Domain
DP
Data Security and Privacy
ET
Education and Training
HA
Human aspects
IH
Identity Management
IM
Incident Handling and Digital Forensics
SE
Software and Hardware Security Engineering
SG
Security Management and Governance
SM
Security Measurements
Table 2.2: The domains from the Cybersecurity Taxonomy [14] which are mentioned in
the reviewed articles. The first column shows the abbreviations which are used to refer
to the domains in tables and figures.
a minimum of ten papers referencing it, equivalent to more than one­third of the papers.
These topics are integrated into the interview guide and questionnaire. In the following,
the domains and findings related to them will be elaborated.
Education and Training
An organisation needs to have employees who are well­equipped to deal with IT security
threats. One way to upskill employees is with the use of education and training. Within
this domain there are several topics, including cybersecurity­aware culture which is related
to work/workplace culture[74, 83], organisational culture [82, 85], corporate culture [84],
and overall security culture [69, 82]. Several articles refer to culture as a responsibility of
management, i.e. management is responsible for instilling a healthy culture [58, 68, 78,
74, 82, 85, 87]. Also, management needs to recognise the importance of IT security for it
to be part of the culture [83]. Branley­Bell et al. go on to emphasise that it is important to
both understand barriers to such a culture and what is required to remove those barriers.
One such thing that managers need to be aware of is cultural differences [74]. Another
aspect is that many individuals have a different understanding of IT security and secure
behaviour. Managers must embrace that when trying to instil a culture of IT security.
Introducing security awareness training programmes is one way to engage employees
in IT security [70]. Several authors suggest that each organisation should adapt such a
programme to their workforce [66, 67, 68, 85] and some authors go as far as to suggest
tailoring awareness programmes to each employee [67, 80]. This underlines the difficulty
of efficiently implementing security awareness programmes. Adding to the difficulty is
the need to frequently evaluate and adapt programmes as the threat landscape changes
rapidly [78, 87]. Rege et al. [79] emphasise this by urging organisations to be proactive
in their adoption of training programmes. Aside from varying in the targeted audience,
awareness programs can vary in type. Sharif and Ameen [80] and Aoyama et al. [71]
suggest incorporating gamification into programmes. It can create a fun and rewarding
experience for the employees where they either solve tasks on their own or in teams
sometimes competing against each other.
When the workplace culture of an organisation encompasses an indifference towards
security, it inhibits the employee’s understanding of IT security which hurts the organi­
sation’s IT security level [58]. A symptom of this is when employees lack accountability
for their actions and knowingly or unknowingly do not comply with security policies. This
18
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:29==
Domains and Topics
ET
HA
IH
IM
SE
SG
Contribution
Year
BT
NT1
BT
NT2
NT3
NT4
NT5
BT
NT6
NT7
NT8
Siponen and Kajava [67]
1998
x
x
x
x
Abawajy et al. [68]
2008
x
x
x
x
x
Hawkey et al. [69]
2008
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Ifinedo [64]
2008
x
x
x
x
Bashorun et al. [70]
2013
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Aoyama et al. [71]
2015
x
x
x
Mahopo et al. [72]
2015
x
x
Teodoro et al. [73]
2015
x
x
x
x
Asgarkhani et al. [74]
2017
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Vakilinia and Sengupta [75]
2017
x
Cayetano et al. [76]
2018
x
x
x
x
Hussain et al. [58]
2020
x
x
x
x
x
x
Kobayashi et al. [77]
2020
x
Putra et al. [78]
2020
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Rege et al. [79]
2020
x
x
x
x
Sharif and Ameen [80]
2020
x
x
x
x
x
Simon and Vernard [81]
2020
x
x
x
Al­Alawi et al. [82]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Axon et al. [57]
2021
x
x
x
Branley­Bell et al. [83]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
Chongrui et al. [66]
2021
x
x
x
x
Kalhoro et al. [84]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Karim et al. [61]
2021
x
x
Onumo et al. [85]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Ali et al. [86]
2022
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Humaidi and Alghazo [87]
2022
x
x
x
x
x
x
Ismail et al. [88]
2022
x
x
x
Ungkap and Daengsi [89]
2022
x
x
Table 2.3: Concept matrix illustrating what domains from the Cybersecurity Taxonomy
[14] are mentioned five or more times in the literature reviewed. The articles are sorted
by year and then alphabetically. In addition, horizontal lines separate the articles by year
published. A table including all mentioned domains can be found in Appendix B.
Domains: ET: Education and Training, HA: Human Aspect, IH: Incident Handling and
Digital Forensics, IM: Identity Management, SE: Software and Hardware Security Engi­
neering, SG: Security Management and Governance
Topics: BT: Broad Topic, NT1: Cybersecurity­aware culture, NT2: Human perception
of cybersecurity, NT3: Coordination and information sharing in the context of cross­
border/organisational incidents, NT4: Incident analysis, communication, documentation,
forecasting, response, and reporting, NT5: Identity and attribute management models,
frameworks, applications, technologies, and tools, NT6: Compliance with information se­
curity and privacy policies, procedures, and regulations, NT7: Risk management, includ­
ing modelling, assessment, analysis and mitigation, NT8: Managerial aspects concerning
information security
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
19
==PAGE:30==
Domain
Topic
#Mentions
Education and Training
BT
18
NT1
12
Human Aspect
BT
13
NT2
17
Incident Handling and Digital Forensics
NT3
6
NT4
6
Identity Management
NT5
5
Software and Hardware Security Engineering
BT
9
Security Management and Governance
NT6
17
NT7
14
NT8
13
Table 2.4: The number of times each domain topic from the Cybersecurity Taxonomy [14]
has been mentioned in the reviewed articles. Only topics mentioned five or more times
are included.
Topics: BT: Broad Topic, NT1: Cybersecurity­aware culture, NT2: Human perception
of cybersecurity, NT3: Coordination and information sharing in the context of cross­
border/organisational incidents, NT4: Incident analysis, communication, documentation,
forecasting, response, and reporting, NT5: Identity and attribute management models,
frameworks, applications, technologies, and tools, NT6: Compliance with information se­
curity and privacy policies, procedures, and regulations, NT7: Risk management, includ­
ing modelling, assessment, analysis and mitigation, NT8: Managerial aspects concerning
information security
can pose a large risk to the security of an organisation. Awareness training programmes
can help employees better understand IT security and appreciate security measures, e.g.
by informing them how organisational security objectives are intertwined with their work
processes [85]. These programmes can become part of the organisational culture and
help employees see the value of IT security [84]. It is important to note, that employ­
ees and employers are responsible for engaging in awareness training programmes [68].
Management must understand why employees sometimes do not want to engage in pro­
grammes and how this attitude can be changed. Al­Alawi et al. [82] emphasise this by
stressing the importance of identifying the employees’ motivations and intentions before
conducting training. If all this is done properly, the culture will be not only part of the
employee’s knowledge but also their behaviour which can, e.g. increase compliance [83].
Awareness training can make an impact on the IT security level of an organisation. Abawajy
et al. [68] stresses this by stating it is vital to the mission of any organisation. However, it
is a non­technical security measure which has been neglected in the past [64]. Training
programmes will have a different impact on each employee as they have a different set of
security skills [67]. Thus, they will yield different results for different employees. Nonethe­
less, as employees get well­versed in IT security, they are more likely to use these skills
[84].
20
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:31==
Human Aspect
All organisations have employees, and they are essential for their business. Thus, the
employee’s behaviour, knowledge and perception of IT security is an important part of
an organisation’s IT security level [64, 66, 70]. Some authors report that many internal
security incidents result from poor knowledge among employees [86, 87]. This calls for
an increased focus on managing the gap in knowledge of IT security among employees,
both for managers and floor workers [78]. Sharif and Ameen [80] found that employees
lack awareness, and addressing this issue should help bridge the knowledge gap. This
deficiency can be awareness of day­to­day activities which improve an organisation’s IT
security level, e.g. locking a computer when leaving it [68]. One way to improve this is
to internalise secure behaviour, otherwise known as prescriptive awareness [67]. Unfor­
tunately, the opposite, known as descriptive awareness, is sometimes achieved where
employees are aware of security but still may perform their tasks insecurely. This relates
to the next part of this domain, behaviour.
Knowledge and awareness are important, but secure behaviour, often referred to as cyber
hygiene [84] or protective behaviour [87], is just as relevant. One of the main reasons for
general behaviour to be protective is that cyber threats change rapidly, and employees
thus cannot be expected to know all possible attack vectors and act accordingly. Though,
it is no easy task to change an employee’s behaviour. One aspect is employees have
different perspectives of what is morally acceptable to do [81]. This can stem from pre­
vious employment, education, and personality. If an employee, who never changed their
password at the previous job, is now forced to change it quarterly, they might see it as
an unnecessary security measure. Another aspect is that individuals perceive IT security
differently [69]. This can be a different perception of risks, e.g. concerning severity and
likelihood [87]. When an employee assesses risks related to IT security as not severe or
unlikely, it affects how relevant they find related security measures. If they are forced to
implement security measures they find irrelevant, it might lead to scepticism, disregard,
and ignorance [58]. Kalhoro et al. [84] emphasise increasing security awareness in an
organisation to reduce IT security risk.
Security­related faults can be several things but are most commonly errors of omission
(failure to do X, e.g. not performing proper password practice) and errors of commis­
sion (incorrect execution of procedure). Following are some of the common undesirable
behaviours found among employees:
• not enforcing proper authentication because the employee is too trusting [58, 74,
78]
• bad password hygiene, e.g. by (re)using insecure passwords or sharing them [61,
67, 68, 76, 78, 82, 84, 87]
• sharing confidential data [79, 84]
• not responding to suspicious events, e.g. malfunctioning computer [71, 84]
• not locking off the computer when leaving it [68]
Security Management and Governance
So far, many thought technological solutions could combat cyber attacks. Humaidi and
Alghazo [87] advocate that this type of solution is not sufficient, and organisations need
to look at how security policies and organisational strategies can be integrated with tech­
nologies. This domain is concerned with both of these topics as well as risk management.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
21
==PAGE:32==
Whether an organisation’s employees adhere to procedures and comply with security
policies is critical to the IT security of that organisation [85, 87]. If they do not comply, it
introduces cyber risks to the organisation [83]. Thus, it is important to understand, what
influences compliance ­ explained in Section 2.4. Several studies researched this topic
using models from psychology such as the theory of planned behaviour (TPB) [61, 85]
and protection motivation theory (PMT) [66, 87], and they studied what affects actual
compliance with policies. Compliance is highly dependent on the employee’s intentions
and motivations making this an important focus point [82]. Creating motivation for a new
security policy or changes to an existing one will most likely introduce tensions as the em­
ployee needs to change their behaviour. Thus, reasons for adhering to a policy should be
justified with plausible arguments [68]. Also, it should be properly documented and writ­
ten in a user­friendly manner to embrace all employees [74, 87]. These measures can
help the employee understand how complying with policies helps achieve their organisa­
tion’s goals. It is very important to combat the many arguments against compliance an
employee can have, like compliance being cumbersome and time­consuming [61].
A security policy is also a way for an organisation to communicate security measures to its
employees, and it can be conveyed with the use of awareness programs [68]. However,
top management must enforce their organisation’s security policy [80, 88]. Hussain et
al. [58] report lack of enforcement as a frequent issue within organisations. This is a
shame because it helps increase awareness, spread knowledge about IT security, and
improve the organisation’s security culture, which underlines the necessity for developing
a security policy within every organisation [84, 86].
Management is responsible for strategic decisions, including budgeting and defining goals
[72, 73, 85, 86]. It is thus important that IT security is a priority for top management [61,
86, 87]. Karim et al. [61] argue that managers at both the strategic and operational
levels of an organisation play an important role when planning IT activities in making sure
they are conducted efficiently and effectively. Several authors suggest that IT security
not just should be a priority of managers but of all employees of an organisation [72, 78,
87]. Hussain et al. [58, p. 3] states that IT security ”must become part of the DNA of
every organization”. By having IT security integrated into the structure of an organisation,
e.g. as part of all employees’ daily routine, the overall security of the organisation is
strengthened [84].
As a way to achieve this, management needs to understand how improving IT security can
reduce exposure to cyber threats and increase business continuity [73]. Only then they
can justify the capital expenses (CAPEX) and operational expenses (OPEX) associated
with an investment in security. By using risk management, it is possible to assess how this
can best be done by hopefully reducing misfits and overlapping technology. Unfortunately,
many organisations choose to buy IT security products instead of reviewing their security
posture leading to misfits and waste of money [57].
Several proposals as to how management can improve security are made. It is impor­
tant to hire qualified people for IT security management [78]. Qualifications are not only
that they are knowledgeable about IT security, but also that they understand how it is
properly integrated into an organisation and how information about IT security is best
conveyed to employees at all levels of an organisation. Authors suggest that manage­
ment needs to convey to their employees’ security objectives as part of their organisation’s
objectives for them to adopt it [83, 84, 85]. Lastly, sharing information about IT security
internally in an organisation improves its overall security level [84]. As mentioned above,
it can be performing awareness training and implementing a security policy. Regarding
22
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:33==
smaller organisations, Simon and Vernard [81] found that these organisations largely rely
on knowledge and skill sharing within the organisation. This implies, that the efficiency of
IT security in such an organisation relies on whether it has a culture of sharing knowledge,
how well the organisation’s structure facilitates information sharing, and whether it is part
of implemented processes within the organisation.
Another aspect of managing IT security is performing risk management [64]. This activity
is focused on risks and thus how an organisation can better its defences against the threat
of cybercriminals. Improving cyber resilience is something an organisation can do, and it
can be done as part of risk management [57, 71, 72, 74, 76, 78, 85, 86]. Several frame­
works and standards for managing risks have been proposed, e.g. NIST 800­30 [9], ISO
27005 [10], COBIT [90], and OCTAVE [91]. The drawbacks of these are that they are elab­
orate and somewhat complex which makes them complicated to understand, especially
for small and medium­sized enterprises (SMEs) [86]. Teodoro et al. [73] argue that there
is no generic model to manage and report IT security investments and enable progressive
and continuous learning approaches. All models need to be tailored to each organisation,
and this process requires expertise on the framework or standard selected. Axon et al.
[57] backs this up by stating ”there is not necessarily a clear path to achieving this” ­ this
being strengthening defences and improving resilience against cyber attacks. One of the
main challenges of risk management is choosing the right controls [57]. One reason for
this is the growing complexity of IT security [74]. Unfortunately, choosing the wrong con­
trols can render the cyber defence ineffective and ultimately be harmful to an organisation.
The rapidly changing threat landscape further adds to the difficulty of conducting proper
risk management as the chosen controls need to be continuously examined to assess
whether they are still relevant and up to date [57].
Mahopo et al. [72] present a tier list for conducting risk management with three levels:
Strategic, Tactical, and Operational. The strategic level is responsible for governance,
e.g. developing policies [88]; the tactical level is responsible for the flow of information;
the operational level is responsible for operating IT security in both the technical and
non­technical aspects. One of the main concerns illustrated with this tier list is that risk
management often lacks a holistic view of the entire organisation. Mahopo et al. [72]
argue that risk management should both be a bottom­up and top­down approach. Another
important aspect is assigning responsibility for different processes in an organisation. The
importance is underlined as the European Parliament recently proposed a new directive
where assigning responsibility is mandatory [8]. On all three levels, factors influence
a management’s decisions and how successful a security policy will be which will be
elaborated on in the following.
2.4
Essential factors
One of the challenges with planned activities is that they do not always go according
to the plan. This also challenges IT security. The reasons for an unexpected outcome
of an activity can be many and vary from day to day. An example of this could be if a
training activity does not impact the employee’s behaviour. Several factors influence this
unwanted result, e.g. poor quality of the activity and lack of motivation on the employee’s
side. The literature reviewed proposes several classifications of factors one of which uses
three categories: human, organisational, and technological (HOT) [69]. Human factors
are associated with employees and other stakeholders influencing an organisation; or­
ganisational factors are associated with procedures, policies, strategies, and structures
in an organisation; and technological factors are associated with digital and non­digital
technology within an organisation. Branley­Bell et al. [83] and Teodoro et al. [73] both
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
23
==PAGE:34==
refer to people/human resources and technology as factors, but use process as the third
category. They refer to the third category as procedures and processes within an organi­
sation. They even name the categories of the three organisational pillars of IT security to
solidify their importance [73]. Ali et al. [86] refer to environment factors while not referring
to human factors. In this case, environmental factors cover third­party applications which
an organisation can make use of. One paper mentions another number of categories,
namely five: personal, social, socio­cognitive, environmental, and technological [84]. The
first three factors are aspects of human factors. The fourth touches on all HOT factors
with the subcategories social norms, low budget priority, and complexity of technology,
and the fifth is concerned with technological factors.
As illustrated, there are many ways in which factors can be classified. In the thesis, the
HOT factors are used to categorise the factors identified. The categorisation of factors
is done to highlight the importance of each aspect according to contemporary research.
The ten most referenced factors can be seen in Table 2.5. Some factors touch on multiple
categories and are labelled accordingly, e.g. a cyber­secure culture is labelled both a
human and an organisational factor. If a factor represents part of one or more domains
from the Cybersecurity Taxonomy, it is noted in the second column. A list of all identified
factors can be found in Appendix C. In the following, some of the factors are highlighted.
Several authors emphasise a need to research human factors because they see it as ei­
ther under­researched or particularly critical to IT security [68, 71, 79, 82]. This trend is
manifested by the large number of times human factors are mentioned. The most men­
tioned factor is the employee’s knowledge and awareness. It is affecting many aspects of
IT security from compliance with security policies to the quality of risk management in an
organisation. Another factor, also part of a domain, having an impact on many aspects
of IT security is education and training. It mostly influences domains in the human realm
such as the employee’s behaviour and whether they comply with security policies. The
culture and knowledge sharing within an organisation comprises both a human and an
organisational aspect. It is because they are manifested in how the employee behaves
while often being facilitated by an organisation’s procedures and policies. The manage­
ment of an organisation also plays a key role in the integration of IT security. This relates
to whether managers actively participate in defining security objectives and behave ac­
cordingly and whether they prioritise IT security as part of their organisation’s overall goal,
e.g. by letting it have an impact on the structure of the structure of the organisation. They
are both part of the managerial aspects of Security Management and Governance. To give
a better understanding of the top ten factors and what they influence, they are elaborated
on below
Human factors
The human factors include knowledge and awareness, active leadership, lack of commit­
ment, and attitude and motivation. Also, knowledge sharing will be elaborated as part of
the human factors.
The employee’s knowledge and awareness are by far the most influential human factors.
When an employee is aware of IT security and better understand the security goals of
their organisation, they are more likely to comply with its security policy [58, 61, 79, 80,
82, 85, 87, 88]. Awareness also plays a key role, when developing security policies [74,
80, 86, 88]. Like compliance, the general protective behaviour (cyber hygiene) of the em­
ployee is affected by their knowledge and awareness [66, 67, 79, 82, 84, 87]. Awareness
of security countermeasures leads to improved cyber hygiene among employees [87].
24
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:35==
Name
Factor
Domain
#Mentions
Knowledge and awareness
Human
HA
26
Education and training
Organisational
ET
22
Cyber­secure culture
Human/Organisational
ET
10
Active leadership
Human
SG
9
Leadership prioritisation
Organisational
SG
9
Attitude and motivation
Human
HA
6
Environment
Organisational
­
5
Governance
Organisational
SG
5
Lack of commitment to train
Human
HA
5
Knowledge sharing
Human/Organisational
­
5
Table 2.5: The ten factors mentioned the highest number of times in the reviewed liter­
ature. The third column shows whether a factor is part of a domain in the Cybersecurity
Taxonomy [14]. A list of all factors identified can be found in Appendix C.
ET: Education and Training, HA: Human Aspect, SG: Security Management and Gover­
nance
Knowing threat actors and their objectives enhances IT security as it assists the process
of risk management [57, 58, 72]. Lastly, the employee’s awareness influences the culture
of their organisation [58, 82]. An example is when an employee understands the impor­
tance of proper password hygiene, they can influence the culture and their awareness
spreads to other employees.
Management’s behaviour and awareness are covered under other factors, but some au­
thors put a special emphasis on how active leadership involvement can influence aspects
of IT security. An example is the employee’s cyber hygiene [85]. Humaidi and Alghazo
state that ”many employees often take their cues from management in practising good cy­
bersecurity behaviour” [87, p. 8]. As written above, culture is influenced by behaviour and
thus leadership involvement [66, 83, 85, 87]. Furthermore, management has a special
authority and can convey messages with a particular emphasis. This can be an efficient
tool when trying to encourage the employee to comply with a security policy [85, 87]. This
unique influence can also be used as part when implementing an education and aware­
ness training program. Humaidi and Alghazo [87] suggest that management should be
involved in this process.
Authors argue that the employee’s attitude and motivation’s primary influence is on their
intention to comply [61, 82, 85, 88]. However, Al­Alawi et al. [82] attribute the employee’s
attitude not only to influence their will to comply with policies but also to influence the
culture of their organisation. Ungkap and Daengsi [89] studied what factors influence an
individual’s security awareness the most. Among the factors surveyed, they found the
individual’s attitude to be the second­most influential.
Closely related to attitude and motivation is commitment. The impact of the employee’s
attitude on their security awareness is analogous to that of the commitment [68, 74]. This
is important for both management and the rest of the staff. If they jointly are committed to
participating in educational and training programs it will positively influence the outcome
of these [68, 82]. Also, the employee’s commitment to security training has an impact on
their organisation’s culture [68].
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
25
==PAGE:36==
Sharing security­related knowledge improves IT security and creates trust within an or­
ganisation. [66, 69, 84]. Shared information can be how one better secures oneself and
one’s organisation by having proper cyber hygiene. It can improve the likelihood of compli­
ance among employees in an organisation [82]. Also, the employee’s security awareness
is increased [81, 84]. One study found this to be particularly true for smaller organisations,
as some of these largely rely on knowledge and skill sharing to ensure an appropriate IT
security level [81]. Managers can promote this behaviour to improve IT security, but that
is an organisational matter of prioritisation which will be elaborated in the following.
Organisational factors
Four of the top ten mentioned factors are categorised as organisational factors. These
include education and training, leadership prioritisation, environment, and governance.
As cyber­secure culture is under the same domain as education and training, it will be
elaborated together with the other organisational factors. The most frequently mentioned
organisational factor is education and awareness training which comprises enhancing the
IT security of an organisation by upskilling its employees. The most obvious domain this
factor influences is the employee’s knowledge and awareness [66, 67, 70, 79, 80, 82,
84, 85, 87]. Sharif and Ameen [80] found that training is the most effective tool to raise
awareness. Many papers suggest that the cyber hygiene of the employee is improved
when education and training are implemented at work [66, 79, 82, 84, 85, 87]. Kalhoro
et al. [84] describe training as essential, and Chongrui et al. [66] found it to be a sig­
nificant contributor to the employee’s cyber hygiene. Humaidi and Alghazo [87] argue
that it is the improved perception of cyber threats from education and awareness training
which increases the employee’s protective behaviour. Education and training can help
those responsible for developing a security policy in an organisation and all its employees
who need to abide by the policy [79, 88]. Analogous to this, it also increases employee
compliance with said policy [85, 87].
Like the employee’s awareness and an organisation’s training, the culture in an organisa­
tion influences both the employee’s behaviour and whether they comply with the security
policy in their organisation [58, 68, 83, 84, 85, 88]. It relates to the previous example
and the fact that culture influences loyalty to entities above oneself, e.g. one’s employer.
If there is a strong security culture in an organisation, its employees are more likely to
comply with its security policy. An organisation’s culture can also raise awareness of IT
security and encourage the employee to become more knowledgeable [67, 80]. Sharif
and Ameen [80] argue that culture should be a key consideration when developing an
educational program. The reason is that culture affects the motivational process which is
an important factor for the success of such a program.
The management of an organisation is responsible for prioritising IT security and the struc­
ture of the organisation. If they prioritise security, it should influence how they structure
the organisation, e.g. the chain of command should facilitate communication between
managers and the security­responsible [58, 69, 84, 86, 87]. Also, the implementation
and outcome of an education and awareness training program are positively influenced
when management prioritises it [66, 68, 80, 85]. The structure of an organisation affects
the entire organisation and an education and training program influence its employees
positively. This underlines the importance of having management prioritise IT security.
The working conditions, referred to as environment, in an organisation influence IT se­
curity. This relates to both the security management and human aspect. Regarding the
former, the employee is less likely to comply with policies when working in a bad en­
26
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:37==
vironment [66, 67]. If the employee is working under a large time pressure or in rigid
conditions, it can increase dissatisfaction which in turn decreases the likelihood of com­
pliance. A good environment on the other hand can increase cyber hygiene positively [66,
67]. Sharif and Ameen [80] found that an organisation’s environment also influences the
security awareness of its employees.
An important aspect of IT security is IT governance which among other things comprises
developing a security policy. When the employee is aware of a security policy, it can
improve both their knowledge of IT security and perception of risks [80, 87]. Also, it can
influence their protective behaviour positively [68, 87]. The integration of this factor and
the other essential factors and domains into the interview guide will be described in the
next section.
2.5
Contributions to data collection
The most essential domains and factors have been selected and are elaborated above.
They are integrated into an interview guide and questionnaire as part of the questions. The
benefit of doing so is twofold. Firstly, addressing the same domains and factors makes the
data more comparable. Secondly, touching on subjects found in contemporary research
increases the relevancy of the thesis. How the factors and domains have been integrated
is elaborated in the following. The entire interview guide can be found in Appendix D, and
the questionnaire can be found in Appendix E.
2.5.1
Contributions to the interview guide
The questions which relate to at least one domain or factor are presented in Table 2.6.
Some of the factors and domains overlap and are thus only integrated as one question.
An example is ”Is it part of your workplace culture?”. This refers to the domain topic
Cybersecurity­aware culture and the factor Cyber­secure culture. This was also the case
for managerial aspects like prioritisation, education and training, knowledge and percep­
tion of security. Some of the factors did not overlap with domains from the Cybersecurity
Taxonomy. These include knowledge sharing within an organisation and an organisation’s
environment. Nonetheless, they were integrated into the guide.
The questions related to factors and domains are spread out across the interview. They
are part of the opening questions and the questions addressing the research question.
There is no ordering of the questions, but they are integrated as sub­questions in a way
that would preserve the dynamic of the interview. This included bundling multiple domains
or factors together, e.g. in the question ”Do you use policies and awareness training?”. It
relates to the domain topics compliance with policies and education and training.
2.5.2
Contributions to the questionnaire
As written in Section 1.3.3, the questionnaire needs to be short. Thus, a question for
each of the essential domains and factors was not feasible. Instead, all of them are
incorporated into questions 8, 9, 11, and 14, where each respondent is asked whether
any of the domains or factors
• is a core part of their organisation’s IT security,
• is a challenge to their organisation’s IT security,
• can solve challenges to their organisation’s IT security, and
• is under­prioritised in their organisation.
Further elaboration of the questionnaire, and how it is used to collect data, can be found
in Section 3.3.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
27
==PAGE:38==
Question
Ref
Name
Q1
Domain
Education and training
Domain
Compliance with information security
and privacy policies, procedures, and regulations
Factor
Education and training
Factor
Governance
Q2
Factor
Knowledge sharing
Q3
Domain
Cybersecurity­aware culture
Factor
Cyber­secure culture
Q4
Domain
Human perception of cybersecurity
Factor
Knowledge and awareness
Q5
Factor
Environment
Q6
Factor
Attitude and motivation
Factor
Lack of commitment to train
Q7
Domain
Human Aspect
Domain
Compliance with information security
and privacy policies, procedures, and regulations
Q8
Domain
Managerial aspects concerning information security
Factor
Active Leadership
Q9
Domain
Managerial aspects concerning information security
Factor
Leadership prioritisation
Q10
Domain
Risk management, including modelling,
assessment, analysis and mitigation
Table 2.6: The questions from the interview guide stemming from at least one selected
domain or factor. The second column refers to whether it is a domain topic or a factor.
In the third column, the names of the factors and domain topics are written according to
Table 2.4 and 2.5. The entire interview guide can be found in Appendix D.
Q1: Do you use policies and awareness training?
Q2: Is knowledge sharing something you practice?
Q3: Is it part of your workplace culture?
Q4: Are the employees’ knowledge and skills at an appropriate level?
Q5: Is the environment in the company constructive for IT security?
Q6: Do you see the employees’ motivation and commitment towards IT security as a fac­
tor?
Q7: Are you aware of the employees’ behaviour and whether they comply with the com­
pany’s policies?
Q8: Is management actively participating in solving IT security challenges?
Q9: Does management prioritise the right areas?
Q10: Do you use risk management in this process?
28
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:39==
3
An analysis of the participants’
perceptions
After the literature has been reviewed and an interview guide and a questionnaire have
been formed, the data collection and analysis can begin. The qualitative data is analysed
using thematic analysis, and the quantitative data is analysed using a descriptive analy­
sis. The following sections comprise: (1) how the qualitative data collection and analysis
have been conducted, (2) the results of the thematic analysis, (2) how the quantitative
data collection and analysis have been conducted, and (4) the results of the descriptive
analysis. After presenting the results of the analyses, they are discussed in Chapter 4
together with the findings of the literature review.
3.1
The course of the interviews and following analysis
3.1.1
Recruiting
The process of gathering informants for the thesis has been conducted together with the
collaborating company. Before recruiting, an information letter is formed, and it contains
information about this research project, its author, the interview, informant criteria, and a
declaration of consent. It can be seen in Appendix F. Together with the collaborating com­
pany, a list of suitable organisations is made. It contained 8 organisations, and they are
all partners or customers of the company. The company has been responsible for send­
ing out the information letter along with an invitation to participate in the research project
to each of the organisations. The invitations are sent out via mail. After a representative
from an organisation has given a positive response, the company forwards their contact
information to me. The following criteria are used to identify suitable organisations and
informants:
1. The organisation have conducted a maturity assessment of their IT security
2. The organisation is willing to let both an employee from top management and an
employee responsible for IT security be interviewed
3. Both employees have worked in the organisation for at least 1 year and ½ year in
their current position
The informants must have a good understanding of both their organisation and their role.
This is ensured by criterion three. The minimum requirement of 1 year of work experience
is similar to other studies researching users’ experience with IT security [92, 93]. Also, an
even representation of perceptions is desirable. In the thesis, an informant is distinguished
as either a security­responsible or a manager (member of top management or board). As
different organisations have different needs, they are assessed individually. These things
are ensured by criterion two. It would be ignorant to assume that a manager or security­
responsible has limited or no knowledge of IT security. To replicate this, informants are
expected to have been involved in an IT security process. It is ensured by criterion one.
In the process of recruiting, the first and second criteria were at some point removed.
This was done to ease the process of gathering informants, e.g. it enabled interviewing
only a single employee in an organisation. This would skew the distribution of managers
and security­responsibles but increase the data sample. Removing the criteria also made
it possible to recruit informants from a larger pool of organisations. However, it never
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
29
==PAGE:40==
Organisation
Informant
Role
A
#1
Security­responsible
#2
Manager
B
#3
Security­responsible
#6
Manager
C
#4
Manager
#5
Security­responsible
D
#7
Manager
#8
Security­responsible
Table 3.1: The informants who participated in the thesis grouped by the organisation they
are employed in.
resulted in the participation of additional informants. Thus, the criteria are presented as
they are above.
3.1.2
Informants
Among the eight invited organisations, four agreed to participate with two employees
each. Each organisation participated with a manager and a security­responsible, result­
ing in a total of eight informants participating in the thesis. All of them had been em­
ployed in their current position for more than a year, and the group consisted of three
women and five men. The organisation represent four different industries, namely IT, re­
tail, consulting, and supply, and their main offices are spread out across three of the five
regions of Denmark. At the time of the interviews, the informants’ age varied from 35 to
56 and their organisations employed 30 and more than 1000 people. The informants who
represent managers are either CEO’s or CFO’s. The informants who represent security­
responsibles have positions where they also are responsible for IT or part of IT. They all
passed the criteria described above. During the interviews, it was discovered that two of
the managers had previously been responsible for IT in their organisation. Also, two of
the security­responsibles were part of the management of their organisation. An overview
of the informants can be seen in Table 3.1.
3.1.3
Meeting the informants
A declaration of consent was sent to each organisation before visiting them. If an infor­
mant has not had the time to read it, they could do so before signing it. Every informant
was prepared for the process before initiating their interview, as suggested by Kvale and
Brinkmann [44]. This includes explaining practical details like consent and time frame as
well as conveying the purpose of this research project. The latter is aimed at making the
informant switch focus from how well they or their organisation is performing to how they
experience the security level of and the communication within their organisation. Also,
Kvale and Brinkmann [44] emphasise the importance of making the informant understand
what the interviewer seeks to know. The term IT security was shortly described in relation
to cybersecurity and information security to limit confusion during the interview.
Before the interviews, the informants were notified about the title and subject of the re­
search project. This gave them time to think about the topic. Hopefully, this would help
them convey clear and concise descriptions of their experiences, thereby improving the
30
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:41==
quality of the data they contribute. This could have been further improved by sending
them the questions beforehand. This has several downsides like putting words in their
mouths and tying them to the questions making a semi­structured interview look more
like a structured interview. I decided against this, as the approach of the thesis is ex­
ploratory. Also, an important goal is to examine how the informants experience security
in their organisation as a whole, and not how they perceive predefined domains.
All interviews were conducted physically by me. They were held at each of the organisa­
tions’ facilities to limit the amount of time taken from each informant. This was important,
as many of the informants, as managers, have limited spare time, cf. Section 1.3.3. Also,
it created a more relaxed atmosphere for the informants. After conducting each interview,
the transcription phase began.
3.1.4
Transcription
The interviews are recorded using a mobile phone. The recordings are transcribed shortly
after the interviews have taken place, as recommended by Brinkmann and Tanggaard
[41]. The main goal of transcribing is to prepare the data for the analysis. It makes the
data easier to process and is part of the first phase of TA, cf. Section 3.1.5. Braun and
Clarke [45] argue that TA does not need a high level of detail in the transcript, unlike
conversational analysis. Furthermore, it has no one set of guidelines when transcribing,
but they stress that a transcript stays true to its original nature while making it practically
suited for the analysis. Therefore, a pragmatic approach to transcribing is taken. Some
details, like pitch and punctuation, are left out and a simple transcription key is used, see
below. These details do not substantially contribute to answering the research question
[41, 45]. In TA, it is important to develop codes and themes which are relevant to the
research question [47]. Also, words are transcribed in their distinct form, e.g. if the ending
of a word is not pronounced, the entire word will be written. This requires interpreting
while transcribing, but is seen as necessary for the analysis and when citing in the paper.
Likewise, the negative impact on the subsequent analysis is negligible. This is because
the analysis revolves around discovering the perception of the informants through their
explanations, and they are not significantly changed when writing words in their distinct
forms. For the same reason, the following cases are not transcribed
• repeated words which do not contribute meaningfully to the context
• minimal communication used as part of active listening
Transcription Key
The following transcription key is used when transcribing
#X
used to indicate who speaks i.e. #number indicates an
informant and #Int indicates the interviewer
[ ]
used to anonymise places, names, and other identifiable information
* *
used to describe sounds which are meaningful for the context
XX
used to show that some word(s) are omitted due to unclear speaking
Line break
indicates a change in whom speaking
Transcripts from each interview can be found in Appendix I.
3.1.5
Thematic analysis
After having transcribed the interviews, a reflexive thematic analysis will be performed as
described by Braun and Clarke [45, 47]. This includes processing the data in six phases.
Although the phases are ordered numerically, the authors suggest an iterative approach
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
31
==PAGE:42==
where previous phases are revisited if needed [46]. In the thesis, the initial outlining of
TA will be used as a basis for the analysis while following the guidelines described in
later publications [45, 46, 47]. The six phases presented by Braun and Clarke will be
conducted as follows:
1. The first phase, familiarisation, is the starting point of the analysis. The key point of
this phase is getting to know the data. Thus, this phase will begin while transcribing
the data. The main activity, though, is to make notes of things that are interesting,
e.g. notes that describe aspects of the data ”that feel most familiar or conversely
strike you as quite unfamiliar” [47][p. 28]. An emphasis will be put on getting to know
the data instead of trying to notice patterns or develop themes.
2. In the second phase, coding, a systematic approach is undertaken to explore and
identify meanings relevant to the research question(s). Meanings are interpreted
from the data and encapsulated in code labels which briefly describe the researcher’s
understanding. The codes are structured in a table where extracts of the data, i.e.
citations from interviews, are collated according to the code they relate to. An em­
phasis will be put on codes not being predefined but evolving as the reflexive analy­
sis is performed, and a deeper understanding is developed. This is one of the core
elements of inductive research which seeks to explore and observe before theoris­
ing.
3. The core of the third phase, Initial theme generation, is to cluster similar codes
”to explore potential patterns of shared meaning” [47][p. 28]. The process is inter­
pretive, thus requiring the researcher’s subjectivity, and the themes should evolve
throughout the process as the researcher’s knowledge of the topic is expanded. An
emphasis will be put on these being initial themes that need further refinement in
subsequent phases. Also, the themes should collaboratively tell a story about the
data which addresses the research question(s).
4. The fourth phase, reviewing and developing themes, involves a thorough exami­
nation of the themes. Each theme is reviewed to check if it is a bad candidate,
e.g. by having too little data supporting it, not being diverse enough and needing to
be merged with another theme, or too broad and needing to be broken down into
multiple themes. This phase is divided into two levels of reviewing:
(a) Level one: Reviewing at this level involves evaluating each theme together
with its collated data extracts. An emphasis is put on considering the data ex­
tracts and ”whether they appear to form a coherent pattern” [45][p. 91]. When
all themes appear to form a coherent pattern, the analysis continues to the
second level
(b) Level two: Reviewing at this level involves re­reading the entire data set to­
gether with the themes. The aim for each theme is twofold: (1) to ascertain
whether they represent/describe part of the story told by the informants and
(2) to identify and code additional data which fits within them.
5. In the fifth phase, defining and naming themes, the themes are made ready for
presentation. Each theme is given a definition (or description) that should capture
the essence of the theme. Opposite to codes, themes are multifaceted, and their
definitions should reflect that. Part of this process is also refining or finding sub­
themes within each theme. To conclude this phase, the name of each theme is
refined to make it concise while it still immediately gives the reader a sense of what
it is about.
32
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:43==
6. The last phase, producing the report, is centred around telling the story of each
theme, and data extracts are used to increase their credibility. To emphasise the
reflexivity of the analysis, there is a focus on telling the story instead of just citing
the interviews.
The themes will be presented in three steps:
1. Document themes: This is the last phase of the TA. Besides presenting supporting
data extracts, solutions to security issues found in the themes are presented. This
is done using content from academia.
2. Organisation­centric comparison: A comparison of informants’ perceptions within
each organisation. The comparison is conducted based on the themes each in­
formant is related to. This gives an overview of which perceptions differ in each
organisation.
3. Role­centric comparison: A comparison of informants’ perceptions within each
role (security­responsibles and managers). The comparison is conducted in the
same manner as the previous one. This gives an overview of which perceptions are
shared across each role and which of these (if any) differ between the two roles.
3.2
Developing themes and comparing perception
After transcribing the eight interviews, they were analysed. The interviews revolved around
how each informant perceived the IT security of and related communication within their
organisation. Based on this, six themes have been formed from 88 codes. Each theme
contributes to a better understanding of the area of research. An overview of the codes
and themes can be found in Figure 3.1.
1. Satisfied? Both yes and no
2. Improvements can be found in many areas
3. Challenges are multifaceted
4. A pragmatic approach is needed
5. Security requires a pragmatic approach
6. Management support is needed (and present)
An individual’s perception of an organisation’s IT security level is the product of how they
perceive its threats and resilience, e.g. #8 puts great emphasis on the danger of phishing
attacks: when you look at the threat matrix that is one can say I believe it is somewhere
above 90 per cent of what is the name of it breaches one can say on security generally
which a conducted via phishing (#8, 54­57). Thus, the themes developed revolve around
how informants describe their organisation’s IT security level and related communication,
what challenges they refer to, and what domains they perceive as important to protect
their organisation.
In the following, the themes and their sub­themes will be elaborated. Transcription of the
interviews will comprise the data used in the analysis. They can be found in Appendix I.
To allow non­Danish speakers to read the thesis, original quotations are translated from
Danish into English and thus referenced as paraphrases. To clarify who said what, each
paraphrase will be followed by a reference to the speaker and the location of the original
quotation in the following way: (#number, X­Y) where #number is the informant and X
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
33
==PAGE:44==
Workload 
challenges
Fail 
tests
Lack 
awareness
Poor level
among 
some
Lacks 
interest
Proficient 
managers
Other 
need 
proficiency
Want 
proficiency
Lack of 
com. to 
managers
Lack 
knowledge
and skill
Good work 
environment
Culture 
supports
Some 
employees
are aware
Limited 
knowledge-​
sharing
Awareness
campaign 
improves
Poor 
contingency 
plan
Lack of 
processes
Team-​
centred 
actions are 
needed
Responsive
Reactive
Participates
when 
requested
Prioritises
Not good at
using 
security 
controls
Proper
level
Proficient 
and 
sufficiently 
equipped
Holistic 
approach
Accept 
inconve-​
nience
Not 
perfect
Satisfied
overall
No 
culture
Supports
Motivated
Employees
are PoE
Important
General 
awareness
Access 
rights are 
important
Type of 
staff 
challenges
Balancing
security
Improvable
Part of
culture
Sufficient 
knowledge
and skills
Physical
threats
Honesty 
improves
Comply
Never 
good 
enough
Fear of 
consequences 
encourages
Other's 
levels 
encourage
Good 
behaviour
Technical
aspects 
challenge
Focus 
on data
Instilling 
ownership
improves
Backup is 
very 
important
Technical 
measures 
are top 
priority
Behaviour
is 
secondary
Human 
measures 
are 
secondary
Modern 
systems 
solve 
challenges
Multi-​
faceted
Use 
external 
speaker to 
diversify
People 
challenges
Focus on 
awareness
Insurance
is a 
priority
Unmotivated
Governance 
solves 
challenges
Dedicated 
CISO 
would help
Pragmatic
approach
Non-​cyber 
threats 
secondary
Not on a
high 
level
Management’s
interest 
enhances
Outsourcing
challenges
Focus on 
contingency 
plan
Technical
audits 
improves
Auth 
improves
Equipment
challenges
Third-​party 
can be 
compro-​
mised
Threats 
to digital
systems
Monitoring
networks 
challenges
Attitude 
challenges
Cannot 
control 
behaviour
Threat of
phishing 
attacks
Focus on 
behaviour
Focus 
on 
policies
Focus 
on the 
network
Operations 
are very 
important
Focus on 
processes
Knowledge-​
sharing 
exists
Process
exists
Lack of 
awareness
challenges
Enforcing 
digital 
policies 
enhances
Satisfied? Both yes and no
Improvements can be found 
in many areas
Challenges are multifaceted
Security requires a pragmatic approach
Proficiency in 
communication
Management support is needed (and present)
Figure 3.1: An overview of the six themes and 88 codes developed as part of the analysis.
A full­size version can be found in Appendix J.
34
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:45==
& Y denotes the lines on which the original quotation is found. Paraphrases are short­
ened using [...] and editorial additions are made using (”addition”). The special word øh,
which expresses hesitation, is translated with uh. Lastly, to keep the sex of the informants
anonymous, an informant will be referred to as ’they/them/their’ in the third person.
The last subsection sums up the themes and includes two comparisons. The first aims to
find differences and similarities in perception within each organisation among employees
(organisation­centric approach), and the second aims to find differences and similarities
in perception within each group of employees ­ either members of top management or
those responsible for IT security (role­centric approach).
3.2.1
Satisfied? Both yes and no
I am super satisfied (#7, 154) and no I do not think our IT security is on a high
level (#8, 196­197)
The first theme is about how the informants describe their satisfaction with IT security in
their organisation. During the interviews, they elaborated on this generally in addition to
commenting on specific domains. This theme contributes to a better understanding of
how the informants perceive their organisation’s IT security level.
Satisfaction on an overall level
IT security is becoming part of the agenda of many organisations. Thus, every informant
was asked whether they believe IT security is important for their organisation. All eight
confirmed this and some rated it as highly important: on a scale from one to ten for ex­
ample uh I think one will uh say that IT security lies on a nine (#3, 47­49), and to us it (IT
security) is important yes it is very important (#8, 37). #2 and #6 assessed it as equally
important as other components in an organisation: more important than things hard to say
(IT security) is at the top [...] it is most important together with other things (#2, 14­16).
Importance is one aspect, another aspect is whether the informants are satisfied with their
IT security. Most of the informants, #1, #3, #4, #5, #6, and #7, express satisfaction with
their organisation’s IT security overall in their organisation. #3 express satisfaction due to
their organisation’s journey getting to where they are today: I am actually very satisfied
with it but I think also it is because that one uh that I know what level we came from and
where we are today and uh what work we actually have put in uh getting to the place we
are today [...] I actually think that we are in a very good place uh today so overall yes I
am satisfied with where we are (#3, 205­215). Conversely, #8 is not satisfied with the IT
security level because they find their security measures insufficient against some attacks:
no I do not think out IT security is at a high level but I think also that if I wanted to get in
well then I would be in a good place (#8, 196­198).
Several informants argue that IT security can be improved. #7 and #8 describe it as a
learning curve and that there is always room for improvement. To elaborate, #3 explains
why they think IT security can be improved: I do not want to say that we could not be better
because uh we are only uh as strong as the weakest link (#3, 209­210). In continuation,
some even argue that IT security will never be good enough: no I will never be satisfied
(with our IT security level) (#8, 133) and I think one should never be satisfied with it be­
cause one can always improve one thing or the other uh and one must always seek to do
it a little better tomorrow then what we have done today (#4, 155­158). #3 continues their
analogy of a journey and is joined by #5: I actually think that uh that we are on a journey
uh which uh we never reach some end destination *laughs* that I think we will never do
(#3, 362­364) and we probably have not reached the goal so I do not know whether one
will ever reach the goal (#5, 108). The impossibility of having perfect security is also a
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
35
==PAGE:46==
product of persistent malicious actors: we can never get rid of all the small holes we can
never keep those that uh really want to get in those we cannot uh keep out (#1, 216­218).
Even though many of the informants agreed their organisations had good IT security,
#1, #3, #6, and #7 describe it as not being perfect. It is important to be aware of the
weaknesses: I think we just need to acknowledge that there are some things we can
solve and then there are some things we cannot solve [...] and again it is about narrowing
and we aware about where we have now I say the holes in the cheese (#3, 376­382). #7
agrees and suggests assessing the risk of these ”holes”: then there are always loopholes
one can say uh in our systems we know that also I believe it is like that for all companies
but more it is better we know it and then uh assess the risk of those areas (#7, 178­181).
It is hard to remove all holes and #1 suggests a more pragmatic approach: we actually
just need to make sure we are at a level where we are somewhat uh secure uh that one
that it is hard to get in [...] but we can do what we need to do uh otherwise we will die in
security (#1, 214­219). More on a pragmatic approach in Section 3.2.4.
Having a well­equipped employee
Many of the informants talked about how the employee affects IT security, and it is by far
the most frequently mentioned topic. One of the more common topics was awareness.
Half of the informants, #4, #5, #7, and #8, regard their organisation as having a general
awareness of IT security. In some cases, awareness is related to specific scenarios, like
phishing: to get phishing when we send something out or they see something suspicious
well I will say I actually think we are above average in relation to how aware people are
(#7, 188­191). #2 has a more diverse view on the employees’ awareness. They regard
some as very as aware while others less so: in part of our company we are super aware
(#2, 158­159) and there are others which are not so aware for example a [worker] right
their main focus is not IT security (#2, 158­159, 58­60). The latter is confirmed by #1 who
think that their lack of awareness can be tied to employees and not positions: we can also
see on our awareness it does not matter whether it is middle managers top managers or
people on the floor [...] it is not dependent on a segment today who slips up and who does
not slip up it is dependent on the person (#1, 372­376).
Awareness is often followed by good behaviour and vice versa. The informants who
believe their employees are aware also think their behaviour is good ­ with the addition
of #6 who calls it: reasonable (#6, 216). Both #7 and #8 mentions behaviour related to
phishing and #8 adds to that: I actually think that people uh are good at being aware I do
not see any yellow labels (with credentials) lying around uh actually when I walk around
(the office) (#8, 243­245). Just like the previous sub­theme, no one is perfect: well there
are always slip ups and it can always be better [...] luckily the trend is that are getting
better but there is always room for improvement but it moving in the right direction (#4,
250­256). On a more negative note, some informants find their employees’ behaviour to
be poor: we have phishing campaigns and it is continuously that uh that people slip up
in stupid places (#1, 251­252) and and then we test and not everyone gets good results
(#2, 97). Poor behaviour could stem from awareness when an employee says something
like: ”I was busy and thought I just need to finish and then I clicked on my it on my phone”
(#1, 254­256). A specific branch of employee behaviour is whether they comply with the
security policy. Three informants, #3, #6, and #8, commented directly on this and were
positive. #3 suggests that compliance with policies has been achieved because they were
cautious when developing their policies: because we just have [...] made some rules and
some guidelines that must be able to function at the same time one must be able to work
(#3, 349­352).
Another thing is whether the employee is well­equipped to deal with security threats. Sev­
36
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:47==
eral informants, #3, #5, #6, #8, believe their employees have the sufficient knowledge and
skills. Not all informants have the same opinion, and one reason for employees not being
well­equipped can be attributed to the type of workers employed: the people we have [...]
are used to using a tool and uh not IT in their daily work [...] now all of a sudden they must
use the computer in a different way than what they have been used to (#4, 225­231). This
is backed up by #1: if you are good at uh being a craftsman or you are good at even if you
are good at uh drawing AutoCad [...] you are not necessarily good at knowing what is a
bad email (#1, 363­367). Behaviour is tied to knowledge and skill and #2 uses this when
expressing dissatisfaction with the latter: when there are maybe 20 who have clicked on
a link then it is not good enough (#2, 128­129).
Affecting all these is the employee’s motivation. The majority of the informants perceive
their employees as being motivated. One is a little hesitant to state that all employees
are motivated: some more than others I think I would say uh that is there are probably
there are some too who are like uh it is cumbersome (#5, 193­194). Conversely, #1, #2,
and #4 argue that this is not the case as their employees are responsive and accept the
inconvenience introduced by security. In the end, only one informant does not believe
their employees are motivated: no (are motivated) I do not think they are that is uh not on
a daily basis [...] IT security generally speaking is not top of mind of the employees (#7,
311­315).
Opposite #1, some informants believe that their IT security level is threatened by a spe­
cific group of employees: it is more those in the periphery (#2, 140). This could have
something to do with their understanding of IT security in general: all our technicians [...]
that are out in the field and doing stuff uh and are not as IT­savvy [...] and maybe do
fully know what will happen if they press on one thing or the other (#5, 97­103) and when
visiting those [...] that do not have much to do with IT [...] then uh then is just hard and
they click (on links) (#2, 41­44).
An organisational structure that supports IT security
An organisation comprises many components one of which is its culture. It is interwoven
with the employee component which is elaborated on above. Though culture is dependent
on employees it is also dependent on the organisation. Regarding the informants, they
differ in their perception of whether IT security is part of the organisational culture. The
majority are positive and the employee’s behaviour is promoted as contributing to this: I
think people are good at and also at making each other aware if there is something they
need to be aware of (#5, 159­161). #3 is more reluctant to say that it is part of all aspects
of their culture: I wish I could unambiguously say yes to that uh and I can for sure in some
areas [...] but whether it is an integrated part of our culture that I would question (#3, 218­
223). The remaining informants, #1, #7, and #8, do not believe IT security is part of the
culture. They have several reasons though mostly revolving around the employees: but
otherwise I would not say that such a culture where IT security is on the top of their mind
prevail (#7, 192­193) and no we also have phishing campaigns and people continuously
uh slip up (#1, 251­252).
Another component is the environment, e.g. tools, resources, and time. It is an important
component which can encourage and motivate employees to work securely. All informants
agree that their organisation has a good environment. The size of an organisation can
be a contributing factor to the environment: we are a small company so we can also uh
easily get employees with uh and employees are can get involved quickly [...] we have
an environment where we can keep track of it and we can easily reach out uh so there
is the basis to create high IT security (#7, 279­283). This is backed up by #8 who also
emphasises that tools are used to support IT security: the environment if you include
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
37
==PAGE:48==
something like our phishing training well it is also part of the environment it supports also
one can say that one gets aware and a lot of these training videos we send out are also
about general security also about USB keys and QR and you know how one generally
must be aware so in that way I think our environment supports it (#8, 266­272).
Literature highlights knowledge­sharing as a factor influencing IT security in an organisa­
tion. Similar to culture it is connected to the employee component. Sharing knowledge
can be structured, e.g. awareness campaigns, or unstructured, e.g. informal talks. All 4
organisations have awareness campaigns and: there we share knowledge (#2, 171­172).
#5 describes a more informal knowledge­sharing between employees: I have experienced
some times that uh someone comes in and asks [...] and I think that it is very important
that one does so because if one by accident clicks something one should not that is then
it is better to ask one time too much (#5, 161­166). In several cases, it is described as
unknown: the unstructured knowledge­sharing I would not know of (#1, 193) and (un­
structured knowledge­sharing) I do not believe they do (#2, 173). A reason for this can be
the mindset: (I) do not believe (knowledge­sharing) is on the top of mind for many people
(#6, 143­144).
Three informants talked about contingency plans, but only one of them commented on its
level: our contingency plan is not adequate that is if something goes wrong what do we do
that is we do somewhat know what we must do because we have some people sitting and
they can take action but we do not have the line all the way to the top to uh our chairman
and how we should act (#2, 81­85). The same informant also highlights that they lack
processes: we are missing some processes which we are working on. Conversely, #7
says they are working a lot with processes: we also go through uh one can say all our
processes in relation to access rights security management processes backup and so
forth so we get through all of it and ensure that our processes are correct (#7, 34­38).
3.2.2
Improvements can be found in many areas
and we try to have the most holistic view on the organisation’s IT as
possible (#1, 81­82)
The second theme is about which domains the informants suggest to improve IT security.
The Cybersecurity Taxonomy illustrates that many domains are relevant, and as #1 puts
it: the measures we put forward are [...] medium­high all around (the organisation) instead
of having high security in some specific areas (#1, 125­128). The theme contributes to a
better understanding of which domains the informants perceive as important.
Incorporating security into the organisation
The by far most mentioned topic is the tool, awareness campaigns. It can contribute in
many ways just as it can take many forms, e.g. awareness courses, phishing training,
and training videos. It is used to train employees and measure their performance: we use
[...] like test our organisation on some awareness to say okay do we open these emails
that is it has a lot to do with phishing emails and that stuff and that way of training that the
organisation all the time must follow up on it (#6, 43­47), upskill employees: there we use
these employee courses to inform and upskill [...] our employees so they are aware (#5,
103­105), and lastly to change behaviour: first time you click a [...] trial phishing link you
will get a that is not so good (message) uh so I think you will learn to understand that it
was not so good (#8, 441­444).
Several processes and activities improve an organisation’s IT security. Maybe an organ­
isation’s employees have a good understanding of IT security and behave accordingly
in general, but a small number of employees lag behind. Then, it can be beneficial to
perform team­centred actions to bring those employees up on the same level as the rest
38
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:49==
of the organisation: in the teams and there one can so who slips up and then one can
speak to them (#2, 248­249). When an organisation instils ownership in the employee
their awareness can be raised: and then try to give them some ownership and then say
yes if you do this then it may result in half of the town no having any [product] or something
else so one will understand that it is maybe not so good (#5, 246­249). Education and
training can be boring when it is always conducted behind a computer screen. #7 talks
about how learning can be varied by inviting a speaker: we have invited one to speak
about IT security also uh so it is not just something they read or do (#7, 83­84). As with
many other things communication is important, and #3 emphasises honesty as a benefi­
cial flavour: but rather be honest and rather be uh quick when one thinks that something
could be wrong and that I think is very important [...] and talking about these things but
being honest about the things we have experienced that our security has been breached
(#3, 330­335). Lastly, an organisation is always subject to threats, but assessing its risks
is the first step to solving them: I see (challenges) solved identifying them [...] one assess
it and says how big of a risk is it are there any shortcuts [...] to minimise risk or can we
live with it (#7, 340­344).
The last domain in the organisational category revolves around top management. Pushing
a new initiative forward requires buy­in from management, thus gaining their interest is
beneficial. #1 and #8 agree that this is one of the reasons when asked why their IT security
is at its current level: management has a general interest in raising (the IT security level).
Another way to prioritise IT security is to have a dedicated IT security specialist (e.g. a
Chief Information Security Officer). Otherwise, IT security just be an area of responsibility
for an employee who already has other responsibilities: as any other companies it would
be nice if one just had an IT security specialist (#7, 447­449) and I need time to go through
Excel sheets and [...] make architecture work [...] if I also shall have time for that then
there is a limit on how much time I can use on IT security (#8, 200­204).
Having control is beneficial
Technological measures can also be used to enhance an organisation’s IT security. This
can be done by having modern systems and updating them: (challenges) are solved by us
renewing and updating our IT all the time (#6, 253). Creating digital policies can be used to
set up alarms for specific behaviour and even restrict particularly unwanted behaviour. #8
suggest this as an option to solve their challenges: we can surely also do more thing about
policies one can enforce in Office 365 (#8, 327­330). One area that can be restricted is
users and access. Their data and old accounts are something #1 suggest could improve
their security: clean uh keep track of ones things uh keep track of the employees where
their data is stored uh are their PC updated [...] are there old users in the user database
that should no longer be there (#1, 442­445).
Some measures integrated into large­scale setups are also feasible to incorporate in
smaller setups or even as stand­alone solutions. Having a VPN to access an organi­
sation’s internal network can be implemented to avoid unauthorised access. Two­factor
authentication can be used to strengthen the security of such a measure and thus both
will enhance security: we try to increase the security even more in relation to how (the
employees) can connect through VPN and two­factor (authentication) (#4, 286­287). This
is one way of enabling the use of security rights which can enhance security: make sure
that not all places are open but you have some access rights on what you are allowed to
see and what you are not allowed to see (#1, 447­449).
In recent years the popularity of conducting technical audits has risen. It can be done by
performing penetration tests and vulnerability scans. They can be used when trying to
assess technical measures: yes that is vulnerability scan and penetration tests [...] but
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
39
==PAGE:50==
again it is very what is the name of it machine focused right again people are auditing our
systems (#8, 185­188). When knowing one’s weaknesses, it is easier to set up measures
to guard against them. Resources are often scarce, and audits can help prioritise between
measures: we actually evaluate the risk we have in the company knowing that we at one
cannot fix all uh but we fix what is most important and that is also what we get out of these
penetration tests (#7, 346­349).
The image is important
Humans look to see how other people are doing while also wondering what others think of
us. The same goes for organisation and their employees. Some people look to companies
to see how they approach IT security. This can improve awareness among employees:
I can hear uh and see and feel uh how my colleagues uh look at others that are maybe
not at the IT security level we are at uh so that is kind of a uh benchmark see [name] uh
have you seen what they do or have you seen what they do not do (#3, 256­260). Another
way awareness is raised is when seeing other organisation’s IT security is compromised:
there are examples of [companies of the same type] which have been hacked and uh
where they have had stolen or locked their data it is called uh so it is something we have
gotten very aware of (#5, 126­129).
In line with the above, the fear of consequences can be encouraging. Now that the world
is connected globally, the news of an incident will quickly spread: we do not want to
end up on the front page of [newspaper] as being those who *laughs* those who have
been hacked (#4, 137­138). Having to notify customers about a breach when sufficient
measures were not set up is also unwanted: no one wants to be in the situation like
some companies are having to notify the customers (about a breach) [...] especially if
one has not taken the necessary precautions for it (#8, 220­224). Repercussions of an
incident caused by legal matters are also terrifying: there is a lot what is the name of it
with ransomware and such things that probably are the biggest fear for what is the name
uh for companies today together with GDPR (#1, 29­32).
3.2.3
Challenges are multifaceted
IT security has many facets uh and thus uh we look at IT security from many
angles that are both when talking about fraud uh when talking about cyber crime
(#7,29­32)
While many domains can improve an organisation’s IT security, it is important to under­
stand what threats are faced. The third theme revolves around this and its contribution is
an insight into which threats and challenges the informants perceive as important.
The employee is the largest threat
The most notable challenge has to do with humans. As referenced earlier, it seems to
have something to do with specific people and not what positions they hold: it is still the
same 10 15 people who do not take their courses [...] it is the same we have to talk to again
and again and it says more about the person than it says about their position or working
area (#1, 398­403). For some, it has become the main focus to limit this challenge our
main focus is the employees I think uh if we must say it that is we can also divide it into
some groups one can say I think the employees are our weakest link today when talking
about IT security (#7, 109­112).
Continuing the talk of the weakest link, half of the informants agree that the employee is
the main point of entry: we know that uh if someone gets in someday then it is because an
employee has clicked on something wrong uh without knowing it (#1, 411­413). Behaving
securely is a big responsibility to put on employees shoulders, but poor actions can have
a large impact: the employees right makes trouble for all of us in principle by opening the
40
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:51==
wrong emails or pressing the wrong links (#4, 234­235). In that regard, it is unfortunate
that employees sooner or later make errors thereby rendering their organisations vulner­
able: you well never do it 100 per cent because that is where the employees click on
something (#7, 243­245) and I think that at some point then someone will press a button
and something will go wrong (#8, 237­239).
One of the main challenges stemming from employees is their behaviour. Machines and
systems can be programmed to behave in a certain way, but employees are uncontrol­
lable: humans you cannot control you cannot well make sure they do things in the same
way every time so humans will always be the biggest what to say risk (#1, 387­389). Their
behaviour follows from raised awareness and a mental surplus: it is about mental surplus
right that is one can uh look aside and say should I click on a link or should I not do it but
it can be difficult (#2, 140­143). Therefore, an organisation will be vulnerable if its em­
ployees lack awareness: there is no doubt that the employees contribute to us avoiding
getting attacked at some point because it is their awareness that is part of being secure
(#7, 239­241).
All employees have an attitude towards a topic and it affects their behaviour. During
the interviews, different attitudes of employees were emphasised. These are of course
related to IT security and more specifically passwords and other constraints stemming
from a security policy. They would get questions like: why do you have to enter your code
again and again and how many codes do you need to have [...] and must it be changed
again (#2, 203­207). People can be lazy, which tempts them into taking shortcuts: there
is something about passwords [...] please do not write them down [...] I do not believe
they do so but I believe that sometimes there are these shortcuts that uh people want to
do so (#7, 323­326).
Phishing is one way to expose employees to malicious links they should not click. One
informant believes that this is their biggest threat: my biggest concern is phishing [...] one
day someone will do it (click on a malicious link) [...] I think there is a pretty high chance
that it will happen at some point (#8, 174­182).
The last challenge related to employees is what type of employees are employed. One
informant mentions this as a challenge. They have a high number of part­time employees
and a high employee turnover rate. This is not due to poor organisational culture or bad
work conditions, but just a structural choice. It is a challenge to create a system that is
easy to use and secure to avoid having their employees conduct poor behaviour: when
one is not often at work they need to have relatively easy access to enter some systems
so there is someplace where we know well there we are maybe vulnerable (#3, 183­186).
Both digital systems and physical constraints challenge
An organisation’s technological challenges are very much dependent on digital setup,
physical constraints, and size. Thus, organisations have their own set of challenges they
need to deal with although some challenges repeat themselves across organisations.
When looking at challenges in general, #2 and #6 emphasise the technical ones: I think
it is the technical which will be our challenge (#6, 242­244). Some challenges arise by
the way an organisation works. They can come from equipment: the area in which we
maybe are challenged the most is probably uh OT­systems (#4, 279­280) and from part­
ners having access to internal systems: if (third­parties) are hacked and someone can
enter through them or others uh then we have a problem [...] (third­party) can be used as
a stepping stone to enter (our systems) it is maybe the biggest danger (#4, 294­298).
Digital systems can be a challenge in several situations. An organisation can need to
run legacy systems. Many old systems do not have the built­in security features which
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
41
==PAGE:52==
are common sense today: so I also think these legacy systems that are some of these
old applications that are programmed in a special way with a security model that is not
up­to­date in a way we actually want it to [...] working with legacy systems it is actually a
challenge some times when we talk IT security (#7, 295­308). #6 agrees to this. Another
aspect is the ease of use of a system. If a system is too restrictive it can be hard and
tiresome to use: we can make passwords with 20 40 characters or something else but
we also need to be able to work with the things right so in that regard it is all the time a
balance of it should be secure but it should also be usable so that I think is one of our
challenges (#5, 180­185).
Monitoring network access is a useful tool to fight off threats, but it needs to be set up right
and continuously reviewed. A surveillance system can be set up to monitor an organisa­
tion’s network traffic. If it only sometimes reports when adversaries enter the network, it
is impossible to know whether someone is in the network. This is a concern: would we
notice if we had some interesting logs somewhere would we notice if someone had been
accessing a drive that I am not sure about I for sure think that is a challenge (#8, 296­
299). A causative factor can be a lack of knowledge among the technically responsible
employee in an organisation: I also think the network part is a challenge [...] but maybe
it is also because I am not so much into the network part of it uh but that is also an issue
(#299­316).
Outsourcing can influence the above­mentioned domains among others. Trust is one
issue here, but more so knowledge of the organisation as a whole: there is uncertainty
when outsourcing [...] and I trust our external partners in security but they do not know
the company as well as we do in here (#8, 319­323). Also, geographical location can be
perceived as an issue: so there is just one can say the fact that it is located somewhere
else will probably uh inhibit security (#8, 323­325).
Lastly, an organisation’s physical constraints can introduce challenges. It can be because
of equipment which has to be located outside the office premises: one does not get rid of
that one can say the PLC­component [...] if you enter there then you can get in (#4, 310­
316). When an organisation’s business is spread out across many locations, it is hard
for the employee responsible for security to monitor what happens. In addition, when
a lot of different people access each premise of a similar organisation, their security is
challenged: on our different locations a lot of different people enter it is not our customers
I am thinking on here but a lot of suppliers goes into our backrooms (#299­302).
Before moving on, there is one last challenge that fits neither of the sub­themes. IT secu­
rity is for many organisations not part of their core business. Nonetheless, their business
might not be able to run if their IT security is breached. For some, other work might stand
in the way of working with IT security: we are a bit what to say limited by work (#2, 118),
and it can be unsatisfactory: it is going more slowly than what I had wished for (#2, 120).
If the workload is too big it can cause a rush at work which can lead to unfortunate be­
haviour: we are under pressure at the moment we are busy very busy at the moment right
uh and when one is busy and under pressure well [...] so one can more easily get to do
something one should not (#5, 143­147). It can also lead to a deprioritising of IT security:
it is not something that is on the agenda every day because we are so busy that it is not
part of the operation (#6, 50­52), which leads to the next theme.
3.2.4
Security requires a pragmatic approach
IT security is also expensive uh so if one need to have a pragmatic approach to IT
security (#8,41­42)
42
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:53==
After identifying threats and challenges, it is time to set up IT security. At least, this ap­
proach will help prioritise resources where they can yield the best benefit. This is a prag­
matic approach, where IT security is developed to combat issues found. The fourth theme
is about which domains the informants highlight and contribute to a better understanding
of what domains each informant perceives as important.
Balancing security
The main theme of a pragmatic approach is balancing security. In many ways, IT security
can be an obstacle for employees in their daily work. Employees still need to be able to
conduct their work: it is like a balance too one need to be able to be in it one can say
that is uh in such a way that one also gets work done (#4, 111­113) and we need to look
everything up also electronically [...] but one also needs to be able to work with things
so one needs to find the balance all the time (#5, 176­179). If security makes workflows
too cumbersome, an organisation risk their employees will not comply with their security
policy: find the point where you do not get tired of the IT security things that make it difficult
to get your work done because then you will circumvent it in some way (#6, 90­92). In
the same alley lies relevancy. IT security needs to make sense to the employee and feel
relevant: if I send out training videos to people with a duration of three hours do they want
to watch them right uh but it must be relevant so there is also a requirement for us that
the training we send out is relevant and interesting (#8, 165­168)
It is very much balancing user rights and the overall security level. By limiting a user’s
access to a system the risk of a breach is lessened: I believe the thing with they only have
access to what they need to have access to it creates that we do not have like an open door
to all places (#3, 159­161). If the restrictions are too heavy, agility is lost: when are we
compromising agility that is and it is also something we discuss right what should people
have access to update their PC or something or should it be uh infrastructure (team) that
is how much it is all the time we sit and discuss how much are we compromising agility
(#7, 285­290).
Behaviour and awareness is prioritised
When prioritising IT security, the employee is a top concern. However, the informants
describe which area to prioritise differently. Like when referring to challenges caused
by the employee, behaviour is a major concern. Having yellow post­it notes attached to
computers or their screens is not good behaviour. Especially when it is in places where
customers or other people from outside the organisation come: (I) focus a lot on that uh
we also not in the shops for example this we did back in time have uh a small Post’it
hanging (#3, 167­169). Behaviour in the digital world is also prioritised: our main focus
is on the employees’ actions (#1, 146) and employee behaviour in relation to computers
(#8, 108). Specifically when it comes to clicking links: everything we can do so that the
(employees) do not click on this that we try to do (#7, 115­116).
Another aspect is awareness. It is related to employee behaviour, but not the same. An
employee can be very aware of IT security, but choose to behave poorly. Also, IT security
is such a vast topic that it is impossible to be aware of everything relevant. #4 describe
how their focus on awareness should improve behaviour: that uh is something we must
have a focus on and it is also something we must teach them in relation to uh how they
should behave in that world so they will not cause any yes trouble for all of us in principle
by opening the wrong emails or press the wrong links (#4, 231­235) #2 and #7 also argues
that they prioritise awareness: (Awareness) is probably the main focus (#2, 103) and We
have in relatively many years had a focus on [...] phishing uh campaigns (#7, 55­56).
Priorities are by definition ordered, and thus things can be secondary or tertiary. Instead of
focusing on employees in many aspects, #6 suggests prioritising rules and then behaviour
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
43
==PAGE:54==
should follow: I believe that it is the rules they shall come from above and form the basis so
that the employees they are inside of it I do not believe that we get our employees to push
it I believe it is something we should do the other way around (#6, 205­209). They go on
to say that behaviour is secondary and employees should be educated enough to behave
properly, e.g. when receiving a malicious e­mail. The human aspect encompasses many
things, and it is possible to focus only on a part of it. This is the case for #8: we focus
more on one can say the cyber part [...] we do not train people in USB sticks uh we do not
train people a lot in QR codes on the wall and such things [...] we do not train our people
in not letting people in who wears suits (#8, 99­103).
Focus on operations and authentication
While some prioritise the employee others prioritise technological security measures, and
for some it is the top priority: (technical measures) are first priority (#6, 139). Even more
informants find that operations have a high priority: it is actually the most important to
keep alive (#4, 69), The most important is (the main operation) (#5, 66), and so our main
focus is that our core operation should be able to run no matter what (#6, 126­127). If
an incident occurs, e.g. a ransomware attack, the downtime of operations can be limited
when a proper backup process is in place: we need to have backup plans for the different
things which need to run and it is the by far the most important (#6, 128­130).
One common security measure on the technological side is authorisation and authenti­
cation. It can be implemented in systems using access rights. Earlier this was less of a
priority but it is gaining focus: the biggest focus probably lies in that is before everyone
had access to everything uh now few have access to everything uh many have access to
something (#3, 171­173). #4 describes it as one of the 3 main foci of their organisation. A
derivative focus is then to audit access to the network: another focus that is network things
yes that is vulnerability scans and penetration tests (#8, 185­186). All in all, it primarily
makes sense to restrict access to a system or network if something valuable is inside ­
and for most organisations, this is the case. Also, national and international regulations
can increase the value of say data: we also have a responsibility to uh to our consumers
that is in relation to GDPR for example their information and such things uh those we
should take care of (#5, 68­71).
Processes and policies are within scope
Domains in the organisational category are also a focus among the informants. Several
of them are related to processes. #2 and #7 state that their processes overall are the
focus: so the focus is on getting our processes up and running (#2, 117­118).
A security policy can define specific processes which must be followed to comply with it.
They can encompass technical procedures, what actions an employee should perform,
and also influence how an organisation is structured. #4 states that they prioritise some of
these: I think we have had a lot on focus on it always and that all our firewalls continuously
get updated and uh and all PCs and so on there are rules for when passwords must be
changed (#4, 89­92). Contingency plans can be part of the policies of an organisation,
and they are important in case of an incident: we put focus on when the incident has
occurred what is it then uh we must do (#7, 116­117) and I will say if I should mention one
thing then it is the employees and what we do if we get in a situation where on clicked right
which is our focus (#7, 146­149). While an organisation may do many things to increase
its security, they can still be breached. In that case, having insurance is advantageous,
and #7 states that as having pretty high focus: cyber crime and cyber crime insurance it
is also something which has a pretty high focus now (#7, 135­136).
44
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:55==
3.2.5
Proficiency in communication
It is my understanding that uh that I think we have the right setup and the right
level around it (#4, 409­410)
Communication is important to every organisation, and it has to be set up properly. It can
be, e.g. communication between decision­makers in management and communication to
lower level employees. This theme is about communication between managers and the
security­responsibles. It contributes to a better understanding of how informants perceive
communication in their organisation.
None of the informants referred to their communication as being poor, though one infor­
mant referred to it as sometimes missing: it is not poor communication it is maybe a little
bit lacking communication from time to time (#1, 515­517). The same informant sums up
communication in general as: I think (the communication) is sufficient (#1, 518­519). #4
elaborates: yes so I think that is neither too little nor too much that is but on a level where
people also uh takes it seriously (#403­404).
No matter the much is communicated, individuals involved need a general understanding
of the topic being communicated and appropriate tools. The majority, #1, #2, #4, #6, and
#7, agree that they are well­equipped for communication. When asked whether they lack
proficiency in communication #6 and #7 agreed that this was not the case: that I will not
say (#6, 322) and no I do not believe [...] I am fairly clear about that I am not very proficient
in IT security (#7, 439­441). #4 refers to their tools specifically: yes I think with these uh
policies and procedures we have yes so uh so I think that uh that I need something that
way around (#4, 383­384). Lastly, #1 and #2 agree their tools are sufficient, and #2
elaborates: I have tools understood on my level and then I have people who understand
it on a more technical level (#2, 327­328).
While the remaining do not disagree, they all suggest areas where they can improve. Two
informants suggest getting greater technical knowledge: I could definitely use a deeper
technical insight myself and a deeper understanding (#3, 500­501) and that could be that
is I have no IT education or something so I do not have all these technical uh what is that
called expression (#5, 318­320). When asked if being skilful enough to communicate IT
security, #8 states that there is always room for improvement: I need to educate myself
all the time that is never will there be a time where I am proficient enough I do not think
there will be a time where I think oh this is nice now everything is in control and such I do
not believe that will be (#8, 414­418).
Upon asking the informants about whether they think other people in top management
and responsible for IT security, the answer is different. Almost all agree that the others
are proficient in communicating: I generally think people [...] can comprehend (#8, 451)
and but luckily there is a reasonable uh digital level also in our board (#4, 374­375). One
approves that management does not understand the details: I believe most understand it
uh and they know challenges and then we understand maybe just and for me it is fine I only
understand 10 per cent of the 100 per cent but that is enough to know that we are on the
right path with it (#6, 326­330). Just one informant argues that it would be advantageous
if others were more technical proficient: there are some times where uh where maybe
something is lost [...] once in a while I actually think it would be beneficial that we were a
several more who had a little deeper technical uh understanding (#3, 506­513).
3.2.6
Management support is needed (and present)
thus all security uh is based on favour from top management (#1, 336­337)
Management decides where resources should be allocated on a large scale in organisa­
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
45
==PAGE:56==
tions. The last theme is about management’s engagement with IT security. It contributes
to a better understanding of how the informants perceive challenges and the overall se­
curity level of their organisation.
The informants are generally positive when it comes to their management commitment to
support IT security. This is expressed through budgets and when responding to recom­
mendations. It is also evident from the fact that employees can spend time on activities
like training: we have a management team who is benevolent about these things [...] we
are allowed to use uh some of the employees time uh and that is only gained through
the middle managers if the top management approves it is the middle managers who are
accountable for the employees hours (#1, 326­331). #3 and #5 agree that management
is supportive: they are interested and support it (#3, 407) and I think there is support for
it (#5, 278­279). In stronger terms, some informants state that management prioritises it:
(the management) prioritise what we say (#2, 265) and I would not make other priorities
than those we have today I believe we have the right priorities today (#6, 292­294). #7
find that the board is actively seeking IT security: (The board) are not down in the detail
in day­to­day work of course but they want to know what we are uh doing (#7, 229­230),
and when asked, #8 believe that they prioritise it: that I most find that they do (#8, 220).
Some refer to management as being more reactive concerning IT security: (the manage­
ment) is not proactive about the things but they what to say they do not react negatively
to the measures [...] it is not the board the management that what is the name of it pulls
the trigger uh on now we need to be more secure (#1, 304­309) and the other (members
of management) are more reactive (#2, 254). In some organisations, it seems to work
in a way where managers participate actively when requested: when the management is
asked to assess some things or such then they are critical and active (#2, 260­261) and
we review it once a year where we get our risks assessed so it is where we follow up on
are we where should be (#6, 286­288). They do not intervene but participate when asked:
they would like to participate when asked it is not them who approach us and says hey
we need awareness (#1, 339­340) and concerning that they have participated actively in
shutting some of the access down (#3, 415­416).
The general image is excellent when it comes to management support of IT security in
their organisation, and only #1 wish for a larger interest from management: (I) would like
for top management to have a little more interest in what we have going on (#1, 512­514).
3.2.7
Summary of the themes
The six themes describe how the informants perceive their organisation’s IT security and
related communication, in addition to what they find important. The themes are based on
several codes and contribute to assessing (a) how they perceive their organisation’s IT
security level and (b) what domains they are most attentive to. To get an overview of the
informants’ opinions, a table has been created. It sums up the informants’ perceptions
in a visual representation making it easier to find similarities and differences in percep­
tions. Their perceptions are represented as subjects (rows), which comprise one or more
codes. If a subject is concerned with an informant’s perception of their organisation’s level
in a specific area, it comprises several codes, e.g. the codes Employees are motivated
and Unmotivated employees are collated into the subject Motivated. Otherwise, a subject
represents a single code. When possible, the subjects are categorised as human, organ­
isational, or technological (HOT) similar to the factors in Section 2.4. The entire table can
be found in Appendix G.
A shortened version displaying the 14 first rows of the table can be found in Table 3.2.
Each row can represent one of two cases: (1) how the informants perceive their organisa­
46
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:57==
Informant #
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Overall Security
Importance
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Satisfied
+
+
+
+
+
+
­
Not perfect
x
x
x
x
x
Never good enough
x
x
x
Level
Human
Awareness
­
0/­
+
+
+
+
Behaviour
­
­
+
+
+
+
+
Compliance
+
+
+
Knowledge and skills
­
­
+
­
+
+
+
Motivated
+
+
+
+
+
+
­
Table 3.2: The table shows some of the subjects the informants have assessed. Every
row in the table either represents whether the informants mention the subject (X or no X)
or if they are positive (+), negative (­), or neutral (0) towards it. The entire table can be
found in Appendix G.
tions’ level in a specific area (a subject which comprises multiple codes) and (2) whether
the informants agree with a subject (a single code). In the former, a cell will represent
whether an informant is positive (+), negative (­), or neutral (0) towards the subject. In
rare cases, an informant is both negative and positive (+/­) or negative and neutral (0/­)
towards a subject. In the latter, a cell will represent whether an informant mentions it (X
if mentioned). In some situations, an informant did not mention a subject, and the corre­
sponding cell is left empty, e.g. #3 did not state whether they perceive their organisation’s
employees as aware or not.
The following comparisons are based on how the informants perceive their organisation’s
IT security, and what they highlight as important (a priority, challenge, or improvement). It
will be a comparison of the similarities and differences ­ first within the four organisations
and then within each role. An overview of how the informants are distributed in organisa­
tions and roles can be found in Table 3.1. Data behind the codes is not referenced with
paraphrases in the following. It is part of presenting the themes (sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.6),
and the reader is referred to this if an elaboration is needed.
This is a qualitative analysis, but part of it will be based on the number of subjects the
informants highlight in each of the HOT categories. As a reference for each category, the
informants highlight one to seven subjects and the average number of subjects highlighted
is ≈3.33. Table 3.3 shows an overview and is based on the data found in Appendix G.
Some notable takeaways before the informants’ perceptions are thoroughly compared.
All informants argue, that IT security is important to their organisations. Also, they all
perceive their managements as supportive of IT security initiatives ­ just one informant
finds that it could be better. Regarding the subjects mentioned, seven out of eight find
that their organisations’ IT security is not perfect or might never be good enough. Half
of the informants argue that the employee is the point of entry for threats while half of
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
47
==PAGE:58==
Informant #
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Human
5
2
3
3
2
2
7
5
Organisational
2
4
2
2
3
2
7
3
Technological
2
1
2
6
3
6
2
5
3
2.33
2.33
3.67
2.67
3.33
5.33
4.33
Table 3.3: The number of times each informant highlights a subject as important (a pri­
ority, challenge, or improvement). It is grouped in the three HOT categories [69]. The
categories which each informant mentions the most are highlighted. The last row is the
average of the number of subjects each informant highlights.
the informants (mostly the same) perceive the employee’s behaviour as a priority in their
organisations. Lastly, all informants state that awareness training improves IT security.
Organisation­centric comparison
All informants agree that IT security is important to their organisation. Regarding sat­
isfaction, only one company has a discrepancy. One informant is dissatisfied because
they find that an adversary would be well off getting in. Regarding the level in the human
category, most informants agree or one of the informants in an organisation did not re­
spond. In one organisation there is a discrepancy related to the knowledge and skills of
the employee. One informant emphasises room for improvement and that some employ­
ees generally lack IT skills while the other informant finds that the employees are at a fine
level. The organisational category tells a story similar to the human category. Regarding
the environment, the informants agree, and when asked about their organisation’s cul­
ture, only two of them have opposite opinions. One finds that IT security is part of the
culture and the other disagrees. Regarding communication, there is more of a difference.
Three informants find that they could be more proficient while the rest see themselves
as well­equipped. This is no disagreement until examining whether they think others lack
proficiency when communicating. Only one informant emphasised that communication
would be enhanced if other members of management were more proficient specifically in
the technical areas. The same informant is one of the three who wants increased tech­
nical proficiency for communicating. Lastly, regarding management involvement, some
refer to their involvement as being more reactive than proactive. In this area, no difference
in perceptions is found within the organisations.
As described above, all informants refer to all HOT categories ­ and in most cases, they
do so two or more times. Within each organisation, when comparing the number of high­
lighted subjects in each category, they mostly differ. Often, there is little difference, but
in some cases, the number of subjects highlighted by each informant is 3 and 4. These
cases are elaborated below.
In the human category, there is a discrepancy of three in one organisation. In this case,
the manager says the organisation is prioritising their employees’ awareness and that their
awareness challenges them. The security­responsible emphasises that their employees’
behaviour is a priority and the main challenge. The former highlights the most (5) subjects
while they agree that their employees’ behaviour and awareness is lacking.
In the organisational category, one organisation has a discrepancy of four. The man­
ager highlights the most (7) subjects and several of them are areas they prioritise: their
48
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:59==
processes, a contingency plan, and insurance. Also, the manager highlights their use
of external speakers and risk management to help solve challenges. They both mention
how an employee only dedicated to IT security would be an improvement, that aware­
ness training improves the organisation’s IT security. In addition, the security­responsible
highlights that IT security is improved when management has an interest in it. They both
agree that IT security is not part of their organisation’s culture, but the organisation’s en­
vironment supports IT security.
In the technological category, three of the organisations had a discrepancy of three or
more.
In two of the cases, the manager highlights more subjects than the security­
responsible in their organisation, and in one organisation the opposite is the case. In
the first organisation, the security­responsible highlights that they prioritise access rights
and that physical threats are a challenge. The manager mentions their digital system as
a challenge and that keeping them updated will improve security. Additionally, technical
measures and core operations are top priority according to the manager while backup is
also a priority to keep operations running. The security­responsible in the second organ­
isation emphasises their digital systems as a challenge, their operation as a top priority,
and that they need to protect the data they store. The same organisation’s manager
agrees that their operation is a top priority in addition to authentication being an improve­
ment and an important part of their IT security. Also, physical threats, compromised third
parties, and hacked equipment are emphasised by the manager. Lastly, the third organi­
sation’s manager just emphasises that their digital systems are a challenge and technical
audits enhance IT security. Their security­responsible also mentions technical audits as
improving IT security in addition to mentioning how using digital policies can improve IT
security. Their network is a priority while also being a challenge according to the security­
responsible who also emphasises the challenge of outsourcing their infrastructure.
Role­centric comparison
The security­responsibles are generally confident in their organisations’ IT security with
only one arguing against it. The managers tell a similar story, though none argued against
it. Regarding human subjects, the security­responsibles are mostly positive. If merging
compliance and behaviour, three out of four are positive about the employees in their or­
ganisation. Also, regarding their knowledge and motivation, they generally agree on being
positive. The managers agree on having motivated employees with good behaviour. Re­
garding the employees’ knowledge and skills, they are predominantly negative. Looking
at the organisational subjects, the informants agree that their organisations’ environment
supports their IT security. Conversely, the majority of the managers find the culture to
support their IT security whereas all but one of the security­responsibles find that to be
true. Regarding proficiency for communicating, the two groups mostly agree with the oth­
ers in their group while not agreeing with the other group. The security­responsibles want
to be more proficient, and two of them emphasise proficiency in the technical area. All
managers agree that other managers and the security­responsible they communicate with
are sufficiently proficient. There are mixed opinions among the security­responsibles.
How many subjects each informant highlights in every HOT category is compared to the
average number of subjects that the informant highlights. This is done to examine which
categories the informants find most or least important. In the human category, three of the
security­responsibles emphasise a larger number of subjects ­ mostly concerning chal­
lenges to their organisation, and what they prioritise. When examining what subjects are
mentioned, the employee’s behaviour stuck out as something they all focused on. In
contrast, just one manager focuses on human subjects and primarily highlights how they
challenge IT security. One security­responsible focus on organisational subjects in par­
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
49
==PAGE:60==
ticular how they can improve IT security. In the remainder of the cases, the informants in
each of the roles are divided with half of them having a focus on the category in question
and the other half not having a focus on it.
This concludes the analysis of the interviews using a thematic analysis and comparing
their opinions. Notable takeaways from the comparisons are
• all informants perceive IT security as important to their organisations,
• most of the informants are satisfied with their organisation’s IT security level,
• the managers and the security­responsibles differ in their perception of whether they
want to be more proficient in communicating IT security,
• likewise, they differ in whether they perceive their organisations’ culture as support­
ing their IT security,
• the security­responsibles focus more on human subjects than other subjects and
the opposite is true for the managers, though
• all informants emphasise that awareness campaigns are important and improve
their IT security.
In the next sections, the quantitative data collection is elaborated and an analysis of its
data is presented.
3.3
The course of the questionnaire
After presenting the qualitative data collection and analysis, the quantitative data collec­
tion and analysis are presented. The quantitative analysis is used in the thesis to find
trends in a larger data set which can support the findings of the qualitative analysis. The
quantitative data is collected using an online questionnaire where respondents are asked
a series of questions about their perception of their organisation’s IT security. In the fol­
lowing, there is a presentation of (a) the questionnaire and its questions, (b) the process
of recruiting people, (c) the respondents who participated, and (d) how the qualitative
analysis is conducted.
3.3.1
The structure
The questionnaire is split into four pages: (1) an introduction to the thesis, (2) background
questions, (3) questions about the organisation’s IT security level, and (4) a page saying
thank you for participating. It contains 14 mandatory questions and a text field for entering
comments. The first six questions are about the respondent, their sex, age, position, etc.
The remaining eight questions are about how the respondents perceive their organisa­
tion’s IT security, e.g. the level, challenges and solutions, and proficiency in communi­
cating IT security. While all background questions are of the type multiple­choice, where
one can only select one answer, the questions about the perception of IT security are
a mix of multiple­choice and multiple­answer questions, where one can select multiple
answers. Using multiple­answer questions, a respondent can quickly select the subjects
they perceive as important, challenging, etc. If a respondent has anything to add after
answering the questions, they can enter it in the comment field. The entire questionnaire
can be found in Appendix E.
One thing should be noted about the 13th question. It was meant to ask in what area the
respondent would like to be more proficient in communicating if the respondent wished to
be more proficient. Unfortunately, the respondents could not select an option stating they
50
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:61==
were satisfied with their current skills. Instead, the question examines in what area the
respondents would like to be more proficient if they had to choose.
In questions eight, nine, eleven, and fourteen, the respondents are asked to assess four
different situations, respectively
1. What is a core part of IT security in your organisation?
2. What challenges your organisation’s IT security?
3. What can solve challenges to your organisation’s IT security?
4. What is under­prioritised in your organisation?
For each situation, they could choose 10 or 11 areas in addition to selecting none of the
above or other where they then had to specify what that would be. In the first, third, and
fourth questions, the areas were
1. Organisational culture
2. Education and training
3. Employees’ general behaviour
4. Employees’ knowledge, awareness, and skills
5. Policymaking
6. Compliance with policies
7. Risk management
8. Management participation
9. Knowledge­sharing within your organisation
10. Environment (e.g. enough time, tools available)
The second question included the above and an additional area Unwillingness to learn
or train. Some of the areas were rephrased to reflect the question’s goal of investigating
challenges, e.g. the option Education and training was changed to Lack of education and
training.
3.3.2
Recruiting
The tool used to set up the questionnaire is SurveyXact made by Rambøll.1 It includes
several ways for distribution and the link option was chosen. It enabled an easy approach
where a link to fill out the questionnaire could, e.g. be attached to an email or integrated
into a social media post.
In the end, the respondents were recruited through the use of the following channels:
• Own network: an invitation was sent to three people in my network who could have
good connections to the management in the organisation they are employed.
• the collaborating company: the collaborating company reached out to contacts in
the organisations they have as their customers.
• Social media: a link to the questionnaire has been shared in several posts on LinkedIn.2
1rambollxact.com/surveyxact
2linkedin.com/
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
51
==PAGE:62==
• Research and entrepreneurial entities: six entities, part of three different universi­
ties, were asked to invite organisations in their network to fill out the questionnaire.
The universities were spread out across three of the five regions in Denmark.
• Associations and networks: 16 associations and networks were asked to invite their
members to participate in the thesis. Nine of them are associations whose members
are organisations based in the same geographic area. Two of the 16 are networks
for managers and board members. The remaining five are sector associations.
• Individual organisations: An invitation to fill out the questionnaire was sent to mem­
bers of management and security­responsibles from 20 organisations. Most of them
are members of the associations and networks mentioned above and thus represent
a wide range of sectors and have a wide geographic spread.
Due to the nature of how the questionnaire was distributed, it is not possible to know
which respondents correspond to which channels. The majority of the research and en­
trepreneurial entities, associations, and networks that responded did not want to forward
the invitation to their members ­ so it is expected that the majority of the respondents were
recruited through other channels.
One inclusion criteria was defined:
• A respondent is only included if they answered at least one of the 8 eight questions
about IT security
If a respondent passes this criterion, their answers will be part of the descriptive analysis.
3.3.3
Respondents
In total, 47 individuals interacted with the questionnaire. Two groups of respondents did
not pass the inclusion criteria and were thus excluded: individuals who (a) did not fill out
any information (5 people) and (b) only filled out the background information (5 people).
The answers of the remaining 37 respondents are part of the analysis below, and their
characteristics can be seen in Table 3.4.
3.3.4
Descriptive analysis
After having removed incomplete entries, the descriptive analysis can begin. The respon­
dents are divided into three groups, security­responsibles, managers, and others. The
former and latter group corresponds to a role option in the questionnaire ­ Responsible
for IT security and Other, respectively ­ whereas the managers are the remaining respon­
dents who have selected any of the following roles:
• CEO
• CFO
• COO
• CMO
• CTO
• CIO
• CRM
• Member of the board
• President
52
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:63==
Item
Variable
Frequency
Sex
Male
26
Female
11
Unknown
0
Age
< 20
0
20­29
6
30­39
7
40­49
12
50­59
8
60­69
4
> 69
0
Tenure in organisation
< 1 year
5
1­5 years
17
6­10 years
7
11­15 years
3
> 15 years
5
Tenure in position
< 1 year
4
1­5 years
13
6­10 years
9
11­15 years
4
> 15 years
7
Position
Responsible for IT security*
11
CEO
8
CFO
1
COO
2
CMO
1
CTO
1
CIO
0
CRM
0
Member of board
1
President
0
Vice president
3
Other
9
Size of organisation
1­9 employees
7
10­99 employees
12
100­249 employees
9
250­999 employees
3
> 1000 employees
6
Table 3.4: The characteristics of the respondents. Respondents who did not fill out any
information or only filled out the background information are not included in the list. * the
respondents were asked to select this option if they were responsible for their organisa­
tion’s IT security.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
53
==PAGE:64==
11
17
9
Security­responsibles
Managers
Others
Figure 3.2: How the respondents are distributed in the groups: security­responsibles,
managers, and others according to Section 3.3.4. Data can be seen in Table 3.4.
• Vice President
CRM should have been CCO and could thus have caused some confusion. Luckily no
one selected the option, and all members of the group managers are expected to be
part of top management. They have not supplied information about where they work,
thus the data cannot be compared using an organisation­centric approach similar to the
qualitative analysis. Instead, a role­centric approach is used to compare the security­
responsibles’ and the managers’ answers. In addition, the entire data set, including the
others, is examined to see the general distribution of answers for each question.
The data is primarily presented in bar graphs, as most of the variables use a nominal scale.
Guided by the illustrated data, the frequencies of the variables are examined to highlight
trends. The data behind the graphs can be found in Appendix H, and the entire data set
can be found in Appendix K. In Chapter 4, the results of the analysis are discussed and
compared to the findings of the qualitative analysis.
3.4
Comparing respondents’ perceptions
To support the findings of the qualitative analysis, a quantitative analysis is conducted. It
is a descriptive analysis of the respondents’ perceptions, and the main focus is to describe
trends and exceptions.
The respondents are divided into three groups, as described above. How they are dis­
tributed in the groups can be seen in Figure 3.2. The following will be a mix of analysing all
the respondents’ answers and comparing the security­responsibles’ and managers’ an­
swers. It is split into three parts: (1) how do the respondents perceive their organisations’
IT security in general, (2) how important do they find different areas of IT security, and (3)
how do they perceive their proficiency in communicating IT security? Lastly, interesting
findings are highlighted, to sum up the analysis.
3.4.1
How do the respondents perceive their organisations’ IT security
Before diving into the respondents’ perception of specific areas of IT security, their overall
perception of IT security is analysed. This includes how they perceive
• the importance of IT security to their organisations, and
• their organisations’ overall IT security level
Regarding how important the respondents perceive IT security, Figure 3.3 shows a distri­
bution of their answers. An overwhelming majority of the respondents perceive IT security
as being very important. Only two respondents perceive it as being somewhat important
or less.
54
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:65==
Irrelevant
Not
important
Somewhat
important
Important
Very
important
0
10
20
30
Number of times selected
How important is IT security to your organisation?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Other
Figure 3.3: Distribution of the respondents’ answers when asked: How important is IT
security to your organisation? Data for the graph can be found in Appendix H.
Very low
Low
Medium
High
Very high
0
5
10
15
Number of times selected
What is your organisation’s overall security level?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Other
Figure 3.4: Distribution of the respondents’ answers when asked: What is your organisa­
tion’s overall security level? Data for the graph can be found in Appendix H.
When the respondents are asked what their organisations’ IT security level is, their re­
sponses are more evenly distributed. Figure 3.4 shows a distribution of their answers.
In general, they perceive their organisations’ level between medium and high. The man­
agers think more highly of their IT security level than security­responsibles. Looking at
Figure 3.5, it can be seen that the managers tend to think of their organisation’s IT secu­
rity level as high while security­responsibles lean more towards a medium level though
several find it to be high and very high.
3.4.2
How important are the different IT security areas?
In the above, it has been established that the respondents perceive IT security as impor­
tant to their organisation. The next step is to examine what areas the respondents find
most important and in what situations. An overview of the four situations and eleven areas
can be found in Section 3.3.1. To reduce cluttering in the diagrams and explanations, the
areas are shortened and referred to as
1. Culture
2. (Lack of) Training
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
55
==PAGE:66==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Security­
responsible
Manager
How often each answer is selected (%)
What is your organisation’s overall security level?
Very low
Low
Medium
High
Very high
Figure 3.5: Distribution of the security­responsibles’ and the managers’ answers when
asked: What is your organisation’s overall security level? Data for the graph can be
found in Appendix H.
3. Behaviour
4. Awareness
5. (Lack of) Policymaking
6. (Lack of) Compliance
7. (Lack of) Risk management
8. Management participation
9. (Lack of) Knowledge­sharing
10. Environment
11. (Unwillingness to learn)
The texts in the parenthesis are used when examining challenges. Each situation is ex­
amined individually below.
What is a core part of IT security in your organisation?
The respondents perceive many of the areas as a core part of their organisations. Ex­
cept for environment, all of the areas have been selected by more than one out of three
respondents. Four areas stand out as being the choice of many (approximately 60­75%),
namely training, awareness, risk management, and knowledge­sharing. One respondent
included physical security as a core part of their IT security. The distribution of answers
can be seen in Figure 3.6.
The security­responsibles and the managers focus on many of the same areas. It can
be seen when looking at the distribution of their answers in Figure 3.7. Two notable ar­
eas are compliance and environment. The former is part of the top four most selected
areas for the security­responsibles and not the managers. Conversely, the latter is part
of the top four most selected areas for the managers and not the security­responsibles.
Comparing the number of selected areas, the security­responsibles selected more areas
per person than the managers. On average they selected between six and seven areas
whereas the managers selected about five. The largest difference is in the area compli­
ance. Here about three in four security­responsibles perceive it as a core part of their
IT security compared to less than one in three managers. The area culture also sees
a large difference as 64% of security­responsibles selected this area compared to 41%
of managers. Three areas, training, awareness, and risk management, are among the
areas both roles selected most frequently.
56
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:67==
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk
management
Management
participation
Knowledge­
sharing
Environment
Other
None of the
above
0
10
20
30
Number of times selected
Which of the following domains are a core part of IT security in your organisation?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Other
Figure 3.6: Distribution of the respondents’ answers when asked: Which of the following
domains are a core part of IT security in your organisation? Data for the graph can be
found in Appendix H.
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk
management
Management
participation
Knowledge­
sharing
Environment
Other
None of the
above
0
20
40
60
80
Selection frequency (%)
Which of the following domains are a core part of IT security in your organisation?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Figure 3.7: Distribution of the security­responsibles’ and the managers’ answers when
asked: Which of the following domains are a core part of IT security in your organisation?
Data for the graph can be found in Appendix H.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
57
==PAGE:68==
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk
management
Management
participation
Knowledge­
sharing
Environment
Unwillingness
to learn
Other
None of the
above
0
5
10
Number of times selected
Which of the following domains are challenging your organisation’s IT security?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Other
Figure 3.8: Distribution of the respondents’ answers when asked: Which of the following
domains are challenging your organisation’s IT security? Data for the graph can be found
in Appendix H.
What challenges your organisation’s IT security?
Having established what areas are a core part of their organisations’ IT security, it is
time to look at what challenges they are facing. A distribution of their answers can be
seen in Figure 3.8. The first thing to note is that the respondents have selected a lot
fewer areas than in the previous questions ­ two areas for every five areas in the above.
Also, their focus has changed, and the three biggest challenges they see are culture,
behaviour, and awareness. The areas which are perceived as a challenge by the least
amount of respondents are unwillingness to learn, lack of policymaking, and management
participation. Though a smaller fraction, one in six respondent did not find any of the areas
to be a challenge to their organisation.
Once again, the areas are distributed relatively equally, cf. Figure 3.9. Two notable areas
are lack of knowledge­sharing and unwillingness to learn. The security­responsible often
perceive the former as a challenge whereas the managers did not select it. While not
frequently perceived as a challenge, the unwillingness to learn is selected several times
by the managers. Conversely, the security­responsible never selects it. Looking at how
often the areas were selected there are some differences. Even though respondents of
both roles focus on culture and behaviour as a challenge, the fraction of how many in
each group have selected the area varies greatly. The former is mentioned by about two
in three security­responsibles compared to about one in four managers, and while close to
half of the security­responsibles have selected the latter about a quarter of the managers
selected it.
What can solve challenges to your organisation’s IT security?
Figure 3.10 presents a distribution of what areas the respondents perceive as a solution to
challenges their organisations’ IT security are facing. No area is perceived as a solution
by the majority of the respondents. Those that are closest are the four areas: culture,
training, risk management, and management participation. They have been selected by
more than one in four respondents. The areas selected as solutions by the fewest re­
spondents (less than one in seven) are policymaking and compliance. One respondent
58
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:69==
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk
management
Management
participation
Knowledge­
sharing
Environment
Unwillingness
to learn
Other
None of the
above
0
20
40
60
Selection frequency (%)
Which of the following domains are challenging your organisation’s IT security?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Figure 3.9: Distribution of the security­responsibles’ and the managers’ answers when
asked: Which of the following domains are challenging your organisation’s IT security?
Data for the graph can be found in Appendix H.
suggested an investment in better security tools and controls as a solution.
The areas which the respondents of both roles focus on are close to identical. The biggest
difference is that more security­responsibles have focus on training compared to the man­
agers. The distribution of their answer can be seen in Figure 3.11. History repeats it­
self when comparing how often security­responsibles and managers select culture even
though they both have it as their most or second most frequently selected answer. About
two in three security­responsibles perceive this as a solution whereas three in ten man­
agers perceive that as the case. Another notable thing to mention is that one in ten
managers do not perceive any of the areas as a solution to their IT security. All security­
responsibles selected at least one of the areas as a solution.
What is under­prioritised in your organisation?
The respondents do not agree on a particular area being under­prioritised or not being
under­prioritised in their organisations. The most frequently selected is risk management
and the least selected is behaviour. Two other areas are suggested ­ both by security­
responsibles. These are security budget and technical maturity. The distribution can be
seen in Figure 3.12.
Regarding under­prioritised areas, the managers have selected more areas than the
security­responsible ones.
On average they selected about three areas whereas the
security­responsible selected about two. Also, the distribution of the selected answers
varies a lot between the two groups of respondents. It can be seen in Figure 3.13. Com­
paring the areas they most frequently selected, they share risk management and manage­
ment participation. In addition, the managers focus on training which none of the security­
responsibles perceive as under­prioritised. On the other hand, security­responsibles fo­
cus on compliance as an under­prioritised area.
3.4.3
How do they perceive their proficiency in communicating IT security
The last topic to examine is the respondents’ perception of their communication ­ more
specifically how they perceive their proficiency in communicating. It will be an examination
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
59
==PAGE:70==
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk
management
Management
participation
Knowledge­
sharing
Environment
Other
None of the
above
0
5
10
Number of times selected
Which domains can solve challenges to your organisation’s IT security?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Other
Figure 3.10: Distribution of the respondents’ answers when asked: Which domains can
solve challenges to your organisation’s IT security? Data for the graph can be found in
Appendix H.
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk
management
Management
participation
Knowledge­
sharing
Environment
Other
None of the
above
0
20
40
60
Selection frequency (%)
Which domains can solve challenges to your organisation’s IT security?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Figure 3.11: Distribution of the security­responsibles’ and the managers’ answers when
asked: Which domains can solve challenges to your organisation’s IT security? Data for
the graph can be found in Appendix H.
60
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:71==
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk
management
Management
participation
Knowledge­
sharing
Environment
Other
None of the
above
0
5
10
Number of times selected
Which of the following domains (if any) is under­prioritised in your organisation?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Other
Figure 3.12: Distribution of the respondents’ answers when asked: Which of the following
domains (if any) is under­prioritised in your organisation? Data for the graph can be found
in Appendix H.
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk
management
Management
participation
Knowledge­
sharing
Environment
Other
None of the
above
0
20
40
Selection frequency (%)
Which of the following domains (if any) is under­prioritised in your organisation?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Figure 3.13: Distribution of the security­responsibles’ and the managers’ answers when
asked: Which of the following domains (if any) is under­prioritised in your organisation?
Data for the graph can be found in Appendix H.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
61
==PAGE:72==
Not
equipped
Somewhat
equipped
Equipped
Well­
equipped
Perfectly
equipped
0
5
10
15
Number of times selected
How well­equipped are you to communicate IT security?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Other
Figure 3.14: Distribution of the respondents’ answers when asked: How well­equipped
are you to communicate IT security? Data for the graph can be found in Appendix H.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Security­
responsible
Manager
How often each answer is selected (%)
How well­equipped are you to communicate IT security?
Not equipped
Somewhat equipped
Equipped
Well­equipped
Perfectly equipped
Figure 3.15: Distribution of the security­responsibles’ and the managers’ answers when
asked: How well­equipped are you to communicate IT security? Data for the graph can
be found in Appendix H.
of how well­equipped they perceived themselves as and what areas they want to be more
proficient in if they had to choose.
The respondents’ perception of their skill level can be seen in Figure 3.14. Their level
seems to be good as two in three respondents see themselves as being well­equipped
or perfectly equipped for communicating IT security. This ratio is higher among security­
responsibles than that of managers. As can be seen in Figure 3.15, the security­responsibles
tend to perceive themselves as well­equipped to perfectly equipped whereas the man­
agers generally see themselves as well­equipped leaning more towards equipped.
Regarding proficiency in areas within communication, the respondents do not seem to
favour one area in particular. Distributions of their answers can be seen in Figure 3.16
and 3.17. Comparing the roles, their distributions are also similar. Managers mostly
want increased proficiency in the organisational and human areas whereas the security­
responsibles perceive the organisational and human areas as more desirable.
62
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:73==
Technical
Organisational
Human
Managerial
5
10
Number of times selected
In what area of IT security would you like to be more proficient in communicating?
Security­responsibles
Managers
Other
Figure 3.16: Distribution of the respondents’ answers when asked: In what area of IT
security would you like to be more proficient in communicating? Data for the graph can
be found in Appendix H.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Security­
responsible
Manager
How often each answer is selected (%)
In what area of IT security would you like to be more proficient in communicating?
Technical
Organisational
Human
Managerial
Figure 3.17: Distribution of the security­responsibles’ and the managers’ answers when
asked: In what area of IT security would you like to be more proficient in communicating?
Data for the graph can be found in Appendix H.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
63
==PAGE:74==
3.4.4
Key takeaways from the responses
In several of the responses, the two roles largely agree. They perceive
• IT security as important, their organisations’ IT security level relatively high, and
themselves as well­equipped to communicate IT security,
• employees’ knowledge and awareness as a core part of their IT security while it is
also challenging their organisation,
• organisational culture both as a challenge and a solution to their IT security, and
• risk management as a core part of their organisation, a solution to their challenges,
and as something that is under­prioritised.
Regarding the differences in their perceptions,
• more security­responsibles than managers refer to organisational culture as a core
part of their organisation, a challenge, and a solution ­ however they both perceive
it as an important,
• the security­responsibles perceive lack of knowledge­sharing as a challenge, and
the managers do not,
• the managers perceive education and training as under­prioritised, and the security­
responsibles do not,
• the security­responsibles focus on compliance with policies as an under­prioritised
area, and the managers do not.
The security­responsibles and the managers found risk management and organisational
culture to be the most important IT security areas, i.e. they selected the two areas the
most frequently. This can be seen in Table 3.5. Risk management is highlighted as a core
part of IT security, a solution to challenges, and as under­prioritised. Organisation culture
is highlighted as a challenge, a solution, and as under­prioritised.
64
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:75==
IT security area
Role
Situation
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Compliance
Risk management
Management participation
Knowledge­sharing
Security­responsibles
a core part
3
3
3
a challenge
3
2
1
a solution
3
2
2
2
under­prioritised
3
2
2
Managers
a core part
2
3
2
a challenge
3
3
3
a solution
2
3
2
under­prioritised
1
2
3
1
Total
12
9
5
9
3
15
7
1
Table 3.5: The table shows which IT security areas the security­responsibles and man­
agers most frequently selected. The four situations refer to questions eight, nine, eleven,
and fourteen and the areas are the questions’ answer options. An elaboration of situa­
tions and areas can be found in Section 3.3.1 and 3.4.2. Also, some areas are omitted
as they were never selected most frequently.
An area selected most frequently by a group is given three points, an area selected
second­most frequently is given two points, and an area selected third­most frequently
is given one point. If several areas are selected an equal number of times, they share the
place. This can result in no second­most or third­most frequently selected area, or that
more than three areas are highlighted.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
65
==PAGE:76==
66
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:77==
4
A discussion of the findings and
employed methods
The two main contributions of the thesis have been presented in Chapter 2 and 3. Namely,
a review of the literature to examine what areas of cybersecurity are identified as important
in contemporary research and two analyses of individuals’ perceptions of their organisa­
tions’ IT security. This chapter comprises (a) a discussion of the findings of the previous
chapters while addressing the research question, (b) a discussion of the employed method
and limitations, and (c) suggestions for future work.
4.1
Addressing the problem using the findings
The research question is addressed by answering two questions:
• What are security­responsibles’ and their managers’ perceptions of IT security in
and related communication within their organisations?
• How do their perceptions differ?
Regarding their perceptions of IT security, it is both what areas they find important and
how they perceive their organisations’ performance within each of the IT security areas.
The discussion is structured in three parts: First, the reviewed literature is compared to the
participants’ perceptions of what subjects are important; After that, the informants’ percep­
tions of their organisations’ security level are compared to factors found by researchers
to see if they follow a similar pattern; Then, the participants’ perceptions are compared to
examine similarities and differences in managers’ and security­responsibles’ perceptions.
After each of the discussion parts, a table and/or figure is presented to give an overview
of the findings. In addition, the discussions are summed up in a fourth section to see if
any general advice can be given.
4.1.1
What do they perceive as important?
All the informants agree that the employee’s awareness is important. They all mention
how they use awareness training programs to improve their employees’ awareness of
IT security. The same picture can be seen in the literature reviewed. In fact, the oldest
(1998) and the newest (2022) studies focus on IT security awareness and argue that it is
necessary to raise awareness among employees to improve an organisation’s IT security
level and reduce the risk of IT security attacks [67, 89]. Siponen and Kajava go as far
as to say that: ”Any attempt to reach an adequate level of security must necessarily
build on IT security awareness” [67][p.5]. The respondents overwhelmingly agree that
the employee’s knowledge, awareness, and skills are a core part of their organisation’s
IT security. About three out of four have this perception.
Today, there are many ways of conducting awareness campaigns and training. Sharif and
Ameen [80] have reviewed security awareness approaches in the literature and found that
the use of gamification in training yields a positive result. Another way of enhancing the
outcome of awareness training is to change the environment. Instead of the employee
sitting behind a computer screen, they should participate in a physical activity. Rege
et al. [79] study how a group activity can improve awareness. Along the same lines
is an activity employed in one of the informants’ organisations: we have invited one to
speak about IT security also uh so it is not just something they read or do (#7, 83­84).
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
67
==PAGE:78==
Here they try to move the employees away from their usual environment to give them a
different experience of learning. Education and training are something the respondents
find very important as about two out of three of them state that this is a core part of
their organisation. In addition, about one out of three respondent perceive awareness
campaigns as a solution to the challenges their IT security faces.
One may ask, why is it so important to care about the employee? Informants argue that
they find the employee to be the point of entry (#1, #4, #7, #8). They also perceive them
as the weakest link and in combination this poses a great threat to an organisation. The
literature supports the informants’ point of view as many studies refer to humans as the
weakest link [60, 63, 65, 66, 70, 82, 85]. Also, more than one­third of the respondents’
answers concerning challenges to their organisations fall into the human area. Ultimately,
what the employee does is what is most important. This is recognised by the informants
where half of them state that their employees’ behaviour is a priority to their organisations.
One way to improve their behaviour is through the use of training [84]. As written above,
the informants agree with the use of awareness training. However, #6 argues that the
employee’s behaviour should be shaped by policies and rules. In addition, several other
informants emphasise policies and processes as important (#2, #4, and #7). Humaidi
and Alghazo [87] agree that policies can improve the employee’s behaviour, but assess
awareness programs as equally important.
Regardless of the focus on policies, an organisation’s IT security benefits if its manage­
ment is actively involved [85]. This is underlined by the respondents’ answers as almost
one­third of them perceive management participation as a solution to their challenges.
They should participate in the process of developing security measures and maintain­
ing them. One reason is that the employee takes cues from management’s actions [87].
When asked about what contributes positively to their organisations’ IT security, both #1
and #8 highlight management’s support. The IT security could be improved even more if
an employee had the sole responsibility of a CISO (#7 and #8). One thing management
can do to enhance security is to convey their organisation’s values. If management has
regular interactions with the employee, they can increase the employee’s compliance by
reinforcing the organisation’s values [85]. Several of the informants talk about how they
do this. #5 tries to give other employees a sense of ownership and responsibility by ex­
plaining the consequences of not being aware. In another organisation, the management
has agreed to be transparent about what incidents have happened and use this in their
training to make the employee aware of real threats (#3). This fear of consequences can
be used for the better. Humaidi and Alghazo [87] encourage management to raise fear
of consequences to improve employee behaviour and while not against it, Chongrui et al.
[66] suggest that managers take great care when doing it. Several informants talk about
how this fear of consequences encourages them to take IT security seriously (#1, #4, #5,
#8). Even in one organisation, other organisations’ IT security level influences employ­
ees’ awareness: my colleagues uh looks at others that maybe are not at the IT security
level we are (#3, 256­257).
Communication is critical in all organisations, and thus it is an issue if it is missing or chan­
nels are poorly established. This issue is getting more potent due to IT security becoming
increasingly complex [69]. Aoyama et al. [71] studied an organisation’s resilience using a
team­based incident activity. They found that employees who are left out of the informa­
tion loop will get repulsive feelings for managers. It is important to have a contingency plan
in case of an incident. #2 mentions how their plan is not yet satisfying and emphasises
that part of the reason is that communication channels are not fully set up. In another
organisation, the contingency plan is set up, and they prioritise reviewing it: we have run
68
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:79==
some contingency plan exercises to set up a scenario and then try going through it and
talk about it (#7, 120­122). This is one way to test an organisation’s defences, and in
essence what Aoyama et al.’s [71] study is about. Several standards have been made to
support organisations in the process of developing IT security [37, 94]. These can also be
used to assess the maturity of an organisation’s IT security. Teodoro et al. [73] has devel­
oped a model based on the NIST Cybersecurity Framework to help organisations review
their performance. Using this model, an organisation can also compare their performance
to a reference level and evaluate how well they comply with the standard or framework
on which the model is based. Not only does the literature find it important, but so do the
informants, as the majority of them highlight how they have assessed the maturity of their
IT security (#2, #3, #4, #5, and #7). However, this is no coincidence as the collaborating
company, which is responsible for recruiting them, helps their clients conduct a maturity
assessment of their IT security. Thus, all the informants’ organisations have conducted
such an assessment.
Though not stating it explicitly, the informants seem to perceive risk management as im­
portant as the majority of them talk about how challenges and risks should be assessed
and a balanced, pragmatic approach employed (#3, #4, #5, #6, #7, #8). In addition, this
is across the board among the most highlighted subjects of the respondents, but their
opinions are divided. About two in three perceive it as a core part of their IT security while
about one in three perceive it as an under­prioritised area in their organisation. National
and international entities perceive it as important and several standards have been de­
veloped [73]. As mentioned above, models are developed, based on standards, to help
an organisation assess their performance. Mahopo et al. [72] even did an entire study on
risk­based IT security to extend the work on standards.
Organisational culture is an area where the informants and respondents do not agree on
its importance. Other than when asked about how they would rate their organisations’
culture, the informants do not mention it. They never highlight it as a priority or a chal­
lenge. On the other hand, about one in three respondents perceive it as a challenge to
their IT security and as a solution to their IT security challenges. One in five respondents
perceive it as under­prioritised. Comparing that to how many informants perceive their
organisations’ culture as lacking, the roles are switched. A larger fraction of informants
perceive it as lacking, namely three out of the eight (#1, #7, and #8). The literature is
not indifferent about the culture in an organisation. Branley­Bell et al. [83] did an entire
study on culture in healthcare organisations as they perceive it as a key to improving IT
security. Another paper also studies organisational culture and is motivated by organisa­
tions’ limited investments into their culture even though IT security ”cannot be confined to
a technical issue alone” [82][p. 1]. Additional studies on culture are mentioned as part of
the next discussion in Section 4.1.2.
When comparing the number of subjects each informant has highlighted in the three HOT
categories, they are distributed almost equally, cf. Table 3.3. An interesting aspect is,
that the informants were never asked directly about their perception of technical subjects.
Nonetheless, these subjects are frequently mentioned as something that would improve
IT security, be a challenge to the informants’ organisations, and be a priority of their organ­
isations. One reason could be that technological subjects have previously been perceived
as important: a few years ago perimeter security was uh a very big thing right and one had
a firewall and then one had to ensure to keep people out (#1, 96­68). In contemporary
research it has also been examined, e.g. in subjects like physical security [70, 76, 78, 82,
86], intrusion detection [76, 84, 86], and penetration testing [80, 81, 84]. However, it has
been much less of a focus in reviewed literature and is thus not elaborated in Section 2.3
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
69
==PAGE:80==
Informants
Respondents
The literature
Awareness
A challenge (#2, #8),
A priority (#2, #4, #8)
Core part (75%)
Essential [67, 82, 80],
Important [83, 58, 84,
87, 78, 68, 70]
Raise awareness
Inviting speakers (#7),
Training (#1, #2, #3,
#4, #5, #6, #7, #8)
Core part (65%), solu­
tion (32%)
Important [67, 84, 58],
Essential [87, 82, 80,
79]
The employee’s behaviour
Point of entry (#1, #4,
#7, #8)
A challenge (27%)
Weakest link [60, 63,
65, 66, 70, 82, 85]
Risk management
Important (#2, #4, #7)
Core part (68%), so­
lution (30%),
under­
prioritised (24%)
Important [72, 74], Es­
sential [58, 73]
Management
support
Important (#1, #7, #8)
Solution
(30%),
under­prioritised
(30%)
Important [67, 83, 85,
88, 87]
Organisational
culture
Limited attention
Challenge (32%), so­
lution (35%),
under­
prioritised (22%)
Important [67, 83, 85,
58, 84, 68, 88]
Table 4.1: An overview of the IT security topics which the informants find important and
how the respondents’ answers and the literature support it. The values in the third column
have been rounded off.
and 2.4. The respondents were not asked about technical subjects, and thus only a few
of them mentioned it. This trend could stem from a respondent having to put significantly
more effort into ”selecting” a technical subject compared to an informant who could men­
tion it just as easily as other subjects. Thus, it cannot be assumed that respondents would
not select technical subjects if they were presented alongside human and organisational
subjects.
In sum, the informants find a variety of different subjects important, all of which are part
of the reviewed literature. Most of them are also highlighted by the respondents and a
few of the subjects highlighted by the respondents were not found to be as important by
the informants. The major differences are (1) the informants pay more attention to tech­
nological subjects than researchers do, and (2) researchers and respondents focus more
on domains in the organisational category (e.g. security management and governance
and culture) than they do. These differences can stem from many scenarios, e.g. the
participants might have experienced a security breach, a news media focus on one do­
main being particularly vulnerable, or a partner might suggest that they prioritise specific
security measures. An overview of the findings can be seen in Table 4.1. Besides describ­
ing domains, the reviewed literature also examines what factors influence what domains.
This will be part of the next discussion where research findings will be compared to how
the informants perceive their organisation’s IT security level.
4.1.2
How do informants perceive their organisations’ IT security level?
Researchers have found that the domains of IT security are interconnected and influence
each other, cf. Section 2.4. The informants have not been asked whether they see the
same correlations, but, they were asked to describe their organisations’ IT security level,
i.e. their perception of their IT security level. These perceptions are compared to literature
70
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:81==
to see if they tell a similar story.
The employee’s awareness is one of the most highlighted topics ­ especially in the re­
viewed literature. Researchers describe it as influencing their behaviour [66, 67, 79, 82,
84, 87]. Looking, at the perception of the informants, it is almost identical. #1 and #2 find
that their employees lack awareness and have poor behaviour. A reason for this can be,
that some of their employees do not use IT as much (#2). On the other hand, most of
the informants who perceive the employees as being alert also perceive them as having
good behaviour. (#4, #5, #7, and #8).
Looking at motivation, it is different. The literature describes it as having an influence on
the employee’s general behaviour and policy compliance [61, 67, 82, 85, 88], and almost
all informants describe their employees as being motivated. The result is, that just half
of the informants’ perceptions align with what literature describes (#3, #4, #5, #6). When
asked whether the employee is motivated to work with IT security, #2 answer: those I
talk to yes (#2, 222). This highlights an important point of the thesis: the informants’
perceptions are based on what they see and hear. Thus, they do not always represent
the reality.
The relationship between the employee’s motivation and their organisation’s culture is a
similar case. The former is found to affect the latter in literature [82], but this time five
out of the eight informants perceive their employees’ motivation in the same way as their
organisation’s culture (#2, #4, #5, #6, #7). Conversely, some informants perceive their
employees as motivated but do not find their organisations’ culture to support IT security
(#1 and #3). Cf. the above, there is some discrepancy on this matter between informants’
perceptions and what researchers have found.
Like motivation, researchers find that an organisation’s environment affects its employee’s
behaviour and whether they comply with policies [66, 67, 83]. In general, the informants’
perceptions are congruent with this description, and only two informants perceive their en­
vironment as being constructive while they perceive their employees’ behaviour as being
poor (#1 and #2). Here, the employee has the necessary time to complete tasks, but they
continue to fail tests (#1). The issue might stem from the organisation’s culture, which #1
perceives as not supporting IT security. Several researchers have found that an organi­
sation’s culture influences its employee’s behaviour and compliance with policies [58, 68,
83, 84, 85, 88]. When comparing the informants’ perceptions of culture and behaviour,
four informants have equal perceptions of the two subjects (#1, #4, #5 and #6).
All organisations need managers, and they are responsible for decision­making. Regard­
ing IT security, Onumo et al. [85] and Humaidi and Alghazo [87] among others mention
active leadership and leadership support as an important component. All the informants
refer to management as being supportive when it comes to prioritising IT security. It
should yield a positive influence on education and training [66, 68, 80, 85]. This seems
to be the case as all informants mention their awareness training programs. #1 high­
lights how management is part of the success because they allow middle managers to
let the floor workers spend time on security­related tasks. When management is active,
it should also influence their organisation’s culture positively [66, 83, 85, 87]. Here, the
informants paint a different picture, as three of them do not perceive IT security as part of
their organisations’ culture (#1, #7, and #8).
An overview of the discussion can be seen in Figure 4.1 and Table 4.2. In many cases,
a discrepancy is found in an informant’s perception of the relationship between two do­
mains and how literature describes it. One reason can be, that domains and subjects
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
71
==PAGE:82==
The employe's
Behaviour
Training
Management
Support
Organisational
Culture
Motivation
Environment
The employe's
Awareness
4
4
5
2
4
3
4
4
6
0
5
2
8
0
Figure 4.1: An overview of how many informants agree (green) and disagree (red) with
one domain influencing another.
Agrees
Disagrees
References
Awareness →Behaviour
#1, #2, #4, #5, #7, #8
[66, 67, 79, 82, 84, 87]
Motivation →Behaviour
#3, #4, #5, #6
#1, #2, #7
[61, 67, 82, 85, 88]
Motivation →Culture
#2, #4, #5, #6, #7
#1, #3
[82]
Environment →Behaviour
#3, #4, #6, #7, #8
#1, #2
[66, 67, 83]
Culture →Behaviour
#1, #4, #5, #6,
#2, #3, #7, #8
[58, 68, 83, 84, 85, 88]
Man.Sup. →Culture
#2, #4, #5, #6,
#1, #3, #7, #8
[66, 83, 85, 87]
Man.Sup. →Training
All informants
[66, 68, 80, 85]
Table 4.2: An overview of whether the domains’ interrelationships, as described in the
literature, agrees with how informants perceive their organisations’ IT security level in
said domains. Domain1 →Domain2: Indicates that the Domain1 influence the Domain2.
Man.Sup.: Management Support.
get interpreted by the informant, the researchers, and me. This surely has an influence,
e.g. an informant’s description of their organisation’s environment could be about time,
knowledge­sharing, culture, etc. Another reason can be, that an individual is bound to the
input they get, and they assess a topic sometimes not knowing the full context. In addition,
an individual’s perception is bound to their life­world, cf. Section 1.3. Thus, two individuals
might perceive the same case differently. This is the topic of the next discussion.
4.1.3
How do managers’ and security­responsibles’ perceptions differ?
An important point to note, before discussing differences in perceptions is that organisa­
tions are different and thus have different needs. This was the motivation for conduct­
ing an organisation­centric comparison to follow up on the thematic analysis. However,
limited data was gathered on the respondents’ organisations, and thus this comparison
cannot be done between informants and respondents. Instead, it is going to be a role­
centric comparison of only the respondents’ and the informants’ answers as the reviewed
literature does not compare security­responsibles’ and managers’ perceptions.
Both managers and security­responsibles agree that IT security is important to their or­
ganisations. Regarding the IT security level, there is some discrepancy among the re­
spondents. The majority of managers perceive their level as high or very high whereas
the security­responsibles are split between a medium and a very high level. The IT se­
72
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:83==
curity of the organisations in which the security­responsibles are employed might have
lower IT security levels, but it is also possible that they are more critical and see more
threats, and thus perceive their IT security levels as lower. The latter is a perception
among several of the informants who are security­responsibles: no not satisfied I do not
think I will ever be (#8, 141) and we will never get rid of all the small uh holes those that
uh really want to get in those we cannot uh keep out (#1, 216­218). With that being said,
the informants do generally think highly of their organisations’ IT security level.
Regarding communication, most of the managers among the informants are content with
their skill level whereas the majority of security­responsibles wish to be more proficient
(#3, #5, #8). It seems to contradict the security­responsibles of the respondents’ per­
ceptions as they are generally content with their skills. Nine out of the eleven perceive
themselves as well­equipped or perfectly equipped to communicate IT security. Their
managers are a bit more pessimistic, but still, about two­thirds of them selected the top
two options. Regarding specific areas, the security­responsibles of the informants wish
to be more proficient in the technical area. This opinion cannot directly be compared to
the respondents as they answered what area they would like to be more proficient in if
they had to choose. The security­responsibles of the respondents distributed their an­
swers almost equally not immediately favouring any particular area. That being said both
managers and security­responsibles selected the organisational area most frequently.
The informants have very similar perceptions when it comes to which subjects are im­
portant. The category which stands out the most is the human. The majority of security­
responsibles highlight human subjects the most (three out of four) whereas it is the case
for one manager. This trend is not present among the respondents. A larger fraction of the
managers than security­responsibles perceive behaviour as a core part of their organi­
sations and the opposite is the case for awareness. The security­responsibles among
the informants do not highlight many organisational subjects aside from awareness cam­
paigns improving IT security. This subject is also highlighted by the managers, and half
of them highlight organisational subjects the most. The respondents perceive organisa­
tional subjects as important. In three out of four situations, they most frequently select the
options culture, training, and risk management. The main difference in their answers is
that a larger fraction of the security­responsibles than the managers selected the options
in all the situations exception under­prioritised domains.
To limit the questionnaire’s time frame, the respondents were not asked to rate their or­
ganisations’ performance in all the subjects. Instead, they were to select the subjects
they perceived as a challenge to their organisations. These perceptions are compared
to the informants’ perception of their organisations’ IT security level. Within the organisa­
tions, the informants’ perceptions did not differ much. Looking at each role overall they
hold comparable views. The largest discrepancies are that the managers seem to be less
fond of the employee’s knowledge and skill and happier with their organisations’ culture
than the security­responsibles. Looking at the respondents’ answers, this is somewhat
supported. Both groups perceive culture as a challenge, however, about two­thirds of
the security­responsibles perceive it as a challenge compared to one­quarter of the man­
agers. In addition, about one­third of the security­responsible perceive knowledge­sharing
as a challenge whereas none of the managers perceive it as a challenge.
In sum, security­responsibles and managers among the informants mostly agree when
comparing their perceptions of their organisations’ IT security levels. Regarding the infor­
mants, their largest discrepancies lie in the subjects knowledge and skill and culture.
When looking at the respondents, there is also a discrepancy in how many security­
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
73
==PAGE:84==
Informants
Respondents
Subject
SR
Managers
SR
Managers
Awareness
Positive (2/4)
Positive (2/4)
­
­
Knowledge & Skill
Positive (3/4)
Negative (3/4)
­
­
Knowledge, Awareness, and Skill
­
­
27%
24%
Behaviour & Compliance
Positive (3/4)
Positive (3/4)
45%
24%
Motivation
Positive (3/4)
Positive (3/4)
­
­
Unwillingness to learn or train
­
­
0%
12%
Culture
Negative (2/4)
Positive (3/4)
64%
24%
Environment
Positive (3/4)
Positive (4/4)
27%
6%
Management Support
Positive (4/4)
Positive (4/4)
9%
6%
Table 4.3: A comparison of security­responsibles’ and managers’ perception of their IT
security. Also, the table compares the informants’ perceptions of their IT security levels
and how many respondents perceive the domains as a challenge. The second and third
columns depict what the majority of the informants of each group perceive. Regarding
some subjects, an informant was neutral or did not describe their perception of it leading
to a majority being reached with two out of four informants. The fourth and fifth columns
depict how many respondents of each group perceive the subject to challenge their IT
security. The subjects are divided into how the employees affect IT security (first six
rows) and how organisational domains affect IT security (last three rows).
SR: Security­responsibles.
responsibles and managers highlight culture as a challenge. They both selected this op­
tion most frequently, but relative to their numbers more security­responsibles perceived
this as a challenge to their organisations than managers. This could be the result of
security­responsibles being more aware of challenges as they on average selected three
options compared to 1.7 among the managers. The security­responsibles’ and the man­
agers’ perceptions of their IT security levels are shown in Table 4.3. It also illustrates how
informants’ perceptions compare to how many respondents perceive it as a challenge to
their organisation. In some areas, an informant was neutral or did not describe their per­
ception. In such situations, a majority could be reached with just two out of four informants
backing it.
Now the informants’ answers have been examined concerning what they perceive as im­
portant, how their perceptions of their IT security level align with literature, and what dif­
ferences are found between security­responsibles’ and managers’ perceptions. To round
off the discussion, a set of recommendations are given below.
4.1.4
Recommendations
The following takes into consideration the analyses, the literature review, and the above
discussion. It is divided into two parts: First focusing on how participants perceive IT
security, and then looking at discrepancies in their perceptions. I acknowledge, that the
data samples are small and that the recommendations apply to the participants and their
organisations. A larger study should be conducted before assuming they apply to other
organisations. Nonetheless, the recommendations might apply to others.
There is no one thing all the participants perceive as an issue. Among the informants,
the lowest rated subjects are the employee’s knowledge and skills and their organisa­
74
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:85==
tions’ culture. This is supported by the respondents as the subjects are the first and
third most referenced challenges to their organisations’ IT security, respectively. In their
work, Bashorun et al. [70] and Cayetano et al. [76] also find that the studied organisa­
tions’ employees lack knowledge. While not all the participants perceive these subjects
as challenged, they should all do an internal check to assess the status of these subjects.
This is further underlined by the respondents who suggest focusing on culture and training
to solve challenges their organisations’ IT security is facing.
When assessing differences in perceptions, the respondents mostly agree. Compared
to the managers, more security­responsibles perceive themselves as well­equipped and
perfectly equipped for communicating IT security. This is opposite to the informants where
more security­responsibles than managers want to increase their proficiency in IT secu­
rity to improve communication. The difference between the informants and the respon­
dents can be, that the security­responsibles perceive levels relatively: no one can always
be better (#8, 411) and I am pretty satisfied but I think the reason is [...] I know what
level we came from (#3, 205­207). This is one of the issues about comparing individuals’
perceptions: they are affected by their life­world, i.e. they are formed by what they are
experiencing and have experienced. It makes it nonetheless important.
As for the informants’ organisations, their IT security can be improved in the human cate­
gory and concerning organisational culture. Among the informants and the respondents,
the managers’ and the security­responsibles’ perceptions of culture differ. About one in
four managers perceive it as a challenge or lacking whereas the ratio is two­three in four
among security­responsibles. Since security­responsibles are most frequently aware of
it, they should raise their managers’ awareness of it as an organisation’s IT security can
be improved by reducing its managers’ and security­responsibles’ gap in knowledge of
IT security [17, 18]. Researchers have also found that organisational culture influences
both the employee’s behaviour and awareness [67, 68, 80, 83, 84]. This emphasises that
an organisation can achieve an overall enhancement of its IT security when adjusting its
culture to support IT security.
Therefore, I have the following recommendations:
• The security­responsible should raise their managers’ awareness of how their or­
ganisation’s culture can support or inhibit its IT security.
• The participants should prioritise enhancing their organisations’ culture so it sup­
ports their IT security.
• The security­responsibles and the managers should acknowledge that they have a
gap in how they perceive their organisation’s IT security and facilitate good commu­
nication to reduce this gap.
4.2
A look­back on the employed methodology
Having discussed the findings of the thesis, the following will address its methodology.
The section comprises a discussion of (a) components of the methodology (approach,
literature review, and data collection), (b) how the collected data is biased, and (c) where
the thesis limitations lie.
4.2.1
Exploring the problem using a phenomenological approach
I choose to use a phenomenological approach to study the problem. Another approach is
a case study which also could have yielded relevant insights on the problem. Then, many
employees of an organisation should be interviewed to get a better understanding of how
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
75
==PAGE:86==
their organisation’s IT security is. The primary reason for not using that approach is that
I wanted to explore the perceptions of individuals in multiple contexts. However, I just
ended up interviewing one manager and one security­responsible in each organisation. It
would have been interesting to study whether multiple managers in the same organisation
perceive its IT security differently.
In the thesis, my primary focus was on the qualitative approach ­ more specifically on
studying perceptions. Another relevant insight could have been gained from doing a dis­
course analysis. It can be used to study how knowledge is constructed in conversations
[44]. By using it, I could have studied how knowledge would be constructed in the in­
terviews. I could have used insights from such an analysis to further examine how the
informants interact and communicate. This is especially interesting now that the infor­
mants mostly agree on their perception of communication in their organisation.
Each interview took less than 45 minutes. This limits the amount of data I could collect
from each informant. If I had used observations over a longer period, I would maybe have
gotten a more complete picture of how the informants perceive IT security. However, it
can be difficult to understand peoples’ perceptions through observations. Still, this high­
lights an issue of examining perceptions in general. They are based on what an individual
senses (e.g. see, hear, etc.), and subject to change every moment. Thus, I would proba­
bly get slightly different results, if I conducted each of the interviews again. This is the core
of the motivation of the thesis. An individual’s actions are influenced by their perception,
and when it changes so might their actions. Knowing that I see the employed approach
as reasonable.
4.2.2
Using a literature review to support the data collection
One of the main contributions of the literature review is an examination of the most fre­
quently studied IT security topics in contemporary research. I did not choose many key­
words and conducted no snowballing. Using more terms in the search and conducting
snowballing would have yielded a larger body of literature to review. This would have
made the outcome of the review more accurately describe the contemporary research.
Because getting the outcome was more important than having the most accurate repre­
sentation of the literature, I chose a pragmatic approach. The result was a limited number
of keywords and no snowballing.
Part of the review was deciding when a domain and a factor would be essential. The
choice was made based on how long I wanted the interview to be. I examined the interview
guide of other studies which used a similar approach [95, 96]. I also considered the
dynamic of the interview [44]. With these things in mind, I decided how many domains
and factors would be appropriate to include in the interview guide. The result was not
selecting any technological domains. This is somewhat of a bias in the collected data.
However, examining what the informants talked about, technological aspects are also
covered. Unfortunately, this is not the case among the respondents ­ only a few mentioned
it when selecting other as an area. It would have been a different and more full picture if
technological domains were included in the interview guide and questionnaire.
This also raises the question: why not use all domains, include technologies and use
cases from the Cybersecurity Taxonomy, or use a standard as the base for data collection?
That would certainly provide a more detailed picture, but it would require the participants
to invest a lot more time. Such a study would require more time and a way to give the
participants an increased incentive to participate, e.g. giving rewards for participation. I
did not find these solutions to fit the thesis and thus chose to use a literature review to
decide between domains.
76
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:87==
4.2.3
Collecting data for the analyses
The qualitative data was collected using semi­structured interviews. In the analysis, I
noticed that sometimes an informant did not answer a question. Thus, some of the infor­
mants did not convey how they perceived some of their organisations’ IT security levels,
cf. Appendix G. This would have been less of an issue if I were more skilled in performing
interviews or had a person skilled in performing interviews do it for me. Hiring a skilled
person would introduce several challenges, as the person would need to be knowledge­
able about the field of study and I would lose some of the contexts of the conversations.
The latter is a downside as having a good understanding of the context will help me get
familiarised with the data which is an important part of thematic analysis [45]. Another
way to limit this issue would have been to use a structured approach instead. The main
downside is, that I would not have been able to follow up on answers to further explore
something they talk about. Also, it reduces the dynamic of the interview, as I would not
be able to rearrange the questions which I did several times. Because I wanted to em­
ploy an exploratory approach and be open to the informants’ perceptions, I chose the
semi­structured interview.
When I introduce a topic to a participant, their perception is affected. On the other hand, if
I only ask very open questions, I might not retrieve their perception of a specific topic, e.g.
how they perceive their organisation’s culture. Regarding the questionnaire, I created a
list of topics so they would not have to write them. This was done to reduce the time
frame of the questionnaire. Regarding the interview guide, I tried to combine introducing
topics and asking open questions. The first couple of questions are open. This helps me
assess what is important and prioritise the remaining interview, e.g. by asking follow­up
questions to reduce having them explain their opinion two times. I chose this approach to
limit my influence on their answers while ensuring they comment on every topic.
The questionnaire’s goal was to obtain data to support the findings of the qualitative anal­
ysis. I wanted to gather data from other individuals, so I needed to find respondents not
only through the collaborating company. However, it was harder to motivate these people
as I had no connection to them. My main method of increasing motivation was to shorten
the questionnaire as much as possible, while still getting useful responses. It would have
been insightful if the respondents had answered how they perceive their organisations’ IT
security level in each of the areas. Still, the employed approach gave an understanding
of how they perceive IT security in their organisations.
4.2.4
The data and analysis is biased
As written above, I needed to motivate people to participate in the thesis. This was primar­
ily the case when gathering respondents. People can be motivated if they find a particular
subject interesting. This was a help for me, as IT security has been discussed a lot in re­
cent years, and thus many find it interesting. A major downside is, that the respondents’
interest in IT security is biased towards being more interested than the general population.
This can be the reason why three­quarters of the respondents perceive IT security to be
very important to their organisations. In general, people are more aware of IT security
due to news media coverage, and that also affects their perceptions. In sum, I expect
that the respondents’ perceptions are skewed towards perceiving IT security as more of
a threat than the general population and it affects the answers.
I expect this bias also to be present in the informants’ answers but for another reason. The
informants are all employed in organisations which have conducted a maturity assess­
ment of their IT security. Thus, the informants or other members of their management
have been part of the process of looking at their organisations’ risks concerning IT secu­
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
77
==PAGE:88==
rity. This will without doubt raise their awareness of the threat of an IT security breach.
While conducting the interviews, I learned that several of them also use the collaborating
company to help them with IT security in other ways than performing a maturity assess­
ment. I am not certain, but I am unsure whether the average organisation has conducted
a maturity assessment of their IT security. That is why I expect the qualitative data to be
biased.
Also affecting the informants’ perception is their experience. Some of the managers had
previously been responsible for IT, and some of the security­responsibles were currently
part of management. The latter is expected when an organisation has a CISO employed,
however, this was not the case for the organisations. In a larger population, it will be the
case that managers have experience with managing IT and that security­responsibles are
part of management, thus I cannot tell in which direction the qualitative data is skewed.
When gathering respondents, I did not define any exclusion criteria. This is mostly due
to my limited knowledge of the population, making it difficult for me to select when a
respondent should be excluded. The questionnaire was shared through several mediums,
thus I have limited control over the quality of the quantitative data. Finally, I do not know
the distribution of the target population and can therefore not assess how biased the data
is.
The data is biased as only a limited number of domains are included as part of the in­
terview guide and questionnaire. Especially because no technological domains were in­
cluded. From reading the qualitative data, it is evident that the informants a concerned
with technical security measures. They talked about it even though I did not ask them
specifically. I expect the same to be true for the respondents and a larger population.
Focusing on domains in the human and organisational categories gave valuable insights
into these areas, but the data would probably have been evenly distributed differently if
the participants were presented with a more even distribution of domains among the three
HOT categories.
Lastly, the qualitative data stems from people working in Danish organisations. I expect
this to also be the case for most, if not all, of the qualitative data. The reason is that
most of the mediums used targeted employees in Danish organisations. The thesis is
not meant to be geographically bound to a specific region, and thus the data is biased. I
acknowledge this, knowing that I did not have the resources and connections to collect
data across the globe.
With all this being said, the data is representative of the sample populations that it is part
of. It cannot be generalised to a larger population, but this was not the intention of the
thesis anyway. This is one of my findings’ limitations which leads to the next topic.
4.2.5
The thesis has limitations
In the thesis, an emphasis is put on a qualitative approach. By nature, this can make
it more difficult to generalise findings to a target population [40]. Still, some of the the­
sis’ findings might represent trends in a larger population. However, this should not be
assumed before more research has been conducted. The thesis is limited by the above
biases and the limitations described below.
The contributions of the thesis are limited by constraints on resources ­ specifically time
and money. A lot more data could have been collected and analysed if I had more time.
In addition, I could probably have collected more quantitative data if I had spent money
on getting the questionnaire out to more people or used it to reward respondents. The
descriptive analysis is not as elaborate as I wanted it to be. It would have been interesting
78
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:89==
to see how each of the situations influenced each other, e.g. whether a high focus on
the employee’s awareness as a challenge would result in a high focus on training as a
solution. The reason I did not get to that is due to time constraints and poor planning.
The questionnaire was not developed right away together with the interview guide so to
get a reasonable number of respondents I decided to close it late in the process. Though
nowhere near enough responses to generalise the results, it gives an early insight into
what they think ­ and this is part of the next limitation.
The data samples are relatively small if it is to be generalised to a larger population. This
limitation is mostly directed at the quantitative data collection. Using the more common
confidence level of 95%, the sample population of 37 respondents can represent a tar­
get population of 40 individuals [40]. In the thesis, this was not a major concern as the
quantitative data was collected to support the qualitative analysis and not to describe the
entire target population.
As discussed above, I did not address all three HOT categories both in the interview guide
and the questionnaire. Although the informants talked about technical security measures,
the questions they were asked did not equally address the categories. Thus, the data is
limited to primarily addressing domains in the human and organisational category within
IT security.
The goal of the thesis was to examine the perceptions of managers and security­responsibles.
This was reached, though the sample populations did not include all possible positions of
the target group. None of the informants representing managers had other positions than
CEO and CFO, e.g. board member and COO. Also, none of the informants representing
security­responsibles had the position of CISO in their organisations. The respondents
had a more diverse background, but due to the questionnaire’s design, it is impossible to
see whether any of the security­responsibles were CISOs. So, the data have major lim­
itations regarding the diversity of the sample populations’ roles in the organisations they
were employed. This is primarily concerning the informants.
Finally, can this approach be used to examine the perceptions of managers and security­
responsibles? Several findings have been discovered, cf. Section 4.1, and they can
describe the thesis participants. However, this is an exploratory study and more research
is needed to find trends among other organisations. This leads to the next section on
suggestions for future work.
4.3
Suggestions for future research
Reflecting on the two previous sections discussing findings and the methodology, there
are several suggestions for future studies. The suggestions are about (a) how can future
reviewing the literature support future studies, (b) how can future complementary studies
be formed, and (c) what future studies on employees’ perceptions can follow up on the
findings.
4.3.1
Grounding future studies in the research
An important part of data collection is to use a proper method and scope. In the thesis,
the scope has been defined with the support of a literature review. It helped narrow down
which domains should be a part of the data collection method. However, the findings
of the analysis suggest conducting a more thorough review of relevant domains. Many
informants mentioned domains which were not selected in the literature review. This
made it more difficult to compare their perceptions as the domains they mentioned varied
greatly. This is part of employing an exploratory approach, but in future studies, it would
be beneficial to have a better coverage of domains which the informants find relevant.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
79
==PAGE:90==
As mentioned in Section 2.2, a straightforward approach would be to include everything
from the Cybersecurity Taxonomy, but it is not feasible due to its extremely wide body. An­
other choice is to use standards used for managing IT security risks as a basis for selecting
domains. Unfortunately, researchers have found such standards not to be complete [13,
97]. Then, there are maturity assessment frameworks which help an organisation assess
how well their IT security is performing. Like the Cybersecurity Taxonomy and standards,
they are very extensive [78]. There is no silver bullet to solve the issue of selecting the ap­
propriate domains. I suggest conducting more research to find the most essential domains
that managers and security­responsibles work with. This will strengthen the relevancy of
studies on perceptions in the future
The literature review showed how interconnected the domains are. They affect each other
and can be seen as both a relevant domain to address but also as a factor that influences
other domains. It cannot be neglected that the domains affect each other, and it is thus
important to review how the domains influence each other. This has been done previously,
but these studies focused on one or several domains and thus their findings are limited
[58, 80, 84]. Also, they categorise factors different from one another. I suggest conducting
a systematic literature review to examine how domains affect each other.
As written in Section 4.2, the method used for collecting qualitative data gave mixed re­
sults. In future studies, it would be beneficial to have a more clear­cut framework to
examine individuals’ perceptions. Based on the findings in the thesis, it is not possible to
say whether the employed methodology is the best way to study managers and security­
responsibles perception of their organisations’ IT security. Thus, I suggest conducting
more research in this area to strengthen the validity of similar studies in the future.
4.3.2
Performing complementary studies
Part of the thesis has been studying a sample population similar to that of the informants
using a questionnaire. Brinkmann and Tanggaard [41] suggest such use of complemen­
tary research methods to support knowledge gathered through interviews. Though the
informants and the respondents did not agree on everything their answers shared similar­
ities in some domains, and it is possible that the same trend would be present in a larger
population. Before doing that, it is necessary to define a target population.
The target population of the thesis would be employees of organisations in the groups:
managers and security­responsibles. I did not research their characteristics of them, but
I expect the sample size of the respondents to be too small to generalise. Future studies
should examine how many individuals are part of the two groups. Not only the size of
the target population is interesting, but also other characteristics like gender, age, tenure,
and size of organisations. If only studying organisations in Denmark, the organisation
Danmarks Statistik1 can provide insight into the distribution of organisations and their
employees [98]. I suggest using their data and conducting a new study using random
sampling to collect data which better represents the target population thereby strength­
ening its validity.
Before doing that, a more thorough literature review should be conducted, cf. Section 4.3.1.
To increase the relevancy of a complementary study’s data, it needs to address a wide
range of domains. Conducting such a complementary study can support findings in future
qualitative studies. Thus, I suggest using domains found in the aforementioned literature
reviews to conduct a complementary study on managers’ and security­responsibles’ per­
ceptions of their organisations’ IT security.
1www.dst.dk
80
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:91==
4.3.3
Studying employees’ perceptions in the future
This thesis gave insight into the informants’ perceptions of their organisations’ IT security,
but the insights had limitations. These are described in Section 4.2 along with an elaborate
list of how the data collected is biased. It is natural, when conducting qualitative research,
that it is difficult to generalise. However, this is not always the aim. In this thesis, the
qualitative approach was used to explore both the why and the how of a problem. The
results of the qualitative analysis made it easier to explain trends found in the quantitative
data. This is the motivation for suggesting to conduct qualitative studies on perceptions
in the future.
Reviewing the literature, taxonomies and standards helps identify what domains to include
in a study on individuals’ perceptions of IT security. It was done in the thesis, but still I
found that the informants were interested in several other domains. In addition to conduct­
ing a systematic literature review of domains and how they are interconnected, I suggest
doing a qualitative study to examine what domains managers and security­responsibles
perceive as the most essential to their organisations.
The previous discussion of findings shows that the informants’ perception of their organ­
isations’ IT security only partly aligns with what the literature describes. In the literature,
domains are found to be affected by several factors. This does not mean that if one do­
main performs poorly another domain will do the same, but it might be the case, e.g. if
organisation culture affects the employee’s behaviour it might be that if the culture is bad,
then the employee’s behaviour will be bad. Studying the thesis data it was found to some­
times be the case according to the informants’ perceptions. However, this should be seen
in the light of the thesis not addressing the phenomenon directly. To investigate it, I sug­
gest conducting a study on how managers’ and security­responsibles’ perceptions of their
organisations’ IT security levels in different domains align with how literature describes the
domains to be affecting each other.
Based on the findings in the thesis, it would be interesting to conduct several case studies
of managers’ and security­responsibles’ perceptions. This way, it would be possible to
examine the cause and effect of perceptions found in similar studies. The following is a
non­exhaustive list of suggested case studies:
• Study how managers’ and security­responsibles’ perceptions of specific domains in
their organisation are related to how the organisation’s level is in those domains.
In addition, the organisation’s performance in the domains can be compared to the
performance of other organisations.
• Study an organisation who have a dedicated CISO to examine if it affects the man­
agers’ perception of domains in the organisation and the organisation’s performance
in such domains. To assess whether the effect is significant, reference organisations
and managers should be examined also. I see this as extra important in this case,
as I expect managers to be disposed to being more aware of IT security when they
invest in having a chief officer with the sole responsibility of securing IT.
• Study how similarities and differences in managers’ and security­responsibles’ per­
ceptions of domains in their organisation are related to their organisation’s perfor­
mance in such domains.
• Study how managers’ and security­responsibles’ perceptions of their organisation’s
IT security are affected by external factors, e.g. if they or another organisation in
their sector experience a security breach.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
81
==PAGE:92==
Knowing that the thesis is bound by its resources and that the qualitative approach has
its limitations, I think it is important to further investigate the topic using a similar ap­
proach. Similar to Mahopo et al. [72], a main motivation is that organisations continue
to be breached even though they try to reduce their risk exposure. Before conducting
more research, it will be beneficial to establish a set of essential domains and how they
affect each other in addition to collecting complementary data on the target population.
Then, one will be better prepared to study a well­distributed sample population. This
includes both CISOs and non­CISOs as security­responsibles and board members and
the remaining C­suite as managers. I suggest conducting a study on managers’ and
security­responsibles’ perceptions of their organisations’ IT security to better understand
why organisations are performing at the level they do and learn how to better prepare for
present and future IT security threats.
82
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:93==
5
Conclusion
The thesis explores managers’ and security­responsibles’ perceptions of their organisa­
tions’ IT security. The initial part of the process included reviewing the literature to find
important IT security domains. These domains were incorporated into an interview guide
and a questionnaire used to collect data. Lastly, the data was analysed to see if similar­
ities or differences in perceptions were present. In addition, the literature was revisited
to see how their answers matched previous findings and whether they could be used to
propose recommendations to the organisations.
The literature was reviewed for the following three reasons: (a) to ensure that the thesis
was grounded in a gap in the literature, (b) to investigate what domains were getting the
most attention in contemporary research, and (c) to get well­acquainted with the research
topic before interviewing. I found that limited research had been conducted on individuals’
perceptions of IT security and even less on the perceptions of managers and security­
responsibles and how they differed. In preparation for addressing this gap in the literature,
I reviewed an additional set of articles to identify which domains and factors influencing
them were most important to contemporary research. The most frequently mentioned
domains were part of the human and organisational areas. Among these were training,
organisational culture, risk management, and the employee’s behaviour and awareness.
With a set of important domains, data could be collected and analysed. The analyses
aimed to assess (a) the participants’ perception of the selected domains and (b) whether
a difference in perceptions between managers and security­responsibles could be found.
Across all participants, it was found that they perceive IT security as important to their
organisations. The informants were mostly positive when talking about their organisa­
tions’ IT security level.
However, their perceptions varied in some domains, namely,
the employee’s knowledge and skill and their organisational culture. When answering
whether the culture of their organisations supported IT security, the security­responsibles
were generally negative whereas the managers were mostly positive.
The question­
naire’s respondents perceived organisational culture as important, and both managers
and security­responsibles mentioned it most frequently as a challenge to their organisa­
tion. Regarding the respondents’ perceptions of solutions to their IT security challenges,
the security­responsibles most frequently mentioned culture as a solution whereas it was
the second­most mentioned solution among managers. The respondents also frequently
mentioned risk management as a core part of their IT security, a solution to their chal­
lenges, and under­prioritised in their organisations. The participants mostly perceived
communication between managers and security­responsibles to be good. When the re­
spondents had to select an area in which they would be more proficient, they most often
chose the organisational area. This could be an expression of an increased wish to un­
derstand culture among other things.
Even though the data is hardly generalisable, it can aid other organisations. As an organ­
isation’s culture influences its employees’ behaviour and awareness, the findings suggest
that the IT security of the participants’ organisations is challenged in multiple areas. I per­
ceive an improvement in the culture of their organisations as a way for them to improve
their overall IT security level. Also, I encourage the security­responsibles to raise their
managers’ awareness of which areas of their culture to improve.
The thesis highlights the need for more research into employees’ perceptions of their or­
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
83
==PAGE:94==
ganisations’ IT security ­ specifically the managers’ and the security­responsibles’ percep­
tions. Developing a framework to help assess individuals’ perception of domains would be
particularly useful both for research and for organisations. However, an organisation can
better use such assessments when recommendations for specific scenarios have been
proposed. I suggest conducting more research in this area to increase the understanding
of how managers’ and security­responsibles’ perceptions can affect their organisations’ IT
security. Then, the next step is to research how an organisation can change their percep­
tions to contribute positively to their organisations’ IT security. This will help us to better
prepare for present and future IT security threats.
84
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
Francis J. Aguilar. Scanning the Business Environment. English. New York, USA:
Macmillan, 1967.
[2]
Richard W. Puyt, Finn Birger Lie, and Celeste P.M. Wilderom. “The origins of SWOT
analysis”. In: Long Range Planning 56.3 (2023), p. 102304. ISSN: 0024­6301. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2023.102304. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0024630123000110.
[3]
IBM Security. Cost of a Data Breach Report 2023. Tech. rep. IBM Corporation, 2023.
[4]
Sophos. The State of Ransomware 2023. Tech. rep. Sophos Ltd., 2023.
[5]
ENISA. ENISA Threat Landscape 2023. Tech. rep. European Union Agency for Cy­
bersecurity, 2023. DOI: 10.2824/782573.
[6]
Nick Huber. ”Cyber attacks are one of the biggest threats facing healthcare sys­
tems”. Accessed: 2024­01­24. 2024. URL: https://www.ft.com/content/77d54679-
0915-4ce2-a42f-0c2b844da7ef.
[7]
S. Ghafur et al. “A retrospective impact analysis of the WannaCry cyberattack on
the NHS”. eng. In: Npj Digital Medicine 2.1 (2019), p. 98. ISSN: 23986352. DOI:
10.1038/s41746-019-0161-6.
[8]
Council of European Union. “Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 14 December 2022 on measures for a high common level of
cybersecurity across the Union, amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 and Di­
rective (EU) 2018/1972, and repealing Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (NIS 2 Directive)”.
In: OJ L 333/80 (Dec. 2022).
[9]
Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative Interagency Working Group. Guide for
Conducting Risk Assessments. Tech. rep. NIST Special Publication (SP) 800­30.
Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2012. DOI: 10.
6028/NIST.SP.800-30r1.
[10]
Joint Technical Committee. ISO/IEC 27005:2022 Information security, cybersecurity
and privacy protection. Tech. rep. International Organization for Standardization,
2022.
[11]
Joint Technical Committee. ISO/IEC 27005:2008 Guidelines for the management
of IT Security. Tech. rep. International Organization for Standardization, 2008.
[12]
Joint Technical Committee. ISO/IEC TR 13335­3:1998 Guidelines for the manage­
ment of IT Security. Tech. rep. International Organization for Standardization, 1998.
[13]
Svana Helen Björnsdóttir et al. “The Importance of Risk Management: What is Miss­
ing in ISO Standards?” eng. In: Risk Analysis 42.4 (2022), pp. 659–691. ISSN:
15396924, 02724332. DOI: 10.1111/risa.13803.
[14]
Joint Research Centre (JRC). JRC Cybersecurity Taxonomy. Tech. rep. European
Commission, 2021. URL: http://data.europa.eu/89h/d2f56334-a0df-485b-8dc8-
2c0039d31122.
[15]
James Carder. Why Your CISO Should Report Directly To The CEO. Accessed:
2024­01­24. Sept. 2021. URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/
2021/09/08/why-your-ciso-should-report-directly-to-the-ceo/.
[16]
John Burke. Ideal CISO reporting structure is to high­level business leaders. Ac­
cessed: 2024­01­24. Nov. 2022. URL: https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/
tip/Why-the-ideal-CISO-reporting-structure-is-highest-level.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
85
==PAGE:96==
[17]
Richard G. Taylor, Jeff Brice, and Sammie L. Robinson. “Perception deception:
security risks created by optimistic perceptions”. eng. In: Journal of Systems and
Information Technology 18.1 (2016), pp. 2–17. ISSN: 17588847, 13287265. DOI:
10.1108/JSIT-07-2015-0062.
[18]
Richard G. Taylor. “Potential Problems with Information Security Risk Assessments”.
eng. In: Information Security Journal 24.4­6 (2015), pp. 177–184. ISSN: 19393547,
19393555. DOI: 10.1080/19393555.2015.1092620.
[19]
Richard G. Taylor. “Management perception of unintentional information security
risks”. eng. In: Icis 2006 Proceedings ­ Twenty Seventh International Conference
on Information Systems (2006), pp. 1581–1598.
[20]
Andrew Reeves, Dragana Calic, and Paul Delfabbro. ““Generic and unusable”1: Un­
derstanding employee perceptions of cybersecurity training and measuring advice
fatigue”. eng. In: Computers and Security 128 (2023), p. 103137. ISSN: 18726208,
01674048. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2023.103137.
[21]
Adedayo Solomon Williams, Manoj S. Maharaj, and Adebowale I. Ojo. “Employee
behavioural factors and information security standard compliance in Nigeria banks”.
eng. In: International Journal of Computing and Digital Systems 8.4 (2019), pp. 387–
396. ISSN: 2210142x. DOI: 10.12785/ijcds/080407.
[22]
Hiep Cong Pham et al. “Enhancing cyber security behavior: an internal social mar­
keting approach”. eng. In: Information and Computer Security 28.2 (2020), pp. 133–
159. ISSN: 2056497x, 20564961. DOI: 10.1108/ICS-01-2019-0023.
[23]
Merriam­Webster. ”Security Definition & Meaning”. Accessed: 2023­10­16. 2023.
URL: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/security.
[24]
Ömer Aslan et al. “A Comprehensive Review of Cyber Security Vulnerabilities, Threats,
Attacks, and Solutions”. eng. In: Electronics (switzerland) 12.6 (2023), p. 1333.
ISSN: 20799292. DOI: 10.3390/electronics12061333.
[25]
Pooya Jaferian et al. “Guidelines for designing IT security management tools”. eng.
In: Proceedings of the 2nd Acm Symposium on Computer Human Interaction for
Management of Information Technology, Chimit ’08 (2007), p. 7. DOI: 10 . 1145 /
1477973.1477983.
[26]
Indira R. Guzman et al. “Panel ­ Cybersecurity workforce development”. eng. In:
Sigmis­cpr 2015 ­ Proceedings of the 2015 Acm Sigmis Conference on Computers
and People Research (2015), pp. 15–17. DOI: 10.1145/2751957.2756529.
[27]
Betsy Uchendu et al. “Developing a cyber security culture: Current practices and fu­
ture needs”. eng. In: Computers and Security 109 (2021), p. 102387. ISSN: 18726208,
01674048. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2021.102387.
[28]
National Bureau of Standards. Audit and Evaluation of Computer Security. Tech.
rep. NIST Special Publication (SP) 500­19. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1977.
DOI: 10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018.
[29]
Wikipedia. ”Information security”. Accessed: 2023­10­17. 2023. URL: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_security.
[30]
International Organization for Standardization. Information technology — Security
techniques — Information security management systems — Overview and vocabu­
lary. Tech. rep. ISO/IEC 27000:2018. International Organization for Standardization,
2018.
[31]
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Framework for Improving Critical
Infrastructure Cybersecurity. Tech. rep. U.S. Department of Commerce, 2018. DOI:
10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018.
86
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:97==
[32]
European Union Agency For Network and Information Security. Reference Incident
Classification Taxonomy. Tech. rep. The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity,
2018.
[33]
Seema Gupta Bhol, J. R. Mohanty, and Prasant Kumar Pattnaik. “Taxonomy of cy­
ber security metrics to measure strength of cyber security”. eng. In: Materials Today:
Proceedings 80 (2023), pp. 2274–2279. ISSN: 22147853. DOI: 10.1016/j.matpr.
2021.06.228.
[34]
Mukrimah Nawir et al. “Internet of Things (IoT): Taxonomy of security attacks”.
eng. In: 2016 3rd International Conference on Electronic Design, Iced 2016 (2016),
pp. 321–326. ISSN: 24703141. DOI: 10.1109/ICED.2016.7804660.
[35]
Alireza Shameli­Sendi, Rouzbeh Aghababaei­Barzegar, and Mohamed Cheriet. “Tax­
onomy of information security risk assessment (ISRA)”. eng. In: Computers and Se­
curity 57 (2015), pp. 14–30. ISSN: 18726208, 01674048. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2015.
11.001.
[36]
Igor Nai Fovino et al. A Proposal for a European Cybersecurity Taxonomy. Tech.
rep. European Commission, 2019. DOI: 10.2760/106002.
[37]
National Institute of Standards and Technology. NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0.
Tech. rep. U.S. Department of Commerce, 2023. DOI: 10.6028/NIST.CSWP.29.ipd.
[38]
Viktor Baron and Nigel van Zwanenberg. “Cues, Needs and Decisions: A ‘Lens’
Model of Security Operations”. eng. In: Security Journal 12.3 (1999), pp. 41–55.
ISSN: 17434645, 09551662. DOI: 10.1057/palgrave.sj.8340029.
[39]
George Drivas et al. “A NIS Directive Compliant Cybersecurity Maturity Assess­
ment Framework”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ 2020 Ieee 44th Annual Computers, Soft­
ware, and Applications Conference, Compsac 2020 (2020). Ed. by WK Chan et al.,
pp. 1641–1646. ISSN: 07303157. DOI: 10.1109/COMPSAC48688.2020.00-20.
[40]
Robert Burke Johnson and Larry B. Christensen. Educational Research ­ Interna­
tional Student Edition: Quantitative, Qualitative, and Mixed Approaches. English.
6th ed. California, USA: SAGE Publications, 2017. ISBN: 9781506386591.
[41]
Svend Brinkmann and Lene Tanggaard, eds. Kvalitative metoder: En grundbog.
Dansk. 3rd ed. Vol. 1. Danmark: Hans Reitzels Forlag, 2020. ISBN: 9788741277264.
[42]
Barney G. Glaser. Theoretical Sensitivity. English. 1st ed. California, USA: The So­
ciology Press, 1978. ISBN: 9781884156014.
[43]
Anselm Strauss and Juliet Corbin. Basic of qualitative research: Grounded theory
procedures and techniques. English. California, USA: SAGE Publications, 1990.
ISBN: 9780803932500.
[44]
Steinar Kvale and Svend Brinkmann. Interview: Det kvalitative forskningsinterview
som håndværk. Dansk. 3rd ed. Danmark: Hans Reitzels Forlag, 2015. ISBN: 9788741263779.
[45]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Using thematic analysis in psychology”. eng.
In: Qualitative Research in Psychology 3.2 (2006), pp. 77–101. ISSN: 14780895.
DOI: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
[46]
Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. “Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis”. eng.
In: Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health 11.4 (2019), pp. 589–597.
ISSN: 19398441. DOI: 10.1080/2159676X.2019.1628806.
[47]
Virginia Braun et al. “Doing Reflexive Thematic Analysis”. eng. In: Supporting Re­
search in Counselling and Psychotherapy: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Meth­
ods Research (2023), pp. 19–38. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-13942-0_2.
[48]
Jan Vom Brocke et al. “Reconstructing the giant: On the importance of rigour in
documenting the literature search process”. eng. In: 17th European Conference on
Information Systems, Ecis 2009 (2009).
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
87
==PAGE:98==
[49]
Barbara A. Kitchenham. “Systematic reviews”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ International
Software Metrics Symposium (2004), p. xii. ISSN: 15301435. DOI: 10.1109/METRIC.
2004.1357885.
[50]
David Moher et al. “Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta­
analyses: The PRISMA statement”. eng. In: Bmj (online) 339.7716 (2009), pp. 332–
336. ISSN: 17561833, 09598138, 14685833, 00071447, 0959535x. DOI: 10.1136/
bmj.b2535.
[51]
Chad Anderson, Richard L. Baskerville, and Mala Kaul. “Information Security Con­
trol Theory: Achieving a Sustainable Reconciliation Between Sharing and Protect­
ing the Privacy of Information”. eng. In: Journal of Management Information Sys­
tems 34.4 (2017), pp. 1082–1112. ISSN: 07421222. DOI: 10.1080/07421222.2017.
1394063.
[52]
Harris M. Cooper. “Organizing knowledge syntheses: A taxonomy of literature re­
views”. In: Knowledge in Society 1.1 (Mar. 1988), pp. 107–112. ISSN: 0897­1986.
DOI: 10.1007/BF03177550. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03177550.
[53]
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. ”IEEE Xplore”. Accessed: 2023­
10­17. 2023. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/.
[54]
Association for Computing Machinery. ”ACM Digital Library”. Accessed: 2023­10­
17. 2023. URL: https://dl.acm.org/.
[55]
Richard T. Watson and Jane Webster. “Analysing the past to prepare for the future:
Writing a literature review a roadmap for release 2.0”. eng. In: Journal of Decision
Systems 29.3 (2020), pp. 129–147. ISSN: 21167052, 12460125. DOI: 10.1080/
12460125.2020.1798591.
[56]
Adrian Baldwin, Marco Casassa Mont, and Simon Shiu. “Using modelling and sim­
ulation for policy decision support in identity management”. eng. In: Proceedings ­
2009 Ieee International Symposium on Policies for Distributed Systems and Net­
works, Policy 2009 (2009), pp. 17–24. DOI: 10.1109/POLICY.2009.16.
[57]
Louise Axon et al. “Practitioners’ Views on Cybersecurity Control Adoption and
Effectiveness”. eng. In: Acm International Conference Proceeding Series (2021),
p. 3470038. DOI: 10.1145/3465481.3470038.
[58]
Abdulla Hussain, Azlinah Mohamed, and Suriyati Razali. “A Review on Cybersecu­
rity: Challenges & Emerging Threats”. eng. In: Acm International Conference Pro­
ceeding Series (2020). Ed. by B Mohamed et al., pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.1145/3386723.
3387847.
[59]
Simon E. Parkin, Aad Van Moorsel, and Robert Coles. “An information security on­
tology incorporating human­behavioural implications”. eng. In: Sin’09 ­ Proceedings
of the 2nd International Conference on Security of Information and Networks (2009),
p. 1626209. DOI: 10.1145/1626195.1626209.
[60]
Odette Beris, Adam Beautement, and M. Angela Sasse. “Employee rule breakers,
excuse makers and security champions: Mapping the risk perceptions and emotions
that drive security behaviors”. eng. In: Acm International Conference Proceeding
Series 08­11­ (2015), pp. 73–84. DOI: 10.1145/2841113.2841119.
[61]
Norisan Abd Karim, Jasber Kaur, and Muhammad Naquib Khalib. “Benefit vs Cost:Examining
Factors of Intention to Comply Information Security Policy”. eng. In: 2021 Ieee In­
ternational Conference on Computing, Icoco 2021 (2021), pp. 291–296. DOI: 10.
1109/ICOCO53166.2021.9673542.
[62]
Adam Beautement, Angela Sasse, and Mike Wonham. “The compliance budget:
managing security behaviour in organisations”. eng. In: Proceedings New Security
Paradigms Workshop (Sept. 2008), pp. 47–58. DOI: 10.1145/1595676.1595684.
88
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:99==
[63]
Muhammad Adnan Tariq, Joel Brynielsson, and Henrik Artman. “The security aware­
ness paradox: A case study”. eng. In: Asonam 2014 ­ Proceedings of the 2014
Ieee/acm International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and
Mining (2014). Ed. by X Wu, M Ester, and G Xu, p. 6921663. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
ASONAM.2014.6921663.
[64]
Princely Ifinedo. “IT security and privacy issues in global financial services institu­
tions: Do socio­economic and cultural factors matter?” eng. In: Proceedings ­ 6th
Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust, Pst 2008 (2008). Ed. by Marsh
Korba L and R S SafaviNaini, p. 4641275. ISSN: 1712364x. DOI: 10.1109/PST.
2008.24.
[65]
Mohd Anwar, Wu He, and Xiaohong Yuan. “Employment status and cybersecurity
behaviors”. eng. In: Ieee/acm Besc 2016 ­ Proceedings of 2016 International Con­
ference on Behavioral, Economic, Socio ­ Cultural Computing (2016), p. 7804493.
DOI: 10.1109/BESC.2016.7804493.
[66]
Liu Chongrui et al. “Exploring the Impact of Information Security Climate and Infor­
mation Security Training on Cybersecurity Behavior: Based on Protection Motiva­
tion Theory”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ 2021 6th International Symposium on Com­
puter and Information Processing Technology, Iscipt 2021 (2021), pp. 803–806.
DOI: 10.1109/ISCIPT53667.2021.00168.
[67]
Mikko T. Siponen and Jorma Kajava. “Ontology of organizational IT security aware­
ness ­ from theoretical foundations to practical framework”. eng. In: Proceedings
of the Workshop on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enter­
prises, Wet Ice (1998), pp. 327–331. DOI: 10.1109/ENABL.1998.725713.
[68]
Jemal H. Abawajy, K. Thatcher, and Tai Hoon Kim. “Investigation of stakeholders
commitment to information security awareness programs”. eng. In: Proceedings of
the 2nd International Conference on Information Security and Assurance, Isa 2008
(2008), p. 4511613. DOI: 10.1109/ISA.2008.25.
[69]
Kirstie Hawkey et al. “Human, organizational, and technological factors of IT secu­
rity”. eng. In: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ­ Proceedings
(2008), pp. 3639–3644. DOI: 10.1145/1358628.1358905.
[70]
Adetokunbo Bashorun, Archbald Worwui, and David Parker. “Information security:
To determine its level of awareness in an organization”. eng. In: Aict 2013 ­ 7th In­
ternational Conference on Application of Information and Communication Technolo­
gies, Conference Proceedings (2013), p. 6722704. ISSN: 24728586, 23788232.
DOI: 10.1109/ICAICT.2013.6722704.
[71]
Tomomi Aoyama et al. “Studying resilient cyber incident management from large­
scale cyber security training”. eng. In: 2015 10th Asian Control Conference: Emerg­
ing Control Techniques for a Sustainable World, Ascc 2015 (2015). Ed. by AC Soh
et al., p. 7244713. ISSN: 20725639. DOI: 10.1109/ASCC.2015.7244713.
[72]
Bessy Mahopo, Hanifa Abdullah, and Mathias Mujinga. “A formal qualitative risk
management approach for IT security”. eng. In: 2015 Information Security for South
Africa ­ Proceedings of the Issa 2015 Conference (2015). Ed. by HS Venter et al.,
p. 7335053. ISSN: 23309881. DOI: 10.1109/ISSA.2015.7335053.
[73]
Nuno Teodoro, Luís Gonçalves, and Carlos Serrão. “NIST cybersecurity framework
compliance: A generic model for dynamic assessment and predictive requirements”.
eng. In: Proceedings ­ 14th Ieee International Conference on Trust, Security and
Privacy in Computing and Communications, Trustcom 2015 1 (2015), pp. 418–425.
DOI: 10.1109/Trustcom.2015.402.
[74]
Mehdi Asgarkhani, Eduardo Correia, and Amit Sarkar. “An overview of informa­
tion security governance”. eng. In: 2017 International Conference on Algorithms,
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
89
==PAGE:100==
Methodology, Models and Applications in Emerging Technologies, Icammaet 2017
2017­ (2017), pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/ICAMMAET.2017.8186666.
[75]
Iman Vakilinia and Shamik Sengupta. “A coalitional game theory approach for cy­
bersecurity information sharing”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ Ieee Military Communica­
tions Conference Milcom 2017­ (2017), pp. 237–242. ISSN: 21557586, 21557578.
DOI: 10.1109/MILCOM.2017.8170845.
[76]
Trisha Anne Cayetano et al. “Cyber­physical IT assessment tool and vulnerability
assessment for semiconductor companies”. eng. In: Acm International Conference
Proceeding Series (2018), pp. 67–71. DOI: 10.1145/3199478.3199482.
[77]
Haruki Kobayashi, Taiichi Saito, and Ryoichi Sasaki. “Trial Development of a Cy­
ber Risk Visualization System with Function of k­Anonymity and Compatibility with
Other Organizations”. eng. In: Proceedings ­ Companion of the 2020 Ieee 20th In­
ternational Conference on Software Quality, Reliability, and Security, Qrs­c 2020
(2020), pp. 184–189. DOI: 10.1109/QRS-C51114.2020.00039.
[78]
Adyan Pamungkas Ganefi Putra et al. “Maturity assessment of cyber security in
the workforce management domain: A case study in bank indonesia”. eng. In: 2020
International Conference on Information Technology Systems and Innovation, Icitsi
2020 ­ Proceedings (2020), pp. 89–94. ISSN: 24431451. DOI: 10.1109/ICITSI50517.
2020.9264982.
[79]
Aunshul Rege, Trinh Nguyen, and Rachel Bleiman. “A social engineering aware­
ness and training workshop for STEM students and practitioners”. eng. In: 2020 9th
Ieee Integrated Stem Education Conference, Isec 2020 (2020), p. 9280596. ISSN:
2330331x. DOI: 10.1109/ISEC49744.2020.9280596.
[80]
Karzan H. Sharif and Siddeeq Y. Ameen. “A Review of Security Awareness Ap­
proaches with Special Emphasis on Gamification”. eng. In: 3rd International Con­
ference on Advanced Science and Engineering, Icoase 2020 (2020), pp. 151–156.
DOI: 10.1109/ICOASE51841.2020.9436595.
[81]
Theo Simon and Bertrand Venard. “Technical codes’potentialities in cybersecurity.
A contextual approach on the ethics of small digital organizations in France”. eng.
In: International Conference on Cyber Security and Protection of Digital Services,
Cyber Security 2020 (2020), p. 9138895. DOI: 10.1109/CyberSecurity49315.2020.
9138895.
[82]
Adel Ismail Al­Alawi et al. “The Analysis of Human Attitude toward Cybersecurity
Information Sharing”. eng. In: 2021 International Conference on Decision Aid Sci­
ences and Application, Dasa 2021 (2021), pp. 947–956. DOI: 10.1109/DASA53625.
2021.9682381.
[83]
Dawn Branley­Bell, Lynne Coventry, and Elizabeth Sillence. “Promoting Cyberse­
curity Culture Change in Healthcare”. eng. In: Acm International Conference Pro­
ceeding Series (2021), pp. 544–549. DOI: 10.1145/3453892.3461622.
[84]
Shadab Kalhoro et al. “Extracting key factors of cyber hygiene behaviour among
software engineers: A systematic literature review”. eng. In: Ieee Access 9 (2021),
p. 9483948. ISSN: 21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3097144.
[85]
Aristotle Onumo, Irfan Ullah­Awan, and Andrea Cullen. “Assessing the Moderating
Effect of Security Technologies on Employees Compliance with Cybersecurity Con­
trol Procedures”. eng. In: Acm Transactions on Management Information Systems
12.2 (2021), p. 11. ISSN: 21586578, 2158656x. DOI: 10.1145/3424282.
[86]
Adnan Bin Amanat Ali et al. “Cybersecurity Infrastructure Adoption Model for Mal­
ware Mitigation in Small Medium Enterprises (SME)”. eng. In: 2022 Ieee 5th Interna­
tional Symposium in Robotics and Manufacturing Automation, Roma 2022 (2022),
6 pp. DOI: 10.1109/ROMA55875.2022.9915696.
90
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:101==
[87]
Norshima Humaidi and Saif Hussein Abdallah Alghazo. “Procedural Information
Security Countermeasure Awareness and Cybersecurity Protection Motivation in
Enhancing Employee’s Cybersecurity Protective Behaviour”. eng. In: 10th Interna­
tional Symposium on Digital Forensics and Security, Isdfs 2022 (2022). Ed. by A
Varol, M Karabatak, and C Varol, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1109/ISDFS55398.2022.9800834.
[88]
Wan Basri Wan Ismail et al. “An Information Security Policy Development Process
in Higher Education Institution: A Case Study Approach”. eng. In: International Con­
ference on Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Informatics (eecsi) 2022­
(2022). Ed. by Mochammad Facta et al., pp. 147–152. ISSN: 2407439x. DOI: 10.
23919/EECSI56542.2022.9946593.
[89]
Pana Ungkap and Therdpong Daengsi. “Cybersecurity Awareness Modeling Asso­
ciated with Influential Factors Using AHP Technique: A Case of Railway Organiza­
tions in Thailand”. eng. In: 2022 International Conference on Decision Aid Sciences
and Applications, Dasa 2022 (2022), pp. 1359–1362. DOI: 10.1109/DASA54658.
2022.9765092.
[90]
ISACA. Cobit 5: a business framework for the governance and management of
enterprise IT. Isaca, 2012.
[91]
Christopher J. Alberts et al. Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability
Evaluation (OCTAVE) Framework. Tech. rep. Carnegie Mellon University, 1999.
[92]
Magiswary Dorasamy et al. “Cybersecurity issues among working youths in an iot
environment: A design thinking process for solution”. eng. In: International Con­
ference on Research and Innovation in Information Systems, Icriis 2019 (2019),
p. 9073644. ISSN: 23248157, 23248149. DOI: 10.1109/ICRIIS48246.2019.9073644.
[93]
Masoumeh Sarbaz et al. “Views of Health Information Management Staff on Non­
Technical Security Management Factors, Mashhad, Iran”. eng. In: Studies in Health
Technology and Informatics 258 (2019), pp. 65–69. ISSN: 18798365, 09269630.
[94]
Joint Technical Committee. ISO/IEC 27001:2022 Information security, cybersecurity
and privacy protection ­ Information security management systems ­ Requirements.
Tech. rep. International Organization for Standardization, 2022.
[95]
Simon Nam Thanh Vu and Ziru Li. “Improving Cybersecurity in Health Technology
Design, Forbedring af Cybersikkerhed i Sundhedsteknologisk Design”. eng. 2022.
[96]
Anja Sigaard Svinth Storbjerg and Mie Landkildehus. “Teenagers as relatives to an
aphasic parent”. dan. 2022.
[97]
Svana Helen Björnsdottir et al. “Benchmarking ISO Risk Management Systems to
Assess Efficacy and Help Identify Hidden Organizational Risk”. eng. In: Sustainabil­
ity (switzerland) 14.9 (2022), p. 4937. ISSN: 20711050. DOI: 10.3390/su14094937.
[98]
Danmarks Statistik. ”Firmaer og koncerner”. Accessed: 2024­01­23. 2024. URL:
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/erhvervsliv/erhvervslivets-struktur/firmaer-
og-koncerner.
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
91
==PAGE:102==
92
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:103==
A
JRC Cybersecurity Taxonomy
The figure shows how selecting an IT security topic can be illustrated using the Cybersecurity Taxonomy [14]. It is borrowed from their website1.
1cybersecurity­atlas.ec.europa.eu/cybersecurity­taxonomy
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
93
==PAGE:104==
B
Domains Mentioned in the Reviewed
Literature
On the next page is a concept matrix illustrating what domains from the Cybersecurity
Taxonomy [14] are mentioned in the literature reviewed in Section 2.3. The articles are
sorted by year and then alphabetically. In addition, horizontal lines separate the articles
by year published. The first table elaborates on the abbreviations used for domains in the
concept matrix. BT means Broad Topic and the second table elaborates on the abbrevi­
ations used for the narrow topics in the concept matrix.
Acronym
Domain
DP
Data Security and Privacy
ET
Education and Training
HA
Human aspects
IH
Identity Management
IM
Incident Handling and Digital Forensics
SE
Software and Hardware Security Engineering
SG
Security Management and Governance
SM
Security Measurements
Narrow topic
NT1
Cybersecurity­aware culture
NT2
Education methodology
NT3
Human perception of cybersecurity
NT4
Enhancing risk perception
NT5
Coordination and information sharing in the context of
cross­border/organisational incidents
NT6
Incident analysis, communication, documentation, forecasting, response, and
reporting
NT7
Resilience aspects
NT8
Identity and attribute management models, frameworks, applications,
technologies, and tools
NT9
Attack techniques
NT10
Intrusion detection and honeypots
NT11
Vulnerability discovery and penetration testing
NT12
Compliance with information security and privacy policies, procedures, and
regulations
NT13
Risk management, including modelling, assessment, analysis and mitigation
NT14
Managerial aspects concerning information security
NT15
Capability maturity models
NT16
Standards for information security
NT17
Measurement and assessment of security levels
94
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:105==
Domains and Topics
DP
ET
HA
IH
IM
SE
SG
SM
Contribution
Year
BT
BT
NT1
NT2
BT
NT3
NT4
NT5
NT6
NT7
NT8
BT
NT9
NT10
NT11
NT12
NT13
NT14
NT15
NT16
NT17
Siponen and Kajava [67]
1998
x
x
x
x
Abawajy et al. [68]
2008
x
x
x
x
x
Hawkey et al. [69]
2008
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Ifinedo [64]
2008
x
x
x
x
Bashorun et al. [70]
2013
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Aoyama et al. [71]
2015
x
x
x
x
Mahopo et al. [72]
2015
x
x
x
Teodoro et al. [73]
2015
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Asgarkhani et al. [74]
2017
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Vakilinia and Sengupta [75]
2017
x
Cayetano et al. [76]
2018
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Hussain et al. [58]
2020
x
x
x
x
x
x
Kobayashi et al. [77]
2020
x
Putra et al. [78]
2020
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Rege et al. [79]
2020
x
x
x
x
x
Sharif and Ameen [80]
2020
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Simon and Vernard [81]
2020
x
x
x
x
Al­Alawi et al. [82]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Axon et al. [57]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
Branley­Bell et al. [83]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
Chongrui et al. [66]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
Kalhoro et al. [84]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Karim et al. [61]
2021
x
x
Onumo et al. [85]
2021
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Ali et al. [86]
2022
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Humaidi and Alghazo [87]
2022
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Ismail et al. [88]
2022
x
x
x
Ungkap and Daengsi [89]
2022
x
x
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
95
==PAGE:106==
C
Factors Discovered in the Reviewed
Literature
Below is a table listing the factors identified in the reviewed literature in Section 2.4. The
second column denotes which of the HOT categories a factor falls into, cf. 2.4. The third
column shows whether a factor is part of a domain in the Cybersecurity Taxonomy [14].
Abbreviations: ET: Education and Training, HA: Human Aspect, LA: Legal aspects,
SE: Software and Hardware Security Engineering, SG: Security Management and Gov­
ernance, TM: Trust Management and Accountability.
Name
Factor
Domain
#Mentions
Knowledge and awareness
Human
HA
26
Education and training
Organisational
ET
22
Cyber­secure culture
Human/Organisational
ET
10
Active leadership
Human
SG
9
Leadership prioritisation
Organisational
SG
9
Attitude and motivation
Human
HA
6
Environment
Organisational
­
5
Governance
Organisational
SG
5
Lack of commitment to train
Human
HA
5
Knowledge sharing
Human/Organisational
­
5
Allocation of resources
Organisational
SG
4
Structure
Organisational
­
4
Vulnerabilities
Technological
SE
4
Cyber hygiene
Human
HA
3
Improper usage
Human
HA
3
Technical complexity
Technological
TM
3
Too trusting of adversaries
Human
HA
3
Trust in organisation and technology
Human
HA
3
Distributed IT management
Organisational
­
2
Education and experience
Human
ET
2
Ethics
Human
HA
2
Fear of reputation damage
Human
HA
2
Knowing how own role contributes to security
Human
HA
2
Lack of enforcement
Organisational
SG
2
Lack of proper content
Organisational
ET
2
Lack of structure and documentation
Organisational
SG
2
Risk perception
Human
HA
2
Time pressure
Organisational
SG
2
Vulnerabilities in supply chain
Technological
SE
2
Weak incident response plan
Organisational
SG
2
Activities focused on security goals
Organisational
SG
1
Awareness on incident response plan
Human
HA
1
Conflicting culture and personalities
Human
ET
1
Cost­benefit analysis affect control selection
Organisational
SG
1
96
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:107==
Name
Factor
Domain
#Mentions
Demographics
Human
­
1
Excluding non­management role players
Organisational
SG
1
Existing infrastructure affects controls
Technological
SE
1
Experience
Human
ET
1
Fear of adversaries utilising information
Human
HA
1
Fear of competitors utilising information
Human
HA
1
Improper maintenance
Human
SE
1
Interaction and interdependencies between controls
Organisational
SG
1
Interests and values
Human
HA
1
Intrinsic motivation
Human
HA
1
IoT devices
Technological
SE
1
IT infrastructure
Technological
SE
1
Lack accountability
Human
HA
1
Laws and regulations
Organisational
LA
1
Leadership’s communication
Organisational
SG
1
Mobile access
Technological
HA
1
Monitoring of activities
Organisational
SG
1
Onboarding processes and access control
Organisational
SG
1
Perceived cost and benefit
Human
HA
1
Quality of technology affects controls
Technological
SE
1
Quality of training
Human
ET
1
Risk Management
Organisational
SG
1
Self­efficacy
Human
HA
1
Skepticism, disregard, and ignorance
Human
HA
1
Staff fatigue
Human
­
1
Understanding organisational benefits
Human
HA
1
Upgradeability of software
Technological
SE
1
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
97
==PAGE:108==
D
Interview Guide
Below is the interview guide used in the thesis. First is the English and then the Danish
version.
IntroducƟon 
- 
Hello - Thank you for helping me out with my master's thesis project. 
- 
Consent – I have sent a declaraƟon of consent. Have you had Ɵme to look at it? 
- 
Intro - The interview will be about your percepƟon of your organisaƟon's level of IT security and how 
related needs are communicated. This will not be a test of your knowledge or the company’s performance 
but an exploraƟon of the topic and your percepƟon. The informaƟon you share will be detached from your 
idenƟty and kept anonymously i.e., it will be present along with informaƟon from all other interview 
parƟcipants and not shared on its own with anyone.  
IMPORTANT: It is important for me to underline that there are no right and wrong answers in this interview. 
How to sustain an appropriate IT security level depend on the context. 
- 
ClariﬁcaƟon of concepts - I will refer to 
o the company / your company which is the company you are currently working at 
o IT security, which you may know as cybersecurity or informaƟon security 
- 
Time - The duraƟon of the interview should be around 30-40 minutes 
- 
Let's begin - Any quesƟons before I start the recording? 
 
 
98
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:109==
Research questions
Interview questions
Demography
Can you tell me something about yourself like age, educaƟon, experience 
in the company? 
- 
Age 
- 
EducaƟonal background 
- 
How long have you been working for the company? 
- 
How long have you been employed in your current posiƟon? 
Opening quesƟons
How important is IT security for the company?
 
How do you work with IT security? 
- 
What tools, methods, or processes do you use? 
- 
Do you use policies and awareness training? 
 
Do you know of other subjects or acƟviƟes within IT security? 
The rest of the interview will be split into three parts. Each part has a special focus – the perceived security level, 
challenges, and communicaƟon. 
How do the managers perceive their 
IT security? 
Name the top foci for IT security in the company
- 
Is knowledge sharing something you practice? 
 
Are you satisfied with your company's level of IT security? 
- 
Elaborate, please 
- 
Is it part of your workplace culture? 
 
Why do you think the IT security is at the level it is? 
- 
What areas contributes positively/negatively? 
- 
Are the employees’ knowledge and skills at an appropriate level? 
- 
Is the environment in the company constructive for IT security? 
Are the managers aware of 
challenges to the IT security? 
Which areas of IT security in the company is challenged?
- 
What factors have an influence? 
- 
Do you see the employees’ motivation and commitment towards IT 
security as a factor? 
o Does it have a positive or negative influence? 
- 
Are you aware of the employees’ behaviour and whether they 
comply with the company’s policies? (and what is your experience?) 
 
How do you see challenges regarding IT security solved? 
- 
Is management actively participating in solving IT security 
challenges? How? 
- 
Does management prioritise the right areas? Where/where not? 
Are the managers conscious about 
how IT security needs are 
communicated? 
*In day-to-day work*: With whom do you discuss IT security?
 
How and with whom do you communicate the needs you ﬁnd in IT 
security? 
- 
Do you use risk management in this process? 
o To ﬁnd and communicate needs 
 
Is the process of conveying IT security level and needs appropriate? 
Ending quesƟons
I have no further quesƟons; do you have anything you want to add?
- 
or any quesƟons? 
 
 
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
99
==PAGE:110==
IntrodukƟon 
- 
Goddag – Tak fordi du vil hjælpe mig med mit specialeprojekt! 
- 
Samtykke – Jeg har sendt en samtykkeerklæring, har du haŌ Ɵd Ɵl at kigge på den? 
- 
Intro – Interviewet vil handle om din opfaƩelse af din organisaƟons IT sikkerhedsniveau og hvordan behov 
relateret derƟl bliver kommunikeret. DeƩe vil ikke være en test af din viden eller virksomhedens 
præstaƟon, men en udforskning af emnet og din opfaƩelse. Den informaƟon, som du deler, vil blive 
aŅoblet fra din idenƟtet og opbevaret anonymt – Det vil blive præsenteret sammen med informaƟon fra 
alle andre interviewdeltagere og ikke delt i sig selv med nogen. 
VIGTIG: Opretholdelse af et godt IT-sikkerhedsniveau aĬænger af kontekst. Da jeg ikke har særlig kendskab 
Ɵl jeres kontekst kommer jeg Ɵl at spørge mere generelt ind Ɵl IT-sikkerhed. Det er vigƟgt for mig at 
understrege, at der ikke vil være rigƟge eller forkerte svar i interviewet. 
- 
AŅlaring af begreber – Jeg vil referere Ɵl 
o Virksomheden / jeres virksomhed som er den virksomhed du arbejder for 
o IT-sikkerhed, som du måske kender som cybersikkerhed eller informaƟonssikkerhed  
- 
Varighed – Interviewet kommer Ɵl at varer ca. 30-40 minuƩer 
- 
Lad os begynde – Har du nogen spørgsmål, før jeg starter optagelsen? 
100
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:111==
Forskningsspørgsmål
Interviewspørgsmål
Demograﬁ
Kan du fortælle mig noget om dig selv så som din alder, uddannelse og 
erfaring i virksomheden 
- 
Alder 
- 
Uddannelsesbaggrund 
- 
Hvor lang Ɵd har du arbejdet i virksomheden? 
- 
Hvor lang Ɵd har du været ansat i din nuværende sƟlling? 
Åbningsspørgsmål
Hvor vigƟg er IT-sikkerhed for virksomheden?
 
Hvordan arbejder I med IT-sikkerhed? 
- 
Hvilke værktøjer, metoder og processer gør I brug af? 
- 
Gør I brug af poliƟkker og awareness træning? 
 
Kender du Ɵl andre emner eller akƟviteter indenfor IT-sikkerhed? 
Resten af interviewet bliver opdelt i 3 dele, hvor hver del har et særligt fokus: det opfaƩede sikkerhedsniveau, 
udfordringer og kommunikaƟon. 
Hvordan opfatter lederne deres IT-
sikkerhed? 
Kan du nævne nogle hovedfokusser for IT-sikkerhed i virksomheden?
- 
Er de ansattes vidensdeling noget I arbejdet med? 
 
Er du Ɵlfreds med din virksomheds IT-sikkerhedsniveau? 
- 
Uddyb gerne 
- 
Er det en del af kulturen på arbejdspladsen? 
 
Hvorfor tror du, at IT-sikkerheden er på det pågældende niveau? 
- 
Hvilke områder bidrager positivt/negativt? 
- 
Er de ansattes viden og evner på et passende niveau? 
- 
Er miljøet i virksomheden konstruktivt ift. IT-sikkerheden 
Er lederne opmærksomme på 
udfordringer ved IT-sikkerheden? 
Hvilke områder af IT-sikkerhed i virksomheden er udfordret?
- 
Hvilke faktorer har indflydelse på dem? 
- 
Ser du de ansattes engagement og motivation for IT-sikkerhed som 
en faktor? 
o Har det en positiv eller negativ indflydelse? 
- 
Er du opmærksom på de ansattes adfærd og om de overholder 
virksomhedens politikker? (og hvordan opleves det?) 
 
Hvordan ser du disse udfordringer ved IT-sikkerhed blive løst? 
- 
Deltager ledelsen aktivt i at løse udfordringer med IT-sikkerhed? 
Hvordan? 
- 
Prioritere ledelsen de rigtige steder? Hvor/hvor ikke? 
Er lederne bevidste om hvordan IT-
sikkerhedsbehov bliver 
kommunikeret? 
*I dit daglige arbejde*: Med hvem taler du om IT-sikkerhed?
 
Hvordan og med hvem kommunikerer du de behov, du ser, ved IT-
sikkerhed? 
- 
Bruger du risikoledelse i denne proces? 
o Til at finde og kommunikere behov 
 
Er processen med at formidle IT-sikkerhedsniveau of -behov passende? 
AfsluƩende spørgsmål
Jeg har ikke flere spørgsmål; har du noget du gerne vil tilføje?
- 
Eller nogle spørgsmål? 
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
101
==PAGE:112==
E
Questionnaire
Below is the questionnaire that was answered by the respondents in the thesis.
Welcome 
This questionnaire is part of my master’s thesis on IT security in organisations. Specifically, how top management and 
employees responsible for IT security perceive their organisation’s IT security level and related communication. 
I hope you will spend 5-7 minutes to fill out this questionnaire. 
Clarification of terms: 
 
The company you are currently employed in is referred to as your organisation 
 
IT security covers information security and cybersecurity 
NB: This is not a test of your knowledge or your organisation’s performance but an exploration of the topic and your 
perception. 
Your answer will be anonymous. By filling out the questionnaire, you consent to the use of your answers in the 
research. 
Cheers, 
Erik Bjørnholt 
 
About you 
1. What is your sex? 
 Male 
 Female 
 Other 
 I do not wish to select either option 
2. What is your age? 
 < 20 
 20-29 
 30-39 
 40-49 
 50-59 
 60-69 
 > 69 
3. How many years have you been employed in your organisation? 
 < 1 year 
 1-5 years 
 6-10 years 
 11-15 years 
 > 15 years 
4. How many years have you worked in your current position or similar? 
 < 1 year 
 1-5 years 
 6-10 years 
 11-15 years 
 > 15 years 
 
 
102
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:113==
5. What is your current position in your organisation? 
If you are responsible for IT security, select this option. 
 Responsible for IT security (e.g. CISO and head of security) 
 CEO 
 CFO 
 COO 
 CMO 
 CTO 
 CIO 
 CRM 
 Member of the board 
 President 
 Vice President 
 Other  _____ 
6. How many people are employed in your organisation? 
 1-9 employees 
 10-99 employees 
 100-249 employees 
 250-999 employees 
 > 1000 employees 
 
About IT security in your organisation 
The remaining questions are about your perception of your organisation's IT security, i.e. NOT how you think everyone 
else perceives your organisation's IT security. 
7. How important is IT security to your organisation? 
 Irrelevant 
 Not important 
 Somewhat important 
 Important 
 Very important 
8. Which of the following domains are a core part of IT security in your organisation? 
You may select multiple answers 
 Organisational culture 
 Education and training 
 Employees' general behaviour 
 Employees' knowledge, awareness, and skills 
 Policymaking 
 Compliance with policies 
 Risk management 
 Management participation 
 Knowledge-sharing within your organisation 
 Environment (e.g. enough time, tools available) 
 Other  _____ 
 None of the above 
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
103
==PAGE:114==
9. Which of the following domains are challenging your organisation’s IT security? 
You may select multiple answers 
 Organisational culture 
 Lack of education and training 
 Unwillingness to learn or train 
 Employees' general behaviour 
 Employees' knowledge, awareness, and skills 
 Lack of security policy or policy quality 
 Lack of compliance with security policy 
 Lack of or poor risk management 
 Management participation 
 Lack of knowledge-sharing within your organisation 
 Environment (e.g. enough time, tools available) 
 Other  _____ 
 None of the above 
10. What is your organisation’s overall security level? 
 Very low 
 Low 
 Medium 
 High 
 Very high 
11. Which domains can solve challenges to your organisation’s IT security? 
You may select multiple answers 
 Organisational culture 
 Education and training 
 Employees' general behaviour 
 Employees' knowledge, awareness, and skills 
 Policymaking 
 Compliance with policies 
 Risk management 
 Management participation 
 Knowledge-sharing within your organisation 
 Environment (e.g. enough time, tools available) 
 Other  _____ 
 None of the above 
12. How well-equipped are you to communicate IT security? 
This includes conveying and understanding issues and solutions regarding IT security – both with members of top 
management and employees responsible for IT security. 
 Not equipped (You have a hard time communicating) 
 Somewhat equipped (You understand a small portion of IT security communicated and can convey it at a low 
 Equipped (You understand some communication of IT security and can convey it at a medium level) 
 Well-equipped (You understand most communication of IT security and can convey it at a high level) 
 Perfectly equipped (You understand all communication of IT security and can convey it at an excellent level) 
104
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:115==
13. In what area of IT security would you like to be more proficient in communicating? 
 IT security at a technical level (e.g. perimeter security, network security, data security) 
 IT security at a broad organisational level (e.g. culture, environment, policymaking, risk management) 
 IT security at a human level (e.g. employees’ behaviour, awareness, knowledge, and skills) 
 IT security at a managerial level (e.g. key performance indicators (KPIs), business contingency and continuity plan, 
capital and operating expenditures (CapEx and OpEx)) 
14. Which of the following domains (if any) is under-prioritised in your organisation? 
You may select multiple answers 
 Organisational culture 
 Education and training 
 Employees' general behaviour 
 Employees' knowledge, awareness, and skills 
 Policymaking 
 Compliance with policies 
 Risk management 
 Management participation 
 Knowledge-sharing within your organisation 
 Environment (e.g. enough time, tools available) 
 Other  _____ 
 None of the above 
15. Do you have any comments you want to add? 
 
 
 
 
Thank you for your time.  
 
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
105
==PAGE:116==
F
Declaration of Consent and Info Sheet
Below is the declaration of content sheet. It was sent out to the informants before inter­
viewing them.
Study on perception of IT security in organisations
Information and consent sheet
Information about the study
Research aim: The goal of this research is to investigate organisations’ perceptions of IT security and
how related needs are communicated. The focus of this study is to assess the attitude of organisa‑
tions’ top management (e.g. CEO or CFO) and an employee responsible for IT security (e.g. CISO or
IT manager). Studies show that an individual’s perception of IT security influences their attitude to‑
wards it and actual security behaviour. Thus, this study is not about unveiling any IT security issues
of organisations but instead exploring whether any discrepancies in perception of IT security exist.
You as a participant have been employed in your current position or equal for at least one year and
in the company you represent for at least half a year.
I as the author am a master’s student studying Computer Science and Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU).
The process
The interview of each employee will last for 30‑40 minutes. From each organisation, a member of
top management and an employee responsible for IT security will be interviewed. Audio from the
interviews is recorded and afterwards transcribed for further analysis. Information that can be used
to identify you as a person or your company will be removed from the transcription.
Data handling
The audio recording of the interview will be stored locally on a recording device and then trans‑
ferred to a computer and stored locally. Furthermore, transcription of the recordings will be con‑
ducted locally and then anonymised. After transcription, the recording will be deleted. Participants’
anonymized data will be used in a thesis and possible future scientific publications.
Kind regards
Erik Krabbe Bjørnholt
Phone: +45 20 30 72 71
Email: s210522@dtu.dk
Declaration of consent
I have received information about this study and agree with the following:
• I am voluntarily participating in this study and have the right to not participate in the interview or
refuse to answer questions during the interview
• At any point during the interview, I can stop the interview
• At any point, before the study is handed in, I can withdraw my participation
• The audio of the interview will be recorded and stored securely by the study’s author and deleted
after the study has ended all by current legislation
• I can at any point ask questions about the study
• All information from the interview will be anonymised
• The results of the interview will exclusively be used in the study and presentations of it.
By signing this letter, I give consent to the above
Date: 
Signature:
106
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:117==
G
Comparison of Codes
Below is a table displaying the subjects which represents the codes from Section 3.2.
Each row can represent one of two cases: (1) how the informants perceive their organisa­
tions’ level in a specific area (a subject which comprises multiple codes) and (2) whether
the informants agree with a subject (a single code). In the former, a cell will represent
whether an informant is positive (+), negative (­), or neutral (0) towards the subject. In
rare cases, an informant is both negative and positive (+/­) or negative and neutral (0/­)
towards a subject. In the latter, a cell will represent whether an informant mentions it (X if
mentioned). When a subject was not mentioned or rated/mentioned by an informant, the
corresponding cell is left empty.
Informant #
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Overall Security
Importance
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Satisfied
+
+
+
+
+
+
­
Not perfect
x
x
x
x
x
Never good enough
x
x
x
Level
Human
Awareness
­
0/­
+
+
+
+
Behaviour
­
­
+
+
+
+
+
Compliance
+
+
+
Knowledge and skills
­
­
+
­
+
+
+
Motivated
+
+
+
+
+
+
­
Responsive
+
Accept inconvenience
+
+
Peripheral employees
­
­
Organisational
Culture
­
+
0
+
+
+
­
­
Environment
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Knowledge­sharing
+
+
Processes
­
+
Security control
­
Contingency plan
­
Communication
Satisfied with organisation’s level
+/­
+
+
+
I am sufficiently proficient
+
+
­
+
­
+
+
­
Others are sufficiently proficient
+
­
+
+
+
+
+
Management
Support
+/­
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Reactive
x
x
x
x
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
107
==PAGE:118==
Informant #
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Important component
Human
Fear of consequences improves
x
x
x
Others level improves
x
x
Employees are PoE (challenge)
x
x
x
x
People challenge
x
x
Human measures are secondary priority
x
Behaviour challenges
x
Behaviour is a priority
x
x
x
x
Behaviour is secondary priority
x
Non­cyber threats are secondary priority
x
Awareness challenges
x
x
Awareness is a priority
x
x
x
Attitude challenges
x
x
Type of staff challenge
x
Phishing attacks challenge
x
x
Organisational
Awareness campaign improves
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Team­centred actions improve
x
Instilling ownership improves
x
Hosting external speakers improve
x
Honesty improves
x
Governance improves
x
Processes is a priority
x
x
Policies is a priority
x
Insurance is a priority
x
Contingency plan is a priority
x
Management’s interest improves
x
x
Dedicated CISO improves
x
x
Workload challenges
x
x
x
108
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:119==
Informant #
Subject
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Important component
Technological
Technical measures is a priority
x
Operations is a priority
x
x
x
Technical audits improve
x
x
Authentication improves
x
x
Access rights are a priority
x
x
Modern systems improve
x
x
Digital policies improve
x
Technical aspects challenge
x
x
Equipment challenge
x
Third­party access challenge
x
Digital systems challenge
x
x
x
Data is a priority
x
Monitoring network challenges
x
Network is a priority
x
Backup is a priority
x
Physical constraints challenge
x
x
Outsourcing challenges
x
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
109
==PAGE:120==
H
Data for graphs
Below is the data for the graphs presented in Section 3.4.
How important is IT security to your organisation?
Answer
Group
Irrelevant
Not
important
Somewhat
important
Important
Very
important
Security­responsibles
0
0
0
2
9
Managers
0
1
1
2
13
Others
0
0
0
1
8
What is your organisation’s overall security level?
Answer
Group
Very low
Low
Medium
High
Very high
Security­responsibles
0
1
5
2
3
Managers
0
1
4
10
2
Others
0
0
4
3
2
Which of the following domains are a core part of IT security in your organisation?
Answer
Group
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk management
Management Participation
Knowledge­sharing
Environment
Other
None of the above
Security­responsibles
7
9
5
9
7
8
9
7
6
4
1
0
Managers
7
11
8
13
8
5
11
8
10
2
0
0
Others
2
4
1
6
3
3
5
1
6
2
0
0
110
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:121==
Which of the following domains are challenging your organisation’s IT security?
Answer
Group
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk management
Management Participation
Knowledge­sharing
Environment
Unwillingness to learn
Other
None of the above
Security­responsibles
7
2
5
3
1
3
3
1
4
3
0
1
1
Managers
4
2
4
4
2
1
3
1
0
1
2
2
3
Others
1
2
1
2
0
1
1
1
1
2
2
0
2
Which domains can solve challenges to your organisation’s IT security?
Answer
Group
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk management
Management Participation
Knowledge­sharing
Environment
Other
None of the above
Security­responsibles
7
5
3
4
1
1
5
5
3
4
1
0
Managers
5
3
3
2
3
2
6
5
3
2
1
2
Others
1
4
1
3
1
2
0
1
1
2
0
1
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
111
==PAGE:122==
Which of the following domains (if any) is under­prioritised in your organisation?
Answer
Group
Culture
Training
Behaviour
Awareness
Policymaking
Compliance
Risk management
Management Participation
Knowledge­sharing
Environment
Other
None of the above
Security­responsibles
2
0
2
1
2
4
3
3
1
1
2
1
Managers
5
6
2
4
4
4
7
5
4
4
0
3
Others
1
3
0
2
0
2
1
1
0
2
0
3
How well­equipped are you to communicate IT security?
Answer
Group
Not
equipped
Somewhat
equipped
Equipped
Well­
equipped
Perfectly
equipped
Security­responsibles
0
1
1
4
5
Managers
1
3
2
7
4
Others
0
2
2
5
0
In what area of IT security would you like to be more proficient in communicating?
Answer
Group
Technical
Organisational
Human
Managerial
Security­responsibles
2
4
2
3
Managers
2
7
5
3
Others
3
0
3
3
112
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
==PAGE:123==
Security­responsibles’ and top management’s perceptions of their IT security
113
==PAGE:124==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
