==PAGE:1==
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applica­
tions in Event­Driven Architectures
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Jonas Weile
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Jonas Weile ­ s173906
Signature
Date
ii
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The landscape of data has been changing for the last many years, with both the quantity
and velocity of data increasing rapidly. Data driven businesses have already embraced
this fact and moved towards more modern data architectures with stream processing ca­
pabilities, specially built for handling large amounts of real­time data. However, being
able to handle real­time analytical data is important for all types of organizations, and the
traditional data­warehouse struggles to handle this type of data. The trend of moving to­
wards architectures based on real­time streaming data is therefore spreading to all types
of organizations.
While these state of the art stream­based data­processing architectures are great for
churning through extraordinary amounts of data with extremely low latency, they intro­
duce a number of unique challenges when being applied to traditional data­warehousing
use cases. In data­warehouses, it is not just about churning through incoming data as
fast as possible, it is about bringing all of the historic data inside an organization together,
making it conform to a common model, and providing a single source of truth for the entire
organization. Data warehouses therefore typically contain very large amounts of historical
data.
This paper deals with one key issue of applying stream processing in the context of data­
warehouses, namely how to handle the necessary reprocessing of data. Data must be
reprocessed whenever the schema is changed or the underlying data­processing logic is
updated, and this introduces a number of non­trivial problems. Most importantly, it tightly
couples the life cycles of the producers of this data to the downstream consumers, mean­
ing that whenever a producer application is updated and reprocesses the vast amount of
historical data, the downstream consumer applications must be restarted along with it.
We explore a solution to this problem that splits streams into a versioned producer output
stream and a versionless consumer input stream. Then, we insert a stream­processor
application in between these streams, and it is the responsibility of this stream­processor
to keep the input stream to the consumers up­to­date with the latest version of the pro­
ducer output stream. In this way, we achieve a decoupling of the life cycles, while both
producers and consumers remain unaware of any changes that have been made to the
architecture.
In Tryg A/S, they are facing exactly this problem with their modern datahub implementa­
tion, build upon an ephemeral, event­driven architecture. This project is therefore devel­
oped in close collaboration with Tryg A/S, and aims to provide a proof of concept solution
that can be deployed and used inside their architecture.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Jonas Weile, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Jørgen Villadsen, Associate Professor, DTU Compute
I owe a great thanks to Jørgen Villadsen for the trust he has put in me, as well as for the
support he has provided.
Andreas Harmuth, Data Engineering Manager, Tryg A/S
I am very thankful to both Andreas and Tryg in general for providing me with both an
interesting problem, and a platform to experiment on.
Anna Fogh Gransøe, Partner
Finally, I do not know how I would have gotten through this long process without the love
and care from my girlfriend.
iv
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
API Application Programming Interface
CDC Change Data Capture
CI/CD Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery
CRD Custom Resource Definition
DAG Directed Acyclic Graph
DRY Don’t Repeat Yourself
EDA Event­Driven Architecture
ESS Event Sourced System
POJO Plain Old Java Object
RDBMS Relational Database Management System
SCD Slowly Changing Dimensions
SDLC Software Development Life Cycle
SLA Service Level Agreement
SOA Service­Oriented Architecture
UDF User­Defined Function
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Research Goals and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Overview of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Technical Background and Related Work
7
2.1
Event­Driven Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Event Stream Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Software Development Life Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Analysis
23
3.1
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.4
Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.5
Reconcile Operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Stream Processor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.7
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.8
Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Design
45
4.1
Stream­Processor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.2
Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
4.3
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5
Implementation
65
5.1
Project Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
5.2
Programming Languages and Build Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.3
Stream­Processor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.4
Operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
5.5
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
6
Evaluation
83
6.1
Unit and Integration Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
6.2
Performance Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
7
Discussion
89
7.1
Goals and Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
7.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
vii
==PAGE:10==
8
Conclusion
93
Bibliography
95
A Hash Precision
99
viii
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
This chapter presents the background for the thesis and defines the problem it will attempt
to solve. It lays out the concrete goals and the methods for achieving these, and argues
for the impact that will be made by solving these goals. Finally, it presents an overview of
the rest of the thesis.
1.1
Background
The term big data was coined over twenty years ago to describe the explosive growth in
both the volume, velocity, and variety of data [1]. Still, the volume and velocity of data
keep growing to this day [2]. Companies are in a constant race to leverage the available
insights and analytics that can be derived from this data in order to make better decisions
and stay ahead of their competition. A growing number of real­time use cases require
the businesses to immediately process the incoming data, demanding very aggressive
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) of the data infrastructure. As a result, there has been
a move towards real­time data streaming architectures that can react to data in motion
[3]. This trend has, in part, been accelerated by the introduction of Apache Kafka.
Apache Kafka is a distributed messaging system which is able to deliver high volumes of
log data to consumers orders of magnitudes faster than conventional messaging systems
[4]. Kafka provides a way to access the data while it is still in motion by publishing streams
of events to a broker. Consumers can then subscribe to each stream and consume events
with minimal latency. By combining the event­streaming capabilities of Kafka with a stream
processing framework (like Apache Flink [5], Kafka Streams [6], or Spark streaming [7])
that provides in­stream processing of events, businesses are able to build large­scale
event­driven architectures that enable them to make rapid decisions.
In such an event­driven architecture with event­streaming capabilities, it is often desirable
to bundle a given type of events inside a single stream. This simplifies the operation of
consumers; a consumer which is interested in a particular type of events can simply sub­
scribe to the corresponding stream. However, the producer applications of these streams
should be versioned like regular software, and this can cause problems when the producer
applications are updated. If all the previously produced events need to be updated as well,
how is this handled by the consumer? A naive solution to this is to bundle the consumers
into the life cycle of the producers, restarting the consumers with the new event stream
on every update of the producer. This ensures eventual consistency, as the consumer
application is effectively replayed with the new version of the stream, but it causes a hard
coupling between the producers and consumers. This is the current approach that Tryg
A/S is taking inside their enterprise datahub, and they are therefore looking for a way to
decouple the life cycles of producers and consumers. The goal of this thesis is to design
and implement a solution to this problem which fits into the existing ecosystem in Tryg
A/S.
1.1.1
Tryg360
The datahub implementation in Tryg A/S is called Tryg360. Tryg360 is built around an
event­driven architecture, and further borrows many concepts from event sourcing. A
high­level overview of the architecture of Tryg360 is given in fig. 1.1.
Tryg360 is maintained as a monorepo containing the source code and configurations de­
scribing a large number of data pipelines. This means, that the system is completely
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: A condensed view of Tryg360. At a very high­level view, Tryg360 is merely
a large number of streaming pipelines that process Kafka streams. These input streams
are transformed into a number of new streams that conform to the Tryg data model.
ephemeral, and any user could spin­up their own environment of Tryg360. At the time of
writing, Tryg360 is released every fortnight. A new release simply creates a new environ­
ment, incorporating all changes that has been added to the monorepo since the previous
release.
To get data into Tryg360, the data first has to be captured from the origin system and
stored in a Kafka cluster as data streams. This is typically done through Change Data
Capture (CDC) applied to classic relational database management systems, but can also
be imported through REST APIs or simple file transfer. This Kafka cluster storing all the
source data is referred to as RAW, and while it is a strong dependency of Tryg360, it is not
directly considered to be part of Tryg360. Instead, each Tryg360 environment copies the
data from the RAW cluster into its own environment. Then, a large number of pipelines
transform the data to make it conform to the Tryg Model, with each pipeline being respon­
sible for a single data source. The data is transformed using stream processors, and
every pipeline might run a large number of processors that consume from a wide range of
sources. These stream processors store intermediate streams in another, internal Kafka
cluster, and the final transformed data streams are stored inside the KADL Kafka cluster,
with KADL being an acronym for Kafka Acord Distribution Layer. This data is then made
available to consumers through a number of different services.
The concrete problem that Tryg is facing, and that this thesis aims to tackle a small part
of, is the goal of being able to update Tryg360 environments in­place, instead of having
to spin­up completely new environments every two weeks. Specifically, Tryg would like
to move towards a setup where only the changed data pipelines needs to be redeployed,
with minimal impact on the rest of the system. This setup would significantly improve the
agility of the system, allowing developers to continuously integrate changes with minimal
delay. The underlying problem that makes this goal hard to achieve, is the requirement
for Tryg360 to maintain the full history of data.
1.1.2
Data History
Maintaining the history of data means capturing how it has changed over time. In data
management, the different methodologies to handle data points changing over time is
captured through the different Slowly Changing Dimensions (SCD) Types [8]. Type 1,
for example, simply overwrites old values with the new data and thus keeps no history,
2
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.2: An example showing a number of coupled producer/consumer applications.
We label the applications with numbers to be able to refer to them individually.
whereas Type 2 appends the changed data point as a new row, thereby keeping any
previous values. When representing data using events, however, we can go even further
in our quest for maintaining history. In particular, we can enable historic views at any point
in time. Since each change to a particular data point is captured and stored as an event,
we also know at which points in time the changes to the data points happened. Further,
we also capture deletions through events. We can therefore enable users to view the
complete historic data as it appeared at some time in the past, even if that data has since
been modified or deleted.
Now, requiring this complete history of events, then whenever a producer application is
updated, it is not enough to apply the updated logic to all future incoming events. Instead,
a producer application must replay the entire history of its input streams in order to cap­
ture any changed events. However, this causes problems for downstream consumers.
Imagine a setup as illustrated in fig. 1.2. If application 1 is updated and has to repro­
cess all of its inputs and reproduce all the output events, these new events cannot be
appended to the same output stream as before, as the historical events would suddenly
be conflicting. Instead of producing to the same stream, application 1 could then version
its output streams, and whenever the application is updated to a new version, it creates a
corresponding new output stream. But then, the consumers 4 and 5 must be restarted to
consume from this new version of the stream, and these two application must in turn cre­
ate new versions of their output streams. Following this recursive argument to its end, we
see that all applications that can be reached by following the directed arrows from applica­
tion 1 must be updated to the new version. Updating a single producer application, even
with very minor changes, will thus trigger an avalanche of other applications that must be
updated as well. This is clearly inefficient, and quickly becomes very hard to manage. To
avoid this, one can instead bundle all applications into the same life cycle, updating all
the applications at once at some specific interval. But this is exactly how the life cycle
of producer and consumer applications are bundled together inside Tryg360, with each
release applying all the updates since the last release.
Instead, we then want to somehow decouple the versioned output streams of the pro­
ducers from the downstream consumers, allowing small updates to single applications.
Returning to fig. 1.2, then when application 1 is updated and creates a new version of
the output stream, we do not want to restart applications 4 and 5 to consume from this
new stream, but they should still be updated to be eventually consistent with this new
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
3
==PAGE:14==
version of the stream. Ideally, we want to keep all downstream applications running and
only propagate the actual updates that this new stream version contains compared to the
previous version.
1.2
Problem statement
Summarizing the background section, the goal of this thesis is to design and implement a
solution to decouple the life cycles of producer and consumer applications in the datahub
implementation of Tryg A/S. The problem statement has been formulated as follows:
Given an event­driven architecture with producer applications that apply ar­
bitrary transformations to an immutable event log, how can the life cycle of
producer applications be decoupled from downstream consumers while main­
taining eventual consistency and high scalabilty?
Thus, the research question of the thesis is focused on the software engineering aspect
of creating such a solution. To make this problem statement more manageable, we break
it down into a number of more specific goals, that we will then aim to achieve throughout
the project. These goals are as follows:
1. How can the life cycle of producers and consumers of event streams inside an event­
driven architecture be decoupled?
2. How does the solution ensure eventual consistency?
3. How does the solution maintain high scalability?
4. How does the solution solve the unique requirements of Tryg A/S?
1.3
Research Goals and Methods
This section will elaborate on the research questions posed by the problem statement,
describing how each of the questions can be answered.
1.3.1
How can the life cycle of producers and consumers of event
streams inside an event­driven architecture be decoupled?
In an event driven architecture, producer and consumer applications are connected by
event streams. Every producer application writes to event streams, and the consumers
correspondingly read from event streams. To decouple the life cycles of producers and
consumers, it is therefore apparent that the producer applications cannot write directly to
the streams from which the consumers read. The thesis will therefore explore how to de­
sign and implement a component that can be inserted between producers and consumers,
maintaining a separate stream for consumers to read from, while keeping this stream up
to date with the producer application.
1.3.2
How does the solution ensure eventual consistency?
In context of the previous question, consistency is the problem of keeping the separated
output streams of the producer and the input stream of the consumer applications syn­
chronized. Eventual consistency allows the length of this synchronization process to be
arbitrarily long. It will be thoroughly analyzed how consistency can be achieved in the
given context, and we will then define an operator that we can directly show satisfies this
requirement. In addition, the implementation will be empirically validated through tests.
1.3.3
How does the solution maintain high scalability?
To ensure high scalability, the product must be designed with scalability as a primitive;
scalability is not easily added as an afterthought. Scalability will therefore be part of the
4
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:15==
analysis chapter and the requirements that will be defined there. This ensures the scalabil­
ity is considered in the design of the product, and the evaluation chapter will then include
tests to show how well the end product is able to scale.
1.3.4
How does the solution solve the unique requirements of Tryg A/S?
The concrete requirements are defined and analyzed in the Analysis chapter, with em­
phasis on a requirement for correctness, and low latency being important as well. The
possible trade­offs will be analyzed, and the product will be designed with configurability
in mind, allowing deployments of the product to be tuned to the specific requirements. In
addition, it is important that the product is able to seamlessly integrate with the existing
ecosystem in Tryg. To ensure this, the product will be designed with technologies that are
already in use inside Tryg, and the final implementation will be deployed to the internal
company infrastructure, where it will eventually be tested and benchmarked.
1.4
Impact
Decoupling the life cycles of producer and consumer applications is a prerequisite for im­
plementing a more fine­grained and agile deployment pipeline of Tryg360. Improving the
agility of the software development process is paramount for ensuring rapid and contin­
uous delivery, improving collaboration with customers and the efficiency of developers.
It will enable a new software development life­cycle, where developers continuously in­
tegrate changes and make frequent deliveries to customers and stakeholders. Further,
it will allow errors to be caught early as updates can be shipped out immediately and
independently, instead of being bundled with a number of other updates which might in­
terfere with each other in unpredictable ways. Finally, due to the sheer amount of data
contained inside Tryg360, redeploying the entire system is not only slow and inflexible, it
also comes at a significant monetary cost. The long term goal is to drastically decrease
the cost associated with deployment.
1.5
Overview of Thesis
The following chapters will present the software product that has been developed to tackle
the given problem statement. Each part of the software development process will be
treated in a separate chapter. The overview of thesis is as follows:
The Background chapter will give the reader a thorough introduction to the underlying
concepts and paradigms that this thesis is build upon, as well as giving a short presenta­
tion on software development life cycles and why this endeavour is important. Then, the
Analysis chapter will define the constraints and requirements that a product must fulfill
to solve the problem statement. Based on this analysis, the Design chapter presents a
detailed design for a number of independent components that can be combined to meet
these requirements, and the Implementation chapter will explain how this design has been
brought to life as a real software product. This product is then tested and benchmarked
in the Evaluation chapter, before we reflect upon whether this product fulfills the defined
problem statement and research goals inside the Discussion chapter. The Discussion
chapter will further consider any limitations to the current product and highlight how these
can be mitigated through future work. Finally, the Conclusion will summarize the thesis.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
5
==PAGE:16==
6
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:17==
2
Technical Background and Related
Work
This chapter presents the necessary background for the reader to follow and understand
the following chapters of the thesis. We start by exploring what event­driven architec­
tures like Tryg360 are, before we dive into event­stream processing. Then, we give an
introduction to the agile methodology and CI/CD. Lastly, we will describe some related
work.
2.1
Event­Driven Architecture
An Event­Driven Architecture is an architectural pattern that uses events to connect the
components of a (typically) large, complex system. Whenever a change happens to the
system, whether this change originated from the outside world or as a consequence of an
action taken inside the system, this change is recorded as an event. The event is then
made available to all components that might be affected by the change, and these affected
components might produce new events corresponding to any actions taken to handle the
original event. Events therefore represent facts ­ they document that something happened
that might be of interest to the system. But the events themselves do not contain any
logic that dictates how the system should react to such an event, it is instead up to the
individual components to define how they each handle different types of events [9, 10].
An event driven architecture thus provides an alternative to more classic command­driven
architectures, such as systems that communicate by a request/response pattern like RPC
[11, Chapter 4].
2.1.1
Events, Producers, and Consumers
A concrete example showcasing the typical architecture of an event­driven application is
shown in fig. 2.1. In general, an event­driven architecture consists of event producers
that generate events and push them downstream, some kind of broker/router to delegate
events to consumers, and event consumers that listen/react to events. Note, that an
application or service in an event­driven architecture is usually not limited to behave as
only producer nor consumer; often an application will both produce and consume events.
To derive meaningful information from events, they must contain the immutable source
data describing the cause of the event, as well as the timestamp at which the original
event took place [12]. It is vital that the original events are immutable. Imagine that
several independent consumers are subscribing to the same events, but that any of these
consumers have the power to mutate the events. Effectively, this allows the consumers to
rewrite history, and the system suddenly becomes highly nondeterministic; the outcome
depends on the order in which the consumers access the events.
Requiring immutability underlines the importance of modelling events as pure facts. This
ensures that an application should never need to mutate the events, as the factual record­
ing of what happened is by definition immutable. Instead, if something needs to be undone
or modified, the system emits a new event that undoes this action, effectively accomplish­
ing a revocation or modification, but without removing the previous event.
The importance of the timestamp is almost self­evident; to make sense of an event, we
need to be able to place it in a context, more specifically we need to know when it occurred.
In cases where events can arrive out­order, attaching a timestamp is also paramount to
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.1: The ubiquitous example of an Event­Driven Architecture; an online retailer.
Events are constantly produced by customers interacting with the website, and these
events are processed real­time to generate recommendations, update inventories, and
billing customers, etc.
ensure the correctness of the system. The timestamp allows the consumers to recon­
struct the actual timeline of events. Together, immutability and timestamps ensure that
consumers can process identical events in the same order. The importance of this follows
from a classic result in distributed systems regarding state machine replication: given the
same starting state, if a number of processes apply the same changes in the same or­
der, they are guaranteed to end up in the same state [13]. This allows all components of
the system to agree on the current state. Moreover, a consumer can replay the history
of events and be guaranteed to end up in an identical state every time. This has huge
implications for fault­tolerance, see section 2.1.3.
2.1.2
Models
Different models of the event­driven architecture can be achieved depending on the be­
haviour/implementation of the event broker. Commonly, we distinguish between the fol­
lowing two types of models [14]:
• Publish and Subscribe: The pub/sub model is an asynchronous, push­based mes­
saging pattern. Consumers subscribe to classes of event types through the event
broker. When an event producer sends an event to the broker, the broker asyn­
chronously pushes a notification to all the consumers that subscribe to the given
event class. These consumers then consume the event, and once the event has
been processed by all consumers, the event broker permanently deletes the event.
The publish and subscribe model is illustrated on the left side of figure fig. 2.2.
The push­based model eliminates polling on the consumer side, as the consumers
8
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.2: The two different models of event driven architectures. A publish/subscribe
model is pictured on the left. Here, the event broker routes messages directly from pub­
lishers to subscribers. On the right, the event streaming model is pictured. Here, the
event broker collects events into event streams that are durably stored, and the event
consumers can then selectively consume from these streams.
are notified whenever an event is available; this translates into extremely low latency.
However, new consumers that are registering with the broker will not receive past
events, and events are not replayable.
• Event Streaming: The event­streaming model is an asynchronous, pull­based mes­
saging pattern. In the event­streaming model, the event broker collects events into
partitioned event streams that are durably stored. The broker does not notify con­
sumers on the arrival of new events, instead it is the responsibility of the consumers
to keep track of their position in the event stream. To detect the arrival of new events,
consumers must therefore continuously poll the event broker. The event­streaming
model is illustrated on the right side of fig. 2.2.
The event streaming model enables consumers to step into each stream at any
point and consume specific subsets of the events. It also allows for a more diverse
consumption pattern, since consumers themselves control the rate of consumption.
Finally, since events are retained, new consumers can access the entire history of
events.
In recent years, the event­streaming model has achieved mainstream adoption with help
from log­based data streaming platforms such as Apache Kafka [4]. Kafka is able to
manage the transmission of massive amounts of events through optimizations such as
partitioning and aggressive batching.
In event streaming, the requirement of immutable events (as touched upon in the previous
section) is extended to the streams themselves. The ability to replay streams of events
hinges on the presumption that neither the events themselves, nor the ordering of events
inside a stream, can change between replays. The event streaming model is commonly
combined with event stream processing (see section 2.2) in order to achieve low­latency,
scalable, fault­tolerant, real­time data processing [15].
2.1.3
Benefits
The strength of Event­Driven Architectures (EDAs) stems from the extremely loose cou­
pling of producers and consumers. The producers do not need to know the business
logic of, nor even interact with, the consumers, and likewise, the consumers need not
care about where an event originated from ­ they only care about the facts contained
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
9
==PAGE:20==
in the actual event. The event broker mediates the flow of events between the produc­
ing and consuming applications and services, allowing consumers to access the types of
events they are interested without ever knowing anything about the producers of these
types of events. This is also what sets event­based communication strategies apart from
more classic request/reply types of messaging. In the latter strategy, clients must explic­
itly ask for a specific service or unit of data using some predefined API. This means, that
clients need to know about the available services and their suppliers in order to correctly
formulate and send requests, thereby coupling components together [16].
Further, the asynchronous nature of Event­Driven Architectures (EDAs) allows for a sepa­
ration in time as well. A consumer could be down for a longer period of time without affect­
ing the producer. The producer can continue pushing events downstream to the broker,
and once the consumer is back up again, it can start processing from where it left off. In
effect, this ensures an almost complete isolation of the components in an event­driven
architecture; the only thing producers and consumers need to agree on is the format of
the events.
Through the isolation of the components, it is therefore possible to manage features and
aspects of the components individually, instead of having to manage the system as a
whole. The tangible benefits of achieving this loose coupling are as follows:
1. Scalability: Components can be scaled independently from one another, adding
extra resources only to the components that need them. Components can be scaled
up both vertically and horizontally, and if workloads decrease again at a later point,
components are easily scaled down again. This provides the system with a lot of
elasticity, allowing it to dynamically be adjusted to varying loads.
2. Fault­tolerance: Decoupling components allows one component to fail without
bringing down other components. If a particular producer fails, consumers can still
process messages from other producers, making the system more resilient.
Further, in the event streaming model, consumers have the ability to replay streams
from the broker. If an application crashes, it can then restore its previous state by
replaying its input stream. This effectively reduces the problem of making the entire
system fault tolerant to a problem of making the event broker fault tolerant, isolating
the effort to a single component. As the event broker is a generic component, a third­
party implementation that already implements fault tolerance can be used, thereby
providing fault tolerance to the system ”for free”.
3. Modularity: Adding new services and applications to the system, or updating ex­
isting ones, does not require changes to the rest of the applications and services.
Instead, it is simply a matter of coupling a new producer/consumer to the event bro­
ker. This makes it easier to manage the life cycles of components, as we will return
to in section 2.3.
4. Real­time: Continuously publishing events as they occur allows the downstream
consumers to process the events and data in real­time. This enables businesses to
make faster decisions,
Of course, for any system, the choice of architecture should be carefully chosen based on
the requirements of the system. An event­driven architecture does not magically solve all
problems, but instead presents a number of trade­offs. The most obvious drawback of an
event­driven architecture is the added complexity of the system as a whole. The loosely
coupled components reduce the complexity of each individual component, but splitting up
10
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:21==
a system in this way is significantly more complex than building a monolithic system. Thus,
the initial design and implementation of such a loosely coupled system requires more
resources than the corresponding monolith. In particular, the events themselves have to
be carefully designed in order to not accidentally couple systems together, which is the
exact opposite of what we want to achieve. In an event­driven architecture, these implicit
dependencies of the system are well hidden. For large complex systems, it might not be
obvious what downstream applications depend on the events of any single producer, and
the interactions between components can be hard to figure out. In a more tightly coupled
architecture, these dependencies are explicitly visible through the connected components
of the system, making it much easier to reason about the combined behaviour of the
system.
2.2
Event Stream Processing
Ingesting events and data into a system in real­time is only meaningful if the system is also
able to process this data in real­time. While overnight batch­processing, as often used in
legacy data­warehouse implementations, is great for effectively processing large amounts
of data, it inevitably adds latency of up to 24 hours to the data, making the continuous
ingestion superfluous. However, naively reducing the interval of batches to achieve near
real­time processing exposes the inherent weakness of the batching model; attempting
to collect infinite streams of unordered, ever­changing data into complete, static chunks.
The implicit assumption of the overnight batch­processing model is that data is bounded
and can logically be grouped by the day it is collected. This might hold true for certain
sources of data, but for others this grouping is arbitrary at best.
Consider a user interacting with an internet streaming provider from 23:45 to 00:10. In this
case, we are splitting a single logical 25­minute session into different groups because it
crosses the boundary between two days. As soon as the batch interval is reduced to, say,
5 minutes, this problem of artificially splitting data becomes obvious. Suddenly we split
such a user session into 5 distinct groups at any time of day, and the data contained in a
single batch will thus be far from complete. The problem can also be seen by considering
late arriving data ­ if we have already processed the data from a previous batch, how do
we treat late events that should have been grouped with this previous batch.
The streaming model makes no such simplifying assumptions, and instead treats events
as unbounded streams of data that can arrive delayed, out­of­order, and only assumed
to be eventually complete. The streaming model makes the trade­offs between latency,
completeness and resource consumption explicit, offering a set of tools to model the be­
haviour of the system according to the specific requirements for an application. The batch
processing model is then entirely contained within the stream processing model.
Note, that the model is general, and it does not dictate the type of underlying execution
engine. The choice of execution engine should be chosen based on the requirements
of the system and the available resources. If the latency requirements allow it, there is
no fundamental argument against using a batch engine to execute the streaming model.
Even with low­latency requirements, a viable approach to attain low latency with a batch
engine is to simply shorten the span of batches from days or hours to the order of minutes
or even seconds. This technique is known as micro­batching [7].
In the following subsections, we will introduce stream processing to the reader, focusing
on how it differs from traditional batch processing.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
11
==PAGE:22==
2.2.1
Streams
An event is modelled as a key/value pair with an accompanying set of timestamps. The
key and value can be of arbitrary types; there are no restrictions regarding the schema of
events, besides those posed by the system itself. An event stream is then nothing but an
unbounded, append­only sequence of events. The location of an event inside a stream
is called the offset of this event, and events thus have monotonically increasing offsets.
To provide a formal definition, we follow Sax. et al. [6]. We denote the key and value do­
mains as DK and DV , respectively. Then, an event e can be defined as a tuple ⟨o, t, k, v⟩∈
N × N0 × DK × Dv, where o is the offset, t is the event timestamp, k is the key, and v is
the value. The event timestamps will be expanded upon in section 2.2.5. A stream S is
then a sequence of events S = (e1, e2, ..., en). When appending a new event en+1 to the
stream S, we then get a new stream S′ = S + en+1 = (e1, e2, ..., en, en+1). All the events
in the stream must have the same schema S = DK × DV , and we denote a stream S with
schema S by S [S]. We introduce a special value ⊥to denote a tombstone. A tombstone
signals deletion by marking that the corresponding key no longer has an associated value,
and in practice, a tombstone is usually marked by setting the value of an event to null.
Since a stream is unbounded, stream processors will be long running, in principle never­
ending. This makes fault­tolerance and correctness significantly harder to achieve than
for batch processing, where a job can simply be restarted on failure. For a long running
stream processing job that has been running for weeks or month, restarting from the
beginning might not be a viable option. We will explore fault tolerance and correctness in
section 2.2.6.
2.2.2
Stream Operators
Given a stream of events S, this stream can be transformed into a new derived event
stream, S′, using a stream operator. A stream operator processes an event stream in
offset order, one event at a time, and produces results as output events. The simplest
stream operators are stateless, directly mapping each input event to a number of output
events. Stateless operators are not particularly expressive though, and only a limited
amount of operations can be implemented using stateless operators. For more complex
logic, stream operators need to consider more than a single event at a time. A stream
operator is not allowed to replay the stream, however, so if an operator needs to consider
previous events, it must do so by either directly storing a limited amount of the events in
state, or by instead maintaining a derived view of the events. Either way requires storing
some kind of state, and we refer to such operators as being stateful. As an example of a
very simple stateful operator, a stream operator implementing the Max operation needs to
maintain the maximum value that has been encountered in the stream so far.
2.2.3
Time
Most data­processing efforts deal with data originating from external processes; the pro­
cesses that generate events are different from the one that processes these events. This
means that data­processing systems in general deal with two different time domains:
• Event Time: The event time is the timestamp at which the event took place in the
source system/process. The event timestamp is attached to the event itself and
should be immutable. The event time is also known as the application time [17].
• Processing Time: The processing timestamp is the current timestamp at which we
are processing the event inside the stream processor. The processing timestamp
will thus be changing as an event moves through the processing pipeline.
12
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.3: The figure shows an example of the relationship between event time and
processing time. The dotted straight line represents an event­skew of constant zero; this
is how the graph would look like if events were always processed immediately. However,
as the black, wavy line shows, in reality the delay between event generation and event
processing is non­zero and varies with time.
We do not include the processing time in our formal definition of an event, since the pro­
cessing time is not a quality of the stream itself, but instead a quality of the consuming
stream operator. Two different operators consuming from the same stream will thus see
different processing timestamps, whereas the offset and event timestamp are intrinsic
properties of the stream.
Using the event time and offsets of events, we can define two different total orderings of
a stream S. Borrowing the terms from Sax et al. [6], we describe a physical order and
a logical order. The physical order is a strict total order defined by the offsets of events,
representing the order that the events were appended to the stream. The logical order
is then defined by the event timestamps. Unlike the offsets, the event timestamps are
not necessarily unique, and we must therefore use the offsets as tie breaker to make the
logical order a strict total order as well. The logical order is thus defined as follows:
Definition 2.2.1 (Logical Order). Given two events e1 and e2 from a data stream S, then
e1 < e2 if and only if:
e1.t < e2.t ∨(e1.t == e1.t ∧e1.o < e2.o)
For many streams, the physical order and logical order will differ, meaning that the stream
is unordered. Further, for any real­world use­case, the event time will necessarily lag
behind the processing time. Merely propagating the event from the source system to
the event­processing systems incurs a non­zero latency, and the inherent lag and asyn­
chronous nature of most distributed systems makes this event­time lag highly variable.
Delays are common and can be caused by a large number of factors, such as unreliable
networking, contention, or application faults and restarts. An example showcasing the
typical relation between processing time and event time is illustrated in fig. 2.3. The dif­
ference between the processing time and event time is also called the event skew, and it
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
13
==PAGE:24==
provides a useful look into the latency of the pipeline over time.
The simplest stream processing operators, like basic filters or maps, are completely time
agnostic. A filter simply tests a predicate against each individual event in order, without
placing the event in a wider context. Other applications might care about the processing
time, but completely disregard the time at which events occurred. Monitoring systems,
for example, that record the number of requests a system accepts, only care about the
point in time an event actually entered the system, not the time at which it was triggered at
the source. Many applications, however, also need to consider the time at which events
occurred. This is especially true for analytical applications that need to correlate or group
events together.
2.2.4
Windows
A common data­processing pattern is to group the data by time. In the batching model,
data is implicitly grouped into batches according to the processing time of each event.
Events that arrive within the same period are grouped together in the same batch. In the
streaming model, working with unbounded data streams, there is no natural or implicit
grouping. Instead, we need a way to explicitly delineate the boundaries between the
different groups. This is commonly achieved with windows [18], a term that is borrowed
from signal processing, where windowing is a common approach to split an input signal
into temporal segments [19]. For stream processing, we differ between the following three
types of windows, all of which are illustrated in fig. 2.4:
1. Tumbling Windows: A tumbling window has a fixed length, and it slices the event
stream into even­sized temporal groups. Each event is then included in exactly one
window.
2. Sliding Windows: Sliding windows also have a fixed length, but further, they have
a fixed period as well. The length of the period does not have to be equal to the
length (in that case you would get tumbling windows); typically the period is shorter
than the length, meaning that windows overlap.
3. Session Windows: Session windows do not have fixed length, but are instead
examples of dynamic windows. Session windows are typically defined om the key
level. Session windows are opened when a new event of a given key (that does not
already have an open window) arrives, and are closed after a predetermined period
of inactivity.
Windows can be applied using either processing time or event time, with different seman­
tics resulting from the choice of time domain. The batch model is then nothing more than
a fixed­size, tumbling window using the processing time domain.
Windowing over processing time is significantly simpler than windowing over event time.
With processing time, there is no such thing as out­of­order or delayed events; the system
has perfect knowledge, and a window is always complete. This makes windowing over
processing time effective and simple to implement. But windowing over processing time
does not provide any meaningful way to analyze events in context of their event time. As
described in section 2.2.3, the event skew varies with time, and there is no consistent way
to extract the event time from the processing time. This implies that the processing time
windows will likely not contain the correct event time data, and we can therefore not expect
correctness with regards to event time for processing time windows. Instead, systems
that analyzes events based on event time (and wish for correct results) are forced to also
window over event time. This makes the issues of delayed and out­of­order events explicit.
14
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.4: This figure illustrates the three different types of windowing operations. Top:
tumbling windows with fixed size. Middle: overlapping sliding windows. Bottom: session
windows, with each color of box representing a specific key.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.5: This figure illustrates an event stream with two ingested watermarks; one with
timestamp 11, and another with timestamp 20. Events are appended to the stream from
the left. The figure also shows the heuristic nature of watermarks, exemplified by the late
event with timestamp 7 that has arrived after the watermark with timestamp 11.
When events can be arbitrarily delayed, and a stream is never­ending, it is impossible to
know whether all data belonging to some event time window has arrived.
2.2.5
Watermarks
Since the traditional approach of grouping data into chunks that are assumed complete
will lead to incorrect results, one might wonder how we ever make progress in a stream
processing pipeline. It seems, that a window can never be triggered, since we cannot be
certain that it is complete. Without some omniscient algorithm to tell us when a group is
complete, the processing will either be stuck or produce incorrect results. Akidau et. al.
[20] therefore argues, that data processing systems should abandon the attempt to contort
unbounded data streams into bounded, eventually complete chunks, and instead accept
the inherent lateness and out­of­order nature of event streams. A data­processing system
should not rely on completeness as a prerequisite for correctness, since completeness
is rare but correctness should be demanded. Instead, stream processors should be able
to cope with new events arriving late and out of order, and old events being changed or
retracted. In other words, we should not wait for a window to be complete before closing
it, but instead rely on some approximate method to trigger the computation, accepting the
fact that the window might never be complete. We then need well­defined semantics for
dealing with late events to update and modify this window, in order to be able to achieve
correctness.
A common approach to reason about the progress of streams is to use watermarks [21]. A
watermark is a simple marker with a timestamp that can be ingested into an event stream.
The watermark then signals that all data with timestamps smaller than the watermark has
already arrived, meaning that after the watermark, no events with larger timestamps will
follow. Watermarks allow more refined ways of reasoning about the progress of an event
stream, based on the logic of the watermark generator. The generator could create water­
marks with a simple bounded out­of­order mechanism, ingesting watermarks with times­
tamp t once an event with timestamp t + c has been observed, but watermarks could
also be created by more complex data­driven logic. Watermarks are a specification of the
more general concept of punctuations [22]. A punctuation is not limited to reason about
timestamps, but instead signals that no more events that fulfill some arbitrary predicate
can follow.
Given we have just argued the infeasibility of making statements about the completeness
of an unbounded stream, watermarks are generally heuristic, and they cannot provide
correctness by themselves. Watermarks are an efficient tool to estimate the progress of
a stream and trigger windows, but the system should keep the heuristic nature of water­
16
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:27==
marks in mind, and some explicit mechanism should be defined to deal with late events.
2.2.6
Fault Tolerance and Consistency
In batch processing, jobs typically accept some immutable state as input and produce
some state as output. Intermediary state can either be durably stored, an approach taken
by fx. Hadoop Mapreduce [23], or simply be kept in memory. Durable intermediate state
speeds up recovery by avoiding recomputation, but since the input to a batch processing
job is immutable, the job can always be restarted on failure. Further, since the result of a
batch job is just some output state, rerunning a batch job will just create another version of
the output state, typically by writing to a separate file. A common approach to interacting
with external systems, is to export all the necessary input data from the external system to
the local batch processes, and then bulk loading the result of the batch job to the desired
systems. With this approach, a batch process typically does not need to interact with
an external system during execution, and consistency is therefore easy to maintain ­ the
output is either all made available to downstream consumers, or nothing is made available.
This ensures exactly­once consistency.
For unbounded streams, the picture is less clear. Simply restarting a failed stream job
is not always a viable option; imagine the stream job has been running for months, then
we really do not want to replay the entire history. Two common approaches are to either
use micro­batching, such that we only need to reprocess the failed batches, or to peri­
odically snapshot the state of the stream processor, and durably store these snapshots
in external storage. Even though the amount of events that must be replayed are mini­
mized using either of these two approaches, it does introduce another problem. Because
stream processing jobs are long running, they might have to interact directly with external
systems; the input to the stream process will be changing over time, and as the job will
never finish, we must continuously output intermediary results to external systems that
need them. This makes achieving consistency harder. When restarting a failed stream
processor from the last available snapshot, or recomputing the failed micro­batch, the
stream processor will unavoidably process some duplicate events, namely those events
that were either received after making the last snapshot, or all the events in the failed
micro­batch. If processing these events results in side effects in some external system,
reprocessing the events will then lead to these side effects being reapplied as well. To
ensure consistency, we therefore want to achieve exactly­once semantics across external
systems as well, meaning that the entire system behaves as if it has seen every event
exactly once. When interacting with external resources, we have two viable approaches
to implement this:
1. Transactions: One way to ensure exactly­once semantics is to use transactions as
known from classic database systems [24, Chapter 7]. This ensures atomic commits,
such that if the processor fails, it knows exactly which events have already been
received by the external system.
2. Idempotent Operations: A simpler, but more restrictive way, of achieving exactly­
once semantics, is to make sure that all interactions with external systems are idem­
potent, meaning that repeated identical operations have the same result as a single
operation.
2.3
Software Development Life Cycles
Having presented the reader for event­driven architectures and event­stream processing,
we now turn to something completely different. To understand the importance of decou­
pling the life cycles of producer and consumer applications in Tryg360 and how it can
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.6: The general stages of the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) frame­
work. The actual models that implement this framework each present their own variations
of, and iterations through, these stages.
affect the software development process, we need to understand a bit more about the
software development life cycle in general. This chapter will provide a brief overview of
the history of software development life cycle frameworks, before focusing specifically on
the agile methodology, as well as continuous integration and continuous delivery.
The Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) is a process that outlines the different
stages that the development of a common software product goes through. From the
very first moment where an opportunity is identified and the software project is initialized,
through development and delivery, all the way to the continued maintenance and oper­
ation of the software product, before it is eventually disposed of. An example of these
common stages is given in fig. 2.6. Each stage then has its own set of tasks and de­
liverables that ensure that the software meets the requirements and expectations of the
customers and stakeholders [25]. The SDLC guides teams through the creation of high­
quality software products by outlining a structured approach for them to follow. The SDLC
framework is implemented through a number of different models. Each specific model de­
scribes how to actually apply the SDLC framework to a real project, by specifying the order
of the common stages involved in software development and the criteria for transitioning
between them, with most models incorporating some kind of incremental and/or iterative
approach. Since the precursor to the waterfall model was first presented in 1956 by Ben­
nington [26, 27], a large number of different models has followed [28]. The agile model is
by far the most prevalent in modern organizations, and this is also the model applied at
Tryg A/S. The following section will therefore explore the Agile model in more detail.
2.3.1
Agile Model
In the agile model, the emphasis is on delivering rapid releases of small, incremental
refinements to a software product. Responding to change is at the heart of the model,
and requirements, plans, and results are continuously (re)evaluated, in order to adapt
the software product to any changes or unforeseen requirements. This is done in close
collaboration with customers and stakeholders. The agile model is both incremental and
iterative; the former implying that features are added as needed, whereas the latter implies
18
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:29==
iteratively refining each of these features.
The Agile model can help teams to identify and rectify issues early in the development
process, before these problems grow intractable. The close collaboration with stakehold­
ers allows feedback to be incorporated in every step of the process. However, the close
collaboration can also lead to extensive changes to the scope of the project, and for large
project with many stakeholders, this close collaboration could present a significant over­
head.
The principles behind the Agile model were formulated in 2001 by 17 software develop­
ment gurusin the form of the Agile Manifesto [29]. This manifesto outlines a number of
value statements and principles that together form the basis for agile software develop­
ment, presenting a lighter alternative to the more heavy and comprehensive SDLC models
that used to dominate. Whereas previous models generally valued large upfront designs,
the agile model is all about embracing change; one should only plan for the imminent
future, since plans and requirements could change at any time. The value of the agile
manifesto is captured by the following 4 statements, as presented in the original mani­
festo [29]:
1. Individuals and interactions over processes and tools.
2. Working software over comprehensive documentation
3. Customer collaboration over contract negotiation.
4. Responding to change over following a plan.
These statements clearly highlight the adaptive core of the Agile model. This adaptive­
ness is necessary to capture the ever­changing world of most real businesses, where
being able to quickly adapt to changes is vital for staying competitive. Further, this need
for adaptiveness is based upon experience of the authors. Customers often don’t realise
what they want from software, until they actually interact with it. As a result, the require­
ments for software products often change once the product is released and the customers
interact with it. Agile methodologies therefore give the customer much more fine­grained
control over the software development process, allowing the customer to change the direc­
tion of the software development process at any time. This is partly achieved by keeping
iterations as short as possible, focusing on high­frequency deliveries of growing func­
tionality, as well as by having strong collaboration and frequent communication with the
customer.
From this adaptive approach, it follows naturally that less focus is given to documenta­
tion, and instead the focus is on producing working code. In an environment of frequent
changes, the documentation tends to become obsolete and even misleading, drifting away
from the actual implementation. Likewise, negotiating fixed­scope contracts up front re­
moves flexibility, thereby limiting the adaptiveness of the software development efforts.
2.3.2
Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery
To implement an agile methodology, developers need to be able to continuously integrate
their changes and deliver the updated software to customers as quickly as possible. The
actual development process is only one part of the chain of requirements to achieve this;
without a well­defined deployment pipeline, projects lose the ability to rapidly and reliably
deliver the product to the customer. Manual deployment pipelines are typically labour­
intensive, error­prone and complex. The time it takes to release to production can be
days, weeks, or even months, making the rapid iterations of the agile methodology impos­
sible to achieve. The goal of Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD), as
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
19
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.7: An example of the steps involved in a deployment pipeline. Each step depends
on the success of the previous steps. Early steps should execute fast to immediately
filter out failing builds, with the later, more costly steps, only applied to serious release
candidates.
described by Humble and Farley [30], is therefore to create a fast, reliable, and repeatable
process for releasing software. To achieve this, CI/CD advocates frequent releases using
(almost) fully automated deployment pipelines.
A deployment pipeline automates the build, deploy, test, and release processes of an
application. An example of the involved steps is given in fig. 2.7. The deploy process
includes provisioning of the environment that the application should run inside, as well as
installation and configuration of the actual application, and the test process includes unit
tests, acceptance tests, and capacity tests. To ensure that the deployment pipelines are
repeatable, CI/CD advocates the usage of version control systems for everything needed
to run these processes. By having everything checked into the version control system,
including the configurations, it is then simple to recreate environments or roll back releases
to previous versions. Ideally, the deployment pipeline is then triggered on every single
change to the project. The result is that errors or regressions are caught and fixed early,
ensuring that the software is always in a working state. Releasing the software should then
simply be a matter of changing the target environment in the deployment pipeline, and the
causes for any failing tests can then be isolated to the potentially differing environments.
By combining an agile software development life cycle model withCI/CD, organizations
are able to achieve reduced cost and time to market, increased software quality, and
better flexibility in responding to change [31].
2.4
Related Work
Finally, we will look at some related work. Much has been written about database version­
ing and migration of traditional Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMSs),
but the literature regarding versioning of event streams is rather sparse. We have found
a number of books and articles that originate from within the world of Event Sourced Sys­
tems (ESSs) [32]. Event sourced systems and event driven architectures share many
similar concepts, with the difference that event sourced systems are typically rule­driven
enterprise software, whereas event driven architecture is a general pattern for communica­
tion between applications and services. In the case of an EDA that applies the streaming
model, however, the similarities between the two are vast, and the challenges and po­
tential solutions to versioning of immutable events carry over from one to the other. The
following 4 strategies are extracted from the event sourcing literature, describing common
approaches to deal with versioning of events [33]:
1. Multiple Versions Support multiple different types of events throughout the applica­
tion. To do this, each event must be tagged with a version when it is produced, and
consumers need to contain the necessary domain logic to deal with the different
versions. The streams themselves are therefore untouched when upgrading to a
new version, pushing the responsibility of handling the versions to the consumers.
2. Upcasting A component is ingested between the event streams and the consumers,
20
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:31==
and this component then takes care of upgrading events to the latest version before
handing them to consumers. The knowledge of how to convert between versions is
thus captured in this central component.
3. In­Place Transformations This technique is widely used in traditional RDBMSs,
where database tables are migrated to a new version through scripting. To apply
the same technique to a stream of events, one can consume the events of a stream,
transform them, and then produce them back to the same stream again. The old
events can then be deleted. This will require consumers to be stopped in the mean­
time.
4. Copy and Transform Instead of outputting the transformed events to the same
stream as they originated from, the events are produced to an entirely new stream,
leaving the old stream untouched.
The goal we are trying to achieve in this thesis can then be seen as a mixture of several of
these techniques. In particular, producer applications will continue creating multiple differ­
ent stream versions, corresponding to item 1. However, as discussed in this introduction,
multiple versions lead to strong coupling inside the system, and instead of handling the
problem in a single place, the responsibility is pushed to the many downstream consumers.
We will therefore combine the multiple versions with the in­place transformations, keeping
multiple versions of producer output streams, but applying in­place transformations to the
consumer input streams. Exactly how we will achieve this will be treated in the following
chapters.
To motivate the difficulty of the problem we tackle in this thesis, we refer to an empirical
study performed by Overeem et. al. [34]. This study finds that the versioning of events is
the main painpoint of event sourced systems. 19 out 25 interviewees describe versioning
events as the hardest challenge of maintaining and operating an event sourced system.
If we look at the reported size of the event stores of these systems, only very few contain
more than a billion events, and all are in the scale of GBs. To compare, Tryg360 contains
several hundred TBs of data, spread among thousands of streams.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
21
==PAGE:32==
22
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:33==
3
Analysis
This chapter will first explain the requirements that the product has to fulfill. To derive
these requirements, we will explore the constraints that the existing system imposes, as
well as the assumptions we can make about the environment in which the product will
operate. We will then analyze how the product can fulfill these requirements, highlight­
ing different alternatives and trade­offs. Finally, we will explore how the finished product
should eventually be integrated into the environment of Tryg A/S, and decide on some of
the technologies we will use to build the application.
3.1
Constraints
We are given a number of constraints that we must adhere to. For example, the current
technologies in use inside the Tryg360 datahub (which was pictured in fig. 1.1) imposes
a number of technical constraints on the implementation, in order to ensure that the end­
product of this thesis can be integrated seamlessly into Tryg360.
3.1.1
Isolation
The product of this thesis should be an isolated component that can easily be added
to the current system. We don’t want to modify producer or consumer applications di­
rectly. The behaviour we wish to implement is general, and adhering to the Don’t Repeat
Yourself (DRY) software development principle, we want to implement this behaviour in
a single place, instead of replicating it inside every producer and consumer application.
The producers and consumers should thus be completely ignorant of this new component,
and should keep working exactly as before.
This constraint does of course heavily limit the design of the application. Recalling the
current architecture in the Tryg360 datahub, producer applications read from a number
of input streams and maintain a number of output streams. Every producer application is
versioned, and whenever a producer is updated to a new version, it creates a correspond­
ing new version of its output stream. Then, the producer application replays the entire
history of its input streams, producing events to the new version of the output stream. For
any downstream consumers, this means that they will have to be restarted as well and
begin consuming from the new version of the streams. This current setup is pictured in
the top half of fig. 3.1.
If we want to avoid this trickle­down effect, it is clear that the consumers cannot directly
read from the versioned output topics of the producers. We need to decouple the ver­
sioned output streams of producer applications from the input streams of consumers. We
thus want to implement a design like depicted in the bottom half of fig. 3.1. The figure il­
lustrates the target design for a single versioned stream. In reality, the goal is to decouple
potentially thousands of such versioned streams.
3.1.2
Technologies
The Tryg360 datahub is widely based on Kafka. Kafka is an open­source event­streaming
platform originally developed by LinkedIn [4]. More specifically, Kafka is a distributed mes­
saging system built for log processing. It utilizes partitioning to enable high scalability, as
well as a number of techniques, like zero­copy transfer, to provide high efficiency. Kafka
offers the event­streaming semantics as described for the event­streaming model in sec­
tion 2.1, with minor differences in terminology. Most importantly, a topic in Kafka corre­
sponds to a partitioned event stream. In Tryg360, every stream is thus implemented by
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
23
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.1: This figure illustrates the current versus the target setup. Currently, the life­
cycles of producers and consumers are strongly coupled. We want to decouple the life­
cycles of producers and consumer applications by building some kind of isolated compo­
nent that can be inserted between them. This component must split the output streams of
the versioned producer applications from the input streams to downstream consumers.
24
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:35==
a Kafka topic. As a consequence, whatever solution we set out to build, we must ensure
that it is able to integrate with Kafka. This does limit the number of different technologies
we can use to implement the solution, but since Kafka is one of the most widely used
technologies for event streaming, most available tools are able to integrate with Kafka.
In addition, Tryg360 is fully deployed on Kubernetes. Kubernetes is an open­source con­
tainer orchestration platform originally developed by google. Kubernetes provides declar­
ative configuration of containerized applications, as well as extensive automation and
operation of these containerized workloads [35]. The end­product must therefore be de­
ployable to Kubernetes, which sets a number of requirements to the deployment and
building of the application. These requirements will be treated further in section 3.7.
3.2
Requirements
Besides the constraints that limit the design and implementation of the application, we
further have a number of requirements that the application must adhere to. We consider
two different types of requirements, namely functional and non­functional requirements.
3.2.1
Functional Requirements
• Map versioned input to single output: Different versions of the same input stream
should be mapped to a single output stream.
• Latest version: The output stream should correspond to the latest available version
of the input stream.
• Maintain History History should be preserved. That is, if the existing value for some
key is updated to a new value, the output stream should maintain the history of all
such values.
• Schema agnostic: The component should be agnostic to both the schema type
and schema versions of the event streams. All event types should be supported.
The component should thus accept multiple versions of an input stream with some given
schema, consolidate these different versions, and present the latest version of the input
streams to downstream consumers. So, essentially, we want to build a stream processor
that applies some kind of transformation to the output stream whenever a new version of
the input stream is released, in order to mutate this output stream into a representation of
the latest version of the input stream.
3.2.2
Non­functional Requirements
• Correctness: The component must ensure that correctness is maintained. How­
ever, strong consistency is not a requirement, and the component is only required
to support eventual consistency.
• Performance: Although no hard latency or throughput Service Level Agreements
(SLAs) exists, the component should introduce minimum latency into the pipeline
from event producers to consumers, and the throughput should preferably be tun­
able depending on the workload.
• Scalability: We should be able to scale to the order of thousands of event streams
and beyond. This is the current size of the Tryg360 datahub.
• Configurability: The component should be configurable such as to specify the ex­
act behaviour. Although the component is developed with a specific use­case in
mind, decoupling producers and consumers in event­streaming is a general con­
cept, and the final product should include options to configure the behaviour.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
25
==PAGE:36==
These non­functional requirements are fairly demanding, with especially the requirement
for scalability posing a significant challenge. If the application is not able to scale to the
number of event streams contained in Tryg360, it essentially becomes useless, and the
system must therefore be designed with scalability as a primitive. Further, by specifying
that the throughput should be tunable, we mean that it should be possible to adjust the
ratio of throughput vs cost. If the client wants/needs high throughput, they should be able
to require this, but it will of course incur a higher cost.
3.3
Assumptions
We rely on a number of assumptions that should hold for the environment in which we will
deploy the application.
1. We assume that the input streams exhibit bounded out­of­orderedness. That is,
consider any given input stream S and any event e1 from this stream with event
timestamp e1.t and offset e1.o. Then, there exists a constant cS, such that for any
later event e2 in S with event timestamp e2.t and offset e2.o > e1.o, we know that
e1.t−cS ≤e2.t. In words, the lateness of any event in the stream S can be bounded
by some constant cS. However, we have no way of finding this constant, and the
constant can vary arbitrarily between different input streams. Thus, we cannot rely
on this assumption for correctness, but given we can find some moderately accurate
estimate of cS, we could use it to optimize the performance of the application.
2. We assume that producers apply versioning by creating new streams. The current
version of a stream should then be available from the name of the stream. For ex­
ample, this could be achieved by simply appending the current version to the name
of the stream. The versioning scheme should be of some ordinal type, meaning
that the versions should have a natural ordering. Whenever the producer is up­
dated and redeployed, it should then increment its current version and create a new
event stream. The name of the input stream should otherwise not change between
versions.
3. We assume that the stream processors we build are the only applications producing
to the output streams. That is, each stream processor creates the corresponding
output stream from the versioned input streams, and this stream processor is then
the only application that is allowed to produce to this stream. Any application is
allowed to consume from this stream, however.
4. Finally, we assume that all events have a key, and that the number of unique keys
associated with a stream is finite
We can now start analyzing how we can satisfy the given constraints and requirements
based on these assumptions.
3.4
Correctness
Correctness is a hard requirement for the system, meaning that the output streams that
the stream processors maintains must be correct ­ we cannot accept approximations.
However, to understand this requirement, we must first understand what correctness even
means in the context of event streams. And to do this, we must start with an even more
basic concept, namely that of a materialized view of a stream.
3.4.1
Materialized Views and Changelogs
As explored by Sax et al. in [6], there is a deep underlying correspondence between
tables and streams of events. We will follow their Dual Streaming Model below.
26
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.2: This figure illustrates a simplified view of a stream S and the corresponding
materialized view T. We can consider a substream Sm of S to contain all events from
S that has offset less than or equal to m. This gives rise to a number of corresponding
materialized views Tm, representing the materialized view of the stream S at different
points in time. This figure illustrates the materialized view at 4 such points in time. The
color of an event is meant to symbolize its key, and the symbol then represents the value.
Given a stream S [S] = (e1, e2, ..., en), this stream can be considered as a table changelog.
Each processed event e from S [S] corresponds to an update to the table T, starting from
an initially empty table. The table T then has primary key attribute from the domain DK and
values from the domain DV . We denote the value of the table T associated with primary
key pk by the indexing operation T[pk]. When appending the event e to the stream S [S],
if the key e.k is not present in corresponding materialized view T, then the value e.v is
also appended to the table. Otherwise, we update the table by setting the value for the
key e.k to be e.v. In any case, after processing the event e from the stream S [S], the
corresponding table T has T[e.k] = e.v. The exception is the special tombstone value ⊥.
When processing a tombstone, we remove the corresponding primary key, and associated
value, from the table. A tombstone thus corresponds to a table deletion. We call this table
T the materialized view of the stream S [S]. The materialized view of a stream at a number
of different points in time is illustrated in fig. 3.2.
It is also possible to go from a table back to a stream of events. This is done by material­
izing each update to the table as an event, creating a changelog of the table. In this way,
we can go from streams to tables, and from tables to streams.
3.4.2
Equivalence of Streams
Using the concept of a materialized view, we can define an equivalence relation on event
streams as follows:
Definition 3.4.1 (Stream Equivalence). Let S [S] and S′ [S] be two different event streams
with the same schema S. Further, let their materialized views be given by T and T ′,
respectively. Then, the two streams are equivalent, denoted as S ≡S′, if and only if their
materialized views are exactly equal:
S ≡S′ ⇔T = T ′
(3.1)
We notice, that since a materialized view is a set of events, this definition does not care
about possible duplicates in the streams, nor events that are added at one point in time
and later deleted. We can consider such events to be noise.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
27
==PAGE:38==
3.4.3
Processor Correctness
Now, using our definition of stream equivalence, we can define the correctness require­
ment for our stream processor. Due to delayed processing, we cannot expect the output
stream to always reflect the most recent input data, and this is captured by the relaxed
requirement for eventual consistency. This entails, that if the input stream is stopped, we
should then expect the output stream to eventually be equivalent to the input stream, with
no hard guarantee on the delay.
Definition 3.4.2 (Correctness). Given versioned input streams S1, S2, ..., Sm and output
stream Sout, then the processor is correct if and only if it eventually holds, that:
Sm ≡Sout
(3.2)
A fundamental issue that we have so far ignored, is the given functional requirement that
we must maintain the history of the stream. This requirement is not yet captured in our
definition of correctness, since the materialized view of a stream only captures the latest
value associated with any given key. To overcome this issue, a simple approach is to
rekey the incoming streams onto a combination of the original key and the timestamp,
for example by concatenating the two values. This allows us to maintain the history of
events, without complicating the definitions of materialized views, stream equivalence,
and processor correctness.
With correctness defined, we can now analyze how we can build a correct solution. To
facilitate this analysis, we will introduce a new type of operator that describes the desired
behaviour. We can then analyze the problem using this operator.
3.5
Reconcile Operator
The reconcile operator takes two streams (with the same schema) as input, and the output
is then a stream of events, that, when applied as updates to the left input, would make
the resulting stream equivalent to the right input. The way to think about it is, that the
reconcile operator takes a current state and a desired state as input, and then outputs a
number of updates that, when applied to the current state, transforms it into the desired
state.
Definition 3.5.1 (Reconcile Operator). The reconcile operator is a binary operator that
takes two event streams SL [S] and SR [S] as input. It produces a new event stream,
Sout [S], that when appended to the left input, makes the resulting stream equivalent to
the right input stream.
The form of the operator is as follows:
Rec(SL, SR) = Sout
(3.3)
Using our definition of stream equivalence, we can formally define correctness for this
operator. That is, any implementation of the reconcile operator that fulfills the following
definition will be considered correct:
Definition 3.5.2 (Reconcile Operator Correctness). Given two event streams SL [S] and
SR [S], the reconcile operator is correct if and only if:
SL + Rec(SL, SR) ≡SR
(3.4)
28
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.3: This figure illustrates how the desired processor behaviour can be imple­
mented using the described reconcile operator. The operator takes the current state,
in form of the output stream, and the desired state, in form of the versioned input stream.
It then applies a number of updates to the output topic to transform it into an equivalent
version of the latest input topic.
Notice, that given our definition of stream equivalence, there is an infinite number of out­
put streams that fulfils this definition for any two input streams. Specifically, this follows
from our introduction of tombstones. The materialized view of a stream ignores any tomb­
stoned events, meaning that we can arbitrarily add events to the output, as long as we
make sure to emit tombstones for these events at a later point in time. Therefore, if not
otherwise specified, we assume the output stream to be the minimum possible output
stream that satisfies the definition. By minimum, we mean the stream with the lowest car­
dinality. This will avoid the aforementioned issue with outputting event/tombstone pairs,
as well as avoiding duplicates in the output.
Using the reconcile operator, we can now express the desired behaviour of the stream
processor. Given a versioned input stream S1 [S], and an initially empty output stream
S0
out = (), the stream processor should update the output to maintain:
S1
out ≡S0
out + Rec
(
S0
out, S1
)
≡() + Rec ((), S1)
≡S1
Now, when a new version of the input stream, S2, is released, the output should corre­
spondingly be updated to maintain:
S2
out ≡S1
out + Rec(S1
out, S2)
≡S1 + Rec (S1, S2)
≡S2
Generalizing, then for input stream with version Sm, we should have the corresponding
output stream Sm
out:
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
29
==PAGE:40==
Sm
out ≡Sm−1
out
+ Rec(Sm−1
out , Sm)
≡Sm−1 + Rec (Sm−1, Sm)
≡Sm
By implementing the stream processor using the reconcile operator, then, assuming we
implement the reconcile operator correctly, correctness of the processor follows immedi­
ately from our definition. Whenever a new version of the input stream is released, the
algorithm for updating the output is therefore quite simple. Apply the reconcile operator,
with the left input (the current state) being the existing output stream Sout, and the right
input (the desired state) being the newest version of the input stream. This setup is illus­
trated in fig. 3.3. After the output stream has been reconciled with the new version of the
input stream, any later events that are appended to the input stream should simply be
mirrored to the output stream.
3.5.1
Basic Implementation
The most trivial implementation of the reconcile operator is a stateless operator. We define
it below.
Definition 3.5.3 (Trivial Reconcile Operator Implementation). The simplest implementa­
tion of the reconcile operator works as follows:
1. Emit tombstones for all events in the left input stream (the current state).
2. Mirror all events from the right input stream (the desired state) to the output.
This implementation achieves correctness, but it does clearly not satisfy our non­functional
requirements to a solution. First, the latency grows linearly with the size of the left input
stream, since we must wait for this stream to be fully processed before we can start mir­
roring the right input stream to the output. Secondly, this is an extremely noisy implemen­
tation ­ we are not only emitting the updated events, but instead reproducing the complete
history of all events. Consider the case where SL ≡SR. In this case, the minimum correct
output would be Rec (SL, SR) = (), but the actual generated output using this trivial imple­
mentation has size O(|SL| + |SR|). We are thus severely polluting the output stream. Of
course, the benefit is the simplicity of having a stateless operator, but in this case it does
not outweigh the disadvantages We will treat both of the aforementioned problems of the
trivial implementation in the following sections, analyzing how alternative implementations
can remove or minimize these problems.
3.5.2
State
We will show, that for all other implementations but the trivial implementation, the reconcile
operator is necessarily a stateful operator.
Lemma 3.5.1. For any other implementation but the trivial implementation, then to main­
tain correctness, the reconcile operator is necessarily a stateful operator.
Proof. We give a proof by contradiction. That is, we assume that the reconcile operator
is stateless, and show that it cannot possibly maintain correctness.
Consider inputs SL and SR to the reconcile operator, s.t. TL ∩TR ̸= ∅. That is, the
materialized views of the input streams contain a number of the same elements.
30
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:41==
Following the definition of the reconcile operator, the output is allowed to contain any
events that are already present in the desired state, and thus, for any event in the desired
stream SR, we can always emit this event to the output, and still maintain correctness
Now, consider instead an event from the left input to the reconcile operator which is also
part of the materialized view TL. We then consider two different cases:
1. The event is present in both TL and TR.
2. The event is only present in TL.
Since this is not the trivial implementation, we know that we do not blindly emit tombstones
for all events in SL before we start processing SR. Now, if the event belongs to case 2,
it must be tombstoned in order to maintain correctness. However, if the event instead
belongs to case 1, and we have already processed the corresponding event from SR,
then emitting a tombstone will overwrite this event, deleting it from the materialized view,
and the output of the operator will be incorrect. But without any state we cannot discern
between these two cases, and we cannot guarantee correctness.
In words, the proof above shows that, for any other implementation but the trivial one that
tombstones all events in the current stream, the reconcile operator must be implemented
as a stateful operator. Events from SR can always be added to the output while main­
taining correctness, but there must be a way to infer whether an event from SL should
be tombstoned. Since this depends on the other events that are given as input to the
operator, the operator must maintain some kind of state.
3.5.3
Noise
As mentioned in section 3.4.3, our definition of correctness allows arbitrary levels of ”noisy”
events in the output of the reconcile operator. We differ between two types of noise:
• Inherent Noise: Noise that is already present in the input data. This might be
duplicate events in the desired state.
• Introduced Noise: Noise which is directly introduced by the reconcile operator.
This type of noise can further take one of two forms:
1. Duplicated events.
2. Unnecessary tombstones.
It is not included in the scope of the project to remove any inherent noise from the input
streams, so we will focus on the introduced noise instead. The two types of introduced
noise have different underlying causes. The first type happens when an event from the
desired stream, that is already in the current stream, is appended to the output stream
anyway. The second type happens when an event from the current stream is mistakenly
assumed not to be in the desired stream, and thus a tombstone is wrongfully emitted to
the output stream. Then, when the event is eventually encountered in the desired stream,
this event must be reproduced to overwrite the prematurely emitted tombstone.
The trivial implementation of the reconcile operator exhibits extreme levels of both these
types of noise, and we will now analyze how to eliminate the noise. To completely elim­
inate the noise, we can show that the input streams to the reconcile operator must both
be complete.
Lemma 3.5.2. To completely eliminate introducing noisy events of either type 1 or type 2,
both input streams to the reconcile operator must be complete.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
31
==PAGE:42==
Proof. We give a proof by contradiction.
That is, we assume that either of the input
streams to the reconcile operator are incomplete, and show that this could lead to the
introduction of noisy events.
First, assume the left input stream to the operator SL (the current state) is not complete.
Then, given some event e in the right input stream SR (the desired state) s.t. e ∈SR but
e ̸∈SL, we cannot possibly know if e will be appended to the stream at some later point.
Thus, we will either have to guess whether or not this is the case, and risk adding a noisy
event, or wait until SL is complete.
Now, assume instead that it is the right input stream to the operator SR (the desired state)
that is incomplete. We follow the same reasoning as for the previous case, and introduce
an event e from the left input stream SL (the current state) s.t. e ∈SL but e ̸∈SR. Again,
since the right input stream is not complete, we cannot know for sure whether this event
should be tombstoned or not, as long as SR is incomplete.
In words, the proof above shows that, if we wish to complete eliminate all types of intro­
duced noise, our only hope is to operate on complete input streams.
3.5.4
Completeness
As described in section 2.2.5, event streams are incomplete by their very definition. We
can only guarantee that the input stream is complete once we know the stream is no
longer being produced to. In effect, if we wanted to wait for the streams to be complete
before applying the reconcile operator, we would have to wait for version n + 1 of the
input stream to be released, before we could reconcile the output stream with version n.
However, if the stream exhibits some kind of ordering, as described in section 2.2, we can
still achieve completeness within bounded parts of the stream, and as a result completely
eliminate noise. We consider three types of logical ordering that a stream can exhibit:
1. Ordered: The stream is logically ordered.
2. Bounded Out­Of­orderedness: Events can arrive out­of­order, but with an upper
bound on the delay.
3. No Order: Events can arrive out­of­order, with no upper bound on the delay.
If an event stream S is ordered, then once we see an event e ∈S with timestamp e.t =
n+1, we can then consider the substream of events with event time smaller than or equal
to n to be complete. This follows, since we are guaranteed, that no new events with
timestamp smaller than n will arrive. We can therefore apply event­time windows over a
single timestamp, triggering the window once we see an event with any larger timestamp.
These windows will then be complete, and the reconcile operator can process the window
without introducing noisy events. The latency is then reduced to the delay between events
with increasing timestamps. That is, as soon as an event with timestamp n + 1 arrives,
the operator can safely process all events with timestamps less than or equal to n, and
the operator is in effect lagging behind the inputs by 1 logical time unit.
If instead, an event stream S exhibits bounded out­of­orderedness with bound c, then
once we see an event e ∈S with timestamp e.t = n + c + 1, we can again consider
the substream of events with event time smaller than or equal to n to be complete. In
this case, if we wish to remain from introducing noisy events, the size of the event­time
windows must therefore be c, and the output of the reconcile operator necessarily lags
behind the input by c + 1 logical time units.
32
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.4: Example: Assuming that the delay of incoming events follow an exponential
distribution with λ = 1 (that is, an average delay of 1 minute), this figure shows a random
sample of 50.000 such events and their delay. The dotted lines show different calculated
percentiles for this data, illustrating that with a window size of 3 minutes, only 5% of events
would be considered late events. To capture 99% of the data, a window size of just below
5 minutes would be needed.
However, for streams without any ordering guarantees, the stream can never be consid­
ered complete as long as it is continuously appended to. In order to completely eliminate
noise, we would have to apply a global window, that would not be triggered until the input
stream is no longer being produced to. As detailed in section 3.3, we assume that the ver­
sioned input streams for the reconcile operator exhibits bounded out­of­orderedness, but
we have no way to determine the size of these bounds. Thus, in practice, we must treat
the streams as unordered, and we can therefore not guarantee to completely eliminate
noise, but only hope to minimize it.
Now, instead of the versioned input streams, consider the maintained output stream. This
stream is applied as the left input to the reconcile operator. Due to our assumption that
the processor is the only application producing to this output stream, we can treat this
stream as a bounded stream, and only consume the events that are already contained
in the stream when the reconcile operator is invoked. Of course, the output events of
the reconcile operator will be produced to this output stream, but the reconcile operator
can ignore the events that it produces itself. Regarding the ordering guarantees of the
output stream, then it will clearly also exhibit bounded­out­orderedness. As opposed to the
out­of­orderedness of the input streams which can be assumed to be fairly constant, the
bound on the out­of­orderedness of the output stream might drastically increase whenever
the reconcile operator has been applied. This follows, because each application of the
reconcile operator might update old events, appending these updates to the end of the
stream. The out­of­order bound of the output stream therefore stretches all the way from
the earliest event timestamp to the latest.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
33
==PAGE:44==
3.5.5
Latency
As detailed in the non­functional requirements, achieving low latency is a high priority for
this project. Specifically, then by latency we mean the time between the reconcile operator
is invoked until it starts producing the updated events from the desired stream. Since
latency is a high priority, we might want to allow some amount of noise in order to reduce
the latency. Further, combining the requirement for low latency with the requirement for
configurability, users should be able to fine­tune the trade­off between noise and latency.
We can achieve this by supplying the reconcile operator with approximate out­of­order
bounds. These approximate bounds specify the out­of­order bound that the operator
should adhere to, although this bound might be nowhere near the actual bound of the
incoming stream. That is, the reconcile operator can use this bound when processing
events, but it should not rely on this bound for correctness. The reconcile operator can
apply event­time windows of length equal to this approximate out­of­order bound to re­
duce noise, but to maintain correctness, the operator must define an explicit strategy for
dealing with late events.
In this way, the supplied bound represents the maximum latency, or lag, that a user will
accept, and noisy events are only produced when events violate this bound. Thus, the
closer this bound is to the actual, unknown bound, the less noise the operator will produce,
with no noise being produced at all if the supplied bound transcends the actual bound.
For many applications, although we cannot find an actual upper bound on the out­of­
orderedness, we might have some statistical measurements providing a 95 percentile,
meaning that only 5% of the data exceeds this out­of­order bound, or have some idea of
the underlying distribution. We give such an example in fig. 3.4. The figure exemplifies
how the out­of­order bound trades off latency and potential noise.
3.5.6
Late Events
Now, we have already shown that the non­trivial implementation of the reconcile operator
is necessarily stateful, but the exact type of the state to maintain has not been discussed.
If the input streams were ordered, we could simply apply event­time windowing over a
single timestamp and achieve correctness. The amount of state stored at any point in
time would then be upper bounded by the number of events with the same event­time
timestamp. Unfortunately, as described in section 3.5.5, we cannot find a bound on the out­
of­orderedness and can only supply approximate out­of­order bounds. As a consequence,
we need an explicit strategy to handle late events in order to maintain correctness, since
no matter how large an out­of­order bound we apply, we cannot guarantee that all events
have arrived. As described in the proof to lemma 3.5.1, we see we can always trivially
deal with late events from the desired stream by simply emitting them to the output and
maintain correctness. On the other hand, to handle late events from the current stream,
it is necessary to store the entire materialized view of the events from the desired stream
that has been processed so far. This follows directly from the proof. Since we need to
be able to tell whether the late event is present in the desired stream, we can never evict
old events. That is, if we consider the approximate event­time windows as described in
section 3.5.5, then we cannot evict these windows after triggering them, but must keep
them around to be re­triggered on the arrival of a late event from the current stream.
3.6
Stream Processor
We have seen, that we can implement the desired behaviour of the stream processor
using the reconcile operator, and in turn analyzed how this reconcile operator can be
implemented, highlighting different approaches and trade­offs to achieve certain perfor­
34
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:45==
mance characteristics. Now, we will turn to stream processor itself. First, we will show
that we can further trade­off costs, latency and noise by introducing a number of other
operators to the stream processor, besides the reconcile operator. Additionally, we will
consider how the stream processor can achieve both high scalability and high throughput.
3.6.1
Buffer Operator
As briefly touched upon in section 3.5.4, the output stream of the processor can be con­
sidered a bounded stream. This follows from our assumption, that we are the only ones
producing to this output stream. When a new version of the input stream is released, the
stream processor should be stopped and updated to start syncing the new version of the
input stream to the output stream. Consequently, when the stream processor is restarted,
no new events from the previous version of the input stream will be produced to the out­
put stream anymore. An approach to trade­off latency for a large reduction in noise could
be achieved by preprocessing the output stream and buffer the materialized view, before
invoking the reconcile operator with this materialized view. Essentially, this means the
reconcile operator would be invoked with a global window over the output stream, and
we can then completely remove the introduced noise of type 1; we can guarantee, that
any events we emit from the desired stream were not already in the output stream. Of
course, this does introduce latency linear in the size of the output stream. As another ad­
vantage, however, buffering the output stream will also remove the problem of late events
discussed in section 3.5.6. The effect is, that correctness is easier to achieve.
For users that want to drastically minimize noise at the cost of some added latency, we
will therefore create a buffer operator. Since the buffer operator will operate on a bounded
stream, the stream processor can run the buffer operator to completion, before invoking
the reconcile operator. For users where latency is of utmost importance, the reconcile
operator can instead be run directly without this buffer operator.
3.6.2
Mirror Operator
When a new version of the input stream is released at some time t, we restart the stream
processor to process this new input version. Clearly, at the point in time where the stream
processor is restarted, all events in the output stream must then have timestamps less
than t. We then start processing events from the very beginning of our timeline, until, at
some point, we reach events from the new version of the input stream with timestamps
larger than t. Given our assumption that the input streams have some hidden bound on
the out­of­orderedness, then at some point all new events in the desired stream will have
timestamps larger than t. At this point in time, the reconciliation process can be consid­
ered finished. All events that will be processed from this point forward cannot have been in
the output stream already. Therefore, it might make sense to stop the reconcile operator,
free the state and buffers associated with this stateful operator, and start simply mirroring
events from the input stream to the output stream instead. Strictly speaking, we could
simply continue applying the reconcile operation to new events, and the behavior would
still be correct. However, the reconcile function maintains state and applies time functions
that are not needed for simple mirroring functionality, effectively wasting resources and
adding unnecessary latency to the pipeline.
We will therefore create a mirror operator. Once the reconcile operator is ”finished”, the
stream processor can then be restarted with this mirror operator instead. The mirror op­
erator will help make the stream processor more scalable, since the expensive reconcile
operator will only be applied to the newly released input streams. In a large system with
a lot of producer applications, we can assume that only a few of the applications will be
updated at any point in time, meaning that most of the stream processors will simply be
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
35
==PAGE:46==
running the mirror operator. We will further discuss scalability in section 3.6.5.
3.6.3
Stop Conditions
As discussed in the previous subsection, we might want to stop the reconcile operator at
some point and instead start the mirror operator. However, we do not necessarily need to
wait until the reconcile operator is ”finished”. As soon as we have finished processing the
output stream, we could in theory stop the reconcile operator, emitting tombstones for all
events which have not yet been seen in the desired stream.
In the spirit of configurability, we can provide different such stopping conditions, allow­
ing users to specify when to consider the reconcile operation as finished. By supplying
different combinations of approximate out­of­order bounds and stop conditions, we can
achieve quite different characteristics of the reconcile operator. For example, by setting
the out­of­order bound to be infinite (in practice, any number larger than the maximum dif­
ference between any two timestamps in the stream), and the stopping condition to some
processing timestamp t, the resulting semantics of the operation correspond exactly to
batch processing. That is, we wait until time t to trigger the window, at which point we
then process all the events seen so far at once.
3.6.4
Multiple Versions
In practice, when releasing a new producer version, we don’t immediately delete the pre­
vious version of the producer application and the corresponding versioned stream, but
leave the application running for a while in case the new producer fails. This means, that
for some overlapping period of time, events will be produced to several different versioned
streams at the same time. Depending on the producer application itself, and the amount
of historical events it has to reprocess, it might take some time for the new producer to
catch up to the real­time events. In some cases, it would then be beneficial to continue pro­
cessing events from the previous version of the input stream while reconciling the output
stream with the newest version of the input stream. By continuing to process the previous
version of the input stream, we can enable consumers to still receive the very latest events
from the input stream while performing the reconcile operation. This of course comes with
the caveat that these new events will be from the previous version of the producer. The
situation is pictured in fig. 3.5.
Continuing to process the previous version only makes sense in cases where we can
assume that most of the new events produced by this previous version will correspond
exactly to events that will be produced by the new version of the producer. Otherwise,
we are essentially prolonging the lifetime of the incorrect logic of the previous producer
version, providing consumers with incorrect events that must anyway be removed by the
reconcile operator. However, consider an example of the former. For example, assume
we updated a filter in the producer application that was aggressively and incorrectly filter­
ing out too many events. The events produced by the old producer version are then a strict
subset of the events produced by the new producer version, meaning that no old events
need to be removed, but the reconcile operator will simply add all the historic events that
was incorrectly filtered out. This is a perfect example of a situation where a consumer
might want to continue receiving events from the previous producer version, until the
newest producer version has ”caught up” and can take over. In this case, it makes the
reconcile operation minimally invasive, as it essentially occurs in the background without
interrupting the flow of current events to the consumers.
This can also be implemented for the buffer operator. We can continue emitting events
from the previous version of the input stream, while we buffer the output stream. Because
36
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.5: This figure illustrates a case where the stream processor continues processing
events from !1 of the producer application while reconciling the output stream with V2 of
the producer application. The figure is made up of two subfigures.
Top: The top subfigure illustrates how the new version of the producer application is
lagging behind the previous version. The new version will have to reprocess all of its
historical data, and this might take anywhere from minutes to days.
Bottom: The bottom subfigure illustrates how the stream processor takes both V1 and V2
of the stream as input. The output stream is still reconciled with the newest input version,
V2, but V1 is mirrored to the output stream while the reconcile operation is ongoing.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
37
==PAGE:48==
this feature is only meaningful for a subset of use­cases, it is however imperative that it
is added as an extra feature, and not the default behaviour of the operators.
From now on, we will therefore consider three different streams as input to the reconcile
and buffer operator:
1. The desired input stream
2. The output stream
3. The previous input stream (optional)
Besides being an optional feature to continue processing the previous version of the input
stream, this previous version might not exist anymore (or might not have existed at all),
which underlines why it must be provided as an optional parameter.
Versioning Events
To differ between events originating from either of the three streams that an operator might
consume from, we introduce some terminology that will be used going forward:
• Previous Event: A current event is an event coming from the previous version of
the input stream.
• Desired Event: A desired event is an event from the newest version of the input
stream, representing the desired state.
• Reconciled Event: A reconciled event is an event coming from the output stream
that the downstream consumers read from. The rationale behind this terminology is,
that this stream only contains events that have already been reconciled (or mirrored).
When consuming from a stream, we attach a version to each event. The desired and
previous events are naturally versioned by the corresponding version of the stream they
are consumed from, and this version can then be added as metadata when producing
events to the output stream. As a result, each reconciled event will be tagged with an
origin version, allowing consumers to tell in what version of the producer application an
event was emitted from.
3.6.5
Scalability
So far, we have thoroughly analyzed correctness, latency, and noise. Now, we will instead
focus on ensuring that the stream process is scalable. In order to be able to deploy several
thousand instances of the different operators at once, we must keep a number of things
in mind.
Grouping
We want to group several different input streams together, and then use a single instance
of the processor to maintain the output streams for all of these. Each stream processor
is then responsible for a number of different pipelines, with each pipeline consisting of an
operator reading from a number of input streams and producing to an output stream. The
stream processor should then execute each pipeline in parallel, as they do not conflict
with each other in any way. There are a number of reasons as to why we would do this:
1. The size of a lot of the input streams might be fairly small. Setting aside resources
and spinning up an isolated environment for each input stream will result in a se­
vere resource overhead. Instead, we want to bundle a number of streams together.
Preferably, the number of streams that are bundled together should be configurable,
such as to bundle a large number of smaller streams together, versus only bundling
a few really large streams together.
38
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.6: This figure illustrates how a stream processor is responsible for multiple
pipelines. Each pipeline corresponds to a number of input streams, an operator, and
an output stream. As the figure illustrates with the bounding box, only the operator is ac­
tually maintained by the stream processor itself, the input and output streams are external
dependencies. Notice, that the operators might vary between pipelines.
2. When consuming from a thousand different input streams, we probably don’t want to
maintain a thousand different connections to the stream broker. Instead, we want to
group several streams into a single instance of the processor, with each processor
then maintaining a single connection to the broker.
3. Lastly, we want to avoid having to configure and setup a processor for each single
input stream. Instead, by grouping streams together, we can jointly configure and
operate a large number of streams together, making it more manageable to deploy
and maintain the product.
A stream processor containing a number of pipelines is visualized in fig. 3.6.
Automated Operation
When deploying a large number of processors, it is important that the process of oper­
ating these should be fully automated. That is, we want to avoid manual interaction e.g.
whenever a new version of the input stream is released. Instead, the application itself
should discover whenever this happens, and correspondingly transform the output topic
to match this new version. This operator should be created as a separate component
that controls/operates the stream processors, separating out the operational logic from
the application logic, leaving each component with a single area of responsibility.
One could argue, that this is a general requirement, and not directly linked to the issue
of scalability, but the importance of this automated operation is increased manyfold as
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
39
==PAGE:50==
the number of deployed processors scales. Manually operating a single instance of the
stream processor is cumbersome, but manually operating hundreds of instances is nearly
impossible and extremely error­prone.
3.6.6
Throughput
Finally, another important non functional requirement for the stream processor is through­
put. Besides wanting low latency, we also wish for the reconcile operator to be able to
achieve high throughput. This follows, since we wish to complete the reconcile operation
as fast as possible, providing consumers with the newest version of the input topic with
minimal delay.
One way to increase the throughout is by processing independent partitions of the streams
in parallel, allowing the work to be distributed over multiple workers. However, since we
are joining events from two different streams based on their key, we cannot blindly match
a partition from the left input stream with a partition from the right input stream; these
partitions might not contain the same keys. To distribute the work to multiple workers,
we must instead repartition events based on their keys. This will incur some overhead
in serializing and deserializing events, as well as require some network traffic assuming
the workers are on different nodes. However, it means that we could in theory run with
parallelism equal to the number of keys (but we of course will not).
3.7
Deployment
Besides requiring interoperability with Kafka, the current technology stack and CI/CD
setup in Tryg A/S pose specific requirements for building and deploying the end­product to
production. Furthermore, as the very purpose of the product is to decouple components
and increase the agility of the Tryg360 datahub, the end­product itself should of course ad­
here to the principles of agile software development practices as detailed in section 2.3.1.
Specifically, we want an almost fully automated deployment pipeline for this product, as
described in section 2.3.2. This deployment pipeline should then be invoked as part of
the existing deployment pipeline in use at Tryg A/S. To integrate with the existing pipeline,
our deployment pipeline needs to provide the following:
1. A fully automated build of the application
2. Containerization of the application
3. Deployment of the containerized application to Kubernetes
To understand these requirements, we explore each of the listed requirements/technolo­
gies in some more detail below.
3.7.1
Build Automation
To fully automate the build process, we will use a build automation tool. Build tools are
used to automate the creation of executable applications from source code. This includes
tasks such as downloading dependencies, compiling the source code, packaging binaries
and running tests.
Build tools provides a number of benefits. First, they simplify the build process by abstract­
ing away the low­level details and providing a uniform interface for different platforms and
environments. Second, they ensure reliable and reproducible build processes by enforc­
ing rules and standards, and by tracking the changes and the status of the build. Third,
they improve the efficiency and the quality of the build process by optimizing the perfor­
mance, detecting errors, and facilitating collaboration and integration.
40
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.7: Caption
The choice of build tool depends on the programming language and platform, and we will
defer the actual choice of build tool to the time of implementation.
3.7.2
Containerization
Containerization is all about serving applications in small, standard units referred to as
containers. A container basically provides a lightweight, isolated environment for an ap­
plication, and the container can then run on any platform or infrastructure without requiring
the application code or configuration to be tweaked to the specific host system. This elim­
inates the infamous problem of ”it works on my machine”, and enables developers to
deploy applications faster and more reliably. Containers are no new concept, but their
popularity exploded with the emergence of Docker [36], an open­source platform that sim­
plifies the creation and management of containers.
To containerize an application using Docker, the first step is to write a Dockerfile that
contains the specific build instructions for the container image. A container image is the
standalone, executable package in which the source code and its dependencies is col­
lected. This Dockerfile is then fed to the Docker engine which builds the container image,
and a container is then a running instance of this container image. Users store and share
container images through a registry service, with the official Docker registry service being
Docker Hub. Most major software products provide publicly available container images
to deploy fully configured, standalone instances of their products.
Containers are usually run in distributed and dynamic environments, and deploying, man­
aging, scaling, and balancing containerized applications is a highly complex endeavour.
Typically, some kind of container orchestration platform is therefore used to automate
and manage the many, otherwise manual, processes involved in this. In Tryg, the chosen
such platform is Kubernetes.
3.7.3
Kubernetes
Kubernetes is an open­source container orchestration platform that automates deploy­
ment, scaling, and management of containerized applications across a cluster of nodes
[35]. Kubernetes provides declarative configuration and automation, and can automat­
ically scale up or down resources according to the current demand, providing options
for both horizontal and vertical scaling. Kubernetes decouples containerized applications
from the specific machine they are executed on. If a machine fails, Kubernetes can then
transparently reschedule the application to another machine, and Kubernetes can also
run multiple instances of the application across a number of different machines.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
41
==PAGE:52==
Kubernetes is structured around objects and controllers, see fig. 3.7. Objects are per­
sistent entities in the Kubernetes system that represent the current state of the cluster.
These objects further specify the desired state of the cluster, but by itself, a Kubernetes
object is nothing more than a way of storing structured data inside the Kubernetes control
plane. By combining objects with controllers, however, Kubernetes provides a declara­
tive Application Programming Interface (API) for managing the system. A controller is
an infinite loop that runs inside the Kubernetes cluster and watches the shared state of
the objects by interacting with the Kubernetes cluster API server. Controllers then apply
or request any necessary changes to bring the current state of the system closer to the
desired state declared inside the objects. Controllers thus encapsulate the operational
knowledge of how to manage the different objects.
The first step in setting up Kubernetes is to create a Kubernetes cluster. A Kubernetes
cluster consists of a control plane, responsible for managing the cluster and providing
coordination, as well as a number of nodes that provide the underlying resources, serving
as worker machines to actually execute the containerized workloads. The containerized
workloads are then deployed to the cluster as Pods, which are the atomic units of com­
putation in Kubernetes. A pod is a grouping of containers with shared resources, that
are correspondingly given a shared context on some node that matches any constraints
specified by the user. Normally, however, users should not manually manage Pods, and
will instead use one of the higher level abstractions for managing their containerized work­
loads [37].
3.8
Frameworks
To implement the stream processor, we will rely on a stream­processing framework for
development as well as a stream­processing engine to execute it. Likewise, we will utilize
a framework for building the operator component. In this section, we will briefly present
the chosen frameworks, along with some justification for the choices.
The current programming languages in use inside Tryg360 are Java and Go. Since the
existing codebase is already built around these two programming languages, the compo­
nents should preferably be developed using either of these. This will make both integration
and operation a lot easier, since the team in Tryg has years of experience with the both
the languages themselves and the tooling surrounding them.
3.8.1
Flink
The most popular stream­processing frameworks are as follows (with all of them providing
support for Java):
1. Apache Flink1
2. Apache Spark2
3. Kafka Streams3
Of these three, Flink and Spark are most alike, with Kafka Streams being the slight out­
sider. In short, both Flink and Spark are open­sourced, general data­processing frame­
works that can integrate with a large number of different systems. Flink is streaming
first, based on an actual streaming engine, whereas Spark is originally built for batch­
processing workloads, with functionality for stream processing added later using micro­
batching techniques. Kafka Streams, in turn, is built for integration with Kafka only, and
1https://flink.apache.org/
2https://spark.apache.org/streaming/
3https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/streams/
42
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:53==
with simpler processing use­cases in mind. For example, Kafka streams only provides a
limited set of stateful transformations, and in general offers less flexibility an customizabil­
ity compared to the other frameworks.
Among these possibilities, we choose Flink as our framework of choice, based on the
streaming first approach and the available low level APIs that enable extremely fine­
grained control. We will therefore describe Flink in slightly more detail below.
Flink is an open­source framework and distributed processing engine that provides state­
ful computations over data streams. Flink offers powerful stream­processing capabilities,
enabling high­throughput, low­latency, and exactly­once processing. A Flink cluster con­
sists of three different types of processes: the client, the Job Manager, and (at least one)
Task Manager [5]. The client takes the program code, transforms it into a Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG) composed of stateful operators that are connected via data streams, and
submits this dataflow program to the JobManager. The Job Manager then coordinates the
distributed execution of this submitted program, tracking the state and progress of each
operator. The Job Manager is also responsible for coordinating checkpoints and potential
recovery from these checkpoints, in case any operator fails. The Task Managers are then
the processes that actually execute the dataflow program, applying the different operators
to their given streams.
Flink provides a layered API to allow for different levels of abstraction. The available APIs
are as follows:
1. SQL
2. Table API
3. DataStream API
4. Stateful Steam Processing
The expressiveness of the APIs increases as one moves down the list, but so does the
complexity of writing the programs. The DataStream API and the Stateful Stream Pro­
cessing integrate well with each other, and allows programs to use a combination of the
two. Flink supports several different types of state, such as keyed state, operator state,
and broadcast state. Flink also supports the different notions of time (event and process­
ing time) and watermarks as described in section 2.2, with the possibility to register timers
to flexible delay and trigger computation.
3.8.2
Kubebuilder
As detailed in section 3.7, the stream processor component should to be deployed to Ku­
bernetes. This means, that the operator component we wish to build should likewise be
deployable to Kubernetes. We will therefore build the operator component by utilizing the
Kubernetes operator pattern [38]. The operator pattern describes a way to extend Kuber­
netes to manage custom resources and automate tasks for applications, taking advantage
of the capabilities that Kubernetes already provides.
The Kubernetes API can be extended with custom resources by creating Custom Re­
source Definitions (CRDs). Following Kubernetes conventions, a custom resource should
contain a specification and a status subresource, representing the desired and the current
state of the custom resource, respectively. The custom resource should be linked to a
corresponding custom controller, and it is then the responsibility of this linked controller
to keep the current state of the resource in sync with the desired state. The controller can
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
43
==PAGE:54==
be implemented as any other application, and be deployed as any other containerized
workload on the cluster.
To implement a custom operator, we thus want to create a CRD for our stream proces­
sor component, and then build an operator application to watch and update this custom
resource. We should embed the necessary operational knowledge inside this operator
application, in order to enable it to automatically manage the stream processor deploy­
ment, aiming to keep the current state in sync with the desired state as specified in the
custom resource. To facilitate the development of the custom resource definitions and the
controller, we will use the Kubebuilder framework.
Kubebuilder is a framework for building Kubernetes API’s 4. Kubebilder facilitate the cre­
ation of Kubernetes APIs through a large collection of Kubernetes development tools. In
particular, Kubebuilder provides tools and libraries to scaffold and generate the basic com­
ponents of a Kubernetes operator that the developer must then modify. In particular, the
Kubebuilder SDK helps to:
1. Create a new project directory
2. Scaffold one or more resource APIs
3. Automatically create CRDs from resource APIs
4. Scaffolding out a controller
5. Bootstrap integration tests
6. Build and publish a containerized controller application
When utilizing the Kubebuilder framework to build a new operator, the manual work mainly
consists of designing a resource API, and then implementing the reconcile loops inside
the scaffolded controllers.
4https://github.com/kubernetes­sigs/kubebuilder
44
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:55==
4
Design
Based on the analysis provided in the previous chapter, this chapter will explain and argue
for the different design choices that have been made to implement the stream processor
and the operator components.
4.1
Stream­Processor
The stream processor is responsible for implementing the actual, operational logic as
presented in the analysis. This includes buffering, consolidation of the versioned input
streams with the output stream, as well as being able to simply mirror the input stream to
the output stream. The stream processor can be deployed by itself and manually operated,
and it should be able to function without the operator component.
4.1.1
Setup
We will create a Runner class to be the application entrypoint. This class will be responsi­
ble for reading configurations and creating each of the pipelines that the stream processor
should execute. The class itself is shown in fig. 4.1, and is extremely simple. A simplified
sequence diagram is given in fig. 4.2. To understand the sequence diagram, we have to
briefly touch upon Flink program execution.
In Flink, data sources must be attached to a Flink execution environment that captures the
context in which the program will be executed (this could be a local machine or a remote
cluster). The execution environment then transforms these sources into DataStreams. A
DataStream is a collection of events of the same type. A DataStream can have multiple
different sources, for example by unioning two separate DataStreams, but these sources
are not visible to any operations applied to it. A DataStream is therefore a generic class
that accepts a type parameter which defines the type of events it contains. One can then
apply transformations to DataStreams in order to create new derived DataStreams. Once
a DataStream containing the desired, final results has been obtained, this DataStream
should then be produced to some output through a Flink Sink. All operations specified
on these DataStreams are executed lazily. That is, these operations are not executed
with the main method of the program. Instead, each operation is added to a dataflow
graph, and once the Flink execution environment is executed by a call to the execute()
method, the resulting dataflow graph is submitted to the Flink cluster. The Flink cluster
is then responsible for executing the dataflow graph. Thus, when the buildPipeline()
method calls the build() method of the JobBuilder, it does not actually execute or return
anything, but instead adds another parallel dataflow to the dataflow graph.
We will follow the flow of the sequence diagram and look at the ConfigFactory class next,
before turning to the different Kafka helper classes and the JobBuilder class.
Figure 4.1: The Runner class
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.2: A simplified sequence diagram showing the setup of the stream processor. We
omit the different helper classes to build Kafka sources and sinks, as well as the specific
arguments to the JobBuilder.
4.1.2
Configuration
To facilitate easy and manageable configuration, we will create a separate class, Config­
Factory, to read and provide all of the different configurations to the stream processor. We
differ between configurations for Kafka and for Flink, and captures these configurations
in two interfaces FlinkConfig and KafkaConfig, respectively. The interfaces are shown in
more detail in fig. 4.3. We leave out the StopCondition interface from this class diagram,
as this interface will instead be explained in section 4.1.8.
The KafkaConfig is not particularly interesting, but simply provides the necessary con­
figurations needed to consume from and produce to a Kafka cluster. The one exception,
however, is the getKafkaPartitioner function. This is needed because, as very briefly
touched upon in the Analysis chapter, we will repartition events onto a concatenation of
their keys and timestamps. This is necessary to maintain history inside the reconcile op­
erator, and it will further allow us to run compaction on the produced kafka topics while
maintainig the SCD Type 2 history. When producing to a Kafka cluster, we must therefore
partition based on the original key, in order to make sure that events with the same keys
end up in the same partition. Further, we cannot simply reuse the partition number from
the input stream, since the number of partitions might be different from the output stream.
We are therefore forced to recompute partitions, and we provide the partition function from
46
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.3: This figure shows the ConfigFactory class and its dependencies.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.4: Kafka helper classes.
the KafkaConfig.
The FlinkConfig provides a large number of different configurations. As discussed in
the analysis, we allow the out­of­orderedness and the stop condition to be specified for
the stream processor. We notice, that we set these on the level of the whole stream
processor, and not on the level of pipelines. The idea is, that the pipelines a stream
processor executes should all belong to a single application, and we then want the same
behavior for all the streams of this application. If a single stream processor contains
streams from multiple different applications, then the stream processor must be restarted
whenever any of these applications are updated, in order to change the desired stream
in the pipeline to the new version.
A pipeline then specifies the Kafka topics it should operate on, and the current RunMode
which specifies the type of operator to execute.
4.1.3
Kafka
To create the Kafka sources and Sinks, we provide a number of helper classes. Specifi­
cally, we create the following classes:
• KafkaAdmin: The KafkaAdmin class should provide functionality for the stream
processor to create any missing output streams.
• KafkaSourceFactory: The KafkaSourceFactory will be responsible for creating
new Kafka data sources that Flink can consume from.
• KafkaSinkFactory: The KafkaSinkFactory will be responsible for creating new Kafka
data sinks that Flink can produce to.
• KafkaSerdeSchema: The KafkaSerdeSchema provides functionality to serialize
and deserialize events from Kafka. This is necessary, to actually read the events in
the stream processor.
The class diagrams for these classes are given in fig. 4.4. The reason for building the
48
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.5: This figure shows the two types of events we will support in our stream pro­
cessing pipeline, Event and ReconciledEvent.
Sources and Sinks outside the JobBuilder is to make them pluggable. The stream pro­
cessor logic should not care about where we consume events from nor produce to, it
should just consume from some given input and produce to an output. This makes it easy
to test the stream processor. For example, we can create DataStreams from simple lists
and provide these as input, and then sink the results to another list. This enables us to
validate the output against the expected output, and we use exactly this approach as will
be discussed in section 6.1. Further, it means we could change the sources or sinks in
the future without having to change the stream processor itself.
In order to consume from and produce to the Kafka topics, we need to be able to dese­
rialialize and serialize events. This is done by providing the factories with an implemen­
tation of the KafkaRecordDeserializationSchema interface or KafkaRecordSerializa-
tionSchema interface, respectively. We treat serialization next.
4.1.4
Serde
Not only must events be deserialized and serialized to consume from and produce to
Kafka, but events must typically also be deserialized and serialized within the Flink job
itself. This happens in two places; when moving data between Flink operators that are not
co­located within the same JVM instance, but instead run inside separate processes, and
when data needs to be written to an off­heap state­backend. Inside the stream­processor,
we will use RocksDB as a state backend for both the buffer and reconcile functions, and
thus we will have to serialize and deserialize events on every state access. Serialization
and deserialization are therefore important, and making the serializers efficient can greatly
improve the performance of our Flink job. In particular, we must make our event types
standard Plain Old Java Objects (POJOs) to use flinks efficient PojoSerializer.
We define two different types of events, namely a class Event and another class Recon-
ciledEvent. The two classes are shown in fig. 4.5. As the name implies, the former data
type represents generic events with the only constraint, that any event must have a key.
The value itself is not deserialized but simply stored as an array of bytes. Thus, we do
not need to know about the schema of events, and can support arbitrary schemas and
schema evolution. Further, the value is allowed to be null to signify a tombstone. The
other data type, the ReconciledEvent class, represents an event after it has been rec­
onciled, and the output topic that the stream processor produces to will thus consist of
ReconciledEvents. The ReconciledEvent class extends the Event class, adding a new
field and a number of helper methods. The new field is the compositeKey, which is simply
a concatenation of the key and timestamp of the underlying Event. This composite key
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.6: The JobBuilder class. Following the builder pattern, all fields have setter
methods that return back the JobBuilder instance. These methods are left out for brevity.
is needed in order to allow the output Kafka topic to be compacted without deleting the
history of events.
4.1.5
JobBuilder
Once the Flink program has been configured, then the actual DataStream program is built
inside the JobBuilder class. As the name suggests, the JobBuilder class will implement
the Builder pattern. But instead of building an instance of a class, the JobBuilder builds
a Flink pipeline, which is then added to the Flink dataflow graph. The class is shown in
figure fig. 4.6. The JobBuilder class builds either a buffer job, mirror job, or reconcile
job, depending on the provided RunMode. The different job types are implemented by
applying different process functions to the DataStream. We will consider the design of
these different functions next.
4.1.6
Functions
The stream processor can operate in three different run modes, each run mode specifying
a different behaviour. These modes are as follows:
• Buffer Mode
• Reconcile Mode
• Mirror Mode
The buffer mode is, as the name suggests, used to process and buffer the output stream
before starting the reconcile operation. As was touched upon in the analysis, this is useful
in cases where we want to minimize noise. The stream processor then creates the mate­
rialized view of the output stream, which can then be used during the reconcile operation.
If buffering is disabled, or once the buffering is complete, the stream processor can then
start the actual reconcile operation. The stream processor will not transition by itself, but
has to be explicitly switched to Reconcile Mode.
Finally, once the stream processor has successfully performed the reconcile operation,
50
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.7: This figure illustrates the log­
ical flow of the buffer function as it pro­
cesses an event. As shown, the logic
differs for current and reconciled events.
Figure 4.8: This figure illustrates the log­
ical flow of the mirror function as it pro­
cesses an event.
The mirror function
unconditionally emits every event to the
output stream.
bringing the state of the output stream to the desired state of the newest input stream, we
no longer need to apply any processing to incoming events. Instead, all future events that
arrive in the input stream can be directly mirrored to the output stream. Therefore, the
stream processor should then be switched to mirror mode.
Each of these run modes are implemented in the stream processor by a corresponding
process function. By isolating the different behaviours into process functions, it allows
us to reuse the setup, configuration etc. of the stream processor between different run
modes. We can use a generic operator implementation and simply provide the user­
defined function it should apply. If a pipeline needs to change mode, the only thing needed
is then to update the process function that is supplied to the operator.
To apply these functions to a Flink DataStream they should all extend the Flink class Keyed-
ProcessFunction. The KeyedProcessFunction processes the elements of a DataStream
one at a time, providing access to both keyed state and timers. The keyed state is both
fault­tolerant and consistent, and the timers can be registered for both event­time and
processing­time. When timers are triggered, they call the onTimer(...) method of the
KeyedProcessFunction. With event­time timers, the timer is triggered once the watermark
has advanced up to or beyond the registered timestamp of the timer. For processing­time
timers, it is instead triggered once the system time has passed the timestamp.
Buffer Function
The buffer function builds the materialized view of the output stream, and is thus a stateful
operator. Further, it should provide the ability to continue processing the events from
the previous version of the input stream while buffering. The logical flow of the function
is illustrated in fig. 4.7. In this figure, the ”update state” step will have to be expanded
upon. This step updates the materialized view that the operator maintains. Any current
events will take precedence over the reconciled events, because the current events will
be emitted and thus appended to the output stream, overwriting any previous state. Thus,
in the ”update state” step, current events will overwrite the state of any reconciled events,
but a reconciled event will not overwrite any previously processed current event.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
51
==PAGE:62==
Mirror Function
The mirror function is even simpler than the buffer function; we unconditionally emit any
processed event to the output stream. This simple flow is illustrated in fig. 4.8. As can be
seen, the mirror function does not need to maintain any state nor timers.
Reconcile Function
Finally, the reconcile function is much more involved than the buffer and mirror functions,
as can be seen from the logical flow depicted in fig. 4.10. The reconcile operator is stateful
and maintains two types of state; a buffer to keep events for later processing, as well as the
materialized view of the processed events. The reason for keeping a separate buffer, is
because we store only the hashes of event values in the materialized view. We will expand
upon this in section 4.1.7. The reconcile function also maintains a number of timers to
delay processing until the watermark catches up. Finally, the reconcile function consumes
from three different streams, and the logic therefore branches for current, desired and
reconciled events.
As was the case for the buffer function, the ”update state” step in the reconcile function
updates the materialized view. To maintain correctness, not all types of events will over­
write previous events of another type. Events are ”ranked” in the following order, where
lower ranking events will not overwrite higher ranking ones:
1. Desired events
2. Current events
3. Reconciled events
Thus, a desired event will overwrite any event, but a current event cannot overwrite previ­
ously processed desired events. Now, the ”process event” step is actually comprised of
two smaller steps; an ”update state” step and then a conditional step emitting the event.
This is depicted in fig. 4.9.
Figure 4.9: The flow of the ”process event” step. We only emit events if they are different
from the materialized view maintained in state.
52
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.10: This figure illustrates the overall logical flow of the reconcile function when
processing a new event. The figure leaves out a number of details in order to present a
clear picture of the flow.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.11: The StopCondition interface and its implementations.
When events arrive before the corresponding watermark has passed, we consider these
events as ”early”, and we register a timer for when the watermark finally passes. When the
timer fires, we assume the input to be (almost) complete, and can then decide on the final
action to be taken for this event. For example, this is needed for cleaning up any current
events we emit that turn out not to be part of the desired state. Once the watermark has
caught up, we then assess whether we need to tombstone this event. The same strategy
applies for the reconciled events, where we wait for the watermark to catch up before
deciding whether to tombstone them or not, using the ”maybe tombstone” step. This step
checks whether the current materialized view differs from the event to tombstone, emitting
the tombstone if that is the case, and does nothing otherwise.
4.1.7
State
In order to be able to handle late events without reprocessing, we maintain the material­
ized view of the processed events in both the buffer and reconcile functions. We notice,
however, that this materialized view is only ever used to compare values. That is, we
check whether the value of a new event differs from the value stored in the materialized
view. Instead of directly storing the event values, we can therefore store a hash of these
values, and compare these hashes instead. Of course, because a hash function maps
from an infinite domain to a limited domain, we are no longer guaranteed complete cor­
rectness, since we introduce the possibility of false positives, where two different values
map to the same hash. To ensure that this probability is kept low, we need to map to a
sufficiently large domain using an (almost) perfect random hash function; a more detailed
analysis is given in appendix A. We therefore introduce a Hasher and HashValue class
to compute and store hash values.
Then, we define a KeyedState class to hold all values that must be maintained in the
materialized view. This class contains the hash value, as well as any data that we need
to store, but which should not be used in checks for equality.
4.1.8
Stop Conditions
As discussed in the Analysis chapter, stop conditions are used to control the behaviour
of the reconcile function, by defining when to consider the reconcile operation to be fin­
ished. We therefore introduce an interface StopCondition. Further, we differ between two
different types of stop conditions; the first one operates on only the newest version of the
input stream (desired events), whereas the second type also takes the previous version
as input (previous events). We therefore refer to them as one input stop conditions and
two input stop conditions. The classes are shown in fig. 4.11. The former class takes the
54
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.12: The classes for testing stop conditions. These extend the abstract Flink class
AbstractStreamOperator in order to directly manipulate watermarks.
processing­time and event­time as input to the test(...) method. The latter takes the
processing­time and then the event­time of both the left and right input streams.
We now look at the different implementations of the OneInputStopCondition and TwoIn-
putStopCindition classes. The behaviour of stopping at a processing/event timestamp
is self­evident from the names; we simply stop the operator once the input reaches the
specified timestamp. Stopping at lag means stopping once the watermark of the input
stream is within a specified specified threshold of the processing time. Stopping at lag be­
hind current then means stopping once the watermark of the newest version of the input
stream is within a specified threshold of the watermark of the previous version.
With these stopping conditions, we are able to flexibly model the behaviour of the recon­
cile operator. For example, when mirroring the previous input version while reconciling,
we can stop once the newest input stream has caught up to the previous version, we
could stop once we process an event with a timestamp larger than the time at which we
started the operation, or we could stop as soon as we have processed the output stream,
disregarding how far along the input stream is.
To enforce the stop conditions, we will create two classes OneInputStopConditionChecker
and TwoInputStopConditionChecker. Before we can discuss how to enforce stop con­
ditions, we will need to look into how watermarks are used in Flink. In Flink, watermarks
are generated using a WatermarkStrategy. A WatermarkStrategy is typically specified
at the sources, but can in principal be specified after any operator in a Flink Pipeline. A
WatermarkStrategy in turn contains a TimestampAssigner and a WatermarkGenerator.
The former simply specifies which field of the events to use as timestamp, and the latter
specifies how to extract watermarks from a stream of events. Flink implements a number
of default strategies, but also allows users to define their own data­driven strategies to
extract watermarks from a DataStream. Watermarks are then ingested in the DataStream
alongside the events for downstream operators to consume and pass along. If an opera­
tor consumes from several different DataStreams, the operator will maintain a simple data
structure to keep track of the minimum watermark.
Flink uses max watermarks to signal that a source has terminated, in order to trigger
all registered timers in downstream operators. Our stop condition checkers can therefore
emit this max watermark once the stop condition evaluates to true, forcing all downstream
operators to trigger their timers. To be able to directly manipulate watermarks, we can­
not use the DataStream API, but must instead use the Stateful Steam Processing API.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
55
==PAGE:66==
Specifically, we will extend the AbstractStreamOperator class, which implements the
ProcessWatermark(...) method. We implement two different operators to check stop
conditions; a OneInputStopConditionChecker that operates on a regular DataStream,
and a TwoInputStopConditionChecker that operates on a ConnectedStream. The latter
is necessary when the reconcile operator is also processing the previous input stream.
The two classes are shown in fig. 4.12.
4.1.9
Overview
The design of the stream processor is summarized in the simplified class diagram in
fig. 4.13. This class diagram shows how the classes discussed so far are connect. The di­
agram omits the Event and ReconciledEvent classes, however, since these will be used
by most classes.
4.2
Operators
To manage and operate the stream processors we will create two separate but very closely
linked operators. The first operator will be responsible for setting up the environment
needed to actual run the stream processors. Most importantly, this includes setting up
and managing a Flink session cluster, along with some kind of persistent storage in order
to enable the fault­tolerance mechanism of Flink. For the latter purpose, we will choose
MinIO1, which provides an S3 compatible object store with native kubernetes integration.
We will name the corresponding custom resources for this operator ReconcilerDeploy­
ments. The second operator will then be responsible for actually operating the stream
processors, and we will name the corresponding custom resources ReconcileJobs.
The Kubernetes operator pattern enables a declarative and level­based API, and the de­
sign of the operators will adhere to best­practices in order to achieve this. Both concepts
are explained below, before we start exploring the design of the two operators.
4.2.1
Declarative
A declarative API is one where users should simply declare the desired state, and it is then
the responsibility of the application to apply the necessary transformations to go from the
current state to the desired state. In declarative APIs, users therefore do not need any
operational knowledge of how to achieve this desired state. This style contrasts with
imperative APIs, where the user instead explicitly calls the API to apply the necessary
transformations, thus deciding on the actions to take by themselves.
4.2.2
Level­based
A level­based component operates based on the current, observed state of the system.
In contrast, an edge­based component depends on the transitions made inside a system.
As a simple example, consider a component that counts the number of clients connected
to some service. A level­based design would need to be able to access the number of
open connections, and whenever the count is requested, this component would count
every open connection and return the result. Consider instead an edge­based design.
Such a design might subscribe to events from the service, and be informed whenever a
connection is opened/closed. This component would then have to keep a running tally,
which could be directly returned when the count is requested.
The edge­based approach is typically more efficient than the level­based approach, since
it does not have to scan the current state whenever it is invoked. But a level­based design
achieves a more resilient system with fault­tolerance added for free. In a level­based
system, whenever a component fails, it can simply be redeployed. The level­based logic
1https://min.io/
56
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.13: This figure shows the class diagram of the stream processor, designed to be implemented with the Flink framework. Some details
and classes has been left out to present a more clean overview, but these will all be described elsewhere.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.14: Class diagram for the ReconcilerDeployment.
means that the redeployed component only needs to consider the current state of the
system.
Of course, one can combine level and edge based approaches. Combining the two ap­
proaches from the previous example, a component could count all the open connections
when starting up, and thereafter modify this count based on incoming open/close connec­
tion events. This would achieve the resilience of the level­based design, and the efficiency
of the edge­based design.
Finally, we notice, that a level­based system can still be edge­triggered, which means
that the system is invoked whenever changes to the system are detected, but the actual
changes are not supplied as arguments. In practice, a combination of edge and level
triggers might be used, invoking the system whenever changes are detected as well as
performing periodic invocations.
4.2.3
Custom Resource Definitions
The custom resources definitions defines the declarative API that users and controllers in­
teract with. Using the Kubebuilder framework, this API is simply implemented as a number
of Go structs and Kubebuilder will then automatically convert this API into a corresponding
Custom Resource Definition. We will therefore model the API using class diagrams.
ReconcilerDeployment
The class diagram for the ReconcilerDeployment custom resource is shown in fig. 4.14.
We clearly see the declarative nature here; the necessary steps for setting up the Flink
cluster and minIO nodes are not revealed to the user. Instead, the user simply creates
a new ReconcilerDeployment resource, specifying the required resources for both Flink
and minIO, as well as providing the necessary parameters for connecting to an instance
of Kafka. These are all set in the ReconcilerDeploymentSpec subresource. It is then the
responsibility of the corresponding controller (see section 4.2.4) to create and maintain
58
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.15: Class diagram for the ReconcileJob.
the Flink cluster and distributed minIO nodes for this ReconcilerDeployment resource.
ReconcileJob
The class diagram for the ReconcileJob API is shown in fig. 4.15. Each ReconcileJob
resource maintains a single corresponding stream processor, which in turn executes a
number of pipelines. The pipelines can either be manually specified as a list of versioned
input topics and a corresponding output topic, or they can be specified using regular ex­
pressions. It is paramount, that each pipeline specifies a unique output topic, and this
constraint should be enforced. This, in turn, means that we can use the output topics to
uniquely identify a pipeline. For hardcoded pipelines, the user must manually update the
pipelines whenever new input versions become available. The operator will then apply
the latest of the available input versions. With the second approach, specifying pipelines
using regular expressions, the operator is instead responsible for monitoring the Kafka
cluster for any topics that match the input regex, and must automatically update the Rec­
oncileJob and corresponding stream processor whenever a new version is detected. The
version regex must be supplied for the operator to be able to extract the version of the
topic from the name. Likewise, the output topic regex is used to extract the name of the
output topic from the input topic name.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure 4.16: This figure illustrates a sequence diagram for the ReconcileDeploymentCon­
troller. The sequence diagram shows three different methods, which make up the control
loop of the controller. All of these methods are self­calls from the ReconcilerDeployment­
Controller called from its Reconcile(...) method.
All pipelines declared in a ReconcileJob have the same number of specified output par­
titions, out­of­order bounds, stop conditions, and flags. The only flag which we have not
already discussed, is the BundleLifecycles flag. This flag only modifies the behaviour
of the operator, it does not directly modify the stream processor in any way. To bundle
the lifecycles means keeping the pipelines synchronized by always maintaining the same
version of the input topic, and by further keeping the operators in each pipeline in sync.
That is, if for example the BufferOutputFlag is enabled, then the operator will wait for all
pipelines to finish buffering before switching to the reconcile operator instead.
From fig. 4.15 we also see that the subresource ReconcileJobStatus contains a status
object for each pipeline contained in the ReconcileJob. These statuses are used both
to keep users informed, but more importantly they enable the level­based design of the
corresponding controller, as we will see in section 4.2.4.
4.2.4
Controllers
Controllers are basically just running control loops that watch and react to the current state
of the system. Using the Kubebuilder framework, the controller structure will be scaffolded
for us. The only real thing we have to do, is to implement the reconcile loop inside the
scaffolded controller. We will model the behaviour of the controllers using sequence dia­
grams.
60
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:71==
ReconcilerDeployment
The controller for the ReconcilerDeployment resource is quite simple. It watches for Rec­
oncilerDeployment resources and then applies the Flink cluster and minIO nodes with the
specified computational resources and Kafka connection parameters. There is no real
logic needed for applying these resources, and the controller is mostly just a collection
of customizable configurations that the controller applies. The corresponding sequence
diagram is depicted in fig. 4.16.
ReconcileJob
The controller for the ReconcileJob is significantly more involved. Following the level­
based design, the controller is split into two different parts.
The first part is responsible for reading the current state of the system, and then writing
the observed state to the status subresource of the Kubernetes object. In order to be
able to observe the current state of the system, we create informers to extract the current
state from external systems. Specifically, we need to extract the current state from Flink
and Kafka, and therefore create two corresponding informers. From Kafka, we need to
be able to extract all the topics that match a regex. From Flink, we need to get the status
of each pipeline, which includes the run mode, the topics, and the current progress which
is measured using the output watermark of the pipeline.
Once the status subresource has been updated, the controller then uses the status to
calculate the new desired state of the Flink job, and applies this new state.
By combining the declarative APIs of the custom resources with level­based controller im­
plementations, we are able to gracefully deal with concurrency issues. Imagine a scenario
where two level­based processes both attempt to modify the same resource, overwriting
each other such that only the latest process succeeds. At some point, the failed process
will be invoked again. By comparing the desired state, as has been declared by the user,
and the current state of the system, the process will automatically detect the previous
failure and the process will be retried.
4.3
Deployment
We will deploy the stream­processor as a Flink Session Job to a corresponding Flink
Session Cluster. We choose a session cluster in order to allow multiple jobs running on
the same cluster. This will split the overhead of running the cluster out to all the jobs on
this cluster, instead of each job paying for the overhead of spinning up a dedicated cluster
itself. The ReconcilerDeployment controller will then be responsible for setting up and
maintaining this Flink cluster. To do this, we will utilize the Flink Kubernetes Operator2.
This will allow the ReconcilerDeployment to declaratively define the desired state of the
Flink cluster, and the Flink Kubernetes Operator will then be responsible for maintaining
the cluster. Further, this will allow each the ReconcileJob controller to declarative deploy
Flink Session Jobs as well, using the FlinkSessionJob resource. All interaction with Flink
for setting up the cluster and creating new jobs will therefore be facilitated through native
Kubernetes resources.
To deploy the ReconcilerdDeployment and ReconileJob controllers we will use the au­
togenerated docker files from Kubebuilder. Both the ReconcileJob and ReconcilerDe-
ployment controllers run asynchronously inside a single process, communicating with
the Kubernetes API server using the Kubernetes controller­runtime3. The Dockerfile con­
2https://github.com/apache/flink­kubernetes­operator
3https://github.com/kubernetes­sigs/controller­runtime
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.17: This figure illustrates a sequence diagram for the ReconcileJobController.
The sequence diagram shows two different methods, which makes up the control loop of
the controller. Both of these methods are self­calls from the ReconcileJobController called
from its Reconcile() method, but to simplify the figure, we do not add them as graphical
self­calls. Further, we do not show the interaction with Flink and Kafka that the informers
perform.
62
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.18: This figure illustrates an abstracted view of the initial, manual deployment.
We do not show the underlying resources necessary to deploy the different components.
tainerizes this process, and enables us to deploy the controllers directly to the Kubernetes
system.
The overview of the deployment is given by two different figures. The first figure, fig. 4.18,
shows what we must deploy ourselves. We assume an exsisting Kubernetes cluster to
deploy onto, as well as a Kafka cluster containing the different input streams. Then, we
must first deploy the different controllers to the Kubernetes system and install the created
CRDs. Then, we create new ReconcilerDeployment and ReconcileJob objects describ­
ing the environment we need, and the different reconcilliation jobs we want to perform.
The second figure, fig. 4.19, then shows the system that the controllers will attempt to
maintain, based on the desired state specified in the created Kubernetes objects.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure 4.19: This figure illustrates an abstracted view of the desired deployment. We do
not show the underlying resources necessary to deploy the different components.
64
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:75==
5
Implementation
This chapter will go through the implementation and deployment of the different compo­
nents. The reader is advised to follow along with the source code available, to provide
reference to what is described here. Some samples of code will be included directly in
the chapter, but for the complete code, we refer the reader to the source code.
5.1
Project Structure
In the root directory, we see a number of different folders. Starting from the top, the
charts folder contains a helm chart for installing the Flink Kubernetes operator. We briefly
mentioned this operator in section 4.3. This operator will automate and manage the Flink
installation on the Kubernetes cluster. This simplifies our operator, since we just have to
declaratively configure the Flink resources, and the Flink operator will take care of the
rest. We will return to this chart in section 5.5.
The next folder is the docker folder. This folder contains the Dockerfiles to containerize
our stream processor application. Again, we return to this folder in section 5.5.
The local-maven-repo folder contains a packaged fork of the flink­kafka­connector 1.
This fork fixes a bug in the Flink­Kafka­Connector, which results in bounded streams never
finishing after being restored from a snapshot. This bug was encountered during devel­
opment of the stream processor, and the fix is important, since we consume the output
stream as a bounded stream. We rely on Flink shutting down the source and emitting a
max watermark once the stream has been fully processed. This, together with the Stop-
Condition for the reconcile operator, signals when the reconcile operator has finished.
Then, the source code for the two components we have developed as part of this thesis are
contained in the flink-stream-processor and operator folders. The topmost of these
two folders, the flink-stream-processor folder contains the source code for the stream
processor implementation using Flink. The the operator folder contains the source code
for the two ReconcilerDeployment and ReconcileJob operators that were presented in
the Design chapter.
The last folder inside the root directory is the utils folder. This folder contains a number
of subfolders containing smaller applications and collections of Kubernetes resources.
Nothing contained inside this utils folder is strictly necessary for the project. Instead,
they all provide some extra functionality which has been used in the testing and evaluation
of our application. These utilities will therefore be explained in chapter 6.
Finally, we see a number of files, namely .gitignore, go.work, go.sum, pom.xml and
README.md. We assume the reader is already familiar with git as a version control system
and the use of .gitignore files. The go.sum, go.work and pom.xlm all relates to the build
and dependency management of the project, and we will explore these in section 5.2.
Finally, the README.md contains a short description of the project, and some examples on
how to run the application.
1https://github.com/apache/flink­connector­kafka
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
65
==PAGE:76==
5.2
Programming Languages and Build Tools
As already mentioned in the design chapter, Flink is written in Java, and we will therefore
be implementing our stream processor component in Java. Flink utilizes Maven2 as a
build tool to build, test, and package Java applications, and we will employ maven as a
build automation tool for our stream processer implementation. The POM is an acronym
for Project Object Model, and this file defines the configuration details used by Maven to
build the project. If we look inside this pom.xml file, we see some information about the
project and a number of dependencies and build commands. At the very top of the file,
we find the following snippet:
1
<groupId>com.tryg</groupId>
2
<artifactId>reconciler</artifactId>
3
<version>1.0</version>
4
<packaging>pom</packaging>
Listing 1: Project information contained inside parent POM
If we look at line 8 in listing 1, we see that this Project Object Model specifies the packaging
type POM. This indicates, that this POM file does not build any application itself. Instead,
it is a parent POM file which defines a number of common configurations and definitions
that are used in a number of child projects. Now, if we were to open the filnk-stream-
processor folder inside the root directory of our project, we would find another pom.xml
file. This file is a child POM which inherits the information and configuration from the
parent POM. Likewise, if we were to open the folder /utils/flink-comparator/, we
would see yet another child POM that inherits from the parent POM. This parent POM
therefore used to remove redundant and duplicate configurations from the children.
To implement the Kubernetes custom resources and controllers, we will instead use Go3.
Kubernetes itself is written in Go, and Go accordingly has the richest Kubernetes commu­
nity with a large number of available frameworks and packages available to aid the im­
plementation of Kubernetes operators. Specifically, the Kuberbuilder framework is meant
for building and publishing Kubernetes APIs in Go. Then, the go.work and go.work.sum
files in the root directory of our project define a multi­module workspace and the shared
dependencies among these modules, respectively. If we open the go.work file, it contains
just three lines (excluding whitespace):
1
go 1.21.1
2
3
use ./operator
4
use ./utils/kafka-regex-tester
Listing 2: The contents of the go.work file
That is, the go.work file defines the version of Go used across the different modules, and
then it shows the urls of the two Go modules contained inside our project. The first url is
for the module containing our operators, and the second is for a utility module.
5.3
Stream­Processor
All the source code related to the stream processor is contained in the flink-stream-
processor folder. This folder, in turn, contains another subfolder src as well as the child
2https://maven.apache.org/
3https://go.dev/
66
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:77==
POM file. If we open the src folder, we see three new nested subfolders; it, main, and
test. The it and test folders contain integration and unit tests, respectively, and will be
explored in section 6.1. Instead, we turn our attention to the main folder. Following Maven
conventions, the directory structure follows the package name com.tryg.reconciler,
with the corresponding directory structure main/java/com/tryg/reconciler. To explain
the implementation of the stream processor, we will follow the order of execution and start
by looking at the implementation of the Runner Class responsible for setup and configu­
ration, before looking at the actual processing logic.
5.3.1
Runner
The application entrypoint is the main method inside the Runner class defined in the Run-
ner.java file. The main method first loads the Flink and Kafka configurations, throwing
an exception if any required parameters are missing. These configurations are loaded
through the ConfigFactory class, which implements the FlinkConfig and KafkaConfig
interfaces. The implementation of the ConfigFactory class is both simple and rather unin­
teresting, as it simply loads a number of configurations passed to the application through
a combination of environment variables and command line arguments. We provide global
configurations that should hold for all pipelines (such as the Kafka configuration) through
environment variables, whereas each pipeline is defined using job arguments.The curious
reader is encouraged to take a look at the class by herself.
After loading the configurations, the main method sets up the Flink and Kafka environ­
ments using these provided configurations. The most interesting part of the main method
happens in lines 62­64, where we call a helper method to build each of the provided
pipelines by calling the buildPipeline(...) method for each configured pipeline. The
method buildPipeline(..) performs the following tasks in the specified order:
1. Extract input and output Kafka topics from the pipeline.
2. Determine the SlotSharingGroup for the pipeline and its resources.
3. Create Flink DataStreams for all input topics.
4. Create a Flink KafkaSink from the output Kafka topic. Then, wrap this sink inside a
Java Consumer that accepts a DataStream to sink.
5. Create a map of static metrics (or, more specific, gauges) that the pipeline should
report.
6. Build the job using the JobBuilder class, supplied with the arguments created in
the previous steps.
The input and output topics are accessible through getter methods in the Pipeline class,
and the SlotSharingGroups simply specify the resources for the job. Instead, we will first
consider the creation of the input DataStreams and the sink Consumer, before we briefly
discuss the created metrics, and finally turn our attention to the JobBuilder class.
The DataStreams are created with help from two methods createEventStream() and
createReconciledEventStream(). These two methods create DataStreams containing
the Event and ReconciledEvent types, respectively, from the extracted Kafka topics
of the pipeline. Because of the different available run modes of the stream processor,
the number and types of the input topics varies between invocations. In particular, it is
not always the case that we are supplied with both the previous and the desired topic.
The call to the createEventStream() method is therefore wrapped inside the maybeCre-
ateEventStream() which might return a null DataStream if the given topic does not ex­
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
67
==PAGE:78==
ist. We naively build all the DataStreams, as well as the Sink, and then provide these
to the JobBuilder class where they will be validated based on the business logic. The
output topic must always be specified, however, and the DataStream of ReconciledE-
vents should never be null. We will look into the createEventStream() and createRec-
onciledEventStream() methods below.
1
public static DataStream<Event> createEventStream(
2
String topic,
3
Integer version,
4
SlotSharingGroup ssg,
5
StreamExecutionEnvironment env,
6
FlinkConfig flinkConfig,
7
KafkaConfig kafkaConfig
8
) {
9
WatermarkStrategy<Event> wmStrategy = WatermarkStrategy
10
.<Event>forBoundedOutOfOrderness(flinkConfig.getOutOfOrderBound())
11
.withIdleness(flinkConfig.getMaxAllowedIdleness());
12
13
KafkaSource<Event> source =
14
new KafkaSourceFactory<Event>(
15
topic,
16
KafkaSerdeSchema.getEventDeserializationSchema(version),
17
kafkaConfig.getConsumerProperties()
18
).getSource();
19
20
return env
21
.fromSource(source, wmStrategy, topic, TypeInformation.of(Event.class))
22
.name(String.format("%S-source", topic))
23
.uid(String.format("%S-source", topic))
24
.slotSharingGroup(ssg);
25
}
Listing 3: This listing shows the createEventStream() method.
A snippet of the createEventStrem() method is given by listing 3. The method defines
a WatermarkStrategy, specifying the out­of­order bound as supplied through the con­
figurations. Further, we set an idleness, which will make sure that the watermarks will
advance, even in the face of idle sources. Then, the KafkaSource is created using the pre­
viously described KafkaSourceFactory class, and the DataStream of Events is created
by registering the KafkaSource with the Flink execution environment. We will not show
the createReconciledEventStream() method, but instead highlight the few differences
between the two methods. The obvious difference is the fact the returned DataStream
contains events of the ReconciledEvent type. The subtle, but important, difference, is
inside the call to the KafkaSourceFactory class. Here, we set a stopping offset, which
means that the source is bounded as we have discussed in both the Analysis and Design
chapters.
Next, we will look at the map of static metrics. The code in question is given by listing 4.
Referring back to the sequence diagram for the ReconcileJob controller in fig. 4.17, we
see that the gauges collected here are exactly the metrics that should be reported by the
FlinkInformer class. To implement the level based design, the informer needs to be able
to read the current state of the world. We achieve this by exposing these values through
the Flink metric system, allowing the informer to access these values.
Finally, a new instance of the JobBuilder class is created from within the buildPipeline
method. The corresponding snippet is given by listing 5. Unlike the DataStream class
68
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:79==
1
Map<String, String> gauges = new HashMap<>();
2
gauges.put("runMode", runMode.name());
3
gauges.put("outputTopic", outputTopic);
4
gauges.put("stopCondition", stopCondition.toString());
5
gauges.put("desiredTopic", desiredTopic);
6
gauges.put("desiredTopicVersion", pipeline.getDesiredTopicVersion().toString());
7
8
if (previousTopic != null) {
9
gauges.put("previousTopic", previousTopic);
10
gauges.put("previousTopicVersion", pipeline.getPreviousTopicVersion().toString());
11
}
Listing 4: This listing shows a number of gauges provided to each pipeline. These gauges
should be exposed as metrics for the operator.
that abstracts away the source of the events, there is no corresponding generic class
for the sink. Therefore, we wrap the KafkaSink inside a Java Consumer that accepts
a DataStream and sinks it to the KafkaSink. By making the JobBuilder class accept
a Consumer instead of a KafkaSink, we could just as well wrap another type of sink
inside this Consumer, producing the events to another destination than Kafka. We thereby
achieve the pluggable design described in section 4.1.1.
1
new JobBuilder()
2
.maybeSetDesiredTopicStream(desiredTopicStream, pipeline.getDesiredTopicVersion())
3
.maybeSetPreviousTopicStream(previousTopicStream, pipeline.getPreviousTopicVersion())
4
.setReconciledTopicStream(reconciledTopicStream)
5
.setStopCondition(stopCondition)
6
.setMode(runMode)
7
.slotSharingGroup(ssg)
8
.setGaugesToReport(gauges)
9
.setPrefix(outputTopic)
10
.sinkTo(sinkConsumer)
11
.build();
Listing 5: This listing shows the call made to the JobBuilder from the Runner class.
Next, we will look inside the JobBuilder class.
5.3.2
JobBuilder
The JobBuilder class is responsible for building the Flink dataflow for an individual pipeline.The
JobBuilder branches based on the supplied RunMode, and calls either the buildBuffer-
Job(), buildReconcileJob(), or buildMirrorJob() method, as shown in listing 6. The
most complex of these is the buildReconcileJob() method shown in listing 7. This buil-
dReconcileJob() method first maps the reconciled DataStream of ReconciledEvents to
a DataStream of the subtype Event. It then sets up the stop condition checker for the input
streams. Finally, it unions the reconciled, previous, and desired streams, and applies the
ReconcileFunction as a process function to this unioned stream, sinking the resulting
DataStream to the supplied sink consumer.
The buildBufferJob() and buildMirrorjob() are implemented in a similar fashion, but
each applies a different process function. The implementation of the different process
functions all closely follow their specified designs as discussed in section 4.1.6. We will
briefly go through each of them below, and the reader can find the corresponding classes
inside the functions folder.
5.3.3
BufferFunction
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
69
==PAGE:80==
1
public void build() throws Exception {
2
validate();
3
if ( this.mode == RunMode.BUFFER ) {
4
buildBufferJob();
5
} else if ( this.mode == RunMode.RECONCILE ) {
6
buildReconcileJob();
7
} else if ( this.mode == RunMode.MIRROR ) {
8
buildMirrorJob();
9
} else {
10
throw new IllegalArgumentException(
11
String.format(
12
"Illegal mode %s given. Should be either %s or %s",
13
mode,
14
RunMode.MIRROR, RunMode.RECONCILE
15
));
16
}
17
}
Listing 6: This listing shows the call made to the JobBuilder from the Runner class.
The implementation of the BufferFunction follows the design pictured in fig. 4.7. First,
the processElement() method routes incoming events based on their type. Events with
the type Event are emitted before the state is updated, whereas events with type Rec-
onciledEvent are never emitted. The interesting method is the updateState() method,
which is shown in listing 8. This method first applies a guard before updating the state. If
the incoming event is of type ReconciledEvent, i.e., originating from the output topic, then
the state is only updated if the current value is also originating from a reconciled event.
On the other hand, an event of type Event always updates the state.
We notice, that the implementation differs from the design in one crucial place. Namely, we
register a timer whenever the state is updated. This timer is stored in the state and will be
supplied to the reconcile operator along with the buffered state. Then, inside the reconcile
operator, the timers will be triggered as the watermark advances past their registered
timestamp, and we can cleanup any events that are not part of the desired stream by
emitting a tombstone. In this way, the timers can be seen as an ordered index over the
buffered state enabling us to extract events in order. An alternative implementation that
would avoid registering these timers, would be to defer the cleanup until the reconcile
operator finishes. We could then iterate over the state, emitting tombstones for all events
from the reconciled stream that were not in the desired stream. However, this will add
significant latency to these tombstones, and we therefore chose the former approach.
Finally, we see that in the case of tombstones, we don’t remove the event key from the
buffered state, but instead set the accompanying value to null. This is a subtle but im­
portant detail. We want to be able to tell that the value has explicitly been tombstoned.
Consider what could happen if we instead removed the key from the buffered state en­
tirely. Imagine that the buffer operator is operating on both the previous stream and the
reconciled stream. Now, the buffer operator processes a tombstone for some event e
from the previous stream. This tombstone is emitted, and we deleted the corresponding
key from the buffered state. Then, at a later point in time, we process an event from the
reconciled stream with the same key. As the buffered state does not contain any entry for
this key, we simply update the state with the new value. But this is incorrect, the latest
emitted value for this event is a tombstone, and the buffered state is no longer in sync with
the actual state of the world. Events from the reconciled stream should never be able to
overwrite events from the previous stream, including tombstones.
70
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:81==
1
private void buildReconcileJob() {
2
// Map the stream of reconciled events to events
3
String name = prefix + delimiter + "Map: ReconciledEvent -> Event";
4
DataStream<Event> mappedReconcileStream =
5
reconciledDataStream
6
.map(event -> event, TypeInformation.of(Event.class))
7
.name(name)
8
.uid(name)
9
.slotSharingGroup(ssg);
10
11
// Apply stop condition checker
12
SingleOutputStreamOperator<Event> intermediateStream;
13
if ( previousDataStream == null ) {
14
name = prefix + delimiter + "OneInputStopConditionChecker";
15
intermediateStream = desiredDataStream
16
.transform("stopConditionChecker",
17
TypeInformation.of(Event.class),
18
new OneInputStopConditionChecker((OneInputStopCondition) stopCondition)
19
);
20
} else {
21
name = prefix + delimiter + "TwoInputStopConditionChecker";
22
intermediateStream = desiredDataStream
23
.connect(previousDataStream)
24
.keyBy(Event::getKey, Event::getKey, Types.STRING)
25
.transform("StopConditionChecker",
26
TypeInformation.of(Event.class),
27
new TwoInputStopConditionChecker((TwoInputStopCondition) stopCondition)
28
);
29
}
30
31
// Set name and ID of the stop condition checker transformation
32
intermediateStream = intermediateStream
33
.name(name)
34
.uid(name);
35
36
// Apply Reconcile Function
37
name = prefix + delimiter + reconcileOperatorName;
38
SingleOutputStreamOperator<ReconciledEvent> outputStream =
39
intermediateStream
40
.union(mappedReconcileStream)
41
.keyBy(Event::getKey, Types.STRING)
42
.process(new ReconcileFunction(previousVersion, desiredVersion, gauges))
43
.name(name)
44
.uid(name);
45
46
sinkConsumer.accept(outputStream);
47
}
Listing 7: This listing shows the buildReconcileJob() method from the JobBuilder
class.
5.3.4
MirrorFunction
The MirrorFunction is extremely simple. It does not contain any state nor time manage­
ment, but simply accepts a DataStream of the Event type and then unconditionally outputs
the event. The body of the processElement() method is a single line of code, as shown
in listing 9
5.3.5
ReconcileFunction
The ReconcileFunction is significantly more complicated than both of the previous func­
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
71
==PAGE:82==
1
private void updateState(Event e, int version) throws Exception {
2
long ts = e.getTimestamp();
3
4
if ( e instanceof ReconciledEvent ) {
5
KeyedState currentState = bufferedState.get(ts);
6
if ( currentState != null &&
7
currentState.version != ReconcileFunction.RECONCILED_VERSION
8
) {
9
return;
10
}
11
}
12
13
Tuple2<Long, Long> hashValue = e.getValue() == null ?
14
null :
15
Hasher.hash128(e.getValue());
16
17
bufferedState.put(ts, new KeyedState(hashValue, version));
18
ctx.timerService().registerEventTimeTimer(ts);
19
}
Listing 8: This listing shows the updateState() method from the BufferFunction class.
1
public void processElement(
2
Event value,
3
Context ctx,
4
Collector<ReconciledEvent> out
5
) throws Exception {
6
out.collect(ReconciledEvent.from(value));
7
}
Listing 9: The implementation of the processElement() method inside the MirrorFunc-
tion.
tions. The ReconcileFunction utilizes both state and timers, as explained in the design
section. The implementation closely follows the design as detailed in section 4.1.6, and we
will not repeat the design here. Instead, we will highlight an interesting implementation de­
tail, namely the method conditionalUpdateAndMaybeEmit() as shown in listing 10. This
method handles all interaction with the maintained state, and all the methods that need to
interact with the state do so by calling this method. This removes a lot of duplicated code,
and makes it easy to reason about the state. As was the case for the buffer function, we
will mark tombstones by explicitly setting the value in state to null.
The conditionalUpdateAndMaybeEmit() method accepts an event with a corresponding
version, a Collector to output events to a new DataStream, and a predicate function to
test whether the state of the operator should be updated. If this predicate evaluates to true,
then the state associated with the given event key and timestamp is updated. Further, if
the value of the updated state is changed and the Collector is not null, then the method
also emits the event. The implementation follows from the observation that we frequently
need to update the associated version of a value in state, without changing the value itself.
In such cases we do not want to emit the value, since the output stream already has the
desired value for the given key and timestamp. For example, this happens whenever the
desired input stream contains the same events as the reconciled stream. In this case, we
want to update the version stored in the state to signal that this event is part of the desired
stream and it should thus not be tombstoned, but we do not want to emit the event, as
this would result in a duplicate.
72
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:83==
1
private void conditionalUpdateAndMaybeEmit(
2
Event event,
3
int version,
4
Collector<ReconciledEvent> out,
5
BiPredicate<HashValue, KeyedState> updateCondition
6
) throws Exception {
7
long ts = event.getTimestamp();
8
KeyedState currentState = reconciledState.get(ts);
9
HashValue incomingValue = event.getValue() == null ?
10
null :
11
Hasher.hash128(event.getValue());
12
13
if ( updateCondition.test(incomingValue, currentState) ) {
14
reconciledState.put(ts, new KeyedState(incomingValue, version));
15
16
// Only emit if the incoming value is different from the current value
17
if ( out != null &&
18
(currentState == null || !Objects.equals(incomingValue, currentState.hashValue)) ) {
19
out.collect(ReconciledEvent.from(event));
20
}
21
}
22
}
Listing 10: This listing shows the conditionalUpdateAndMaybeEmit() method as imple­
mented inside the ReconcileFunction class.
5.3.6
StopConditions
The implementations of the different stop conditions are given in the StopConditions.java
file. The implementations are straight­forward, and we will leave the reader to explore
these by herself. Instead, we want to focus on the custom operators that have been
implemented to support evaluation of these stop conditions inside a DataStream.
The OneInputStopConditionChecker and TwoInputStopConditionChecker classes both
extend the AbstractStreamOperator class. This enables the classes to directly process
the watermarks embedded inside a DataStream and emit new watermarks to the output
stream. The ProcessWatermark() function from the OneInputStopConditionChecker is
shown in listing 11. Inside this method, we test the stop conditions whenever we receive
a watermark. If the stop condition evaluates to true, then we emit the max watermark.
Otherwise, we simply pass on the watermark to any downstream operators. The imple­
mentation of the TwoInputStopConditionChecker is very similar, but here we have two
incoming DataStreams instead of one.
5.4
Operator
Using the Kubebuilder framework to initialize the Operator directory and our Reconcil-
erDeployment and ReconcileJob operators, we get the directory structure shown in fig. 5.1
scaffolded for us.
Further, we get a large number of automatically generated files. The important files, for
us as developers, is contained in the api and controllers directories, as well as the
main.go file in the Operator directory. For each operator we wish to implement, we get
an API and a controller stub that we should extend. In the API directory, these stubs will
be the name of the operator appended with _types. The relevant files are thus recon-
cilejob_types.go and reconcilerdeployment_types.go. In the controllers directory,
the stubs are instead appended with _controller, and the corresponding files are rec-
oncilejob_controller.go and reconcilerdeployment_controller.go. To implement
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
73
==PAGE:84==
1
@Override
2
public void processWatermark(Watermark mark) throws Exception {
3
if ( stopped ) {
4
return;
5
}
6
7
long processingTimestamp = System.currentTimeMillis();
8
if ( stopCondition.test(processingTimestamp, mark.getTimestamp()) ) {
9
stopped = true;
10
super.processWatermark(Watermark.MAX_WATERMARK);
11
} else {
12
super.processWatermark(mark);
13
}
14
}
Listing 11: This listing shows the implementation of the processWatermark() method
inside the OneInputStopConditionChecker class.
Figure 5.1: The directory structure scaffolded by Kubebuilder, including an external API
directory that we added ourselves. The arrows mark the folders that we need to modify.
the operators, we will have to add the APIs to former mentioned files, and the actual
control loops must be implemented in the controller files.
The APIs will follow the design given in section 4.2.3, and the implementation simply cre­
ates the corresponding Go structs. Further, to interact with the CRDs defined by the Flink
Kubernetes Operator, we must create a copy of this API inside the api/external/v1beta1
directory. Once the APIs have been defined, we simply generate to corresponding CRDs
using the Kubebuilder development tools. The actual operator logic is then implemented
inside the controller files, and we will examine these next.
5.4.1
ReconcilerDeployment Controller
The entrance point to the ReconcilerDeployment controller is the Reconcile(...) me­
thod inside the reconcilerdeployment_controller.go file. We notice the unfortunate
overloading of the word Reconcile, since the internals of Kubebuilder use this name in
several places, leading to awful names of the autogenerated Go structs like reconcil-
erDeploymentReconciler. This Reconcile(...) method takes two arguments:
1. A struct Context, which is a native Go struct that enables timeouts and cancellations
of requests across API boundaries and processes.
74
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:85==
2. A struct Request from the controller­runtime package, which carries information
about which Kubernetes object to reconcile.
The Reconcile(...) method is invoked whenever a change has been detected to any
object of the types that the controller is watching. The Request struct will then contain the
information about what object changed, but we will not receive the actual changes, which
forces us to apply the level­based design. The body of the Reconcile(...) method
should then implement the operational logic that reads and updates the current status of
the object as well as the desired state, and then applies any necessary changes to move
the system closer to this desired state.
In our case, the current controller is watching ReconcilerDeployment resources, and we
then use the latter argument to request the specific ReconcilerDeployment object from
the Kubernetes API server. In reality, the contol loop will run inside a Manager that caches
the Kubernetes objects we watch, and we thus retrieve the object from this cache. But in
the following, we will abstract away from such low­level details. The snippet for requesting
this object is shown in listing 12.
1
var reconcilerDeployment reconcilerv1alpha1.ReconcilerDeployment
2
if err := r.Get(ctx, req.NamespacedName, &reconcilerDeployment); err != nil {
3
log.Error(err, "unable to fetch ReconcilerDeployment")
4
return ctrl.Result{}, client.IgnoreNotFound(err)
5
}
Listing 12: This listing shows the call inside the Reconcile(...) method to retrieve the
ReconcilerDeployment object.
To make the Reconcile(...) method clean and extendable, we split the reconciliation
process up in more fine­grained and self­contained steps. Each of these steps will im­
plement their own reconcile() method, which will execute the logic of this specific step.
For both of our controllers, the first step will be updating the current status of the object
to reflect the current state of the world. Then, each step that follows will attempt to bring
some isolated part of the system closer to the desired state. This will be attempted using
different apply steps that idempotently apply some kind of resources in the system. For
the ReconcilerDeployment controller, the specific steps are seen in listing 13. This figure
also shows the loop that calls the reconcile() methods for each of these steps.
We see, that besides the update step, the controller will attempt to apply MinIO and Flink.
We will look into each of the three steps below.
UpdateReconcilerDeploymentStatus
The updateReconcilerDeploymentStatus step is implemented inside the file update_-
status_reconcilerdeployment.go. This step will try to retrieve a reference to a FlinkDe-
ployment object, and then try to retrieve a list of ReconcileJobs currently being executed
by this deployment. It does so by calling two helper functions, as seen in listing 14. Each
of these methods simply tries to retrieve matching objects from the Kubernetes API Server
and then update the status of the ReconcilerDeployment object with these references.
ApplyMinio
This step will setup a deployment of MinIO, if no such deployment already exists. The
reconcile() method for this step is shown in listing listing 15.
As can be seen from this listing, setting up MinIO requires setting up two Kubernetes
Services and a StatefulSet. Each of these functions simply takes some predefined
configuration that is specified inside the apply_minio.go file (as well as some shared
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
75
==PAGE:86==
1
startTime := time.Now()
2
log.Info("Reconciliation started")
3
args := reconcilerDeploymentReconcileArguments{req, r, &reconcilerDeployment, &log}
4
reconcileSteps := []reconcilerDeploymentReconcileStep{
5
updateReconcilerDeploymentStatus{
6
reconcilerDeploymentReconcileArguments: args,
7
},
8
applyMinio{
9
reconcilerDeploymentReconcileArguments: args,
10
},
11
applyFlinkDeployment{
12
reconcilerDeploymentReconcileArguments: args,
13
},
14
}
15
16
for _, step := range reconcileSteps {
17
requeue := step.reconcile(ctx)
18
if requeue == nil {
19
continue
20
}
21
22
return requeue.Handle(log)
23
}
Listing 13: This listing shows a snippet from the Reconcile(...) method inside the
ReconcilerDeployment_controller.go file.
1
if rq = u.updateFlinkDeploymentRef(ctx); rq != nil {
2
return rq
3
}
4
5
if rq = u.updateReconcileJobList(ctx); rq != nil {
6
return rq
7
}
Listing 14: This listing shows a snippet from the reconcile() method inside the update_-
status_reconcilerdeployment.go file.
1
func (a applyMinio) reconcile(ctx context.Context) *Requeue {
2
if req := a.applyHeadlessService(ctx); req != nil {
3
return req
4
}
5
6
if req := a.applyMetricsService(ctx); req != nil {
7
return req
8
}
9
10
if req := a.applyStatefulSet(ctx); req != nil {
11
return req
12
}
13
14
return nil
15
}
Listing 15: This listing shows the reconcile() method inside the apply_minio.go file.
configurations from the constants.go file inside the common folder), and then uses a re­
source builder struct to create a Kubernetes object with this specified configuration. As an
76
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:87==
example, the applyHeadlessService(...) method is shown in listing 16. We implement
a number of different such Kubernetes resource builders inside the reconciler/opera-
tor/controller/builders directory to facilitate building Kubernetes objects. We will not
explicitly explore these builders, and the reader is encouraged to look at these herself.
1
func (a applyMinio) applyHeadlessService(ctx context.Context) *Requeue {
2
namespace := a.reconcilerDeployment.Namespace
3
builder := builders.NewServiceBuilder()
4
5
builder.Meta().
6
Name(MINIO_SVC_NAME(namespace)).
7
Namespace(namespace)
8
9
builder.Spec().
10
ClusterIP("").
11
Ports(minio_ports).
12
Selector(MINIO_LABELS)
13
14
target, err := builder.Build()
15
if err != nil {
16
return &Requeue{Err: err}
17
}
18
19
return Appliable[*corev1.Service, *v1alpha1.ReconcilerDeployment]{
20
Obj:
&corev1.Service{},
21
Target: target,
22
Owner:
a.reconcilerDeployment,
23
Client: a.reconciler.Client,
24
Scheme: a.reconciler.Scheme,
25
}.Apply(ctx, a.log)
26
}
Listing 16: This listing shows the applyHeadlessService() method inside the apply_-
minio.go file.
Besides the builders that help building Kubernetes objects, we notice the Appliable struct
in listing 16. This struct is implemented in the apply.go file, and it helps idempotently
applying Kubernetes resources. When giving a resource specification and calling the
Apply(...) method on the Appliable struct, the method will create the corresponding
Kubernetes object if it does not already exist. If it already exists, it will instead attempt to
update this object to reflect the given specification. We use this helper struct all over the
place.
ApplyFlinkDeployment
The ApplyFlinkDeployment step is implemented in the apply_flinkdeployment.go file.
This step follows the same structure as the ApplyMinio step, and the reconcile() method
is shown in listing 17. Again, the method simply applies a number of configurations, and
we will not go into further details. Instead, the reader is encouraged to go through the file.
5.4.2
ReconcileJob Controller
The controller for the ReconcileJob is structured exactly like the ReconcilerDeployment
controller, and implemented in the file reconcilejob_controller.go. That is, it first re­
trieves the Kubernetes object that must be reconciled (this time of type ReconcileJob),
and then applies a number of more fine­grained steps. These independent steps of the
control loop, as implemented in the Reconcile(...) method, can be seen in listing 18.
The first step updates the current status of the given ReconcileJob. The second step
then uses this updated status to infer the new desired state of the ReconcileJob, and
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
77
==PAGE:88==
1
func (a applyFlinkDeployment) reconcile(ctx context.Context) *Requeue {
2
namespace := a.reconcilerDeployment.Namespace
3
4
podTemplate, err := a.commonFlinkPodTemplate()
5
if err != nil {
6
return &Requeue{Err: err}
7
}
8
9
jobManager, err := a.jobManager()
10
if err != nil {
11
return &Requeue{Err: err}
12
}
13
14
taskManger, err := a.taskManager()
15
if err != nil {
16
return &Requeue{Err: err}
17
}
18
19
builder := builders.NewFlinkDeploymentBuilder()
20
builder.Meta().
21
Name(common.FLINK_DEPLOYMENT_NAME(namespace)).
22
Namespace(namespace)
23
24
builder.Spec().
25
Image(common.FLINK_IMAGE_REPOSITORY + "/" +
26
common.FLINK_IMAGE + ":" +
27
common.FLINK_IMAGE_VERSION).
28
ImagePullPolicy(common.FLINK_IMAGE_PULL_POLICY).
29
FlinkVersion(common.FLINK_VERSION).
30
FlinkConfiguration(a.flinkConfiguration()).
31
ServiceAccount(common.FLINK_SERVICE_ACCOUNT).
32
JobManager(jobManager).
33
TaskManager(taskManger).
34
PodTemplate(podTemplate).
35
Mode(v1beta1.KDM_Native)
36
37
target, err := builder.Build()
38
if err != nil {
39
return &Requeue{Err: err}
40
}
41
42
return Appliable[*v1beta1.FlinkDeployment, *v1alpha1.ReconcilerDeployment]{
43
Obj:
&v1beta1.FlinkDeployment{},
44
Target: target,
45
Owner:
a.reconcilerDeployment,
46
Client: a.reconciler.Client,
47
Scheme: a.reconciler.Scheme,
48
}.Apply(ctx, a.log)
49
}
Listing 17: This listing shows the reconcile() method inside the apply_flinkdeploy-
ment.go file, which is responsible for setting up the Flink session cluster.
78
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:89==
then applies this desired state to the corresponding object. The update and apply steps
follow the exact same structure as the steps we explained in the previous section, but the
configurations are not static in this case. The applyFlinkSessionJob step therefore con­
tains significantly more logic than f.x. the applyMinio step of the ReconcilerDeployment
controller. Specifically, the new RunMode and input topics of the different pipelines in the
ReconcileJob must be determined.
To determine the new specification of the pipelines, the ReconcileJob controller has to
communicate with external systems. Specifically, the updateReconcileJobStatus step
must get all the topics from the Kafka cluster to see if any new versions are available, as
well as reading the current status of each of the pipelines executed on the Flink cluster. To
facilitate this, we use the KafkaInformer and FlinkInformer, which we see are supplied
to the updateReconcileJobStatus step in lines 7 and 8 in listing 18. We leave the reader
to go through the updateReconcileJobStatus and applyFlinkSessionJob steps (imple­
mented in the update_reconcilejob_status.go and apply_flinksessionjob.go files,
respectively) by herself, and instead focus on the two informer implementations below.
The files containing the implementation of the informers are located in the reconciler/-
operator/controllers/informers directory.
FlinkInformer
The FlinkInformer implements a number of methods to read the status of a specific
pipeline inside a Flink job. Before using the FlinkInformer, the method EnsureCacheIsUp-
dated(string) must be called. This method takes a Flink job id, and then retrieves and
parses the status of this job from the Flink cluster. The status of the pipeline can then be
read from the metrics exposed by this Flink job. The pipelines of a reconcile job should
be uniquely defined by their output Kafka topic, and thus the metrics for each pipeline are
registered using the name of this output topic. Thus, after updating the cache of the Flink-
Informer, the status of the pipeline can be read by requesting the corresponding metrics
that the stream processor registers. To actually query the Flink cluster for a specific met­
ric, we implement another helper struct which we name FlinkClient. For example, the
method for retrieving the current output watermark of a pipeline is given by listing 19
In line 2 of listing 19, we specify the specific metric we want to retrieve. Then, in line
6, we retrieve a vertex id from the cache which was updated by the EnsureCacheIsUp-
dated(...) method call. In Flink, a vertex corresponds to a node in the Dataflow graph.
In turn, a node can contain a single or multiple operators chained together. To retrieve
the metrics registered by a specific operator, we need to query the metrics exposed by
the corresponding vertex. Using this vertex id, we then call a method on an instance of
the FlinkClient struct to get the specified metrics. The Flink cluster exposes the metrics
through a REST­ful API, and the FlinkClient then implements a number of methods for
sending http requests to this API and then parsing the JSON responses. The FlinkClient
is implemented in the reconciler/operator/controllers/clients/flink_client.go
file.
KafkaInformer
The KafkaInformer is used to get all Kafka topics that matches a given regular expres­
sion. The GetMatchingKafkaTopics(regex) method is shown in listing 20. As for the
FlinkInformer, we use a separate client to actually perform the query at the external
system. In the case of the KafkaInfomer, we use a corresponding KafkaClient as imple­
mented in the reconciler/operator/controllers/clients/kafka_client.go file. The
KafkaClient, in turn, creates a new Kafka AdminClient and retrieves the entire list of top­
ics from the Kafka cluster. It then filters these topics with the provided regular expression
and returns all the matches.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
79
==PAGE:90==
1
startTime := time.Now()
2
log.Info("Reconciliation started")
3
args := reconcileJobReconcileArguments{req, r, &reconcileJob, &log}
4
reconcileSteps := []reconcileJobReconcileStep{
5
updateReconcileJobStatus{
6
reconcileJobReconcileArguments: args,
7
kafkaInformer:
kafkaInformer,
8
flinkInformer:
flinkInformer,
9
},
10
applyFlinkSessionJob{
11
reconcileJobReconcileArguments: args,
12
},
13
}
14
15
for _, step := range reconcileSteps {
16
requeue := step.reconcile(ctx)
17
if requeue == nil {
18
continue
19
}
20
21
return requeue.Handle(log)
22
}
Listing 18: This listing shows a snippet from the Reconcile(...) method inside the
reconcilejob_controller.go file.
1
func (f *FlinkJobInformerImpl) GetWatermark(outputTopic string) (*int64, error) {
2
metrics := []string{
3
flink_reconcile_operator_prefix(outputTopic) +
4
metricsDelimiter +
5
"currentOutputWatermark",
6
}
7
8
vId := f.vertexCache[outputTopic]
9
result, err := f.client.GetAggSubtaskMetrics(f.jobId, vId, nil, metrics)
10
if err != nil {
11
return nil, err
12
}
13
14
minWaterMark := float64ToInt64(result[0].Min)
15
return &minWaterMark, nil
16
}
Listing 19: This listing shows the GetWatermark(...) method of the FlinkInformer
class.
80
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:91==
1
func (k KafkaInformerImpl) GetMatchingKafkaTopics(regex string) ([]string, error) {
2
desiredTopicRegex := regexp.MustCompile(regex)
3
matchingTopics, err := k.KafkaTopicsFromRegex(desiredTopicRegex, queryTimeoutMS)
4
5
if err != nil {
6
return nil, stacktrace.Propagate(err,
7
"encountered error trying to match topics against regex %s", regex)
8
} else if len(matchingTopics) == 0 {
9
return nil, stacktrace.NewError(
10
"could not find any topics matching regex %s", regex)
11
}
12
13
return matchingTopics, nil
14
}
Listing 20: This listing shows the GetWatermark(...) method of the FlinkInformer
class.
5.5
Deployment
The Kubebuilder framework makes deployment of the Kubernetes operators easy.
A
makefile is generated to install the CRDs on the Kubernetes cluster, and the dockerfile
for containerizing the controller application is automatically generated.
To deploy the Flink stream processor, we similarly need to create a dockerfile for container­
izing the application. To execute a the stream processor application as a Flink Session
Job on the Flink Session Cluster, we need to add the Stream Processor jar to the Flink
Kubernetes Operator image. This is necessary for the operator to install the image on the
provisioned cluster. The dockerfile is given in listing 21.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
81
==PAGE:92==
1
FROM capcr.azurecr.io/maven:3.6.3-jdk-11 AS builder
2
3
# Install parent POM
4
COPY local-maven-repo /opt/local-maven-repo
5
COPY pom.xml /opt
6
WORKDIR /opt
7
RUN mvn clean install
8
9
# Build the reconciler jar
10
COPY flink-stream -operator /opt/reconciler
11
WORKDIR /opt/reconciler
12
RUN mvn clean install -DskipTests
13
14
# Build the comparator jar
15
COPY utils/flink-comparator /opt/flink-comparator
16
WORKDIR /opt/flink-comparator
17
RUN mvn clean install -DskipTests
18
19
FROM capcr.azurecr.io/apache/flink-kubernetes -operator:1.7.0
20
21
# Copy jars
22
RUN mkdir -p /opt/flink/usrlib
23
COPY --from=builder /opt/reconciler/target/flink-reconciler -1.0.jar /opt/flink
/usrlib/flink-reconciler.jar
24
COPY --from=builder /opt/flink-comparator/target/flink-comparator -1.0.jar /opt
/flink/usrlib/flink-comparator.jar
Listing 21: This LISTING shows the dockerfile for containerizing the stream processor
application inside the Flink Kubernetes Operator.
82
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:93==
6
Evaluation
In this chapter, we will test and evaluate the final product. First, we will describe the
different types of unit and integration tests that have been performed to validate the cor­
rectness of the product, ensuring that it fulfills the basic functional requirements. Then,
we will describe a number of manual tests and benchmarks to test how well the product
fulfills the non­functional requirements.
6.1
Unit and Integration Tests
We differ between unit and integration tests, describing each type of tests in a separate
subsection.
6.1.1
Unit tests
We use unit testing to validate the functionality of the independent functions that we have
developed as part of the stream processor. All unit tests are located in subdirectories of
the path reconciler/flink-stream-processor/src/test. Specifically, we create unit
tests for the BufferFunction, MirrorFunction, and ReconcileFunction classes that ex­
tend the Flink KeyedProcessFunction, as well as the stop condition checkers that extend
the AbstractStreamOperator. To test the functionality of the process functions and oper­
ators, we need to mock both the configuration and the runtime context of the application.
Flink provides TestHarness classes that provides this functionality, and we create a Keye-
dOneInputOperatorTestBase class that wraps a testharness to provide a number of easy­
to­use utility functions to test the keyed process functions. The unit tests are then created
in the BufferFunctionTest.java, MirrorFunctionTest.java, and ReconcileFunction-
Test.java files, respectively. We perform both black­box testing where we simply feed
the process functions with some input, and test that the output equals what we expect, as
well as white­box testing where we check that the internal state and timers match what
we expect. To execute the unit tests, we simply execute the mvn test command at the
root of the flink-stream-processor directory.
6.1.2
Integration Tests
Unit tests are great for validating the implementation of the different process functions and
operators in isolation. But of course, these functions and operators will not be running as
isolated functions. Instead, we want to check an entire Flink pipeline that reads the input,
applies a stop condition checker and/or a process function, before the output is written to
some output stream. Further, the stream processor itself is not an isolated component. In
particular, it has to be deployed to a Flink cluster and interact with Kafka to consume from
the input topics and produce to the output topic.
We also want to validate the operators. We will have to check that they integrate properly
with the Kubernetes API server, and that created objects match the actual desired state.
For the ReconcileJob operator, we will further validate that it can interact with both Flink
and Kafka.
We therefore create a number of different integration tests for both the stream processor
and the operators. We will consider the stream processor in isolation first, before we
consider the integration tests for the operators.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
83
==PAGE:94==
Stream Processor
To perform integration tests of the stream processor, we will use the Flink MiniCluster-
WithClientResource to execute our Flink job, and use the Testcontainers framework1
for setting up a Kafka installation. We implement the integration tests using a behaviour
driven approach using the Cucumber framework2. This involves writing test cases as sce­
narios in a natural language (specifically, we use the Gherkin language), which are then
linked to actual code through a number of step definitions. This will enable us to use the
scenarios as both test definitions and as documentation for the desired behaviour. Fur­
ther, with a number of general step definitions defined, it makes it easy to add new tests
while avoiding a lot of duplicated code.
All the integration tests and related resources for the stream processor are located inside
the reconciler/flink-stream-processor/src/it directory. The code for implement­
ing the step definitions and setting up the tests is located in the com/tryg/reconciler
directory, and the actual scenarios are then defined inside feature files in the resources/-
com/tryg/reconciler directory. An example of a scenario from the feature file recon-
ciler.feature is given in listing 22. From this example, it is clear how the implementation
of the stream processor is completely abstracted away from the scenario, which instead
only focuses on the behaviour.
1
Scenario: Desired topic should trump
2
Given the previous topic
3
| timestamp | key | value
|
4
| 1
| 1
| first1
|
5
| 2
| 2
| second1 |
6
And the desired topic
7
| timestamp | key | value
|
8
| 1
| 1
| first2
|
9
| 2
| 2
| second2 |
10
And the reconciled topic
11
| timestamp | key | value
|
12
| 1
| 1_1 | first0
|
13
| 2
| 2_2 | second0 |
14
When reconciling
15
Then the compacted reconciled topic equals
16
| timestamp | key | value
|
17
| 1
| 1_1 | first2
|
18
| 2
| 2_2 | second2 |
Listing 22: An example scenario from the reconciler.feature file.
The implemented workflow for each of the scenarios is as follows:
1. Setup a Kafka container.
2. Push the topics defined in the scenario to Kafka.
3. Setup a Flink minicluster.
4. Execute the stream processor as a Flink job on the cluster, sinking the output back
to the Kafka container.
5. Validate the output kafka topic against the expected topic as defined in the Scenario.
1https://testcontainers.com/
2https://cucumber.io/docs/cucumber/
84
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:95==
To execute the integration tests for the stream processor, run the command mvn verify
in the root directory of the Flink stream processor. This command will also run the unit
tests. Please note, that executing the integration tests takes some time, as there is a lot
of setup of external components involved.
Operators
For the operators, we want to test how they interact with the Kubernetes API, verifying
that they create, update, and delete Kubernetes resources as expected. For the Recon-
cilerDeployment controller, the configurations of the created Kubernetes resources are
static, and we can simply verify that they are created as we expect. For the ReconcileJob
operator, however, we further want to test that the specified desired state of the FlinkSes-
sionJob resources are correctly derived from the current state of the world, as should be
extracted from Flink and Kafka. We therefore create mocks of the KafkaInformer and
FlinkInformer, enabling us to simulate the the state of Kafka and the FlinkSessionJob
in a controlled way. This will allow us to isolate and validate the behaviour of the Recon-
cileJob controller.
To perform the tests, Kubebuilder provides the envtest testing environment which sets
up a local Kubernetes control plane, allowing us to run the tests against a real Kuber­
netes API server. The tests are implemented in the files reconcilerdeployment_con-
troller_test.go and reconcilejob_controller_test.go, respectively, with the imple­
mentations of the FlinkInformerMock and KafkaInformerMock located in the informers
directory. To run the tests, run the command make test from the root of the operator
directory.
6.2
Performance Tests
After having tested the correctness of the program, we are now interested in measur­
ing the performance. Therefore, we will run a number of different performance tests to
measure the throughput of the stream processor, and investigate how well it is able to
scale. To help facilitate these tests, we have created a number of utilities located in the
reconciler/utils directory. We describe each of these below:
6.2.1
Utilities
1. flink­comparator: The flink­comparator is a small stream processing application
that takes two streams as input, and then checks whether the materialized views of
the input streams match. The utility that this stream processor provides is of course
to enable us to verify the output of the reconciler application. Given that we will run
the tests with streams consisting of tens of millions of events each, it would be a
rather tedious endeavour to otherwise verify the output.
2. kafka­regex­tester: The kafka­regex­tester is a very simple application, but one
that has proved surprisingly useful. The sole purpose of the application is to verify
the regular expressions that we use to set up a ReconcileJob consisting of a large
number of pipelines. The kafka­regex­tester evaluates the given pipeline regex and
tests it against the Kafka cluster, showing exactly what input topics the regular ex­
pression will match, and what their extracted versions and output topic names are.
3. kafka­test­cluster: The kafka­test­cluster utility consists of a number of different
helm charts for setting up an isolated Kafka cluster on Kubernetes. Besides the
cluster itself, we include a schema registry and a UI, as well as a containerized
python script that can be deployed to Kubernetes to produce test data to the Kafka
cluster. The python script mimics production data from Tryg, serializing data with
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
85
==PAGE:96==
avro3 and pushing the schemas to the schema registry.
4. prom­grafana­metrics: Finally, the prom­grafana­metrics create a Prometheus4
and a Grafana5 deployment. Prometheus is a monitoring tool that records real­time
metrics and records them in a timeseries database, and Grafana is an analytics and
interactive visualization web application that integrates seamlessly with Prometheus.
By integrating the two, it allows us to monitor the performance of our Flink jobs in
real­time.
Using these utilities, we set up a separate Kafka cluster on Trygs Kubernetes cluster. We
use the python script to setup 50 Kafka topics with approximately 30 million events in each
input topic. We then run the Flink reconciler jobs mirroring the data to the corresponding
output topics, meaning that we have 100 topics with 30 million events, for a complete total
of ≈3 billion events. We simulate out­of­order data by randomly adding a random number
from the range [−2½, 2½] minutes to the event timestamps. This out­of­orderedness can
be provided as an environment variable to the python script. Finally, we set the number
of unique keys to 10 000 000. Depending on the type of data, 10 000 000 seems like
a reasonable number of unique keys. If, for example, we looked at unique customers, it
seems a quite fitting. However, if we instead considered order ID’s, it might no longer be
appropriate.
The performance is measured using the non­buffering approach, in order to minimize
latency. We use the prom­grafana­metrics utilities to measure and report the performance,
and the flink­comparator to verify the output. The results are shown in the bottom­most
graph of fig. 6.1.
As can be seen in the figure, the performance varies significantly through the shown life­
time. The bottom graph is actually two separate jobs, with the second job containing
double the amount of data that the first job did. From the figure we see, that the first job
took ≈40 minutes, and the second took just over an hour and 20 minutes, depending on
how far we follow the tail. As we did not change the available resources for the jobs in
between, this provides a nice symmetry; it took roughly twice as much time to process
twice as much data. This second job was the one described above, with around 3 billion
events.
To execute the job, we used 4 different Flink taskmanagers with an upper limit of 25
cpus each. As can be seen in figure fig. 6.2, however, the 4 taskmanagers that was in
use over the course of the two jobs never reached more than maximum 40% cpu usage.
This implies that we were memory and/or IO bound instead. This makes intuitive sense,
since we have already emphasized how much state we need to store for the operator to
maintain correctness. Finally, if we look at the graphs in fig. 6.3, the top chart shows this
actual memory usage of the 4 taskmanagers, which crosses 100% of the allocated size
at several point in time. On the bottom we then see how the number of active
6.2.2
Noise
Now, as we have discussed through most of the thesis, we are not only concerned about
the performance of the Flink stream processor, but also the amount of generated noise that
is produced to the output topics. Because we reconcile a topic against a mirrored version
of itself, we can reliably measure the amount of generated noise by simply comparing
the amount of events in the input topic to the number of events in the output topic. In
3https://avro.apache.org/
4https://prometheus.io/
5https://grafana.com/
86
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:97==
(a) This figure shows a small snippet of the Flink UI, showing the actual dataflow of a number of
jobs.
(b) This figure is taken from the Grafana dashboard, and it illustrates the throughput at the sources
of the flink job over time.
Figure 6.1: A small snippet of the Flink UI at the top, and a selected visualization from the
Grafana dashboard. These are our tools to monitor the stream processors.
Figure 6.2: Taskmanager cpu usage.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
87
==PAGE:98==
Figure 6.3: TaskManager memory usage over time.
figure fig. 6.1, we deployed a ReconcileJob with the maximum out­of­orderedness set
to 60 minutes. In this case, we actually know that this a far greater than the underlying
out­of­orderedness bound, and as a result, the job actually removed some noise from the
topic, since it performed deduplication of a couple of datapoints.
To emphasize the importance of this out­of­order bound, we ran another, smaller job rec­
onciling two producer output topics with two consumer input topics. Again we ran on data
that had a uniformly distributed random penalty between [−2½, 2½] minutes. For this job,
we simply set the out­of­order bound to 60 seconds, and he result was almost two million
extra events introduced to a stream of only 30 million events, meaning that we added
almost 7% extra noise to this stream.
88
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:99==
7
Discussion
In this chapter, we will interpret and explore the findings that have been made so far.
We will first argue if the project has succeeded with the goals we initially laid out, before
we discuss the current limitations and how they can be improved upon through future
iterations.
7.1
Goals and Results
This section reflects on each of the goals listed in the introduction, discussing whether we
have achieved these goals to a satisfactory extent, and reiterating the methods we have
applied to do so.
7.1.1
How can the lifecycle of producers and consumers of event streams
inside an event­driven architecture be decoupled?
This thesis proposes, and implements, a solution to decouple the lifecycle of producers
and consumers using an event stream processor. The event­driven architecture already
decouples otherwise tightly coupled producers and consumers using event streams, and
we take this a step further and decouple the lifecycles by inserting another event stream
between the versioned output streams of the producers and the consumers. This event
stream is maintained by a stream processor, which keeps the input stream to the con­
sumer in sync with the latest version of the output stream of the producer application.
Besides the stream processor itself, the setup includes automated operation to automati­
cally apply the stream processor whenever a new output version of the producer stream
becomes available.
7.1.2
How does the solution ensure eventual consistency?
To ensure eventual consistency, we have carefully analyzed the problem at hand, de­
tailing the requirements for guaranteeing an eventual consistent solution. This includes
explicit handling of late events, requiring us to either keep the materialized view in state,
or implement a solution to get around the problematic late events. While late events from
the input stream are unavoidable, we can eliminate the pesky late events from the output
stream by buffering it before the reconciliation process is invoked.
7.1.3
How does the solution maintain high scalability?
Scalability is achieved, in parts, through the very design; by introducing fairly lightweight
stream processors between producers and consumers, it is made easy to simply add
more processors as demands grow. The application simply grows horizontally with the
number of streams inside a system, and even for systems with fewer, large streams, we
can parallellize the workload by processing smaller groups of keys together. This paral­
lelization is already employed by Kafka through the use of partitioned topics, but we can
further split each partition into a number of keyed groups if needed. To make it feasible
having potentially hundreds of stream processors running at a time, we make sure that in­
dividual processors scale as needed, only requesting a higher number of resources when
they have to perform the actual reconciliation. Otherwise, we leave the stream processors
running as stateless mirror operators.
7.1.4
How does the solution solve the unique requirements of Tryg A/S?
First and foremost, the actual problem itself is in many ways unique to Tryg and their
datahub implementation. The Tryg360 datahub employs modern data steaming approaches,
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
89
==PAGE:100==
combined with an ephemeral, agile and gitops based system, aiming for changes to data
to be fully versioned and continuously integrated and deployed, adopting what is becom­
ing the norm for most modern software development into the world of data. Combining this
with the requirements of keeping the full history of the data, while demanding complete
correctness, presents a number of unique problems. Most streaming data architectures
avoid the problem by only keeping a limited amount of historical data, and others still use
traditional data warehouse implementations with huge batch­processing workflows. This
is to say, that the problem itself is a somewhat unique problem, although one we expect
to become more common.
Focusing instead on the unique requirements of Tryg A/S, we fully embrace the ephemeral
nature of the system, keeping no permanent state for our stream processors, but instead
spinning them up as needed. The solution further provides explicit trade­offs to prioritize
latency, while being open about how this might affect other metrics. Tryg also has an
enormous amount of data, and as was presented in the introduction, much more than
many comparable event sourced systems, and we can therefore consider the requirement
for extreme scalability a specific, although not unique, requirement for Tryg. Finally, the
solution is designed and implemented around many of the existing technologies in use
inside the Tryg360 datahub, enabling the final product to seamlessly be integrated with
the existing infrastructure.
7.2
Limitations
We will discuss a number of different limitations of the project. We split the limitations
section into two different parts; the first considers fundamental limitations of the design
itself, whereas the latter will consider specific limitations that have been introduced as a
byproduct of the implementation. We do not claim to uncover all the potential limitations,
but instead highlight a number of the most important ones.
7.2.1
Limitations of the Design
As touched upon in the discussion of the goals, the project attempts to solve a very con­
crete problem, in a real world system. Thus the design was created with the specific
system in mind, and although the different parts have been made extendable or replace­
able where appropriate, the product will require a number of modifications if it is to be
used in another environment.
The design introduces some complications around handling breaking changes to the event
schemas. This follows, because the events from both the old and the new versions of this
schema will coexist inside the output topic. Even though the materialized view of the out­
put topic will eventually converge to the materialized view of the input topic, the previous
events will still be present inside the stream until the stream is potentially compacted at
some point. However, the reconciler application does not control this compaction, and we
can therefore not provide any guarantees on when this might happen. To guard against
this, any breaking changes should preferably be rolled out as a number of smaller non­
breaking changes whenever possible.
Finally, by prioritizing the configurability of the behaviour of the stream processor, we
might sacrifice a number of specialized optimizations. The danger is, that the design lands
somewhere in the middle on the scale of generality, neither providing a truly general solu­
tion, nor taking advantage of the specific optimizations that can be made for speciliazed
applications. Clearly, the product is created to solve a very specific problem experienced
by a specific customer, and the design shows this. So the generality we offer might not be
enough to use the product in any other environment anyway, and we have thus needlessly
90
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:101==
sacrificed a number of optimizations in a futile attempt to cling on to generality.
7.2.2
Limitations of the Implementation
Finally, we will consider some of the limitations imposed by the specific choices made
during implementation.
The project depends on a large number of different frameworks, packages and modules.
This could lead to problems with relative versioning of the different dependencies, for
example when integrating with systems that use some of the same dependencies, but with
different versions. As another example, we encountered some problems with Kubebuilder
and the version of Go that was used, which required updating to a newer version of the
controller­runtime used by Kubebuilder. In general, bringing together several frameworks
always introduces some complexity in maintaining any shared dependencies.
Due to a combination of designing the different run modes of the stream processor through
the three different KeyedProcessFunctions, i.e., BufferFunction, MirrorFunction, and
ReconcileFunction, and executing the Flink job as a session job, then whenever we
we wish to change between the functions, we have to upgrade the Flink job using a save­
point. When upgrading from the BufferFunction to the ReconcileFunction, this requires
transferring significant amount of state between upgrades. However, as long as jobs are
updated in place, the state can be restored from local storage without too much overhead.
7.3
Future Work
Although the product works as is, there are still some tweaks left before it would be ready
to be deployed into a production environment. We deal with these first, before we consider
more general improvements and additions.
7.3.1
Robustness
As of now, a lot of the configurations for especially the ReconcilerDeployment are hard­
coded. This includes the amount of storage we provide to the MinIO nodes, for example,
as well as the amount of actual nodes. Instead, we would want to add automatic resizing
and scaling of all of the different components, to protect against failures due to nodes
running out of persistent storage, for example. This specific example could be avoided
by applying disk scalers that automatically resize volumes.
7.3.2
Graceful Error Handling
Right now, if some part of the Flink job fails, it is not always clear from the ReconcileJob
resource. That means, that users might have to check the FlinkSessionJob resources
and logs when trying to find the cause of an error. Instead, the ReconcileJob should be
responsible for detecting any failures in its dependencies, and report these directly to the
users through the ReconcileJob API. This is especially important in cases where the error
might be due to a bug in the ReconcileJob controller, but where the error shows up in
one of the Flink related resources. In such cases, it will be almost impossible for users to
find the underlying causes of the error.
7.3.3
Framework Improvements
Some future improvements of the underlying frameworks might be of interest. As a con­
crete example, although the RocksDB backend that our Flink jobs use is based on log
structured merge trees, and thus inherently sorted, Flink does not provide range queries
into the underlying state. This functionality might improve the performance of our applica­
tion though, given the state accessing patterns of the stream processor.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
91
==PAGE:102==
7.3.4
Stream Analysis
The specific configuration of the Flink jobs could be fine­tuned for each pipeline based
on an analysis of the underlying streams. Presumeably, the reconciler application will be
long running for each input stream. This would allow each stream processor to collect
and summarize information about the underlying streams, using this data to tailor the
execution when new versions are released. For example, we base the window sizes on
the out­of­order bound provided by the user. As we have discussed, this bound is at best
an informed guess, and might be completely pulled from thin air. This out­of­order bound
could be used as a starting point, with the stream processor then making adjustments as it
processes the streams and collects measurements, providing an empirical and statistically
inferred out­of­order bound.
7.3.5
Optimizing rollbacks
As the reconciler application is implemented now, rollbacks are slow and cumbersome,
and we need to completely reprocess the streams. This might be avoided by keeping
state around for a limited time after finishing an invocation of the reconciler, for example,
to provide almost immediate rollbacks for some limited period after a new release.
92
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:103==
8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to implement a concrete software product to solve a problem
experienced by Tryg A/S. The problem in question is the hard coupling of life­cycles of
producer and consumer applications inside the Tryg360 datahub. This hard coupling is a
result of their event­driven architecture based on the event­streaming model, combined
with the requirement for maintaining history corresponding to at least SCD Type 2. To
develop a solution to this problem, we took a structured approach as outlined by the
thesis.
First, the problem was thoroughly analyzed. and we uncovered some fundamental limi­
tations. If we want low latency and/or low amounts of noise, we must necessarily apply
a stateful approach, and in the current context with streams that have unknown out­of­
orderedness bounds, we can never guarantee to eliminate all noise. We also showed,
that in order to maintain correctness, either the materialized view of the input stream
to the consumers must be buffered before beginning the reconciliation process, or the
materialized view of the desired stream must be maintained throughout the entirety of
the reconcile operators lifetime. Finally, the analysis discussed different frameworks that
were either necessary or could aid the development, and we decided to use both Flink
and the Kubebuilder framework.
Then, building upon the analysis, the product was first designed and later implemented.
The design allows users to configure the behaviour of the stream processor, while still en­
suring complete correctness. This means, that the user cannot completely remove state,
for example, but the amount of latency versus noise is made highly configurable. Besides
the actual stream processor, the design explained how the product can be made almost
fully autonomous by implementing two Kubernetes operators to manage the stream pro­
cessor.
With a complete implementation of the software product, we set out to validate that the im­
plementation works, before we evaluated whether it also fulfilled the stated requirements.
The former was done using a combination of unit and integration tests, and the latter eval­
uation was based on a large­scale performance test. Unfortunately, we weren’t able to
actually put the soft product into production use at Tryg, but we instead tested the product
on Tryg’s infrastructure with closely mimicked data. This proved, that the product can
actually be deployed to production when the time comes.
Finally, we discussed any limitations the current solution imposes, and we reflected upon
how it could be improved through future iterations. Although we unearthed a few different
limitations during this discussion, I will lastly conclude that, personally, I think the project
was a success. I achieved what I set out to do, and I have learned a lot in the process.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
93
==PAGE:104==
94
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1]
Francis Diebold. “On the Origin(s) and Development of the Term ’Big Data’”. In:
SSRN Electronic Journal (Sept. 2012). DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.2152421.
[2]
Pranay Ahlawat et al. A New Architecture to Manage Data Costs and Complexity.
Boston Consulting Group. URL: https://www.bcg.com/publications/2023/new-data-
architectures-can-help-manage-data-costs-and-complexity (visited on 09/17/2023).
[3]
James Serra. Deciphering Data Architectures. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2023.
[4]
Jay Kreps, Neha Narkhede, Jun Rao, et al. “Kafka: A distributed messaging system
for log processing”. In: Proceedings of the NetDB. Vol. 11. 2011. Athens, Greece.
2011, pp. 1–7.
[5]
Paris Carbone et al. “Apache flink: Stream and batch processing in a single engine”.
In: The Bulletin of the Technical Committee on Data Engineering 38.4 (2015).
[6]
Matthias J. Sax et al. “Streams and Tables: Two Sides of the Same Coin”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the International Workshop on Real­Time Business Intelligence and
Analytics. BIRTE ’18. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Association for Computing Machin­
ery, 2018. ISBN: 9781450366076. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 3242153 . 3242155. URL: https :
//doi.org/10.1145/3242153.3242155.
[7]
Matei Zaharia et al. “Discretized Streams: Fault­Tolerant Streaming Computation
at Scale”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty­Fourth ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles. SOSP ’13. Farminton, Pennsylvania: Association for Comput­
ing Machinery, 2013, pp. 423–438. ISBN: 9781450323888. DOI: 10.1145/2517349.
2522737. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2517349.2522737.
[8]
Wikipedia contributors. Slowly changing dimension — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclo­
pedia. [Online; accessed 15­January­2024]. 2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/
w/index.php?title=Slowly_changing_dimension&oldid=1187846669.
[9]
K. Mani Chandy. “Event Driven Architecture”. In: Encyclopedia of Database Sys­
tems. Ed. by Ling Liu and M. Tamer Özsu. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2016,
pp. 1–5. ISBN: 978­1­4899­7993­3. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4899-7993-3_570-2. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7993-3_570-2.
[10]
Amazon Web Services. What is an Event­Driven Architecture? URL: https://aws.
amazon.com/event-driven-architecture/ (visited on 09/15/2023).
[11]
M. van Steen and A. S. Tanenbaum. Distributed Systems. 4th. 2023. ISBN: 9789081
540636.
[12]
Martin Fowler. Focusing on Events. URL: https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventN
arrative.html (visited on 12/11/2023).
[13]
Fred B. Schneider. “Implementing Fault­Tolerant Services Using the State Machine
Approach: A Tutorial”. In: ACM Comput. Surv. 22.4 (Dec. 1990), pp. 299–319. ISSN:
0360­0300. DOI: 10.1145/98163.98167. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/98163.98167.
[14]
Microsoft Learn. Event­driven architecture style. URL: https : / / learn . microsoft . c
om/en- us/azure/architecture/guide/architecture- styles/event- driven (visited on
09/15/2023).
[15]
Martin Kleppmann, Alastair R. Beresford, and Boerge Svingen. “Online Event Pro­
cessing: Achieving Consistency Where Distributed Transactions Have Failed”. In:
Queue 17.1 (Feb. 2019), pp. 116–136. ISSN: 1542­7730. DOI: 10.1145/3317287.
3321612. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3317287.3321612.
[16]
D. Trowbridge et al. Integration Patterns (Patterns & Practices). USA: Microsoft
Press, 2004. ISBN: 9780735618503.
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
95
==PAGE:106==
[17]
Utkarsh Srivastava and Jennifer Widom. “Flexible Time Management in Data Stream
Systems”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty­Third ACM SIGMOD­SIGACT­SIGART
Symposium on Principles of Database Systems. PODS ’04. Paris, France: Asso­
ciation for Computing Machinery, 2004, pp. 263–274. ISBN: 158113858X. DOI: 10.
1145/1055558.1055596.
[18]
T. Akidau. Streaming 101: The world beyond batch. URL: https://www.oreilly.com/
radar/the-world-beyond-batch-streaming-101/ (visited on 11/20/2023).
[19]
K.M.M. Prabhu. Window Functions and Their Applications in Signal Processing. Oct.
2013. ISBN: 9781466515833. DOI: 10.1201/9781315216386.
[20]
Tyler Akidau et al. “The Dataflow Model: A Practical Approach to Balancing Correct­
ness, Latency, and Cost in Massive­Scale, Unbounded, out­of­Order Data Process­
ing”. In: Proc. VLDB Endow. 8.12 (Aug. 2015), pp. 1792–1803. ISSN: 2150­8097.
DOI: 10.14778/2824032.2824076. URL: https://doi.org/10.14778/2824032.2824076.
[21]
Tyler Akidau et al. “MillWheel: Fault­Tolerant Stream Processing at Internet Scale”.
In: Very Large Data Bases. 2013, pp. 734–746.
[22]
P.A. Tucker et al. “Exploiting punctuation semantics in continuous data streams”. In:
Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 15 (June 2003), pp. 555–
568. DOI: 10.1109/TKDE.2003.1198390.
[23]
Apache Hadoop. URL: https://hadoop.apache.org/ (visited on 12/05/2023).
[24]
M. Kleppmann. Designing Data­Intensive Applications. O’Reilly Media, Inc., Mar.
2017. ISBN: 9781491903100.
[25]
Amazon Web Services. What is SDLC? URL: https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/sdlc/
(visited on 09/15/2023).
[26]
H. D. Bennington. “Production of Large Computer Programs”. In: Symposium on
Advanced Programming Methods for Digital Computers. Navy Mathematical Com­
puting Advisory Panel and Office of Naval Research. June 1956, pp. 15–28. URL:
https://ntrl.ntis.gov/NTRL/dashboard/searchResults/titleDetail/PB121670.xhtml.
[27]
T. E. Bell and T. A. Thayer. “Software Requirements: Are They Really a Problem?”
In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Software Engineering. ICSE
’76. San Francisco, California, USA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1976, pp. 61–
68.
[28]
Nayan B. Ruparelia. “Software Development Lifecycle Models”. In: SIGSOFT Softw.
Eng. Notes 35.3 (May 2010), pp. 8–13. ISSN: 0163­5948. DOI: 10.1145/1764810.
1764814.
[29]
K. Beck et al. The Agile Manifesto. URL: https://agilemanifesto.org/ (visited on
11/26/2023).
[30]
D. Farley and J. Humble. Continuous Delivery: Reliable Software Releases through
Build, Test, and Deployment Automation. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2010.
[31]
Fernando Almeida, Jorge Simões, and Sérgio Lopes. “Exploring the Benefits of
Combining DevOps and Agile”. In: Future Internet 14.2 (2022). ISSN: 1999­5903.
DOI: 10.3390/fi14020063. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/14/2/63.
[32]
Greg Young. Versioning in an Event Sourced System. URL: https://leanpub.com/
esversioning/read (visited on 09/16/2023).
[33]
Michiel Overeem, Marten Spoor, and Slinger Jansen. “The dark side of event sourc­
ing: Managing data conversion”. In: Feb. 2017, pp. 193–204. DOI: 10.1109/SANER.
2017.7884621.
[34]
Michiel Overeem et al. “An empirical characterization of event sourced systems
and their schema evolution — Lessons from industry”. In: Journal of Systems and
Software 178 (2021), p. 110970. ISSN: 0164­1212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
96
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:107==
jss.2021.110970. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016412122
1000674.
[35]
Kubernetes Overview. URL: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/ (visited
on 12/15/2023).
[36]
Docker. URL: https://www.docker.com/ (visited on 12/25/2023).
[37]
Kubernetes Workload Resources. URL: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workl
oads/controllers/ (visited on 12/16/2023).
[38]
Kubernetes Operators. URL: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernete
s/operator/ (visited on 12/16/2023).
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
97
==PAGE:108==
98
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
==PAGE:109==
A
Hash Precision
When using a n bit hash function (assumed to be a perfect hash function, i.e. completely
uniform), then the probability that at least two values out of k random values collide is
given by (see the birthday problem1):
P ≈1 −e
−k(k −1)
2 × 2n
= 1 −e
−k(k −1)
2n+1
Which, for k = 1011, or 100 billion (roughly the number of data points in Tryg360), and
n = 128 is equal to:
P ≈1−e
−1011(1011−1)
2128+1
≈1.47 × 10−17
Similarly, we can compute the number of random values to hash before we expect a
collision with probability = 0.001%. We do this by solving the following expression:
1−e
−x(x−1)
2128+1 = 0.00001
Solving for this expression,we get:
x ≈82496553663778160 ≈8.2 × 1016
Again, assuming the total number of data points in Tryg is around 1011 records, that means
we would have to process all data points 820.000 times before the expectation of one or
more collisions reaches 0.001%.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birthday_problem
Life Cycle Management of Streaming Applications in Event­Driven Architectures
99
==PAGE:110==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
