==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of an Immersive Simulator for Quantifying Universal Design Effi-
ciencies in Civil Engineering
Master Thesis
28 January, 2024
By:
Alexander Barholm-Hansen & Henrik Clausager Nielsen
Supervisor:
Kristoffer Negendahl, Associate Professor, Department of Civil and
Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Co-Supervisor:
Hans Toke Thorup, VDC manager & XR technology lead, CN3 A/S
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was conducted between September 2023 and January 2024 at the Department of
Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in collaboration with CN3, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, M.Sc. Eng. in Building
Design.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of terminology and concepts relating to
the areas of Universal Design, Virtual Environments and statistical principles.
2
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This research endeavours to create an immersive simulator tailored to Universal Design (UD)
applications within the realm of Civil Engineering. Universal Design aims to establish in-
clusive environments that accommodate individuals with diverse abilities. Traditional ap-
proaches to accessibility, often rooted in rule-based frameworks and regulatory specifications,
inadequately capture experiential facets and hinder comparative performance evaluations.
This study proposes a multifaceted approach involving the development of an interactive
tool to simulate immersive scenarios for quantifying UD solution efficiencies. The tool in-
tends to replicate physical aspects of mobility disability and use of a wheelchair. Subsequent
phases entail testing the tool’s efficacy with both civil engineering students and experienced
practitioners, leveraging statistical modelling to analyse perceived quality and physical re-
actions. An advisory panel comprising individuals with disabilities and experts in UD will
critically assess the method and its implementation.
3
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor at DTU, Kristoffer Negendahl, for inspiring the topics
explored in this thesis, and offering valuable advice and guidance throughout the project. A
large thank-you to our co-supervisor Hans Toke Thorup at CN3, for enlightening discussions
regarding implementation of the simulator, and taking time out of his schedule to assist our
project.
We also extend our gratitude to John Paulin Hansen, DTU and Anders Hermund, Ture
Slot Bundgaard and Emil Ballegaard, KADK for taking time to share their experience and
research findings. We also thank the advisory panel for their time and contribution of expert
knowledge and key insights.
Thanks to:
Kristoffer Negendahl, Assoc. Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Hans Toke Thorup, VDC manager & XR technology lead, CN3 A/S
John Paulin Hansen, Professor, Department of Technology, Management, and Economics
Anders Hermund, Assoc. Professor, Building art and Design, KADK
Ture Slot Bundgaard, Assoc. Professor, Building art and Design, KADK
Emil Ballegaard, PhD student, Building art and Design, KADK
Advisory Panel, Members of Rygmarvskadede i Danmark
4
==PAGE:7==
List of acronyms and relevant terminology
AEC
Architecture, Engineering, and Construction
AR
Augmented Reality
BR18
Building Regulation 2018
CMB
Combination
COL
Collision
DS
Dansk Standard
DSRM
Design Science Research Methodology
EEG
Electroencephalography
FOV
Field of View
GAZ
View-tracking
GPU
Graphics Processing Unit
HMD
Head Mounted Display
INT
Interaction
IPQ
Igroup Presence Questionnaire
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
ITS-SOPI
ITC-Sense of Presence Inventory
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LNOB
Leave no one behind
LOC
Location
MAE
Mean Absolute Error
NASA-TLX
NASA Task Load Index
PPS
Predictive Power Score
PIFF
Presence-Involvement-Flow Framework
RYK
Rygmarvskadede i Danmark
UD
Universal Design
UE5
Unreal Engine 5
UNSDG
United Nations Sustainable Development Group
SAM
Self Assessment Manikin
VE
Virtual Environment
VSR
Virtual Scenario Responder
VR
Virtual Reality
XR
eXtended Reality
Play-through
The act of playing a game from start to finish.
Spawn
To cause something new to appear or start suddenly.
Teleport
To transport or be transported across space and distance instantly.
Widget
A graphic and interactive menu system.
Haptic
Technology that involves the application of forces, vibrations, or motions to the
user to create a tactile experience.
Tick
An increment in time by one period
Morphology
Concerning form, shape, or structure
5
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
9
I
Universal Design and Simulated Reality
12
2
Background & Context
13
2.1
Guidelines and design methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.1
The 7 Principles of Universal Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.2
The 8 Goals of Universal Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.3
Accessibility for whom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Universal Design - Danish Context and Current Practices . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Immersive Simulated Experiences
28
3.1
Virtual Reality Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Research considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Related Work and Current Research Landscape
33
4.1
Research settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Playable experiences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
II
Implementation
43
5
Methodology
44
6
Defining scope of project
50
6.1
Portals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Test environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
7
Simulator construction
55
7.1
VR system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2
UE5 implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8
Simulator Validation
60
9
Data collection
62
9.1
Qualitative data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.1.1
SAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.1.2
Preferred Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9.2
Sensor data collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
10 Relationship Modelling and Formulation
69
III
Results and Evaluation
73
11 Summary of Field Testing and Validation
74
11.1 Test group - Simulator Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
11.2 Advisory panel - Simulator Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
12 Simulation Results
78
12.1 Qualitative research results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
12.1.1 SAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
12.1.2 Preferred Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
12.2 Sensor-based results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
12.2.1 Location - LOC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
12.2.2 Interaction - INT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
12.2.3 View tracking - GAZ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
12.2.4 Collision - COL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
13 Data analysis and interpretation
99
13.1 Spearman correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
13.2 Predictive Power Score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
13.3 The Ideal Door . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
IV
Discussion and Future Perspectives
110
14 Discussion
111
15 Conclusion
118
V
Appendices
126
8
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
This project is centred on devising an innovative method for objectively evaluating Universal
Design (UD) efficiencies pertinent to civil engineering projects. Universal Design advocates
for environments that can be accessed and utilized by individuals with diverse abilities. Un-
like conventional accessibility paradigms, which often rely solely on discrete regulatory stan-
dards, this research aims to incorporate immersive technologies to comprehensively measure
performance and foster a deeper understanding of accessibility and usability aspects. The
integration of immersive simulations offers an avenue to quantitatively assess UD impacts,
yielding results independent of individual experiences.
The United Nations (UN) estimates the global population of the world to a staggering 8.05
billion people as of this year [1]. All of whom are individual in their character, preferences,
and abilities. As engineers who are responsible for how our physical environment and spaces
are designed, how do we accommodate the needs of such a diverse global population? The
Universal Design paradigm presents a simple solution: we must develop and disseminate
designs so that all individuals shall have equal opportunity to participate in the social and
communal institutions of our society. Our buildings, infrastructure, products, and services
must be available without individual adaption or personal differentiation [2]. The broader
context of UD, its history, and principles is presented in (Sec. 2).
In Denmark, current practices regarding disability design are at a crossroads between tra-
ditional rule-based and modern UD inspired function-based approaches [3]. The dichotomy
between these approaches reflects ongoing research on the most effective means of achieving
inclusivity in the built environment. Rule-based strategies, often grounded in strict regula-
tions, have traditionally been employed to ensure accessibility. However, there is a growing
recognition that relying solely on a regulation-based approach, when excessively rigid, risks
segregating and diminishing the overall design space [4]. Moreover, the reduction of individ-
9
==PAGE:12==
1
INTRODUCTION
uals needs to a mere checklist may oversimplify the complexities of accommodating various
disabilities.
On the other hand, a UD inspired function-based approach emphasizes the broader goal of
creating environments that function well for all individuals, regardless of their abilities. This
approach is seen as more flexible and responsive to the diverse needs of users. However,
Frandsen et al. notes that “there is a need to discuss how to establish a relevant evaluation
practice, culture, and capacity within universal design, for example, in architecture and con-
struction.” [5]. Challenges arise when attempting to establish broadly applicable standards
for measuring or quantifying UD efficiency, and whilst a strictly regulation-based approach
may not capture the nuanced requirements of different contexts, a wholly individualized
review process for each building can be logistically challenging and time-consuming [6].
This research seeks to address these contrasting perspectives by avoiding the pitfalls of a
strictly regulation-based model while still providing a systematic means of evaluating and
ensuring access for all individuals. Developing metrics that capture the essence of universal
design without stifling creativity remains a key challenge in promoting inclusivity in the built
environment.
The project will undertake several key objectives (a) to develop an immersive simulator to
enable creation of interactive scenarios that quantify UD solution efficiencies, (b) to engage
civil engineering students and professionals in immersive UD simulations to gain comprehen-
sive understanding of user experiences and assess perceived quality via physical reactions, (c)
to employ statistical modelling to derive comprehensive insights from user feedback, and (d)
to foster critical evaluation and refinement of the proposed method through the involvement
of an advisory group comprising individuals with disabilities and UD experts. To achieve
these objectives, we define several simplifications regarding the scope of the simulator (Sec.
6). We establish that the experience shall model the interaction between one disability and
one building element. The scope thus covers persons who use a self-propelled wheelchair,
10
==PAGE:13==
1
INTRODUCTION
and their interaction with portals (doors) between two spaces in a building.
Ultimately, by merging quantitative methodologies with immersive technologies, this project
endeavours to revolutionize UD assessments within the realm of civil engineering. The pro-
posed approach promises to provide a comprehensive, data-driven perspective on UD solution
efficiencies, ultimately advancing the creation of inclusive and universally accessible built en-
vironments.
Leave No One Behind
Central in the promotion of adopting Universal Design theories and advancing increased
accessibility for all, are the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as defined by the
United Nation Sustainable Development Group (UNSDG). Essential to the social sustainabil-
ity agenda presented by these goals is the phrase Leave No One Behind, shortened LNOB.
This mantra implies a commitment to inclusivity, equality, and social justice. It recognizes
that to achieve true sustainable development, we must reach everyone, and no individual or
group should be excluded from the opportunities and benefits of progress.
The overarching goal is to create a world where every person has the opportunity to lead a
dignified and fulfilling life, aligning with the broader vision of the SDGs to achieve a more
sustainable, equitable, and just global society. The report, Operationalizing Leave No One
Behind [7], describes why involvement of disability groups is vital:
Persons with disabilities are actors of change – a diverse, non-homogenous population
possessing unique knowledge and lived experience of disability that others do not.
UNSDG [7]
As able-bodied individuals, we acknowledge the importance of involving a diverse advisory
group with lived experience, to achieve the defined objectives.
11
==PAGE:14==
Part I
Universal Design and Simulated Reality
This part introduces the design philosophy Universal Design and involves comprehensive liter-
ature review and analysis of existing UD and Virtual Reality implementations with analogous
applications. This includes current “best-practice” and regulatory approaches to designing for
individual abilities within a Danish context. This is done by looking at how UD is perceived
in the field of architecture and civil engineering, from a client and a consultant’s point of view,
and how universal design plays a role in a sustainable certification system. Furthermore, this
phase entails the explanation of virtual reality and how this immersive environment can be
used in scientific context.
12
==PAGE:15==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
2
Background & Context
With regard to Civil Engineering, Universal Design (UD) can be succinctly defined as the
design of objects or spaces, that can be used or accessed by people of all ages, abilities, and
cultures, to their fullest potential without requiring any adaptive aids. The characteristics
of UD are duly summarized by Story, one of the original proponents of the philosophy:
In the best examples, universal design features go unnoticed because they have been
fully integrated into thoughtful design solutions that are used by a full spectrum of the
population. Successfully designed universal solutions do not call attention to themselves
as being anything more than easier for everyone to use, which is exactly what they are.
Designs that were developed with consideration for the needs of a diverse population
work for men and women, children and elders, small people and large, and people with
temporary or longer-term disabilities. They work when it’s dark, noisy, wet, or when
we’re tired. Everyone benefits.
Molly Follette Story [8]
Universal Design, a term first coined in the 1980s by architect and accessibility advocate
Ronald L. Mace, is a design philosophy in response to the terms accessibility and barrier-
free design being perceived as stigmatizing in the American context [9]. Mace suggested that
by moving away from a mind-set that resulted in the division of users, into able-bodied and
disabled groups, and instead considered the lifetime perspective of users, diversity in user
needs would be a parameter concerning everyone.
Traditional approaches such as Accessible Design; defined as design that follows established
regulations to ensure usability by individuals with disabilities, and Adaptive Design; refer-
ring to alterations made to a conventional design with the aim of ensuring its usability for
a given individual, often achieve inclusion by providing separate solutions for the “special”
user. Thereby isolating them from the majority [8]. The diagram (Fig. 1) demonstrates
how advocates of Universal design view the philosophy regarding traditional approaches and
13
==PAGE:16==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
how it integrates to a broader view of humanity. Throughout our lifetimes we all experience
changing needs, whether it be due to ageing, changes in size or ability, or perhaps tempo-
rary or chronic disability. Universal Design simply allows for stigma free discussion, and
development of user-centric solutions focused on user diversity and equality.
Figure 1: UD in relation to alternate design philosophies and a broader humanitarian per-
spective. Adapted from C. Ryhl [10] and M. F. Story [8]
14
==PAGE:17==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
2.1
Guidelines and design methods
As Universal Design is an abstract concept with which the average designer might not be
accustomed to, or lack experience in [4][6], proponents of the philosophy have sought to
define approaches to assist the layman in crafting designs that achieve the definitions of UD.
Two of the most significant models are presented here, alongside a series of guidelines on
distinguishing disabilities.
2.1.1
The 7 Principles of Universal Design
Ronald Mace, the pioneer of Universal Design, in conjunction with North Carolina State
University’s School of Design, founded the Center for Accessible Housing which later morphed
into the Center for Universal Design. After receiving American federal funding, it became a
leading resource for research and information on universal design in products and the built
environment. As part of the centres research, a program was launched to develop guidelines
for Universal Design excellency. Between 1994 and 1997 staff from The Center of Universal
Design, alongside specialists in various design fields and researchers from other facilities,
convened to develop principles that could encapsulate the current body of knowledge [8].
The resulting guidelines, The 7 Principles of Universal Design, apply to all design disciplines
and can be used by any practitioner. They are both aimed at evaluating a design of an
object or space, but also for instruction and communication between individuals (whether
it be education or media). A principle is structured as follows: the primary name, selected
to be concise and memorable; the definition of the principle, a short description of the key
concepts embodied; and guidelines, elements of the design that ideally should be present to
adhere to the principle. The guidelines were developed for evaluating new or existing designs
and as definite measures that illustrate what effective Universal Design is [11]. The principles
are listed below. Note that the guideline part of each principle has been omitted here. A full
version of the principles is available in appendix A.
15
==PAGE:18==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
1. Equitable Use
The design is useful and marketable to people with diverse abilities.
2. Flexibility in Use
The design accommodates a wide range of individual preferences and abilities.
3. Simple and Intuitive Use
Use of the design is easy to understand, regardless of the user’s experience, knowledge, language
skills, or education level.
4. Perceptible Information
The design communicates necessary information effectively to the user, regardless of ambient
conditions or the user’s sensory abilities.
5. Tolerance for Error
The design minimizes hazards and the adverse consequences of accidental or unintended actions.
6. Low Physical Effort
The design can be used efficiently and comfortably and with a minimum of fatigue.
7. Size and Space for Approach and Use
Appropriate size and space is provided for approach, reach, manipulation, and use regardless of
user’s body size, posture, or mobility.
The 7 Principles of Universal Design as defined by B. R. Connel, et al. [11].
It’s important to emphasize that Universal Design principles do not exist in isolation, instead,
they should be considered alongside other factors that contribute to good design, such as
aesthetics and cost [11].
2.1.2
The 8 Goals of Universal Design
Subsequent literature has criticized the instrumental approach and particularly the principles
above for being overly focused on the practical usability. Additionally, the use of “universal”
in the term is questioned because it may imply a disregard for human diversity, emphasizing
the lowest common denominator [5]. A later definition of universal design, articulated by
Steinfeld and Maisel, aims to address this criticism by focusing on the goals of design and the
process that can lead to equality and inclusion. They have proposed eight goals for universal
16
==PAGE:19==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
design, initially formulated in 2012 as an evolution and critique of the seven principles from
15 years prior. The purpose of these new eight goals was to place greater emphasis on social
participation, health, and well-being. The intention was also to express them concisely and
precisely in a way that makes the impact of the goals measurable [12]. The authors also
present a varying definition of the Universal Design term from which the eight goals are
created:
Universal design is a process that enables and empowers a diverse population by improv-
ing human performance, health and wellness, and social participation.
E. Steinfeld and J. Maisel [12]
The goals are listed below in the order they have been defined.
1. Body Fit
Accommodating a wide range of body sizes and abilities.
2. Comfort
Keeping demands within desirable limits of body function and perception.
3. Awareness
Ensuring that critical information for use is easily perceived.
4. Understanding
Making methods of operation and use intuitive, clear, and unambiguous.
5. Wellness
Contributing to health promotion, avoidance of disease, and protection from hazards.
6. Social Integration
Treating all groups with dignity and respect.
7. Personalization
Incorporating opportunities for choice and the expression of individual preferences.
8. Cultural Appropriateness
Respecting and reinforcing cultural values, and the social and environmental contexts of any
design project.
The 8 Goals of Universal Design as defined by E. Steinfeld and J. Maisel [12]
17
==PAGE:20==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
In opposition to the seven principles of Universal Design, which solely deal with the shaping
of the design as a tool to achieve participation for all individuals, the eight goals are broader
in focus. From the eight goals, only goal one to four address the properties of the design itself,
whereas the remainder are related to more abstract concepts regarding social participation,
equality regarding standards of health, and respect for individual and cultural background.
This aims to ensure that Universal Design cannot simply be reduced to standardized solutions
and checklists, but must take into account place and process to achieve Universal Design as
defined by the authors of the eight goals [5].
2.1.3
Accessibility for whom
The group for Danish Disability Organizations (Danske Handicaporganisationer), was central
in creating a certification system called God Adgang which translates to Good Access. This
certification system defines seven distinct disability categories, split between physical, sensory
and social/communicative disabilities [13]. This system allows a building to be certified by
God Adgang, and subsequently used to market this building as accessible space. They are
included in this report as a precursor to scoping the development of the immersive simulator.
The seven categories of disabilities are described below as defined by God Adgang:
1. Wheelchair users
Wheelchair users are often most commonly associated with disabilities, perhaps as the size of
a wheelchair imposes very specific requirements on the surroundings for the user to navigate
comfortably.
2. Walking, arm or hand disability
Individuals with walking, arm or hand disabilities are also described as having a mobility
disability.
They may be affected by a lack of balance, orientation, or the ability to judge
distance and have very diverse needs in regard to providing full accessibility.
3. Blind and visually impaired
The group of people with visual impairments includes blind individuals who have a total loss
of vision, and visually impaired individuals who have residual vision. People with cataracts or
age-related vision loss are also part of this group.
18
==PAGE:21==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
4. Deaf and hearing impaired
Deaf and hearing-impaired individuals are amongst those with a sensory impairment. There is
a significant difference between being completely deaf and having a hearing impairment.
5. Asthma or allergy
Individuals with asthma or allergies constitute a somewhat unconventional group in relation
to physical and sensory impairments; nonetheless, there are several specific conditions that are
crucial for whether it is possible or comfortable to stay in a building.
6. Cognitive disability
It is not always easy to tell if a person is affected by a cognitive impairment, or to what extent.
Often, it involves a social disability, where individuals may behave in ways different from what
is socially expected. Individuals with Alzheimer’s or dementia are also included here.
7. People with reading difficulties
In the group of individuals with reading difficulties there are, in addition to dyslexics, also many
others who, for one reason or another, struggle with reading or are no longer able to read.
The 7 different types of disabilities according to God Adgang [13].
19
==PAGE:22==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
2.2
Universal Design - Danish Context and Current Practices
This section of the thesis contextualizes the Universal Design philosophy from a Danish
perspective, both from a regulatory- and industry standpoint. A summary of how current
regulations are structured is presented first, followed by discussions regarding current prac-
tices from the perspectives of both developers/clients and the industry professionals that
advise them (architects, engineers, etc.). Lastly, references are included as to how sustain-
ability certifications, in this case the German Sustainable Building Council (DGNB), handle
the social aspects relating to accessibility.
Building Regulations and ISO Standards
The Danish building regulations, Bygningsreglementet 2018 (BR18), govern the construction
and renovation of most structures. Within the regulation framework, demands regarding
accessibility and usability are defined. The regulations adhere to the UN Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and it is through these that the term Universal Design
is introduced. The UD philosophy introduces the term Brugerbegreb, translated as user
concept, into the regulations, which is central in defining to what degree a building must
be equal in accessibility and function. By defining a user concept, it allows developers to
specify function based requirements in order to create buildings designed with equality in
mind and provide flexibility with regard to the legal provisions and their guidelines [14]. The
user concept may include, persons in wheelchairs or with walking difficulties, persons with
ADHD, with visual or other sensory impairments, elderly and children, or small and large
persons. Social, cultural, gender, and experience-based differences are also relevant, with the
list being far from exhaustive.
The regulations also specify that the current guidelines are formulated with a focus on
wheelchair users, individuals with walking difficulties, and those with visual impairments,
and therefore not representative of broader human diversity.
Ultimately, developers and
20
==PAGE:23==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
professionals are urged to consider UD solutions or alternatives that meet a wide variety
of potential user needs and requirements. The user concept in the regulations allows case
by case definition of intended users, wherein building applications providing sufficient doc-
umentation that proposed solutions meet the identified requirements, can be submitted as
alternatives to the otherwise enforced provisions. How developers, building owners and in-
dustry professional interact with this possibility is described in (Sec. 2.2) below.
It is important to note that, in all cases, the developer or building owner is responsible
for documenting that solutions meet the prescribed provisions regarding accessibility and
furnishing, regardless of whether they make use of the user concept approach or not. Docu-
mentation will often happen in cooperation with any advisors hired by the client. However,
the municipal instance that approves the building application is under no obligation to pro-
cess the documentation. They only require that this documentation exists so that they may
conduct random sampling of projects [3].
Additionally, the guide SBi-anvisning 249: Tilgængelige boliger - indretning, published
by Statens Byggeforskingsintitut (SBi) and developed for an older version of the building
regulations, exposes additional requirements that construction- or renovation-projects must
fulfil. Herein, three quality levels are introduced. Quality level C is a minimum requirement
and corresponds to the guidelines in BR18 following provisions accessibility (§48 - §62) and
layout of the building (§196 - §241). The levels above, quality level B and A, both indicate
a progressive increase in how strict and detailed requirements become to ensure increased
accessibility [15].
21
==PAGE:24==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
The structure of the regulations are presented here.
Each provision in BR18 is divided
into two segments, a requirement and a number of detail suggestions or guidelines to fulfil
said requirement. At the time of this report, the current version of the Danish Building
Regulations is from 2018 (BR18) [14].
Note that some regulations have received partial
updates since their introduction. Below, the structure of the regulations are illustrated and
exemplified with regard to disability design.
Provision: This part of the regulation must be upheld. Presented in chapters, each concern-
ing a specific topic and consisting of several paragraphs. The paragraphs are where specific
widths, angles, heights etc. that designs must comply with are defined.
Guidance: The guidance can help fulfil the values specified by the provision, e.g.
how
to achieve sufficient manoeuvrability in a bathroom.
In Denmark, guidance sections are
provided by Dansk Standard (DS) and build on top of the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO). One current publication regarding “Accessibility for All” is Building
construction - Accessibility and usability of the built environment[16].
DS have also
created a useful manual [17], in which the requirements from BR18 and the guidance from
DS/ISO 21542:2012 are compared, alongside a note of potential pitfalls. A translated example
of a comparison from the DS-Handbook 186:2017 can be seen on next page (Fig. 2). Note
that the DS-Handbook 186:2017 compares the current Danish building regulation (BR18) to
the older DS/ISO 21542:2012 publication.
In summary, current building regulations allow for both rule-based and function-based ap-
proaches to documenting accessibility. To attain a function-based building requires to be
increased documentation and effort from both the executing and certifying parties. A pos-
itive from the increased documentation is that it forces government bodies to process the
application (thus ensuring building quality), whereas rule-based applications do not require
direct processing of accessibility documentation to gain approval. Whether the current sys-
tem is viable for industry parties is discussed below.
22
==PAGE:25==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
Figure 2: Translated version of page 20 in DS Håndbog 186:2017 [17] showing how a BR18
provision is compared against the DS/ISO standard.
Universal Design in Architecture & Civil Engineering
The term Universal Design was introduced in the Scandinavian region in the late 1990s, but
it was first after the publication of the UN report; Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (CRPD) in 2006, that UD was used as a term like “design for all” and “inclusive
design” [2]. The concept accessibility has long been prevalent in architectural practice, but
interpreted as additional solutions to meet the needs of minor groups, not normal design
practice. The UD concept necessitates a shift from the conventional and narrow emphasis
solely on the physical structure and specific “accessible design solutions”. Instead, it calls
for a more nuanced and intricate comprehension, emphasizing the importance of meeting a
diverse spectrum of users with a diverse range of solutions:
23
==PAGE:26==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
…the shift in understanding has moved from “one solution fits all” to the universal design
solution being a range of different design solutions, or in other words, “a number of
different solutions to meet different user needs”.
S. Grangaard, et al. [2]
Looking at the Danish construction industry, there are two main actors: the developer/client
and the consultant. The developer/client is responsible for the building program, where the
overall goals for the building are defined. A variety of consultants are then employed by the
client to execute the building process. Consequently, there are two different ways to perceive
how UD shall be implemented. The following two paragraphs summarize findings from two
analyses conducted by Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut (SBi) in order to explain how industry
parties work with UD and the governing regulations. Each report details findings from the
perspective of one party, sourced by a number of interviews amongst industry members.
The developer/client:
- The current Danish building regulations (BR18), state that
the responsibility for compliance with accessibility requirements is placed solely on the
client/building owner [14]. Despite historical points of criticism regarding diversity within
BR18, the ambition level of the clients to incorporate better solutions, does not match this
criticism.
Some suggest that the provisions should focus on function-based requirements
rather than a target-based requirement. Studies shows that, if a client is ambitious regarding
the implementation of universal design, the end product will reflect a more diverse design
philosophy. The problem arises when the owner does not consider diverse use from the be-
ginning. When a building project reaches the construction phase, the majority of the clients
believe it is too late to make any measurable changes. While certain clients express their
accessibility requirements in the building program, others rely on the regulatory process to
ensure their building meets these targets [6].
24
==PAGE:27==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
The clients also identify a lack of competences from the consultants with respect to universal
design, whilst broadly true, the SBi report concludes that in some cases the client is not
experienced in what to look for when choosing consultants. Accessibility and universal design,
therefore, do not appear as a ’driver’ for future-proofing, but rather as a by-product. This
indicates that if the needs for a particular type of accessibility measure are not present,
there are clients who choose to disregard that specific accessibility provision. Instead, they
may postpone the implementation of the measure to a later time if the need arises. In this
context, the client finds it highly important that such development is driven by legislation;
otherwise, accessibility will not be prioritized, as finances are considered the primary barrier
to achieving a higher level of accessibility [6].
The consultant: - Consultants suggest that developing and constructing a building can be
challenging if the objectives or criteria for a diverse solution haven’t been considered by the
client. This becomes a problem, especially in turnkey contracts, where the quality may be
compromised by contractors. Therefore, it is crucial for the client to define a standard so
that consultants can demand this standard to be maintained throughout the entire process.
They also suggest a way of aiding the client, and thereby also themselves, is the use of
function-based solutions as a mandatory part of the legislation, instead of minimum target-
based measurements [4]. These measures also exist in other aspects of the building industry,
especially in relation to fire safety, where they are implemented with greater success. Here,
predefined solutions are used for smaller projects, and function-based requirements are used
for unconventional or larger projects [18].
This way of thinking raises new challenges, crucial amongst which, is that efforts from all
parties must be made. Shared sentiment amongst consultants is that there is no reason to
develop new and innovative solutions if they are not approved because authorities lack insight
or are inflexible concerning applications. A major requirement for the wider use of function-
based projects is a general competency uplift of the industry, otherwise projects will simply
25
==PAGE:28==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
fall back to relying on underlying standards and checklists. The report also emphasizes the
lack of insight into what building functions are actually useful to people on an everyday
basis, and that accessibility not only is for people in wheelchairs. A function-based model
introduces greater flexibility and architectural freedom because it will be possible to interpret
accessibility in relation to each specific task, thus achieving much greater differentiation.
There is, therefore, a need for both new perspectives on what it means to have a disability
and a new approach to whom one designs for [4].
The conclusions from both SBi documents is, that in order to implement universal design in
the Danish building industry, a common understanding of the term needs to be determined,
and the knowledge needs to be distributed among all the involved parties, this includes clients,
consultants but also the governing parties. From the client’s point of view, requirements
within the building legislation are needed to force the industry to allocate the needed budget,
otherwise no matter the initiatives, no change will be made. The consultants’ proposal is to
define a new set of function-based requirements, with reference to the fire-safety methods,
which enable more architectural freedom as it will be possible to interpret accessibility in
relation to what the space is intended for.
The research also stresses the importance of
meeting the actual people that are going to use the building when built [19]. The knowledge
and life experience they can provide is crucial for designers to create functional solutions.
Sustainable building certification
The Green Building Council Denmark is a non-profit membership organization that exists to
promote sustainability in the construction and real-estate industry. They are responsible for
the administration and development of a Danish version of the certification system created
by, and named after, the German Sustainable Building Council (DGNB). DGNB is amongst
the most widely used certifications in Denmark that includes social sustainability aspects [20]
wherein references to Universal Design and UN development goals are made.
26
==PAGE:29==
2
BACKGROUND & CONTEXT
The certification is structured according to the three sustainability pillars, environmental,
economic, and social sustainability, where each accounts for 22.5% of the total certification
grade.
They are supplemented by technical quality, process quality, and context quality,
accounting for 15%, 12.5%, and 5% respectively.
The criteria referencing UD is dubbed
SOC2.1 and accounts for between 3.4, and 5.6% of the total grade, depending on intended
use of the building [21]. The DGNB system requires that the building complies with current
legislative regulations in order to be certified. To achieve a perfect score in these criteria, all
persons must have equal access to all spaces and functions, both indoors and in associated
outdoor areas. The criteria and documentation of requirements references the three quality
levels defined by SBi and references which provision are related to each sub-criteria. The only
additional requirement, that does not reference regulations or quality levels, is to develop a
project-specific accessibility strategy during the design phase and make it available no later
than the application phase. The strategy must include a description of relevant user needs,
legal requirements (BR18 provisions), and guidelines, as well as how these are conceptually
addressed in the project [21].
In closing, the DGNB certification forces building developers and owners to consider uni-
versal design in their project, regardless of whether their focus is social or environmental
sustainability. However, since the certification primarily relies on the qualities described in
BR18 and SBi-anvisning 249, resulting buildings will only achieve a quality that is at-best
equal to the quality of the regulations and guidelines. There is no stipulation to document
that these changes to the built environment have the intended effect.
27
==PAGE:30==
3
IMMERSIVE SIMULATED EXPERIENCES
3
Immersive Simulated Experiences
Often, new experiences, that challenge our knowledge and perception, are vital in expanding
our understanding of the world. However, certain experiences may be elusive or impractical
to undergo physically. To this end, Virtual Reality (VR) technology allows us to bypass the
limitations of the physical world by creating immersive digital simulations. These virtual
environments (VE), presented to users through the medium of a VR headset, open up new
possibilities for experiential learning and research [22] which becomes particularly interesting,
in regard to investigations concerning human diversity and understanding. In this section, we
present the theoretical foundations of VR and explore its applicability in scientific research.
There are numerous methods of defining which components create a VR experience and how
to determine the quality hereof. The theory which this project adheres to is presented in
Understanding Virtual Reality - Interface, Application, and Design which defines Virtual
Reality as:
A medium composed of interactive computer simulations that sense the participant’s
position and actions and replace or augment the feedback to one or more senses, giving
the feeling of being mentally immersed or present in the simulation.
Sherman and Craig [23]
From this definition, five key principles to remember when creating VE’s are defined. The
terminology is presented here, and subsequent use of these phrases throughout the report,
shall be understood in the context in which they are defined below.
1-2. The participants and creators
The participant is identified as the central element of a simulated experience, as their mind
is what allows the virtual world to become more than a digital representation of spatial data.
Their individuality shapes how they experience the virtual environment. Creators are defined
as those who implement the application or simulator. It is only through an interaction between
participant and creator, through the application, that an experience is created.
28
==PAGE:31==
3
IMMERSIVE SIMULATED EXPERIENCES
3. A virtual world
The content of a non-physical space manifested through a medium. It includes a programmatic
description of the objects in the space and what rules and relationships apply. It may be as
simple as a static 3D model, or more complex where physical rules we know from our reality
are present.
4. Immersion
Typically, an emotional or mental state, where one feels involved in the experience. In VR,
physical immersion, achieved by synthetically stimulating senses of the body and providing
sensory feedback, is equally important. The authors use presence, or a sense of presence, to
refer to mental immersion.
5. Interaction
The features that allow a participant to navigate, and change the virtual environment to their
desire (within the rules defined by the virtual world). Allowing users to position their body
and affect events in the virtual world are tantamount to making the experience compelling and
immersive. The ability to interact and change the world we experience gives us agency and
suggest to us that this world is real.
Five key elements of the Virtual Reality Experience as defined by Sherman and Craig [23].
3.1
Virtual Reality Technology
The following section aims to give a brief description of the technical and hardware related
aspects of VR. A VR system functions by placing two small, high-resolution screens close to
each eye. A stereoscopic lens is placed in front of the screen, creating distortion that mimics
a 3D environment as perceived by our eyes. The combination of these technologies is referred
to as a Head Mounted Display (HMD). When combined with tracking technology, which then
creates a complete VR headset, the system adjusts the visuals presented through the HMD
to imitate real-world movement in the virtual environment [24]. Any remaining field of view
not covered by the two screens is blocked by the headset to force the user to experience their
visual surroundings entirely through the VR system. Common VR systems consist of two
important parts:
29
==PAGE:32==
3
IMMERSIVE SIMULATED EXPERIENCES
Tracking: A central part for allowing users to immersive themselves in the virtual environ-
ment, is that their movements in the physical world must be replicated in the virtual world
they are presented with. Therefore, VR systems must track where a user looks, how they
move their head, and movement of any additional limbs (most often hands). This can be
done using depth-sensing cameras integrated in the headset to detect its position, or using
external tracking stations placed around the user. VR headsets typically make use of an
accelerometer and gyroscope to determine tilt and orientation of the headset [23].
Interaction: As defined above, interaction allows a participant to affect the virtual world.
For basic headsets, this may be limited to movement and orientation of the HMD only.
Some systems offer participants the option to manipulate the environment via a hand-held
controller, whilst more advanced versions are able to track hand and finger movement without
dedicated hardware. Whichever level of detail in the system, additional limbs are presented
within the virtual world to allow the participant to determine their location. For the most
immersive experience, controllers seek to imitate and replicate expected physical behaviours
digitally [23].
3.2
Research considerations
VR can be applied to solve a number of problems ranging from education, medicine, sto-
rytelling, to problems within the engineering domain [25]. It is well documented that VE’s
are a valid research setting, both regarding experiential aspects [26], human perception [27],
and motor functions [28]. Applications of VE’s analogous to our own are presented in (Sec.
4). There are several important aspects to consider when designing a VE for the purpose of
research. Most relevant to this project are what movement method is implemented, and how
measures regarding participant experience are evaluated.
Previous studies suggest that movement plays a role in determining how players perceive
and thereby experience a given environment [29]. The greatest sense of presence is achieved
30
==PAGE:33==
3
IMMERSIVE SIMULATED EXPERIENCES
when participants achieve a flow state, defined as a state of enjoyment and concentration
[30], achieved when there is a sufficient balance between skill and challenge. Issues regarding
interface are often the largest hindrance in reaching this state. Designers of a virtual ap-
plication must therefore be careful when choosing a movement method and how VR system
controllers interact with the navigation system. Regarding this project is it equally important
as the movement system also defines the likeness of the simulator to the disability it seeks
to imitate. Traditional approaches are categorized into organic (movement that attempts to
mimic natural movement), and inorganic (movement that is not physically possible) tech-
niques. Results from the paper The Movement Patterns and the Experiential Components
of Virtual Environments show that player movement skill and experience are related [29].
It is necessary to either group participants by skill or treat each person and their experiences
as individual before extracting any experimental results.
Concerning the evaluation of experiences, there are multiple evaluation methods. Studies
mentioned in this paper employ techniques such as the Igroup Presence Questionnaire (IPQ),
ITC-Sense of Presence Inventory (ITS-SOPI), or the Presence-Involvement-Flow Framework
(PIFF). Most methods use several components to rate experiential aspects, however presence
is the most common and is nearly always evaluated through subjective measures [31]. These
methods are structured as post experience questionnaires or ordinal ratings, each with its
own benefits. The focus of the mentioned evaluation techniques is to determine the quality
of the experience itself, and less so tasks or events within the simulation. However, overall
measurement of presence and flow also indicate how participants rate their skill, interac-
tivity, degree of control and challenge when performing tasks [29][32]. It is expected that
by introducing a novel simulator, developed following conclusions from literature presented
here, both the necessary immersion and flow can be achieved, allowing evaluation of events
within the simulation. The evaluation method employed in this project is described in (Sec.
9).
31
==PAGE:34==
3
IMMERSIVE SIMULATED EXPERIENCES
Interestingly, the realism of the virtual world does not directly equate to what degree of
“realness” experiential aspects of the simulation are evaluated to. Studies comparing two
versions of a simulator with a marked difference in realism, found that once a minimum
level of detail necessary to create sufficient immersion is reached, further detailing of the
environment is not rewarded. Participant behaviour in the study also followed this pattern,
as both detail levels resulted in similar natural behaviours [32].
The study caveats that
these findings require a minimum level of activity from, or novelty to, participants to create
sufficient sense of presence.
Lastly, when using VE for research purposes, creators must be cautious of VR sickness.
Otherwise known as simulator sickness, VR sickness is a medical condition closely related
to motion sickness.
It is caused by a conflict in perceptual clues, often occurring when
the body detects motion but is not noted by the visual system. Resulting symptoms may
be nausea, headache or discomfort [33]. To mitigate the risk of sickness, it is beneficial to
ensure that hardware and software are optimized to provide an experience with both sufficient
resolution, latency, and frame-rate close to what our eyes perceive. Moreover, it is suggested
to avoid virtual movements that rotate a player around two or more axes simultaneously [22].
Participants in VR studies should be able to interrupt the experiment should they begin to
experience symptoms.
To sum up, creating virtual experiences playable through VR systems, is a powerful research
tool to achieve experiments that would otherwise be difficult due to resource considerations.
Designers must be vigilant in tailoring their application to ensure that participants are suf-
ficiently engaged and that interaction with the virtual world is not a hindrance. Evaluation
methods follow similar techniques and should be chosen with respect to what aspect of the
simulation is to be evaluated.
32
==PAGE:35==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
4
Related Work and Current Research Landscape
In this section, we review analogous projects that intersect both Virtual Reality and Univer-
sal Design fields. By examining existing literature, our focus is on extracting insights and
methodologies that create immersive VR experiences whilst also considerate of accessibility
and UD topics. The presented projects are divided into two sections, research settings and
playable experiences.
4.1
Research settings
Virtual Scenario Responder
To demonstrate the efficacy of using VR to determine quality of interaction with architectural
aspects, researchers at the Royal Danish Academy for Architecture, Design, and Conservation
(KADK), have conducted a series of studies. The output has been the research project and
tool Virtual Scenario Responder (VSR). VSR is an interface that converts digital 3D models
into VE’s to create a sensation of immersion in imaginary architectural spaces, that is not
thought to be achievable through traditional means of representation. Automatic logging of
participant actions and verbal evaluations are captured by the system and transformed into
feedback reports, allowing evaluation of the architectural aspects of the space [34].
The paper The Cognitive Experience of Architecture in Real-Life and Virtual Reality
details results on this topic through use of the VSR tool. By comparing how participants
completed and evaluated tasks in the same architectural setting (two similar auditoriums were
used) but different visual representations, three virtual and one physical representation, dif-
ferences in perception and experience could be determined.
Virtual scenarios included a
low resolution model, a high resolution model, and a laser scanned point-cloud represen-
tation. Participants evaluated their experience before, during, and after completion using
33
==PAGE:36==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
surveys for measures including cognitive load, arousal and motivational aspects. Continu-
ous Electroencephalography (EEG) recording of each participant corroborated the emotional
and cognitive responses derived from survey material. Results indicated that both low- and
high-resolution models were comparable to the physical room in terms of reported presence
and emotional state, although had increased cognitive load. The laser scan representation
required increased cognitive processing and reported the highest emotional intensity, making
it the least comparable to the physical room [35].
The VSR tool also included a wheelchair based movement method, which designers used to
evaluate a real architectural case in order to quantify the spatial experience. Results from
this simulation are concluded to have made changes to the architectural project, but no direct
results are referenced in the paper [34]. Transferable aspects from the research include several
quantitative evaluation metrics from within the simulator, such as eye-tracking, movement,
and collision, which may be relevant in determining the quality of UD solutions and not
simply architectural qualities. It also indicates that using VR technology, in order to deter-
mine qualities regarding the built environment from the perspective of disabled persons, is
a viable approach. Through a meeting with the creators of VSR, we had the opportunity to
experience the three virtual representations of the test space and receive guidance regarding
this project. Notes from the meeting are summaries in appendix B.
Advanced control of robotics for telepresence
Ongoing research, conducted by a mix of fellow students and academics from the Department
of Management Engineering at DTU, has investigated the viability and utility of telepresence
robots using gaze, head-, or hand-movement. These topics are closely related to accessibility,
as they allow non-mobile users to navigate new environments through the use of HMD’s
and Virtual Reality Simulators.
A doctoral thesis, titled Gaze controlled Telepresence:
Accessibility, Training and Evaluation, presented by a contributing member of the research,
34
==PAGE:37==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
references the large body of work and presents relevant findings and evaluation methods
applicable to this project [36].
The Ph.D. thesis specifically explores the use of gaze-controlled telepresence for individuals
with motor disabilities, leveraging recent advancements in robotics, and emphasizes how the
application of this technology enhances accessibility for those unable to use traditional con-
trols. Through empirical studies and a systematic literature review, the thesis highlights the
viability and potential benefits of gaze-controlled telerobots. It introduces a novel method
for measuring situational awareness, emphasizing the technology’s effectiveness and potential
impact on various aspects of users’ lives, as confirmed in a field study at a care home. Find-
ings also show that training through VR provides a measurable benefit to real-life practice
by decreasing level completion times [36]. Further highlighting the importance of allowing
participants to reach flow state for optimal results.
The thesis presents a few interesting measures, both qualitative and quantitative, used
throughout the project to elicit participant responses.
Qualitative measures consisted of
recorded video from the physical and simulated test environments, alongside audio and writ-
ten feedback from participants during post-trial interviews.
Quantitative data included;
several types of log data, both from the telerobot itself (such as spatial position and veloc-
ity), and from the User Interface (such as response times to questionnaires, and the related
responses). Furthermore, measures such as the NASA Task Load Index (NASA-TLX), and
Self-Assessment-Manikin (SAM), were used to determine mental load and emotion using nu-
merical and ordinal scales. NASA-TLX is widely accepted as it consistently shows strong
reliability, good user acceptance, and low variance between participants [37]. Lastly, a pres-
ence questionnaire, akin to those described in (Sec. 3.2), was used to rate the feeling of
presence using several categories of question [36].
Findings from the thesis indicate that
collecting a broad spectrum of data, gathered with the least intrusion possible, is preferable.
35
==PAGE:38==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
Route planning
A typical approach to evaluating interactions between disabled persons and the built environ-
ment, is using algorithms to optimize and plan routes (i.e. moving from A to B) for a given
disability. But even through careful planning, narrow passages like door openings and level
differences can be difficult to avoid entirely. So does implementation of computer optimized
routes actually help minimize the amount of obstructions encountered? One challenge is that
the “existence of accessibility barriers is not known in advance, even for permanent barriers
that are often a longstanding feature of the local landscape.” [38]. This is very much the
case in the built environment, where compromises between accessibility, indoor climate etc.
are performed to create a cohesive building. Route planning and optimization approaches
focus on minimizing the “inevitable” barriers that individuals face, rather than eliminating
them by reason of making the best of existing spaces not designed for universal use [38]. Our
project aims to provide insights into what aspects of an interaction with a specific barrier are
vital, and thus how we can design to avoid prospective barriers. Whilst acknowledging that
existing spaces pose challenges, and that in some cases optimization rather than new design
is necessary.
Simulating Disabilities
Simulating disabilities is a complex challenge, as it navigates a delicate balance between pro-
viding valuable insights into the experiences of individuals with disabilities and the potential
perpetuation of ableism. A common critique amongst disability advocates and disabled indi-
viduals is that “simulation is a common but misguided approach to invoking empathy” [39]
and unable to capture emotional aspects of a disability. Disabled individuals are not able to
take their disability on or off, and their entire life has shaped their experience. A simulation
cannot emulate emotional baggage, chronic pain, or fatigue [40].
36
==PAGE:39==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
Meta review of studies investigating the effects of mobility disability simulation on able-
bodied attitudes towards disabled individuals recommends either discontinuation or signif-
icant reform of these programs [41].
The review identified that disability simulation can
enforce “negative” and undesirable emotions toward disabled persons if measures were not
actively taken to ensure adequate debriefing of participants to recognize and process emo-
tional responses to the unfamiliar experiences. Building new and less ableist beliefs requires
time, both during and post simulation. Programs shall frame participant’s attention toward
causes and manifestations of inaccessibility, the barriers disabled individuals experience are
not a result of their “impairment status” but rather the cause of it [41].
The reviewed studies aim to improve able-bodied persons attitudes towards people with
disabilities. This is not the primary objective of the present project, which instead concerns
itself with deriving what factors govern the experiential aspects of interactions. We are aware
of the inherent difficulties in employing able-bodied individuals to produce interaction data,
but do not aim to change and evaluate the effect of the simulator on participant attitudes.
Considering these sentiments, we postulate that a validated simulator may achieve sufficient
replication of purely physical experiences to allow data collection.
4.2
Playable experiences
GazeIT Whee'll Power
A project, sponsored by the Department of Management Engineering at DTU under the
leadership of Professor John Paulin Hansen, is one example of a playable game experience.
The aim of the project was to provide individuals without disabilities the opportunity to
experience wheelchair-based navigation in a virtual setting. Simultaneously, the underlying
wheel-chair based control interface developed as a proof-of-concept, had the potential to
empower individuals with disabilities, allowing them to employ their own wheelchair as a
37
==PAGE:40==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
controller for engaging in virtual gaming experiences.
To demonstrate the functionality
of this interface, a game comprising four concise levels was developed. Within this game,
players find themselves situated within a virtual environment while seated in a wheelchair,
either through the physical wheelchair control system developed, or by using the controllers
associated with the VR system (Fig. 3) [42].
Figure 3: Interface to VE (right), and view from inside the VE (left). Images courtesy of
GazeIT lab [42].
The scenarios represent three urban settings and require players to navigate a confined portion
of the cityscape. The primary objective is to crash into, and thereby destroy, illegally parked
bicycles while avoiding collisions with vehicular traffic.
Completion of these three levels
culminated in the player’s acquisition of a luxury apartment, within which the task was to
locate multiple diamonds to conclude the game. After completing the game, players received
a summary of their performance, including metrics such as the number of bicycles destroyed
and a record of collisions between the player and the virtual world.
Initial setup (using a VR headset but seated in a normal chair with armrests) is straight
forward, but testing of the game lead to immediate VR sickness, as experienced by the
present authors. Possible reasons may include the low frame rate, coupled with the jittery
38
==PAGE:41==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
environment, and harsh movement in the simulated wheelchair. The project demonstrates
that despite mobility issues, individuals are still able to participate and use simulated expe-
riences. Additionally, it highlights how important movement and programming of the VE is
with regard to ensuring participants are not ill during the experience. Feasibly, the physical
setup of this project could be a relevant avenue to pursue as an alternative to employing the
interaction interfaces of commercial VR systems.
Wake
Another playable experience is a project created in collaboration between students from the
University of South Wales and game studio Tiny Rebel Games. The result of the project is a
short demo game with limited scope and story, but instead implements convincing wheelchair
interaction and movement. The design brief for the project was “We’re Sorry to Inform
You That It’s The End of The World”. Rules for the project specified a 10-minute long
game-play experience, that took place within a room and ended with some sort of apocalypse.
Starting the game, players find themselves situated on a porch outside a cabin, seated in a
wheelchair controlled by the VR system. The objective of the game is to navigate through
the cabin and interact with the virtual environment to find clues as to why they are in a
wheelchair at this location (Fig. 4) [43].
In comparison to the GazeIT simulator, the testing did not lead to any kind of VR sickness of
any kind during play. Even after multiple play-throughs of the game, no drops in framerate
or notable screen jitter within the HMD was encountered, leading to a more immersive
perception of the virtual environment. Movement of the wheelchair saw the user place their
hands in proximity of the virtual wheels, highlighting them in red, (see fig. 4), when the
hands were placed close enough to interact. By then grabbing each wheel through the push of
a button on the VR controller, the player was able to impart motion by swinging their arms
forward or back. This physical behaviour and real world resemblance of hand placement,
39
==PAGE:42==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
played a significant role in creating a more natural and fluid navigation through the VE. The
project shows the importance of a smooth virtual environment, and how a close resemblance
to physical behaviour is effective in creating a sense of immersion.
Figure 4: Snapshot of the VE showing the physics based wheelchair, and interface to the VE
(top left). Images courtesy of USW’s demo video of in-game simulation [43]
40
==PAGE:43==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
Hot Potato VR
This game was produced as a part of the thesis Virtually There: An Exploration of Im-
mersive Experiences for the Blind and Visually Impaired [44], with the aim of exploring
how people with visual impairments can experience immersion, presence and flow through
the use of VR. The project questions the use of VR, seen only as a visual tool for people
without any visual reduction, and therefore raises the question:
Developers are mostly concerned with the visuals, and this is of course only natural since
96% of the world’s population, sight is our most dominant sense. But what about all the
other senses, like audio and touch? And what about the last 4% of the population? Can
people who are visually impaired even use VR? And why not?
G. T. Dalsgaard [45]
When a person is visually impaired, their reliance on other human senses becomes crucial for
navigating and experiencing the world. The loss of sight often leads to a heightened awareness
and sharpening of the remaining senses, such as hearing. Without the distraction of visual
stimuli, blind and visually impaired individuals, often develop a keen sense of hearing. Sounds
gathered from their surroundings, such as the direction of footsteps, traffic patterns, or the
rustling of leaves, allows them to create mental soundscapes of their environment [46]. Also,
the sense of touch becomes a primary component regarding interaction and exploration.
Information about object size, texture, and context can thus be revealed through touch.
The game is an alternate take on the children’s party game Hot Potato, where players gather
in a circle and toss a small object randomly between each other whilst music is played. The
participant holding the object when the music stops is ejected from the game. The objective
within Hot Potato VR is to use audio cues to catch a ball falling from the ceiling and throw
it to an imaginary person hidden by a green wall. Music coming from the other side of the
wall indicates the direction for the ball to be thrown. The ball will fall randomly from one
41
==PAGE:44==
4
RELATED WORK AND CURRENT RESEARCH LANDSCAPE
of twelve cubes placed in the ceiling, with sound hinting to the direction and distance of
the ball for the player to catch. Because the game has been developed as a prototype and
not published, we have not been able to experience it personally. But it emphasizes that to
be fully immersed within VR, more than just the visual aspect is required. Projects, using
haptic feedback, together with sound cues, have been tested as a way of navigating inside
a virtual environment [47]. Here the user is equipped with a cane, that physically stops or
vibrates when hitting virtual elements or dots on the floor, together with playing different
sounds depending on the imaginary object it is hitting.
In summary, we have gained several important insights through literature review and revi-
sion of prior analogous projects. A key takeaway is several existing projects combine VR
and UD concepts, but the majority do not assess the quality of design. They are more often
experiential, i.e. used to highlight to able-bodied people the experience of disability or creat-
ing virtual environments for a specific group of people. The different projects also underline
how important a smooth visual interface is to prevent VR sickness, and suggest a number
of relevant evaluation methods.
Importantly, they stress that VR is not simply a visual
experience, but that audio and touch play a major role in the overall immersive experience.
Virtual Experiences are not only relevant for physical, mobility-related disabilities, but are
a tool relevant for all groups regardless of ability.
42
==PAGE:45==
Part II
Implementation
Part II focuses on the implementation of the immersive, interactive simulator, specifically
tailored to the interaction of portals and the target demographic identified as wheelchair users.
The implementation follows the Design Science Research methodology as well as proposing
a project specific method for the development of the simulator. This part entails detailed
description of project scope, creation of simulator software, and the process of extracting
validated results for further investigation.
43
==PAGE:46==
5
METHODOLOGY
5
Methodology
The development of an immersive simulator enabling designers to craft interactive scenarios
that quantify UD solution efficiencies is implemented following the Design Science Research
Methodology (DSRM). This method seeks to enhance technology and science knowledge
bases via the creation of an innovative artifact, that can solve or improve upon an identified
problem within the environment [48]. Rooted in the fusion of design and scientific principles,
DSRM offers a structured framework for solving real-world challenges through the systematic
development and evaluation of artefacts. The DSRM process consists of the six steps shown
below (Fig. 5), starting from the overall problem definition, through to the definition of
solution objectives, the development of the artifact itself, demonstration of the solution,
evaluation, and finally to communication of findings.
Figure 5: The six steps of the Design Science Research Methodology process according to K.
Peffers and T. Tuunanen [49]
Within the DSR Methodology, the term design knowledge, is introduced. This refers to the
insights, principles, and expertise that guide the creation and development of innovative arte-
facts. Design knowledge encompasses both tacit and explicit knowledge held by researchers,
designers, and practitioners involved in the design process, and plays a crucial role in shaping
decision-making processes. The following sections will elaborate on each step of the DSRM
44
==PAGE:47==
5
METHODOLOGY
in detail, and seek to document the design knowledge acquired throughout the project. For
each step of the DSR methodology, references are made to subsequent sections elaborating
on how the method has been applied to this project.
Problem Identification
Problem identification requires the practitioner to identify a real-world problem or oppor-
tunity for improvement over current methods in a given field [48]. As presented during the
literature review, current practices regarding accessible design are at a crossroads between
rule-based and function-based approaches. We recognize that when practising Leave No One
Behind, designers must be better equipped to create solutions that consider human diver-
sity, whilst we from a regulatory perspective are still able to ensure the quality of our built
environment. Simply put, how can we quantify Universal Design efficiencies so that we may
be able to meet the needs of a diverse population?
Defining Solution Objectives
Objectives are derived from the problem identification and can be used as key metrics in
evaluating the performance of the product [48]. The objectives of the project, given the
identified problem and current best practices within the industry as described in (Sec. 2.2),
are defined as follows:
1. Propose a framework for creating a tool to evaluate UD efficiencies related to persons
with diverse abilities.
2. Create an immersive tool to provide designers with a method for quantifying the effi-
ciency and quality of their design.
3. Use statistical modelling to derive comprehensive insights regarding user interaction
and experience.
45
==PAGE:48==
5
METHODOLOGY
Design and Development
During this stage, a preliminary design for the artifact should be produced. This activity
involves creating a novel system, model, determining the desired functionality or architecture,
and lastly the production of the artifact itself [48].
To establish a solution (artifact) that aligns with the objectives defined above, we have
proposed both a method for creating an immersive simulator and developed a proof-of-concept
version. The method details a generic approach, and is presented here. Each step references
relevant work from the development of the simulator, presented elsewhere in the report. The
method is evaluated upon completion of the simulator and discussed in (Sec.
14).
The
proposed method consists of five steps:
1. Defining the scope of which human physicality or behaviour to model against an inter-
action within the built environment
2. Construction of the simulator program itself following the scoped specifications
3. Validation of the simulator by experts, either academic or with lived expertise
4. Collection of qualitative and measurable data through repeated tests of a sample pop-
ulation
5. Statistical analysis of gathered results and modelling of relationships to determine a
formula for predicting the scoped interaction
The method is visualized below (Fig. 6). Note that the validation of the simulator is intended
to be an iterative process, promoting continuous improvement until there is a sufficient match
between the simulator and lived reality of the target demographic.
46
==PAGE:49==
5
METHODOLOGY
Figure 6: Proposed five-step method for development of an immersive simulator to quantify
UD efficiencies
The decisions made in the development of the simulator are clarified in sections titled relative
to the step of the method they reference, starting with Scope Definition (Sec. 6), followed by
Construction (Sec. 7), Validation (Sec. 8, Data Collection (Sec. 9), through to Relationship
Modelling in (Sec. 10).
Demonstration
This step is where the created artifact is exposed, and it is shown how it addresses the
identified problem to fulfil the defined objectives [48]. Given the inherently iterative nature
of developing digital solutions, as well as the design science research methodology, we have
conducted several iterations to determine the robustness and quality of simulator functions
during development. The proposed simulator development method also includes demonstra-
tion, firstly to an advisory group, and then to a broader group of civil engineering students
and professionals as the sample population. The visual environment within which all portals
types are tested is shown below (Fig. 7).
47
==PAGE:50==
5
METHODOLOGY
Figure 7: Snapshot of the starting area from an arbitrary room within the VE of the simu-
lation tool. The wheelchair user is the “body” of the participant during play.
Evaluation
Evaluation includes a comparison of the results gathered during demonstration activities to
the objectives defined above, but may also involve feedback from external sources, qualitative
surveys or comparing results against quantitative measures. Based on the assessment results
in the evaluation step, earlier steps may be revisited to improve the developed artifact [48].
As mentioned above, internal demonstrations concerning the simulator adequacy are contin-
uously evaluated during the development of the artifact. Whereas the proposed method is
only evaluated at the completion of the simulator and after possible relationships are inves-
tigated (Sec. 13). The demonstration to external parties, consisting of students and profes-
sionals in the Civil Engineering sphere, allowed us to gather the required experiential and
behavioural data to determine what relationships govern interaction quality. Additionally,
test participants commented on how they experienced greater understanding, and increased
48
==PAGE:51==
5
METHODOLOGY
consideration for designing for the target demographic in future (Sec. 12.1.2). Regarding
evaluations from the advisory group, they provided vital knowledge and ultimately enabled
us to ensure the quality of the immersive simulator (Sec. 11.2 or see appendix G and H).
Communication and Conclusion
The final step summarizes key findings, and implications of the research before disseminating
this knowledge to appropriate academic or professional audiences through a variety of chan-
nels [48]. This paper serves as the primary communicative channel of the findings produced.
Conclusions regarding the efficacy in using an immersive simulator, and whether possible to
quantify UD efficiencies based on results produced by this artifact, are presented in (Sec.
15).
49
==PAGE:52==
6
DEFINING SCOPE OF PROJECT
6
Defining scope of project
Following the DSR Methodology, we now begin to design and develop the proposed artifact.
To this end, we adhere to the proposed method when developing an immersive simulator
with the goal of quantifying design efficiencies. The first step in this method involves scoping
the simulator and defining the framework within which our simulator can be constructed.
The resulting artefact, produced by the identified method, shall be a piece of software capable
of entering into the design phase of a building project, and evaluating the efficiency of a given
interaction between building and user. For proof-of-concept we have made two deliberate
restrictions, firstly that only interaction against portals (defined as doorway, door, or divider
between rooms) is explored, and secondly that the simulator is limited to demonstrating one
type of disability. If the proof of concept shows promising results, we imagine the tool can be
extended to cover a wider range of interactions in modern building design, for a wider range
of human ability.
As explained in (Sec. 2.1.3), disabilities can be classified using 7 distinct categories, of which
the wheelchair class has been chosen for this project because many existing accessibility
regulations relate primarily to mobility [3]. Therefore, our proposed tool allows for validation
of, and comparison to already accepted design regulations. Raising the question as to what
actual “quality” design is, and whether it exists within the regulations.
An advisory panel of experts will be introduced to validate the overall “correctness” of the
simulator and the interaction with the portal designs defined in (Sec. 6.1). For the actual data
collection, a mixture of civil engineering students from DTU and industry professionals will be
used as test subjects. Their educational background is useful for two reasons, firstly, it means
that the test pool subjects have basic knowledge regarding the design of built environments
and what portal types that are regularly encountered. Secondly, it allows us to receive verbal
evaluation of the simulator from prospective users that may eventually use methods such as
50
==PAGE:53==
6
DEFINING SCOPE OF PROJECT
the one proposed. Additionally, the sample pool does not differentiate whether participants
are able-bodied or not, as the method presumes a validated simulator produces valid results
regardless of the user’s ability. In summary, the simulator must therefore deliver an immersive
experience that accurately reflects the physical experience of navigating a wheelchair whilst
interacting with various portal designs.
6.1
Portals
With the general scope of the simulator defined, a population of 10 portals is created to com-
pare experiential ratings and to determine any difference in efficiency. We have designed the
included portals to represent what we believe are the most commonly used manual door types
in the built environment. The naming of each portal describes its properties. Names are cre-
ated from a series of identifiers structured as GridSize_HandleType_HingeSide_Opening-
Type_Modifiers. The GridSize moniker describes the size of the door, and has been lim-
ited to three options.
The first M8x21 equalling a 725×2040 mm door leaf, the second
M10x21 a 925×2040 mm door leaf (the most common door size), and lastly M14x21 meaning
a 1325×2040 mm door leaf.
For HandleType several options have been chosen, H800 a lever style handle at 800 mm above
the floor plane, H1000 a lever style handle at 1000 mm of elevation, H1200 a lever style
handle at 1200 mm, and HBAR a pull or recess bar type handle of length 1600 mm centred at
1000 mm. The identifier HingeSide describes which side of the door jamb is hinged, thereby
determining the side which the door opens against. There are two options, HH for hinges along
the right jamb, and VH for hinges along the left jamb. Similarly, OpeningType describes which
direction the portal opens, either IND into the posterior room away from the player, or UD into
the anterior room and towards the player. A third option, SLD, allows for sliding door that
move either from left to right, or right to left, specified by HH or VH respectively. Lastly, the
Modifier space allows for any unique modifications to be made to a portal. Currently, only
51
==PAGE:54==
6
DEFINING SCOPE OF PROJECT
SC is defined, which refers to a self-closing mechanism being mounted to the door, causing
it to automatically shut should it not be held open. The 10 door variations are summarized
below (Tab. 1) and are shown graphically on (Fig 37) in appendix C.
Portal
Description
M10x21_H1000_HH_IND
Size 925×2040 mm with lever style handle at 1000 mm eleva-
tion opening away from the player and hinged along right jamb.
M10x21_H1000_VH_IND
Size 925×2040 mm with lever style handle at 1000 mm eleva-
tion opening away from the player and hinged along left jamb.
M10x21_H1000_HH_UD
Size 925×2040 mm with lever style handle at 1000 mm eleva-
tion opening towards the player and hinged along right jamb.
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD
Size 925×2040 mm with pull bar style handle opening towards
the player and hinged along right jamb.
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC
Size 925×2040 mm with pull bar style handle opening towards
the player and hinged along right jamb. Self-closing.
M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD
Size 925×2040 mm with recessed pull bar style handle, and
slides from left to right.
M14x21_H1000_HH_IND
Size 1325×2040 mm with lever style handle at 1000 mm eleva-
tion opening away from the player and hinged along right jamb.
M8x21_H1000_HH_IND
Size 725×2040 mm with lever style handle at 1000 mm eleva-
tion opening away from the player and hinged along right jamb.
M10x21_H800_HH_IND
Size 925×2040 mm with lever style handle at 800 mm elevation
opening away from the player and hinged along right jamb.
M10x21_H1200_HH_IND
Size 925×2040 mm with lever style handle at 1200 mm eleva-
tion opening away from the player and hinged along right jamb.
Table 1: Morphology overview of portal variations included in project.
52
==PAGE:55==
6
DEFINING SCOPE OF PROJECT
6.2
Test environment
For the portals to be tested appropriately, they must exist within a relatable context for
participants to interact with. This environment is henceforth referred to as a level. A level
containing 10 rooms with the exact same layout, dimensions, and choice of materials is
introduced, where the only independent variable across rooms, is the design of the portal.
This way, we are able to test and compare the different designs shown in (Tab. 1). Each
individual room consist of two parts of equal size (8×12 m), separated by a wall, where
each portal design is placed in the centre. Two volumetric boxes, invisible to the user, are
placed and used to activate and track participant behaviour during the simulation. Two
lines on the floor marked “Start line” and “Finish line” are the only context clues motivating
the participants to move through the room. The placement of the tracking volumes and the
lines are visualized on (Fig. 8). What information and data is produced inside the “Tracking
volume” is explained in (Sec. 9.2).
Figure 8: Plan drawing of the testing environment for portal M10x21_H1000_HH_IND indicat-
ing essential areas of the room.
53
==PAGE:56==
6
DEFINING SCOPE OF PROJECT
The room is constructed, so the test participants spawn directly in line with the door, ensuring
that the angle of approach is equal for every type of door. When a participant crosses the
“Finish line”, movement controls are disabled and an evaluation scheme is presented in front
of them. Details on which evaluation scheme, and why it has been chosen, are presented
in (Sec. 9.1.1). When the participants have evaluated their experience and submitted their
answers, they are instantly moved to the spawn point of the next room.
This sequence
continues until all 10 doors have been passed and evaluated. Submission of the evaluation
in the last room sees the simulation ending. The order in which participants are directed
between rooms is random. This is intentional, and is implemented to prevent any unintended
bias and ensure neutral assessment in the rating of a room, either to due to a particularly
good or bad experience in the preceding room. This approach mitigates the risk of potential
confounding variables that could arise if the teleportation sequence followed a predetermined
pattern, thereby enhancing the reliability and validity of the experimental design [50]. The
order in which the participants are guided through the simulator can be found in appendix
J.
54
==PAGE:57==
7
SIMULATOR CONSTRUCTION
7
Simulator construction
With the framework for the simulator defined, the software itself is developed. The proof-
of-concept simulator was implemented as a custom project file using the game engine Unreal
Engine 5 (UE5) and the Meta Quest 2 VR system. Unreal Engine provides common function-
ality that is used to create both professional and entertainment software. Its key features are
its accessible programming interface, wide variety of integration’s, class leading 3D graphics
rendering, and handling of complex geometries and large models. Importantly, it supports
development for virtual reality devices with the inclusion of encapsulated logic for basic VR
functionality allowing us to craft a robust, immersive simulator [51]. The following section
will introduce the main concepts of the development platform and technical aspect of the sim-
ulator construction. The details of interaction between custom scripts, interaction methods,
and movement controls within the engine are presented, together with a brief introduction
to the used VR system. The executable file (standalone program) and files required to con-
struct the simulator are provided in the zip-folder PortalSimulator.zip, attached to this
report. The structure of the folder can be seen in appendix F.
7.1
VR system
The VR system used for the project is the Oculus software by Meta, specifically the Meta
Quest 2 VR headset. The system consists of a VR headset (HMD), and a right- and left-
hand controller. It functions either as a stand-alone system or in connection with a computer
through the proprietary Oculus software. Benefits of this system include flexible use as the
headset and the controllers are solely responsible for tracking their location in 3D space
and translating this to a virtual space so that no additional sensors are needed [52]. The
simulator can be ported to most similar VR systems with ease, but has not been tested with
other systems. Interaction between the system and the simulator is explained in appendix E.
55
==PAGE:58==
7
SIMULATOR CONSTRUCTION
7.2
UE5 implementation
When the users are introduced to the simulator, they are presented with one coherent expe-
rience in the form of the test environment, or “level” in UE terminology. Behind this visual
representation is a complex flow of data between different programmatic building blocks,
covering everything from data collection, to interaction logic. Please refer to appendix D for
a comprehensive description of UE5 terminology. For this case study, Unreal Engine version
5.3.2 has been used.
Figure 9: UE5 “sandbox” environment consisting of the modelling window (middle), a content
browser (bottom) and the item/settings panel (right).
There are two ways of creating content in Unreal Engine, one is similar to the node-based
programming that exists in program extensions like Grasshopper for Rhino and Dynamo for
Revit, which are both common parametric programs/extensions used within Architecture,
Engineering, and Construction (AEC). Here, every node is a small container for code that
56
==PAGE:59==
7
SIMULATOR CONSTRUCTION
performs a specific function, and when connected together in a network they become a high
level function called a “Blueprint Visual Script”. The other part of Unreal Engine works like
a large “sandbox” for everything concerning real-time 3D creation. This includes geometry,
lighting, atmosphere etc. (Fig. 9).
Figure 10: UE5 Blueprint environment of the VR PAWN consisting of a component/variable
tab (left), programming “canvas” (middle) and settings tab (right).
The complete workflow of the simulator is illustrated by (Fig. 11), and visualizes the direction
of information flow during the simulation. The level (purple bar) includes both visual and
functional parts that create the immersive universe of the simulator. The underlying LEVEL -
BLUEPRINT consolidates all the functionality implemented in the rest of the program so that
it may be presented to the player through the immersive universe. The blueprint working
environment from within UE5 can be seen on (Fig. 10).
57
==PAGE:60==
7
SIMULATOR CONSTRUCTION
Figure 11: Information flow between the key programmatic components of the simulation
tool.
The simulation tool consists of eight different blueprint types whose interactions are described
briefly here. The internal construction of the four most comprehensive custom blueprints,
LEVEL, VR PAWN, BP_DOOR and WIDGETS, is described in appendix E.
Firstly, the two widget blueprints combine both visual and programmatic aspects. The MENU
WIDGET is only used as a developer tool for moving between the familiarization level, explained
in (Sec. 8), and the testing environment. It also provides the possibility to calibrate the VR
setup, if for some reason the player becomes misaligned with the in-game visuals. The other
widget-blueprint combination, called SAM WIDGET, is used in the evaluation process performed
by the participants at the end of each room (Sec. 9.1.1). When the evaluation is submitted
via a button on the widget, the evaluation results from the room in question are saved within
the LEVEL - BLUEPRINT and information is sent to the TELEPORT blueprint to change the
location of the in-game character from one room to another. By teleporting the participants
58
==PAGE:61==
7
SIMULATOR CONSTRUCTION
between the rooms, rather than moving through the rooms one by one, we ensure that the
different portal designs are tested in a random order, as detailed in (Sec. 6.2).
More complex is the relation between the blueprint called BP_DOOR, which covers 10 unique
blueprints created for each portal type, the two grab blueprints called GRAB and VRGRAB_INT-
ERFACE, and the blueprint called VR PAWN. Every door blueprint is constructed so that it
represents the actual physical behaviour, and in combination with the grab interface, makes
for an interaction process that closely resembles a real world experience. The VR PAWN can,
in simplified terms, be seen as the user’s body that they manoeuvre around the environment.
This means that a close relationship between the VR PAWN and the door blueprints is essential
to ensure an immersive experience. A stream of constant information is sent between these
blueprints while the simulator is running, where previously mentioned parts of the script are
only activated upon requests made by these key blueprints.
59
==PAGE:62==
8
SIMULATOR VALIDATION
8
Simulator Validation
Integral to the success of both simulator and method, is the validation by academic experts
and persons with lived expertise from the target demographic. The validation step in the
proposed method relates to both the Demonstration and Evaluation of the adopted DSR
methodology.
The validation and testing of the simulator are performed independently of one another, and
explicitly used for only their defined purpose. The chosen procedures are similar for both,
only differing in that no data is collected during simulation for the advisory group. Instead,
a qualitative evaluation session, performed during simulation, prompting their opinions re-
garding the experience itself is conducted. Due to time constraints, the validation has been
performed only after procuring results from the test group. Resulting comments from the ad-
visory group are not implemented in the simulator, but instead used to discuss the accuracy
of data throughout the result processing and modelling process. Eventual major discrepan-
cies identified by the advisory group shall naturally be discussed during the evaluation of
method and simulator. Ultimately, the scope of this project is not to present the perfect
simulator for door interaction, but to showcase that an immersive VR based software, can
be a valuable design tool in the wider adoption of UD.
Actual validation was facilitated by the nationwide organization Rygmarvskadede i Danmark
(RYK). RYK is a Danish organization whose focus is on improving the life of those affected
by a spinal cord injuries, through research towards more effective treatment, and creation of
a fulfilling social life [53]. The organization assembled an advisory group consisting of two
experienced wheelchair users, with a combined 38 years of experience, who were an invaluable
asset in ensuring the correctness of the simulated experience. Results from the validation are
summarized in (Sec. 11.2), and included in full in appendix G and H.
60
==PAGE:63==
8
SIMULATOR VALIDATION
As an additional consideration with respect to the validity of results, all participants are
presented with an initial “familiarization level” before being permitted to complete the sim-
ulation levels. Here, they are allowed to familiarize themselves with using a VR simulator,
control schemes for interacting and moving about, and practice interacting with doors. No
data is tracked during this stage, and no time-limit is enforced. We intend for this measure
to ensure a minimum of skill for all participants. The design of the familiarization level is
shown on (Fig. 12).
Figure 12: Plan drawing of the simulator familiarization level presented to participants prior
to testing.
The familiarization level is implemented in the same UE based program file as the simulator
itself, however as it does not contain any unique functionality, no mention of its construction
is made.
Note, the area marked “Familiarization level complete” does not automatically
transfer a test subject into the simulation levels. It is only upon their confirmation that they
feel comfortable using the simulator that the testing proceeds.
61
==PAGE:64==
9
DATA COLLECTION
9
Data collection
Post validation of the simulator, we move to collect the sample data used to determine
relationships between user experience and design quality. The proposed method requires a
minimum of two data categories, a qualitative measure to determine quality of experiential
aspects, and sensor based measures to determine physical actions/reactions. Depending on
the defined scope, different approaches to how, and what information is recorded for these
two categories may vary. Choices concerning evaluation method are rooted in insights gained
from prior projects (Sec. 4) and evaluation methods suggested during (Sec. 3).
Figure 13: Flow-diagram depicting what, and when, information from a simulation run is
saved. Legend indicates the source of information. Grey lines indicate out-of-scope methods
for data collection.
62
==PAGE:65==
9
DATA COLLECTION
The diagram above (Fig. 13) indicates what, and when, data is collected during play. The
dark blue blocks indicate measures of physical reactions that have been used in reviewed
literature (Sec. 4), but are beyond the capabilities of the study. Light blue and green blocks
indicate the qualitative and quantitative measures, respectively. Diamonds indicate a gate
where data is only logged after a specific event occurs, e.g.
for collisions only after the
player collides with another object does information get saved. In contrast, the remaining
parameters are simply logged continuously at time intervals.
9.1
Qualitative data
This part introduces two different methods to obtain qualitative results referencing par-
ticipant experience.
The first measures the participant’s emotional state using the Self-
Assessment-Manikin method also employed by [36] where ratings are given using an ordinal
scale. The second method allows the user to formulate thoughts on their preferred door de-
sign, using a simple digital tool. The different door designs allow us to verify the connection
between physical actions and perceived design ideals.
9.1.1
SAM
The quality of design can be difficult to objectively quantify, as perception is very individual.
Through empirical work in the field of psychology, it has been confirmed that “… pleasure,
arousal, and dominance are pervasive in organizing human judgments for a wide range
of perceptual and symbolic stimuli.”
[54].
Developed by Bradley and Lang, the Self-
Assessment-Manikin (SAM), conceptualizes these three concepts and builds upon the older
method of semantic differential (which uses two antonym words to create a rating scale).
The SAM is presented as a questionnaire consisting of several pictograms in the three different
categories. It is used to measure emotional response when exposed to an object or event.
63
==PAGE:66==
9
DATA COLLECTION
Each category consists of five stylized images, creating a five-point scale, where participants
must select an image in each row representative of their state.
Figure 14: The Self-Assessment-Manikin’s three pictogram scales with associated semantic
descriptions of the scale extremes.
A major benefit of using pictograms is the inclusive nature, due to their non-verbal structure
and language independence, nor are participants required to determine nuances of the words
associated with the scale. The system is also chosen for the simplicity so that it creates the
least possible disturbance within the simulator, thereby not interrupting participant flow.
This is in opposition to alternate evaluation techniques, which often consist of several written
questions for each component [31]. The ranking system is created, so the first pictogram in
each row constitutes a rating of 1, the second pictogram a 2 and so on. A representation of
the self-assessment manikin is shown above (Fig. 14). The NASA-TLX subjective assessment
tool is another viable choice due to its robust nature [37].
64
==PAGE:67==
9
DATA COLLECTION
We have declined to use this method due to its written essence and increased interruption of
tasks by addition of two-step process and further rating items.
Comparing this theory to the goals of universal- and inclusive design, we have assumed that a
measure of quality can be determined by these three concepts. In the context of this project;
Pleasure is understood as the degree of happiness or joy experienced when interacting with
the door. Arousal is understood as the degree of stimulus the participants experience, from
calm and relaxed to excited and stimulated.
The last concept, Dominance, is seen as a
measure of control the participants felt they had over the situation. It is likely that the three
components correlate in their rating of a given portal. If there are no marked differences
between components, the most reliable (i.e. has the smallest standard deviation) will be
used.
9.1.2
Preferred Design
A different approach to collecting subjective data, is by introducing a novel task asking
participants to design their preferred door. This task is performed after the participants
have completed the simulator experience, to provide context for the design task. The task
consist of the participants moving multiple numerical sliders and activating boolean toggles
that describe parameters relevant for different door designs. We introduce some limitations
in the tool itself regarding design of the door; the height of the door is fixed at 2100 mm
and the maximum allowed width of the door is set to 2000 mm. This is assumed to be a fair
limitation with regard to an actual door design. The two different sliders and three different
toggles the user is able to interact with are shown below (Fig. 15). The tool saves the current
state of each variable to a database when participants indicate they are satisfied.
Simultaneously with the participants’ interaction with the different sliders and toggles, a
plan- and section drawing is generated to give the user a preview of the door which they are
“designing”. The front view and section drawing are shown on the bottom half of (Fig. 15).
65
==PAGE:68==
9
DATA COLLECTION
It is indicated by the tool, that the initial direction of approach to the door is from below and
upwards. This is done to ensure that participants consider hinge side and opening direction.
Figure 15: Snapshot of the preferred door design task tool as presented digitally to partici-
pants.
66
==PAGE:69==
9
DATA COLLECTION
9.2
Sensor data collection
In regard to quantitative measures from the simulated environment, the gathered data can
be divided into 4 categories, as shown on (Fig. 13). Each category tracks a different aspect
of the player’s digital actions. They are inspired by those employed in the VSR project [34].
The Movement category logs the player’s location in the simulated world, and the Collision
category tracks when the player character collides with another object.
The Eyes/Gaze
category tracks the gaze of the player, simplified to a linear projection from the HMD directly
forwards to the first object that blocks the view. Finally, the Interaction category tracks
the player’s hand movement in 3D space and logs when the player grabs an object.
Category
Component
Description
Data type
LOC
Time
Global time from start play
Float in unit seconds
Location
XYZ coordinate
3D vector in unit cm
Speed
Player velocity
Float in unit cm/s
COL
Object location
XYZ coordinate
3D vector in unit cm
Player location
XYZ coordinate
3D vector in unit cm
Object identity
Name of object in collision
String
GAZ
Time
Global time from start play
Float in unit seconds
HMD location
XYZ coordinate
3D vector in unit cm
Target location
XYZ coordinate
3D vector in unit cm
Target
Name of the object being looked at
String
INT
Time
Global time from start play
Float in unit seconds
Location right
XYZ coordinate right controller
3D vector in unit cm
Location left
XYZ coordinate left controller
3D vector in unit cm
Hand holding
Right/Left to indicate hand used
String
Table 2: Description of information type included in each of the four tracking components
67
==PAGE:70==
9
DATA COLLECTION
The four different abbreviations in (Tab. 2) above, refer to; LOC - the location of the character,
COL - the character’s collisions with objects, GAZ - eye-tracking of the player and INT - the
player’s interaction with the door in question.
These four categories consist of different
tracking components like in-game timestamp, coordinates for both the character, VR headset
and controllers within the simulator. The different data collected within the four categories
is examined and showcased in (Sec. 12.2). Note that the GAZ category does not individually
record each pupil to determine a focal length, and can therefore not be classified as full
eye-tracking. Instead, we use the simplified method suggested by [34].
Using values for wheelchair movements, studies indicate maximum velocities of 1.25 m/s
for daily use [55], it is deemed sufficient to track location every quarter of a second. The
resulting distance between locations becomes at maximum 0.3m. The gaze tracking occurs
every tick of the game engine (i.e. the frame-rate) and may therefore vary slightly depending
on current software performance. This component is logged most frequently, as changes in
vision focus point are only limited by the combined speed of head movement and latency
between headset and game engine. The interaction tracks the controller position every tenth
of a second. This value has been chosen to capture intricacies of hand movement without
generating excessive amounts of data. When participants interact with a portal, it is logged
for the following data point. Collision tracking only occurs when the player collides with
another object in the simulation.
68
==PAGE:71==
10
RELATIONSHIP MODELLING AND FORMULATION
10
Relationship Modelling and Formulation
The key to success is determining relationships between subjective ratings of each portal, as
provided by test participants, and its morphology. In this section, the methods employed in
determining these relationships are defined. With respect to the proposed framework, the
methods suggested here are specific regarding the format and types of data collected and
should therefore be chosen to best fit the given composition of data.
There are two sets of information with which we intend to compare against portal rating, the
first is the sensor data (Sec. 9) logged for each participant during the simulation. Second is
the design of each portal, where design refers to the different combinations of door identifiers
as defined in (Sec. 6) such as width or handle height. As we wish to compare numerical values
(e.g. handle height) to categorical descriptions (e.g. opening direction), we are limited in the
selection of comparative methods. A summary of how data types are classified is presented in
(Fig. 16) and divided into two primary categories; Qualitative, and Quantitative, each with
two subdivisions. Each information set we wish to compare is explained below in relation to
its data types and related analyses.
Figure 16: Definition of data types used to identify what type of statistical analysis is viable.
69
==PAGE:72==
10
RELATIONSHIP MODELLING AND FORMULATION
Data collected through sensor-based methods is used to determine which physical actions or
reactions determine the qualitative rating of a portal. From this data, a number of parameters
are extracted so that they may have their relationship with the experiential scores of the
portals further explored. These parameters, which shall be referred to as proposed KPIs,
are presented in (Sec. 13), in relation to the sensor component they belong to. The choice
of these parameters is influenced by insights gained from literature and comments by the
advisory group, alongside visual inspection of data itself.
One such insight stems from Särkelä et al., who suggests that using entropy theory regarding
movement is beneficial as measures are thus calculated by “using the true occurrence of
information in the data, unlike many other estimators which make assumptions about the
distributional properties of the data.” [29]. Findings from this research also indicate it is
possible to identify and classify movement patterns and how they relate to user experience
in or of the simulated environment. Though it is outside the scope of this project, further
examination of the relation between movement pattern and subjective experience of each
portal may yield interesting results. The study proposed measures of total completion time,
amount of stops, stationary time, and average acceleration.
Entropy measures involved;
location - determined as the likelihood of a participant visiting a given point, turning -
whether a participant used few equal or many different sized turns, and speed - how the
velocity of participants fluctuated over time during the test. These measures of participant
performance, although not directly transferable, have informed the calculation of several
KPIs.
All performance indicators are presented as quantitative-continuous-ratio type values, re-
sulting in a continuous to ordinal relationship to the SAM derived scores. To detect rela-
tionships of this type, literature recommends using the Spearman’s’s rank-order correlation
[56].
Also known as Spearman’s’s rho, this analysis provides a correlation or relatedness
between measures by assessing monotonic relationships, whether linear or not. If no values
70
==PAGE:73==
10
RELATIONSHIP MODELLING AND FORMULATION
in the dataset are repeated, the resulting correlation becomes either +1, indicating a perfect
increasing monotonic trend, and -1 indicating a perfect decreasing monotonic trend. Thus, a
higher value means a stronger relationship between the rating and the KPI. The calculation
is performed using the Spearman’s correlation function, implemented by the Pandas library
for Python [57].
Morphology
Door width (Ratio)
Handle height (Ratio)
Portal names
M8x21_H1000_HH_IND,
M10x21_H1000_HH_IND,
M14x21_H1000_HH_IND
M10x21_H800_HH_IND,
M10x21_H1000_HH_IND,
M10x21_H1200_HH_IND
Morphology
Opening direction (Nominal)
Hinge side (Nominal)
Portal names
M10x21_H1000_HH_IND,
M10x21_H1000_HH_UD
M10x21_H1000_HH_IND,
M10x21_H1000_VH_IND
Morphology
Handle type (Nominal)
Self-closing (Nominal)
Portal names
M10x21_H1000_HH_UD,
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD,
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC
Table 3: Comparison groups for determining relationships between rating and portal mor-
phology
Information relating to the morphology of each portal is modelled against SAM scores using
subsets of the complete portal group, to compare specific variations in design without the
influence of multiple factors. The changes in design and the subset of doors with which they
are investigated are presented in (Tab. 3). The data type for each design variation is also
noted. For this relationship, we wish to compare both nominal, and ratio measures to our
ordinal ratings. Common methods for comparing continuous to ordinal and nominal to
ordinal, such as a point-biserial, and rank-biserial respectively, only allow for two ordinal
levels as standard [56]. Our implementation of SAM has five levels for each scale. If there
are more than two levels, it is possible to encode the ordinal measure (i.e. using dummy
71
==PAGE:74==
10
RELATIONSHIP MODELLING AND FORMULATION
variables) into k number of binary columns where k is the number of levels. The correlation
can then be determined between each new column and the relevant measure. Drawbacks
to this approach stem from the method itself, introducing multiple new variables to the
calculation decreases calculation efficiency [58]. Especially if it is necessary to encode both
the nominal descriptor and ordinal rating. Additionally, resulting scores are not comparable
between these methods.
To efficiently determine a relationship between these measures, we therefore employ a tech-
nique dubbed Predictive Power Score (PPS). This method produces the following, “An asym-
metric data-type-agnostic score for predictive relationships between two columns that ranges
from 0 to 1” [59]. It can detect asymmetric relationships where the strength or direction of
association between two variables is different when comparing one variable to the other (un-
like Spearman’s rho). PPS also produces a comparable score for all relationships regardless
of the input data types, and it is not limited to detect only linear or monotonic relations.
Calculation for PPS are performed using the ppscore library for Python [60]. Despite being
a powerful tool in detecting relationships, PPS does not reveal anything about the type of
relationship investigated.
To interpret the predictive score, it is necessary to understand how it is calculated. After
having identified a target variable and a feature, a cross-validated Decision Tree is calculated
followed by a suitable evaluation metric. The evaluation metric is determined using the Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) if the target is numeric, and a weighted F1 if the target is categorical
[59]. The final provided score reflects the improvement of the determined model over that of
a naive model (either simply predicting the most common category or the mean value).
We have now established techniques for determining possible relationships between both
portal morphology, and physical behaviour from sensor data in regard to the experiential
rating of a portal. Findings are presented in (Sec. 13) and detected relationships are also
explored further.
72
==PAGE:75==
Part III
Results and Evaluation
In this part, we present a comprehensive examination of the testing phase involving diverse
user groups and thorough critique from the advisory panel. A concise summary of the con-
ducted tests, followed by an in-depth presentation of the results obtained, leads to the analysis
of statistical relationships derived from the gathered data. This analytical exploration aims
to uncover meaningful insights and correlations within the dataset, informing evaluation of
both the proposed method and the produced artifact.
73
==PAGE:76==
11
SUMMARY OF FIELD TESTING AND VALIDATION
11
Summary of Field Testing and Validation
In this section, we present a summary of the DSRM demonstration phase, both for testing
and advisory groups. Followed by a short description of the testing setup, which is identical
for both groups. The validation is performed following (Sec. 8) and, testing is according to
(Sec. 9).
The setup and equipment used for testing of the simulator consist of a PC with the installed
UE program, an external graphics processing unit (GPU), a Meta Quest 2 VR headset con-
nected by cable to the PC and a fixed non-movable or rotate-able chair. To improve per-
formance of the simulator and reduce the risk of motion sickness using the HMD, a desktop
sized GPU and wired connection to the VR headset are recommended.
11.1
Test group - Simulator Testing
The testing was conducted over two days on location at DTU, where a mixture of civil
engineering students with between 1 and 5 years of experience, and professionals participated
as part of the testing group. In total, 25 test-runs were performed. All participants were
handed an introduction paper, see appendix I, with a brief explanation on the context of the
project, the test environment, the evaluation method (SAM) and general controls on how to
manoeuvre and interact with doors. The participant’s age, height, preferred hand, and any
further notes regarding disabilities were recorded (see appendix K).
The initial information given by the participants, results in ages ranging from 22 to 36 years.
22 right-handed persons (88%), and 3 left-handed (12%), with no ambidextrous individuals,
which follows the average representation of left and right-handed people in Denmark [61].
The height of the participants ranged from 1.64m to 1.97m. No participants stated any type
of disability.
74
==PAGE:77==
11
SUMMARY OF FIELD TESTING AND VALIDATION
In practice, the test began with participants navigating and interacting within the familiar-
ization level explained in (Sec. 8). Once familiar and comfortable with the interface, the
actual simulation began, taking the participants through the 10 rooms, and separated be-
tween each room by the evaluation scheme explained in (Sec. 9.1.1). During the simulation,
participants were not prompted with any questions and only received verbal assistance if
they raised any concerns. Results derived from sensor data are presented in (Sec. 12.2),
qualitative responses are presented in (Sec. 12.1.1). Lastly, participants were asked to design
their preferred door on the basis of their experiences in the virtual environment. The results
of this task are presented in (Sec. 12.1.2).
11.2
Advisory panel - Simulator Validation
This section explains the validation process involving the advisory panel of experts and the
results hereof. Note that the two advisory experts occupied their own wheelchair, compared
to a fixed chair for the test group, during the validation session. The evaluation prompt
following each completed room was replaced with a series of questions and an open, con-
tinuous conversation during the simulation (see appendix G and H). Both experts started
in a familiarization level and then progressed through the 10 simulation levels. The test
ended prematurely for advisory representative 1 due to nausea. Validation data on portals
M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD, and M8x21_H1000_HH_IND has only been obtained from the second
representative.
75
==PAGE:78==
11
SUMMARY OF FIELD TESTING AND VALIDATION
The advisory panel was not introduced to the preferred door design task after the simulation.
Instead, follow-up questions regarding the overall experience with the simulator and how
well it replicated their lived experience were posed. Basic information from advisory group
participants is listed below (Tab. 4).
Test person
Age
Height
Handedness
Identified disability
Wheelchair use
VR Experience
Person 1
55
177
Right
Spinal cord injury
33 years
No
Person 2
47
167
Left
Spinal cord injury
5 years
No
Table 4: General information on the two advisory experts
The following section summarizes the general comments and observations made during and
after the simulation, together with comments on particular doors throughout the simulation.
Special attention is devoted to comments describing how the simulator could be improved
regarding realism. All general and individual notes on the different doors can be found in
appendix G and H.
Simulator comments and observations
During the simulation, several observations were noted, particularly regarding the positioning
of the wheelchair prior to initiating interaction with the door. A general observation was, that
greater attention was given to avoiding collisions with the environment by the advisory group
than seen from the test group. A member of the advisory group emphasized that navigating
public spaces involves more considerations for obstacle avoidance compared to a home setting,
where the wheelchair is utilized as “leverage” when opening doors. As observers, it became
evident that their spatial awareness was heightened not only in terms of positioning, but also
in “scanning” the door each time a new simulation run commenced. Prior to any controller
input, they had already formulated a plan of approach and could articulate the anticipated
challenges posed by a design before actively engaging with it.
76
==PAGE:79==
11
SUMMARY OF FIELD TESTING AND VALIDATION
Both experts promptly acknowledged the challenges posed by the self-closing door M10x21_HB
AR_HH_UD_SC and were mentally prepared for the complexities associated with this design,
asserting that it represents one of the most challenging door scenarios for wheelchair users in
real-life situations.
The conversation delved into some key points, with the first addressing the resemblance
between the simulator and the physical world concerning spatial experience, interaction, and
movement. Both advisory experts noted a deficiency in the simulation regarding the sensation
of physical mass and the force required to navigate and open various types of doors. This
resulted in less distinction between theoretically easy and difficult doors, failing to accurately
mirror the real-world experience except for the self-closing door, where additional factors
contributed to the difficulty.
A specific comparison was drawn between M8x21_H100_HH_IND and M14x21_H1000_HH_IND,
highlighting the significant role played by the actual door leaf’s weight in shaping the per-
ception of door difficulty. The experts also emphasized the absence of the ability to grasp
the door frame and use it for pulling the wheelchair through the opening, a common practice
in their navigation routines. However, they acknowledged the simulator’s immersive spatial
aspect, expressing the importance of this in relation to the overall experience.
The last topic of discussion prompted reflections on the concept of the “perfect door”, ex-
ploring whether such an ideal door existed and what its characteristics might be. Advisory
representative 2 noted that they had not yet encountered the “perfect door” but they had
some ideas to how a door with excellent accessibility could entail. The illustration provided
was that of an automatic door equipped with a form of near-field tracking, ensuring it con-
sistently opened into the adjacent room, regardless of the approach side. In the absence of
an automatic door option, then the door leaf should always have equal perceived mass, no
matter the size, material, or the presence of a self-closing mechanism.
77
==PAGE:80==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
12
Simulation Results
In this section of the thesis, we present a comprehensive examination of results, obtained
from two distinct yet interconnected aspects of our investigation. The first segment of this
section details the outcomes from the qualitative evaluation measures, offering a nuanced
exploration of participants’ experiential responses.
In the second part, we transition into an analysis of sensor based data, leveraging spatial
analysis to derive insights into participants’ interactions and behaviours. This empirical ex-
ploration provides a detailed account of spatial dynamics, movement patterns, and temporal
considerations. By scrutinizing both subjective measures and objective tracking data, this
section endeavours to present a comprehensive understanding of the nature of our experi-
mental outcomes.
12.1
Qualitative research results
As specified in (Sec. 9.1) there are two evaluation methods regarding the experiential out-
comes. Firstly, results from the direct evaluation of the portal using the SAM method are
presented. Thereafter, these are sanity-checked using the second method, the preferred portal
design generator, which was performed on completion of all simulation levels.
12.1.1
SAM
The Self-Assessment-Manikin employed as a measure of ’Goodness’ or ’Quality’ consists of
the three components; Valence, Arousal, and Dominance. Results are summarized in (Tab.
5) and (Fig. 17) below with average participant ratings for these three components across
the 10 door types. The data is represented such that door types are systematically arranged
based on the average score derived from the three components.
78
==PAGE:81==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
Room
Combined rating
Valence
Arousal
Dominance
M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD
4.64
4.63
4.54
4.75
M10x21_H1000_HH_IND
3.92
3.83
4.00
3.92
M8x21_H1000_HH_IND
3.88
3.76
3.84
4.04
M10x21_H800_HH_IND
3.84
3.68
3.88
3.96
M10x21_H1200_HH_IND
3.83
3.67
3.81
4.00
M14x21_H1000_HH_IND
3.69
3.76
3.68
3.64
M10x21_H1000_VH_IND
3.51
3.26
3.61
3.65
M10x21_H1000_HH_UD
3.09
2.80
3.16
3.32
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD
3.00
2.87
3.00
3.13
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC
1.97
1.71
2.13
2.08
Table 5: Average rating (n = 25) from SAM questionnaire by component. Ratings are given
in a [1-5] scale.
Figure 17: Average rating (n = 25) from SAM questionnaire answers split by component.
Dashed lines indicate standard deviation.
79
==PAGE:82==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
Perhaps unsurprisingly, Valence, Arousal, and Dominance exhibit a consistent and syn-
chronous trend across all door types under consideration. However, the presence of a notably
substantial standard deviation for each of the three components across the ten types implies
that a more extensive number of trials is necessary to precisely capture minute nuances among
door types. To address this, Dominance, which has the smallest standard deviation across
all categories (delimited by the area between the top and bottom dashed lines) is adopted as
the rating measure. This approach aims to ensure a more robust evaluation while mitigating
the impact of inherent variability.
Figure 18: Average rating (n = 25) from SAM questionnaire for the highest and lowest rated
portal. SAM icons visualize ratings as a pictogram interpolated between the nearest ordinal
scores.
As described during the method section, the participant paths through the 10 rooms are
randomized to ensure that ratings should not be influenced by the previous door. The figure
showing the paths can be seen in appendix J.
80
==PAGE:83==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
12.1.2
Preferred Design
The preferred door design task collects subjective data to provide context for tracked data
from the simulation. As described in (Sec. 9.1.2), the design tool consists of five different
sliders and toggles; Door Width, Handle Height, Hinge Side, Opening Direction and whether
it should be sliding- or a conventional door. Unsurprisingly when looking at the SAM ratings
for the doors, the sliding door option was preferred by 21 out of 25 participants, this means
that the results from the category “opening direction” are redundant, because this results in
too few data points for any meaningful analysis of trends. The results also highlights that
the preferred “hinge side” is Right, no matter the selection of a sliding- or a conventional
door. The analysis therefore concentrates on the difference between design and simulated
results on handle placement (Fig. 19), and door height (Fig. 20).
Figure 19: Deviation in [mm] between participants handle grab height in the VE and their
preferred placement handle height according to 9.1.2
The graph above (Fig. 19) shows the individual deviation between the height of the door
81
==PAGE:84==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
handle from a subjective point of view (when the participants are designing their own door)
and the tracked grab height from the simulation results. Blue bars indicate that the partici-
pants have placed the handle higher, and red bars indicate that the handle was placed lower
compared to the tracked height from the simulation. The average difference between the
subjective selected placement of the door handle and the average tracked grab height from
the simulation results, is 38 mm across all participants. It should be noted that the number
for simulated grab height, comes from the calculated average height of first grab interaction
from the doors with a “bar type” handle, placed in room 4, 5 and 6.
Figure 20: Histogram of ideal door widths as identified by test participants (nbins = 25) and
normal distribution
The histogram (Fig. 20) above shows the count of participants who designed a door with a
width within a range of 25 mm of each other, represented as a bin width (nbins = 25). As seen
on the graph, the majority of the door designs are between 1050 mm and 1500 mm and the
bell curve shows the probability distribution, which is symmetric around the average width
82
==PAGE:85==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
of 1269 mm. The curve shows that data near the average are more frequent in occurrence
than data far from the average. The standard deviation is 208.12 mm, indicating that the
width is very subjective, which could relate to the individuals’ perception of an accessible
door.
In comparison to the average SAM rating and completion times seen in (Tab. 6), it seems
that even though the room with the wide door M14x21_H1000_HH_IND takes less time to
complete, it has a worse rating of 3.64 compared to the room fitted with the narrow door
M8x21_H1000_HH_IND with a rating of 4.04. This indicates that the participants hold the
idea that a wider door is better for accessibility. But when tested, a narrower door is equally
good or better compared to the ratings. It should be noted that the simulation places the
participants directly in line of the door, this means that the angle of approach is close to
zero. A higher angle of approach could be beneficial for the wider door design, but this test
scenario has not been tested.
Looking at all the results from the subjective design task, the average preferred door design
is shown below (Fig.21). The results conclude that the door should be a sliding door type,
sliding from left to right, with a width of 1269 mm and a handle height of 977 mm. A table
with all the collected results can be found in appendix K.
Figure 21: The resulting portal constructed using the preferred door design task averages.
83
==PAGE:86==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
12.2
Sensor-based results
Here, results gathered from the data tracked during each participants’ simulation are ex-
pounded upon. They are presented to visualize what type of information can be extracted
from each component of the tracking system. Components are presented in the four categories
(LOC) Location, (INT) Interaction, (GAZ) View-tracking, (COL) Collision, and consist of
information given in (Tab. 2). Basic results from central aspects of the sensor components
are presented in (Tab. 6) before they are discussed in greater detail in the following subsec-
tions. Portals are sorted by their average rating across the three evaluation components (Sec.
12.1.1). Some initial relationships can already be surmised by results in the table. These are
also clarified further below.
Room
Avg. Rating
[1-5]
Avg. comple-
time [s]
Total
collisions
Avg. inter-
action time [s]
M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD
4.64
24.35
28
1.98
M10x21_H1000_HH_IND
3.92
29.37
46
4.56
M8x21_H1000_HH_IND
3.88
31.35
55
4.12
M10x21_H800_HH_IND
3.84
28.24
41
3.96
M10x21_H1200_HH_IND
3.83
30.47
38
5.16
M14x21_H1000_HH_IND
3.69
30.72
55
4.06
M10x21_H1000_VH_IND
3.51
31.77
37
4.83
M10x21_H1000_HH_UD
3.09
40.22
54
4.04
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD
3.00
50.24
29
3.90
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC
1.97
104.53
256
21.1
Table 6: Summarized results from sensor based components by portal type.
For each component, a reference is made to the tracked data from the advisory group to
84
==PAGE:87==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
visualize any possible discrepancies. No numerical or statistical analysis of differences between
the advisory and test group have been conducted, as we have deemed the pool of data for
advisory participants too small for any meaningful results from these types of test.
12.2.1
Location - LOC
Two analyses are constructed from the location tracking component. The initial analysis
extracted from the location data depicts the spatial location of players within the simulated
rooms. This is combined with a point-density calculation to visualize both closeness of players
across test runs, and areas which players occupy for extended periods of time (Fig. 22). Each
square thus indicates a coordinate location and is coloured based on the point density, where
values are scaled from the least dense, to the most dense point across all rooms. Density of
points is calculated by dividing the number of points within a 1-metre radius of a given point
by the volume of a bounding box (with faces aligned along X, Y, and Z axes) containing all
points within a given room. Data is presented in a top-down projection, however still retains
its Z-coordinates (i.e. height from the ground plane).
A second analysis visualizes the aforementioned spatial locations but exchanges its density
colour scale for one of player velocity. The velocity is directionless (given as cm/s in UE)
and is measured for each spatial point.
The general conclusion from the velocity study
shows movement is largely full throttle or very reduced pace for finer movements around the
portal area. The visualization can be found in appendix L along with an alternate density
visualization that is normalized per room instead of globally.
Considering all portals, the noticeably highest density is for M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC imme-
diately prior and slightly left of the door. Across all rooms the density is similarly higher
preceding the entrance, and immediately following it, indicating how participants are required
to pause and interact with the door, thus occupying this area for longer. Interestingly, for
M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD, the density is consistently higher throughout the room than other
85
==PAGE:88==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
rooms. This can be simply explained by a markedly lower average completion time for the
room, resulting in less tracking points, thereby reducing the total density of the room and
increasing the individual point density. There is also a clear relation between doors with the
UD moniker and density of points forwards of the door.
Figure 22: Temporal location of test group participants presented by portal type. Colour
scale indicates density of points and is normalized across rooms.
86
==PAGE:89==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
The aforementioned spatial data is overlaid with the equivalent data from the advisory group
to determine any major variations (Fig. 23). As there are only two participants from the
advisory group, we unsurprisingly measure less variation in their behaviour. From a purely
visual inspection of the data, we do not believe there to be major differences between the
behaviour of the two groups. However, there is some suggestion that the advisory group
is more experienced regarding positioning themselves in an advantageous position before
interacting with the door. To summarize, we expect to see some relationship between global
player locations (what becomes density), level time, and the resulting average qualitative
rating.
87
==PAGE:90==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure 23: Temporal location of advisory group (Red) and test group (Blue) participants,
presented by portal type.
88
==PAGE:91==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
12.2.2
Interaction - INT
For interaction, arguably the central component governing a participant’s experience with a
given portal, three visualizations are presented. The first (Fig. 24) shows each participant’s
initial interaction with the portal, presented as an elevation, to visualize the variation in
Z-height between individuals.
The remaining two, (Fig.
25 and (Fig.
26), present the
entire range of interaction data for participants in an elevation and a top-down projection,
respectively. Data is visualized as a series of coloured spheres indicating the movement of
the controller responsible for the interaction (i.e. a right- or left-hand interaction).
Figure 24: Initial interaction with portal. Participant ID is indicated by colour. Measures
[cm] indicate Z-height variation of interaction, and distance from ground plane. See appendix
M for a larger rendition.
Regarding initial interaction height. the portals of interest are the three containing HBAR as
part of their identifier. These use a bar type handle which allows interaction anywhere along
the vertical expansion of the object. The average interaction height for these portals (Tab.
7) matches the standard handle height of 1̃000 mm as identified by literature and used for
the majority of portals in the study. This indicates that, for the test group population, the
standard handle height, with some margin for variation, is a sensible choice.
89
==PAGE:92==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
First grab height
Complete grab height
Room
x [cm]
σ [cm]
x [cm]
σ [cm]
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD
99.48
8.71
99.30
11.16
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC
102.14
8.54
100.20
11.22
M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD
101.60
7.88
102.33
10.11
Table 7: Mean controller elevations for first interaction (Fig.24) and complete interaction
process (Fig. 25) for portals with HBAR.
Interestingly the variation in interaction Z-height, at most 305 mm for M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD
and smallest at 249 mm for M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD, is of similar, but smaller scale to the
variation in participant height; 330 mm (Sec. 12.1.2). Note, that for all portals without
the HBAR denomination, the variation in first interaction height is a result of the interaction
tolerances built into the simulation experience. Some tolerance is required when allowing
participants to interact with objects as, in contrast to the physical world, individuals are
not able to sense when they touch the handle. Thus eliciting frustration if the simulation
requires perfect placement of the digital hand.
Figure 25: Complete interaction trace by portal with participant ID indicated by colour.
Measures [cm] indicate Z-height variation of interaction, and distance from ground plane.
See appendix M for a larger rendition.
90
==PAGE:93==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
An examination of the elevation showing complete interaction traces for portals
M10x21_H800_HH_IND, and M10x21_H1200_HH_IND, highlights the effect of placing the handle
at the limits of the preferred grab height range. In the H800 case, handle elevation of 800 mm,
participants proceed to grab higher on the door as the interaction progresses. As for H1200
test group, individuals move their interacting hand downwards after the initial interaction.
Portal M10x21_H1000_HH_UD has the lowest variation in total interaction height, perhaps due
to the opening direction, as it may be natural when pulling the door leaf towards oneself
that only the handle is grabbed. In contrast to a door opening away from the player room
where participants often grab and push the door leaf. Portal M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC has the
highest variation in grab height at 706 mm, likely due to the need to repeatedly and quickly
grab and hold the door leaf.
Figure 26: Complete interaction trace by portal with participant ID indicated by colour. See
appendix M for a larger rendition.
As mentioned, a clear visual differences appears in the interaction between doors marked
UD and IND. For portals opening towards the player, noticeably fewer participants grab the
door leaf during the interaction sequence.
Whereas, door opening away from the player
are in most cases pushed open using the door leaf instead of the handle. The exception is
91
==PAGE:94==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC where participants find the need to brace the door, stopping from
closing, using the leaf instead of the handle. For doors with a higher rating we observe less
disjoint interactions, i.e. a participant releasing and grabbing again, compared to doors with
a lower score.
Once again, data is compared against the advisory group to determine possible differences.
Two visualizations are shown, one elevation (Fig. 28) and one top-down projection (Fig. 27),
where red indicates advisory group participants and blue indicates test group participants.
Primarily, we see that the advisory group lies at the lower, or lowest, end of the grab height
range compared to the test group. Easily explained due to their lower height in combination
with performing the simulation seated in their own wheelchair, as opposed to the test group
which all used the same fixed chair. It is clear the advisory group makes considerably more
use of pushing or holding the door leaf when interacting with a given door, as evidenced by
interaction traces closer to the hinging point.
Figure 27: Complete interaction trace by portal for advisory group (Red) and test group
(Blue) participants.
92
==PAGE:95==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure 28: Complete interaction trace by portal for advisory group (Red) and test group
(Blue) participants.
In summary; The similarity in first interaction height and participant self reported height
suggest some relationship between the two. However, since there is no significant difference
in the rating of doors with handle height, we do not expect this to show any statistical
significance. Regarding the test population, we conclude that existing handle heights are
reasonable but see no reason to avoid using more flexible bar type systems. It is uncertain
whether handle type will relate well to the rating of a portal. Considering the best, and worst
rated doors, we expect that there is some relation between interaction length or amount, and
qualitative score.
12.2.3
View tracking - GAZ
The data concerning view and visual focal points is likely the most complex of the four
tracking components to visualize and interpret. Of most significance from the data is the
point in space, and which object occupies this space, participants are focused on. For each
tracked ’focal’ point, the object in focus is recorded, and an initial visualization of this
component consists of mapping each focus point by which category the object being looked
93
==PAGE:96==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
at belongs to.
A top-down projection containing all rooms (Fig.
29), and an elevation
isolating only points on the portal wall (Fig. 30) are presented.
Figure 29: Plan view of traced focal point for all participants, coloured by what category the
focus object belongs to.
94
==PAGE:97==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
Inspecting the data, we see that the most viewed category is the floor surface of the rooms.
Participants are highly focused on the area of floor between them and the portal, as well as
the portal itself when approaching the door. During interaction, and when moving through
the portal, we then see that the focus points become increasingly spread in the latter half of
each room as participants shift focus between the door, the wheelchair, and the room.
Additionally, considering only the points placed on the portal wall and portal itself, we
see that points are most dense in areas surrounding the door leaf and handle. The points
seemingly become denser around the location of the handle itself, and points on the door leaf
are concentrated in the side which the handle is placed. Focus points on the wall surface also
appear to be concentrated at the handle location for several of the portals. For doors opening
towards the player, there seems to be no increased focus on the hinging side of the portal,
compared to doors which open away from the player. This perhaps suggests that the test
group use other context keys to determine the opening direction of the door. In comparison
to the advisory group, no major differences are apparent when directly comparing focal points
for the portal wall (see appendix N).
In brief, it is clear that the focus of participants is the portal itself whilst approaching it,
rather than surroundings in the room. For the viewing data, we suspect that there will be
some relation between how often participants focus on the portal compared to the rest of
the room, and the qualitative rating of the portal. The less that participants are required to
shift their focus, or move their head, the better the rating may be.
95
==PAGE:98==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure 30: Traced focal points for portal wall, from entering the tracking volume to the first
interaction between player and portal. Colour indicates what category of door component is
in focus.
96
==PAGE:99==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
12.2.4
Collision - COL
The final component, collision, is rather one dimensional in what data can be extracted. A
visualization combining, again, the temporal location of points coloured by their density is
presented. The density is calculated by dividing the number of points within a now smaller,
0.5-metre radius of a given point by the volume of a bounding box containing all points
within a given room. Data is presented in a top-down projection.
Figure 31: Spatial location of collisions for all test participants, coloured by spatial density
of points (Red = Most dense, Purple = Least dense).
From the figure and results given in (Tab. 6) we see that the portal with, by a fair margin,
the highest collision count (with 256 collisions) and density, is M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC. At
the other end of the spectrum, portal M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD has the lowest collision count
at 28 instances, whereas the lowest collision density is for door M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD (at 29
collisions). For portals opening away from the player, the most common collision is between
the player and the door leaf. In contrast, for doors opening towards the player, they are more
likely to collide with the door frame (except for the self-closing door). For the sliding door,
players seem equally likely to collide with either door or frame.
97
==PAGE:100==
12
SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure 32: Spatial location of collisions for advisory group (Red) and test group (Blue)
participants.
Comparing the test and advisory group, there is no major difference between collision lo-
cations, except for M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC. This suggests that the difference in experience
between the two groups with regard to doors of this type plays a substantial role in ap-
proach. The advisory group seems to be more cautious in avoiding and mitigating collisions
with the moving door leaf. Ultimately, we expect there to be some relation between rating
and frequency or amount of collisions.
98
==PAGE:101==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
13
Data analysis and interpretation
In the pursuit of quantifying the efficiency of a given portal, we previously defined several
subsets of portals to test against SAM scores, as well as introducing the concept of KPI’s
describing physical actions extracted from sensor data. First, we describe what performance
indicators have been chosen and how they are calculated. Subsequently, data is processed to
determine relationships using Spearman’s Rank correlation and the PPS approach. Discus-
sion of the reasoning for the choice of the indicators can be found in (Sec. 10).
KPIs are calculated for individual participants, so that calculations may be performed person
by person, where-after a global relationship based on data from all individuals in the test
group is constructed. The individual processing is intended to take into account differences in
skill level and subjectivity in evaluation results. In contrast, when determining relationships
to door morphology, results are determined for the entire sample population. The rating
of a portal given a parameter (e.g. width) is of course subjective, however this metric does
not need to take into account the individual “entropy” that movement does. In accordance
with conventional statistical practice, significance determined by P-values are set at 0.05 or
5%, and confidence intervals at 95%. Below, these indicators are presented by which of the
four tracking components they originate from. A new component that combines data from
the four others, to create additional performance indicators, is also presented. The general
terminology for the calculation of the KPIs uses n to indicate a logged data point for a
given time in a given room. The resulting KPIs for each participant are available in through
appendix F.
Location component - LOC
Level time - The difference in time from entering, to exiting the tracking volume described
in (Sec. 6.2). Calculated as ∆T = Tfinal −Tstart.
99
==PAGE:102==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
Level speed - Average movement speed of player throughout the tracking volume. Calcu-
lated as Vmean = (V1 + V2 + ... + Vn)/n for the given run.
Speed changes - A count of the total changes in player speed made during the level play-
through. The count is increased every time a subsequent data point has a different velocity
value than the current. Given as S = S + 1 if Vn != Vn+1.
Interaction component - INT
Hand switches - Count of times when the subsequent interaction with the portal was
performed with a different hand (i.e. using the other controller). Calculated as HS = HS +1
if Handn != Handn+1
Successful grabs - The total amount of times the door was grabbed and moved. If the
door is grabbed, but not moved, this interaction would not count towards the total amount
of grabs. Calculated as Sgrab = G1 + G2 + ... + Gn
Grab height variation - The total variation in Z-height with which a participant held
their hands whilst interacting with a given portal. Calculated as ∆H = Max(H1...Hn) −
Min(H1...Hn)
Grab time - Total time when a player was interacting with a given portal. Time is summed
for each interaction, where for a given interaction, the value is the time delta between the
start and finish of the player grabbing the door.
Calculated as Tgrab = ∑n
i=1 ti, where ti
represent the time delta for the ith interaction (the time difference between the start and
finish of the player grabbing the door).
Hand speed - An average velocity of hand movement during interaction with a given portal.
Defined as the distance of hand movement from start to finish of a specific interaction divided
by the time delta for these two events. Calculated as Vhand = Lmovedist/Tletgo −Tgrab
100
==PAGE:103==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
Viewing component - GAZ
Door ratio - The number of focus points on the portal divided by the total number of
focus points for the play-through. Not only points that fall on the door leaf are counted, but
those that fall on handles, jambs, and thresholds are also included (Fig. 30). Calculated as
Rdoor = (Fdoor1 + ... + Fdoorn)/(F1 + ... + Fn)
Total FOV - The total Field of View (FOV) used for during a given play-through. Presented
in degrees, where 360° indicates that a participant looked in every direction (to the nearest
whole degree). Calculated as Sfov = Angle(yfwrd, y1) + ... + Angle(yfwrd, yn)
Vertical change - Count of times when there was more than a 5° change in vertical viewing
direction. Calculated as Svfov = Svfov + 1 if Vfovn != Vfovn + 1.
Collision component - COL
Collision count - The total amount of times when the player collided with another object
in the simulation. Calculated as Scol = C1 + C2 + ... + Cn
Collision density - Defined as the total amount of times when the player collided with
another object in the simulation, divided by the total volume of which the collisions cover.
Calculated as Dcol = Scol/Min(C1...Cn) · (Max(C1...Cn)
Component combinations
Total reach - We have defined reach as the distance from one controller, to the HMD,
and then to the second controller. Reach for a single point in time becomes the cumulative
distance between the set of three points. Total reach is determined as a sum of the reach for
each data point in time within the tracking volume divided by total level time. As the location
of the HMD is logged more often (through GAZ HMD location) than that of the controllers
(through INT), we simply discard the extra HMD data points. Given as Rtot = ∑n
i=1 ri
101
==PAGE:104==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
Average reach - Average reach takes the same reach for each data point and calculates the
mean value. Calculated as Ravg = 1
n · ∑n
i=1 ri, where, ri represent the reach length for the ith
data point.
Longest reach - Takes the maximum value of the list of reach values for all data points.
Calculated as Rmax = maxn
i=1ri, where, ri represent the reach length for the ith data point.
13.1
Spearman correlation
Results from the Spearman’s rank correlation are presented on (Fig. 33) below. Squares
below the diagonal which are empty are ignored as the statistical significance, as determined
by the p-value, were not sufficient (i.e. above 0.05) and could not reject a null hypothesis.
Data above the matrix diagonal is ignored, as results are symmetric about the diagonal. We
are most interested in comparing the correlation between KPI’s and the experiential rating.
Observing the first column, we see that the LOC indicators have the highest correlation to
the rating. Second to these, both CMB Total reach = -0.55, INT Grab time = -0.51, and
GAZ Vertical Change = -0.47 all have a moderate negative correlation (when these decrease
the rating increases). The remaining performance indicators are between −0.4 ≤0 < 0.4,
described as a weak correlation in regard to rating.
Considering subsequent columns, we see that LOC Level time is well correlated to other in-
dicators across all categories. Unsurprisingly, the strongest correlation is between LOC Level
time and LOC Level speed. Ideally the correlation between measures, that are highly cor-
related with rating, would be low. This would provide us with several independent measures
from which a relationship to experiential rating could be determined.
102
==PAGE:105==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
Figure 33: Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient for identified KPI’s and experiential rat-
ing. Where +1 indicates a perfect increasing monotonic trend, and -1 indicating a perfect
decreasing monotonic trend between columns.
13.2
Predictive Power Score
Predictive power scores have been determined for both KPI’s and door morphology parame-
ters. Values in each analysis are comparable due to the nature of the PPS approach. From
(Fig. 34) we conclude that the four performance indicators that have the highest predictive
power are also those with the strongest correlation to rating. Most powerful is LOC Level
103
==PAGE:106==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
time, which provides a 54% improvement over the naive model, suggesting moderate pre-
dictive power. In general, the INT indicators have no predictive power, with GAZ KPI’s only
performing marginally better despite both INT Grab time and GAZ Vertical change show-
ing moderate correlation using Spearman’s Rho. Interestingly, CMB Average reach shows
a reasonable predictive power against rating it was disqualified from the Spearman Rank
correlation due to a high P-value. Differences between the two analysis types are likely due
to the ability of PPS to detect many types of symmetric and asymmetric relations, and not
solely limited to monotonic relations. For both PPS and Spearman’s Rho, collision shows
middle of the road relation to rating.
Figure 34: Mean Predictive Power Score for KPI’s against experiential rating. 0 indicates no
predictive power, and 1 indicates perfect predictive ability.
104
==PAGE:107==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
Since scores are calculated participant by participant before averaging to determine mean
predictive power, both standard deviation and the 95% confidence interval (CI) are calculated.
These values are presented in (Tab. 8). Note that KPI’s with a PPS of zero are omitted from
the table. Generally we see a large standard deviation across all indicators. When comparing
standard deviation against the confidence interval, we note that the interval is considerably
more narrow. This suggests that outliers within the participant group are responsible for the
large standard deviation.
KPI
x
σ
95% CI
LOC Level time
0.54
0.25
[0.44,0.63]
LOC Level speed
0.44
0.22
[0.35,0.52]
LOC Speed changes
0.36
0.20
[0.28,0.44]
CMB Total reach
0.28
0.17
[0.20,0.36]
CMB Average reach
0.24
0.16
[0.17,0.31]
CMB Longest reach
0.20
0.16
[0.13,0.27]
COL Collision count
0.16
0.13
[0.1,0.21]
COL Collision density
0.13
0.12
[0.08,0.19]
GAZ Door ratio
0.07
0.10
[0.06,0.15]
GAZ Total FOV
0.05
0.08
[0.04,0.12]
GAZ Vertical change
0.06
0.06
[0.02,0.10]
INT Hand switches
0.03
0.04
[0.01,0.05]
INT Successful grabs
0.02
0.01
[0.00,0.03]
Table 8: Mean Predictive Power Score for KPI’s against experiential rating, with standard
deviation and 95% Confidence Interval
Regarding the door morphology and its relation to experiential rating, there is a fairly robust
relationship for some parameters across the entire sample population. Visualized on (Fig.
35) below, it is clear that some design decisions such as self-close mechanisms majorly affect
105
==PAGE:108==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
ratings, however predicting ratings from less polarizing aspects, such as width, is difficult.
Both self-close at 60% and sliding at 56% constitute a solid moderate predictive power,
with Handle type making it into the moderate range at 47%. Handle height barely falls
short of the moderate category and shows a weak predictive power together with Hinge
side. Both opening direction and Door width show no predictive power.
Figure 35: Mean Predictive Power Score for door morphology parameters against experiential
rating. 0 indicates no predictive power, and 1 indicates perfect predictive ability.
Unlike before, as the PPS is estimated for the entire population, no traditional statistical
measures are evaluated. Instead, the baseline score (the naive assumption) and model score
(the determined score from the regression model) are listed (Tab. 9). The method which
the PPS implementation uses to determine the score is a Weighted F1 classification, as
the target column is always categorical, where predictive power is determined as PPS =
106
==PAGE:109==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
(F1model −F1naive)/(1 −F1naive) [60]. It should also be noted that just from the PPS graph
above, it’s not specified whether the prediction would lead to a better or worse design. But the
predicted power score gives some knowledge about the extreme cases, such as the self-close
or sliding door, that affects the rating in both directions.
Note that morphology parameters with a PPS of zero are omitted from the table.
KPI
PPS
Baseline score
Model score
Self close
0.60
0.34
0.74
Sliding
0.56
0.71
0.87
Handle type
0.47
0.34
0.65
Handle height
0.36
0.35
0.58
Hinge side
0.15
0.38
0.47
Table 9: Mean Predictive Power Score for door morphology parameters against experiential
rating, with baseline and regression model score.
13.3
The Ideal Door
In summary, there are fairly well-defined relationships emerging from both the correlation and
PPS data, even considering the small sample pool (n = 25). From the results discussed above
both KPIs, derived from participant physical behaviour, and morphology parameters, such
as handle type, show a broad variation in their relationship with rating. Overall Self-close
and Sliding alongside LOC Level time show promising influence in determining experiential
rating. The large spread in predictive power and correlation values between KPI’s suggests
that the behaviour that governs experiential aspects is complex and multifaceted.
Across all results, the extent and practical significance of found relationships, need further
examination. High standard deviation in the results suggest the need for a larger sample
pool, both in order to better represent population diversity, but mainly to increase precision
107
==PAGE:110==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
and reliability of estimated relationships. Especially, door morphology requires additional
investigation to determine alternate typologies that may affect rating. Many of the measures
that show good predictive power in relation to rating are boolean or categorical in nature
(i.e. “Is the door sliding? Yes or No”). The association of these measures is also unclear,
does a sliding door become worse when it is also self-closing? Combinations such as these
may need testing in order to provide a complete answer. Alternatively, redefining the tested
portal variations, such that each variation for a given morphology parameter is investigated
in finer detail, may yield more robust results.
Results from SAM ratings, and what can be inferred from the PPS, match the results from
the preferred door design task (Fig. 21) in that test participants prefer a sliding door. In the
preferred door design task, the width of the door plays a significant role in the test group
design choices, but interestingly, this parameter did not affect ratings in the simulation. This
behaviour could be rooted in prejudice, when able-bodied people are asked to design a door
for a wheelchair user, a typical feature that is imagined are wide openings and space to
manoeuvre. This scenario highlights the disconnect between how able-bodied and advisory
group experts define quality door design, and highlights the importance of involving diverse
user groups when designing.
We can, despite the uncertainties noted, attempt to create examples of the “ideal door” for
the scoped case, and the portal typologies tested, based on experiential results. These designs
are shown below (Fig. 36) in order from the highest assumed rating (left), to lowest (right).
We conclude that difficulty/inconvenience is a large driver in rating, logically the best portal
should therefore be an empty frame (A), thus presenting no resistance when moving either in
our out. If the portal must contain a blocking element, the second-best proposal is a sliding
door using a bar type handle (B). As the hinging side shows slight preference for the right
jamb when approaching the door, it is able to slide both directions depending on the direction
of approach. Note that advisory group experts did not rate sliding doors higher than hinged
108
==PAGE:111==
13
DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION
doors. A third proposal, should we not want a sliding door, is a hinged door with no self-close
mechanism (C). Again the hinge side is the right jamb, for both directions of approach and
as identified (from both test and advisory groups) there is a strong preference that doors
open in the direction of travel. Relevant to all proposals is that the PPS cannot determine
a relationship between door width and rating, and we are therefore unable to conclude what
the ideal width is. Under the assumption that the PPS are more telling than results gained
from the preferred door design task.
Figure 36: Suggested “optimal” morphology of portals, considering PPS and SAM results. An
inwards opening portal refers to movement from the bottom and upwards when inspecting
the plan diagrams (bottom row).
109
==PAGE:112==
Part IV
Discussion and Future Perspectives
In part four, we engage in a thorough discussion, initially scrutinizing the efficacy of our
employed methodology and evaluating its strengths and limitations in meeting our research
objectives. Our focus shifts to the determined statistical relationships, unravelling key in-
sights and implications.
Furthermore, we extend our gaze towards the future, outlining
potential avenues for further research and methodological enhancements, followed by final
concluding remarks.
110
==PAGE:113==
14
DISCUSSION
14
Discussion
In the previous section, findings from the simulation testing were presented where-after the
relationship between both experiential rating, behaviour and portal morphology was ex-
plored. This section will focus on the project methodology, discussing the efficacy of the
proposed method, whether the proof-of-concept simulator is valid/worthwhile developing
further, and interpretation of found relationships. Finally, the leanings and inspirations for
future iterations of the simulation tool will be discussed.
Methodology Explored
The research was performed according to the Design Science Research Methodology [49].
This methodology follows an iterative approach, where continuous iterative improvements
are performed until the developed artifact solves the identified objectives in a satisfactory
manner.
The end goal is to publish the findings and results, so they can establish the
frameworks for future research. In this study an iterative process during the development of
the simulator, followed by demonstration and evaluation from advisory experts ensured we
adhered to the methodology. The possibility for further iterative development of the artifact,
and its role in a broader non-academic context, is discussed in the subsequent section. In
addition, we proposed a method for the development of alternate immersive experiences to
determine design efficiencies. This method, inspired by the DSRM structure, is evaluated
below through the use of this project as a proof-of-concept.
Method Efficacy
From our result, we can draw several general conclusions in relation to the proposed method.
Firstly, by defining an explicit scope, we were able to develop a highly immersive simulator
ratified by advisory experts to create a sufficiently accurate experience. Subsequently, we
111
==PAGE:114==
14
DISCUSSION
successfully determined a qualitative rating for the series of doors included and could deter-
mine relationships from both morphology parameters and physical behaviours to the rating.
Despite the limited sample pool, this suggests that further development of the simulator,
and increased testing, can produce more robust results. A positive outcome is, that well
correlated and decently predictive KPI’s, such as level time, are easily measurable compared
to more complex indicators such as eye-tracking ratios.
The method does require a series of several portal typologies in the same simulation in order
for participants to accurately determine a rating. Without any appropriate context, other
than the physical doors each subject has previously interacted with, subjects may find it
difficult to determine what a “stimulating” or “calm” experience is. Especially as interaction
“feeling” may differ between temporal and virtual worlds. This does suggest that it is vital to
include a broad variation of door typologies in order to cover the entire spectrum of possible
design qualities. However, once we determine what KPIs are relevant for a given interaction,
it is possible for participants to play simulations containing just one design variation as
their recorded KPI’s will inform the rating. In summary, we believe that this project and
the proposed method confirm the efficacy of using a validated VE to determine experiential
factors that determine the quality of a design.
Validity and Limitations
Several implicit assumptions are made in the design of the test cases. We assume that placing
participants a fair distance from the portal, and facing exactly perpendicular to the wall in
which it is placed, provides the most neutral experience (and thereby rating). Furthermore,
participants are only tasked with moving from the first area, through the door, and over
the finish line.
They are not required or encouraged to engage in behaviour that might
affect their rating. Feasible changes to the experimental setup include varying the angle of
approach towards the door, requiring that the door is closed to complete a test, or changes
112
==PAGE:115==
14
DISCUSSION
in test room layout and shape such as narrow rooms or tight corners. Exploring if, and
how, these changes affect the rating of a given portal is necessary for full understanding of
what factors influence our interaction experience with a door. Considering feedback from
validation sessions, advisory experts identify that closing a door substantially influences
their interaction experience, this becomes increasingly relevant. This does not invalidate
the presented results, only that the validity is limited to the tested situation until further
investigation is conducted.
Advisory experts identified a lack of mass and strain during interaction that is present in
the physical world. This critique also reflects sentiments echoed by disability advocates that
simulations are not able to capture the multifaceted experience of a disability, especially
regarding strain (both physical and emotional) [40][39]. Two visually identical doors in our
“model” would receive the same rating, whereas the physical versions might have widely
different heft, resulting in increased strain and difficulty when interacting. This also extends
to manoeuvring of the wheelchair itself, which in the digital format requires no strength.
Performing the same experiments in a physical setting would avoid these drawbacks. These
points of criticism from the advisory group are directly related to limitations of the VR
technology and highlight the inability to fully capture the physical experience. Depending
on how the project is scoped, which interactions and disabilities are being studied, issues
regarding physicality may be more or less significant.
In regard to movement, the advisory experts observed that complex movement and interaction
combinations are not possible in the simulator. Both experts would ordinarily use tactics and
techniques that had not been considered when programming the simulator. These include
using the door frame and grabbed door to pull or push themselves in a direction, or that a
wheelchair rarely becomes entirely stationary when not being held. It is difficult to quantify
how much different the simulation is from the temporal interaction due to factors such as
these. An ideal validation technique that could remedy this discrepancy would be to construct
113
==PAGE:116==
14
DISCUSSION
two identical spaces, one physical and one simulated. Advisory experts would test both cases
whilst having the same KPI’s recorded for both situations.
Comparison of performance
indicators would allow tweaking of the simulator to match real behaviour exactly. We have
not pursued this avenue due to time and resource constraints.
In regard to measurement strategies, we can observe very mixed SAM ratings looking at
individual answers, and globally we see that many doors receive a similar total score. This
suggests that the scale may either need increased graduation, or that it is simply incredibly
difficult to measure the effect of some typology changes. A change of door width of 100
mm may be too minute to detect from SAM scores. It is difficult to know how SAM would
compare to other evaluation methods, but we believe the method strikes a good balance
between usability and effectiveness. The visual nature, and condensed number of measure,
of the SAM allows participants to quickly become familiar with the system.
As mentioned in (Sec.9) there are several alternate data sources that may be relevant such as
physiological reactions and cerebral activity. It is unknown whether these would have closer
relation to rating, however considering the increased difficulty in measuring and interpreting
these results, we do not deem them essential to include.
From the critique above, and learnings derived from [44], it is important to consider how
to replace “senses” that are otherwise lost within the VE. Either by compensating through
other senses, or through feedback systems built into the interaction interface (e.g. controller
vibration). Neither the advisory-, nor testing group mentioned the presence of such compen-
satory aids in our simulator. It is unclear to what degree these features influenced overall
immersion and behaviour of participants. We intended these features to replicate missing
physical effects to the best of our abilities, given limitations in available hardware.
114
==PAGE:117==
14
DISCUSSION
Future work
The outcomes derived from the proposed method can be categorized into two key aspects: the
acquisition of physical behaviour data and the analysis of door morphology, both of which
bear a complex connection to the determined rating. These outcomes, once proven to be
sufficiently robust, can then be utilized through two distinct approaches.
Firstly, having extracted the influential behavioural KPI’s it would be possible to determine
the rating of a given design through utilisation of the simulator, without asking participants
to evaluate their experience. This would allow simulation of any feasible new design variations
under the assumption that the model held for door typologies it was not trained on. However,
the drawback of this approach is that it demands the utilization of one or a series of agents
that engage with the validated simulator for each new design variation. If only one agent
is used, how is the inherent subjectivity of skill, and movement entropy introduced from
this given agent avoided? Using only one agent therefore necessitates the development of
a neutral, digital agent modelled on behaviour from a large population sample.
If more
agents are considered, the solution may involve “generative agents” created using artificial
intelligence (AI). With a limited amount of initial information seeded in each agent, they act
as unique characters with their own “personality” [62] allowing for some replication of human
diversity.
The use of AI requires that we are vigilant, as the nature of AI holds implicit bias towards
a norm. Discussions about “fair AI” have predominantly focused on gender, minorities, and
ethnicity. However, the inclusion of people with disabilities has largely been neglected [63].
An AI requires a model to learn and develop from; The article defines two models regarding
disability.
The first, the medical model, bases its norm on biomechanical standards and
considers an individual without any impairments, illness, or disorder. The second, the social
model, is different, and defines disability as the product of disabling environments and at-
115
==PAGE:118==
14
DISCUSSION
titudes, not aberrations located in individual bodies. This distinction between “norm” and
“abnormal” reinforces stereotypes of able-bodied and disabled persons. “To understand the
disabled body, one must return to the concept of the norm, the normal body… the ‘problem’
is not the person with disabilities; the problem is the way that normalcy is constructed to
create the ‘problem’ of the disabled person.“ [64]. Therefore, implementing artificial agents
requires a flexible understanding of how interactions influence experience through physical
behaviour, that we must view solutions as good and bad (the UD philosophy), not more or
less disability compliant.
On the other hand, when dealing with portal morphology, the results lend themselves to
the establishment of an equation. This equation can be formulated when a comprehensive
understanding of all factors influencing the rating is achieved. It could serve as a simple tool
for predicting outcomes and guiding design decisions but would only be valid for morphology
types on which the model was based. Introducing new variations in design would thus require
reconstruction of the entire model to take into account these new influences. This approach
provides a systematic and quantitative means of assessing the impact of design variations on
the overall rating.
Both approaches have merit regarding measuring design quality, and the choice is perhaps
dependent on what type of interaction is being explored. Objects with many minor, unique
variations such as doors might benefit from the behavioural approach, whereas objects with
well-defined typologies could make use of the formulaic rating style.
We believe the be-
havioural approach coupled with artificial agents (under assumption of a suitable model)
would also result in a much more flexible system, able to cover a greater variation of inter-
actions.
During the literature review, we identified studies in which route planning was used to opti-
mize the macro experience of navigating built spaces. In contrary, our project explores the
intricacies of micro experiences within a building, seeking to identify what factors enable us
116
==PAGE:119==
14
DISCUSSION
to enhance the quality of interactions. Both macro and micro approaches are integral; while
route planning ensures equitable access throughout the entire building, micro-optimizations
become crucial, especially in older structures where extensive modifications may be challeng-
ing. Time emerges as a common denominator in both scenarios. The efficiency of interactions
and journeys directly correlates with user satisfaction. This underscores the importance of
addressing both macro and micro aspects to create a comprehensive and satisfying environ-
ment for building users. Exploring the combination of these methods may allow even more
comprehensive study into enriching building experiences.
Perspectives on UD and Industry Adoption
As identified during the literature review, three primary factors prevent further adoption of
function-based building projects and UD adoption. These are lack of industry competences,
increased documentation for approval, and thereby a higher cost for unknown financial return
[4][6]. Regarding competences, we as engineers are able to simulate a variety of building
performance aspects such as energy efficiency, lighting- and indoor-climate quality etc. These
metrics are well-defined in literature, and professionals are schooled in how to use and apply
related tools to achieve compliance. However, when we consider accessibility, despite the
extensive prior research on the topic we do not endeavour to simulate the quality of our
interaction with a building. Our proposed simulator, although rudimentary, suggests it is
possible to create measures and provide statistical documentation that a project achieves
functional stipulations. We believe that consultants equipped with the proper tools are a
key step in achieving wider adoption of UD. But with the caveat that building owners and
clients must see either a financial incentive, or a more forceful regulatory push, to further
adopt function-based methods.
117
==PAGE:120==
15
CONCLUSION
15
Conclusion
In conclusion, the project has successfully achieved its set research objectives, laying the
groundwork for advancements in quantifying Universal Design efficiencies.
The develop-
ment of a novel, immersive simulator has provided a dynamic platform for the creation of
interactive scenarios that relate both behavioural and typology measures to experiential qual-
ity. By engaging civil engineering students and professionals in immersive UD simulations,
the research has fostered an understanding of user experiences, evaluating perceived quality
through physical reactions. The utilisation of statistical modelling has been instrumental in
deriving insights from key performance indicators, contributing to a deeper comprehension
of factors governing interaction quality. Furthermore, the inclusion of an advisory group,
comprising individuals with disabilities and lived experience, has facilitated critical evalua-
tion and refinement of the proposed method. This proof-of-concept project meets the initial
objectives, affirming the project’s success in advancing wider adoption of UD within civil
engineering.
118
==PAGE:121==
REFERENCES
References
[1]
United Nations Population Fund UNPF. World Population Dashboard. https://www.
unfpa.org/data/world-population-dashboard. Accessed: 2023-09-20. 2023.
[2]
Camilla Ryhl et al. “Universal Design In Architecture – Editors’ Notes”. In: Nordic
Journal of Architectural Research 28.2 (2016), pp. 5–8. iSSN: 1893–5281.
[3]
Bygningsreglementet.dk. Adgangsforhold (§48 - §62). 2024. URL: https://bygnings
reglementet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/02/Krav.
[4]
Sidse Grangaard and Anne Kathrine Frandsen and Camilla Ryhl. SBi 2016:31 Analyse
af de gældende regler om tilgængelighed i Bygningsreglementet. DK. 2016.
[5]
Anne Kathrine Frandsen, Inge Storgaard Bonfils, and Leif Olsen, eds. Universelt design
– tværdisciplinære perspektiver i teori og praksis. 1st ed. Aalborg Universitetsforlag,
2023. iSBN: 978-87-7573-021-6.
[6]
Sidse Grangaard. SBi 2018:02 Analyse af bygherrens tilgang til tilgængelighed og
universelt design i byggeriet. DK. 2018.
[7]
UNSDG. Operationalizing Leave No One Behind. Version 1. 2022. URL: https://
unsdg.un.org/resources/leaving-no-one-behind-unsdg-operational-guide-
un-country-teams.
[8]
Molly Follette Story. “Maximizing Usability: The Principles of Universal Design”. In:
Assistive Technology 10.1 (1998), pp. 4–12. iSSN: 1949-3614. DOi: 10.1080/10400435.
1998.10131955.
[9]
Miodrag Mitrasinovic. “Universal Design”. In: Design Dictionary: Perspectives on
Design Terminology. Ed. by Michael Erlhoff and Tim Marshall. Basel: Birkhäuser
Basel, 2008, pp. 419–422. DOi: 10.1007/978-3-7643-8140-0_290.
[10]
Camilla Ryhl. Sammenkobling af menneskesyn og Universelt Design. 2020.
[11]
Betty Rose Connell et al. The Principles of Universal Design. Version 2. 1997.
119
==PAGE:122==
REFERENCES
[12]
Edward Steinfeld and Jordana Maisel. Universal Design: Creating Inclusive Envi-
ronment. John Wiley & Sons, 2012. iSBN: 978-04-7039-913-2.
[13]
God Adgang. Tilgængelighed for alle - hvem er alle? 2023. URL: https://godadgang.
dk/om-handicap/tilgaengelighed-for-alle-133.
[14]
Bygningsreglementet.dk. Adgangsforhold (§1 - §57). 2024. URL: https://bygningsr
eglementet.dk/Administrative-bestemmelser/Krav.
[15]
Lone Sigbrand and Philip Henrik Jensen. Tilgængelige boliger - indretning. 1st ed.
SBi-anvisning 249. SBI forlag, Feb. 2015. iSBN: 978-87-563-1655-2.
[16]
ISO Central Secretary. Building construction — Accessibility and usability of the
built environment. en. Standard ISO 21542:2021. Geneva, CH: International Organi-
zation for Standardization, 2021. URL: https://www.iso.org/standard/71860.html.
[17]
Danish Standard Association. Vejledning – Tilgængelighedskrav i BR18 – holdt op
mod DS/ISO 21542:2012. dk. Handbook DS 186:2017. Copenhagen, DK: Dansk Stan-
dard, 2017. URL: https://webshop.ds.dk/standard/M319651/ds-haandbog-186-
2017.
[18]
Bygningsreglementet.dk. Brand (§ 82 - § 158). 2024. URL: https://bygningsreglem
entet.dk/Tekniske-bestemmelser/05/Krav.
[19]
Sidse Grangaard. “Øjenåbnere og erfaring i universelt design”. In: Nordic Journal of
Architectural Research 28.2 (2016), pp. 59–81. iSSN: 1893-5281.
[20]
Sweco Danmark A/S. BÆREDYGTIGHED: Certificeringer. https://www.sweco.
dk/baeredygtighed/certificeringer/. Accessed: Jan. 15, 2024. 2024.
[21]
Rådet for Bæredygtigt Byggeri. DGNB-system Danmark: Bæredygtighedscertificer-
ing af Nye bygninger og omfattende renoveringer. Green Building Council Denmark
/ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen, 2023.
[22]
Bernhard Preim et al. “Chapter 12 - Introduction to Virtual Reality”. In: Visualization,
Visual Analytics and Virtual Reality in Medicine. The MICCAI Society Book Series.
120
==PAGE:123==
REFERENCES
Academic Press, 2023, pp. 355–401. iSBN: 978-0-12-822962-0. DOi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-822962-0.00022-5.
[23]
William R. Sherman and Alan B. Craig. “Chapter 1 - Introduction to Virtual Reality”.
In: Understanding Virtual Reality (Second Edition). Second Edition. The Morgan
Kaufmann Series in Computer Graphics. Boston: Morgan Kaufmann, 2019, pp. 4–58.
DOi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800965-9.00001-5.
[24]
William R. Sherman and Alan B. Craig. “Chapter 8 - Bringing the Virtual World
to Life”. In: Understanding Virtual Reality (Second Edition). Second Edition. The
Morgan Kaufmann Series in Computer Graphics. Boston: Morgan Kaufmann, 2019,
pp. 658–723. DOi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800965-9.00001-5.
[25]
William R. Sherman and Alan B. Craig. “Chapter 9 - Experience Conception and De-
sign: Applying VR to a Problem”. In: Understanding Virtual Reality (Second Edi-
tion). Second Edition. The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Computer Graphics. Boston:
Morgan Kaufmann, 2019, pp. 724–779. DOi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800965-9.00001-5.
[26]
C Pettit T Germanchis and W Cartwright. “Building a three‐dimensional geospatial
virtual environment on computer gaming technology”. In: Journal of Spatial Science
49.1 (2004), pp. 89–95. DOi: 10.1080/14498596.2004.9635008.
[27]
D Waller. “The WALKABOUT: using virtual environments to assess large-scale spatial
abilities”. In: Computers in Human Behavior 21 (2005), pp. 243–253.
[28]
J Zacharias. “Exploratory spatial behaviour in real and virtual environments”. In: Land-
scape and Urban Planning 78 (2006), pp. 1–13.
[29]
Heikki Särkelä et al. “The movement patterns and the experiential components of virtual
environments”. In: International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 67.9 (2009),
pp. 787–799. DOi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2009.05.003.
[30]
M. Csikszentmihalyi. Beyond Boredom and Anxiety. Jossey-Bass behavioral science
series. Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1975. iSBN: 9780875892610.
121
==PAGE:124==
REFERENCES
[31]
Aliane Loureiro Krassmann et al. “How are the sense of presence and learning outcomes
being investigated when using virtual reality? A 24 years systematic literature review”.
In: Interactive Learning Environments 0.0 (2023), pp. 1–24. DOi: 10.1080/10494820.
2023.2184388.
[32]
Marnix van Gisbergen et al. “What We Don’t Know. The Effect of Realism in Virtual
Reality on Experience and Behaviour”. In: Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality:
The Power of AR and VR for Business. Ed. by M. Claudia tom Dieck and Timothy
Jung. Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 45–57. DOi: 10.1007/978-3-030-
06246-0_4.
[33]
Samuel Ang and John Quarles. “Reduction of cybersickness in head mounted displays
use: A systematic review and taxonomy of current strategies”. In: Frontiers in Virtual
Reality 4 (2023). DOi: 10.3389/frvir.2023.1027552. URL: https://www.frontiers
in.org/articles/10.3389/frvir.2023.1027552.
[34]
Anders Hermund. “Human Computer Interacting Through a Game Engine: Qualify-
ing Inclusive Design in Architecture”. In: Human-Computer Interaction. Theory,
Methods and Tools. Ed. by Masaaki Kurosu. Springer International Publishing, 2021,
pp. 30–49. DOi: 10.1007/978-3-030-78462-1_3.
[35]
Anders Hermund, Debora Lombardi, and Thomas Ramsøy. “The Cognitive Experience
of Architecture in Real-Life and Virtual Reality”. In: eCAADe 2023: Digital Design
Reconsidered. Jan. 2023, pp. 863–872. DOi: 10.52842/conf.ecaade.2023.2.863.
[36]
Guangtao Zhang. “Gaze-controlled Telepresence: Accessibility, Training and Evalua-
tion”. English. PhD thesis. 2021.
[37]
Anjana Ramkumar and et al. Using GOMS and NASA-TLX to evaluate human–
computer interaction process in interactive segmentation. 2017.
[38]
Reuben Kirkham and Benjamin Tannert. “Using Computer Simulations to Investigate
the Potential Performance of ’A to B’ Routing Systems for People with Mobility Impair-
ments”. In: CoRR abs/2107.01570 (2021). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.01570.
122
==PAGE:125==
REFERENCES
[39]
Sheri Byrne-Haber. Simulating Disabilities. https://sheribyrnehaber.medium.
com/simulating-disabilities-d03986e05c1b. Accessed: Jan. 23, 2024. Mar. 2020.
[40]
John Loeppky. Accessibility.com. https://www.accessibility.com/blog/disabili
ty-simulations-harmful-or-enlightening. Accessed: Jan. 23, 2024. Dec. 2020.
[41]
Gloria Yuet Kwan Ma and Winnie W. S. Mak. “Meta-analysis of studies on the impact
of mobility disability simulation programs on attitudes toward people with disabilities
and environmental in/accessibility.” In: PLoS One (2022). Ed. by Muhammad Shahzad
Aslam. DOi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0269357.
[42]
GazeIT DTU. Low cost wheelchair simulator. https://github.com/GazeIT-DTU/
Low_cost_wheelchair_simulator. 2017.
[43]
USW Games. Wake: A VR Wheel Chair Experience. https://uswgames.itch.io/
wake. Accessed: Jan. 17, 2024.
[44]
J. Sivesgaard G. T. Dalsgaard and M. Østergaard. Virtually There: An Exploration
of Immersive Experiences for the Blind and Visually Impaired. Danish. 2023.
[45]
J. Sivesgaard G. T. Dalsgaard and M. Østergaard. Virtually There: An Exploration
of Immersive Experiences for the Blind and Visually Impaired. 2023. URL: https:
//www.specialefestivalen.dk/specialer/virtually-there-an-exploration-
of-immersive-experiences-for-the-blind-and-visually-impaired.
[46]
M. Bates. Super Powers for the Blind and Deaf. 2012. URL: https://www.scientif
icamerican.com/article/superpowers-for-the-blind-and-deaf/.
[47]
Yuhang Zhao et al. “Enabling People with Visual Impairments to Navigate Virtual
Reality with a Haptic and Auditory Cane Simulation”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Association for Computing
Machinery, 2018, pp. 1–14. DOi: 10.1145/3173574.3173690.
[48]
A. Hevner J. v. Brocke and A. Maedche. Design Science Research Cases. Springer
Nature Switzerland AG, 2020. DOi: 10.1007/978-3-030-46781-4_1.
123
==PAGE:126==
REFERENCES
[49]
Ken Peffers et al. Design Science Research Process: A Model for Producing and
Presenting Information Systems Research. 2020. DOi: doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2006.02763.
[50]
Shagofah Noor, Omid Tajik, and Jawad Golzar. “Simple Random Sampling”. In: 1 (Dec.
2022), pp. 78–82. DOi: 10.22034/ijels.2022.162982.
[51]
Epic Games. VR Template. https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.3/en-US/vr-
template-in-unreal-engine/. Accessed: Jan. 11, 2024. 2023.
[52]
Meta Corporation. Meta Quest 2: Immersive all-in-one VR headset. https://www.
meta.com/dk/en/quest/products/quest-2/. Accessed: Jan. 12, 2024. 2024.
[53]
RYK - Rygmarvsskadede i Danmark. Om RYK. https://ryk.dk/om-ryk. Accessed:
2023-12-12. 2023.
[54]
Margaret M. Bradley and Peter J. Lang. “Measuring emotion: The self-assessment
manikin and the semantic differential”. In: Journal of Behavior Therapy and Exper-
imental Psychiatry 25.1 (1994), pp. 49–59. DOi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-
7916(94)90063-9.
[55]
Sharon Eve Sonenblum, Stephen Sprigle, and Ricardo A. Lopez. “Manual Wheelchair
Use: Bouts of Mobility in Everyday Life”. In: Rehabilitation Research and Practice
(2012). Ed. by Richard Crevenna. DOi: 10.1155/2012/753165.
[56]
Harry Khamis. “Measures of Association: How to Choose?” In: Journal of Diagnostic
Medical Sonography 24.1 (2008), pp. 155–162. DOi: https://doi.org/10.1177/
8756479308317006.
[57]
The pandas development team. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas. Version 1.5.3. Jan. 2024.
DOi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3509134.
[58]
Andre Ye. Stop One-Hot Encoding Your Categorical Variables. https://medium.
com/analytics-vidhya/stop-one-hot-encoding-your-categorical-variables-
bbb0fba89809. Accessed: Jan. 11, 2024. 2020.
124
==PAGE:127==
REFERENCES
[59]
Florian Wetschoreck. RIP correlation. Introducing the Predictive Power Score. htt
ps://towardsdatascience.com/rip-correlation-introducing-the-predictive-
power-score-3d90808b9598. Accessed: Jan. 11, 2024. 2020.
[60]
Florian Wetschoreck, Tobias Krabel, and Surya Krishnamurthy. 8080labs/ppscore:
zenodo release. Version 1.1.2. Oct. 2020. DOi: 10.5281/zenodo.4091345. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4091345.
[61]
Statens Naturhistoriske Museum SNM. Den foretrukne hånd. https://snm.ku.dk/
natureksperterne/alle_opslag/2013/2013.6/den-foretrukne-haand/. Accessed:
2023-11-27. 2013.
[62]
Matthew Hutson. ‘They went to the bar at noon’: what this virtual AI village is
teaching researchers. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-023-02818-9.
Accessed: 2023-09-23. 2023. DOi: 10.1038/d41586-023-02818-9.
[63]
M. Whittaker et al. “Disability, Bias, and AI”. In: AI Now Institute (2019). URL: https:
//www.are.na/block/23776337.
[64]
Lennard J. Davis. The Disability Studies Reader. 5th ed. New York, Routledge, Nov.
2016. iSBN: 9781315680668. DOi: 10.4324/9781315680668.
[65]
University of Cambridge. blueprint. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictiona
ry/english/blueprint. Accessed: 2023-12-01. 2023.
[66]
Epic Games. Blueprints Visual Scripting. https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.3/
en-US/blueprints-visual-scripting-in-unreal-engine/. Accessed: 2023-12-01.
2023.
[67]
Epic Games. Developing for Head-Mounted Experiences with OpenXR. https://d
ocs.unrealengine.com/5.3/en-US/developing-for-head-mounted-experiences-
with-openxr-in-unreal-engine/. Accessed: 2023-12-04. 2023.
[68]
Epic Games. Enhanced Input. https://docs.unrealengine.com/5.3/en- US/
enhanced-input-in-unreal-engine/. Accessed: 2024-01-15. 2023.
125
==PAGE:128==
Part V
Appendices
Appendix
Contents
A
Description of the 7 principles of Universal Design, including guidelines for each principle.
B
Notes from meetings with fellow researchers and professors.
C
Visual representation of the 10 portal typologies.
D
Detailed description of UE5 structure and terminology.
E
Detailed description of custom content created during simulator development.
F
Overview of simulator program folders and their contents.
G
Validation notes from advisory panel on the tested portal typologies.
H
Validation notes from advisory panel on simulator correctness and overall experience.
I
Introduction paper presented to participants as part of the testing process.
J
Visual representation of the randomized room order in which participants met each portal.
K
Table of results on the “preferred door design” task.
L
Additional result visualizations for LOC component.
M
Large format visualizations for INT component.
N
Comparison between test and advisory group for GAZ component.
Table 10: Overview of included appendices
126
==PAGE:129==
A
APPENDIX - 7 PRINCIPLES OF UD
A
Appendix - 7 Principles of UD
The 7 Principles of Universal Design as defined by B. R. Connel, et al. [11]. Number denotes
principle and letter series denotes guidelines for said principle.
1. Equitable Use
The design is useful and marketable to people with diverse abilities.
1a Provide the same means of use for all users: identical whenever possible; equivalent when
not.
1b Avoid segregating or stigmatizing any users.
1c Make provisions for privacy, security, and safety equally available for all users.
1d Make the design appealing to all users.
2. Flexibility in Use
The design accommodates a wide range of individual preferences and abilities.
2a Provide choice in methods for use.
2b Accommodate right- or left-handed access and use.
2c Facilitate the user’s accuracy and precision.
2d Provide adaptability to the user’s pace.
3. Simple and Intuitive Use
Use of the design is easy to understand, regardless of the user’s experience, knowledge, language
skills, or education level.
3a Eliminate unnecessary complexity.
3b Be consistent with user expectations and intuition.
3c Accommodate a wide range of literacy and language skulls.
3d Arrange information consistent with its importance.
3e Provide effective prompting and feedback during and after task completion.
4. Perceptible Information
The design communicates necessary information effectively to the user, regardless of ambient
conditions or the user’s sensory abilities.
127
==PAGE:130==
A
APPENDIX - 7 PRINCIPLES OF UD
4a Use different modes (pictorial, verbal, tactile) for redundant presentation of essential in-
formation.
4b Maximize “legibility” of essential information.
4c Differentiate elements in ways that can be described (i.e., make it easy to give instructions
or directions).
4d Provide compatibility with a variety of techniques or devices used by people with sensory
limitations.
5. Tolerance for Error
The design minimizes hazards and the adverse consequences of accidental or unintended actions.
5a Arrange elements to minimize hazards and errors: most used elements, most accessible;
hazardous elements eliminated, isolated, or shielded.
5b Provide warnings of hazards and errors.
5c Provide fail-safe features.
5d Discourage unconscious action in tasks that require vigilance.
6. Low physical Effort
The design can be used efficiently and comfortably and with a minimum of fatigue.
6a Allow user to maintain neutral body position.
6b Use reasonable opening forces.
6c Minimize repetitive actions.
6d Minimise sustained physical effort.
7. Size and Space for Approach and Use
Appropriate size and space is provided for approach, reach, manipulation, and use regardless of
user’s body size, posture, or mobility.
7a Provide a clear line of sight to important elements for any seated or standing user.
7b Make reach to all components comfortable for any seated or standing user.
7c Accommodate variations in hand and grip size.
7d Provide adequate space for the use of assistive devices or personal assistance.
128
==PAGE:131==
B
APPENDIX - NOTES FROM MEETINGS
B
Appendix - Notes from meetings
Notes from meetings with fellow researchers and professors regarding the intersection between
UD and VR fields.
John Paulin Hansen, Professor at Department of Technology, Management, and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) - 20/09/2023
- Background:
Prof. Hansen is a Bevica professor in the Innovation Division at DTU, where his research areas
are human-computer interaction with a special focus on innovation, usability of new technology,
and eye-tracking technology.
- Potential use cases:
Hansen imagines a hotel environment to be a good building typology to demonstrate a prospec-
tive tool with, as it requires access for a broad spectrum of individuals.
- Key indicators:
A number of data points to indicate quality in a virtual setting could include (1) the time
it takes the test subject to navigate the room, (2) how many collisions does the test subject
encounter during the test, (3) time for a test subject to evacuate in case of an emergency, and (4)
architectural aspects might include How many times does a person look out of the window?
or a more subjective measures, such as How did the test subject experience a room). This
could be quantified via eye-tracking data.
- Future perspectives on UD:
He further identifies a need to consider robot’s in the universal design strategies for the modern
building. In the not so far future, robots will be all around us. They are already delivering
food to tables, but could feasibly help deliver medicine between different sections of a hospital
or collecting mail from the side walk.
- Reference projects:
Prof. Hansen suggests researchers Hermund and S. Bundgaard and the project Virtual Sce-
nario Responder as an additional source of knowledge regarding how controls affects people’s
experience and how to isolate the input difficulties from the scenario.
- Potential contacts:
Fiona Bríd Mulvey, Senior Researcher. Research includes simulation of visual impairments and
development of visual aids.
129
==PAGE:132==
B
APPENDIX - NOTES FROM MEETINGS
Anders Hermund, Associate Professor at The Royal Danish Academy for Art, Ar-
chitecture and Design (KADK) / Ture Slot Bundgaard, Student Professor at The
Royal Danish Academy for Art, Architecture and Design (KADK) - 26/09/2023
- Model detail:
Both professors emphasized different degrees of detail for different purposes. Low detail, high
detail, and scanned models all have different performances versus the physical world. Their
research concluded that in general, the majority of testing showed that the high detail models
gave the best understanding and visualization of a space.
- Measurements:
To determine differences between LOD they employed measures relating to collisions, route
tracking, time, simplified eye tracking (recording the direction and what the headset was looking
at, not pupils) as well neural activity. Collisions were interpreted differently than an actual
collision, as someone in a simulated wheelchair was more likely to hit something than in a
physical setting. Collisions were also useful for detecting door thresholds.
- Game purpose:
Their research tested experiments both with and without a goal. If no goal was defined, people
would wander, perhaps too much. Having objects and things to interact with in the VE increased
immersions. Tasks could distract from the immersion, such that if the test subject had a task
to complete, the realism was less important.
- Difficulties in VR:
They identified that doors were problematic when using VR, as participants did not have a
strong sense of relation to their “hands” in the VE. Their work-around has been to change
the opacity of the door itself when a person approach, allowing them to pass straight through
without any interaction. Additionally, they firmly recommended avoiding forcing participants
to use staircases in VR.
130
==PAGE:133==
B
APPENDIX - NOTES FROM MEETINGS
Emil Ballegard. Ph.D. stipendiary at The Royal Danish Academy for Art, Ar-
chitecture and Design (KADK) - 20/11/2023
- Background:
Previous research projects using VR as a tool to develop spaces appropriate for individuals with
mobility issues.
- Understanding the Setting:
We’re looking closely at how people interact with a specific type of door in a particular situation.
It’s important to consider the context, i.e. in what situation and type of building the door is
placed, to determine the complete experience.
- Taking Care of Participants:
Ballegard suggested preparation of a strategy should participants feel nauseous during the test.
Ensure that valuable opportunities for data collection or feedback are not lost / invalidated.
- Looking Beyond Validation:
We’re not just checking if the simulator works; we’re comparing how people with disabilities
go through the test to those without disabilities. This helps us see if there are any differences
in how the tests are done. He questioned whether this approach was ideal compared to a more
open-ended test for those with disabilities.
- Evaluation of Inclusion:
An additional parameter of significance is the evaluation of participants’ feelings of inclusion.
This entails an analysis of whether the testing environment fosters a sense of inclusivity among
individuals with diverse abilities. A possible measure to include in future analysis methods.
- Emphasis on Experiential Aspects:
Recognizing the value of subjective experiences, there is a deliberate emphasis on the experi-
ential aspects of the test. This includes a qualitative exploration of how participants perceive
and engage with the door interaction.
- Regarding testing setup:
To get clear results, we’re sticking to a specific interaction. Ballegard’s experience suggested
that a lack of focus in regard to what part of the environment was the main focus led to difficulty
in quantifying what changes made a significant impact.
131
==PAGE:134==
C
APPENDIX - PORTAL SCHEDULE
C
Appendix - Portal schedule
Figure 37: Complete overview of portal typologies present in the project (continued on next
page).
132
==PAGE:135==
C
APPENDIX - PORTAL SCHEDULE
Figure 37 cont: Complete overview of portal typologies present in the project (continued on
next page).
133
==PAGE:136==
C
APPENDIX - PORTAL SCHEDULE
Figure 37 cont: Complete overview of portal typologies present in the project.
134
==PAGE:137==
D
APPENDIX - UE5 ASSETS AND ACTORS
D
Appendix - UE5 assets and actors
Any piece of content within an Unreal Engine project is called an Asset or an Actor. Assets
can be seen as building blocks that can be used when developing any game or application.
These assets can be of many types, such as widgets, materials, particle systems and sound
cues. Some assets or actors are built directly in the game engine, such as Blueprints, but
assets can also be produced outside Unreal Engine (for example, in other 3D programs like
Revit or Rhino) and imported into the project. From a technical standpoint, an Actor is
a programming class used within Unreal Engine to define an object with three-dimensional
positional, rotational, and scaling data. The following sections will give a brief introduction
to the assets and actors used for the creation of the simulator. Each colour represents an
individual asset or actor type.
Level
The environment where the construction of the overall gaming experience takes place is
commonly referred to as a level. The level can be seen as a three-dimensional space where
positioning of various objects and geometries help shape the immersive world the players
sees and interact with. Every element inserted into the environment, whether it’s a light
source, a mesh model, or a character, is categorized as an Actor. The Level is the canvas
where shaping of the landscapes, control of Level of Detail (LOD) on objects, and setting
of lights take place. Initially the test environment was modelled as a blank, empty room,
but through internal evaluation it was determined the addition of context creating objects
was necessary to improve the feeling of immersion. As a result, materials were added to all
surfaces, together with light fixtures in the ceiling, and different assets like a plant, chairs
and skirting boards. The wheelchair and dummy mannequin within it, together with the
floating hands, are added through the VR PAWN blueprint, to give players the perception of
being sat in an actual wheelchair when navigating through the room. Detailing was limited
135
==PAGE:138==
D
APPENDIX - UE5 ASSETS AND ACTORS
to a few objects to avoid distractions for the participants, and allow them to focus on the
interaction and rating tasks.
Blueprints and Interface
The basic understanding of a blueprint is“an early plan or design that explains how some-
thing might be achieved” [65]. In UE5, these blueprints allow the user to easily add func-
tionality on top of existing gameplay classes. This is done through the node-based interface
in UE5. The blueprints consist of a network of individual components, each with a different
function determined by code within. As with many common scripting languages, components
define Object-Oriented (OO) classes or objects in the engine [66]. A wide range of different
custom blueprints have been developed in order to create the simulation tool. Some of which
translate the VR controller input to executable movement commands, and some to control
the test environment that the portals are placed in. Tracking of all the data and the different
behaviours of the portals is also controlled using blueprints. A detailed explanation of the
inner workings of the constructed blueprint is found in appendix E.
Static Mesh Actor
A Static Mesh Actor is one of the most commonly used, and simple, type of Actor. It displays
any 3D mesh within the level. The “static” part of the name refers to the type of mesh used,
and not necessarily that the Actor is static (or unable to move).
A mesh is static if its
geometry does not change, the Actor itself can be moved or changed during gameplay. When
a static mesh is placed in a level, it can be resized in any direction and a material can be
added for realism purposes.
Trigger Volume
In simple terms, a trigger volume is an actor that is used to cause an event when another
object enters the space in the level they occupy. Trigger volumes can have different shapes
such as boxes, spheres and pill capsules, but retain the same function. The volumes are not
visible for the player to view during simulation, but acts as a development tool used within
136
==PAGE:139==
D
APPENDIX - UE5 ASSETS AND ACTORS
UE. For this project, trigger volumes are used to define the area of where different tracking
parameters should be collected and to trigger the evaluation widget upon task completion
Widget
A widget, defined as a small program producing visual output, is a 3D component that can
be shown inside the level built through a blueprint. A widget is often a menu or overlay that
the user can interact with during the game. A widget can include textures, text, and buttons
that trigger an event, this could be saving data, resetting a position, or exiting a game. The
widget component produced in the project is used as a part of the evaluation process when
players cross the finish line as described in (Sec. 6.2). The layout presented to the user is
shown below (Fig. 38).
Figure 38: Visualization of the evaluation process from inside the simulation tool
Material and Textures
Materials and textures add to the overall immersion of the simulator experience. Materials
137
==PAGE:140==
D
APPENDIX - UE5 ASSETS AND ACTORS
can be seen as the “paint” that is applied to control the visual appearance of objects. The
materials are built upon different textures that determine colour, reflectivity, roughness,
transparency etc. All of which are parameters used to inform the render engine, how the
surface should interact with the surrounding light. Textures are an image-based asset and
are primarily used for materials, but textures can also be used outside a material, for instance
as a plain image placed in the level or on a widget.
Enumeration (Enum)
In programming, an enumeration is a sorted list containing all the items in a collection. UE
enumerations can contain text strings, numbers, and other data formats. The use case for
this asset is switching between different mapping context’s (ways of controlling the character)
depending on user preference or hand mobility. For example, if the user is only able to use
one hand, the user can select right or left respectively through the enumerator. This will
trigger the part of the blueprint concerning user input and thus use a different mapping
context, meaning that all the controls are mapped to work with that specific hand.
Input Action
An Input Actions is typically used for discrete inputs, such as keyboard keys or buttons on a
game controller. Examples include pressing spacebar to jump. One input action per button
or key is created, each with a specific “value type”. The four different value types are: Digital
(is the button pressed or not?), Axis1D, Axis2D and Axis3D, which are continuous inputs
presented as float values (from 0 to 1). Different modifiers alter input behaviour, for example
Dead Zone, specifies a minimum movement before the game register an input.
Mapping Context
When all the input actions are created, they need to be mapped to the specific buttons on a
controller or keys on a keyboard, here the “Mapping Context” comes into play. Each individual
input action has a “key” assigned to it, for example, Input action: “MoveX_Right” is mapped
to “Oculus Touch (R) Thumbstick X-Axis”. Unreal Engine 5 supports a long list of different
138
==PAGE:141==
D
APPENDIX - UE5 ASSETS AND ACTORS
VR controllers through OpenXR [67], which is an open standard that provides cross-platform
compatibility within the AR and VR environment. As explained under “Enumeration” a
game can included more than one mapping context depending on user preference, this means
that the number of input actions and mappings depend on the use case. For this study three
different mapping contexts have been created, one for the use of both hands, one for left- and
one for right-handed control schemes. The final mapping context of buttons can be seen of
figure 39 below.
Figure 39: Mapping of controller button to simulator actions
Haptic Feedback
The haptic feedback in Unreal Engine is controlled through the use of graphical curves, which
define the intensity and frequency of haptic feedback vibrations sent to the controller. The
curve is applied to simulate different sensations or effects during specific events in a game,
this could be vibrations in the VR controllers when colliding with a wall.
139
==PAGE:142==
D
APPENDIX - UE5 ASSETS AND ACTORS
Sound Wave
The “Sound Wave” asset type is used to represent and store digital audio data. It serves as
a container for audio information and can be used to manage various aspects of sound, such
as pitch, volume, and playback settings. For this project, a “Sound Wave” have been used in
conjunction with a blueprint to trigger audio playback in response to events or interactions
within the game.
140
==PAGE:143==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
E
Appendix - UE5 Custom blueprints
Here the four primary components governing the behaviour of the simulator are presented.
They are presented in order of interaction from the top down (Fig. 11).
Level
This blueprint exists as a child of the level itself, acting as an intermediary between what the
player sees during simulation and the functionality of child blueprints. It contains its own
logic that functions as one large programming loop, ensuring that players start in one random
location, moves through all rooms one at a time executing the required evaluations before
ending the simulation upon completion. The components that constitute the blueprint are
shown in (Fig. 40) below.
Figure 40: Representation of UE asset types that constitute the LEVEL - BLUEPRINT, split
into visual and functional categories
This blueprint does not create any visual changes to the level during simulation, and therefore
all visual parts of the blueprint are entirely static. The floor, roof, walls, and several detailing
assets all follow the same construction of static mesh, material, and textures. Lighting is
processed during initial creation of the level and is fixed unless changes are made to the level
141
==PAGE:144==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
within the UE editor.
Beginning of play - When a player enters the simulation level the blueprint immediately
records the spawn points for all rooms, with unique portals in each, and creates a randomly
shuffled list containing the locations. The player is then instantly transported, using the
TELEPORT blueprint, to the first location in this shuffled list. Subsequently, the information
containing the player’s list of locations is sent to the VR PAWN to be saved to a log file. An
iterator is created starting from an integer value of one.
During play - Continuous checks are made to determine the location of the player. When
a player enters the trigger volume by crossing the finish line, the LEVEL - BLUEPRINT first
sends information to the VR PAWN to inform it that a player is now in the process of using a
menu and then activates the functionality that calls the SAM widget to the screen. When
a menu is open, checks are performed to determine when the player has submitted their
evaluation. When this check becomes true, the level blueprint again calls the VR PAWN and
closes the SAM menu before proceeding.
Now, one of two processes occur, depending on whether the player occupies the last room in
the shuffled location list or not. If not, the VR PAWN is prompted to begin fading the player’s
view to black before initiating the save functionality for the tracked data. After ensuring
the player has no further visibility and that data is saved, the iterator value is fetched and
gets the corresponding value from the shuffled list of locations. The player is then moved
using the TELEPORT blueprint to this new location and has their rotation reset. They now
face straight towards the portal in this new room. The VR PAWN is informed that the player
is no longer located in a trigger volume, or in the process of using a menu, and is prompted
to reverse the visual fade allowing the player to see again. Lastly, the iterator is increased
by one. If the current room is indeed the last, the VR PAWN is prompted to initiate the save
functionality for the tracked data before ending the simulation.
142
==PAGE:145==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
VR Pawn
The VR Pawn is created on top of a VR template provided with the installation of UE5.
This means that the OpenXR system is already initialized, alongside hand animations, and
the default mapping contexts which uses teleport as its movement method.
As default,
the VR template is a pawn actor, this means that it can be “possessed” and receive input
from a controller. But for our application, we have turned the pawn into a character. A
character class is a type of pawn that includes methods mimicking conventional mobility
instead of teleportation between spots. The visual representation of the VR PAWN (see Fig. 7)
consists of a wheelchair with separate left and right wheels for animation of wheel rotation. A
mannequin within the chair suggests the presence of a body to the player. The VR PAWN can
be seen as the direct link between the player and the simulator, and it consists of building
blocks shown on (Fig. 41).
Figure 41: Representation of UE asset types that constitute the VR PAWN, split into visual
and functional categories
Beginning of play - In the startup procedure of the simulator, an array of tasks and
definitions are executed. First, a mesh plane is defined and placed directly in front of the
HMD to be used when creating a “fade to black” effect after every submitted evaluation.
143
==PAGE:146==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
A maximum movement speed of the wheelchair is set, and the VR system sets the HMD
/ controller location in relation to the origin of the play area defined by the VR system.
With the help of UE5’s “Enhanced Input Local Player Subsystem” [68], relevant mapping
contexts are initialized for use in menu’s and game controls depending on player ability (left-,
right-, or double-handed control). The start of the simulator also prompts the timers that
log various sensor information to begin counting, and a file for saving the tracked data is
created with a timestamp and name. The following sections all describe events that occur
during simulation.
Movement & Controls - The different buttons assigned in the mapping context can be
accessed thought the VR PAWN and used as triggers for executing different parts of the script.
All movement controls depend on whether the user is grabbing the wheel or wheels on
the wheelchair, in technical terms this means that grabbing a wheel opens a gate, so that
information can be passed on to the next step of the script. In the case of a user being able
to use both hands, the forward and backward movement and rotation is activated when the
buttons [LT] and [RT] are pressed simultaneously (Fig. 39). With the two buttons depressed,
the joysticks, referred to as [LM] and [RM], can be used for movement and rotation within
the simulated environment. The joysticks both have the value type “Axis1D”, this means
that the input is translated as a decimal number between -1 and 1, 0 being standing still, -1
being full reverse and 1 full forward movement. The input signal is added to the maximum
speed defined in the beginning of play, this determining the speed of which the user should
travel at. The direction of the movement is defined by the forward vector direction of the
character, adding the speed to this vector ensures the direction of movement is also aligned
with the player.
Rotation of the character works in a very similar manner, here rotation clockwise gets ac-
tivated when the user moves [LM] forward and [RM] backwards at the same time, and vice
versa for anti-clockwise rotation. The speed of the rotation is controlled by the input from
144
==PAGE:147==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
the controllers and the set rotation speed, which is then made framerate independent by
multiplication of the framerate divided by “delta time” (time between frames). This ensures
smooth rotation. To rotate the actual player, the blueprint checks the current world rotation
of the character and adds the new calculated rotation from the control input. If the user only
has mobility in one hand, all the controls are mapped to work with one controller.
To give the wheelchair a more immersive nature, animations are added to the wheels so
that they turn depending on the speed with which the player moves or rotates. Each wheel
is a separate blueprint actor for the VR PAWN to interact with. Animation of forward and
backwards movement takes the length of the velocity vector for the character and uses this
as delta rotation around the x-axis of the two wheels. The rotation animations use the vector
length of the angular velocity divided by the rotation speed, to calculate the wheel animation
speed. Animations account for correct rotation of wheels when rotating in either direction.
VR template - Some functions implemented by the standard pawn, contained in the VR
template, are retained in our custom version. They are mentioned here. Firstly, the GRAB
blueprint has two specific actions within the pawn that are activated when the player grabs
and releases objects, one for each controller. Both function similarly, and when activated
by a button press, they proceed to search for nearby actors that contain the GRAB blueprint.
If one is found, and is within a valid distance, the pawn then now knows it is holding an
object. Depending on what type of interaction is defined by GRAB the held object changes its
behaviour. The pawn allows an object to be passed between each hand without a release of
the object. Instead, the reference to which hand is holding the object is updated. When the
player completes the action, by releasing the correct button, a check ensures that the hand
where the button is released is also holding the component. The object is then released.
Further details surround interactions within the simulator are discussed under BP_DOOR.
The MENU_WIDGET is activated through the VR PAWN, thereby changing the mapping context
and placing the menu above the simulated hand. The corresponding hand can then be used
145
==PAGE:148==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
as a pointer to chose between the menu options, like changing between levels and calibrating
the orientation of the VR system. The logic of the menu system is not described further but
can be accessed through the freely available VR template [51].
Lastly, the VR template implements a series of animations for the digital hands that the player
sees in the simulator. These animations use the OpenXR system to map common actions
from VR system controllers to comparable hand positions through a series of animations. For
instance, when a player depresses the grab button, digits on the digital hand curl together,
mimicking how one would hold an object. These animations provide an additional degree of
realism to the player, and provide context clues as to what buttons perform a given action.
The logic of the hand system is not described further but can be accessed through the freely
available VR template [51].
Data tracking and logging - We deal with two types of data as specified in (Sec. 9).
In our implementation, these are Qualitative ratings produced by the SAM WIDGET and a
wide variety of sensor data. The sensor data is produced and logged solely though the pawn
blueprint. Whereas, room order and qualitative data are only saved through the blueprint.
The logic behind producing and logging the sensor data is therefore the primary interest in
this section.
Continuous checks are made to determine whether the player enters or leaves the trigger
volume within which sensor information is to be tracked. When the player enters this volume,
a boolean value is set to True, allowing data to be added to a series of arrays in which sensor
data is logged. When the player leaves this volume, the boolean is set to False, preventing
any further data being added to the arrays. Whilst the tracking is active, a timer controls
the frequency with which sensor data is saved. This varies depending on what part of the
player activity the component tracks. In the case of player location, this is limited by the
movement speed of the character so can occur less frequently, in comparison hand movements
are much more rapid and need much finer detail to capture intricacies of player actions. Two
146
==PAGE:149==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
of the chosen components have an additional condition, one requires the player to collide
with another actor present in the level before data is logged. The other requires players to
interact with a door blueprint before logging data.
When the SAM evaluation is completed, the LEVEL - BLUEPRINT informs the VR PAWN to
save both data types. This initiates a sequence where the all information to be saved is
transformed from a UE array, into a series of Comma-Separated-Value (CSV) strings that
are writable to a plain text file. The file time stamp, initialized when play of the simulator is
started, is appended to the descriptive name for each component being saved, thus creating
a series of filenames. The group of files is saved to a central folder, containing sub folders
for each portal in the simulation. Data for all participants is saved in one location. All data
is saved using the .txt format so that it is easily readable. Lastly, each array is emptied of
tracking data produced in the current room, thereby ready for logging data for the subsequent
room.
BP_Door
Each of the ten portal types implement a custom version of the BP_DOOR blueprint, though
most are largely identical and differences are primarily geometry based.
Differences are
highlighted during the description of the interaction logic. Within the blueprint, geometry
for the given door is imported and divided into the static parts (wall, casing, door jambs,
etc.) and dynamic parts (door leaf, handle, etc.). Importantly, all geometry has its origin
point centred at the rotation point of the door to allow for doors to correctly rotate or move
as expected. The static parts serve no further purpose than visual detailing and allowing
for eventual collisions against the player. Movable parts are structured so that all detail
components are children of the door leaf. Referencing the door leaf in blueprint logic allows
all dynamic parts to be moved as one. The diagram below (Fig. 42) depicts the UE assets
that make up the portal blueprint.
147
==PAGE:150==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
Figure 42: Representation of UE asset types that constitute the BP_DOOR blueprint, split into
visual and functional categories
The door blueprint implements two other blueprints, the GRAB blueprint and the INTERFACE
blueprint. The GRAB blueprint is included as a predefined component of the UE5 VR template,
and provides functionality allowing the player to pick up, and hold physics based objects.
This blueprint exists in the engine as a physical point in 3D space and has been modified
to contain a custom interaction type specifically for doors. Each door includes two GRAB
components, one for each handle side.
The GRAB component is placed as a child of the
dynamic parts in the door blueprint at the handle location. The INTERFACE blueprint is
custom and serves as a way for information to be passed between the player (by proxy of
the VR PAWN), and the door with which the player is interacting. The interface constitutes
two actions; int_grab and int_release, which in accordance with their names occur when a
player grabs or releases the door.
For all versions of the blueprint, the initiation logic is identical. When the player depresses
the grab button, the VR PAWN initiates logic that searches for the nearest GRAB component
throughout the level. If one is found within a specified grab tolerance, the GRAB blueprint
activates and uses the custom int_grab action from INTERFACE to pass a reference to which
controller is performing the action, and which GRAB component is interacted with onto the
door blueprint. A series of events now occur in BP_DOOR depending on the door type:
148
==PAGE:151==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
1A Doors with a lever type handle - An initial check is performed to determine if
the door is closed and where the player is grabbing.
If the door is closed and the
player grabs the handle, they are allowed to move the door and a sound and animation
play to indicate the latch being retracted and handle moving. The door is marked as
open. If the door is closed and the player grabs outside handle range, no interaction is
allowed, and the door will not move. If the door is marked as open, and regardless of
the grab location, the player is allowed to move the door. A reference to the controller
performing the interaction is logged.
1B Doors with a bar type handle - The player is allowed to open these doors, regardless
of where they grab or if the door is closed (except grabbing the door leaf and pulling
towards the player). A reference to the controller performing the interaction is logged.
1C Self closing doors with a bar type handle - A check is performed to determine if
the door is currently in motion. If yes, the closing animation is stopped. The player
is allowed to open these doors, regardless of where they grab or if the door is closed
(except grabbing the door leaf and pulling towards the player). A reference to the
controller performing the interaction is logged.
2 For all doors - Every event tick, two checks are performed. First to determine if
the controller reference logged is valid, and second determining the distance from the
interacting hand to the door. If this distance becomes too large (i.e. by moving the
interacting hand in a direction the door cannot move) the door is forced to be released.
Should this occur, an event mimicking a release performed by the player is called.
Se relevant step below. If the door leaf or handle is within an acceptable interaction
distance its position is continually updated, either by rotation around its pivot point,
or by sliding along its track so that the grab location of the door remains the same as
the hand position in 3d space.
Each door has defined limits within which it is allowed to rotate (from closed up to a
149
==PAGE:152==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
130° angle) or slide (from 0 to 870 mm).
3 For all doors - When the player willingly (or is forced by the distance check) releases
the grab button, data is again sent from the VR PAWN through the INTERFACE now using
the int_release action. A check is performed, ensuring that the hand that initiated a
release is the one holding the object.
3A Doors with a lever type handle - The release event is activated in the blueprint,
and a check is performed to determine if the handle was grabbed (playing a sound and
animation). If yes, then another sound cue and animation are played to indicate the
extension of the latch and return of the handle to level. Lastly the position of the door
is compared to its starting position, within a certain tolerance (less than 0.5°), it is
automatically re-positioned to be closed, resulting in players being required to grab the
handle to open it again. If not, it is simply marked still open.
3B Doors with a bar type handle - The release event is activated in the blueprint,
and a check is performed determining the position of the door compared to its starting
position. Within a certain tolerance (less than 0.5° or 5 mm), it is automatically re-
positioned to be closed.
3C Self closing doors with a bar type handle - The release event is activated in the
blueprint, and after a 0.2 s delay the self-closing logic is initiated. The door now slowly
begins rotating back towards a closed position. It continuously checks for collisions
between the leaf and the player. The moment a collision is detected, the closing ani-
mation is paused until either the player moves the door away, or moves themselves out
of the door’s path. Then it will resume its closing animation until it has returned to
its starting position.
150
==PAGE:153==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
For bar handles, we allow an additional vertical tolerance during the check for valid interaction
distances. When the vertical difference in distance becomes more than half the height of the
bar handle from the GRAB component placed at its centre, the door is released. This allows
players to grab anywhere along the vertical expanse of the handle.
Widget
Each of the two widgets, MENU_WIDGET and SAM_WIDGET, consist of both a visual and a more
technical aspect of implementation. But in comparison to the previous explained blueprints,
widgets are constructed without a great number of relations to different assets or actors, as
the simple diagram below (Fig. 43) shows.
Figure 43:
Representation of UE asset types that constitute the two MENU_WIDGET and
SAM_WIDGET blueprints, where visual and functional categories, are combined
The UE asset type “widget blueprint”, used for creation of the two widgets, has a fully
customizable user experience (UX) interface, with a palette of effects and shapes that can be
used to create any type of visual content within a canvas. Apart from the visual appearance,
the different content can be set to “Is Variable”, this gives the possibility to implement
logic into the different actions such as “On Hovered”, “On Clicked”, “On Released” etc. The
following section will focus on the explanation of appearance and logic behind the SAM_WIDGET
blueprint. The MENU_WIDGET works using exactly the same principles.
151
==PAGE:154==
E
APPENDIX - UE5 CUSTOM BLUEPRINTS
Appearance - All the visual content placed within the boundaries of a canvas is treated as
a 3D instance and is therefore treated like an object and visualized inside the simulator. The
SAM_WIDGET is constructed using three rows of buttons, each with a unique texture / image
of the different variation of each assessment component (Sec. 9.1.1). The colour or state
of the individual images is set to change depending on where it is neutral, hovered upon or
pressed by the user.
Logic - Each of the buttons is set to be a variable, with the same name as what the icon
symbolizes (E.g. for Arousal a rating of 2 corresponds to “Dull”). An array with all fifteen
variable names is constructed. Once a button is pressed, a corresponding integer (from 1-5) is
added to an empty array of the size (1×3), the individual places in the array each represents
an answer from one of the three rows of the SAM. Only one icon in each row can be selected,
trying to select more than one will change the index sent to the array. If the array contains
empty spots, e.g. the user has not selected an image in each row, the evaluation can’t be
submitted. The three integers within the array, are then used as the indices’ to extract the
corresponding values, from the array of names. The button named “Submit” in the bottom
of the widget triggers a series of events in the LEVEL - BLUEPRINT and VR PAWN blueprint.
Firstly, it sends the final extracted array, consisting of the three names of the selected SAM’s,
to the VR PAWN blueprint where it is saved together with the tracking data collected from
inside the room. Secondly, it sets the boolean toggle ”Q&A Submitted” to true and hides the
widget.
The MENU_WIDGET blueprint works after the same principles as the SAM_WIDGET but performs
different tasks like, jumping between the familiarization and simulator level, together with
resetting the orientation of the vision seen through the VR headset and exiting the simulator
completely.
152
==PAGE:155==
F
APPENDIX - UE5 PROJECT
F
Appendix - UE5 Project
The attached zip-folder consist of two sub folders.PortalSimulator_Demo contains a pack-
aged version of the simulator, that can be used without any additional programs, by open-
ing the executable file PortalSimulator.exe. The ProtalSimulator_Dev folder includes all
the blueprints, actors, and assets used for development of the actual simulator.
Unpro-
cessed sensor data is located in the KPI_Tracker folder, and extracted KPIs are available
in KPI_Analysis as CSV files.
153
==PAGE:156==
G
APPENDIX - ADVISORY GROUP COMMENTS ON PORTALS
G
Appendix - Advisory group comments on portals
Comments from the advisory group regarding portal interactions. The doors are listed in
the order they appear in the door schedule.
Each table presents comments that a given
participant made pertaining to the given door. The number in brackets indicates the order
in which the participant met the door.
Door:
M10x21_H1000_HH_IND
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (2)
Participant noted that they moved in a manner closely resembling how they would
approach this door in a non-virtual environment.
Prs. 2 (2)
No comments.
Door:
M10x21_H1000_VH_INDD
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (1)
Participant noted that they moved in a manner closely resembling how they
would approach this door in a non-virtual environment. Specifically mentioning
being parallel to the door leaf and facing forwards towards the handle side.
Prs. 2 (7)
No comments.
Door:
M10x21_H1000_HH_UD
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (6)
Participant noted that the door opened in the outward direction.
Prs. 2 (4)
Participant specified they moved as they would in a non-simulation environ-
ment. They also noted that the door was easy to get through.
154
==PAGE:157==
G
APPENDIX - ADVISORY GROUP COMMENTS ON PORTALS
Door:
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (7)
Participant looks down often to ensure that there is space for the wheelchair
to pass.
Prs. 2 (1)
Participant noted that this door type with a vertical bar, but no self-close
mechanism, wasn’t typically what they encountered outside the simulation.
Door:
M10x21_HBAR_HH_UD_SC
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (4)
Described how they would position themselves (the wheelchair) in the path of
the closing door leaf to block it from closing whilst repositioning their grip.
Prs. 2 (3)
Immediately noticed the self-close mechanism when approaching the door.
Specified that they would grab both the door and frame, using the latter to
help pull them through.
Door:
M10x21_HBAR_HH_SLD
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (9)
Test ended prematurely due to nausea before reaching this room.
Prs. 2 (6)
No comments.
Door:
M14x21_H1000_HH_IND
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (3)
No comments.
Prs. 2 (9)
Participant noted that the door was difficult to use without noticing the width.
Only noticed the width when looking back at the door.
155
==PAGE:158==
G
APPENDIX - ADVISORY GROUP COMMENTS ON PORTALS
Door:
M8x21_H1000_HH_IND
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (10)
Test ended prematurely due to nausea before reaching this room.
Prs. 2 (8)
No comments.
Door:
M10x21_H800_HH_IND
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (8)
Test ended prematurely due to nausea before reaching this room.
Prs. 2 (10)
Commented on the low placement of the handle and that it was problematic
due to the risk of catching the handle.
Door:
M10x21_H1200_HH_IND
Test person
Notes
Prs. 1 (5)
Noted the tall handle height and found it difficult as its placement increased
the required reach.
Prs. 2 (5)
Mentioned the height of the handle was very unusual.
156
==PAGE:159==
H
APPENDIX - ADVISORY GROUP COMMENTS ON SIMULATOR
H
Appendix - Advisory group comments on simulator
Comments from the advisory group regarding the simulator and general portal interactions
outside the VE.
Test person
General notes
Prs. 1
More careful not to collide with the environment than our able-bodied test
group.
Is more careful about colliding with doors in public places. More often uses
chair to push doors at home.
The participant is used to moving whilst holding the door, without mentioning
it as a feature of the simulation.
Did not notice handle height in other cases than the H1200 one.
Prs. 2
Doors with a self-close mechanism require fair amounts of strength.
Participant is used to moving whilst holding the door.
Closing doors also impacts the experience to a large degree.
The substrate or floor surface is very important in the overall experience.
Test person
Plan of approach and forethought. Particular attention when approaching ob-
stacles.
Prs. 1
Participant always focuses on substrate / surface material and type
On approach, scans the edges of the door to determine how it will move and
what its properties are.
Most often uses both hands. Uses left hand to grab the door and right hand
to support by holding the door frame.
Prs. 2
Stairs, ramps, and rooms such as bathrooms all require some thought. Do I
have to reverse or manoeuvre in a difficult manner?
Participant always looks for hinges on approach.
157
==PAGE:160==
H
APPENDIX - ADVISORY GROUP COMMENTS ON SIMULATOR
Test person
To which degree does the simulator replicate the physical world, with regard
to spatial experience, interaction, and movement?
Prs. 1
Missing the feeling of weight and force. This makes difficult doors easier, and
easy doors not much easier.
Participant missed being able to push doors and have them swing open given
the pushing force.
A real wheelchair does not stand still just because the user does not move it.
Prs. 2
The physical mass of the doors is important.
The spatial aspect feels very correct. Identified as very important for the overall
experience.
Interactions also feel natural after becoming familiar with the control scheme.
Missing physics on wheelchair in regard to having it move from external forces.
Missing influence from threshold / sill
Test person
The perfect door
Prs. 1
Ideal if the perceived weight / force required was the same for all doors
Always prefers a motorized door, regardless if it is manually or sensor activated.
Lighter doors are preferred since heavy doors can be tiring to use all day. Wrists
and arms get tired.
Sliding doors are not always best as they require large range of motion to open
and need to be completely open to pass.
Prs. 2
Positive if the door opens automatically and disappears entirely from the open-
ing.
Sliding doors are bothersome to close.
Ideally, doors should always open into the next room.
Self-close mechanisms are often detrimental to the experience.
158
==PAGE:161==
I
APPENDIX - PRE-TEST INFORMATION SHEET
I
Appendix - Pre-test information sheet
Immersive Simulator for Quantifying Universal Design Efficiency
Age:
Height:
Preferred hand:
Right
Left
Ambidextrous
Functional impairment if relevant:
The construction industry in Denmark is, at all times, subject to the prevailing building regulations
that set a range of requirements to ensure accessibility in and around buildings.
Universal design is
an approach that seeks to move away from direct requirement-based design and in-stead focuses on
designing environments that account for all forms of human diversity.
Our project aims to investigate how one can quantify the effectiveness of a given universal design through
a virtual environment (Virtual Reality - VR). Specifically, it explores how people with mobility challenges
interact with different types of doors and whether a virtual environment can be used to measure the
degree of universal design for a specific door design.
The test consists of two parts; the first part takes place within the virtual environment. Here, the test
participant will start in a practice course to become familiar with navigation and interaction with objects.
Subsequently, the test participant will navigate through 10 rooms, each containing a door as shown in
the figure below.
159
==PAGE:162==
I
APPENDIX - PRE-TEST INFORMATION SHEET
When the finish line is crossed, the test participant will be greeted by SAM, the ”Self Assessment Manikin”.
This is an evaluation form that must be filled out based on the experience of passing through the latest
door.
The evaluation is conducted through three rows of pictograms: VALENCE, AROUSAL, and
DOMINANCE. A pictogram in each row is selected (clicked on) based on the experience that the test
participant had in the respective room.
VALENCE - unpleasant / pleasant
AROUSAL - stimulated / calm
DOMINANCE - controlled / in control
The evaluation form is shown below.
The setup consists of a set of VR goggles and two controllers as illustrated below. To navigate around
the environment, [LT] Wheel Grip and [RT] Wheel Grip must be held down. When this is done, [RM]
Move & Rotate / [LM] Move & Rotate can be used to move the ”player” for-ward and backward, as
160
==PAGE:163==
I
APPENDIX - PRE-TEST INFORMATION SHEET
well as rotate. The two [RB / LB] Door Grip buttons are to be used when interacting with a door; the
test participant can choose which hand to use for this. Evaluation is done by pointing the controller at
a pictogram and pressing the end of [LT] Wheel Grip or [RT] Wheel Grip.
NOTE: If at any point you feel uncomfortable, the VR goggles can be removed, and the test can be
interrupted.
161
==PAGE:164==
J
APPENDIX - PARTICIPANT ROOM ORDER
J
Appendix - Participant room order
Figure 44: Participant randomized path through portal rooms.
162
==PAGE:165==
K
APPENDIX - PREFERRED DOOR DESIGN DATA
K
Appendix - Preferred door design data
The following table present complete results from the preferred door design task described in section
12.1.2. All numeric data, unless otherwise specified, is presented in units of millimetre (mm).
Participant ID
Age [y]
Height
Handedness
QA Width
QA Handle height
QA Hinge side
133639
27
1640
Right
1125
1000
Right
134850
23
1870
Right
1300
875
Left
140419
23
1950
Right
1100
1050
Left
141645
26
1820
Right
1300
1025
Left
143148
34
1780
Left
1450
1200
Right
145045
24
1860
Left
1200
1050
Right
150928
26
1750
Right
1325
875
Right
152855
24
1730
Right
1225
1000
Right
154818
34
1830
Right
1450
1200
Right
160940
24
1670
Right
1400
1075
Right
162414
28
1700
Right
1300
900
Right
084259
23
1860
Left
1075
1050
Right
085501
22
1640
Right
1225
1175
Right
091044
24
1700
Right
1350
900
Right
092510
24
1850
Right
1300
850
Right
093954
22
1690
Right
1200
1025
Right
095502
22
1700
Right
1075
925
Right
101248
23
1830
Right
1500
950
RIght
102815
23
1880
Right
950
1025
Right
104025
23
1800
Right
1350
850
Right
105408
23
1800
Right
1250
875
Right
110802
24
1760
Right
1225
925
Right
112249
22
1740
Right
1150
950
Right
140903
27
1900
Right
2000
900
Right
150800
36
1950
Right
900
775
Right
Avg.
25
1788
1269
977
Table 11: Results from the preferred door design task
The table is continued on the following page…
163
==PAGE:166==
K
APPENDIX - PREFERRED DOOR DESIGN DATA
Participant ID
QA Opening
QA Sliding
Tracked handle height
Difference handle height
133639
In
Yes
1112
112
134850
Out
Yes
1039
164
140419
In
Yes
1008
-42
141645
Out
Yes
1135
110
143148
In
Yes
1100
-100
145045
In
Yes
1097
47
150928
In
Yes
1113
238
152855
In
Yes
1151
151
154818
In
Yes
1098
-102
160940
In
Yes
1047
-28
162414
In
Yes
1014
114
084259
In
Yes
893
-157
085501
Out
Yes
948
-227
091044
In
Yes
948
48
092510
Out
Yes
893
43
093954
Out
No
978
-47
095502
In
No
912
-13
101248
In
Yes
935
-15
102815
In
Yes
955
-70
104025
In
Yes
923
73
105408
Out
No
1010
135
110802
Out
Yes
1034
109
112249
In
Yes
1005
55
140903
In
Yes
1046
146
150800
Out
No
988
213
Avg.
1015
38
Table 11 cont.: Results from the preferred door design task
164
==PAGE:167==
L
APPENDIX - LOC SENSOR DATA VISUALISATIONS
L
Appendix - LOC sensor data visualisations
Additional figures depicting LOC component data for all participants across all portal types.
Figure 45: Temporal location of test group participants presented by door type. Colour scale
indicates forward velocity in km/h
165
==PAGE:168==
L
APPENDIX - LOC SENSOR DATA VISUALISATIONS
Figure 46: Temporal location of test group participants presented by door type. Colour scale
indicates density of points scaled per room.
166
==PAGE:169==
M
APPENDIX - INT SENSOR DATA VISUALIZATION
M
Appendix - INT sensor data visualization
Figure 47: Initial interaction with portal for each test participant. Left dimensions indicate
Z-height variation of interaction, and distance from ground plane.
Right indicates mean
height. All units are in [cm].
167
==PAGE:170==
M
APPENDIX - INT SENSOR DATA VISUALIZATION
Figure 48: Complete interaction trace by portal for each test participant indicated by colour.
Left dimensions indicate Z-height variation of interaction, and distance from ground plane.
Right indicates mean height. All units are in [cm].
168
==PAGE:171==
M
APPENDIX - INT SENSOR DATA VISUALIZATION
Figure 49: Complete interaction trace by portal for each test participant indicated by colour.
169
==PAGE:172==
N
APPENDIX - GAZ COMPARISON VISUALISATION
N
Appendix - GAZ comparison visualisation
Comparison of GAZ data between test- and advisory groups.
Figure 50: All traced focal points for advisory group (Red) and test group (Blue).
170
==PAGE:173==
==PAGE:174==
