==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Implications of congestion income 
distribution on economic feasibility of 
hybrid offshore wind projects
Max Walter Müller
DTU Wind-M-0739 
January 2024
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
DTU Wind-M-0739 
January 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Lena  Kitzing
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Phil Swisher
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of 
Denmark Department of Wind 
Energy Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: 
Max Walter Müller
Title: 
Implications of congestion 
income on economic feasibility of 
hybrid offshore wind projects
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:4==
Executive Summary
Offshore bidding zones (OBZ) are recognised as a economically efficient solution for mar-
ket integration of offshore energy hubs in the North Sea. However, this market integration
leads to increased volume and price risks for hybrid offshore wind projects, prompting the
European Commission to propose Transmission Access Guarantees (TAG), which re-
distribute congestion income to compensate for the reduction in onshore market access.
This thesis uses a flow-based market coupling optimisation of the Balmorel energy system
model model to determine TAG compensation levels for different OBZ configurations and
assess their impact on the economic feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects through
discounted cash flow analysis.
The study calculates TAG compensation ex-post for limited onshore market access in-
duced by power transfer distribution factors from constrained critical network elements,
finding a minor impact on total revenue depending on OBZ topology. In the analysed
OBZ configuration, TAG compensation varies from 0.01% to 3.34% of annual revenue for
different hybrid offshore wind projects. While TAG increases project profitability, none of
the projects become economically viable solely through TAG compensation.
For economic viability, additional support instruments are essential, but caution is advised
to avoid overcompensation and inefficient allocation of resources. Moreover, the study
emphasises that TAG compensation may be redundant if alternative support instruments
are used.
The thesis explores variations in OBZ configurations, finding that increased transmission
capacity or offshore wind generation overcapacity does not significantly impact the level of
TAG compensation. However, these configurations result in higher project costs, making
them less favourable investment options compared to the base scenario.
The study identifies non-intuitive flows on the OBZ-home market interconnectors, repre-
senting an additional market access and price risk, which were found to be addressed by
TAG. The frequency of flow-based reduced market access that triggers TAG compensa-
tion with implications for project economics varies among OBZs but appears to be rare.
In conclusion, the research recommends exploring alternative financial support instru-
ments to make hybrid offshore wind projects economically viable. TAG compensation,
while beneficial, is insufficient alone, and careful consideration of project-specific factors
and alternative financial instruments is crucial to encourage investment in offshore wind
projects located in OBZs in the North Sea.
iv Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Lena Kitzing and Phil Swisher.
Lena, thank you for giving me the opportunity to write about this fascinating topic of Trans-
mission Access Guarantees compensation for Offshore Bidding Zones in the North Sea.
Your guidance and advice throughout the thesis have been very helpful. Phil, thank you
so much! Your continuous support and assistance with questions regarding the Balmorel
model and other aspects have been instrumental in the completion of this work.
I also thank Ea Energy Analyses for providing me with the opportunity to work as a student
assistant in energy systems analysis during my master’s degree. The responsibility and
trust in me during my time there have contributed significantly to my learning and growth.
I am excited to continue my career as a full-time consultant at Ea Energy Analyses, where
I can further explore my passion for understanding the complexity of energy systems and
effective regulatory instruments that enable market-driven, innovative solutions to achieve
carbon neutrality. I would also like to thank Ea Energy Analyses for allowing me to use
their resources and the Balmorel model for my thesis, and for lending me noise-cancelling
headphones for undisturbed work in the Black Diamond Library in Copenhagen.
I also want to thank my roommates Tabea, Elia, Ira, Hanna, and Sofie, as well as my
friends and colleagues. Your presence has made life so much more enjoyable and fulfill-
ing. Thank you for making every day brighter.
Last but certainly not least, I want to thank my parents and my three little sisters. Your
support in everything I do, including my decision to leave Germany and move to Denmark,
has been a source of strength for me. Growing up in a safe and privileged environment
that you provided has shaped me into the person I am today. Thank you for your endless
love and support.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects v
==PAGE:6==
vi Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structural integration of hybrid offshore wind projects . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Congestion income redistribution instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Motivation and scope of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methodology
9
2.1
Energy system modelling in Balmorel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Congestion income redistribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.3
Private economic feasibility analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.4
General approach to obtain results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3
Results
27
3.1
Offshore Bidding Zone market results and TAG compensation . . . . . . . . 27
3.2
Economic feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4
Discussion
51
4.1
Limitations of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.2
Implications of Transmission Access Guarantees on hybrid offshore wind
projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.3
Recommendations for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects vii
==PAGE:8==
viiiImplications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This thesis analyses the impact of the congestion income distribution on the economic
feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects located in an offshore bidding zone in the North
Sea. For a good understanding of this work, the reader should have a general understand-
ing of electricity markets and energy system modelling. The introduction will provide an
overview of the anticipated structural integration of hybrid offshore wind projects, as well
as discuss the income distribution challenges associated with the transition from a radial
home market to an offshore bidding zone integration of offshore wind projects. In addition,
there is a brief introduction to different congestion income distribution instruments.
1.1
Structural integration of hybrid offshore wind projects
In response to the Russian invasion in Ukraine to strengthen the energy security of the
European Union (EU) and fight against climate change, four members of the North Sea
Energy Cooperation (NSEC) have highlighted the importance of offshore wind energy
from the North Sea in a joint declaration at an offshore wind summit in Esbjerg in 2022. In
the Esbjerg Declaration, the four northern European countries Belgium, the Netherlands,
Germany, and Denmark decided to jointly develop the North Sea as a Green Power Plant
of Europe and pledged to increase their combined offshore wind power capacity in the
North Sea to 60 GW by 2030 and 150 GW by 2050 [1].
Following the plans of the NSEC’s Transmission System Operators (TSOs), in the future
North Sea as a Green Power Plant, offshore wind capacities will be integrated in a combi-
nation of conventional radial offshore connections, hybrid interconnectors, energy hubs,
and in combination with hydrogen generation and distribution infrastructure. Hence, hy-
brid interconnected energy hubs will play a key role in ensuring the availability of offshore
wind energy while distributing renewable energy more efficiently between wind farms,
hubs, and connected countries [2].
1.1.1
Offshore grid setups
Different examples of offshore wind power grid connections are shown in fig. 1.1. To-
day, the vast majority of offshore wind farms are radially connected to the corresponding
country in the same exclusive economic zone (EEZ). These wind farms are connected
near-shore by an alternating current (AC) connection or far offshore by a direct current
(DC) connection [2]. The world’s first hybrid interconnector was inaugurated in October
2020 connecting the Kriegers Flak offshore wind farm in the Baltic Sea with Denmark and
Germany. While exporting offshore wind power to shore, the hybrid interconnector also
serves as an interconnector between the two neighbouring countries Denmark and Ger-
many, where electricity can be transported and traded in both directions [3]. An energy
hub includes a combination of radially connected offshore wind farms and one or more hy-
brid interconnectors that connect the hubs/wind farms in different market bidding zones.
Similarly to hybrid interconnectors, energy hubs have the dual function of exporting off-
shore wind power to the shore and using the hybrid interconnector for cross-border power
trading [2]. Hybrid offshore wind projects will be further defined as an offshore wind farm
(OWF) located in an energy hub and connected to at least two different energy markets
through a transmission asset.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects 1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Offshore wind integration concept examples [2]
Currently, there are no existing energy hubs in the world, although Denmark and Belgium
are planning the world’s first energy hub / island solutions in their exclusive economic zone
in the North Sea, which will be connected by a hybrid interconnector called the Triton Link
project [3]. In addition, multiple member states of the North Sea Energy Cooperation have
announced plans to build energy hubs for hybrid offshore wind projects in their EEZ and
connect them with each other. Belgium’s Princess Elisabeth Island will be the first artificial
energy island in the world and is planned to complete and connect 3.5 GW of offshore
wind energy by 2030 while having a hybrid interconnection with Denmark and the United
Kingdom [2]. Denmark recently paused planning its energy island in the North Sea and
postponed the tender due to updated analyses showing that the artificial island solution
would be too expensive for the Danish economy. However, the Danish transmission sys-
tem operator Energinet is now investigating an alternative platform-based hub solution at
reduced costs to replace the artificial energy island [4]. For the Danish energy island, up
to 4 GW of offshore wind capacity is expected to be connected to the island in the first
phase at the beginning of the 2030s and up to 10 GW towards 2040 [5]. Furthermore,
Germany and the Netherlands have plans to establish large-scale energy hubs / energy
clusters with connected offshore wind capacities greater than 10 GW [2].
1.1.2
Market integration
One of the challenges in planning energy hubs and hybrid offshore wind projects is effi-
cient market integration. There are different options on how to implement a hybrid offshore
wind project located in an energy hub in the electricity market. The two currently most
discussed options are the home market (HM) and the offshore bidding zone (OBZ) inte-
gration. For the home market bidding zone integration, the hybrid offshore wind project
is added to an existing connected onshore bidding zone. In contrast to this, the offshore
bidding zone integration implements the OWF in a newly created bidding zone, and thus
reflects potential structural congestion in the surrounded electricity network. In general,
bidding zones are used to group the supply and demand of electricity for the market dis-
patch in the European power system. Therefore, all generators and consumers in one
bidding zone will be exposed to the same market clearing price, and the design of the
bidding zones determines the location of the hybrid offshore wind project from a market
perspective [6].
Different studies have analysed the advantages and disadvantages of the home market
bidding zone and offshore bidding zone integration of hybrid offshore wind projects. A
2 Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:11==
report for the European Commission written by THEMA Consulting Group simulated and
compared both market integration options in their TheMa power market model and came
to the conclusion that an offshore bidding zone would be the preferred option [6]. Follow-
ing the recommendations of the report, an OBZ is the superior approach to maximise the
overall social welfare of the market clearing solution and to make the system more re-
silient to future adaptations of the offshore network. Furthermore, OBZs have been found
to reduce the potential discrimination between marked participants. At the same time, the
OBZ would come with the additional risk of shifting market revenue from hybrid offshore
wind projects to TSOs in the form of congestion income on the interconnector.
Congestion income accrues when the electric power capacity on interconnector trans-
mission elements between two different bidding zones is congested and is equal to the
allocated capacity on the interconnector multiplied by the market price spread between
the two connected bidding zones. The European Union Agency for the Cooperation of
Energy Regulators (ACER) defined a congestion income distribution methodology stat-
ing that the TSOs on each side of the two neighbouring bidding zones should receive
their share of the net border income using a 50%-50% sharing key [7]. Depending on the
ownership of the transmission asset, the sharing key might deviate from a 50%-50% split.
To a similar conclusion came also the North Sea Wind Power Hub programme consortium
[8]. The North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH) consortium consists of the Danish TSO
Energinet, the Dutch and German TSO TenneT, and the Dutch natural gas and trans-
portation company Gasunie. Their work investigates the hub-and-spoke concept of a
North Sea Wind Power Hub, which is their proposed solution to integrate renewable en-
ergy into the North Sea [9]. Therefore, they used among other methodologies the energy
system model Balmorel and performed a economic dispatch and capacity expansion op-
timisation. They found that OBZs would improve market efficiency while better reflecting
the actual physical limitations of the energy system and produce efficient price signals
to all market participants. However, the NSWPH consortium also stated different risks
associated with the implementation of OBZ. The relatively small size of the OBZ is a risk
for the OWF because incremental changes to the OWF would have a greater influence on
price levels in small OBZs. Furthermore, would an OWF located in an OBZ, depend on
the available interconnector capacity. Congestion and technical unavailability of the inter-
connector would lead to an increased price and volume risk for the OWF [8]. To mitigate
these risks, the NSWPH consortium recommended the establishment of well-defined ad-
ministrative compensation schemes between TSOs and OWFs, which will be described in
more detail in section 1.2. The TSO and the legislator should also increase transparency
on the availability of interconnector capacity and the capacity allocation methodology. In
addition, there should be a clear overview of future offshore development plans with re-
spect to transmission and generation capacities to reduce uncertainties.
Kitzing and Gonzales explored different market arrangements for massive offshore wind
generation in the North Sea, which is at the same time internationally connected in a net
transfer capacity based setup of the energy system model Balmorel [10]. Their results
indicate that creating a separate offshore bidding zone can lead to a more efficient en-
ergy system setup than sending the electricity to a home market in a radial OWF market
integration or granting Financial Transmission Rights to the offshore wind farm operators
in the hubs.
An increased social welfare in Europe resulting from an offshore energy hub in the North
Sea is also found by Tosatto et al. [11]. In their study, Tosatto et al. performed a large-
scale impact analysis of offshore hubs on the whole European power system and elec-
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects 3
==PAGE:12==
tricity market using a flow-based market model. They furthermore found national grid
congestion within the German grid, resulting in offshore wind curtailment within the off-
shore hub.
In a different study by Kenis et al., applied advanced hybrid coupling was used, which
includes offshore DC transmission lines in flow-based market coupling, and different off-
shore bidding zone configurations were compared [12]. Kenis et al. found that offshore
bidding zones lead to a welfare transfer: compared to a home market integration, the pro-
ducer surplus of offshore wind farm owners decreases due to a lower average price, and
the congestion rent for TSOs increases, which impacts the need for support instruments
for offshore wind farms.
Following the findings and recommendations of academia and industry, the European
Commission announced in its ”EU strategy to harness the potential of offshore renewable
energy for a climate neutral future” in 2020 that it would clarify the regulatory framework
on offshore bidding zones for hybrid projects [13]. Furthermore, the European Commis-
sion described the proposal of an amending legislation on the allowed use of congestion
income with regard to offshore hybrid projects as a key action.
1.2
Congestion income redistribution instruments
As described above, the implementation of offshore bidding zones comes with an in-
creased volume and price risk for hybrid offshore wind projects compared to a home
market integration. A report by ENGIE Impact and published through the European Com-
mission in 2022 examines different market-based congestion income distribution options
to mitigate the potential risks for OWF business cases when OBZs are established, which
are listed below [14].
1. Financial Transmission Rights (FTR)
2. Contracts for Difference (CfD)
3. Transmission Access Guarantee (TAG)
It is found that an offshore bidding zone and its different allocation of the hybrid offshore
wind project’s market revenue does not fundamentally justify an alternative reallocation
methodology in favour of newly built OWFs. However, ENGIE Impact concluded that in-
stances with reduced operational transmission capacity (operational deratings) of a hybrid
interconnector expose hybrid offshore wind projects located in an OBZ to specific trans-
mission volume and price risks, which are currently not addressed and may justify the
implementation of measures to mitigate the mistreatment of hybrid offshore wind projects.
Those operational deratings would be the result of preventing internal congestion from oc-
curring in the system where affected generators are less exposed to transmission volume
risk than in the OBZ.
Financial Transmission Rights (FTRs) would allow market participants to hedge locational
risk between bidding zones in a particular direction. FTRs are auctioned in advance by the
TSOs and compensate the holder in the event of an unfavourable price spread. Allocating
FTRs to hybrid projects for free would transfer congestion income from TSOs to OWF.
In a pre-allocation round, the FTRs would be initially allocated to offshore generators
before auctioning the remaining to other market participants. This ex ante distribution
could be part of the competitive tender in which connection contracts are awarded (at
the investment decision level) [14]. However, the FTR instrument comes with certain
drawbacks. With an FTR congestion income distribution, the compensation of the OWF
would be restricted by the physical capacity of the interconnector. If the OWF capacity
4 Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:13==
exceeds the transmission capacity to the reference bidding zone, the OWF would not be
fully hedged. More important, would an FTR lead to overcompensation because the OWF
would receive compensation every time there is a price spread between the home market
and the offshore bidding zone.
Contracts for Difference (CfDs) are traditionally awarded in a tendering process based
on a compensation contract between a government and an energy producer.
A CfD
would eliminate the price risk of a project by guaranteeing an agreed fixed strike price
for each unit of delivered energy. An CfD, with the TSO as a counterparty, could be fur-
ther redesigned with a variable home market strike price to compensate the OWF. Yet,
similarly to the FTR instrument, the CfD would also tend to overcompensate the OWF by
eliminating the price risk also in situations where there is no operational derating of the
interconnector [14].
1.2.1
Transmission Access Guarantees
Transmission Access Guarantees (TAG) is a newly conceptualised congestion income
distribution measure by ENGIE Impact, which would compensate the OWF in the situation
of operational deratings of the interconnector and being paid by the TSO that owns the
restricted network element [14]. Therefore, the TAG would incentivise the TSO to ensure
the export capabilities of the hybrid offshore wind project. ENGIE Impact came up with
the following methodology (see eq. (1.1))
TAG compensation =
max(reference HM price −OBZ price, 0) · total offshore generation available
(1.1)
The reference HM would be equal to the home market bidding zone, located in the same
exclusive economic zone. ENGIE Impact designed the TAG under the assumption that
the system is designed so that all offshore wind generation can be exported to shore [14].
The NSWPH consortium also named different compensation measure options to mitigate
transmission volume risks caused by the delay in commissioning or technical unavail-
ability of the electrical transmission infrastructure in its commercial framework offshore
bidding zone report from 2023 [8]. Among firmness commitments and priority availability
to OWF developers, the NSWPH consortium also listed Transmission Access Guaran-
tees as a possible compensation instrument. In firmness commitments, the TSO or the
government would guarantee a certain transmission export volume to the OWF and com-
pensate the OWF financially if the commitments are not met. The second named option
would provide a higher dispatch priority to the OWF compared to interzonal transmission
on the interconnector. The Transmission Access Guarantees instrument is defined as an
compensation from TSOs to OWF in the event of reduced interconnector transmission
capacity due to congestion management. The NSWPH consortium described the TAG as
”[...] effectively a CfD with a variable strike price at a particular time for all available vol-
ume.”. However, the NSWPH consortium also found that the TAG would lead to discrim-
ination between different users of the interconnector if they are only committed to OWF
in an OBZ and hence also stroke against the fundamental non-discriminatory principle of
the European electricity market. Furthermore, TAG would also create an additional risk
for the TSO in the event that the required compensation exceeds the congestion income
on the interconnector.
Following the findings and recommendations of the report by ENGIE Impact [14], the Eu-
ropean Commission proposed in its first draft of the EU’s electricity market design reform
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects 5
==PAGE:14==
in March 2023 the TAG as the preferred congestion income distribution instrument for
hybrid offshore projects [15]. The European Commission proposed to amend Article 19
paragraph 2 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 by the point ”(c) compensating offshore gener-
ation plant operators in an offshore bidding zone if access to interconnected markets has
been reduced in such a way that one or more transmission system operators have not
made enough capacity available on the interconnector or the critical network elements
affecting the capacity of the interconnector, resulting in the offshore plant operator not
being able to export its electricity generation capability to the market.”.
The risks associated with TAG were also identified by European TSOs. The European
Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E) published a white
paper at the beginning of 2023 in response to the first draft of the electricity market de-
sign reform by the European Commission [16]. ENTSO-E emphasised that congestion
income should not be used to support hybrid offshore wind projects and would ”[...] be an
implicit and non-transparent subsidy paid by consumers, and contradict internal markets
principles.”. Furthermore, should the exclusive use case of congestion income continue
to be the investment in transmission capacity expansion and secondly the reduction of
consumer tariffs. Instead of TAG, ENTSO-E recommended in its white paper the use of
well-designed CfDs.
Since the initial proposal of the EU’s electricity market design reform was published in
March 2023, the amendment for Articel 19, paragraph 2, was discussed during the pro-
cedure 2023/0077(COD) in the Council of the European Union, the Economic and Social
Committee, and the European Committee of the Regions. As of January 2024, it awaits
the European Parliament’s position in the 1st reading. The most recent proposed amend-
ment to Article 19 paragraph 2 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 that includes the provisional
position of the European Council on the Commission’s proposal was published on the 19th
of October 2023 and has the following adaptation: ”(c) compensating offshore renewable
electricity generation plant operators in an offshore bidding zone directly connected to
two or more bidding zones if access to interconnected markets has been reduced in such
a way that it results in the offshore renewable electricity plant operator not being able
to export its electricity generation capability to the market and, where relevant, a corre-
sponding price decrease in the offshore bidding zone, as compared to without capacity
reductions. The compensation applies where one or more transmission system operators
have not made enough available the capacity available agreed in the connection agree-
ment on the interconnector or have not made available the capacity on the critical network
elements affecting pursuant to the capacity calculation rules in Article 16 (8) of Regula-
tion (EU) 2019/943. On an annual basis, this compensation shall not exceed the total
congestion income generated on interconnectors between the concerned bidding zones
of the interconnector, resulting in the offshore plant operator not being able to export its
electricity generation capability to the market.” [17].
1.3
Motivation and scope of the thesis
As shown in section 1.1, future studies have identified offshore bidding zones to be the
most efficient solution for market intergration of hybrid offshore wind projects located in
energy hubs. Although the benefits and risks of OBZ market integration and various
compensation measures using congestion income redistribution to mitigate OWF risks
in OBZs have been identified in the literature, no studies have yet been published that
analyse the implications of these congestion income redistribution measures on the eco-
nomic viability of hybrid offshore wind projects. These compensation measures have the
potential to mitigate the financial risks associated with hybrid offshore wind projects in an
6 Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:15==
OBZ. Therefore, understanding their impact on private economic viability can help design
effective risk mitigation strategies and provide valuable insights for informed investment
decisions. Furthermore, such a study can help policy makers in formulating effective leg-
islation that promotes the integration of hybrid offshore wind projects in OBZs. As the
concept of OBZs and the compensation of hybrid offshore wind projects with congestion
income is relatively new, and the proposal for the reform of the EU electricity market de-
sign, including transmission access guarantees as the preferred compensation option,
has only been published in March 2023, there is no published literature yet analysing
these implications. Given that the current proposal to reform the EU’s electricity market
design includes Transmission Access Guarantees to reduce investment risks for offshore
developers, this work will analyse the impact of TAG on the private economic feasibility
of hybrid offshore wind projects.
The objective of this work is to calculate the amount of annual TAG compensation and OBZ
market income of hybrid offshore wind projects and determine the implications of TAG on
the private economic feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects. In addition, recommen-
dations will be formulated that address the research question: What are the implications
of Transmission Access Guarantees as a congestion income redistribution instrument on
the private economic feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects?
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects 7
==PAGE:16==
8 Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:17==
2
Methodology
The applied methodology for analysing the impact of Transmission Access Guarantees
on the economic feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects includes a combination of
two different tools: An energy system model optimisation to compute electricity prices,
net transmission flows, offshore wind farm generation and curtailment and congestion
income (CI) to calculate the anticipated congestion income redistribution of the OWF and
a Discounted Cash Flow model analysis to examine the influence of CI compensation on
the private economic feasibility of OWFs in an OBZ. In the first step, an outline of the
energy system model Balmorel is given, followed by a description of the model’s data
set-up for this analysis including different North Sea energy hub scenarios. Furthermore,
a definition for the application and calculation of CI redistribution is derived from the TAG
proposal for the EU regulation. Hereafter, the assumptions and setup of the Discounted
Cash Flow model are explained. Finally, a description of the general approach to obtain
the results of this work is given.
While the Balmorel model data setup is based on an previous analysis done by the pri-
vate consultancy companies Ea Energy Analyses and energynautics, the hybrid offshore
hub configurations, the derived CI compensation cases, as well as a definition of the CI
distribution compensation instrument, and the private economic feasibility analysis form
the innovative part of this work.
2.1
Energy system modelling in Balmorel
Energy system modelling is a powerful tool to analyse different aspects of energy sys-
tems. A subset of energy system models are power system models that have proven to
be an important tool in supporting decision makers in defining renewable power capac-
ity or emission reduction targets [18]. Connolly et al. reviewed a wide range of different
computer tools used to analyse energy systems [19]. As they concluded, there is no per-
fect energy system modelling tool that includes all functions to analyse the integration
of energy sources. Instead, the ideal model depends on the outputs required for each
individual analysis. Van Ouwerkerk et al. made a different tool comparison that focused
on comparing different open source power system models that are applied for capacity
expansion planning and dispatch optimisation [18]. In their study, they compared the re-
sults of five different mature open-source, techno-economic power sector models on an
example case study of the German power system. While the Genetic Optimization of a
European Energy Supply System (GENESYS-2) model and the Global Energy System
Model (GENeSYS-MOD) are mostly used for long term energy planning, the Open En-
ergy Modeling Framework (oemof), urbs and Balmorel can be also used for short-term
analyses. The Open Energy Modeling Framework (oemof) and the urbs model have the
additional advantage of allowing a linear optimal power flow function within the model.
For this work, the Balmorel energy system model was chosen because it can perform a
least-cost optimal system dispatch, and hence compute hourly electricity prices and con-
gestion rents on transmission lines. Furthermore, due to a cooperation with the private
consulting firm Ea Energy Anlyses [20], it was possible to use its northern European en-
ergy system model set-up and a flow-based adaptation of the Balmorel model which was
developed by Ea Energy Analyses and energynautics [21].
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects 9
==PAGE:18==
2.1.1
The Balmorel model
The Balmorel model is a bottom-up partial equilibrium model for simultaneous optimisa-
tion of generation, transmission, and consumption of electricity and heat under the as-
sumption of perfectly competitive markets and has been developed and distributed under
open-source ideals since 2001 [22]. Initially, Balmorel was developed by Hans Ravn at
the Danish Technical University (DTU) from 1999-2001 [23]. Although the initial model
was written for the Nordic countries, adaptations are now also available for worldwide ge-
ographical areas. The linear programming model, GAMS-based source code is available
for everyone to inspect, use, and modify and can be downloaded and found together with
its documentation on (www.balmorel.com). However, to run the model, a licensed version
of the modelling language General Algebraic Modelling System (GAMS) is required.
One of the greatest strengths of Balmorel is the open-source availability of the code.
Furthermore, it has a transparent structure and is very flexible in its geographical and
temporal scope [22]. There is a short-term optimisation running mode, which allows for
the dispatch optimisation required for this thesis’ analysis. Balmorel comes with the use
of consecutive time steps and the possibility of a high resolution of time and space, which
makes the modelling of storage systems and renewable energy sources more realistic.
However, there are also certain weaknesses of the Balmorel model, as found by Wiese
et al. [22]. Like many other energy system models, Balmorel is a deterministic model,
assuming a perfect foresight. It cannot represent the uncertain behaviour of outages in
generation and transmission technologies or the influence of weather on variable renew-
able energy sources. The original Balmorel model also does not provide a flow-based
representation of the electricity network and relies on simple net transfer capacities that
do not take into account voltage and angle stability, as well as reserve management.
Furthermore, the Balmorel model assumes a market with perfect competition and all en-
ergy suppliers being price takes without strategic behaviour in the market, which does not
necessarily represent actual electricity and heat markets.
The objective function in Balmorel minimises the total system costs including the system
fuel costs, the fixed and variable operation and maintenance costs, transmission costs,
emission taxes, as well as fuel and energy taxes, and the capital costs of new units mi-
nus subsidies and consumer utility of consumption. Meanwhile, the objective function is
constrained by multiple constraints: Electricity / heat demand and supply balance, opera-
tion constraints of the generation technology, generation dispatch capacity and availabil-
ity limitations, transmission capacity constraints, storage balances, resource availability
constraints, emission caps, and many other depending on the add-ons and setup of the
Balmorel model.
The geographical resolution of the model is divided into three layers, starting with coun-
tries, which is the highest layer, followed by regions included in countries, and finally areas
on the bottom layer included in regions. Additional policy constraints can be defined for
countries, regions, and areas. The electrical network / net transfer capacities are defined
between the different regions which are in itself modelled like a copperplate not represent-
ing any internal network congestion. Finally, generation capacity and investment options
are defined at the area level.
There are three different temporal layers in Balmorel that represent the time resolution of
the model. The highest time resolutions are years, followed by seasons / weeks (maxi-
mum 52 within a year) and hours (up to 168 within a season). Similarly, to the geographical
resolution, the time resolution is very flexible and can be adjusted depending on the re-
quired resolution of the results and computational limitations. A Balmorel year with a full
10Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:19==
hourly temporal representation starts on the first Monday of the year and has 8736 time
steps.
Since electric demand and the electrical transmission network are defined on a regional
level in Balmorel, the electricity price, which is the marginal value of the electricity supply
and demand balance constraint on the objective function, is calculated for each region and
time segment of the modelled year. Hence, the electricity price is the equilibrium between
the electricity producer’s marginal cost of generation of the marginal unit of production
and the marginal willingness to pay of the electricity consumer.
A more comprehensive description of the Balmorel model can be found in the article by
Wiese et al. [22], in the Balmorel documentation (www.balmorel.com), and is summarised
in a user manual by Ea Energy Analyses [24].
2.1.2
Balmorel flow based setup
In a white paper from 2021, the European TSOs represented by ENTSO-E were ques-
tioning the fact that CI and wind farm revenues are inversely correlated in real offshore
bidding zones [25]. ENTSO-E stressed in the paper that the setup of previous studies
on offshore bidding zones only considered systems based on the net transfer capacity
methodology and mostly a simplified model in which the OBZ is only connected to two dif-
ferent home markets. Although, it is planned to have fully introduced flow-based market
coupling capacity calculation in the Nordic and Core Capacity Region by the time offshore
hybrid projects are implemented [25][26]. Therefore, it was chosen to setup the Balmorel
model for this work with a more complex energy hub system using a flow-based electrical
network representation.
The day-ahead and intraday capacity calculation methodology is defined in Article 20
of the European Capacity Allocation and Congestion Management (CACM) Regulation
(Regulation (EU) 2015/1222) [27]. It defines the guidelines for each capacity calculation
region to determine the amount of capacity available for trading between bidding zones
during day-ahead and intraday market time frames. According to the CACM Regula-
tion, the future capacity calculation methodology in the European day-ahead and intra-
day marked can be expressed by flow-based (FB) marked coupling or coordinated net
transmission capacities (NTC). However, the TSOs are required to introduce flow-based
marked coupling in the capacity calculation regions if they cannot demonstrate that the
NTC is equally efficient as the flow-based methodology. The advantage of the flow-based
approach is that it takes into account the physical constraints of the transmission network
compared to the simplified approach of net transfer capacity currently applied [28]. There-
fore, physical transmission lines can be better utilised, resulting on average in increased
trade volumes [29], leading to more accurate electricity prices, reduction in redispatch
costs and increased social economic welfare of the system [30].
As described in section 2.1.1, the version of the Balmorel model used by Ea Energy Anal-
yses is based on a net transfer capacity approach and does not provide a flow-based
representation of the electrical network. However, during a joint project of Ea Energy
Analyses and energynautics, a modification of Balmorel was developed, constraining the
NTC capacities in Balmorel by a power transfer distribution factor (PTDF) matrix and the
remaining available margins (RAM), which were calculated using a simulation of energy-
nautics PyPSA model.
PTDFs are parameters that indicate the amount of power flowing through a specific trans-
mission grid element when an additional unit of electricity is injected into a particular bid-
ding zone, while the RAM represents the transmission capacity given to the market that
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects 11
==PAGE:20==
limits the sum of power flows from all bidding zones that flow on a particular line at a given
hour [28].
To replicate the basic steps towards the flow-based coupled day-ahead marked as de-
scribed in the flow-based market coupling for cross-border electricity trading article by
Schönheit et al. [31], Ea Energy Analyses and energynautics set up a three-step pro-
cess to generate flow-based day-ahead market results. In the first step, a preliminary
Balmorel market run determined the dispatch of each hour of the year, representing the
two-days-ahead congestion forecast (D2CF) (see Step 1 in fig. 2.1). In reality, the D2CF
represents the basis for the flow-based market coupling calculations. The preliminary run
in Balmorel includes the same input assumptions as the final flow-based run and uses the
conventional NTC modelling approach for the transfer capacities.
In the second step, the D2CF estimated generation dispatch, cross zonal transmission
capacities, and HVDC flows were further implemented in a PyPSA grid model, which was
operated by energynautics [32][21], to perform a lineload calculation and calculate the
day-ahead RAM, identify critical network elements, and calculate the PTDF matrix (see
Step 2 in fig. 2.1). The methodology and formulas to calculate the required flow-based
constraints were based on the flow-based market coupling rules of the Core Capacity
Calculation Region (CCR) [33], where perfect communication and hence capacity alloca-
tion was assumed between all participating TSOs. The PTDF matrix was configured with
N-1 security, ensuring that any contingency of transformers or lines will not result in the
overloading of an transmission element. Furthermore, the impact of long-term trades was
neglected, so that all cross-zonal trades were optimised for each hour. For any transfer
element, the 70% rule and a constant flow reliability margin of 10% were applied, ensuring
a minimum of 70% transfer capacity available to the market for each of the critical network
elements. The 70% rule is defined in Regulation (EU) 2019/943 Article 16, paragraph 8
(b) [27]. Finally, the advanced hybrid coupling approach was used to connect control-
lable grid elements / high voltage direct current (HVDC) lines via virtual bidding zones
and unique PTDFs with the alternating current grid [28]. The PyPSA model includes the
non-aggregated grid model implemented in PyPSA-Eur from September 2022 [34], which
contains the publicly available ENTSO-E grid data on alternating current (AC) and direct
current (DC) lines and is further extended by the TYNDP build-out plans [35]. The gener-
ator types from the preliminary Balmorel market run were disaggregated based on current
power plant information and expectations on the distribution within bidding zones. Long-
term trades usually take up some capacity in the cross-zonal trades but were neglected
in the study by Ea Energy Analyses and energynautics.
Figure 2.1: Balmorel flow-based process
12Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:21==
For the day-ahead market optimisation in the third step, the calculated flow-based market
constraints from the PyPSA model were implemented in Balmorel, constraining the flows
on the Balmorel NTC capacities (see Step 3 in fig. 2.1). Apart form the flow-based con-
straints and scenario variations, the input data for the day-ahead market optimisation in
Step 3 is equal to the input data of the preliminary Balmorel market run in Step 1.
∑
CriticalLine∈
CritConCritLineCritCon,CriticalLine
RAMCriticalLine,IS3,T ≥
∑
CriticalLinesIRE,IRI∈
IXKINI_YIRE,IRI
∪IXKNIRE,IRI
∪IXKNIRI,IRE
PTDFCritCon,IRE,IRI · V X_TIRE,IRI,IS3,T
∀CritCon ∈CritCon,
∀IS3 ∈SSS,
∀T ∈TTT
(2.1)
with:
V X_TIRE,IRI,IS3,T
Variable of electricity export from region IRE to IRI
for each week and hour
RAMCriticalLine,IS3,T
Parameter of Remaining Available Margin for each
CriticalLine, week and hour
PTDFCritCon,IRE,IRI
Parameter of Power Transfer Distribution Factors for
each CritCon element from region IRE to IRI
IXKINI_YIRE,IRI
Parameter of exogenous electric transmission capacity
between regions IRE and IRI at the beginning of the year
IXKNIRE,IRI
Set of region pair that may get new transmission capacity
CriticalLine
Set of all critical lines identified in PyPSA
CriticalLinesIRE,IRI
Set assigning transmission connections to critical lines
CritCon
Set of combined critical Line and contingency (CNE)
CritConCritLine
Set to connect CritCon to CriticalLine
IRE/IRI
Alias of regions in the simulation
SSS
Set of weeks in simulation
TTT
Set of hours within weeks in the simulation
The eq. (2.1) limits the flow of electrical power on a critical branch between two regions
in Balmorel by the flow-based constraints calculated in the PyPSA model. The sum of all
remaining available margin (RAM) over all critical lines that are connected to contingen-
cies (critical network element, CNE) for each week and hour is greater or equal to the sum
of all CNE’s power transmission distribution factors multiplied with the export of electric
power over the set of all cross-regional transmission connections included in exogenous
electric transmission capacities between regions and region pairs that may get new trans-
mission capacity for every week and hour in the simulation. The same equation was also
implemented for the remaining available margin of the reverse critical line direction.
The Balmorel market run with the flow-based constraints is optimising the generator mar-
ket dispatch volumes and prices by maximising the market players’ profits based on the
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects13
==PAGE:22==
generator’s marginal cost of supply and the consumers’ utility of consumption. The day-
ahead price in each bidding zone/region is determined by the equilibrium of supply and
demand bids for each timestep. In general, when there are no transmission constraints
between two bidding zones, the market equilibrium price in the two zones will be the same,
because any price difference between the bidding zones could be balanced through cross-
zonal transmission.
2.1.3
Balmorel input data setup
The Balmorel market run (flow-based) model for this work was set up to run a full year
hourly dispatch optimisation based on predefined exogenous capacity and data input with
endogenous investments in (demand) flexibilties.
The simulated year in the model is 2035, as this is the year in which the hybrid offshore
wind projects planned in the North Sea are expected to be in operation (see section 1.1.1).
The year 3035 was further run with 52 weeks and 168 hours per week, which represents
a full year in Balmorel. Subsequently, the 8736 optimised hourly generation results were
extrapolated by the factor 8760/8736 to sum up to a realistic yearly yield.
The geographical scope of the market model includes 30 regions of 22 European coun-
tries: Austria, Balkans, Belgium, Czech, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Great Britain, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland (see fig. 2.2).
Figure 2.2: Included regions in the model
The energy system generation capacities and demand projection in the model are based
on the anticipated buildout towards 2035 in the distributed energy scenario of the TYNDP
14Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:23==
[36]. The power capacities installed in the Balmorel model for each of the countries in-
cluded in the simulation are shown in fig. 2.2. In addition to the capacitites stated in fig. 2.2,
there are 1.718 TW of smart charging electric vehicles existing in the simulation that are
capable of providing flexibility to the system. The largest share of existing capacities in the
2035 system is solar photovoltaic and concentrated solar power with an overall share of
38.2% followed by onshore wind with 21.2% and natural gas with 8.5%. 10.1% of the ex-
isting capacities are hydro power divided into 7.8% run-of-river and 2.3% pumped-hydro
power. The remaining share of exisiting capacities is distributed over 8.2% offshore wind,
6.3% hydrogen turbines, 2.3% nuclear, 1.8% biomass and waste, 1.8% battery storage
(shown as electricity in fig. 2.3), 1.2% coal, and 0.4% oil. In total, this adds up to 2.64 TW
of installed power capacities across the 22 countries.
Figure 2.3: Installed power capacities in the simulation by fuel and country in 2035
In addition to the power sector, Balmorel is also modelling parts of the heating sector.
Thus, exogenous heat generation capacities were also implemented in the Balmorel en-
ergy system. The heat capacities installed in the Balmorel optimisation are indicated in
fig. 2.4. There is a total of 437 GW distributed over 70.3% electricity, 14.4% heat storage,
6.7% biomass and waste, 5.91% natural gas, 1.9% oil, 0.7% coal, 0.1% concentrated
solar power.
Figure 2.4: Installed heat capacities in the simulation by fuel and country in 2035
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects15
==PAGE:24==
The weekly electricity demand of the modelled system in Balmorel is shown in fig. 2.5.
There is a total annual net system consumption of 4808TWh in the system with a variable
hourly profile. The weekly demand of the system in all countries changes throughout the
year, with a maximum weekly consumption of 114TWh in winter versus a minimum weekly
consumption of 80TWh in summer.
Figure 2.5: Weekly net system electricity demand by country in 2035
By performing a first analysis of the electricity system described above, it was found that
the system had little flexibility. Therefore, it was decided to run a myoptic one-year in-
vestment run with 26 weeks and 12 timesteps per week on the 2035 system, allowing in-
vestments in electrolyzers, hydrogen turbines, hydrogen storage, and electricity storage.
Thus, Balmorel invested 265 GW hydrogen electrolyzers, 456GW hydrogen storage, 87
GW hydrogen turbines and 20 GW electricity storage (see fig. 2.6).
(a) Fuel capacity investments
(b) Power capacity investments
Figure 2.6: Invested capacities in the system in 2035
2.1.4
Hybrid offshore hub configurations
The hybrid offshore hub configuration chosen for this work is based on the North Sea Wind
Power Hub of the NSWPH consortium and the national plans of the NSEC TSOs (see
section 1.1.1)[9][2]. The Base scenario (fig. 2.7a) is the NSWPH with an additional 1GW
installed offshore wind capacity in the Danish hub and the corresponding 1GW additional
interconnector transmission capacity to Danish home market zone DK1. Furthermore, the
transmission line capacities between the OBZs / hubs were set to 2GW each [2] and it
16Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:25==
was chosen to implement an additional 2GW transmission line capacity from the Danish
OBZ to the Norwegian zone NO2 and from the Dutch to the British zone GB. Hence, the
Base scenario has 4GW offshore wind installed in the Danish and Dutch OBZ, 6GW in
the German OBZ, equal amounts of transmission HVDC line capacity as offshore wind
power installed in the hub from each national offshore bidding zone to the national home
market, 2GW transmission HVDC line capacities between the hubs and 2GW HVDC line
capacities from the Dutch and Danish hub to Great Britain and Norway, respectively. Ad-
ditional connections to Norway and Great Britain were implemented because they have
been part of the study from Ea Energy Analyses and energynatics and are implemented
in the flow-based constraints from the PyPSA model (see section 2.1.2). In difference
to the other 7 interconnectors in the offshore hybrid grid, the interconnector between the
German OBZ and the German home market bidding zone has been implemented as two
separate CNEs with individual PTDF coefficients.
(a) Base
(b) 2xDC
(c) 2xHub2Hub
(d) 1.1xGen
(e) 1.2xGen
(f) 2xGen
(g) 3Country
(h) NoH2Inv
Figure 2.7: Hybrid offshore scenarios. Changes to the Base scenario are expressed in
red
In addition to the Base scenario, seven hybrid offshore configuration scenarios / variations
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects17
==PAGE:26==
of the Base scenario were chosen to evaluate the influence of the given hub configura-
tion on the results. The seven hub configuration scenarios are displayed together with
the Base scenario in fig. 2.7. The scenario 2xDC (fig. 2.7b) doubles the transmission
capacities between the OBZs and their corresponding national home market in the same
EEZ and represents an extreme case of transmission overcapacity. In the 2xHub2Hub
scenario (fig. 2.7c), the transmission capacities between the three hubs are doubled to
examine the influence of the hub interconnectors. Furthermore, there are three variations
of the base scenario in which the influence of generation overcapacity in the hub should
be investigated. Therefore, the offshore wind capacities in the OBZ are increased to 110%
(fig. 2.7d), 120% (fig. 2.7e), and 200% (fig. 2.7f) of transmission interconnection capacity
to the respected home market zone in scenario 1.1xGen, 1.2xGen and 2xGen, respec-
tively. To look at a more similar offshore configuration as in the NSWPH programme,
the interconnections from the OBZ to Norway and Great Britain were neglected in the
3Country scenario (fig. 2.7g). Finally, the scenario NoH2Inv was set up (fig. 2.7h), where
no investments in flexibilities (hydrogen electrolyzer, turbines, and storage, as well as
electricity storage, see fig. 2.6) were allowed in the overall Balmorel system described in
section 2.1.3.
All eight scenarios have in common that they make use of the offshore bidding zone
market configuration with an own market clearing price as described in section 1.1.2. The
Danish, German, and Dutch hub are implemented as three new individual market bidding
zones with transmission interconnectors between each other and to surrounding onshore
home market zones. Each of the three OBZs is located in the exclusive economic zone of
the corresponding country. The only generation asset installed within the offshore bidding
zones are offshore wind turbines with the same characteristics shown in table 2.1. There
is no demand installed in the OBZs.
Table 2.1: Offshore wind turbine characteristics (based on [37])
Efficiency
CAPEX
fixed O&M
variable O&M
Lifetime
[%]
[mEUR20/MW]
[kEUR20/MW/year]
[EUR20/MWh]
[Years]
Offshore wind
1
1.642
38.12
2.82
30
2.2
Congestion income redistribution
As described in section 1.1 and section 1.2.1, the offshore bidding zone market inte-
gration of hybrid offshore wind projects exposes the OWF to an additional volume and
price risk compared to a radial home market integration. Since the revenue of the OWF
in an OBZ is highly dependent on the transmission interconnection capacity to onshore
markets, different stakeholders have analysed market situations and identified conditions
when congestion income distribution compensation from the TSO to the OWF operator
is justified (see section 1.2.1). These studies and findings have been taken into account
in the current proposal for the reform of the European electricity market design, which is
the basis for the design of the congestion income distribution compensation instrument in
this thesis.
2.2.1
Congestion income redistribution cases
The latest legislative proposal for the amendment to Article 19 paragraph 2 of Regula-
tion (EU) 2019/943 by the European Council (see section 1.2.1) describes a legislative
foundation for the implementation of Transmission Access Guarantees as the instrument
for congestion income distribution between TSOs and OWF in an OBZ. The legislative
18Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:27==
proposal states that an OWF operator in an OBZ should be compensated if the market
access has been reduced and the OWF operator cannot ”export its electricity generation
capability to the market” with a corresponding OBZ market price reduction and should be
compensated if the responsible TSOs ”have not made available the capacity agreed in the
connection agreement on the interconnector or have not made available the capacity on
the critical network elements affecting pursuant to the capacity calculation rules in Article
16 (8) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943”.
Four major implications are derived from the legislative proposal by:
1. TAG is the EU’s preferred instrument for congestion income distribution for OWF
located in an OBZ
2. Compensation should arise if the market access has been reduced by the TSO and
the OWF cannot export its electricity generation capability to the market resulting in
an OBZ market price reduction
3. Market access reduction by the TSO has two possible thresholds:
(a) The agreed interconnector capacity in the connection agreement
(b) The 70% available capacity on the critical network element (Articel (8) of Reg-
ulation (EU) 2019/943)
4. Annual TAG compensation must not exceed the total congestion income on the
corresponding interconnector
Thus, the legislative proposal excludes the case of overplanted capacity (more generation
capacity installed than connected transmission capacity) from compensation.
There are two different situations in a flow-based market coupling system that can lead to
the congestion of a critical network element (CNE) connecting an OBZ and a home market
onshore bidding zone. In this work, the home market (HM) bidding zone is defined as the
connected onshore bidding zone located in the same exclusive economic zone as the
OBZ.
The first case is the event of the electrical power flow on the CNE between the bidding
zones reaching the CNE’s, here the HVDC line’s, maximum available capacity to the
market which is equal to the RAM. Since the electrical flow between the bidding zones
is constrained, this can lead to a price difference between the two connected bidding
zones. However, in flow-based advanced hybrid market coupling, the transmission ca-
pacity between two bidding zones is not only limited by the sum of the interconnector
capacity between the two bidding zones itself, but is constrained by the total available
transfer capacity, which depends on the network topology, the physical characteristics of
the network, as well as the market conditions and the anticipated behaviour of the mar-
ket participants [38]. Thus, the solution space for the maximum amount of transmission
capacity increases beyond simply the physical limitation of direct cross-zonal intercon-
nectors.
The second case that can lead to the congestion of an HVDC OBZ interconnector is that
the HVDC line is indirectly constrained because its flow is affecting another congested
CNE, which is indicated by a marginal value / shadow price of the CNE’s flow-based
constraint (the constraint reaching its bounds) in Balmorel, which has an allocated power
transmission distribution factor (PTDF) coefficient on the HVDC line / virtual bidding zone.
In general, the first case does not effectively trigger redistribution through the TAG (as
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects19
==PAGE:28==
proposed by the EU Council) as long as the agreed interconnector capacity in the con-
nection agreement is below the maximum line capacity, because the flow is above the
70% required market availability / agreed interconnector capacity. However, the flow-
based constraint in the second case can potentially reduce the available transmission
capacity below an agreed interconnector capacity or the 70% required market availability.
Since interzonal CNEs are also considered in flow-based marked coupling, the TSO will
no longer manage the operational capacity of an interconnector directly, as with the co-
ordinated NTC approach [14]. Instead, the marginal social welfare gain through avoiding
interzonal congestion is already taken into account in the flow-based market coupling ca-
pacity allocation outcome, and thus cross-zonal interconnections might be constrained by
the PTDF coefficients from endogenous flow-based constraints. This flow-based capacity
reduction represents the case of operational deratings described in section 1.2.1.
2.2.2
Transmission Access Guarantees calculation
Figure 2.8: TAG calculation algorithm
CongestionIncomeIS3,T = NetFlowOBZ→HM
IS3,T
(MP HM
IS3,T −MP OBZ
IS3,TTT )
∀IS3 ∈SSS, ∀T ∈TTT
(2.2)
∑
IS3∈SSS,T∈TTT
CongestionIncomeIS3,T ≥
∑
IS3∈SSS,T∈TTT
TAGIS3,T
(2.3)
The ex-post algorithm to calculate the TAG value for each of the simulated timesteps is
shown in fig. 2.8. In the first step, the Balmorel optimisation is executed, resulting in a
20Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:29==
least cost optimised hourly market dispatch for all 8736 simulated consecutive timesteps.
Subsequently, the marginal values / shadow price of the Balmorel flow-based constraint
(see eq. (2.1)) are evaluated and compared if the hybrid transmission interconnector be-
tween an OBZ and its home market bidding zone has a PTDF coefficient of a congested
CNE. If the flow on the hybrid interconnector is affected by a different congested CNE, the
net flow on the interconnector towards the home market zone is below the agreed con-
nection capacity, and the OWF’s electricity generation available to the market is above
the net flow from the OBZ to the HM, the congestion income redistribution via the TAG is
triggered. If one of the three conditions is false, the TAG will be equal to zero. Otherwise,
as derived from the latest EU proposal and the work of ENGIE Impact and the NSWPH
consortium, the TAG will be equal to the positive price spread between the OBZ and the
HM bidding zone multiplied with the sum of generation and curtailment in the OBZ, which
is limited by the transmission capacity of the interconnector. Therefore, the OWF operator
is compensated for the total available capacity that was offered to the market. Further-
more, it is ensured that the annual accumulated TAG compensation does not exceed the
accumulated annual congestion income of the interconnector where the congestion in-
come is equal to the net flow from the OBZ to the HM multiplied with the market price
spread between the HM bidding zone and the OBZ (see eq. (2.2) and eq. (2.3)). The 70%
interconnector availability was chosen as the reference value for the agreed connection
capacity in the TAG calculation.
2.3
Private economic feasibility analysis
In addition to the modelling of the OBZ configurations in Balmorel and the ex post deter-
mination of TAG, a private economic feasibility study has been performed to evaluate the
implications of TAG on the hybrid offshore wind project’s business case using a discounted
cash flow model.
Since the three different national OBZ have different market revenues, sizes, geographical
locations, and economic parameters, three separate discounted cash flow models were
developed. The discounted cash flow model evaluates the ability of a project / investment
to generate wealth in the future by calculating its value from the sum of expected cash
flows and is described in [39].
2.3.1
Private economic feasibility analysis of the hybrid offshore wind
projects
Three different measures were used to evaluate and compare the value and profitability
of the three national hybrid offshore wind projects:
1. Net Present Value (NPV)
2. Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
3. Profitability Index (PI)
4. Levelized Costs of Energy (LCOE)
The net present value is the value that a project is worth today. It is the difference between
the present value of all expected incoming cash flows and outgoing cash flows of a project
over time. The applied calculation of the NPV is shown in eq. (2.5), where CFt is the cash
flow in a given year t, T is the number of all discounting periods, and r is the discount
factor. A cash flow, CFt, is the difference between the sum of all revenues and the sum
of all costs in year t (see eq. (2.4)). If the NPV of a project has a positive value, the
investment in the project will be profitable. The internal rate of return describes the annual
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects21
==PAGE:30==
return that a project is expected to yield over its lifetime. It is the discount rate that would
be necessary for the project to have an NPV of 0. Its calculation is shown in eq. (2.6).
If the IRR is greater than the discount rate, a project will be profitable. Furthermore, the
profitability index (PI) is defined in eq. (2.7), which makes the NPV of projects with different
investment scales comparable. It calculates the relation of between the net present value
of all operational cash flows except the initial investment, NPCOCF , and the initial capital
investment, CF0. The PI indicates that an investment option should be taken if its PI is
greater than 1, with a higher PI being preferred to a lower one. Finally, the levelized cost
of energy represents the average cost of one unit of energy over the lifetime of a project.
It can be further described as the minimum cost at which the energy produced must be
sold so that the project becomes profitable. The calculation of the LCOE is defined in
eq. (2.8), where TCt is the total cost of the project in a given year t and qt represents the
amount of energy produced in year t.
CFt =
∑
Revenuest −
∑
Costst
(2.4)
NPV = −CF0 +
T
∑
t=1
CFt
(1 + r)t
(2.5)
0 = −CF0 +
T
∑
t=1
CFt
(1 + IRR)t
(2.6)
PI = NPVOCF
CF0
(2.7)
LCOE =
∑T
t=0
TCt
(1+r)t
∑T
t=0
qt
(1+r)t
(2.8)
The results of the discounted cash flow models will be compared between three different
hybrid offshore project income scenarios:
1. OBZ market revenues
2. OBZ market revenues + TAG as described in section 2.2.2
3. HM bidding zone revenues (as comparison)
In the HM bidding zone revenue scenario, the OWF receives the HM bidding zone price
for each generated unit of electricity.
2.3.2
Discounted cash flow model inputs
The input of the three different discounted cash flow models is composed of market re-
sults from the Balmorel dispatch optimisation of the eight scenarios (section 2.1.4), the
calculated TAG compensation, as well as financial and technical assumptions. Since the
same type of offshore wind turbine is used in all three national hubs, the inputs to the
three models differ in their distance and size of the transmission line to shore and the as-
sociated transmission infrastructure costs, the power generation capacities in the hubs,
the annual amount of full load hours / power generation, the average OBZ market prices,
the amount of TAG compensation, national taxes, and national depreciation methods.
The parameters that are equal for all three models are listed in table 2.2. All cost parame-
ters are expressed in real 2020 prices, in line with the results of the Balmorel optimisation.
22Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:31==
Following the plans of the Danish TSO Energinet, the capital cost for the hub, the trans-
mission connection, and the use of the interconnector should be paid by the OWF operator
[40] and it is assumed in this work that the German and Dutch TSO will develop similar
financial structures. The capital costs for the hub infrastructure are very uncertain and are
derived from an estimated projection of the Danish Energy Agency’s energy island teaser
for potential investors [41]. However, this document was released before the Danish En-
ergy Agency stopped the energy island project [4]. The discount rate in the discounted
cash flow models corresponds to the weighted average cost of capital (WACC), which
is a financial metric that represents the average after-tax cost of capital of an investor
from all sources and is the anticipated rate of return that investors require for the most
favourable alternative project exposed to the same level of risk [42]. The WACC is usually
not revealed, and therefore an uncertain parameter of the discounted cash flow model.
Table 2.2: Constant DCF model assumptions
Parameter
Value
Source
Lifetime
30
Ea Energy Analyses Balmorel inputs based on [37]
OWF CAPEX
1.642 mEUR20/MW
Ea Energy Analyses Balmorel inputs based on [37]
Fixed O&M
38.12 kEUR20/MW/year
Ea Energy Analyses Balmorel inputs based on [37]
Variable O&M
2.82 EUR20/MWh
Ea Energy Analyses Balmorel inputs based on [37]
Hub CAPEX
0.445 mEUR20/MW
Energinet in [43]
Interconnector CAPEX
0.474 mEUR20/MW/100km
Ea Energy Analyses Balmorel inputs based on [37]
Discount rate
7%, nominal
Own assumption based on [44][41][45]
Start of generation
2035
Anticipated year of project commission
Valuation year (end of year)
2032
Construction time based on [37]
Feedin & balance tarif
1.27 EUR20/MWh
Based on Energinets proposal [40][46]
Inflation
6%, from 2024: 1.94% - 2.18%
Based on Eurostat [47]
The discounted cash flow morel, used in this work, accounts for inflation by using nom-
inal cash flows and a nominal discount rate, since taxes are involved. All future cash
flows, including the OBZ capture prices and annual TAG compensations, are adjusted
for expected inflation, converted into nominal cash flows, and discounted by the nominal
discount rate.
Following the plans of the Danish TSO Energinet, it is expected that the cost of the trans-
mission connection to the hub / OWF will be transferred to the OWF ”to as great an extent
as possible” [40]. Thus, the cost of the transmission infrastructure to the home market is
included in the capital cost of each project and depends on the length of the transmission
interconnector and its capacity (see table 2.3). The estimated distances to shore were
obtained from the map shown in [2].
Table 2.3: Transmission infrastructure costs (based on [37])
Parameter
DKOBZ-DKHM
DEOBZ-DEHM
NLOBZ-NLHM
Interconnector length (km)
90
180
110
Interconnector infrastructure costs (mEUR20/MW)
0.426
0.853
0.521
Furthermore, tax rates and depreciation methods are different between the three national
hybrid offshore wind projects discounted cash flow models and stated in table 2.4.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects23
==PAGE:32==
Table 2.4: National taxation
Parameter
DK OWF
DE OWF
NL OWF
Source
Tax rate
22%
29.94%
25.8%
[48]
Depreciation method
Declining balance @15%,
Loss carryforward
Straight line @3%
Straight line @3%
[49]
Since some of the input parameters in the discounted cash flow model were found to be
uncertain, it was further decided to perform a sensitivity analysis on the Balmorel results
of the Base scenario as described in section 2.1.4 to test the influence of each parameter
on the profitability of the different hybrid offshore wind projects. The different sensitivities
are shown in table 2.5.
Table 2.5: Sensitivities
Parameter
Low Values
High Values
Source
Discount rate (%)
9
5
Based on [44][41][45]
Hub CAPEX (mEUR20/MW)
0.593
0.297
Based on [43]
Interconnector costs (mEUR20/MW/100km)
0.237
0
50% and 0% costs based on [37]
Agreed connection capacity (TAG)
0.8
1
Own assumption
2.4
General approach to obtain results
The general approach to determine TAG compensation levels for different OBZ configura-
tions and assess their impact on the economic feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects
uses the described methods in this section and follows the following steps:
1. Run of the flow-based Balmorel optimisation
2. Export the Balmorel results
• Cross-regional transmission flows
• OWF generation
• OWF curtailment
• Regional electricity prices
• Marginal values / shadow prices of the flow-based market coupling constraint
3. Processing of Balmorel results
• Calculation of annual accumulated CI for each interconnector
• Hourly determination if PTDF coefficients of congested critical network ele-
ments are constraining the flow on onshore market interconnectors
• Hourly determination if TAG copensation requirements are fulfilled
• Calculation of annual accumulated TAG compensation for each OWF
• Calculation of wind market values and capture prices for each OWF
• Calculation of OWF capacity factors
• Calculation of OWF market revenues
24Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:33==
• Counting of annual share of hours with constrained onshore market intercon-
nectors
• Counting of annual share of hours with non-intuitive flows on onshore market
interconnectors
4. Perform a discounted cash flow model analysis
• Calculate the OWF’s NPV
• Calculate the OWF’s IRR
• Calculate the OWF’s PI
• Calculate the OWF’s LCOE
5. Perform a sensitivity analysis on the results of the discounted cash flow model (just
for the Base scenario)
These steps are repeated for each of the 8 analysed OBZ configurations.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects25
==PAGE:34==
26Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:35==
3
Results
The following chapter will present the results of this thesis following the methodology
described in chapter 2. First, a brief overview of the overall system’s generation dispatch
for the Base scenario is given, followed by a more detailed representation of the hybrid
offshore wind project market results, including hourly offshore hub system snapshots and
accumulated TAG compensation. Subsequently, the dispatch results of the Base scenario
are compared to the other 7 offshore hub configurations. Thereafter, the private economic
feasibility results of the discounted cash flow model are compared between the 8 different
scenarios and three hybrid offshore wind projects. Finally, the sensitivities of the uncertain
assumptions to the DCF model will be assessed in a sensitivity analysis.
3.1
Offshore Bidding Zone market results and TAG
compensation
The depiction of the Balmorel system results starts with a introduction to the overall sys-
tem generation dispatch of the Base scenario followed by a representation of the offshore
hub system results, TAG aggregation and comparison of key values between the 8 sce-
narios. All the following results are extracted from the 2035 full-year, 8736 hours, Balmorel
dispatch optimisation. All financial Balmorel results are expressed in real 2020 monetary
units.
3.1.1
Overall system dispatch results
The shares of generator types in the total annual electricity generation of each country in
the Base scenario are shown in fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Balmorel share of electricity generation by fuel and country in the Base sce-
nario in 2035
Most of the simulated countries have a share of > 90% renewable energies (RE) in the
accumulated annual electricity generation by 2035. The only countries that have a lower
share than 90% RE generation are France, Sweden, the Czech Republic, and Poland, due
to an higher share of nuclear generation and coal and natural gas generation in the case of
Poland. The type of generation with the highest overall share in total electricity generation
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects27
==PAGE:36==
is onshore wind (31%), followed by solar PV and CSP (27%), offshore wind (14%), hydro
(12%), nuclear (7%), biomass and waste (3%), electric batteries (2%), natural gas (2%),
pumped hydro (1%), coal (>1%), and hydrogen (>1%). In total, 4937 TWh electricity is
generated in all countries in the annual simulation.
The system demand, the installed capacities, and the hourly generation dispatch as previ-
ously stated, result in the average regional electricity prices shown in fig. 3.2. Poland and
NO1 have observed high average market prices, which in turn affect their neighbouring
market bidding zones. Apart from the two outliers and the northern Nordic bidding zones,
most of the simulated market regions show average electricity prices in the range of 55
to 65 EUR/MWh.
Figure 3.2: Balmorel average electricity price in the market bidding zones around the
North Sea OBZs in the Base scenario in 2035 (in EUR/MWh)
3.1.2
OBZ dispatch results
The offshore hubs dispatch results for the Base scenario, as described in section 2.1.4,
of the simulated year 2035 in Balmorel are displayed in this section.
In fig. 3.3a the annual generation, curtailment and capacity factor of the OWFs in the three
different national OBZ are shown. The German hub has the highest total generation
with 26 TWh and experiences 1.2 TWh curtailment, although these values cannot be
directly compared to the other two OWFs due to the additional 2 GW installed capacity
compared to the Dutch and Danish OWF. However, the capacity factor of the OWFs can
be compared. Here, the Danish OWF has the highest capacity factor of 53%, due to the
best wind resources and fewer curtailment, followed by the German OWF with 49% and
the Dutch OWF with 47%. The OWF market sales and the market value of wind in the
OBZ are shown in fig. 3.3b. Again, only the Danish and Dutch OWF market revenues can
28Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:37==
be directly compared, since the German OWF has 3/2 of the Danish and Dutch OWF’s
installed capacity, yet the wind value is independent of the installed capacity.
(a) Base OWF annual electricity generation and
capacity factor
(b) Base OWF electricity sales and market values
of wind
Figure 3.3: OWF dispatch and revenue results in the Base scenario in 2035
The hourly market values of wind are weighted by the potential amount of offshore wind
produced (including curtailment) in each timestep. In addition, and for comparison, the
corresponding OBZ revenues of the hybrid offshore wind projects are shown, as well as
the market revenues if the OWFs would sell their electricity at potential HM prices. While
the annual OBZ revenue of the Danish OWF is only marginally lower than the potential
sales with the HM prices, there is a higher difference between OBZ and HM sales in the
German and Dutch OWF with -21 and -85 mEUR lower revenues in the OBZ, respectively.
The comparison of the different market values of wind also shows the highest market
value of wind in the Danish OBZ followed by the Dutch and German OBZ. However, when
comparing the HM values of offshore wind it can be observed that the Dutch HM value
of wind is greater than the other two OWFs HM wind values, which is indicating a higher
price spread between the HM and OBZ when the Dutch OWF is potentially generating
electricity (incl. curtailment). The other two connected onshore markets show market
values of wind above the three OBZ and HM values for the Norwegian (NO2) bidding
zone and below the OBZ and HM values for the Great Britain (GB) bidding zone.
Table 3.1: Weighted average market prices and congestion income in the Base scenario
in 2035
DK
NL
DE
GB
NO
Average market price HM (EUR/MWh)
58.0
66.0
58.2
60.7
61.8
Average market price OBZ (EUR/MWh)
57.8
57.8
57.8
Capture price wind HM (EUR/MWh)
54.8
58.6
53.6
50.3
60.9
Capture price wind OBZ (EUR/MWh)
54.6
53.4
52.8
Market value wind HM (EUR/MWh)
53.3
55.5
51.2
47.6
59.3
Market value wind OBZ (EUR/MWh)
53.6
51.1
50.9
Overall, the average, capture prices (excluding curtailment), and market values of wind
(including curtailment) in the OBZs are lower than the corresponding market prices in the
HM zones. That differences can be seen more clearly in table 3.1.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects29
==PAGE:38==
(a) Price duration curve of the three OBZ and HM
zones
(b) Price duration curve of the three OBZ and HM
zones, including GB and NO2
Figure 3.4: Price duration curves of the Base scenario in 2035
The price duration curves in fig. 3.4 show the proportion of time that market prices in the
different offshore and onshore bidding zones exceed a certain price level. Here, fig. 3.4a
shows the proportion of annual hourly market prices for the three OBZs and their corre-
sponding HM zones. While the price duration curves of the three OBZs and the DE and
DK1 HM zones are very similar to each other, the NL HM price duration curve deviates
and lies above the other five curves, showing higher hourly price levels in the Dutch home
market, especially in the most expensive 20% proportion of prices. In fig. 3.4b the price
duration curves of the two additional connected markets GB and NO2 are displayed on
top of the curves in fig. 3.4a. They are found to differ from the OBZ price duration curves,
with NO2 having 90% of its market prices around 55 and 65 EUR/MWh, showing fewer
higher and lower prices than the OBZs and the GB zone experiencing a greater quantity
of higher and lower market prices than the OBZs.
Figure 3.5: Net annual electricity flow between market bidding zones around the hybrid
offshore wind projects in the Base scenario in 2035 (in TWh)
The net annual electricity export between the different market bidding zones in fig. 3.5
shows that there is a net annual flow from the OBZ to the surrounding onshore markets.
30Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:39==
In addition, it also shows a net flow from the Danish OBZ to the German and Dutch OBZ
and from the German OBZ further to the Dutch OBZ. The net flow from the Dutch OBZ
to the Dutch HM zone is 86% of the net flow from the German OBZ to the German HM
zone, although it has only 2/3 of the installed transmission capacity. Furthermore, it can
be observed that Great Britain is a net importer of electricity from all other connected
markets.
3.1.3
OBZ TAG compensation
As described in section 2.2.2, the Transmission Access Guarantees compensation ap-
plied in this work will be executed, as soon as the interconnector / CNE between the OBZ
and its HM zone is constrained by PTDF coefficients, the net flow to the HM on the in-
terconnector is below 70% / the agreed connection capacity and below the OBZ power
generation availability to the market. The following results show the TAG compensation
for the Base scenario, using the Balmorel offshore hub dispatch results.
Figure 3.6: Occurrence of hours with line constraints and compensation at 70% agreed
connection capacity in the Base scenario in 2035
The number of hours in which the electric flow on an interconnector / CNE between the
OBZs and the onshore market zones is constrained is presented in fig. 3.6. The con-
strained flow can be caused by the interconnector reaching its physical maximum capac-
ity, here the RAM, or by the PTDF coefficients of other constrained CNEs. The figure
also displays the number of hours in which the flow is constrained by a PTDF coefficient
and the number of hours in which the flow is exclusively constrained by the PTDF co-
efficients. The difference between the second last two options are the hours, when the
flow is constrained by the RAM and by PTDF coeffcients at the same time. If the flow
on the interconnector is constrained by the PTDF coefficients and the net flow is below
70% / the agreed connection capacity and the OBZ’s power generation availability to the
market, the requirements for TAG compensation are met. However, compensation is
only transferred if there is a positive price spread between the OBZ and the onshore HM
price (see fig. 2.8). While the interconnector to the Danish HM zone is only constrained
in 32% of the hours, the other four interconnectors are constrained more than twice as
much, at least 88% of the time. In particular, the connections to Germany and Norway
are constrained almost every hour of the year, with a large proportion of it caused only
by the PTDF coefficients, 89% and 70%, respectively. In 58% of the time, there could be
TAG compensation for the German OWF, since the TAG requirements are met, but the
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects31
==PAGE:40==
price spread between the German OBZ and HM zone is negative, resulting in zero TAG
compensation. The highest number of hours where TAG compensation is transferred to
the OWF is in the Dutch hybrid offshore wind project. Here, the OWF is compensated
with TAG in 29% of the hours followed by the German OWF, which is compensated in
26% of the hours. The fewest number of hours with TAG compensation is found with the
Danish hybrid offshore wind project, which only receives TAG compensation in 4% of the
hours. Finally, fig. 3.6 also shows the annual share of hours when the transferred TAG
compensation is greater than 1 EUR/MWh. Here, it can be observed, that this event hap-
pen never for the Danish OWF. Meaning that the price spread is always marginal when
TAG is transferred to the Danish OWF. It is higher for the Dutch and German OWF with
annual shares of 18% and 7%, respectively. This indicates that the Dutch HM access
reduction through the PTDF constraint results more often in higher price differences to
the OBZ than between the German OBZ and HM. At the same time, it also shows that
there are many hours where TAG is transferred, but the actual price difference between
the HM and OBZ remains low. This occurs 100% of the time for the Danish OWF, 1/3 of
the time for the Dutch and almost 3/4 of the time for the German OWF. Furthermore, the
interconnectors to the onshore market zones in Great Britain and Norway are constrained
to a great proportion of the year, where the Great Britain interconnector has a high share
of hours when it is constrained by the RAM. In comparison, the Norwegian interconnector
has fewer hours in which it is constrained by the RAM and more hours when it is only
constrained by the PTDF coefficients.
Figure 3.7: Accumulated TAG compensation and congestion income in the Base scenario
in 2035
The accumulated annual congestion income (CI) and TAG compensation for each hybrid
offshore wind project and transmission interconnector can be seen in fig. 3.7. Further-
more, the figure also shows the amount of TAG compensation as a share of annual OBZ
market revenue. It should be noted that the CI is given as an annual total, including hours
with negative CI, which are the result of non-intuitive flows explained in more detail in sec-
tion 3.1.4. It can be observed that most CI and TAG compensation is accumulated at the
Dutch OBZ. The congestion income on the Dutch interconnector amounts to 161 mEUR
and is 9 times higher than the CI on the German interconnector (18 mEUR) and 27 times
higher than the CI on the Danish interconnector (6 mEUR). More similar to the annual con-
gestion income on the Dutch interconnector is the amount of accumulated CI on the Great
Britain and Norwegian interconnectors with 207 and 158 mEUR, respectively. It should be
noted that different transmission capacities are being compared here. The accumulated
32Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:41==
amount of annual TAG compensation, which is calculated following the methodology de-
scribed in section 2.2.2, does not exceed the congestion income on the interconnectors
between the OBZ and their HM bidding zones. It is the highest for the Dutch OWF with
29.61 mEUR, which is equal to 3.34% of the annual OBZ market revenue and 18% of the
CI on the interconnector, followed by 11.63 mEUR TAG compensation for the German
OWF, equal to 0.85% of its OBZ market revenue and 64% of the CI, and the Danish OWF
receiving 0.06 mEUR, equal to 0.01% of the OBZ market revenue and 1% of CI. Although
the German OBZ has 9% fewer hours with TAG compensation than the Dutch OBZ and
has 3/2 of the Dutch HM interconnection and OWF generation capacity installed, it only
receives 40% of the Dutch TAG compensation. This is due to smaller price spreads be-
tween the German OBZ and HM zone and lower prices in the German HM zone, which
are also observed in the price duration curves in fig. 3.4 and table 3.1. The annual TAG
compensation per generated unit of electricity for each of the three OWFs is shown in
table 3.2. The table shows a similar trend to fig. 3.7, just taking into account the differ-
ent capacities of the hybrid offshore wind projects and their wind resources. Thus, the
additional revenue through the TAG compensation of the OWF is 0.00 EUR/MWh for the
Danish OWF, 0.45 EUR/MWh for the German and finally 1.78 EUR/MWh for the Dutch
OWF.
Table 3.2: Annual TAG compensation per generated electricity unit for each OWF
DK
NL
DE
Annual TAG compensation (EUR/MWh)
0.00
1.78
0.45
Figure 3.8: Electricity sales with HM and OBZ prices including TAG compensation in the
Base scenario in 2035.
To visualise the influence of TAG compensation on the annual market revenue of the
OWFs, fig. 3.8 shows the electricity sales of the three OWFs if they could sell the gener-
ated electricity at HM prices compared to the actual case where they sell their electricity at
the OBZ prices and are compensated with TAG. While the Danish OBZ market revenues
are only marginally lower in the OBZ market than in the Danish HM, it can be observed
that the TAG compensation is not able to make up for the reduced income with the OBZ
prices for the German and the Dutch OWF. After recompensating the OWF with the TAG,
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects33
==PAGE:42==
there is a gap between the potential HM and OBZ revenues of 4 mEUR in the Danish,
9 mEUR in the German and 55 mEUR in the Dutch market. This implies that the Dutch
OWF is experiencing the greatest economic loss by its integration in the offshore bidding
zone and the TAG is not able to mitigate all the losses.
The influence of the agreed connection capacity on the number of hours with met TAG re-
quirements and the annual amount of TAG compensation is different between the OWFs
can be observed for different levels of agreed connection capacity from 70% to 100% in
fig. 3.9. In contrast to the German OWF, the annual TAG compensation for the Danish
and Dutch OWF increases only marginally with increasing agreed connection capacity
by 13%, from 0.062 mEUR at 70% agreed connection capacity to 0.07 mEUR at 100%
agreed connection capacity, for the Danish OWF and by 3%, from 29.61 mEUR to 30.53
mEUR, for the Dutch OWF. This is because the difference between the number of hours
in which the interconnector with the Danish OBZ at 70% agreed connection capacity is
only constrained by the PTDF coefficients and the number of hours when the TAG require-
ments are met is very low, leaving only little margin for improvements at increased agreed
connection capacities (see fig. 3.6). The number of hours in which the interconnector is ex-
clusively constrained by the PTDF coefficients represents the maximum number of hours
in which TAG compensation can be allocated, since the definition of TAG in section 2.2.2
excludes hours in which the maximum capacity of the interconnector is available to the
market. Similarly to the Danish OWF, the number of hours with fulfilled TAG requirements
for the Dutch OWF increases only marginally with increasing agreed connection capacity
(as shown on the secondary y-axis in fig. 3.9), limiting the improvement of annual TAG
compensation. The highest percentage of TAG improvement can be observed for the
German OWF, which increases by 23% from 11.63 mEUR at 70% agreed connection
capacity to 14.28 mEUR at 100% agreed connection capacity. The three accumulated
annual TAG compensations remain below their annual amount of CI on the interconnec-
tor, while the CI of the Dutch interconnector is outside the scale of fig. 3.9 and amounts to
161.5 mEUR. Overall, the three OBZ to HM interconnectors show a decreasing positive
influence of the level of agreed connection capacity on the amount of TAG compensation
to the OWF, with the TAG being almost constant between the agreed connection capacity
90% and 100%.
Figure 3.9: Influence of agreed connection capacity level on the hours with fulfilled TAG
requirements and the TAG compensation in relationship to the congestion income for the
Base scenario in 2035
34Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:43==
3.1.4
OBZ system hourly dispatch snapshots
The following hourly snapshots of the hybrid offshore energy hub system are visualising
the market prices and volumes of different chosen dispatch situations that occur through-
out the simulated year.
The snapshot in fig. 3.10 shows a normal dispatch situation without TAG compensation.
Four of the five interconnectors to the surrounding onshore market bidding zones are con-
strained, and only the interconnector between the Danish OBZ and HM is unconstrained.
The interconnectors to the onshore markets in the Netherlands, Great Britain, and Norway
are constrained by their RAM / maximum transmission capacity and a PTDF coefficient of
a different CNE, whereas the flow on the German interconnector is only constrained by a
PTDF coefficient, although it can export the full generation capacity of the German OWF.
All electric power flows on the different transmission elements flow in intuitive directions,
from low to high price regions. Since there are no transmission constraints between the
three OBZs, the price is the same in all OBZs and similar to the Danish HM price due
to the unconstrained interconnector between the Danish OBZ and HM (as explained in
section 2.1.2). The minor price difference between the Danish OBZ and HM is based on
the constraints of the Balmorel model and the losses on the transmission lines. Further-
more, an exchange of electric power can be observed from the low market price region in
GB to the higher market price regions NL and NO2, which is constrained by the RAM of
the Great Britain, Norwegian, and Dutch interconnector. Although the Dutch and German
interconnectors are constrained by a PTDF coefficient of a different CNE, there is no TAG
compensation to the OWF because the flow on the interconnector towards the HMs is
above the required market availability of 70%.
Figure 3.10: Hourly OBZ dispatch snapshot without TAG compensation (Base scenario,
2035-Week01-Hour009). The values on the transmission arrows between the market
zones represent the net power flow in the direction of the arrow in MWh.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects35
==PAGE:44==
A hybrid offshore energy hub flow-based dispatch situation with TAG compensation is
shown in fig. 3.11. Here, three of the five onshore interconnectors are constrained. The
Norwegian interconnector is both constrained by RAM and PTDF coefficients, the Dutch
interconnector is only constrained by its RAM, and the German interconnector is exclu-
sively constrained by the PTDF coefficient of a different CNE. Since the German flow on
the German interconnector is lower than 70% of its capacity and lower the OWF gen-
eration availability to the market, the German TSO compensates the OWF with the TAG
equal to the product of the price spread between the OBZ and the HM and the OWF power
generation. Although the OWF is compensated because the PTDF constrained intercon-
nector limits its access to the German HM zone, which results in a lower OBZ price, the
amount of transferred compensation is low compared to its OBZ market revenue, because
the price delta is low. While the German OWF is making a market revenue of 232,393
EUR, it is additionally compensated with 1,001 EUR, which is 0.43% of its market revenue
in that hour. This is because the market prices in the OBZs are almost equal to the prices
in GB and DK, since both interconnectors are not constrained, and the German onshore
market price is very close to the Danish, Dutch, and Great Britain onshore market prices.
However, there is a price differential towards the Norwegian onshore market, which is
constrained by the RAM of the Norwegian interconnector.
Figure 3.11: Hourly OBZ dispatch snapshot with TAG compensation (Base scenario,
2035-Week01-Hour140).The values on the transmission arrows between the market
zones represent the net power flow in the direction of the arrow in MWh.
A different dispatch situation with applied TAG compensation and curtailment in the OBZs
is presented in fig. 3.12. In this hour, all OBZ interconnectors with the surrounding on-
shore markets are constrained by the PTDF coefficients on other CNEs. Furthermore, the
prices in the OBZs and the three HMs are equal to or below the short-term marginal costs
/ variable O&M costs of the OWFs due to a very high share of variable renewable energy
36Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:45==
generation in the Danish, German, Dutch, and Great Britain onshore market, leading to
a complete curtailment of all three OWFs. Again, there is a price differential towards the
Norwegian onshore market, but the Norwegian interconnector capacity is constrained to
19% exchange capacity by PTDF coefficients. Since the three OBZ to HM interconnec-
tors are constrained by PTDF coefficients, the flows on the lines / exchange capacities
are below 70% of the interconnectors’ capacity and the flows to the HMs are below the
OWF generation availability to the market, the TAG compensation is triggered. Although
there is no compensation in this situation, because the HM prices are equal or below the
OBZ prices and the curtailment of OWF is happening by the market and not because of
the reduced market access. The Dutch and Danish OBZ have the same market prices
because the transmission capacity between the two zones is not constrained, which is
equal to their marginal OWF generation cost, and their price is very close to the Dutch
home market, although the interconnector to the Dutch HM is PTDF constrained. This can
be explained by a very low sum of shadow prices on all congested CNEs with a PTDF
coefficient on the Dutch interconnector of the flow-based grid constraint, which is equal
to the price difference between the two regions and here close to zero. The flow-based
grid constraint shadow prices also explain the market price in the German OBZ. Since
both of the transmission capacities to the other two OBZs are constrained, the day-ahead
market run finds a lower market price for the German OBZ than for the other two OBZs.
If there would be one additional unit of electricity demand in the German OBZ, the effect
on the objective function would be equal to the sum of shadow prices on all congested
CNEs with a PTDF coefficient on the German interconnector, which is equal to difference
between the German OBZ and HM market price and lower than the marginal cost of the
OWF generation.
Figure 3.12: Hourly OBZ dispatch snapshot with curtailment and TAG compensation
(Base scenario, 2035-Week19-Hour133). The values on the transmission arrows be-
tween the market zones represent the net power flow in the direction of the arrow in MWh.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.13: Hourly OBZ dispatch snapshot with curtailment and TAG compensation and
non-intuitive flow (Base scenario, 2035-Week22-Hour130). The values on the transmis-
sion arrows between the market zones represent the net power flow in the direction of the
arrow in MWh.
Finally, fig. 3.13 shows an hourly dispatch situation with TAG compensation, OWF ca-
pacity curtailment, and flow-based induced non-intuitive power flows from high price to
lower price bidding zones. Here, the interconnectors to the Norwegian and Great Britain
onshore markets are constrained by both their RAM and PTDF coefficients, while the
interconnectors to the German and Dutch HM are exclusively constrained by PTDF co-
efficients of other CNEs in the system. The OBZ market prices are at the marginal cost
of OWF generation and equal to the Danish HM price because the Danish interconnec-
tor is not constrained by the system. The available capacity to the market of the Dutch
and German OWFs is fully curtailed and the Danish OWF is experiencing 15% market
based curtailment of its available generation capacity to the market. In both the Ger-
man and Dutch HM zone, the OWF could export their generation capacities at higher
market prices, though the market access to both HMs is constrained by the PTDF co-
efficients, which themselves induce an electricity flow in the direction of the lower price
OBZs. These non-intuitive flows are an optimisation model solution where the Balmorel
flow-based model is optimising the overall socioeconomic welfare in the system. They
can be interpreted as a flow from a medium price bidding zone (DE and NL) to a high
price zone (NO2 and GB) through a low price zone (DE OBZ, DK OBZ, NL OBZ) and re-
lieve consgestion on CNEs, allowing more exchange between other bidding zones. Non
intuitive flows in flow-based market coupling are further explained in [28]. Because the
non intuitive flows limit access of the Dutch and German OWF to their HMs, both OWF
are compensated for their curtailed generation capacity by the difference of the OBZ and
the HM prices through the TAG. The Danish OWF, however, does not receive any TAG
compensation for the curtailed generation in the OBZ, as its market access to the Danish
38Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:47==
HM is not restricted and the curtailment is induced by the market.
The hour displayed in fig. 3.13 is not the only simulated hour in the model with non-intuitive
flows on one of the OBZ to onshore market interconnectors in the hybrid offshore hub
system. The annual share of hours with non-intuitive offshore hub flows against a price
difference is shown in fig. 3.14. It can be observed that the German HM interconnector has
the highest occurrence of hours with non-intuitive flows in the simulated year. The German
interconnector experiences non-intuitive flows in 3100 hours or 35% of the simulated year
followed by the Norwegian interconnector with 1571 hours (18%) and the Great Britain,
Dutch, and Danish interconnectors which have non-intuitive flows for 6%, 5%, and 3% of
the year, respectively.
Figure 3.14: Occurrence of non-intuitive flows and compensation with a flow towards the
OBZ in the simulated Base scenario in 2035
Furthermore, fig. 3.14 also shows the annual share of hours with applied TAG compensa-
tion and a simultaneous flow from the HM towards the OBZ. This situation can be based
either on a non-intuitive flow and or on the curtailment of electricity with an intuitive power
flow on the interconnector, as observed at the German OBZ in fig. 3.11. Here, the Dutch
interconnector shows the highest number of annual hours with flow in the direction of the
OBZ and simultaneous compensation of the OWF that occurs 5% of the annual timesteps,
followed by the German interconnector with 3%. TAG compensation and coincident flow
in the direction of the OBZ almost never occurs on the Danish interconnector.
3.1.5
Offshore hubs scenario comparison
To evaluate the influence of the particular OBZ setup on the results in the Base scenario
presented in section 3.1.2 and section 3.1.3 above, seven different variations of the Base
OBZ configuration, as described in section 2.1.4, were simulated and their results are
compared with the results of the Base scenario.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.15: The difference of generation, curtailment and capacity factors from the Base
scenario in 2035
The differences in OWF generation, curtailment and capacity factor from the Base sce-
nario are displayed in fig. 3.15. The differences of generation and curtailment from Base
can only be directly compared between the Danish and Dutch OBZ because the German
OWF has an increased generation capacity by 50%. In the figure, it can be observed that
the doubling of OBZ to HM interconnector capacity (2xDC) or OBZ to OBZ interconnec-
tors (2xHub2Hub) does not make any difference to the generation, curtailment or capacity
factor of the OWF showing that the curtailed OWF capacity in the Base scenario is not af-
fected by the HM interconnector capacities. The generation and curtailment in the OBZs
is increasing with minor overplanting up to 120% installed generation capacity, although
it does not affect the real capacity factor of the OWFs (as additional wake losses have not
been considered). However, if the generation capacity in the OBZs doubles (2xGen), 84%
of the potential additional generation capacity is curtailed in the Dutch OBZ and 19% in
the German OBZ causing the capacity factor of the OWFs to decrease nominally by 19%
and 4%, respectively. The OBZ configurations with no interconnection to GB and NO2
are resulting in slightly more curtailment and lower capacity factors compared to the Base
scenario. The scenario with no allowed flexibility investments (NoH2Inv) in the energy
system has causing a lot more curtailment in the hubs leading to a significant reduction
of the OWF’s capacity factors in all three OBZs.
40Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.16: The difference of market incomes with HM and OBZ prices and value of wind
from the Base scenario in 2035
Similar trends can be observed in fig. 3.16, which shows the differences in annual mar-
ket sales and capture prices (excl. curtailment) of wind from the Base scenario. Since
the difference from the Base scenario is stated in percent, the influence of the different
OBZ configurations can be compared between the OBZs. The 2xDC and the 2xHub2Hub
configurations have only a marginal impact on the capture prices and therefore an in-
significant effect on the OWF revenues. Only for the German hub is there a marginal
increase of revenue in the OBZ market due to increased OBZ capture prices. The minor
overplanting scenarios 1.1xGEN and 1.2xGEN show a positive effect on the market rev-
enues in the OBZ and if they would sell to the potential HM prices, although the OBZ and
HM capture prices are decreasing, since they are selling more electricity at lower market
prices. Additionally, the gap between potential HM sales and actual OBZ sales is increas-
ing. The potential HM electricity sales increase with the doubling of the OWF generation
capacity in the three OBZs, although the strongest for the Danish OWF, followed by the
German and Dutch OWF with 80%, 74% and 23% potential HM revenue increases, re-
spectively. This implies that doubling the generation capacity is not doubling the market
revenues. HM capture prices are decreasing for the Danish and German OWF because
they would be selling more electricity at lower HM prices. However, the Dutch HM capture
price is increasing, as increased generation is sold at higher electricity prices. Thus, this
does not reflect the high curtailment in the Dutch OBZ. In contrast with the potential HM
sales, the OWF revenues in the OBZ decrease in the double generation capacity scenario
because the increased generation capacity in the hub significantly reduces the actual cap-
ture prices in the OBZs by -40 up to -60% or by -21 up to -31 EUR/MWh depending on
the OBZ. While the capture prices are almost the same in the Base and three-country
interconnection scenario, the market revenues are slightly reduced due to increased cur-
tailment in the OBZ. The OBZ and the potential HM capture prices are reduced in the
scenario without allowed flexibility investments in the system compared to the Base sce-
nario due to a lower system demand and overall lower system electricity prices. This also
negatively affects market sales in all three OBZs and represents the greatest reduction in
sales between all scenarios at around -65% of the Base revenues.
The influence of the different OBZ configurations on the number of hours of constrained
interconnectors compared to the Base scenario is shown in fig. 3.17. Here, it is found
that the 2xDC scenario increases the number of hours where the OWF is compensated
with TAG only for the Danish and Dutch OWF while the German OWF is having fewer
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects41
==PAGE:50==
hours with TAG compensation due to an increased number of hours with a negative price
spread towards the OBZ. The only other scenario that has a positive effect on the number
of hours with TAG compensation is the scenario without allowed investments in flexibili-
ties (NoH2Inv). In this OBZ configuration, the annual number of hours with compensation
is increased by 33% or 114 hours for the Danish, 8% or 201 hours for the Dutch OWF
due to more hours with a simultaneous PTDF constraint and flow below 70% of the inter-
connector capacity and fewer negative price spreads. All other scenarios show a nega-
tive influence on the annual number of hours when the OWF are compensated with TAG
compensation. While there is only a minor reduction in the number of TAG compensa-
tion hours in the 2xHub2Hub, 1.1xGen and 1.2xGen scenarios for the Dutch and German
OWF, the 1.1xGen scenario has a significant influence on the Danish OWF. Here, it re-
duces the number of hours with TAG compensation by 80% or 272 hours. In the double
OWF capacity (2xGen) and the three-country connection scenario (3Country), the reduc-
tion of hours with TAG compensation is more considerable, especially for the Dutch and
German OWF, but also percentage-wise for the Danish OWF. This is due to the much
lower amount of connected interconnection capacity per OWF generation capacity, re-
sulting in the OWF interconnectors reaching their maximum transmission capacity / RAM
for a higher amount of hours in the year, and thus not fulfilling the defined TAG criteria.
Figure 3.17: The number of hours with TAG compensation as difference from the Base
scenario
In fig. 3.18a and fig. 3.18b, the influence of the different OBZ configurations on the annual
amount of interconnector congestion income and the TAG compensation is visualised.
It can be observed that only in the double-transmission capacity (2xDC) and the no in-
vestments in flexibilities scenarios (NoH2Inv) on the interconnectors to the Danish and
German HMs, the congestion income is decreasing. Meanwhile, it increases Dutch con-
gestion income with every scenario, notably in the case without investments in flexibilities,
where there is a high price spread over the interconnector in many hours, leading to an
increase in CI of 100% or 137 mEUR. However, the potential in- and decrease in CI is the
highest on the Danish and German HM interconnectors because of their comparable low
levels in the Base scenario. The case with the highest percentage and nominal increase
in CI is the double generation (2xGen) scenario in fig. 3.18b, due to the much higher
price between the OBZ and HM zone. Here, the annual CI increases by 8989% or 564
mEUR on the Danish interconnector compared to the Base scenario and by 5235% or 939
mEUR and 424% or 684 mEUR on the German and Dutch interconnectors, respectively.
42Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:51==
The 2xDC configuration has a positive effect on TAG compensation for the Dutch OWF
and, in contrast, the highest negative effect on the German OWF with an annual reduc-
tion in TAG compensation by 70% or 13 mEUR, caused by a reduction in hours where the
TAG requirements are met, which generates almost the same amount of electricity as in
the Base scenario. The 2xHub2Hub scenario does not have a significant influence on the
annual amount of TAG compensation for the three OWFs. A more significant influence of
the OBZ configuration on the amount of annual TAG compensation can be observed for
the three overplanting scenarios. Here, the 1.1xGen and 1.2xGen scenarios result in an
increased TAG compensation, especially for the Dutch and German OWF, even though
their total number of hours with TAG compensation is decreasing. This can be explained
by the higher amount of generation that is compensated for in the remaining hours with
transferred TAG compensation to the OWFs. In contrast, the 2xGen scenario is reducing
TAG compensation for the Dutch and German hub, caused by a major reduction of hours
with compensation. Similarly, the 3Country configuration has a negative influence on
TAG compensation for the Danish and German OWF, due to fever interconnector capac-
ity, but a slight positive effect on TAG compensation for the Dutch hub, due to an increase
in price spread over the Dutch interconnector in the remaining hours with compensation
and high electricity generation. Finally, the NoH2Inv scenario is significantly increasing
the amount of TAG compensation for the Dutch OWF, caused by higher price spread over
the interconnector and an increase in the number of hours with compensation. However,
the German and Danish OWF experiences a minor reduction in TAG compensation due
to a reduction in price spreads, although the number of hours with TAG compensation is
increasing in the Danish OWF.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.18: The difference of annual congestion income and TAG compensation from
the Base scenario in 2035
Finally, the wind market values of the OBZs in the potential HM bidding zone and in the
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects43
==PAGE:52==
actual OBZ combined with the market values of TAG compensation (incl. curtailment),
shown in fig. 3.19, are chosen to compare the influence of TAG between the different
scenarios. The influence of TAG compensation on the market value of wind in the OBZ
is found to be the highest for the Dutch OWF in all OBZ configurations. At the same
time, the difference between the potential HM value and the OBZ plus TAG value for the
Dutch OWF remains greater than for the Danish and German OWF. An exception is the
2xGen scenario, where the potential HM value is also significantly reduced for the Dutch
OWF due to high curtailment. Only the NoH2Inv scenario shows a higher OBZ plus TAG
market value of wind compared to the potential HM value for the Danish and German
OWF due to the significant reduction in overall market prices. While the wind market
values of the 2xGen and NoH2Inv scenarios differ considerably from the other scenarios,
they are much more similar for the other six OBZ configurations. Between that six OBZ
configurations, the 2xDC stands out with the highest combined OBZ and TAG wind market
values among all three OWFs. It furthermore stands out as it is the only scenario where
the TAG is capped by the CI for the German OWF. The 2Hub2Hub scenario does not
show differences in the wind market values compared to the base scenario. Finally, there
is a gradual reduction in the potential HM and OBZ plus TAG market values of wind for
the OWF with increasing minor overplanting in the 1.1xGen and 1.2xGen scenarios.
Figure 3.19: The difference of market value of wind and market value of TAG from the
Base scenario in 2035
3.2
Economic feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects
The Balmorel 2035 OBZ dispatch results presented in the previous section 3.1 are further
used as input to different discounted cash flow models for each of the OWF projects to
evaluate the influence of the TAG compensation on the private economic feasibility of
each hybrid offshore wind project. It is assumed that the capture prices from the Balmorel
optimisation in section 3.1 and the capacity factors for the three OWFs remain constant
throughout the entire lifetime of the projects. The results of the discounted cash flow
model are presented in real 2032 present values unless otherwise stated.
44Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:53==
3.2.1
Influence of TAG on the economic feasibility of hybrid offshore
projects
The technology costs per generated unit of electricity are compared between the different
OWFs and are displayed in fig. 3.20a. All three OWFs have the same wind turbine capital,
operation, and maintenance costs, the only difference between the three Levelized Costs
of Energy (LCOEs) is the capacity factor of each OWF and the transmission connection
costs, which depend on the wind resources, the amount of curtailment and the distance
of the project to shore. What is not taken into account in the LCOEs are the different tax
expenditures of the three OWFs. The Danish OWF is found to have the lowest LCOE with
53.2 EUR2020/MWh followed by the Dutch and German OWF with 61.1 mEUR2020/MWh
and 65.1 mEUR2020/MWh, respectively. These LCOEs represent the minimum average
costs at which each generated unit of electricity would need to be sold (excluding taxes)
in order to make each hybrid offshore wind project profitable.
The different LCOEs also affect the net present values (NPV) of the three OWFs shown in
fig. 3.20b. Here, the only difference between the potential HM NPV, the actual OBZ NPV,
and the OBZ plus TAG NPV are the different capture prices because each OWF capac-
ity factor remains constant. Furthermore, it is not possible to compare the NPVs of the
projects in fig. 3.20b directly between each other, since all projects have different capital
expenditures / project volumes. It is observed that none of the three hybrid offshore wind
projects with the Base scenario OBZ configuration has a business case because each of
their NPVs is below zero, meaning that all three projects are unprofitable. The project with
the fewest losses is the scenario in which the Danish OWF could sell its entire electricity
generation for the Danish HM prices in DK1 with an NPV of -183 mEUR2032. The NPV
of the actual OBZ market revenue is 68 mEUR2032 lower, and this deficit can be reduced
by TAG compensation to 67 mEUR2032. Though, the three different market revenues are
not able to make the Danish project profitable. Therefore, in the OBZ market with TAG
compensation, the OWF project would have an NPV of -250 mEUR2032. A similar rela-
tionship is found for the Dutch and German hybrid offshore wind projects, where the TAG
compensates for some of the potential losses in the OBZ compared to the case where the
OWF sells at HM prices. Although the influence of TAG is higher, both projects remain
also unprofitable.
(a) Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE) in the Base
scenario
(b) Net present value (NPV) of hybrid offshore
wind projects in the Base scenario
Figure 3.20: Private economic feasibility results in the Base OBZ configuration
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects45
==PAGE:54==
The internal rates of return (IRRs) of the hybrid offshore wind projects are listed in ta-
ble 3.3. Since the discount rate of all three discounted cash flow models is equal to 7%,
an IRR above 7% indicates the profitability of a project, and an IRR below 7% indicates
that the project is not profitable. Therefore, the IRR values in table 3.3 indicate the same
findings as the NPV values in fig. 3.20b. For all three projects, the IRR indicates the rate
of return that the hybrid offshore project would need to have in order to yield an NPV of
zero.
Table 3.3: Internal Rate of Return (IRR) for the hybrid offshore wind projects in the Base
OBZ configuration
DK
NL
DE
HM IRR
6.90%
5.72%
4.35%
OBZ IRR
6.86%
4.97%
4.23%
OBZ + TAG IRR
6.86%
5.24%
4.29%
To compare the different hybrid offshore wind projects with their different investment
scales, the profitability index (PI) was chosen, which is independent of the investment
scale, and the PIs of the different projects are shown in fig. 3.21. Since a PI above one
indicates the profitability of a project, a PI below one consequently indicates that a project
is not profitable. The same findings from the NPVs in fig. 3.20b and the IRRs in table 3.3
are confirmed by the PIs, showing that all projects are unprofitable. While the project prof-
itability of the Danish OWF is very similar between the three potential market revenues and
the German profitability varies slightly, the Dutch profitability is stronger affected by the
different options of market revenues. Here, the TAG compensation reduces the unprof-
itability by 0.03 compared to the German and Danish OWF with 0.007 and 0, respectively.
Although the three hybrid offshore wind projects are found to be unprofitable, it can be
observed that the Danish project with actual OBZ market income and TAG compensation
is close to being profitable with a PI of 0.983, whereas the Dutch project with the same
income is more unprofitable with 0.788 and the German project is found to be the least
profitable with a PI of 0.687. This can be explained by their increased investment costs,
higher taxes, lower capacity factor, and lower capture prices.
Figure 3.21: The three OWFs compared by their profitability Index with different market
revenues in the Base scenario
46Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:55==
The influence of the different OBZ configurations on the NPV of the Base scenario is
presented in fig. 3.21. It is found that only the 2xHub2Hub and 3Country configurations
have a partially positive effect on Base NPV values depending on the source of market
revenue. The 2xHub2Hub scenario increases the NPV with the potential HM revenue
for the Danish, Dutch, and German project by 3, 8 and 1 mEUR, respectively. Further-
more, it also increases the NPV of the Dutch project with OBZ revenues by 6 mEUR. With
the 3Country configuration, only the NPV of the Dutch project with potential HM revenue
increases by 18 mEUR, whereas all other project’s NPVs are decreasing even further.
While the 1.1xGen and 1.2xGen scenarios have a comparable minor negative effect on
the NPV, the 2xGen and NoH2Inv OBZ configurations are reducing the NPV compared to
the Base scenario dramatically. The overall strongest NPV reduction occurs in the 2xGen
OBZ configuration with OBZ and OBZ + TAG revenues.
Figure 3.22: The different scenarios NPVs as difference from the Base scenario
To compare the profitability between the different scenarios of OBZ configuration and the
impact of TAG compensation on the profitability, fig. 3.23 shows the PIs of the different
projects and potential market revenues. Once again, it is found that none of the hybrid
offshore projects, independent of their source of market revenue, is profitable / has a busi-
ness case. For all scenarios and projects, the potential revenue from the HM represents
the least unprofitable income option. TAG compensation is most beneficial to the prof-
itability of the Dutch project in all scenarios, as it increases the profitability compared to
the case of exclusive OBZ market revenue the most. The influence of TAG on the prof-
itability is less strong for the German project and is least beneficial for the Danish projects,
regardless of the scenario. Due to higher costs for generation capacity, lower capacity
factors, and lower market capture prices, the 2xGen and NoH2Inv scenarios stand out
as the least profitable OBZ configuration for all three projects. They are followed by the
2xDC scenario which has double interconnection costs compared to the other scenarios,
which the marginal higher capture prices cannot make up for. Finally, the profitability of
the Base, 1.1xGen, 1.2xGen, 2xHub2Hub, and 3Country scenarios is similar within each
of the hybrid offshore wind projects.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.23: The different scenarios compared by their Profitability Index
3.2.2
Sensitivity analysis of uncertain DCF assumptions
As described in section 2.3.2, five input parameters of the discounted cash flow model
were found to be especially uncertain. To evaluate the influence of these parameters
on the DCFM results, a sensitivity analysis was performed on the results of the Base
scenario. Sensitivities are expressed as high and low, as defined in table 2.5.
Figure 3.24: Change in NPV from Base in relation to sensitivities
The effect of the different parameters on the NPV of the Base scenario with OBZ + TAG
income is shown in fig. 3.25. It can be observed that the different agreed connection
capacities of the TAG compensation have a negligible positive effect on the NPV of the
three hybrid offshore wind projects in the Base OBZ configuration. The change in discount
rate has the greatest effect on the NPV of the Danish and Dutch project, followed by the
48Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:57==
interconnection costs and the capital costs of the offshore hub. However, for the German
project, it is the reduction in costs of interconnection to zero that has an even greater
positive impact on the amount of NPV than the reduced discount rate of 5%. Thus, it is
closely followed by the discount rate, which still has a greater impact than the capital costs
of the hub. The reduction or increase in hub capital or interconnection costs have a linear
relationship with the reduction and increase in NPV.
Figure 3.25: NPV of the Base scenario in relation to sensitivities
To compare the effect of the parameters on profitability between the different projects
in the Base scenario, fig. 3.25 shows the profitability index for all the projects and its
sensitivity to the parameter divisions. The reduction in the discount rate to 5% makes
the Danish and Dutch hybrid offshore wind project profitable. Although the profitability of
the German project increases with the lower discount rate or decreased interconnection
costs, it remains unprofitable. Furthermore, the Danish project becomes profitable with a
reduction in offshore hub capital costs to 0.297 mEUR2020 and also with a 50% or 100%
reduction in interconnection costs. However, these cost reductions are not able to make
the Dutch or German project profitable.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects49
==PAGE:58==
50Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:59==
4
Discussion
After introducing the subject of this work in chapter 1, describing the methodology in chap-
ter 2 and presenting the results in chapter 3, the following chapter will reflect on the char-
acteristics and limitations of the applied methodology and the results. Furthermore, the
results will be analysed with a focus on the implications of the applied congestion in-
come distribution instrument, Transmission Access Guarantees, on hybrid offshore wind
projects. In addition, the results of this work are compared with previous studies and
opportunities for further research are presented.
4.1
Limitations of the study
Different methodologies with different assumptions were applied during this work, which
come with individual limitations that must be taken into account when interpreting the
results of this thesis.
4.1.1
Balmorel energy system model setup
One of the major limitations are the characteristics of the partial equilibrium energy sys-
tem model Balmorel. As described in section 2.1.1, Balmorel is a deterministic model
and assumes perfect foresight without being able to represent the uncertain behaviour of
the real energy system, such as unit outages or the influence of weather on RE. In ad-
dition, Balmorel assumes energy markets with perfect competition where all players act
as price takes without strategic behaviour, which does not necessarily reflect the actual
characteristics of energy markets. The setup of the Balmorel model used for this thesis
did not use the unit commitment add-on of the model because of computational burdens,
which means that there are no start-up costs, minimum generation or up and down time
requirements, and ramp-up or down constraints for the dispatch of the generators. For
the investment option in system flexibilities used in this work, this implies that there are
no economics of scale or lumpiness of investments.
The energy system simulated in the Balmorel model was set up based on assumptions by
ENTSO-E’s TYNDP, the NSWPH programme, and the plans of the Esbjerg cooperation’s
TSOs on installed generation capacities and energy demands in the European energy
system in 2035. Since no party can foresee the actual future energy system, these input
assumptions, as well as the assumed costs and additional input parameter, are uncertain
and their future deviation can impact the results of this thesis.
One of the potential deviations from the energy system, used in this work, is the energy
island planned by Belgium. The Belgian TSO elia plans to start construction of the island
in 2024, which is supposed to be interconnected with the Danish offshore hub through
the transmission interconnector ”Triton link” [50]. Due to the limitation of the 2035 annual
flow-based constraint parameters available from the consultancy energynautics, which
were used in Balmorel, it was not possible to integrate the Belgian energy island into
the offshore hub system of this work. Furthermore, these fixed flow-based constraint
parameters also limited the Balmorel results of this work to the year 2035.
Another limitation arising from the constant flow-based parameters is the assumption that
the PTDF coefficients will remain constant despite the interconnector transmission capac-
ity changing in the 2xDC scenario. Ideally, the PTDF coefficients would be updated for
the system with double the OBZ to HM interconnector capacity.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects51
==PAGE:60==
The allowed investments in power-to-x / hydrogen systems and electricity storage sys-
tems, which were used as installed system capacities in each of the scenarios except
the NoH2Inv scenario, were optimised using a Balmorel NTC based investment run of
the energy system and the Base scenario OBZ configuration. Thus, hydrogen and bat-
tery storage capacities are optimising socioeconomic welfare in the Base scenario but not
necessarily in the other six variations of the Base OBZ configuration. Furthermore, the
invested hydrogen capacities might be ambitious and do not represent actual projections
[51].
A further limitation is given by the simplified assumption that the potential home market
(HM) revenues of the OWFs are equal to the offshore wind generated in the energy hubs
being sold at their HM prices. In an actual HM run setup of Balmorel, the market clearing
results would be different, resulting in a different generation dispatch of the energy system
capacities and electric flows on the interconnectors. However, it was possible to compare
the simplified fictive HM revenues of the Base scenario with the actual HM revenues of
an equal system setup used in a previous analysis by Ea Energy Analyses and energy-
nautics. The annual deviation of the fictive HM revenues from the actual HM revenues is
shown in table 4.1. Here, it can be observed that the deviation is marginal for the Danish
and German HM and small for the Dutch HM. Therefore, the difference between the OBZ
and potential HM revenues presented in section 3.1.2 would be smaller. However, the
fictive HM revenue still represents a good approximation of the actual revenue and does
not impact the scope of this work, to analyse the influence of TAG on the OWF’s total
income in an OBZ market configuration.
Table 4.1: Difference between the actual OWF sales in a HM setup and in the fictive HM
used in this work
DK
NL
DE
Difference of fictive from the actual HM revenues
-0.21%
+3.91%
-0.61%
As described in section 1.1.2, it is not yet certain how the future energy hub system will
look and what the exact combination of installed generation capacity will be. The NSWPH
programme describes in their work the opportunity to combine the installed offshore wind
power capacities in the OBZ with electrolysis power-to-x systems to produce hydrogen in
the OBZ and export it to shore [9]. If any kind of electricity demand, such as a power-
to-x system, was installed within the OBZ, the OWF would have the alternative option
of selling its generated electricity not only to the surrounding onshore markets but to an
electrolysis system located at the hub, which will change the market outcome depending
on the market price of hydrogen, the technical specifications of the power-to-x system,
and its availability. This could potentially make the compensation ineffective.
Furthermore, there are no complete transmission line outages modelled in the Balmorel
optimisation. In reality, line outages might occur and would affect the available market
access of the OBZs and thereby OBZ prices and revenues, as well as TAG compensation.
The flows against price differences / non-intuitive flows, as observed in section 3.1.4, are
currently not allowed in the Market Coupling Western Europe (CWE) region and the price
coupling algorithm ”PCR EUPHEMIA”, where flow-based market coupling is applied to the
CWE internal borders. The Nordic TSO’s describe this solution as one of the possibilities
on how to deal with the non-intuitive flows in the market outcome, although it would not
result in the maximum possible socioeconomic welfare [52]. In this work the non-intitive
52Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:61==
flows were just taken as they are and the TSO owning the interconnector is taking the
loss in hours with non intuitive flows resulting in lower accumulated annual CI. Hence,
the occurrence of non-intuitive flows observed in the OBZ system in fig. 3.14 would ex-
pose evolved TSOs to new market risks and the question of how to distribute congestion
income so that no TSO needs to pay for the overall socioeconomic welfare gain of the
system. Whatever solution is decided, it can also affect the amount of TAG compensation
transferred to the OWFs.
Finally, the flow-based market coupling methodology in this work assumes perfect market
communication between all European capacity calculation regions. As this is not the
status quo in the price coupling of regions (PCR), it is questionable if this will be fully
achieved in the future flow-based European energy market clearing algorithm [53].
4.1.2
Discounted cash flow model
One of the major limitations that affects the DCFM results is the input of the Balmorel
optimisation with the limitations described above. Furthermore, the considered market
revenue in the DCF is the result of the 2035 optimisation and remains constant through-
out the 30 years of OWF operation. It does not represent an actual forecast of all future
OWF income streams. The energy system is expected to transform itself during the 30
years of OWF operation, and hence the market incomes of the OWF and the calculated
TAG compensation can differ from the 2035 values in the period from 2036 to 2064. The
TSOs of the Esbjerg cooperation describe, for example, a road map with up to 10 GW in-
stalled OWF capacity in the Danish North Sea hub and more than 10 GW for the German
and Dutch hub towards 2040. This will change the initial business case of the consid-
ered hybrid offshore wind projects due to changing markets within the bidding zone, and
therefore changing income streams throughout the projects’ lifetimes.
Another limitation are the costs and grid tariffs considered in the DCFM. They are largely
based on the Energy Catalogue of the Danish Energy Agency and the Danish TSO En-
erginet [37] [43] [40]. However, they might differ between the three different countries.
The DCFM of this work does not include the capital costs of the OBZ to OBZ interconnector
transmission infrastructure in the total costs of the hybrid offshore wind projects. It is
questionable who will bear the costs of those interconnectors and they can represent
an additional cost for the projects, making them less economically attractive. The same
applies to the OBZ interconnectors with the Norwegian and Great Britain onshore markets.
Lastly, it was not taken into account that TAG compensation could reduce the discount
rate of the projects, due to a reduction of risks.
4.1.3
TAG design
Currently, the European Parliament has not yet adopted the TAG legislation proposal as
the chosen instrument to compensate the OWF in an OBZ using CI, and, as of January
2024, it still awaits the first reading in the EU Parliament. Therefore, it is not yet clear
what the final congestion income compensation instrument will look like or which of the
current proposals will be implemented in the final legislation. The final instrument can be
different from the TAG compensation applied in this work. It could, for example, exclude
the compensation of curtailment, exclusively include the compensation of curtailment, do
not include the 70% / agreed connection capacity threshold, or end up being one of the
different options described in section 1.2.
The TAG compensation designed in this thesis was set up with the HM within the same
EEZ as the reference market for compensation. However, for OBZs with interconnec-
tors to two onshore markets, like Denmark and the Netherlands, a different or multiple
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects53
==PAGE:62==
reference markets could be chosen, which will affect the amount of TAG compensation.
4.2
Implications of Transmission Access Guarantees on
hybrid offshore wind projects
The presented results provide a fundamental basis for deriving implications of TAG com-
pensation on hybrid offshore wind projects located in an OBZ in a flow-based market cou-
pling system with transmission capacity allocation within market clearing, despite some
limitations in its assumptions and methodology.
In the future European electricity markets, cross-zonal transmission capacity will be par-
tially allocated through flow-based market coupling, while simultaneously clearing the
electricity market. Therefore, TSOs will no longer have the same direct management
control over their allocated capacity, as it is currently the case [8][53]. Flow-based market
coupling maximises socioeconomic value of energy exchanges, among others, by allocat-
ing reduced transmission capacity to specific cross-zonal interconnectors on occasion to
solve inter-zonal or cross-zonal congestion elsewhere in the electricity system. A hybrid
offshore wind project located in an OBZ faces volume and price risk due to flow-based
reduced transmission capacity allocation, which can limit its access to the surrounding
onshore electricity markets, leading to lower capture prices and market returns compared
to a system where the OWF is integrated into an onshore home market. A similar occur-
rence of a flow-based induced reduction in market access has been observed in the study
by Tosatto et al. [11]. The reduction of cross-zonal transmission capacity due to PTDF
coefficients from the flow-based market coupling constraints, which are observed in this
work, represent ”operational deratings” as endogenous model constraints. ENGIE Impact
has identified these deratings as the main risk of OWFs in an OBZ, which is currently not
being addressed [14].
As expected in the motivation of this thesis, TAG compensation increases the market
revenue of an OWF located in an OBZ. Congestion income is used for this compensation
and is no longer exclusively distributed to the TSOs that own the interconnector. This
ensures a fairer distribution of congestion income while reducing the additional risk of
limited market access of an OWF located in an OBZ. Especially when the hybrid offshore
wind project is paying for the costs of the transmission interconnector, as assumed in this
work. However, the level of TAG compensation and its share of the total OBZ market
income are highly dependent on the topology of the OBZ and its surrounding onshore
markets.
TAG compensation has only a minor effect on the profitability of hybrid offshore wind
projects in a flow-based market coupling system, as demonstrated in fig. 4.1. It is impor-
tant to note that even with the potential revenues from the HMs, these projects are not yet
profitable under the given cost assumptions. Therefore, TAG compensation is not the key
factor in ensuring the overall long-term business case of hybrid offshore wind projects in
an OBZ under flow-based market coupling.
Also Kitzing and Gonzales found that their hybrid offshore wind farms in an offshore bid-
ding zone require support instruments to be economically feasible, which is consistent with
the findings of this work [10]. Their OWFs in one large OBZ require 8,618 mEUR2029PV
of support compared to a required total support of 11,312 mEUR2029PV to make the three
hybrid offshore wind projects with OBZ market income in the Base scenario of this work
economically feasible. Although the two levels of support required are not directly com-
parable due to different assumptions and modelling methods, the two values point in the
same direction.
54Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.1: Implications of TAG compensation on the ecomomic feasibility of hybrid off-
shore wind projects (based on results presented in section 3.2.1)
However, reducing the project’s weighted average cost of capital, the share of transmis-
sion interconnector costs, or the hub infrastructure costs of the project has a significant
impact on the private economic profitability of the hybrid offshore wind project. These
financial cost parameters have the potential to create a business case for hybrid offshore
wind projects in OBZs under flow-based market coupling, in contrast to TAG compensa-
tion.
It is assumed that the hybrid offshore wind projects are charged by the TSOs for the
full cost of interconnection with their HM. If the projects are charged with the full cost of
transmission interconnection capacity but do not own the interconnector, this would further
justify a redistribution of CI to offshore wind projects.
Furthermore, neither overcapacity in OWF generation nor overcapacity in transmission
interconnection significantly increases the amount of annual accumulated TAG compen-
sation compared to the scenario in which the OWF has the same installed generation
capacity as the transmission interconnection capacity with its home market in the same
exclusive economic zone. Meanwhile, both OWF generation and transmission intercon-
nection overcapacity have a negative effect on the profitability of the hybrid offshore wind
project because they increase the capital costs of the project while not improving revenue
marginally.
The analysed Base scenario with three OBZs and transmission interconnection capacities
to the corresponding home markets, as well as with each other and to Norway and Great
Britain, represents an OBZ configuration with overcapacity in transmission interconnec-
tion. The total amount of annual transferred TAG compensation turns out to be lower in a
system where the interconnectors to Norway and Great Britain are not existing because of
the missing potential price differential towards the two markets affecting the OBZ prices.
However, this scenario does not have a significant influence on the profitability of hybrid
offshore wind projects, because the transmission capacity costs to Norway and Great
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects55
==PAGE:64==
Britain are not included in the total project costs of the OWF, and the TAG compensation
is initiated only by the reduced access to the home markets, while the OBZ prices are to
a high degree synchronised with the Danish and German HM onshore prices.
Furthermore, an energy system with a lower amount of demand flexibility, such as power-
to-x or battery storage, would result in significantly lower average electricity prices and
market values of wind, as observed in the NoH2Inv scenario. Although this would result
in a higher total amount of TAG compensation being transferred to the OWFs, it would
dramatically reduce their total annual market revenues, which would greatly decrease the
profitability of the hybrid offshore wind projects.
The chosen TAG design in this work mitigates the volume risk and price risk of reduced
HM access, due to endogenous flow-based market coupling constraints, of a hybrid off-
shore wind project located in an OBZ. If the compensation criteria are met, it compensates
the OWF with the price difference between the OBZ and HM multiplied by the potential
generation offered to the market including curtailment. It is based on the assumption that,
with sufficient market access, the OWF would receive the home market price for the total
generation potential as offered to the market (including curtailment).
The TAG compensation has been designed so that the reference market for the access
reduction is the HM of the country within the same Exclusive Economic Zone as the OBZ.
However, as the German and Dutch OBZ have an additional interconnector with another
onshore market, this does not directly compensate for the reduction in access to the on-
shore markets that are not the reference HM, in this case the Norwegian and UK onshore
markets. Since the legislative proposal by the EU Council states: ”compensation applies
where one or more transmission system operators have not made enough available the
capacity [...] on the interconnector”, the TAG compensation could be also designed in a
way that the OWF gets compensated by the TSO that is responsible for the total market
access reduction of the OWF [17]. However, in a flow-based market coupling system,
this might be challenging to determine because it would correspond to the TSOs with the
restricted critical critical network element that has a PTDF coefficient on the exchange
between the OBZ and the onshore market.
One way to not overcompensate for the curtailment of the OWF in an OBZ, is to only
compensate by the price spread between the home market and the OBZ multiplied by the
potential offshore wind generation offered to the market, as proposed by ENGIE Impact
and the NSWPH consortium and applied in this work [14][8]. However, this can underes-
timate the amount of justified compensation in Balmorel, as the regional electricity price
is equal to the lowest marginal cost of the available potential generation or import market
price. If the curtailment in the OBZ is caused by flow-based induced reduction of mar-
ket access, as observed in fig. 3.13 for the German and Dutch OWF, the price spread of
the applied TAG compensation in this work will be reduced by the marginal cost of wind
energy.
The flow-based market coupling applied in this work only rarely results in a reduction of the
market access of OWFs to the onshore HMs in DE, NL and DK1 combined with a larger
price difference between the OBZ and the HM. This can be explained by the Balmorel
energy system optimisation, which sees the value of inexpensive offshore wind energy in
the OBZs and reduces the exchange capacities on the HM interconnector only when this
is cost-optimal for the system.
Nevertheless, the flow-based market coupling results in non-intuitive flows, which repre-
sent an additional market access and price risk for the OWF in an OBZ. These risks can
56Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:65==
be addressed by TAG compensation, as observed in this work.
All of the hybrid offshore wind projects considered were found to be not commercially vi-
able because they are unprofitable. If a hybrid offshore wind project in an OBZ market
does not become profitable with TAG compensation, the project would need an additional
subsidy to be economically feasible and making the undertaking of the project favourable
for a private investor. This subsidy could, for example, be a Contract for Difference (CfD)
that hedges the market price risk of an OWF [54]. Any support instrument, including TAG,
would likely also reduce the discount rate of the project, due to a reduction in market
risks, and thus increase the projects profitability. However, there should not be two com-
pensations that cover the same risk of a project, as this could lead to overcompensation,
market distortions, and inefficient allocation of resources. This means that TAG compen-
sation only makes sense if it makes the project economically viable, thus supporting the
investment decision of a private investor, and would be redundant if additional financial
support is provided at the same time.
4.3
Recommendations for Future Research
There are many opportunities for further research arising from the findings of this work. A
limited selection of recommendations for future research is presented below.
First, the influence of an interconnection between the Danish OBZ and the planned Bel-
gian energy island, which was not represented in this work, should be investigated.
This work did not investigate the origin of the flow-based OBZ to HM transmission ex-
change reductions. Therefore, it would be necessary to investigate the grid topology of
the model setup and determine which congested critical network elements affect the ex-
change reduction and where they are located in the system, including a detailed analysis
of system power flows and regional prices.
In addition, another model setup could be used where the market outcome does not allow
for non-intuitive power flows between regions. This is currently the case when calculating
prices and volumes in the Euphemia market algorithm with flow-based market coupling for
the allocation of the CWE internal border exchange and could further reduce the annual
amount of TAG compensation [52].
Since in this work the HM prices were used as an approximation to estimate the revenues
of the OWFs in a HM integration, future work should integrate all described scenarios in a
real HM setup where flows and market price may differ from the HM revenues calculated
in this work. Subsequently, the combined OBZ market revenue and TAG compensation
should be compared to the alternative HM integration revenue.
This work is based on the assumption that a OBZ configuration increases socio-economic
welfare in the system. However, in an analysis similar to that carried out by Kitzing and
Gonzales [10] or Tosatto et al. [11], it should be investigated in an economic feasibility
study, including the TSOs, how the different OBZ configuration scenarios under flow-
based market coupling affect socio-economic welfare and a large-scale impact analysis
of the considered hybrid offshore wind projects could be carried out.
Finally, it would be important to calculate the OBZ market revenues and the TAG compen-
sation of the OWFs for several years over the lifetime of the project, including adjusted
installed capacity expectations or least-cost investment pathways, in order to obtain more
certain results in the discounted cash flow analysis.
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects57
==PAGE:66==
58Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:67==
5
Conclusion
The offshore bidding zone (OBZ) market integration has been shown by previous stud-
ies to be the most efficient solution for market integration of offshore energy hubs in the
North Sea. However, this market integration entails an increased volume and price risk for
offshore wind projects, as their revenues depend on access to the surrounding onshore
markets. Therefore, the European Commission proposed Transmission Access Guaran-
tees (TAG) as an instrument to compensate offshore wind farm operators by redistribut-
ing congestion income in the case of onshore market access reduction. This thesis uses
a flow-based market coupling day-ahead dispatch optimisation of the Balmorel energy
system model to determine the level of TAG compensation for different OBZ configura-
tions. In addition, the Balmorel dispatch results are used to assess the implication of TAG
compensation on the private economic feasibility of hybrid offshore wind projects using a
discounted cash flow model analysis.
A methodology is developed that calculates TAG compensation ex-post in the event of
limited market access of the offshore wind project to its home market, induced by the
power transfer distribution factor coefficients of congested critical network elements from
the flow-based market coupling constraints. The home market is defined as the onshore
market within the same exclusive economic zone as the OBZ.
Transmission Access Guarantees compensation of flow-based induced market access
reduction for hybrid offshore wind projects has a minor impact on the total revenue of the
offshore wind project and its level depends on the topology of the OBZ. In the analysed
OBZ configuration (Base scenario), which is similar to the configuration of the NSWPH
programme [9], the TAG compensation for the Dutch offshore wind project corresponds
to 3.34% of its total annual revenue, 0.85% of the German project’s annual revenue, and
just 0.01% of the Danish project’s annual revenue. Due to TAG, the congestion income of
the TSOs is redistributed and reduced by 18% for the Dutch interconnector, 64% for the
German interconnector and 1% for the Danish interconnector.
The compensation provided by TAG is increasing the profitability of the Dutch hybrid off-
shore wind project by 3.89%, the German project by 0.95%, and the Danish project by
0.01%. Though, none of the three projects become economically viable through the TAG
compensation. The Danish hybrid offshore wind project requires the lowest additional sup-
port of 250 mEUR2032 present value (PV), followed by the Dutch with 3,186 mEUR2032PV
and the German project, which would require 7,946 mEUR2032PV support to become eco-
nomically feasible.
Additional support instruments will therefore be needed to encourage private investors
to invest in one of the hybrid offshore wind projects. However, a market risk should not
be covered by different support instruments at the same time, as this could lead to over-
compensation, market distortions and inefficient allocation of resources. Consequently,
additional support for the hybrid offshore wind project would make the TAG compensation
instrument redundant.
Neither the variations of the OBZ configuration with OBZ to home market interconnector
transmission overcapacity (more home market transmission capacity than generation ca-
pacity) nor with overcapacity of offshore wind generation (more generation capacity than
home market transmission capacity) significantly increase the annual amount of TAG com-
pensation and total offshore wind project revenue. Yet, both configurations are associated
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects59
==PAGE:68==
with higher total project costs, resulting in a less favourable investment option compared
to the economically infeasible projects in the Base scenario configuration.
The flow-based market coupling optimisation of Balmorel results in multiple hours with
non-intuitive flows on the interconnectors between the OBZs and home markets. These
non-intuitive flows represent an additional market access and price risk which is ad-
dressed by the TAG instrument. However, the annual share of hours in which access
to the home market is reduced by the power transfer distribution factor coefficients of the
flow-based market constraints, resulting in a price difference between the onshore home
market and the OBZ of more than 1 EUR/MWh and triggering TAG compensation, can
be low and depends on the project’s OBZ topology. While this annual share is 18% of
the hours for the Dutch OBZ and 7% of the hours for the German OBZ, it is zero for the
Danish OBZ in the Base scenario.
Endogenous, flow-based induced reduction of exchange capacity between the OBZs and
the home market zones, resulting in a significant price difference between the zones,
depends on the OBZ topology but appears to be comparatively rare. Though, this will
have to be demonstrated in more detail in further studies.
This work recommends the use of different financial support instruments to make hybrid
offshore wind projects located in an offshore bidding zone economically viable, as Trans-
mission Access Guarantees under flow-based market coupling are not found to be able
to ensure a viable business case for these projects.
60Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
Mette Frederiksen et al. THE ESBJERG DECLARATION on The North Sea as a
Green Power Plant of Europe. 2022.
[2]
50hertz et al. Esbjerg Cooperation Expert Paper. 2023. URL: https://en.energinet.
dk/about-our-news/news/2023/04/25/transforming-the-north-sea-into-europe-s-
green-power-plant/ (visited on 10/16/2023).
[3]
Elia Group. Harvesting Europe’s Full Offshore Wind Potential - Elia Group’s White
Paper on Promoting Hybrid Offshore Interconnectors. 2022. URL: https://www.elia.
be/en/news/press-releases/2022/04/20220405_hybridoffshoreinterconnectors (visited
on 11/29/2023).
[4]
Thomas G. Svaneborg. “Kontoret er lukket, direktøren er stoppet, og drømmen om
ø-eventyr er slukket”. In: borsen.dk. Bæredygtig (Nov. 20, 2023). URL: http : / /
borsen.dk/nyheder/baeredygtig/kontoret-er-lukket-direktoren-er-stoppet-raadgiveren-
er-fyret-og-drommen-om-dansk-o-eventyr-er-slukket (visited on 12/04/2023).
[5]
Energinet. DIMENSIONING OF RESERVES AND BALANCING OF DANISH EN-
ERGY ISLANDS. 2023. URL: https://energinet.dk/el/systemydelser/nyheder-om-
systemydelser/2023/10/27/balancering-af-energioer/ (visited on 10/31/2023).
[6]
Directorate-General for Energy (European Commission) and THEMA Consulting
group. Market Arrangements for Offshore Hybrid Projects in the North Sea. Publi-
cations Office of the European Union, 2020. URL: https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.
2833/36426 (visited on 11/30/2023).
[7]
ACER. Congestion Income Distribution Methodology in Accordance with Establish-
ing a Guideline on Capacity Allocation and Congestion Management. 2021.
[8]
North Sea Wind Power Hub Programme. Commercial Framework Offshore Bidding
Zone. NSWPH, May 2023. URL: https : / / northseawindpowerhub . eu / knowledge /
commercial-framework-offshore-bidding-zone (visited on 11/30/2023).
[9]
North Sea Wind Power Hub Programme. Towards the First Hub-and-Spoke Project.
NSWPH, May 2021. URL: https://northseawindpowerhub.eu/knowledge/towards-the-
first-hub-and-spoke-project (visited on 11/30/2023).
[10]
Lena Kitzing and Mario Garzón González. “Market Arrangements for Offshore Wind
Energy Networks”. In: (2020).
[11]
Andrea Tosatto et al. North Sea Energy Islands: Impact on National Markets and
Grids. Mar. 1, 2022. arXiv: 2103.17056 [physics]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.
17056 (visited on 12/21/2023). preprint.
[12]
Michiel Kenis et al. “Off-Shore Bidding Zones Under Flow-Based Market Coupling”.
In: 2023 IEEE Belgrade PowerTech. 2023 IEEE Belgrade PowerTech. Belgrade,
Serbia: IEEE, June 25, 2023, pp. 1–6. ISBN: 978-1-66548-778-8. DOI: 10.1109/
PowerTech55446 . 2023 . 10202755. URL: https : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / document /
10202755/ (visited on 11/30/2023).
[13]
European Commission. An EU Strategy to Harness the Potential of Offshore Re-
newable Energy for a Climate Neutral Future. Nov. 19, 2020. URL: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2020%3A741%3AFIN (visited
on 11/30/2023).
[14]
Arnaud Laur, Gerd Küpper, and Pierre Henneaux. Support on the Use of Congestion
Revenues for Offshore Renewable Energy Projects Connected to More than One
Market. European Commission, Aug. 2022. URL: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects61
==PAGE:70==
system/files/2022-09/Congestion%20offshore%20BZ.ENGIE%20Impact.FinalReport_
topublish.pdf (visited on 07/20/2023).
[15]
European Commission. Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PAR-
LIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL Amending Regulations (EU) 2019/943 and (EU)
2019/942 as Well as Directives (EU) 2018/2001 and (EU) 2019/944 to Improve the
Union’s Electricity Market Design. Mar. 14, 2023. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52023PC0148 (visited on 08/20/2023).
[16]
ENTSO-E. ENTSO-E Position on the EC Proposals on Market Design. Mar. 31,
2023. URL: https : / / www . entsoe . eu / 2023 / 03 / 31 / entso - e - s - position - on - the -
ec- proposals- on- electricity- market- design/#:~:text=Position%20ENTSO%2DE’
s%20Position%20on%20the%20EC%20proposals%20on%20Electricity%20Market%
20Design&text=ENTSO%2DE%20supports%20the%20objectives, to%20improve%
20affordability%20for%20consumers. (visited on 11/30/2023).
[17]
European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Proposal for a REGULA-
TION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL Amending Reg-
ulations (EU) 2019/943 and (EU) 2019/942 as Well as Directives (EU) 2018/2001
and (EU) 2019/944 to Improve the Union’s Electricity Market Design. Oct. 19, 2023.
URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=consil%3AST_14339_
2023_INIT (visited on 11/30/2023).
[18]
Jonas Van Ouwerkerk et al. “Comparing Open Source Power System Models - A
Case Study Focusing on Fundamental Modeling Parameters for the German En-
ergy Transition”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 161 (June 2022),
p. 112331. ISSN: 13640321. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . rser . 2022 . 112331. URL: https : / /
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1364032122002453 (visited on 01/02/2024).
[19]
D. Connolly et al. “A Review of Computer Tools for Analysing the Integration of
Renewable Energy into Various Energy Systems”. In: Applied Energy 87 (Apr. 1,
2010), pp. 1059–1082. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2009.09.026.
[20]
Ea Energianalyse A/S. Homepage. Ea Energianalyse. URL: https : / / www . ea -
energianalyse.dk/en/ (visited on 01/02/2024).
[21]
Energynautics GmbH. Homepage. Energynautics. URL: https://energynautics.com/
en/ (visited on 01/02/2024).
[22]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel Open Source Energy System Model”. In: Energy
Strategy Reviews 20 (Apr. 2018), pp. 26–34. ISSN: 2211467X. DOI: 10.1016/j.esr.
2018.01.003. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2211467X18300038
(visited on 11/30/2023).
[23]
Hans Ravn et al. Balmorel: A Model for Analyses of the Electricity and CHP Markets
in the Baltic Sea Region. 2021. URL: https://www.balmorel.com/index.php/balmorel-
documentation.
[24]
Ea Energianalyse A/S. Balmorel User Guide. Ea Energianalyse webpage. URL:
https://www.ea-energianalyse.dk/en/publications/3063/ (visited on 01/02/2024).
[25]
ENTSO-E. ENTSO-E Position on Offshore Development: Assessing Selected Fi-
nancial Support Options for Renewable Generation. Nov. 2, 2021. URL: https://
www.entsoe.eu/outlooks/offshore-development/ (visited on 01/02/2024).
[26]
Energinet. Ny dato for ”go live” for nordisk Flow-based Capacity Calculation. URL:
https://energinet.dk/om-nyheder/nyheder/2023/11/07/ny-dato-for-go-live-for-
nordisk-flow-based-capacity-calculation/ (visited on 01/02/2024).
[27]
European Union. EU Law - EUR-Lex. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/homepage.html
(visited on 01/03/2024).
[28]
Energinet et al. Supporting Document for the Second Amendment of the Nordic
Capacity Calculation Region’s Proposal for Capacity Calculation Methodology in
62Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:71==
Accordance with Article 20(2) of Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24 July
2015 Establishing a Guideline on Capacity Allocation and Congestion Management.
2020. URL: https://consultations.entsoe.eu/markets/cacm_article12_amended_da_
id_ccm_nordic_ccr/ (visited on 09/26/2023).
[29]
Tarjei Kristiansen. “The Flow Based Market Coupling Arrangement in Europe: Im-
plications for Traders”. In: Energy Strategy Reviews 27 (Jan. 1, 2020), p. 100444.
ISSN: 2211-467X. DOI: 10.1016/j.esr.2019.100444. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2211467X19301373 (visited on 01/03/2024).
[30]
Lukas Maximilian Lang, Bettina Dallinger, and Georg Lettner. “The Meaning of Flow-
Based Market Coupling on Redispatch Measures in Austria”. In: Energy Policy 136
(Jan. 1, 2020), p. 111061. ISSN: 0301-4215. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2019.111061.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421519306482 (visited
on 01/03/2024).
[31]
David Schönheit et al. “Toward a Fundamental Understanding of Flow-Based Mar-
ket Coupling for Cross-Border Electricity Trading”. In: Advances in Applied Energy
2 (May 2021), p. 100027. ISSN: 26667924. DOI: 10.1016/j.adapen.2021.100027.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2666792421000202 (visited on
11/30/2023).
[32]
Thomas Brown, Jonas Hörsch, and David Schlachtberger. “PyPSA: Python for Power
System Analysis”. In: Journal of Open Research Software 6.1 (Jan. 16, 2018), p. 4.
ISSN: 2049-9647. DOI: 10.5334/jors.188. URL: https://openresearchsoftware.metajnl.
com/article/10.5334/jors.188/ (visited on 01/04/2024).
[33]
ENTSO-E. Core CCR Capacity Calculation Legal Framework. URL: https://www.
entsoe.eu/bites/ccr-core/framework/ (visited on 01/03/2024).
[34]
Tom Brown et al. PyPSA-Eur: An Open Sector-Coupled Optimisation Model of the
European Energy System. Version 0.9.0. Jan. 4, 2024. URL: https://github.com/
PyPSA/pypsa-eur (visited on 01/06/2024).
[35]
ENTSO-E. Grid Map. URL: https://www.entsoe.eu/data/map/ (visited on 01/06/2024).
[36]
ENTSO-E. TYNDP 2022 Scenario Report. Apr. 2022. URL: https://2022.entsos-
tyndp-scenarios.eu/ (visited on 01/05/2024).
[37]
Energistyrelsen. Teknologikatalog for produktion af el og fjernvarme. Teknologikata-
loger. Mar. 22, 2018. URL: https://ens.dk/service/fremskrivninger-analyser-modeller/
teknologikataloger/teknologikatalog-produktion-af-el-og (visited on 01/08/2024).
[38]
Endre Bjorndal, Mette Helene Bjorndal, and Hong Cai. The Flow-Based Market
Coupling Model and the Bidding Zone Configuration. Oct. 24, 2018. DOI: 10.2139/
ssrn.3272190. URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3272190 (visited on 01/08/2024).
preprint.
[39]
Joseph Tham and Ignacio Vélez Pareja. Principles of Cash Flow Valuation: An In-
tegrated Market-Based Approach. Academic Press Advanced Finance Series. Am-
sterdam ; Boston, MA: Elsevier Academic Press, 2004. 487 pp. ISBN: 978-0-12-
686040-5.
[40]
Energinet. ENERGY ISLANDS: TRANSFER OF COSTS THROUGH GRID CHARGES.
Oct. 26, 2022. URL: https://energinet.dk/media/infj3o5m/energy-islands_transfer-
of-costs-through-grid-charges.pdf (visited on 01/09/2024).
[41]
Danish Energy Agency. Offshore Wind Potential in the North Sea Long-run Supply
Curves and Cross-Country Competitiveness. Mar. 25, 2022. URL: https://ens.dk/
sites/ens.dk/files/Vindenergi/offshore_wind_potential_in_the_north_sea.pdf (visited
on 12/12/2023).
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects63
==PAGE:72==
[42]
João Amaro de Matos. Theoretical Foundations of Corporate Finance. Princeton
University Press, Nov. 25, 2001. 320 pp. ISBN: 978-0-691-08794-8. Google Books:
MuU9DwAAQBAJ.
[43]
Energinet. The Energy Island in the North Sea - Teaser for Potential Investors. Nov.
2022. URL: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Energioer/the_energy_island_in_
the_north_sea_-_teaser_for_potential_investors_november_2022.pdf (visited on
01/09/2024).
[44]
AURES II. Renewable Energy Financing Conditions in Europe: Survey and Impact
Analysis. Mar. 2021. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/documents/
downloadPublic?documentIds=080166e5daaba9f4&appId=PPGMS (visited on 12/12/2023).
[45]
Mak Đukan and Lena Kitzing. “A Bigger Bang for the Buck: The Impact of Risk
Reduction on Renewable Energy Support Payments in Europe”. In: Energy Policy
173 (Feb. 2023), p. 113395. ISSN: 03014215. DOI: 10.1016/j.enpol.2022.113395.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0301421522006140 (visited on
12/12/2023).
[46]
Energinet. Aktuelle tariffer. ENERGINETS ELTARIFFER. 2024. URL: https://energinet.
dk/el/elmarkedet/tariffer/aktuelle-tariffer/ (visited on 01/09/2024).
[47]
European Union. Home - Eurostat. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat (visited on
01/09/2024).
[48]
OECD. Corporate Tax Statistics 2023 - OECD. URL: https://www.oecd.org/tax/tax-
policy/corporate-tax-statistics-database.htm (visited on 01/10/2024).
[49]
PwC. Denmark - Corporate - Deductions. URL: https://taxsummaries.pwc.com/
denmark/corporate/deductions (visited on 01/10/2024).
[50]
Elia Group. Princess Elisabeth Island. URL: https://www.elia.be/en/infrastructure-
and-projects/infrastructure-projects/princess-elisabeth-island (visited on 01/23/2024).
[51]
ENTSOG. ENTSOG TYNDP 2022. Apr. 11, 2023. URL: https://tyndp2022.entsog.
eu/downloads/ (visited on 12/20/2024).
[52]
Energinet et al. Stakeholder Consultation Document and Impact Assessment for
the Capacity Calculation Methodology Proposal for the Nordic CCR. 2017. URL:
https://consultations.entsoe.eu/markets/capacity-calculation-methodology-for-the-
nordic-cc/ (visited on 11/02/2023).
[53]
Next Kraftwerke. What Is Market Coupling and How Is the European Electricity
Market Interlinked? We Explain: Definition, History, Cross Boarder Trading (XBID),
FBMC and More. URL: https : / / www . next - kraftwerke . com / knowledge / market -
coupling (visited on 12/22/2023).
[54]
IEA. Contract for Difference (CfD) – Policies. IEA. URL: https : / / www . iea . org /
policies/5731-contract-for-difference-cfd (visited on 01/25/2024).
64Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects
==PAGE:73==
Implications of Congestion Income Distribution on Economic Feasibility of Hybrid Offshore Wind Projects65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://wind.dtu.dk/
