==PAGE:1==
A study of Accountability for Security
Protocols
Authors
Siyu Chen - s212402
January 28, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Security protocols describe how honest agents are supposed to behave, but we can-
not force dishonest agents to follow the protocol. It is part of standard protocol analysis
to show that even when some participants are dishonest, secrecy and authentication
properties are not violated. However, one often need to assume that some parties like
a server that issues key certificates will behave honestly, which we cannot cryptograph-
ically enforce. The notion of accountability acts as a deterrent for agents to deviate
from the protocol because they run the risk of being blamed for their actions. Ac-
countability means that if there is a problem caused by a policy violation, then we
can identify at least one participant who misbehaved and caused the problem and hold
them accountable. This master thesis will work on the approach of "three branches
of accountability" which consists of defining three aspects for a given protocol: define
a legal system, i.e., what actions are forbidden and what actions bear legal meaning;
define how some misbehavior may be detected; and define how a judge evaluates a case.
We will apply this approach to several protocols, namely a voting and a fair exchange
protocol. This involves formally defining the three branches for each protocol and prov-
ing that this implies the security goals of the protocol provided that no agent performs
illegal actions when they run the risk of being found guilty. Finally a question is how
this can be linked with automated verification tools like OFMC: can one translate a
specification into a problem that can be analyzed by such a tool.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
2
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
The Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Protocol 1: Bank Transfer System
7
3.1
Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Legislative Branch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Executive Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Judicial Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Security Based on Perfect Crimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Protocol 2: Bingo Voting System
21
4.1
Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Informal Description of the Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.2
Zero-knowledge proofs for bingo voting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Legislative Branch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Executive Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.1
Security goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.2
Attack states
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Judicial Branch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Security Based on Perfect Crimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Conclusion
31
References
I
ii
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
In security protocols, honest agents act according to the protocol. But there are also
dishonest agents, and we can’t force them to follow the protocol, so there is often non-
compliant behavior behavior. Therefore, it is common to assume that there are honest third
parties, i.e., that they will act exactly according to the protocol. However, it is not feasible
to enforce honesty among agents using cryptographic techniques. The introduction of the
concept of accountability is a good way to discourage people from taking inappropriate
measures, because if there’s a problem that violates the policy, we’re bound to be able to
find at least one participant who caused the problem because of his or her misbehavior. This
is a great deterrent for the participants.
K¨usters, Truderung and Vogt.[1] give a general framework for accountability that broadly
describes how accountability works(i.e., they propose a generic, model-independent defini-
tion of accountability and interpret their definition in terms of symbolic and computational
models).
Although their definition of accountability can be applied to a wide range of
cryptographic tasks and protocols.They define protocols for both honest and dishonest par-
ticipants, which is very cumbersome under some scenarios because we sometimes don’t want
to describe all the protocols. It will appear that our system is very redundant.
M¨odersheim and Cuellar[2] mentioned that this framework defines protocols for all hon-
est and dishonest participants, and thus poses a problem: we do not want to characterize all
the protocols that may be present in the environment. So they proposed the idea of "three
branches of accountability" based on the accountability framework of K¨usters, Truderung
and Vogt. "Three branches of accountability" is a model for formalizing and analyzing ac-
countability with a tree of rules or processes, similar to the three branches of government:
Legislative branch, Executive branch, judicial branch. Specifically, the model defines the
body of law, i.e., what behaviors are prohibited and what behaviors have legal significance;
it defines how certain misconduct is detected; and it defines how judges evaluate cases. The
cornerstone of their approach is the perfect crime hypothesis, which they define precisely
after introducing three branches of government. the perfect crime hypothesis is the assump-
tion that agents will engage in illegal behavior only if there is no risk that they will do so,
that is, if they are certain that they will never be convicted for such behavior.
The proposed "three branches of accountability" allows us to apply it to many security
protocols, so this thesis chooses two protocols out of the many security protocols that have
not been covered, and then applies the "three branches of accountability" approach to these
two security protocols. One is bank transfer system and the other is bingo voting system
[3]. We will give the definitions of these two systems and then design for their legislative
branch, executive branch, judicial branch. Finally, We will also consider security based on
perfect crime after designing "three branches of accountability" for each protocol.
Open Source Fixed-point Model Checker OFMC[4][5] is a tool which is used to auto-
mated analyze security protocol. It can help us to check the whether the protocol would be
Page 1 of 32
==PAGE:5==
attacked or not. Thus we will try to link our protocol after designing.
This thesis is structured by the methodology used in this thesis in section 2, defining
two security protocols and then designing three branches for them in section 3 and section
4 respectively, followed by some reflections on perfect crime.
2
Methodology
2.1
Background
In past research, one often needs to assume that certain participants will act hon-
estly when studying security protocols, but this is actually difficult to do. It was not until
the emergence of accountability that more solutions to this problem were found.KuÂ¨sters,
Truderung and Vogt.[1] presented a framework for accountability with a completely new
foundation, which is in fact the initial starting point of this thesis. Although the content of
this thesis is based on the "three branches of accountability" approach, the "three branches
of accountability" approach is also based on the above mentioned framework.
We often encounter security protocols with tree rules or processes, and the "three
branches of accountability" approach gives us new ways to formalize and analyze these
protocols. It is also convenient to use this approach when analyzing protocols because we
only need to define three branches instead of considering the definitions of all honest and
dishonest participants.
However, M¨odersheim and Cuellar[2] only gives the definition of the "three branches of
accountability" approach and the complete framework, but does not go further to apply the
approach to real world frameworks. Therefore, the purpose of this thesis is to apply this
approach to two security protocols that are common in our daily lives. In fact, there are
many other protocols that can be analyzed using this method, but due to time and other
factors, we can only design and analyze two protocols. One is bank transfer system and the
other is bingo voting system.
The expected result of this thesis is to be able to correctly define two security protocols,
followed by a good application of the "Three Branches of Accountability" method to both
protocols. Finally we are able to experimentally relate the completed system to the automatic
verification tool OFMC and make some analysis of it. In the following we will show the
definition and relative information for the core of our thesis - three branches of accountability
and how it works.
Page 2 of 32
==PAGE:6==
2.2
The Methodology
2.2
The Methodology
As mentioned above, the methodology of this thesis is the "Three Branches of Account-
ability" approach. I will now describe the specifics of this methodology.
M¨odersheim and Cuellar[2] mentioned that their "Three Branches of Accountability"
were based on the general framework for accountability given by K¨usters, Truderung and
Vogt.[1] This general framework for accountability defines protocols for honest and dishonest
participants, but in some open protocols this would be cumbersome and they do not want
to describe all protocols in a scenario. So they came up with a new framework, the concept
of three branches. In this framework there are no honest people, all participants will be
intruders and they can do whatever they want. The three branches are the legislative system,
the executive system and the judicial system, just like in reality.
Next, we will describe the details of "Three Branches of Accountability" approach.
Firstly, A complete three-branches system consists of a number of components:
Figure 1: The structure for three branches of accountability
1. There is a set of players. Especially, a police and a judge are included in this set for
the executive branch and the judicial branch.
Page 3 of 32
==PAGE:7==
2.2
The Methodology
For example, in the bank transfer system the set of players consists of the clients, the
banks, the identity provider, police and judge.
2. There is a set S of states at least including two things.
One is that the current
knowledge of every player is a set of message, in connection with this, we also assume a
(state-independent) notion of derivability.; the other is a set of players who is considered
guilty. Besides, we can freely define these states.
3. An initial state containing the initial knowledge and nobody is considered guilty.
4. There is a set of transaction τ is associated with a player performing the transaction.
5. There is a body of law that defines what is legal and what is illegal, what information
has legal significance in the system, and what obligations participants have.
In addition, we will describe the core of our methodology. What is three branches and
how do they work in the system. Figure 1 is the structure for three branches of accountability.
Figure 2: The legislative branch
In the legislative system, we will define some laws and regulations, i.e. what participants
can do and what is forbidden. Here the concepts of legal and illegal come into play. For
example, in the bank transfer system below, it will be mentioned that certain documents
and specific agents will be legally binding. Participants can do anything except what is
Page 4 of 32
==PAGE:8==
2.2
The Methodology
stipulated in the law. This is the brilliance of this approach because we don’t need to be
overly concerned with what the participants are doing or have done, we are only concerned
with whether or not they are breaking the law. They can do whatever they want, whether
it’s sending an email or saying hello, or even doing nothing at all, as long as they don’t violate
the relevant provisions that we have in the law they don’t run the risk of being considered
guilty. Figure 2 is the diagram of legislative branch.
The executive system is the simulation of a police. In real life, the police go out to the
scene when they are called to investigate and finally come to a conclusion. Thus, in this
"three branches of accountability" approach, they define a discovery transaction, that is,
the executive system is a simulation of a police collecting evidence in an investigation like
in reality, where the police solves some cases and hands over the collected evidence to the
judge. Figure 3 is the diagram of executive branch.
Figure 3: The executive branch
In the judicial system, they define two transactions, that is, a judge, upon receiving
evidence from the police, will either convict a person or use a subpoena against the relevant
participant. The significance of a subpoena is that it will enable the particular person to
provide details of the acts they have committed. If the subject of the subpoena is unable
to answer the subpoena, then he will be convicted. A refusal to answer a subpoena, which
we also regard as a failure to answer the subpoena, will also lead to conviction. Both the
summons and the offense will be based on the law to ensure that the sentence is fair. Figure
Page 5 of 32
==PAGE:9==
2.2
The Methodology
4 and Figure 5 are the two transactions of judicial branch.
Figure 4: The first transaction in judicial branch
Figure 5: The second transaction in judicial branch
Finally, M¨odersheim and Cuellar[2] also mentioned The "Three Branches of Account-
ability" approach is based on the assumption of perfect crime. Perfect crime is the idea that
some illegal behaviour will only be carried out in a state where the agent is sure that there
is no risk, so the model needs to be designed in such a way that all crimes are likely to be
Page 6 of 32
==PAGE:10==
detected, i.e. all crimes are risky. Below is the diagram of working process for three branches
of accountability. In the following, we will display its definition: For each player A, if at
least one of the following two conditions holds, we will label that player A with a red label.
1. A is Convicted in S.
2. There exists a non-A transition from S to a red state, or in the case of a double
transition from a subpoena to A, all of A’s answers in the second part lead to a red
state.
If an illegal player A answers the subpoena perfectly and there is no way to find him
guilty. Then he will escape the law so that our outcome state will not be labeled red. Then
we’ll say it was a perfect crime. We provide a definition of the perfect crime hypothesis: a
player acts illegally only in the case of a perfect crime.
In the end we can get a result that no player will be convicted as long as two points
are met. One is that the legal system we have in place is reasonable, and the other is that
justice is fair in its decisions.
3
Protocol 1: Bank Transfer System
In this section, we will introduce our first security protocol - bank transfer system. it
is a simple SSO system and it’s a simple process that clients transfer money in the bank.
In the following we will describe how we define it, how we apply the "three branches of
accountability" approach to this protocol, and finally we try to analyze it using OFMC.
We chose this protocol for two reasons: first of all, bank transfer is a very common
scenario in our daily life and is very relevant to our lives. Our design and analysis can be of
some help to Danish banks when thinking about how to make transfers secure. Second, this
protocol is simpler than the bingo voting system that follows it, and as the first protocol it can
play a recursive role and allow us to better understand the "three branches accountability"
approach.Now we begin our study of the first protocol - Bank Transfer System.
3.1
Model
The system consists of three roles: Clients(C), Banks(B) and Identity Provider(idp).
The whole process of this system is that a client goes to bank for transferring money, then
the bank tells him he needs to log in to complete the transfer. The client will send a request
and log in on the identity provider. It is considered that this system is based on single-sign
on system. Next the identity provider sends a token to the client. Finally the client sends the
Page 7 of 32
==PAGE:11==
3.1
Model
Figure 6: The process diagram of Bank Transfer System
token to the bank and after the bank confirms the client’s identity, it will start transferring
money for the client. Below is the diagram of this system.
This model is a standard Dolev-Yao style model. First, for the identity provider, let
pk(idp) is the public key of the identity provider, inv(pk(idp)) is the corresponding private
key of pk(idp). the identity provider knows its key pair (pk(idp), inv(pk(idp))). Clients and
Banks have pk(idp) for checking the signature of the identity provider. A Bank also has its
own key pair, we let pk(b) and inv(pk(b)) are its public key and private key respectively.
we define some functions for the system: sign, f1 and f2. Then function sign is for rep-
resenting the digital signature, for example, knowing sign(inv(pk(idp), m) and inv(pk(idp)),
one also knows the message m. Both function f1 and function f2 are message format and it
is stable of inside parameters. f1 consists of three components: C, password(C, idp), f2REQ.
C is the name of the client. Password(C, idp) is the password of the client, only known
by corresponding client and identity provider. f2REQ is a request for transferring money
and the component of f2 will display later. f2 consists of nine components: B, C, ACC,
C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB. B is the name of the bank. C and ACC are the name
and bank account of the client respectively. Likewise C2, ACC2 are the name and bank
account of another client who receives the money from former in the system respectively.
Amount is the number of the transferred money. Date is trading time. NC, NB are the
nonces of client and bank respectively(nonce are random numbers that is used only once for
a challenge-response).In the following, We define transactions for p and j when we continue
this example.
Page 8 of 32
==PAGE:12==
3.2
Legislative Branch
3.2
Legislative Branch
Firstly, before we define legislative branch, we assume that the identity provider is always
honest. Although it mentions that Our model does not need to talk about honesty, because
the players are simply formalized by the set of all behaviors they are cryptographically
capable of[1], this system is special and the system will be over if the identity provider is
dishonest.
Let us formulate the legal system for Bank Transfer System as a set of laws. The laws
are:
1. The key pair (pk(idp), inv(pk(idp)) is legally bound to the identity provider.
2. The key pair (pk(B), inv(pk(B)) is legally bound to the bank.
3. There are two legally recognized formats:
f1(C, password(C, idp), f2REQ)
f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB)
1) f1 is used to certificate requests. When a client enters the system and wants to
transfer her money to others, she has to send f1 which is encrypted by pk(idp)
to the identity provider for login and transferring money. If the identity provider
gets the message that is not of format f1, it does not do anything.
2) f2 is used to give a certificate for identifying C. The identity provider gives it with
the signature of the identity provider back to client.
4. Bank is punishable if any of the following conditions is violated.
1) Bank has received and stored a certificate of the form
sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB))
2) Whenever a judge issues a subpoena to bank, the bank supplies the received and
stored the message with signature of the identity provider mentioned.
5. Client is punishable if the bank can satisfy the subpoena from judge.
Some comments on the law are necessary. First of all, in this system we assume that the
identity provider is always honest, although this is not consistent with the "Three Branches
of Accountability", but we must assume that the identity provider is always honest, if the
identity provider is not honest the system will not be able to continue, which is also considered
to be some of the shortcomings of the design of this thesis.
Thus, for the identity provider, we defined that it has its own private and public keys.
And its public key and private key are core because the message f2 that signed by its own
private key is used as core information when the judge subpoenas the bank. Besides, in
Page 9 of 32
==PAGE:13==
3.3
Executive Branch
the law we don’t define if it’s illegal when the secret key of the identity provider is missing,
because we assume that the identity provider is always honest above, it must not do the
behavior of losing the key.
In addition, We define a law - law 5: Client is punishable if the bank can satisfy the
subpoena from judge.
In the following section 3.3 and section 3.5 we will mention two
states of attack and security based on perfect crime respectively, we will know the judge just
convicts somebody depending on bank can satisfy the subpoena or not. The judge never
subpoenas the client.
Now we define the function crime(S) according to these laws. Some items named records
will be saved in the function and the function can return them. These records consist of the
culprit, the violated law and some relevant information:
- (Law = 4,Perp = B,Sig = m0,Wit = C,idp):
if the bank can not provide m0 = sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2,
Amount, Date, NC, NB))
- (Law = 5,Perp = C,Wit = B,idp):
If the bank can satisfy the subpoena from the judge.
Finally, we reveal that our legal system is reasonable. As long as the identity provider
produces message f2 with its own signature, it can prove that the client has a request for the
transfer operation. Due to the uniqueness of the message f2 with signature and the fact that
f2 ends up at the bank. So for an honest bank it would be impossible to lose this message
f2 with signature. Our legal system would not require the judge to send a subpoena to the
client, because the judge would be able to convict either the bank or the client by the bank
answering the subpoena. Besides we assume the identity provider is honest. So there would
be no requirement for the client or the identity provider to produce information that they
cannot produce. A reasonable law can not let players show some information that they can
not show. So our legal system is reasonable.
3.3
Executive Branch
In the previous section, we designed a set of laws for the bank transfer system, that is,
we defined which behaviors are legal and which behaviors are illegal in the bank transfer
system.
In this section, police plays an important role and We will focus on how to define
the discovery transactions for the bank transfer system. This transaction is done with a
police and then the police records some information as evidence in the bank transfer system
through these transactions and then these records will increase the knowledge of the judge.
But before we define the police, we define a security goal for the system.
Page 10 of 32
==PAGE:14==
3.4
Judicial Branch
When it comes to defining security goals, we need to know when the whole system is in
a state of attack, and we try our best to keep from reaching such a state of attack to achieve
our security goals. First, there are two attack states in this system:
1. The bank made one, two or or several times transfer operation without the client’s con-
sent.(i.e., before the bank gets sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount,
Date, NC, NB)), the bank transfers money from the client‘s account.)
2. The client later denies that he made the transfer after the bank gets sign(inv(pk(idp)),
f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB)) and transfer money from the
client‘s account.
The security goal of the bank transfer system is to try not to reach these two states.
Actually, these two states are achievable, because dishonest bank and client will tell lies. If
everyone was honest and obeyed the law, these states wouldn’t happen. So once an attack
state has occurred, there must be at least one player who has committed a crime.
Next we will define the discovery transaction for these two situation. It can be triggered
in the attack states. The first one is that one day the client claims that the bank made a
transfer from her account but she does not do any operation. In fact, as long as the bank
does not get sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB)), then it
is illegal to transfers the money of the client to other accounts. The second one is that after
the client sends the sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB))
to the bank and finish the transfer operation, later the client denied and said that she does
not made any transfer operation from the bank. The transition simply adds the following
two records respectively to j′s knowledge:(Evid = the number of sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C,
ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB)) is different from the number of transfer operation)
and (Evid = the number of sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date,
NC, NB)) is same as the number of transfer operation).
3.4
Judicial Branch
The judicial process is starting, when the police has provided the record of the form:
(Evid = the number of sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC,
NB)) is different from the number of transfer operation) or (Evid = the number of sign(inv(pk
(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB)) is same as the number of transfer
operation).
We only define the process that the bank should supply the subpoena when the judge
asks it.
We do not define any of situation that the client should supply the subpoena,
because client does not save any document. We now define a subpoena transaction for the
first situation: The judge can ask the bank to reveal the message f2 with the signature of
the identity provider according to 4.2). This subpoena is considered that it is fairness due
Page 11 of 32
==PAGE:15==
3.5
Security Based on Perfect Crimes
to only the bank is required to store sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount,
Date, NC, NB)) in the whole process. Thus, if the bank complies with the law, it can show
the message f2 with the signature of the identity provider.
If the bank does not satisfy the subpoena, the bank is considered guilty and the judicial
process stops. This can happen when the bank did not get the message f2 with the signature
of the identity provider from the client and then the bank made the transfer illegally, or when
the bank actually did nothing wrong, but it would like to protect someone by answering to
the subpoena incorrectly. If this case happens, we can not find who the real criminal is, but
We do have a criminal who clearly brokes the law - the bank.
If the bank complies with the subpoena, then the investigation will get sign(inv(pk(idp)),
f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB)), and we can see all kinds of valid infor-
mation inside this message, such as the signature of the identity provider, the name of the
bank, and the name of the client. In this case, it can be proved that the bank did not lie
and it did receive sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB))
before proceeding to the next step. So this is where we consider the bank to be innocent and
the client to be lying, i.e., the client is guilty. In our system we don’t consider occurrence of
some situations, such as the machine is broken or there are non-human errors, because if we
did, we wouldn’t be able to actually find who is guilty.
When the second situation happens(i.e., the client denied and said that she does not
made any transfer operation from the bank after she finished the transfer operation), the
judge also ask the bank to reveal sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount,
Date, NC, NB)). Only when the client finishes the transfer operation, the bank must receive
and store the message f2 with signature of the identity provider. If the bank does not store
the message, it is against the law. In our system only the identity provider has its own
private key inv(pk(idp) and it is always honest, so this signature can only come from the
identity provider. sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB)) is
a powerful piece of evidence. Thus, if the bank satisfies the subpoena, the client is guilty,
otherwise the bank is guilty.
3.5
Security Based on Perfect Crimes
As mentioned above, the security goals of bank transfer system are that we can not
reach two states of attack. The bank transfer system has two attack states: one is when
the bank does transfer operations without the client’s consent, which can be two, five, or
even countless times(i.e., the bank performs the transfer operation without obtaining the
sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount, Date, NC, NB)) from the client).
The other player who transfers the money may cooperate with the dishonest bank, and then
the bank can get a huge benefit from it; the other is that after the client and the bank
have completed a transfer operation, the client denies the fact that he has done the transfer
operation(i.e., The bank does get sign(inv(pk(idp)), f2(B, C, ACC, C2, ACC2, Amount,
Page 12 of 32
==PAGE:16==
3.5
Security Based on Perfect Crimes
Date, NC, NB)) from the client and makes the transfer operation.
But later the client
denied that he made the transfer operation).
First we analyze the first case. We prove that in the case of a perfect crime, there
is no attack state that can be reached. Let’s assume that attack state one is reachable,
Then it is possible for the client to detect that money withdraw without their consent and
then the client will complain to judge, which in turn leads to a judicial investigation. and
then the judge will subpoena the bank. the only thing the bank can do is to answer the
subpoena. If the bank makes a transfer without having a signed f2, then they would commit
an imperfect crime, because they could get a subpoena about the transfer that they cannot
answer. Hence, under the perfect crime assumption, the bank does have a signed f2 that
they will provide now. Because the identity provider is necessarily honest in our model,
the client must have sent the f2 request and password to the identity provider - or have
leaked the password so that somebody else did that. So either the client indeed intended the
transaction or is guilty(by leaking password). It is only to clarify whether the bank could
have done the same transfer request more than once. if the bank makes multiple transfers
without the client’s consent, this means that when the judge sends a subpoena to the bank,
the bank will be able to show the correct information. he must show the judge the same
number of message f2 as the number of transfers. Each time the client requests a transfer, a
new nouce is generated, and although the bank can also generate a nouce, the signature is
only possessed by the identity provider, and we have assumed that the identity provider is
always honest. So the bank cannot forge multiple copies of the f2 message with signatures.
We also consider one situation: the bank will get other bank‘s message f2 with signature,
but it is impossible. There is a bank name(B) in the f2, so the bank can not use other bank‘s
message f2 with signature to cheat. Then when the bank answers the subpoena incorrectly
or it can’t show the correct information to the judge. That means we can definitely convict
the bank. Each signed message f2 is impossible to forge, so there is no such thing as a perfect
crime.
Similarly, we analyze the second case. As mentioned above, the client sends a request
to the identity provider as long as she wants to perform a transfer operation, and then
obtains an message f2 with a signature and sends it to the bank. There is a one-to-one
correspondence between each transfer operation and each message f2 with a signature. the
client denies that she performed the transfer operation after the transfer operation, which
means that the identity provider will not generate an message f2 with a signature, and the
bank will not get this information. But this is contrary to the facts, because the message f2
with signature cannot be forged. And as long as the transfer operation happens, signed f2
must be created by the identity provider. When the judge subpoenas the bank, what it has
to do is show the judge the signed f2 message to prove that the client lied, and the client
will be found guilty. Now let’s assume that the client is able to commit a perfect crime,
then it must be impossible to let the bank answer the subpoena correctly, which is clearly
impossible. Maybe the client does something to Prevent the bank from answering subpoena
correctly, but the Banks must consider risk that the bank will be guilty if it does not satisfy
the subpoena. Since we defined an obligation in the law for the bank to properly keep the
Page 13 of 32
==PAGE:17==
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC
information that it receives, otherwise it commits a crime. So the client obviously can’t steal
this message f2 with a signature or makes it impossible for the bank to satisfy the subpoena
in any way.
In summary, it is impossible for either the client or the bank to achieve a perfect crime
because the uniqueness of the f2 message with the signature, and our assumption that the
identity provider is always honest, makes it impossible for a perfect crime to exist in our
system.
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC
After we have finished designing and defining the protocol and the three branches of
accountability for that protocol, we will use OFMC to analyze this protocol.
Firstly, we can not define message f1 and f2 including some information, so we just define
f1 and f2 to a number and responding information will follow them. In previous section we
define a f2REQ, but actually, f2REQ is same as f2, so we do not define f2REQ and it is easier
to analyse. In our initial design we do not use the public key of the identity provider to
encrypt the password and f1. We can see there is an attack that the intruder will cheat and
get the password of the client. Obviously, this is a common mistake. the password can only
be known by the client and the identity provider. When the client use the public key of
the identity provider to encrypt the information, only the identity provider can use its own
private key to decrypt it.
Protocol: BankTranfer
Types:
Agent C,B,idp;
Number Nc,Nb,f1,f2,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date;
Function password;
Knowledge:
C: C,idp,B,pk(idp),pk(B),password(C,idp),f1,f2;
B: idp,B,pk(idp),pk(B),inv(pk(B)),f1,f2;
idp: C,idp,B,pk(idp),inv(pk(idp)),pk(B),password(C,idp),f1,f2
Actions:
B->C: Nb
C->idp: f1,C,password(C,idp),f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb
idp->C: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
C->B: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
Page 14 of 32
==PAGE:18==
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC
Goals:
B authenticates C on f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb
password(C,idp) secret between C,idp
Open-Source Fixedpoint Model-Checker version 2020
INPUT:
C:\Users\chens\Desktop\master project\
ofmc-2020\ofmc-2020\examples\classic\bank transfer.AnB
SUMMARY:
ATTACK_FOUND
GOAL:
secrets
BACKEND:
Open-Source Fixedpoint Model-Checker version 2020
STATISTICS:
TIME 31 ms
parseTime 0 ms
visitedNodes: 2 nodes
depth: 1 plies
ATTACK TRACE:
i -> (x30,1): x207
(x30,1) -> i: f1,x30,password(x30,idp),f2,x28,x30,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),
Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x207
i -> (idp,1): f1,x30,password(x30,idp),f2,x31,x30,x307,x308,x309,x310,x311,
x312,x313
(idp,1) -> i: {f2,x31,x30,x307,x308,x309,x310,x311,x312,x313}_inv(pk(idp))
i -> (i,17): password(x30,idp)
i -> (i,17): password(x30,idp)
% Reached State:
%
% secrets(password(x30,idp),secrecyset(idp,1,ppasswordCidp),i)
% state_ridp(idp,1,f2,f1,password(x30,idp),pk(x31),inv(pk(idp)),pk(idp),x31,
x30,x313,x312,x311,x310,x309,x308,x307,f1,x30,password(x30,idp),f2,x31,x30,
x307,x308,x309,x310,x311,x312,x313,{f2,x31,x30,
x307,x308,x309,x310,x311,x312,x313}_inv(pk(idp)),1)
% contains(secrecyset(idp,1,ppasswordCidp),x30)
% contains(secrecyset(idp,1,ppasswordCidp),idp)
% state_rC(x30,1,f2,f1,password(x30,idp),pk(x28),pk(idp),x28,idp,x207,ACC(1),
C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),f1,x30,password(x30,idp),f2,x28,x30,ACC(1),
C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x207,1)
Page 15 of 32
==PAGE:19==
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC
% state_rB(x29,0,f2,f1,inv(pk(x29)),pk(x29),pk(idp),idp,1)
% witness(x30,x28,pBCf2BCACCC2ACC2AmountDateNcNb,f2,x28,x30,ACC(1),C2(1),
ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x207)
Next, we try to convert this protocol to code and use OFMC to verify that this protocol
is secure again. The code is shown below, which simulates the flow of a bank transfer system
(i.e., the client sends her password and a transfer request to the identity provider, which
then sends an f2 with his/her signature to the client, and finally, the client sends an f2 with
her signature to the identity provider, which then sends a f2 with her signature to the client.
The client sends this f2 to the bank.) We encrypt the information that the client sends to
the identity provider with the identity provider’s public key, which is a secret between the
client and the identity provider.
Protocol: BankTranfer
Types:
Agent C,B,idp;
Number Nc,Nb,f1,f2,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date;
Function password;
Knowledge:
C: C,idp,B,pk(idp),pk(B),password(C,idp),f1,f2;
B: idp,B,pk(idp),pk(B),inv(pk(B)),f1,f2;
idp: C,idp,B,pk(idp),inv(pk(idp)),pk(B),password(C,idp),f1,f2
Actions:
B->C: Nb
C->idp: {f1,C,password(C,idp),f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}pk(idp)
idp->C: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
C->B: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
Goals:
B authenticates C on f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb
password(C,idp) secret between C,idp
The following figure shows the results of OFMC’s test, and we can see that the result is
that no attack was found. This shows that this protocol is secure and will not be attacked.
In fact, in the previous design, we did not use the identity provider’s public key to encrypt
C->idp: f1,C,password(C,idp),f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb. This results in
Page 16 of 32
==PAGE:20==
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC
an attack (i.e., the attacker can steal the client’s password and pretend to be it to perform
subsequent operations.) After we encrypt this message with the identity provider’s public
key, the attacker will not be able to attack because only the identity provider’s private key
can decrypt and get the content of this message.
Open-Source Fixedpoint Model-Checker version 2020
INPUT:
C:\Users\chens\Desktop\master project\
ofmc-2020\ofmc-2020\examples\classic\bank transfer.AnB
SUMMARY:
NO_ATTACK_FOUND
GOAL:
as specified
DETAILS:
BOUNDED_NUMBER_OF_SESSIONS
BACKEND:
Open-Source Fixedpoint Model-Checker version 2020
STATISTICS:
TIME 828 ms
parseTime 0 ms
visitedNodes: 1010 nodes
depth: 9 plies
In the above we have simulated the entire bank transfer system. We have ensured that
it will not be attacked by intruder. next, we will add the three branches of accountability,
and in addition to simulating the entire operation, we will simulate the bank replying to the
judge’s subpoena. The bank needs to answer the subpoena after it receives the subpoena.
B->j: f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nbinv(pk(idp)) in the following diagram is
the bank responding to the subpoena.
We also add a new record in Goals: j authenticates C on f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,
Date,Nc,Nb. When j receives a satisfactory subpoena from the bank, that is, the bank can
be shown to be innocent, and then you can get that the client is guilty.
Protocol: BankTranfer
Types:
Agent C,B,idp,j;
Number Nc,Nb,f1,f2,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date;
Function password;
Page 17 of 32
==PAGE:21==
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC
Knowledge:
C: C,idp,B,j,pk(idp),pk(B),pk(j),password(C,idp),f1,f2;
B: idp,B,j,pk(idp),pk(B),inv(pk(B)),pk(j),f1,f2;
idp: C,idp,B,j,pk(idp),inv(pk(idp)),pk(B),password(C,idp),f1,f2;
j: j,pk(idp)
Actions:
B->C: Nb
C->idp: {f1,C,password(C,idp),f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}pk(idp)
idp->C: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
C->B: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
B->j: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
Goals:
B authenticates C on f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb
password(C,idp) secret between C,idp
j authenticates C on f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb
Here we can see that an attack has been discovered. The intruder or the dishonest bank
will play the role of the client and the identity provider. First, the intruder sends a request
to the client. The client thinks the intruder is the bank and encrypts the password and the re-
quest with the identity provider’s public key (i.e. f1,C,password(C,idp),f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,
Amount,Date,Nc,Nbpk(idp)), and then the client sends it to the identity provider, but by
this time the protocol has been attacked by the intruder, so the client is actually sending
the information to the intruder pretending to be the identity provider.
In addition, the intruder then pretends to be the client and sends the encrypted password
and the request to the identity provider, and finally gets the f2 file signed by the identity
provider. Once the intruder obtains this file, it can pretend to be a bank and do illegal
activities, even when the judge subpoenas it to produce the relevant documents, the intruder
can still display the same signed file f2. No matter how many times, the intruder can show
this signed file f2 to get itself off the hook.
First we can compare i -> (j,1): f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),
Nc(1),x511inv(pk(idp) and i -> (j,2): f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),
Nc(1),x511inv(pk(idp)). We can see that the reason for this attack is that every time the
intruder, or dishonest bank, answers a subpoena, it sends the same f2 message with a sig-
nature, and every time the Nb is x511, which results in the intruder being able to answer
multiple subpoenas with a single f2 message with a signature, and thus the attack is gener-
ated. So this requires that each time the bank generates a nouce it must be a brand new
nonce to prevent the attacker from answering multiple subpoenas with the same f2 message.
Open-Source Fixedpoint Model-Checker version 2020
Page 18 of 32
==PAGE:22==
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC
Verified for 1 sessions
INPUT:
C:\Users\chens\Desktop\master project\
ofmc-2020\ofmc-2020\examples\classic\bank transfer final.AnB
SUMMARY:
ATTACK_FOUND
GOAL:
strong_auth
BACKEND:
Open-Source Fixedpoint Model-Checker version 2020
STATISTICS:
TIME 187 ms
parseTime 0 ms
visitedNodes: 74 nodes
depth: 3 plies
ATTACK TRACE:
i -> (x602,1): x511
(x602,1) -> i: {f1,x602,password(x602,idp),f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),
Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511}_(pk(idp))
i -> (idp,1): {f1,x602,password(x602,idp),f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),
Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511}_(pk(idp))
(idp,1) -> i: {f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511}
_inv(pk(idp))
i -> (j,1): {f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511}
_inv(pk(idp))
i -> (j,2): {f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511}
_inv(pk(idp))
% Reached State:
%
% request(j,x602,pjCf2BCACCC2ACC2AmountDateNcNb,f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),
ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511,2)
% request(j,x602,pjCf2BCACCC2ACC2AmountDateNcNb,f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),
ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511,1)
% state_rj(j,1,pk(idp),x511,Nc(1),Date(1),Amount(1),ACC2(1),C2(1),ACC(1),
x602,x503,f2,{f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),
x511}_inv(pk(idp)),2)
% state_rB(x30,0,f2,f1,pk(j),inv(pk(x30)),pk(x30),pk(idp),j,idp,1)
% state_rC(x602,1,f2,f1,password(x602,idp),pk(j),pk(x503),pk(idp),j,x503,idp,
x511,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),{f1,x602,password(x602,idp),
f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511}_(pk(idp)),1)
% state_ridp(idp,1,f2,f1,password(x602,idp),pk(x503),inv(pk(idp)),pk(idp),j,
Page 19 of 32
==PAGE:23==
3.6
Analysis on automated verification tool - OFMC
x503,x602,x511,Nc(1),Date(1),Amount(1),ACC2(1),C2(1),ACC(1),{f1,x602,
password(x602,idp),f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),
x511}_(pk(idp){f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511}
_inv(pk(idp)),1)
% state_rj(j,1,pk(idp),x511,Nc(1),Date(1),Amount(1),ACC2(1),C2(1),ACC(1),x602,
x503,f2,{f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511}
_inv(pk(idp)),1)
% state_rB(x36,0,f2,f1,pk(j),inv(pk(x36)),pk(x36),pk(idp),j,idp,2)
% state_rC(x33,0,f2,f1,password(x33,idp),pk(j),pk(x35),pk(idp),j,x35,idp,2)
% state_ridp(idp,0,f2,f1,password(x37,idp),pk(x38),inv(pk(idp)),pk(idp),j,
x38,x37,2)
% witness(x602,j,pjCf2BCACCC2ACC2AmountDateNcNb,f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),
ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511)
% witness(x602,x503,pBCf2BCACCC2ACC2AmountDateNcNb,f2,x503,x602,ACC(1),C2(1),
ACC2(1),Amount(1),Date(1),Nc(1),x511)
% contains(secrecyset(idp,1,ppasswordCidp),idp)
% contains(secrecyset(idp,1,ppasswordCidp),x602)
% secrets(password(x602,idp),secrecyset(idp,1,ppasswordCidp),i)
Here we can see that we just added a weakly to j authenticates C on f2,B,C,ACC,
C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb , and OFMC didn’t find any attacks.
Protocol: BankTranfer
Types: Agent C,B,idp,j;
Number Nc,Nb,f1,f2,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date;
Function password;
Knowledge:
C:C,idp,B,j,pk(idp),pk(B),pk(j),password(C,idp),f1,f2;
B: idp,B,j,pk(idp),pk(B),inv(pk(B)),pk(j),f1,f2;
idp: C,idp,B,j,pk(idp),inv(pk(idp)),pk(B),password(C,idp),f1,f2;
j: j,pk(idp)
Actions:
B->C: Nb
C->idp: {f1,C,password(C,idp),f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}pk(idp)
idp->C: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
C->B: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
B->j: {f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb}inv(pk(idp))
Page 20 of 32
==PAGE:24==
Goals:
B authenticates C on f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb
password(C,idp) secret between C,idp
j weakly authenticates C on f2,B,C,ACC,C2,ACC2,Amount,Date,Nc,Nb
Open-Source Fixedpoint Model-Checker version 2020
INPUT:
C:\Users\chens\Desktop\master project\
ofmc-2020\ofmc-2020\examples\classic\bank transfer final.AnB
SUMMARY:
NO_ATTACK_FOUND
GOAL:
as specified
DETAILS:
BOUNDED_NUMBER_OF_SESSIONS
BACKEND:
Open-Source Fixedpoint Model-Checker version 2020
STATISTICS:
TIME 5093 ms
parseTime 0 ms
visitedNodes: 6690 nodes
depth: 12 plies
4
Protocol 2: Bingo Voting System
In this section we will discuss the second protocol - bingo voting system. We chose
this protocol for two reasons: First of all, the bingo voting security protocol is mentioned
by K¨usters, Truderung and Vogt[1], and they use their approach to define this protocol
and design how the accountability works. So we would like to use a new approach "three
branches of accountability" to apply to this security protocol. Secondly, voting systems are
very common in our lives, from presidential elections to deciding on something, we all need
to vote. So our work will also help people to be secure during elections. Besides, compared
with the bank transfer system, we do not design OFMC linking with this protocol due to
the complexity of the bingo voting system. We were unable to simplify it to a protocol that
could be used for OFMC analysis. In the following we will explain what the bingo voting
system is and apply the "Three Branches of Accountability" approach to this protocol.
Page 21 of 32
==PAGE:25==
4.1
Model
4.1
Model
4.1.1
Informal Description of the Protocol
In our life there are lots of scenarios which use ordinary verifiable voting to decide results.
This type of voting means that each vote has a unique number on it, and each participating
voter can cast his or her vote on the voting machine and take away a copy of the completed
vote. When the election is announced, all votes are published mandatorily, so that all voters
know whether they voted for the candidate of their choice. But this simple voting protocol
is prone to problems, people can create fake votes and publish them in the list of all votes.
Then that voter who cheats can deny his or her vote, which is a very dangerous thing to do.
So Bohli, M¨uller-Quade and R¨uhrich[3] came up with a concept of bingo voting and then
K¨usters, Truderung and Vogt[1] gives an informal Description based on the concept. Thus,
our system will base on these two papers.
First of all, the bingo voting system defines some basic components. These components
plus police and judge are the players of this system which is defined in section 2. These
components consist of n voters(v), l candidates(P) and then a random number generator
(RNG) and a voting machine(M) that can be used in the voting booth and some auditors. the
role of auditors will have randomized partial checking[7] in zero-knowledge proofs provided
by the voting machine. The entire election process is divided into three parts: Initialization
phase, Voting phase and Tallying phase.
Initialization phase. In this phase the voting machine will generate n random number
xj
1 . . . xj
n for every candidate j. Besides, generating the dummy vote pairs (j,xj
i) for the
candidates. Thus, there are n × l dummy vote pairs together generated for the candidates.
Next, we define m(m equals n × l) commitments, which are unconditionally hiding. These
commitments C1 . . . Cm are computed with random coins rj
i . So the Commitment Cj
i =
comm((j,xj
i);rj
i ) and all of commitments are shuffled[8] and published on the bulletin board
before the election begins.
Pedersen commitments[6] are used.
Besides, zero-knowledge
proofs can guarantee that the number of commitments for every candidate is the same
number n(The zero-knowledge proofs are described in the subsequent section).
Voting phase. In this phase the voter will enter the voting booth and reveal their vote
by the following steps, which is also displayed on figure 7:
1. The voter enters the voting booth and indicate her choice to the voting machine by
pressing the corresponding candidate‘s button. The voter also choose to abstain from
voting.
2. Next, the random number generator will generate a fresh random number N for the
voter. Of course the random number generator will generate fresh random numbers for
every voter after they indicate their votes. Besides, if the voter abstains from voting,
the random number generator do not create the fresh random number for this voter.
Page 22 of 32
==PAGE:26==
4.1
Model
3. The random number generator displays the fresh number N to the voter and transfers
it to the voting machine.
4. The voting machine then prints one receipt for every voter who have indicated their
vote, but the abstaining voters can not get the receipts generated by the voting ma-
chine. The receipt consists of the names of candidates and the following numbers next
to corresponding candidates:
1) The number next to candidate chosen by the voter is the fresh random number
which is generated by the random number generator. At this time the voter needs
to check whether the number next to the candidate of her choice is same as the
number displayed by random number generator(the reason that every voter needs
to check the number will be revealed on the legislative branch).
2) The numbers next to every other candidates j′ are the numbers xj′
i which are
never used before in the poll of random numbers belonging to j′, for the voter
i(e.g., voter 1 goes to the voting booth and votes to candidate 2. On the receipt
the number next candidate 1 is x1
1, the number next candidate 3 is x3
1.
The
number next to the remaining candidates on receipt are similar).
5. Finally the voter leaves the voting booth and takes out their receipt. Anybody outside
can not recognize what the fresh random number is and who this voter votes to.
Tallying phase. In this phase every voter has finished voting and the voting machine
will calculate the result of election and display some data on the bulletin board. The data
consist of four parts:
1. The final result of the election;
2. All of the receipts which are given to the voters in a lexicographical order;
3. The commitments to all pairs (j,xj
i) where the number xj
i is not printed in any receipts.
4. Zero-knowledge proofs are provided to reveal that those unopened commitments can
be correctly allocated to the receipts. The zero-knowledge proofs are described in the
subsequent section.
Now every voter can easily determine the result of election. the amount of votes for
the candidate j equals the number of opened commitments comm((j,xj
i);rj
i ) for the voter i
minus the number of voters who decided to abstain.
We give an example to explain why we determine the result of election in this way.
There are five voters(from 1 to 5) and five candidates (from A to E). Voter 1 and 2 vote to
candidate A; voter 3 votes to candidate C; voter 4 votes to candidate D and voter 5 abstains.
In terms of candidate A, the random number generator will create two fresh random numbers
Page 23 of 32
==PAGE:27==
4.1
Model
for voter 1 and 2 respectively; there are two random numbers used in the receipts of voter
3 and voter 4; due to voter 5 abstaining, they can not get receipt from the voting machine.
Thus, There are three numbers which are never used in the receipt and the candidate A gets
three votes.Obviously, it is an incorrect result and the candidate A just get two votes, so we
need to minus the number of abstaining voters because the numbers of abstaining voter for
the candidate j are not used.
Figure 7: The diagram of Voting phase
4.1.2
Zero-knowledge proofs for bingo voting
In the following we describe zero-knowledge proofs for bingo voting mentioned by
K¨usters, Truderung and Vogt[1]. In the above, we know that Zero-knowledge proofs are
used in two phases: one is the Initialization phase and the other is the Tallying phase. And
below is the figure 3 for the process of zero-knowledge proofs.
Zero-knowledge proofs for tallying phase. There are some steps for zero-knowledge proofs
displayed on every receipt:
Page 24 of 32
==PAGE:28==
4.1
Model
1. The voting machine will generate a new commitment comm((j,N);rj
i ) to the pair (j,N),
where j is the chosen candidate by the voter and N is the number that is generated by
the random number generator and is printed next to chosen candidate by the voting
machine. i is the the voter who got this receipt. rj
i means the random coins mentioned
as above.
2. All of the commitments for the receipt are shuffled and published in the random order.
one of these commitments is this new commitment that we have described. the other (l
−1) commitments are unopened commitments published on the bulletin board in the
initialization phase. Actually, different commitments for different receipts are taken
from the bulletin board. the auditor can verify this case.
3. These new commitments are re-randomized and shuffled twice. Thus, we can get two
sets of commitment: intermediate set and final set. These two sets are published and
the final set of commitments are opened. Now one of the auditors can check two things:
one is whether there is every actual commitment belonging to each of candidate. the
other is that whether all of numbers displayed on the receipt were contained in the
final commitments.
4. The auditor chooses a random bit[9]. The voting machine publishes the random factors
depending on the bit value for the first or for the second re-randomization step.
Due to every auditor will check the things mentioned above with percentage of 50(i.e.,
the auditors can check it or they do not check it.). The voting machine will be detected with
a probability of 50% percent if it would try to cheat. And when the amount of repeating of
the procedure increase to s times, the probability of detected will increase to 1 −(1
2)s.
Zero-knowledge proofs for initialization phase. K¨usters, Truderung and Vogt[1] men-
tioned there is a inaccurately definition of the proof[3], so they decided that the zero-
knowledge proof for initialization proceeds similarly as in the tallying phase, but There
are some differences. Note that there is an assumption that a commitment comm(j,xj
i) on
a pair (j,xj
i) is implemented as (Cj
i ,Dj
i ) =(comm(j),comm(xj
i)), where the commitments
on the single components are Pedersen commitments. Now the process of zero-knowledge
proofs is similar with that in the tallying phase, but here is an extra Cj
i .
In the section 4.1.1 we show the definition of the commitment. There are random coins
rj
i using to compute the commitment. The r,p and q is the same random coins(rj
i , pj
i, qj
i ),
but now they are called random bit. In the judicial branch, the judge will subpoena the
voting machine, and then the voting machine will be asked to explain the zero-knowledge
proofs. We know that finally the voting machine publishes the random factors for the first
or for the second re-randomization step. This is also mentioned in the following laws.
For the first case, the voting machine publishes the random factors for the first re-
randomization step in the end. Everybody can know rj
i ×pj
i, and then by the voting machine
telling pj
i, we can easily link the commitments in the intermediate set with the initial set.
If it can be one-to-one corresponding, then there is no problem. And if the voting machine
Page 25 of 32
==PAGE:29==
4.2
Legislative Branch
can’t explain how to get from the intermediate version to the initial version, then it’s guilty.
The second case is the same, the voting machine publishes the random factors for the second
re-randomization step, and everyone can learn about rj
i × pj
i × qj
i . As long as the voting
machine can explain how he can get rj
i ×pj
i from rj
i ×pj
i ×qj
i , it can prove that it is innocent,
otherwise it will be convicted guilty.
Figure 8: The Process of zero-knowledge proofs for bingo voting
4.2
Legislative Branch
Firstly, we start to define the legislative branch, here are the laws for the bingo voting
system:
1. The authority publishes the list of legal voters(v1,...,vn) and candidates(P1, ..., Pl)
before the election.
2. In initialization phase, the voting machine generates random numbers xj
1 . . . xj
n for
every candidate j. If other participants know the random numbers before it can be
revealed according to the law. the voting machine is punishable.
Page 26 of 32
==PAGE:30==
4.2
Legislative Branch
3. The voting machine must generate commitments comm((j,xj
i);rj
i ) for every candidate
j. If one of these commitments are not shuffled or published on the bulletin board, The
voting machine is punishable.
4. In voting phase, a voter must indicate her choice to the voting machine by press the
according candidate‘s button. If the voter does not do any choice, they are considered
to abstain and do not get the receipt.
5. The random number generator must create a fresh random number when every voter
indicates their votes, then displays it to the voter and transfer it to the voting machine.
If other participants does not get the fresh numbers, the random number generator is
punishable.
6. The voting machine must print a receipt for every voter. In the receipt, the random
number generated by the random number generator will display next to the voter‘s
choice. For any other candidate, the voting machine will display xj
i for some i, where
xj
i has not been used on the any other receipts.
7. The voters need to check their receipts and make sure whether the number next to
chosen candidate on the receipt is same as the number displayed by the random number
generator. The votes of the honest voters can be guaranteed, the votes of the dishonest
votes can not be guaranteed.
8. In tallying phase, the voting machine must publish the result of the election and all of
receipts gives out to the bulletin board.
9. The voters need to check whether their receipts display on the bulletin board and
complain if not. The votes of the honest voters can be guaranteed, the votes of the
dishonest votes can not be guaranteed.
10. Whenever a judge issues a subpoena to the voting machine for the commitment, the
voting machine supplies the explanation of the zero-knowledge proofs(i.e., whatever
random factors the judge asks, the voting machine needs to give a correct answer to
the judge.). Otherwise the voting machine is punishable.
Some comments on the law are necessary. The system is divided into three phases, so
our laws are defined around these three phases. These laws are actually very similar to how
the whole system works, but the laws dictate what participants can and cannot do. In the
case of Law 3, K¨usters, Truderung and Vogt[1] mentions that all commitments are shuffled
before they are published on the bulletin board. We do not know why the commitment
should be shuffled before published. Maybe doing this will protect the system from intruder
attacks[8], but this thesis do not get any useful answer. We just use this setting.
Besides, In the case of Law 10, although everyone can see the published commitment,
only the voting machine knows how the entire zero-knowledge proofs are going to be secured.
So when a judge subpoenas the voting machine, whether or not the voting machine can
Page 27 of 32
==PAGE:31==
4.3
Executive Branch
correctly answer the zero-knowledge proofs process becomes the key to judging whether or
not it is honest. Because an honest voting machine will always answer the subpoena correctly.
Participants are obliged to keep the information received or to explain some of the
processes and to disclose it when requested by the judge, as described below. Failure to
produce relevant information will also be penalized.
Now we define the function crime(S) according to these laws. This function will return
all of following functions. These records consist of the culprit, the violated law and some
relevant information:
- (Law = 2,Perp = M,Num = xj
i, Wit = v/RNG):
if any of voters or the RNG knows the random number xj
i before it can be revealed.
- (Law = 3,Perp = M, comm ̸= shuffled and published, Wit = v/RNG):
if any of commitments are not shuffled and published.
- (Law = 5,Perp = RNG, Num = N , Wit = v/M):
if the random number generator does not generate a fresh random number N for the
voter and the voting machine after the voter votes.
- (Law = 10,Perp = M,zk-proofs ̸= correctly explain, Wit = auditor):
if the voting machine can not explain zero-knowledge proofs.
Besides law 2, 3, 5, 10, there are six laws remaining(i.e., law 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9) which are
just parts of our model definition, so nobody will violate those six laws.
Finally, we reveal that the legal system is reasonable. For Laws 2, 3, and 5, a particular
message will only be generated by a particular participant. If the participants are honest,
there is no way that they could fail to complete their tasks and cause the vote to fail.
For example, only the random number generator generates a fresh random number, so if
someone else doesn’t receive it, then something must have gone wrong with it. So as long as
the random number generator is honest, the random number generator will make sure that
the vote is done correctly, i.e. it will generate a fresh random number. As for Law 10 it is the
same thing, the voting machine must be guilty if he can’t explain the range of information
he publishes. An honest voting machine must not cheat and must be able to explain.
4.3
Executive Branch
In the previous section, we defined what is legal and what is illegal in the bingo voting
system, and once a participant does something illegal it is possible to be found guilty. For
example, if the random number generator does not generate a fresh random number after
the voter has voted, then it is guilty of violating the law.
Page 28 of 32
==PAGE:32==
4.3
Executive Branch
In this section, we’re mainly going to go over the definition of discovery transaction.
Because this transaction is with a police, and then the police goes through these transactions
to record this bingo voting system and then increases the knowledge of the judge through
these records. So we will define a police for this system as well. But before defining a police,
let’s define a security goal for the system.
4.3.1
Security goals
First we have to declare the vote privacy is not an issue in this paper. Otherwise we
cannot continue the following work. We know that this is essentially a voting system, so the
only participants who can complain are the voters, and the behavior of the voters is critical.
So we define the security goal of the bingo voting system as: The votes of honest voters can
be guaranteed. The result of the voting agrees with actual votes of the honest voters plus
some assignment of the dishonest voters. That is, it may be possible to change the vote of a
dishonest voter, but all the honest votes must be counted correctly, and one cannot increase
some votes. After we define the security goal, we can define the attack states in the following
subsection.
4.3.2
Attack states
And due to honest voters will always check their receipts, and dishonest voters will never
check their receipts. we will find two situations where the votes of honest voters cannot be
guaranteed (i.e., two states of attack). One is due to the fact that a particular participant
does not fulfill his or her task well. We call it direct attack, because this attack can direct
prevent the vote from proceeding. For example, if the random number generator does not
generate a fresh random number after the voters have voted, then the system cannot proceed
and the voter cannot vote for the person he or she wants to vote for. We call another attack -
votes tampering attack. It is that there is a dishonest participant in the system who tampers
with the vote of an honest voter, so that his vote does not go to the person he wants to vote
for.
In fact, in the bingo voting system, we can regard the auditor as the police, and in the
above section, we mentioned that we have defined some auditors whose role is to randomly
check the zero-knowledge proofs provided by the voting machine, because in our law, only
when zero-knowledge proofs are involved, the judge will subpoena the voting machine and
convict it.
The only time a judge will subpoena the voting machine is when the zero-
knowledge proofs are involved, otherwise it’s a straight conviction. So as far as this law is
concerned the auditor is the police, because the task of auditor is check the zero-knowledge
proofs randomly, then the records are sent to the judge, who then issues a subpoena to the
voting machine.
Now let’s define the discovery transaction simply: when a voter complains that a prob-
Page 29 of 32
==PAGE:33==
4.4
Judicial Branch
lem with the voting system prevents him or her from getting the voting operation done, The
transition simply adds one of some records to the knowledge of the judge.
4.4
Judicial Branch
Once the police have collected the evidence, they make a report and send it to the judge,
and that’s when the judicial process begins.
In previous chapters we mentioned that in the judicial system judges have two forms
of transactions. One is to convict a particular player directly, and the other is to initiate a
subpoena to the player. For the bingo voting system, we also need to define two forms of
transactions for the judge. The first one is that, when the record sent by the police shows
that there is a direct attacks(i.e., a player has violated the laws 2, 3, and 5), the judge
can directly convict the corresponding offending player according to the corresponding laws.
For example, if the police find that the random number generator failed to generate a fresh
random number, the judge can convict the random number generator under law 3.
The second form is when the judge finds that the record shows that the player has
violated Law 10(i.e., votes tampering attack happens), then the judge will send a subpoena
to the voting machine, and according to Law 10, the voting machine will have to explain the
zero-knowledge proofs that it has provided to the judge after it receives the subpoena. i.e., the
voting machine either published the the random factors for the first re-randomization step,
or the random factors for the second re-randomization step, or both two re-randomization
steps. He has to explain correctly how the random factor runs. For example, how the final
set of commitments and intermediate set of commitments can be matched by rj
i × pj
i × qj
i .
Otherwise, we consider the voting machine to be tampering with the votes of the voters,
i.e. we consider the voting machine to be guilty. Since all commitments from creation of
re-randomization commitments to zero-knowledge proofs are done by the voting machine
providing, the honest voting machine must be able to explain all of it. Of course, the voting
machine can fail to explain or intentionally fail to explain for any reason, and then the voting
machine is also guilty, and if it wants to protect someone who breaks the law from being
convicted, then it has to take the risk of being convicted.
4.5
Security Based on Perfect Crimes
Since we define two attack states, we will also analyze the perfect crime of this system
in two ways. Firstly with respect to the first state - direct attack, we do not think that
there will be any perfect crime, because once laws 2, 3 and 5 are violated, then it must be a
specific player who has violated the law. For example, once the random number generator
does not generate a fresh random number after the voter votes, then the random number
generator must be convicted. This means that once this state is reached, there is no way
that the random number generator can find any reason to exonerate itself, because the law
Page 30 of 32
==PAGE:34==
clearly states that this state is illegal, and once it happens the person who breaks the law is
the random number generator.
In the second state of attack - votes tampering attack, we know that the voting machine
only needs to be able to explain the zero-knowledge proofs it provides to the judge. We
assume that the voting machine is able to achieve a perfect crime, i.e., it is still able to
correctly explain the zero-knowledge proofs after it has tampered with the ballots of a certain
honest voter.However, we know that in the initialization phase, the voting machine generates
for each candidate the same number of commitments as the number of voters, and the
commitments cannot be changed after they are created. Once the voting machine tampers
with the votes, one of the commitments will be replaced. The randomized commitments
can no longer match each other. Then the voting machine will not be able to correctly
interpret the zero-knowledge proofs it provides, so our assumptions do not hold and the
voting machine will not be able to commit a perfect crime.
In the above we mentioned, the amount of votes for the candidate j equals the number
of opened commitments comm((j,xj
i);rj
i ) for the voter i minus the number of voters who
decided to abstain. But actually, the candidates will get less votes than the votes that the
voters vote to, because there is no way to avoid the appearance of dishonest voting in our
system. Thus, the legitimate result of the bingo voting system for the candidate j is the
votes of honest voters plus the votes of dishonest minus abstaining votes. There will be
some deviation between the final election results and the actual honest votes, but as long as
the deviation is not too large it is reasonable.
5
Conclusion
The starting point for our paper was M¨odersheim and Cuellar[2]’s paper in which they
proposed a brand new accountability framework - the three branches of accountability. Our
work is the process of putting the theory into practice. We apply this approach to two
security protocols. The first one is the bank transfer system which is very common in our
daily life. We designed it in general, defined the members of the system, designed the process
of its operation, and then combined it with the three branches of accountability (i.e., we set
up the laws for the system; defined the police and the judges, and described how they work).
We then discussed whether perfect crime could be achieved by the participants in this system.
Finally, we try to integrate the whole system with OFMC and make some analyses of the
results.
The second system is the bingo voting system. K¨usters, Truderung and Vogt.[1]’s paper
has defined this system, as well as some of the designs. So we describe the whole bingo voting
system based on that paper, and we also have our own understanding of zero-knowledge
proofs. Then similarly we apply three branches of accountability to it. We designed the law,
defined the police and the judges and the operational processes. The perfect crime scenario
was also discussed. But unfortunately, due to the complexity of this system, we could not
Page 31 of 32
==PAGE:35==
find a suitable way to link it to OFMC.
In summary, we apply the "three branches of accountability" approach to two security
protocols successfully.
These two cases can also serve as a reference for future research
on the three branches of accountability approach, and will be useful for future research on
security protocols. But there are some shortcomings in this paper. Firstly, in the bank
transfer system we assume that the identity provider is always honest due to the uniqueness
of this protocol, this is contrary to the content of the three branches of accountability. Next,
in the bingo voting system we can not link the system with OFMC, because this system
is very complex and we do not find a good way to simplify it.
We hope we can find a
good way to combine the approach with various security protocol. We believe There will be
more development on accountability and the three branch of accountability approach will be
applied to more protocols.
Page 32 of 32
==PAGE:36==
References
References
[1] R. KĂźsters, T. Truderung, and A. Vogt, “Accountability: definition and relationship to
verifiability,” in Computer and Communications Security, 2010.
[2] S. Mödersheim and J. Cuellar, “Three branches of accountability,” in Protocols, Strands,
and Logic: Essays Dedicated to Joshua Guttman on the Occasion of his 66.66 th Birthday.
Springer, 2021, pp. 293–311.
[3] J.-M. Bohli, J. Müller-Quade, and S. Röhrich, “Bingo voting: Secure and coercion-free
voting using a trusted random number generator,” in E-Voting and Identity: First In-
ternational Conference, VOTE-ID 2007, Bochum, Germany, October 4-5, 2007, Revised
Selected Papers 1.
Springer, 2007, pp. 111–124.
[4] S. Mödersheim and L. Vigano, “The open-source fixed-point model checker for symbolic
analysis of security protocols,” in International School on Foundations of Security Anal-
ysis and Design.
Springer, 2007, pp. 166–194.
[5] S. Mödersheim, “Protocol security verification tutorial,” 2018.
[6] T. P. Pedersen, “Non-interactive and information-theoretic secure verifiable secret shar-
ing,” in Annual international cryptology conference.
Springer, 1991, pp. 129–140.
[7] M. Jakobsson, A. Juels, and R. L. Rivest, “Making mix nets robust for electronic voting by
randomized partial checking,” in 11th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
02), 2002.
[8] D. L. Chaum, “Untraceable electronic mail, return addresses, and digital pseudonyms,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 84–90, 1981.
[9] J. Clark, A. Essex, and C. Adams, “Secure and observable auditing of electronic voting
systems using stock indices,” in 2007 Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer
Engineering.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 788–791.
Page I of I
