==PAGE:1==
Collecting physiological biometrics while us­
ing mobile game application for assessment
of children’s anxiety awaiting hospital treat­
ment
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for as­
sessment of children’s anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Tina Plamenova Petkova
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover picture:
Illustrations by Storyset [1], 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Build­
ing 321, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Sector of DTU Compute, Depart­
ment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Den­
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
Tina Plamenova Petkova ­ s200464
Signature
Date
ii
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
28.01.2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In emergency pediatric care children’s emotional well­being is important, since it impacts
the child’s emotional state and the health care procedures. It is common that children in
the hospital are anxious and feel distressed about possible pain they might experience,
fear of certain medical procedures or the new and unknown environment around them. If
not addressed these negative emotions may lead to emotional outbursts from the children
which can result in complications in the treatment such as delays, risks to the well­being of
the medical personnel, and increased need for using sedatives or restraints. Such circum­
stances can cause future negative experiences for the children and fear of being treated
in the hospital. This study aims to investigate how can biometric data of children await­
ing hospital treatment be collected while children are playing a mobile game application.
The main objective is to develop a serious game containing cognitive behavioural therapy
(CBT) and explore how feasible it is to collect usable biometric data that can be used for
further development and studies. The game was tested with 15 children aged 5­11 in the
pediatric department and private arrangements. Results show that usable gaze biometric
data collected using the Tobii 4C eye tracker was 67% and 61% for the right and the left
eye respectively during gameplay time. The mean percentage of collected heart data dur­
ing gameplay using the Empatica E4 wristband is 94% for blood volume pulse (BVP) and
39% for heart rate. The game was attractive and engaging for children, however, there
was no apparent reduction in anxiety after playing the game since the children testing the
game were already calm. While more testing is required to determine the usability, and
effectiveness of the game, this solution provides a viable way of collecting biometric data
during game playing of children awaiting hospital treatment
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Tina Plamenova Petkova, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
During the time working on this Master’s thesis, I was supported by multiple people and
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to the following people for their support,
feedback, encouragement and cooperation.
Per Bækgaard , Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Technical University of Denmark
Michael Deininger, Associate Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineer­
ing Engineering Design and Manufacturing systems, Technical University of Denmark
Gitte Maria Flyger Würtz, Researcher and Clinical Nursing Specialist, Herlev and Gen­
tofte Hospital Department for Children and Young People
Medical personal, at Herlev Hospital, Department for Children and Young People
Children and parrents, at Herlev Hospital, Department for Children and Young People
iv
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Related work
3
2.1
Anxiety in the PED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Methods
15
3.1
Overall design method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Methods for collecting insights
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Methods for Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Methods for developing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5
Methods for validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Problem Exploration and Definition
19
4.1
Problem Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Problem definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Solution Discovery
27
5.1
Architectural overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6
Development and Testing
33
6.1
Testing of the initial prototype with users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2
Testing of the refined prototype with users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.3
Testing of the final prototype with users
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7
Results and Analysis
41
7.1
Overview of test participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.2
Biometrics data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.3
Usability and User experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
8
Discussion
61
8.1
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
8.2
Reflections and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
8.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
9
Future work
64
10 Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
v
==PAGE:8==
A Appendix
71
A.1 PRISMA flow diagram and Validation tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.2 Hospital visit and Interview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.3 Stakeholders meeting and presentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
A.4 Affinity Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
A.5 Test Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
A.6 Link to source code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
A.7 Test results from initial prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
A.8 Test results from the refined prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
A.9 Test results from the final prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
A.10 Test results and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
vi
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In emergency pediatric care children’s emotional well­being is important, since it impacts
the child’s emotional state and the health care procedures. It is common that children in
the hospital are anxious and feel distressed about possible pain they might experience,
fear of certain medical procedures or the new and unknown environment around them. If
not addressed these negative emotions may lead to emotional outbursts from the children.
This can result in complications in the treatment, as critical medical procedures are being
delayed, may put at risk the well­being of the medical personnel, and increase the need
for using sedatives or restraints to calm down the child. Such circumstances can cause
future negative experiences for the children and fear of being treated in the hospital.
Hence, it is critical to address the anxiety of children being treated in the hospital. Re­
search shows that interactive and serious games help in distracting, educating and calm­
ing children treated in the hospital. Serious games provide a playful and engaging way
to educate and prepare children for upcoming procedures or treatments in the hospital.
Games that involve cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) have proven to decrease the anx­
iety of children using them in the hospital. In addition, researchers find value in biofeed­
back and exploring biometrics that can reveal the emotional state of children. Combining
serious games and biometric feedback can create a child­friendly tool for preparing chil­
dren for hospital treatments.
Currently, the pediatric emergency department in the Herlev Hospital lacks a tool to assess
and reduce anxiety in children awaiting hospital treatment. Previously an interactive game
with (CBT) exercises was prototyped for this growing demand. However, it was never
developed for actual use in the hospital. Furthermore, medical personnel there find it
difficult to assess children’s anxiety because it requires a lot of experience and intuition
to recognize anxiety and address it. It is especially difficult to recognise and understand
the emotional state of children in the age group of 5­8 since they are unable to clearly
express their feelings. There is no external tool to help in accessing anxiety. Therefore
this project aims to develop an interactive serious game that can also collect biometric
data of the children playing it, to explore how biometric data collection can aid in this
objective to assess and reduce anxiety of children awaiting hospital treatment. Therefore
the main problem statement of this thesis is:
How can biometric data be collected while playing a mobile game application for
reducing children’s anxiety while awaiting hospital treatment?
To understand the issue and how it can be solved, insight was collected via literature
review, interviews and observations. This study also encompasses the solution discovery
process as well as the development process and validation of the solution. Finally, the
results and findings are presented and discussed.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and Related work
Before embarking on building a solution to address the problem statement, it is essential
that previous work on this subject is reviewed, so as to provide background context, as
well as to avoid repeating the work already done by others. Instead, the solution presented
in this paper intends to improve and build upon previous research in this field.
Since the primary objective is to help assess and reduce anxiety in children waiting in
a hospital pediatric department, the first field of review will revolve around previous re­
search in this specific area. This study builds upon the research and work of Kjeldsen[2]
and Meyer, Folmer[3] and investigates how anxiety in the pediatric department can be
assessed and reduced.
2.1
Anxiety in the PED
Usually, children are afraid of new environments and lack of information. This is also
true when it comes to children being admitted to a hospital. According to a study done
in Finland [4] it is common for children aged 4­6 years old to have a hospital­related fear.
70% of the children interviewed (19) with previous experience in a hospital said they were
afraid of pain and 53% (14) said they were afraid of nursing interventions. In addition,
managing children’s anxiety in this age group is particularly difficult, because children are
not able to express themselves clearly.
However, this could lead to negative experiences during the treatment for both the child
and the hospital personnel. Children who are anxious during treatment could also lead to
increased time on the procedures because they are not willing to assist or hinder the pro­
cedures with their emotional outbursts. Studies have shown that having anxiety while be­
ing treated in a hospital may lead to negative memories and more painful experiences.[4]
It is essential to understand anxiety and find ways to quantify and assess it to tackle it
sensibly. Based on the research of Kjeldsen[2] and Folmer and Mejer [3] anxiety can be
measured by self­reporting, proxy reporting, by observational reporting by third parties.
Multiple anxiety measuring methods have been developed by many medical such as the
Visual Analog Scale (VAS), modified Yale Preoperative Anxiety Scale (mYPAS), etc.
Furthermore, when talking about children’s anxiety it is critical to understand that young
kids are unable to express fully what they feel and therefore there is often a need for
external means to help in assessing their anxiety.
2.1.1
Assessing anxiety through physiological biometrics
Biometric data is already used to recognize human emotions, by measuring differences
in behaviors and physiology. Kjeldsen[2] maps out the main types of psychological bio­
metrics that are used for assessing anxiety in figure 2.1. As seen in the figure there are
nine different biometrics used:
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Types of phycological biometrics for assessment anxiety
Heart rate (HR) can show signs of emotional changes when it suddenly spikes and heart
rate variability (HRV) decreases. HRV is often used to measure stress since it measures
variation in time between heartbeats. This process is controlled by the autonomous ner­
vous system (ANS) that responds to feelings of danger. It is very often used since it is an
effective and cheap way to measure anxiety. It can be measured using electrocardiogra­
phy (ECG) or Photoplethysmography (PPG)[5].
Skin conductance or galvanic skin response is the response of the body when in emo­
tional distress that causes continuous variations in the electrical characteristics of the skin.
t is easily measurable by using electrodes to meter the subtle changes of electrical current
passing through it.[6]
Brain activity is typically measured with electroencephalography (EEG). It is used to
evaluate changes in brain activity.[7] Electrodes are attached to the head to measure
electrical activity of the brain. However, it requires a larger setup to gain measurements,
especially for young children it could be stressful or hard to apply.
Facial expressions and movement patterns have also been used to assess anxiety
via taking photographs and videos. Results from Perkins’s study suggest that anxiety
produces a distinct facial expression such as eye darts and head swivels and is adaptive
value to situations [8]. Other research states that facial expressions cannot be always
trusted since they are dependent on personality and social and cultural norms.[9]
Respiration rate is increasing when a person is anxious. It can be measured by wearable
devices with microphones attached to the nose, however, this can also be difficult to apply
for kids, as it could make them more anxious to place a device in their face. Respiration
rate can be influenced by physical activity, therefore it may be unreliable.
Voice analysis can be measured by taking videos or audio recordings, however, it is quite
complex to analyze since voice pitch, volume, and rate can be influenced by personality
and social and cultural norms.
Hormonal changes are also linked with anxiety levels. Cortisol is also called the stress
hormone that can indicate when the nervous system reacts to stress. However, this can
only be measured by blood samples, urine, or saliva tests, which are too intrusive for
children at that age who are generally afraid of hospital procedures.
Pupillometry and gaze are an innovative way to see the results of acute stress in real­
time, because the muscles that control the pupils are controlled by ANS [10].
Pupil size and dynamics are controlled by two synergistic pathways that operate on the
4
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:13==
muscles of the pupil. There is also evidence that mental events contribute to the dilation
of the pupil. According to Snowden et al.[11] pupils are dilated when a person becomes
aroused or excited. Based on this response researchers use pupillometry to measure
psychological processes. Results show that the pupil is more dilated when a person is
presented with fear images than neutral images.
Visual­motor operations with a computer or task shifts are correlated with a series of
abrupt pupil dilations averaged over some time. Pupillary dilation appears to be a func­
tion of the cognitive workload and attention required to perform the task. The emotional
content embedded in the picture might also trigger, and be proportional to, the pupil dila­
tion reaction; very aversive or pleasant pictures are associated with large dilation. Other
important studies on the correlation between attention demand and pupil diameter have
been conducted.[12]
Even though pupillometry and gaze are complex it is relatively easy to capture gaze and
pupil dilation through eyetrackers or even good­quality cameras. This method is both
non­obtrusive and practical when it comes to assessing a child’s anxiety levels.
The solution presented in this paper has opted to combine two of the less obtrusive metrics
above in order to measure and track physiological changes in children which, according
to the referenced research are indicative of current levels of stress and anxiety.
2.1.2
Reducing anxiety
Assessing anxiety, however, is only half the task. It is just as important to review what
research has been done in the area of anxiety reduction and which methods are most
effective, especially as pertained to hospital environments. It is very important to address
negative emotions by recognising them and trying to counteract them. This may lead to
better social experiences for the children and better physical health. There are multiple
studies assessing different ways to deal with children’s anxiety. According to Kjeldsen [2]
there are five main categories of interventions for reducing children’s anxiety in medical
settings ­ preparation and involvement, play and distraction, mindful relaxation, emotional
support, and complementary interventions.
Figure 2.2: Interactions for reducing anxiety in a medical setting by Kjeldsen[2]
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Related work
The previous section explored research on the various methods employed by others to
both assess and reduce anxiety in children. Having established the options available in
this regard, it is important to review the ways others have applied them, particularly in
pediatric hospital departments. By doing so, a clearer context may be established as to
how well these methods work in practice to help ease children awaiting treatment. Such
a review is therefore beneficial to the development process of the solution presented in
this paper. The scope of this review is limited to digital technologies as applied to anxiety
management and educational/CBT interactive games.
2.2.1
Digital Technology in Pediatrics for Reducing Anxiety
Digital technology and e­health are being used more widely now as information and com­
munication are developing rapidly. Digital technology improves the level of service in the
healthcare sector because it is economical, easily accessible, and attractive.
It is widely used to counteract the anxiety of children in the pediatric departments. Computer­
based health intervention is particularly suited for youth because nowadays millions of
people from all sociodemographic groups use computers and mobile devices and play
digital games in their leisure time.
The most common types of digital interventions for addressing anxiety and mental health
are AR and VR, Biofeedback, digital games, internet therapy, and web­based programs
[13].
Serious games are applied games that are designed to be fun and entertaining but also
have an additional purpose apart from pure entertainment [14] which makes them a good
means to motivate and enhance learning and can be implemented using different tech­
nologies.[15] Serious games can be divided into two main types ­ process­oriented games
and outcome­oriented games. Process­oriented games are games that try to use the
game­playing experience to achieve a certain goal. Examples of process­oriented games
are simulation games, decision­making games, discovery games, etc. On the other hand,
Outcome­oriented games have an aim that they try to achieve by the end of the game. Ex­
amples of such games are educational, motivational games, etc. It is also very common
to combine the two types and use both the process and the outcome to achieve specific
goals. The following sections will present examples of different process and outcome­
oriented games.
Figure 2.3: Types of serious games
6
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:15==
Educational games for reducing hospital­related anxiety
To understand what types of games and how they were developed to help with reducing
anxiety in children treated in hospitals and how can biometrics be collected using such
games, a literature review was conducted following the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta­Analyses (PRISMA)[16]. The search strings can be seen
in Appendix A.1. The following three databases were used DTU Findit[17], PubMed[18],
and Google Scolar[19]. Figure 2.4 displays the PRISMA flow diagram. As a result of the
analysis, 13 studies were included.
Figure 2.4: PRISMA flow diagram for the literature review.
Research has proven that serious games that use anxiety coping techniques such as edu­
cation and preparation, mindful relaxation and cognitive behavioural therapy, biofeedback
are effective in reducing anxiety in children and early adolescents.
An example of such serious games that use education as a way to reduce anxiety by
understanding the unknown is CliniPup game [20] (Figure 2.5a) and HospiAvontuur [21].
They are both used to reduce preoperative anxiety in young children by educating them
about the operation stages and how to prepare for it. Both games were developed for
young children in the age group respectively 4­11 and 3­9.
CliniPup is a friendly dog that guides kids through a typical day of surgery, so children
can better understand what should they expect. This helps them prepare for the surgery
process and teaches them to communicate their experience and manage their anxiety
[22] The outcome of testing CliniPup with children shows that children who played the
game one week before the operation had a significant reduction in preoperative anxiety,
but only in this time point.
In the game HospiAvontuur, the Hospi cow takes the player on an adventure journey in the
hospital, where it prepares the child for what to expect from acceptance into the hospital to
the process of hospital discharge. The child meets and interacts with different characters
in the hospital in the game such as anesthesiologists. It learns how to find his/her way
in the hospital and some treatment tools [23]. Results from testing HospiAvontuur were
positive on educating the children for their preparation for elective surgery.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
7
==PAGE:16==
(a) CliniPup®[24]
(b) HospiAvontuur[21]
Figure 2.5: Serious educational games for reducing preoperative anxiety
In addition, Schenck et al.[25] developed a VR educational game (figure2.6a) to reduce
stress in children by educating them about the proton centre. Since the proton treatment
is very complex and produces noises that could be scary to children, the main goal of
the game is to educate and simulate stress­inducing sounds in a stress­free environment
before the treatment. The movement of the participant is very restricted, therefore the
game uses the technique of gaze and wait as a method for the users to interact and utilizes
specific sounds to indicate events in the game. When the user gazes at a particular point
a loading bar appears and when it is filled the game teleports the player to the point of
gaze. The game is used in preparation for the treatment and while the patient is lying on
the treatment table. The game aims to help the hero of the game to fill hexagon objects
with colour by gazing at them. Initial evidence suggests that the game is well received
and helps reduce anxiety by preparing children for their treatment.
Another study that provides evidence that preparation is decreasing anxiety for children in
the hospital was done in Taiwan with the game ”Saving the Animals Planet” (figure2.6b).
It was used in the oncology department for kids aged 3­5 to reduce anxiety by involving
them in a game where they were doing the treatment procedures for leukaemia. [26]
The results of the research provide evidence that therapeutic video games (TVG) can
decrease anxiety in preschool­aged children with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL). It
can also be used as a supportive tool for medical professionals before executing invasive
treatments.
(a) WPE VR game [25]
(b) Save the animals planet [26]
8
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:17==
Games for distraction
A widely used approach for reducing anxiety in children undergoing hospital treatment
is distraction. VR is often used for this purpose especially when in needle procedures,
because it also provides free access to the kids’ arms. This approach was used in a
Danish project Khora and was tested in Rigshospitalet during an IV procedure [27]. This
game was developed for children in the age group 5­12 and is designed especially to
keep children from moving during the procedure and can be played with only one hand
so it doesn’t interfere with the treatment. The game aims to shoot water balloons with a
slingshot and protect the fish from the seagulls that are flying around.
Dunn et al.[28] have utilized VR to game with the main purpose of distracting children
aged 6 to 18 with haemophilia while undergoing life­threatening procedures. The games
presented to the children in the VR headset used a special navigation technique with
glance and breath navigation to prevent children from moving their arms. The patient
reported a positive influence of the distraction on pain and anxiety during the procedure.
Figure 2.7: A child playing the game while having an IV/venflon inserted. [27]
Serious games with CBT for reducing anxiety
Triumf [29] is another game that uses education, and it also combines it with mindfulness
and relaxation exercises to address anxiety. It prepares school­age children for a day’s
surgery with useful information about the treatments and provides an environment where
they can share their feelings and find support. It also provides cognitive behavioural ther­
apy exercises such as breathing exercises. The Triumf game is currently in an ongoing
randomized trial with the main aim of determining if the game can be recommended for
hospital use to reduce children’s anxiety.
Similarly, Mina and the Land of Dreams is a serious game that uses CBT to calm children
before getting anaesthesia. The game is intended for children aged 4­6. The story of the
game is that the character Mina the Owl guides the player on a journey to the hospital to
receive anaesthesia or other procedures. On the journey, Mina teaches the child about
their procedure, breathing exercises, and muscle tension exercises.[30].
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
9
==PAGE:18==
(a) Triumf Health[29]
(b) Mina and the Land of Dreams[30]
Figure 2.8: Serious games for reducing anxiety using CBT
Kjeldsen [2], Mejer and Folmer [3] designed and prototyped a game using CBT techniques
to reduce anxiety in children awaiting hospital treatment. It was created for kids aged 4­
8 and was developed in collaboration with the Herlev Hospital. It leads the child to the
imaginary land of Bear the Nurse and helps children find exciting places along the way
and do some breathing and muscle tension exercises. However, this game is still only a
design prototype and is not tested as an implemented game.
Figure 2.9: CBT game used for reducing anxiety [2] [3]
Biofeedback Serious games
Biofeedback is a technique that helps train people to improve their health based on con­
trolling bodily processes such as heart rate, muscle tension, and blood pressure. Using
sensors body processes are measured and presented and with time people can learn with
the help of healthcare professionals if needed to change their biometrics. It is proven to
be an effective therapy also for anxiety.
The game and application MightFighter[31] (figure 2.10a) is a biofeedback game where
players are asked to regulate their heart rate while playing the game. The game is in­
tended to be used by children and adolescents aged 3­19 who experience mental health
symptoms like anxiety, frustration and outbursts, anger and aggressive behaviour. While
playing the players have attached a heart rate monitor armband that is monitoring their
heart rate and is sending it via Bluetooth to the game application. The MightFighter app
includes 27 different games that all show biofeedback when played. The heart rate is
shown at the bottom of the app and if rises above average they receive visual feedback
that their heart rate is elevated. If the heart rate continues to stay elevated then smoke
starts to appear from the bottom of the screen and start obscuring objects in the game.
10
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:19==
Whenever their heart rate starts going back to the baseline the smoke disappears. When­
ever the player’s heart rate rises above average, the players can either decide to continue
playing and calm down by using an individual strategy or go through guided deep breath­
ing exercises. The application was used for 16 weeks with participants. During the 16­
week playing period, families had the opportunity to receive coaching calls to educate
them about parent­children engagement, the benefits of using biofeedback to improve
emotional regulation, and also to support with technical issues. The results of this study
suggest that the e­health application was well received by families had a positive effect
and helped with emotion regulation for children who experience mental health symptoms.
In the research of Burkhart et al.[32] an application called WildDivine[33] is used to reduce
anxiety in adolescents in the age group 11­21 (mean age 15) that have reported anxiety,
stress, and/or somatic complaints when they were admitted in the medical clinic in their
town in the USA. Participants received psychoeducation from a clinical psychologist about
the causes of stress and how they can use exercises to relieve stress. Then participants
could use the application WildDivine and while using the application, the participants had
a biofeedback sensor attached to their ear to measure their heart rate variability (HRV).
Wild Divine is a mobile application that includes interactive experiences for mindfulness
relaxation including deep breathing, and techniques for relaxation and provides real­time
feedback on HRV so users can evaluate their emotional state. Results of the study sug­
gest that this one­time stress management intervention endorsed a clinically significant
decrease in subjective distress and can benefit patients. 93% of the participants reported
the intervention was helpful and gave them the tools to practice anxiety coping mecha­
nisms outside of the clinic as well.
(a) Mightier[31]
(b) Wild Divine[33]
Figure 2.10: Serious games with biofeedback used for reducing anxiety
A game that has successfully applied biofeedback and cognitive behavioural therapy is
Starship Rescue [24] (Figure 2.11a) which is used for treating anxiety in young people with
long­term physical conditions. It is made for children aged 10­17. The game is based on
a story set in a space hospital­ a starship that is caught up in a vortex of anxiety. The
goal of the game is to help the captain of the starship to free the lost starts and restart the
engine. The game consists of 5 modules that educate players about the origin of anxiety
and how to cope with it. It utilizes CBT exercises during gameplay and provides heart
rate biofeedback that can be used by participants to try to address their emotional state.
It uses a wrist wrist­based heart monitor to measure heart rate during the execution of
relaxation exercises. The outcome of this study shows that significant anxiety reduction
were noted in the Generalised Anxiety Disorder 7­item scale, Spence Child Anxiety Scale,
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
11
==PAGE:20==
and Likert Visual Analog scales between the start and end of the game.
In the research of May et al. [34] the IMAGINE game is used for the preparation for anxiety
management during MRI procedures. It simulates an experience in an MRI using VR to
educate children of what is the experience of undergoing an MRI procedure. The IMAG­
INE game’s story is set in space where children board a spaceship and need to perform
different tasks to start the MRI machine, which is a tool that provides medical care for
crew members. The participants learn about the MRI machine and experience a realistic
simulation of MRI examination. During the simulation, head position and movement are
extracted via the VR headset and are used to give feedback to help the participants po­
sition their heads in the correct manner in the replica of the MRI. In addition, a validated
device (such as Thought Technology [35]) is used to continuously record biofeedback
such as heart rate, skin conductance, hand temperature, and muscle tension to help pre­
dict which children are more responsive to this type of intervention. This study is still
ongoing.
(a) Starship Rescue[34]
(b) Imagine VR game[34]
Figure 2.11: Illustration of serious games with biofeedback used for reducing anxiety
2.3
Problem statement
The goal of the thesis is to address the main problem statement:
• How can biometric data be collected while playing a mobile game application for
reducing children’s anxiety while awaiting hospital treatment?
To answer this question the following sub­questions are investigated:
• To what extent can biometric data, including information on eye movements, gaze
patterns, and heart rate, be effectively collected during gameplay?
• What is the percentage of usable biometric data collected from participants during
the study?
• In the context of the game, do children demonstrate the ability to engage in game­
play, and what are their preferences and responses to the game?
• How effectively can participants perform the deep breathing and PMR exercises as
part of the game?
This project aims to solve the problem by collecting and analyzing biometrics such as
pupil dilation, eye gaze data, and heart measures.
12
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:21==
2.3.1
Contributions to this paper
This thesis aims to implement the serious game prototyped previously by Kjeldsen[2] and
Mejer and Folmer [3] and extend it by collecting physiological biometrics such as pupil
data, gaze data, and heart­rate measurements and test the game usability in the pediatric
department.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:23==
3
Methods
In order to define and address the problem statement effectively, a systematic approach
was necessary so as to help capture the problem at hand in as much detail as possible
and design a solution which would appropriately address all requirements. This chapter
presents the methodologies used to do so.
3.1
Overall design method
The overall method used is the Design Council’s Double Diamond model [36] for design
and innovation processes. It consists of four stages ­Discover, Define, Develop, and De­
liver. The first diamond represents identifying and understanding the problem and the
second diamond guides the process of creating a solution for the problem. Both dia­
monds have a divergent phase ­”Discover” and ”Develop” that allows for exploring the
issue more widely and a convergent phase ­ ”Define” and ”Deliver” that focuses on pro­
cessing information, structuring it, and taking action. The model is iterative and it enables
revisiting previous phases and improving ideas.
The following diagram (Figure 3.1) displays the overall design process.
Figure 3.1: Double diamond model used for the development process
3.2
Methods for collecting insights
Desk research and literature review were conducted to gain an understanding of the prob­
lem of reducing and assessing children’s anxiety in medical settings. A semi­structured
interview was conducted with a nurse and open­ended questions were asked, researches
involved in the problem were consulted to get a better overview of what was done already
and how it could be improved. In addition, the fly­on­the­wall technique was used to ob­
serve the hospital environment, patients, and healthcare personnel.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
15
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Methods for Problem definition
Following the Discover phase, the problem was analysed and synthesised. Collected
insights were grouped and analysed using an Affinity diagram. Concrete written require­
ments specifications were made as a result of this phase.
3.4
Methods for developing
In the development phase, user stories were identified from the requirement specifica­
tions, and the system design was outlined. The game implementation is done in Agile
methodology, using multiple sprints also following the Build­Measure­Learn cycles of Lean
UX [37] that promote early testing, continuous development, and improvement. Each
sprint has a specified work period, and defined tasks, and finishes with a review of the
outcomes.
In addition, the development adheres to the SOLID design principles for Software devel­
opment defined by Martin [38] for improving the structure, maintenance, and performance
of the software. The game is developed using the Unity Game Engine.
Physiological biometrics were collected using the Tobii 4C eye tracker. It was utilized
using the Tobii SDK for Desktop to use in the Unity Game engine to make it possible to
integrate eye­tracking data in the game. In addition, the tobii­research python library was
used to collect eye gaze data and save it for analyses and research purposes. Moreover,
the Empatica 4 wearable wristband was used to collect heart rate measures. Collecting
of heart rate data was independent from the game and was manually done.
3.5
Methods for validation
Software testing was done continuously during the development of the game. The de­
veloped game was tested by performing manual functional tests to validate the software
against the requirements that were specified previously. Considering the scope and lim­
ited timeline of the project, only manual functional testing was since unit testing and au­
tomatic testing take more time and effort to set up.
The user experience evaluation is done using Empirical UX Evaluation Methods sug­
gested by The UX BOOK [39] including critical incident data observation and reflection
on user inputs from ”Think­aloud” tests performed in the UX lab and the field. The game
was evaluated by its usability via the success rate of performing tasks in the game. Sat­
isfaction and enjoyment are measured by asking the question ”Would you recommend
the game to someone?”. Engagement was also tested using the model of Schønau­Fog,
Bjørner [40] In addition, the game is evaluated by the adherence the players have to fol­
lowing the intents of the game. Furthermore, two anxiety reporting methods were used to
address the efficacy of the game. The VAS scale was used to evaluate the anxiety level
of the children. The mYPAS scale was also used to evaluate the usefulness of the game
before and after the game using a template from the research made by Jong­Hyuk Lee
et. al. [41].
Tests in the process of developing the game were made in private arrangements with
children, UX specialists. When testing with children in private arrangements, it should
be taken into consideration that the environment and children’s moods were more playful
and energetic than in the target environment of a hospital.
The final evaluation of the developed game was performed only on 12 children aged
5­9 in Herlev Hospital, meaning that statistical analysis would be implausible, therefore
qualitative analysis was valuable.
16
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:25==
Ideally, the evaluation would be performed on children in the age group 5­8, so it is consis­
tent with previous research by Kjeldsen[2], Meyer and Folmer[3]. However, this was not
always possible to test with children in the target age 5­8 in in medical setting, therefore
the age range was extended to 5­11.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:27==
4
Problem Exploration and Definition
After establishing the Discovery and Definition methodologies to be used, discussed in
the previous section, work on carving out a clear definition of the problem to be solved
could begin. This chapter is focused on explaining the methods and findings of the first
two stages of the Double Diamond­ the Discover stage where the problem is examined,
users’ needs are explored and the Define phase where collected insights are analysed
and synthesised to create concrete written requirements for solving the problem.
4.1
Problem Exploration
This section provides an overview of the Pediatric Emergency Department at the Herlev
Hospital in Copenhagen and insights from key stakeholders involved in researching the
problem of children’s anxiety in the hospital. Interviews and an observational study were
conducted in Herlev Hospital. The research group collaborating with Herlev Hospital was
consulted to better understand the needs and expectations of the stakeholders. The end
of the section summarizes the findings, distilling them into a problem definition which was
used to design and implement an appropriate solution, presented in the next section,
Section 5.
4.1.1
Hospital visit and Patient flow
To understand the problem better, an interview was conducted with one of the stakeholders­
Gitte Maria Flyger Würtz who is a researcher and clinical nursing specialist in the Pediatric
Emergency Department (PED) of Herlev Hospital. The PED in Herlev admits children
aged 0­18 and works 24 hours a day. The full interview with researcher and nurse Gitte
Würtz can be seen in Appendix A.2
Figure 4.1: Common waiting area in the Emergency Pediatric Department in Herlev Hos­
pital
The patient flow for being treated in the PED in Herlev Hospital is the following. Children
are referred to the PED either by their general practician or by the emergency hotline
(1813).
Once they arrive at the hospital, they inform the receptionist of their arrival and register.
Then they have to wait in the waiting area (figure 4.1) to be triaged by a nurse. The child
is examined and asked about complaints. Their heart rate, respiration, temperature, and
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
19
==PAGE:28==
blood oxygen saturation are checked. The abdomen area is also examined by the nurse.
In addition, asks about the child’s pain and evaluates it using the Wong­Baker/Visual
Analog Scale (VAS) for self­reporting.
Afterward, the child is asked to wait for the following procedures either in the common
waiting room or is admitted in a single­waiting hospital room (figure 4.2) in case there is a
need for an emergent procedure. The single waiting room is equipped with a tablet that
has options for streaming services. From then on the child and their guardian can wait up
to 5­6 hours and come in and out of procedures back to the waiting area.
Figure 4.2: Single patient waiting room in the Emergency Pediatric Department in Herlev
Hospital
Figure 4.3 displays a flow diagram of the patient flow made where the waiting times are
coloured in grey.
20
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: Patient flow for pediatric patients in the PED in Herlev Hospital
According to Gitte, children’s anxiety in the PED is not explored and it is difficult for children
to express their feelings. She said:
“Kids fear what they don’t know. However, currently, anxiety is not measured
or considered in Herlev Hospital.”
This is a problem according to her because it affects the quality of treatment and present
and future treatment experiences. It is also very difficult to assess currently that is the
difference between pain and anxiety, because in Herlev Hospital there is only a proce­
dure for evaluating pain. However, it is very often, that children cannot discern between
pain and anxiety. Therefore when examined they either exaggerate their pain or act out
by crying, kicking, and screaming. It is also possible that children belittle their situation
and complaints because they are scared of following procedures. According to her ex­
perience, assessing anxiety and coping with it is an individual process and is connected
to the experience and personality of the medical personnel. It is often, more challenging
for inexperienced nurses and therefore there is a need for an external tool to help with
assessing children’s anxiety.
Some of the tools used to distract and calm down children while waiting in the hospital.
There are available toys, VR glasses (with some games installed), streaming services in
the single room, and clowns. Figure 4.6 shows some of them in the waiting area.
In addition, distracting patients during procedures is done with BuzzyBee[42] and Lido­
caine plasters to numb the skin area for example for needle procedures. The full interview
with researcher and nurse Gitte Würtz can be seen in Appendix A.2
Observational study
Following the methodology for problem exploration the Fly­on­the­wall technique was
used to gain a deeper insight into the problem of children’s anxiety in the hospital. The
Fly­on­the­wall observational technique was used while visiting the hospital. After the in­
terview with Gitte, she gave my colleague Melinda and me a tour around the PED. We
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
21
==PAGE:30==
could quietly walk in the department learn about the environment and observe some of
the children and their parents that were there that day.
Nurses have their room where they can monitor patients and their situation­ name, age,
triage conditions, assigned doctors and nurses, as well as preview upcoming patients.
Figure 4.4 shows some of the screens with patient overviews.
Figure 4.4: Screens for nurses to have an overview of patents
In the waiting area of the PED department, there is a big aquarium with fish that children
enjoy looking at and often interact with it, by touching it and observing the fish. In many
places on the walls or doors, there are pictures or picture games hung for children to
interact with. In addition, there were toys spread in the different places in the waiting area
for children to play with. We could see cars toys, and children’s small bikes as well that
children could move around with. In addition, there were some children’s books left for
children to look at. There was juice and cups available for children by the reception area.
By observing the children in the waiting area, we could see that some of the parents had
brought additional materials for coloring or drawing for their children. Another parent was
reading a book to their child quietly. From a brief interaction with a parent, we understood
that the waiting time is usually very long, especially for young children. According to her,
there should be different ways of distracting and entertaining the children when having to
wait for multiple hours in the hospital, because they are often impatient and quickly get
bored.
It was also visible that many of the children were very active while waiting for treatment.
Even though they were in some pain or discomfort they were walking around and touching
different objects or the walls and the aquarium. Some children were visibly in discomfort
or anxious and stayed quietly with their parents. Some kids were also playing games on
their parent’s mobile phones or tablets.
Additional pictures and resources can be seen in Appendix A.2
22
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:31==
(a) Games on the walls in the waiting area
(b) Available Toys for children in the PED
Figure 4.5: Distraction tools used in the PED in Herlev Hospital.
(a) Available Toys for children in the PED
(b) Colorful pictures and labels set in the PED
Figure 4.6: Distraction tools used in the PED in Herlev Hospital.
It was observed that the single waiting rooms have a tablet that can be used to deploy an
interactive game. There are also interactive screens with information and some that were
not used in the common waiting area, which suggests that the game could also deployed
in the common waiting area as well.
Takeaways
After collecting information from the literature review, the interview with the researcher
and nurse Gitte, and observing, a diverging session was carried out to iterate through the
gathered information and structure it. Some of the takeaways from the collected insights
are:
• Children are unable to communicate their feelings, pain, or anxiety. It is also very
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
23
==PAGE:32==
common that they confuse anxiety for pain and only very experienced nurses can
discern levels of anxiety versus pain. This problem is still being examined by re­
searcher and nurse Gitte in her PhD study.
• Exploring how physiological biometrics could be collected could be beneficial to help
in understanding how to assess the anxiety of children awaiting hospital treatment.
• Children spend a lot of time waiting in the hospital and easily become impatient
and anxious about the unknown, therefore it is worth investigating distraction and
relaxation tools.
4.1.2
Meeting the Research Group and Defining Goals
Understanding the problem from the stakeholders was an important step in the problem
exploration phase and a vital prerequisite for the problem definition phase. The problem
of children’s anxiety in the hospital has been researched for multiple years and there is
a research group investigating and developing different solutions concerning this issue.
The key stakeholders are researcher and nurse Gitte Maria Flyger Würtz working in Herlev
Hospital and researchers and professors Per Bækgaard and Michael Deininger from the
Danish Technical University. I had the opportunity to attend two stakeholder meetings
with the key stakeholders as well as nurse Hanne Konradsen, and students involved in
the topic Signe Meyer, Emil Folmer, and Jiajing Zhang. It was a presentation by Emilie
Kjeldsen and Prajal Garg who introduced their studies and the findings and results they
gathered. The focus of the meeting was to align what was already done, and what were
the current needs and expectations of the people invested in the project. Notes and
resources from this session can be found in Appendix A.3. The key takeaways of these
sessions were:
• There is an interest in utilizing tablet mobile devices in the single waiting room in the
hospital to deploy mobile games for the children waiting for treatment.
• Children are often unfamiliar what the environment of the hospital and what the
different medical procedures encompass, therefore it is interesting to explore how
children can be introduced to the environment around them.
After meeting with the research group another meeting was set up with researchers Per
Bækgaard and Michael Deininger to prioritize key needs in the context of the research
group. In this session, it was identified that building on top of the existing study developed
by Emilie Kjeldsen and extended by Signe Meyer and Emil Folmer would be beneficial
for the needs of the research group. In addition, another essential need was presented:
collecting biometrics for further analysis of the emotional state of the children. It was
identified that these two needs were the most impactful areas to focus on considering my
capabilities and background in computer science and engineering. Therefore the goals
of the study were defied with the following topics: developing and building on top of the
prototyped CBT game and collecting biometrics.
Following this meeting, different biometrics and tools for collecting biometrics were re­
searched. Technologies and methods were investigated considering that they were to be
used in the environment of the hospital. In addition, it was important to use tools that
are child­friendly and wouldn’t introduce confusion or fear of using them. Considering the
previous research of Kjeldsen[2], Meyer and Folmer [3] the key biometrics that were con­
sidered were eye and gaze tracking, and heart monitoring. The key takeaways of these
sessions were:
• Interactive games with CBT exercises present a viable way of reducing anxiety. The
24
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:33==
prototype of the CBT game developed by Kjeldsen[2] demonstrated that children are
interested in and appreciate playing serious games while waiting for their treatment
in the hospital
• Biometrics that could be explored need to be noninvasive and child­friendly. Pos­
sible biometrics that could be interesting to investigate are pupil, gaze and heart
monitoring.
• Biometrics collection tools and techniques need to be possible to use in the hospital,
easy to adapt and test within the hospital.
4.2
Problem definition
As described previously this section describes the converging processes of the Defining
phase of the Double Diamond. It focuses on analysing and synthesising ideas and in­
sights. The Affinity diagram was used to group and organize all takeaways and create
concrete written requirements for solving the problem.
4.2.1
Affinity diagram
The Affinity diagram also known as the K­J method is a visual tool that helps organize
and summarize collected ideas and topics in the Discovery phase. The following figure
4.7 presents the results using the tool. The diagram can be seen in detail in Appendix A.4.
Figure 4.7: Overview of clustering and summarizing ideas in the Affinity diagram. On the
left data is not organized and on the right information is structured. The diagram can be
seen in detail in Appendix A.4
From the data and insights analysed in the Affinity diagram, the requirement specifications
were developed considering the previously defined goals by the researchers.
4.2.2
Requirements
After organizing and synthesising insights, the following requirements were proposed for
developing a solution according to the main problem statement. First, all the functional
requirements were listed and then the non­functional were identified. Lastly, delimita­
tions were considered and recorded. The following requirements were approved by re­
searchers Per Bækgaard and Michael Deininger.
Functional Requirements:
R.1 An interactive serious game must be developed based on the design and research
of Kjeldsen, Meyer, Folmer.[2][3].
R.2 All data collection must occur during gameplay in real­time.
R.3 Data must be saved to disk for follow­up analysis.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
25
==PAGE:34==
R.4 The game should signal when either eye­tracking is obscured/face is lost.
R.5 The player should not be aware of data collection.
R.6 Pupil and gaze data needs to be collected during gameplay.
R.7 Heart data needs to be collected during gameplay.
Nonfunctional Requirements:
• The game will be developed with Unity Game Engine.
• Pupil and gaze data will be collected in the background of the game.
• Heart data measurements be collected in the background.
• Game will be developed according to the Figma design by Kjeldsen[2], Mejer and
Folmer [3].
Delimitations:
• The game will be implemented to be used on PC since it has to integrate with eye­
tracking hardware for the collection of pupil data. However, since it is developed in
Unity, it could be easily deployed on other platforms when needed.
• The heart rate data will be collected independently from the game due to the project’s
time restrictions.
• Biometric data will be analyzed after collection.
26
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:35==
5
Solution Discovery
Based on the problem definition discussed previously the following solution was proposed
following the main problem statement and the requirement specifications presented in
advance. This chapter presents considerations related to the development phase of the
study. It includes defined user stories derived from the requirement specifications. The
design choices for creating a solution are presented as an architectural overview. Soft­
ware and hardware and the rationale for using it are explained. The chapter also presents
implementation details.
5.0.1
User stories
Given the requirements defined previously, the following user stories were created.
1. As a user, I want to play an interactive and calming game while waiting for hospital
treatment.
2. As a researcher, I want the game to collect pupil and gaze data during gameplay.
3. As a researcher, I want the game to collect heart data during gameplay.
4. As a researcher, I want to minimize lost pupil data due to blocked eye tracker vision
or moving outside of the eye tracker visibility perimeter.
5.0.2
Hardware and software resources
This section presents the required resources to complete the project. More explanation
on how are these resources are used and the rationale for choosing them can be found
in section 5.1.
Hardware
• Laptop Lenovo Yoga with touchscreen
• Tobii Eye Tracker 4C
• Empatica E4 Wristband
Software
• Unity Engine
• Tobii Experience Software for Windows
• Tobii Pro SDK for Python
• Tobii Unity SDK for Desktop
• Empatica E4 connect framework
• Emaptica client application
5.1
Architectural overview
After deriving the user stories from the requirements, some design choices were made
in the solution discovery phase. Technologies and available tools were considered to
create a structure of the solution and architectural overview. In this process, the main
considerations were: available tools and technologies in the market, how similar solutions
were developed and previous experience and knowledge.
Unity Game engine was chosen for the game development because it is one of the leading
game engines in the industry. It is a multi­platform game engine that supports both 2D and
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
27
==PAGE:36==
3D game development. Unity is compatible with Windows, Linux, iOS, Android, Switch,
Xbox, PS4, and others [43] which makes it easier to create one solution that could later
be extended to other platforms. In addition, it is free for personal use, small teams, and
students which makes it perfect for the scope of this project. It was also the preferred
choice because of previous experience with the engine.
Different tools for collecting eye and gaze biometrics were explored, such as eye­tracking
devices, and AI­powered software for recognizing pupils using a high­resolution camera.
After investigating different tools for pupil detection and gaze detection and tracking, it
seemed reasonable to use an eye tracker device. The Tobii 4C eye tracker [44] is a
gaming eye tracker that connects with a computer to make high­resolution images of the
eyes and calculates eye and gaze position on the screen. In addition with the help of
additional SDKs, it can provide information on gaze points, pupil size, gaze origin, etc.
These main features are sufficient to make it a good match for this project. In addition, it
was previously used for similar projects and was readily available to use. It is also very
lightweight and has a seamless design that makes it suitable for use with children.
The heart data collection was considered to be done using the Empatica product. The
Emaptica E4 solution includes a wristband, a client application, and a cloud­based frame­
work that stores data in real time. The wristband has 6 different sensors that collect
biometric data in real­time such as a photoplethysmography (PPG) sensor for measur­
ing heart rate and heart rate variability, there is also an accelerometer, internal real­time
clock, infrared thermopile, event button, electrodermal activity (EDA) sensor. This tool
was already used for measuring heart data in the research of Kjeldsen[2] and Meyer and
Folmer[3] and was readily available so it made it a good solution for this use case. Since
the Empatica E4 technology already provides the solution needed for collecting heart rate
data, it was chosen to use it out of the box, in consideration of the time constraints of the
project.
Data was decided to be stored in a comma­separated format (CSV) which is a widely
used format for data science since it is simple to make, parse, human­readable, and
highly compressable. Since data is to be analyzed after data collection, CSV is a suitable
format to store data.
After considering these technologies and tools the following architectural overview was
created. The following diagram (figure 5.1) displays the software design of the system.
Figure 5.1: Design of the software system
28
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:37==
The game is created in Unity and uses the Component­based Architecture supported by
Unity Engine and the “SOLID” design principles by Robert C. Martin.
In addition, the game starts a separate process defined as a Python script, that connects
with the Tobii 4C eye tracker for the collection of eye gaze and pupil data. This interaction
is done using the Tobii Pro SDK for Python which allows retrieving data from the eye
tracker. Moreover, this process is also responsible for saving the gaze data to disc in the
form of comma­separated values(CSV).
The game also communicates to the eye tracker via the Tobii SDK for Unity allowing to
use of eye tracking in games and applications. It includes scripts for common eye tracking
features such as aiming with eyes, recognizing gaze, gaze awareness, etc.[45]. This will
be used for giving feedback to the user if not seen by the eye tracker device.
The Empatica wristband is used for tracking the heart data of the child while playing the
game. This type of data is going to be collected separately from the game. Empatica has
created the following flow for using the wristband and collecting data. The wristband is
controlled by the Empatica client application. It allows for starting and halting recording
sessions and previewing recorded data in run­time. It also uploads data to the E4 Connect
cloud. After that data can be saved to disc manually.
5.2
Implementation
5.2.1
Game
The game was developed following the Figma design made by Kjelden[2], Meyer and
Folmer[3] using Unity’s animation system, touch input system, audio system, event sys­
tem, etc. Unity is made to have a specific order of execution of events and functions. It
supports a lifecycle flow that dictates the order of execution, such as when the engine
executes the scripts, interacts with the physics engine, acts on registered input events,
game logic, rendering and much more. The base class MonoBehaviour is the one that
offers life cycle functions and the most common methods that are implemented from it
are used are the Update, Awake and Start. The Awake method is called when a script
i initialised. In the implementation of the game, it was used to instantiate 2D objects in
the game before interacting with them. The game was designed to have a specific order
of execution of CBT exercises. Therefore the Start is called when a scene or script is
started, therefore the method was used to initialize the order of functions that follow the
logic of the game. The Update method was mostly used for handling user input since it
is called every frame. The frame rate at which Unity renders the game is dependent on
the platform it is deployed on. It is usually 60 frames per second for a PC and around
30 frames per second for a mobile device. Animation was an important part of the game,
since characters and objects in the game move via animation. The Unity game engine
supports animation with the help of sophisticated state machines, hierarchies and transi­
tions built into the engine. In addition, the Leen Tween package was used to enable the
interpolation of objects. It was chosen because it is a very commonly used tween engine
in Unity and is very simple and efficient. Synchronization of separate animations in the
game was done using the built­in animation state machine of Unity, which has event han­
dlers, before after and during execution of an animation. Coroutines were used when a
function needed to execute its code across multiple frames since the Update method exe­
cutes only in one frame. Therefore coroutines were used especially for the deep breathing
exercises and the PMR exercises since these functions need to wait for a certain period
of real time before they finished.
The interaction with the Tobii eye tracker in the game was done using a game manager.
Using game managers is a very common way of separating responsibility in game devel­
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
29
==PAGE:38==
opment. A game manager was created to keep track of the current level the player is in.
It was a design choice not to persist the game’s progress after closing the game because
the game is designed to be played by multiple people in the PED. Therefore the idea was
to start the game from the beginning every time, the application was started. A game
manager was also used to manage interaction with the Tobii SDKs that the game inter­
acted with. Another game manager was used to start the eye­tracking process. Doing
this in a process makes it easier to ensure that eye data collection is done while playing
the game and not outside of this time. A link to the source code can be found in Appendix
A.6.
Eye tracker interaction
Tobii provides multiple SDKs to interact with their eyetrackers supporting also different
languages and platforms, including Python, Unity, Matlab, .NET, and C, however, they
are all made for different purposes. For example, the Unity SDK is made to be used in
games to make user interactions better and easier, just by gazing at objects in the game.
On the other hand, the Python SDK is made for research purposes and provides raw gaze
and pupil data, that can be collected and analyzed. Therefore there was a need to use
both of these SDKs to collect data for analysis and to make a user interaction in the game.
Eyetracker interaction in the game
According to the requirements, there needs to be a way to guide the player’s attention
back to the screen whenever the user is not in the visible area of the eye tracker. While
brainstorming a solution for this problem it was considered adding a character that would
wave/speak to the player to move back to focus or pause the game until the player moves
back to the visible area of the eye tracker. Another idea to do this subtly and interactively
was to add an interactive tunnel around the visual part of the screen. This tunnel is initially
invisible to the player of the game, but if the eye tracker detects that the player is coming
close to the border of visibility of the eye tracker then the tunnel starts to slowly appear
and limit the game view of the player, as if the player is entering a tunnel. Whenever the
player moves their face back in focus of the eye tracker, the tunnel disappears gradually
in the same manner that it appeared.
The tunnel guiding the eye focus of the players is made so that it doesn’t block the entire
screen if the player goes fully out of the visibility range of the Tobii eye tracker, since it
might distract or confuse the player. It is rather a very gentle and subtle way to invite the
player to move to a place that is within the visibility of the eye tracker.
The following figure 5.2 displays the interaction.
30
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:39==
(a) Tunnel doesn’t show when the player is in the eye
tracker visibility scope.
(b) Tunnel appears when the player moves to the right close
to the border of the visible area of the eye tracker.
(c) Tunnel appears when the player moves to the left close
to the boundary of the eye tracker visibility area
(d) Tunnel appears when the player moves upwards close to
the boundary of the eye tracker visibility area
Figure 5.2: Added tunnel to guide participant’s eye gaze to the screen
In addition, from a technical point of view, it was possible to implement it by using the
library developed by Tobii Unity SDK for Desktop. This library can interact easily with the
connected Tobii eye tracker and indicate the presence of a user in front of the eye tracker
using the class Tobii.Gaming.UserPresence and Tobii.Gaming.HeadPose
The tunnel guiding interaction was developed as an initial prototype to adhere to the re­
quirements defined previously, However, it could be further improved and tested with a
larger team of designers and children.
5.2.2
Pupil and gaze data collection
The Python library called tobii­research provides the functionality of collecting pupil and
gaze data from the Tobii eye tracker. This library provides a way to find and connect to
available eye trackers and then subscribe to specific events and data of interest. Using a
callback function, data is easily stored in a CSV file.
For this solution, a Python script was created to process data and save it to a file as
mentioned previously. An already­made interface for connecting and streaming gaze and
pupil data made by Baekgaard [46] was used as a base for connecting to the eye tracker
and streaming its data.
Then the script was turned into an executable file together with supporting files (such as a
license for using the eye tracker) with the pyinstaller library. Converting the Python script
to an executable file was done to simplify the intercommunication of Unity and Python.
Unity has very simple support for running Python scripts, but it is too simple to be used
for this use case. Having an executable file makes it possible to use it easily in C# since
creating and starting processes is part of the standard library. The goal is that the game
starts collecting data, therefore a new process was created with starting the game that
invokes the executable python file to start eye tracking collection.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
31
==PAGE:40==
5.2.3
Heart data collection with Empatica
As mentioned previously the Empatica E4 solution was used out of the box. A client mobile
application was installed on a mobile device and was used to initiate the recording session.
The application has a user interface that can either display real­time data simultaneously
or just keep recording in the background. The heart data recording was done separately
from the game and is to be started manually right after the wristband is placed on the
child’s wrist. The recording session is again manually halted through the client app after
the game is finished. Then the client application automatically uploads collected data to
the cloud solution E4 Connect. Later on data is manually downloaded from the cloud.
The proposed solution implemented the heart data tracking separate from the game. How­
ever, this means that the heart data was not synchronized exactly with the eye­tracking
data. A better approach could be to implement tracking of heart data as part of the game
initiation similar to eye tracking. However, due to limited time in this project, it was opted
to track heart data separately.
32
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:41==
6
Development and Testing
This section describes the process of development and testing. The development was
done in an agile way and since the development team consisted only of one person it was
most effective not to follow standard processes used in development teams, but rather
customize the process to the needs of this study and its time constraints. Therefore, a
Kanban­like process was used for the development where the focus was to prioritize and
complete tasks as quickly as possible and test them. The project was also made to fit the
workload of a single developer. Tasks and their progress were tracked using an online
free platform called Monday[47]. Figure 6.1 shows the development board that was used
for the development process.
Figure 6.1: Screenshot of the development board at the point when development was
finished. The used platform is Monday.com[47].
In the initial stages of the development, the software was tested as soon as new function­
ality was created. Due to the time constraint of the study, only manual functional testing
was done, since setting up automated testing requires a lot of time and effort to initially
set up and was not a priority for the scope of the study. Software testing of the function­
ality was done following the requirements defined previously in section 4.2.2. In addition,
since the game was developed following the design defined by Kjeldsen[2]. Meyer and
Folmer[3], manual functional tests were done to confirm the game complied with the de­
sign of the game.
The following ssections provide insight into how the game prototype was tested with users
and what was learned from the user interactions with the prototype. There are two inter­
mediate testing cycles with participants and one final validation with children of the target
age in the hospital. Each of these cycles is described with the following key points: the
goal of the testing, what was built before testing, how it was tested, and what was learned
from the iteration.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
33
==PAGE:42==
6.1
Testing of the initial prototype with users
The goal of the development:
• Validate the usability of the game.
• Validate if participants in the intended age group are interested in the game.
• Test collection of pupil data biometrics while children are playing the game.
What was built: In this development session, the scenes of the introduction, in the moun­
tain and the orange garden were implemented according to the Figma design created by
Kjeldsen[2] and Meyer and Folmer[3]. It was also the focus of this interaction to make
game characters more interactive since in the original Figma prototype the characters
were static. This was done by editing limbs and other parts of the characters to allow for
creating animation where characters can move slightly, such as breathing and moving
their mouths to talk as shown for the character called Emma in figure 6.2. The explana­
tion of how to play the game was added as an audio recording made by Signe Meyer in
the prototype. In this iteration, the Unity touch input system library was used to make the
game interactive with touch input. In addition, a tunnel was made to guide the children’s
focus back to the eye tracker’s visible area.
Figure 6.2: Animation of the character
What was tested:
Participants: The goal of the validation was to test the usability of the game with the
target age group, however, only two children were recruited in the age group. Both of
them were female and spoke Danish, one of them aged 5 and the other aged 9. Figure
6.3 displays the children while playing the game. This was the initial iteration, therefore
testing with adults was also acceptable to minimize usability problems. The game was
also tested by two adult UX experts both female and aged 28.
Procedure: The iteration was tested qualitatively in a think­aloud approach. However it
is generally difficult for children to express their thoughts, they were occasionally asked
questions such as ”Do you understand what you should do next?”. They were encour­
aged to play the game intuitively and were helped if they couldn’t understand what to do
next. The success rate of exercise execution was noted as well as comments they had
during gameplay. At the end of the game, the children were asked if they liked the game
and if they would like to continue playing, based on the research of Schønau­Fog, Bjørner
[40] for validating engagement.
Apparatus: The game was tested with a laptop Lenovo Yoga that has touch screen func­
tionality. The Tobii 4C eye tracker was also connected to the laptop to collect data during
gameplay. In addition, since the supplementary objects used by Meyer and Folmer’s
34
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:43==
research were not available, two new prototypes were made just for this test ­ a round
orange paper­made object to resemble orange and a paper with a drawn wind mile to
resemble the wind mile in their research.
Figure 6.3: Children testing the game
Learnings and Results: Testing showed that the explanation audio of the game was
too long for the children, especially in the introduction of the game. They were easily
bored and lost focus of the game, which led to misunderstanding what to do next in the
game since they didn’t listen carefully. The test was done as a private arrangement which
meant that the environment around was also noisy and distracting. Therefore it was no­
ticed that it would be better to bring an additional speaker that would help the children to
hear the audio explanation better. In addition, the 5­year­old participant had a hard time
identifying smaller objects that needed to be pressed, this suggested that objects in the
orange garden need to be larger to be noticed by younger children and also to prevent
users from misclicking or clicking slightly outside of the borders of objects. In addition,
there were some bugs when switching the game exercises that became apparent when
children started playing and clicking in unexpected places. The rewards collection at the
end of the exercises seems to be confusing since children are expected to click on it and
not drag and drop it in the right position. Since the laptop was not rotated to resemble a
tablet, the children had the opportunity to both use the touchpad of the laptop and occa­
sionally use the touchscreen when they were reminded they could use it.
Both children were able to execute the breathing and progressive muscle relaxation exer­
cises. Collecting of simple pupil data was successful as shown in figure 6.4. The 5­year­
old participant liked the game and even though she had to leave she asked her parent
to allow her to play more. On the other hand, the 9­year­old participant felt that it was
not engaging enough since she was very active and was used to playing many different
games. All results can be found in Appendix A.7
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.4: Plotting of the initial test data of pupil sizes for the children playing the game
6.2
Testing of the refined prototype with users
The goal of the development:
• Test the whole game implementation with children and whether the participants car­
ried out the breathing and PMR exercises appropriately.
• Validate if participants in the intended age group are interested in the game.
• Test collection of pupil data, gaze data, and heart data biometrics while children are
playing the game.
What was built: Based on the learnings of the previous testing, in this development cycle,
the audio explanation was shortened slightly so that it still gives the explanation of how
to do the exercise but some of the unnecessary explanations were skipped. In addition,
some of the clickable objects that were observed to be too small to click in the previous
test were made larger. In this iteration, the whole game was built with all levels and the
option to move between levels as well as the concluding scene. Eye gaze data tracking
was also added to the game in this iteration. Collections for both gaze and pupil data
were made to be saved in a CSV file. From the previous test it was observed, that the
rewards collection was confusing, therefore in this iteration, the rewards collection was
built to support an A/B test. There were two different ways to collect rewards on different
levels, for example, in one level the reward had to be simply clicked to be collected and
in another level, the reward had to be dragged and dropped to the rewards panel.
What was tested:
Participants: This iteration was tested with three children ­ a boy aged 5, a girl aged 7,
and a girl aged 11. Figure 6.5 shows pictures of the children while playing the game.
Procedure: The children were first introduced to the idea of the game as they were asked
to imagine they were in the hospital and were expecting to be treated and were perhaps
a bit anxious. Then the Empatica wristband was placed on their wrist and they could
start playing the game. The children were encouraged to play the game intuitively but
were helped in case they asked for help. At the end of the gameplay, they were asked
36
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:45==
qualitative questions about the ease of playing the game, satisfaction, and engagement
with the game, and were asked if they had any suggestions of how the game could be
improved to be more fun. The interview questions can be seen in detail in Appendix A.8
Apparatus: It was again tested on a Lenovo Yoga laptop with touchscreen functionality,
but this time the laptop was also rotated to resemble a tablet, in this way, the touch inter­
action was fully tested by the children. The eye tracker device was also connected to the
laptop and the Empatica wristband was placed on the participants just before starting to
play the game.
Figure 6.5: Children testing the game
Learnings and Results: It was observed that dragging was sometimes hard to do for the
younger participants aged 5. Therefore, touch and swipe interactions should be made
smoother. The A/B test setup for the rewards collection showed that children above 5
and children with more experience using touch screens enjoy more touch interactions
compared to young children aged 4,5 or children with less experience with touch screens.
Therefore an idea to adapt the game for both cases was to allow for both interactions
when collecting rewards.
All children managed to finish the game and only occasionally asked for help. The breath­
ing and PMR exercises were executed correctly and only occasionally were out of sync
with the game. The children were well engaged in the game and expressed a wish to
continue playing. They also responded positively to the question of whether they would
recommend the game to a friend. The collection of gaze and pupil data was also success­
ful. However, the heart measures collected with the Empatica wristband were harder to
collect. When starting the wristband­collecting session everything seemed fine, however,
when reviewing the results after the test it was apparent that the wristband did not collect
data the whole time. This could be caused by loose contact with the child’s wrist. All test
results in detail can be seen in Appendix A.8
6.3
Testing of the final prototype with users
The goal of the iteration:
This iteration’s goal was to test the usability, engagement, satisfaction, and effectiveness
of children in the Herlev Hospital.
• To what extent can biometric data, including information on eye movements, gaze
patterns, and heart rate, be effectively collected during gameplay?
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
37
==PAGE:46==
• What is the percentage of usable biometric data collected from participants during
the study?
• In the context of the game, do children demonstrate the ability to engage in game­
play, and what are their preferences and responses to the game?
• How effectively can participants perform the deep breathing and PMR exercises as
part of the game?
What was build: Based on previous learnings, small improvements in the touch interac­
tions with the screen were made. In addition, the collection of rewards was improved to
support both children with less experience with touchscreen and children that are more
experienced with touchscreen. This was done by allowing for the touch input system in
the game to respond differently to the difference of the end­of­touch event. Whenever
the participant lets go immediately of the touch screen after touching an object then the
game animates the object to the correct place. On the other hand, if the touch input kept
registering a touch event then the object could be drawn to the rewards panel. In addition,
small changes were made in the format of saving biometrics to make processing easier.
6.3.1
Methods of empirical testing
Children’s anxiety was assessed through the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) that is com­
monly used already in the hospital. Children were asked to self­assess their anxiety and
were assessed by their guardians as well. In addition, the modified Yale Preoperative
Score(mYPAS)was used to assess their anxiety. It was used with a premade template
from the research made by JongHyuk Lee [41] Usability was tested with success rate,
satisfaction was assessed with the question ”Would you recommend the game to your
friends?” and engagement was tested with the question ”Would you like to continue play­
ing the game?”
Testing in the PED
Testing in the PED is very unpredictable, because of its acute setting, there is an irregular
flow of patients. After consulting with researcher and nurse Gitte Würtz, it was considered
that testing in the afternoon/evenings between 16 and 20 o’clock would be better. This
time is one of the busiest in the PED because general practitioners close around 17 o’clock
and patients are referred to the PED. Patients are most of the time waiting in the waiting
area but are called in and out for procedures multiple times. This made it also more difficult
to recruit test participants. Two times, test participants were called for a procedure and
they had to stop the gameplay to proceed with their procedures. There was also another
family that declined to participate because they were awaiting a procedure in the next few
minutes.
The apparatus was set up in a space with a table and a chair next to it that was a bit more
isolated so that the child and their parent could feel more comfortable. Figure 6.6 shows
the setup for the test in Herlev Hospital.
38
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:47==
Figure 6.6: Test setup in the Herlev Hospital
Participants:
Tests were done with 14 children (8 boys and 6 girls) aged 4­9 with a mean age of 6.5.
They all tried the final version of the developed game. The eligibility criteria included:
• Speak Danish
• Aged 4­9
• No acute procedure needed (enough waiting time)
• Have no cognitive impairment
Apparatus:
• Laptop Lenovo Yoga with touch screen
• Tobii Eyetracker 4C
• Empatica 4 wristband
• Portable speaker
• Prototype of an orange toy (with or without button inside of it)
Procedure:
A detailed test plan was created and experiments were executed following the test plan.
The test plan in detail can be viewed in Appendix A.5.
Participants were approached while waiting in the waiting area. The parents’ consent was
obtained orally before executing the test with their child. Then the child and the parent
were briefly introduced to students, the project its purpose, and the game. Afterwards,
the Empatica wristband was placed on the child’s hand and anxiety was assessed by
asking the child if he/ she was scared. They could point to the VAS scale and explain
their feelings if they wanted to. In addition, their parent was asked to assess the child’s
anxiety before starting the game.
The child was encouraged to play the game by themselves but if they needed help they
were assisted by their parents or by the facilitators. While the children were playing the
game, the facilitators were observing and taking notes and pictures.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
39
==PAGE:48==
After playing the game the child was asked again to assess their anxiety level and the
mYPAS template was also filled. The kids were asked if they would like to continue playing
the game to measure their engagement. They were also asked about easy and difficult
parts of the game, and overall satisfaction by asking the question ”Would you recommend
the game to your friends?” or ”Would you tell about the game to your friends?”. In addition,
they were asked if they could think of something that could be improved for the game to
be more fun.
The following figure 6.7 shows some of the children playing the game.
Figure 6.7: Children testing the game in Herlev Hospital
Results and learnings of the final iteration are further discussed in the chapter 7 Results
and Analysis. Artefacts from the final user testing can be seen in Appendix A.9, A.10.
40
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:49==
7
Results and Analysis
This chapter presents test results from testing the developed CBT game in the PED in
Herlev Hospital and results from testing the full game in private arrangements as part of
the testing process. It is important to acknowledge the impact of having a smaller set of
test participants, therefore the focus is of this chapter to draw qualitative observations and
conclusions. The main questions that this chapter aims to answer are the following:
• To what extent can biometric data, including information on eye movements, gaze
patterns, and heart rate, be effectively collected during gameplay?
• What is the percentage of usable biometric data collected from participants during
the study?
• In the context of the game, do children demonstrate the ability to engage in game­
play, and what are their preferences and responses to the game?
• How effectively can participants perform the deep breathing and PMR exercises as
part of the game?
7.1
Overview of test participants
The game was tested with 12 children in Herlev Hospital in the age group 5­9. Out of them,
7 were males and 5 were females. In addition, the collected results include 3 participants
who were recruited in private arrangements outside of the hospital 2 girls and a boy aged
7,11,5 respectively. The mean age of test participants is 6.9. The following diagram 7.1
displays the age distribution of test participants.
Figure 7.1: Age distribution of test participants
Participants took different time to finish the game. Figure 7.2 shows the time it took differ­
ent children to finish the game according to their ages. The average gameplay time was
12 minutes and the correlation coefficient (R2) between age and gameplay time is ­0,41.
This suggests that there is a moderately strong association between age and the time it
takes to finish the game. The correlation is negative, indicating that as the age increases,
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
41
==PAGE:50==
the time it takes the child to finish the game decreases. Duration of gameplay could also
be connected to children’s experience with playing video games, whether they have used
touchscreen devices often previously, and their personality.
Figure 7.2: Amount of time it took the children to play the game from beginning to end.
7.2
Biometrics data collection
This section focuses on analyzing the attempt to collect biometric data during gameplay. It
aims to answer the questions: To what extent can biometric data, including information on
eye movements, gaze patterns, and heart rate, be effectively collected during gameplay?
and What is the percentage of usable biometric data collected from participants during
the study?
Processing of data
Data was preprocessed and plotted using common Python libraries for data science such
as pandas, matplotlib, numpy, etc. Eye and gaze data were saved in the form of CSV files
and these files were very large and contained inconsistencies introduced when writing
data to files. As part of the preprocessing, data rows that did not follow the schema
defined by the CSV file heather were discarded. Data that did not contain system and
device timestamps were removed as well because these timestamps ensured the data
was collected in the right order. In addition, outliers in pupil size were dropped, because
they pollute the data and provide no value.
Results and analysis artefacts can be seen in detail in Appendix A.10.
7.2.1
Pupil and gaze data
This section presents gaze and pupil data collected while participants played the CBT
game. Data was collected with the Tobii 4C eye tracker with the help of the python library
tobii_reseach[48]. It contains information about gaze points, gaze origin, and pupil size.
Gaze is one of the points of interest when analyzing patterns because it provides infor­
mation on what the person is looking at. However, a person doesn’t see a point in space
but rather a collection of elements that fall within the path of a vector, originating from the
eye of the person and continuing until it extends to the opaque object. This is called a
gaze vector. Gaze and gaze vectors are complex therefore for the scope of this project
gaze is explained in a simplified way.[49]
Gaze points on display
Gaze points in the Tobii software are provided separately for the left and the right eye.
They describe the position of the intersection between the Active Display Area plane and
42
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:51==
the line originating from the gaze origin in the same direction as the gaze vector. The
coordinates for the gaze point are given as normalized 2D points in the Active Display
Coordinate System.[49] Gaze points are often used for gaze estimation and cursor control
in human­machine interactions.
Figure 7.6 to 7.5 displays gaze points plotted during the time of gameplay for 3 participants
with some of the better results. The x­axis presents the time and the y­axis presents the
display coordinate system, where the upper left corner is (x,y)(0,0), and the lower right
corner is (x,y)(1,1).
As seen in the figure gaze points can be successfully collected in this setup while playing
the game. The quality of gaze point collection varies for the different participants. Empty
sections on the diagram signify that the eye tracker could not detect eye positions in the
period. Some of the reasons for this might be that the participant loses focus and moves
away from the visibility area of the eye tracker or blocks the visibility by covering their eyes
or placing their hands in front of the visibility area of the eye tracker.
In the following three examples, the correlation coefficients between the left and the right
gaze points in the X coordinate are 0.98, 0.98, and 0.97 respectively. The correlation
between the left and the right gaze points in the Y coordinate are 0.98, 0.99, and 0.98
respectively. This suggests a very strong positive association between the left and the
right eye measurements. Considering the gaze points between the left and the right eye
are highly correlated and visual plots of data are within the expected values, it could be
suggested that the quality of the recorded data is good.
Figure 7.3: Participant A
Gaze points of 3 participants with better results in x and y coordinates on the screen for
the left and right eyes. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right
eye are marked with orange.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 7.4: Participant B
Gaze points of 3 participants with better results in x and y coordinates on the screen for
the left and right eyes. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right
eye are marked with orange.
Figure 7.5: Participant C
Gaze points of 3 participants with better results in x and y coordinates on the screen for
the left and right eyes. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right
eye are marked with orange.
Pupil size
The figures below 7.8 display the pupil size in millimetres for each eye of the same three
participants presented previously and are a representation of some of the better results.
Pupil size can have different definitions, but for Tobii eye trackers, it refers to the internal
44
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:53==
physical diameter of the pupil based on their 3D eye model. In scientific research, the
actual size of the pupil is not as important as the changes in size over time [48].
The normal pupil size in adults varies from 2 to 4 mm in diameter in bright light to 4 to 8
mm in the dark. The pupils are generally equal in size. They constrict to direct illumina­
tion (direct response) and to the illumination of the opposite eye (consensual response).
Changes in pupil size can be affected by factors such as light conditions, cognitive pro­
cesses, and emotions.[50]
In the following three examples, the correlation coefficients between the left and the right
pupil diameter are 0.93, 0.89, and 0.96 respectively. This suggests a very strong positive
association between the two variables. Based on the analysis it could be suggested that
the pupil size data is of good quality.
Figure 7.6: Participant A
Pupil size displayed in times in millimetres for 3 of the better participants during
gameplay.The x­axis represents the time of gameplay and the y­axis represents the
value in millimetres. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right
eye are marked with orange.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 7.7: Participant B
Pupil size displayed in times in millimetres for 3 of the better participants during
gameplay. The x­axis represents the time of gameplay and the y­axis represents the
value in millimetres. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right
eye are marked with orange.
Figure 7.8: Participant C
Pupil size displayed in times in millimetres for 3 of the better participants during
gameplay.The x­axis represents the time of gameplay and the y­axis represents the
value in millimetres. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right
eye are marked with orange.
Visualising the data provides insight into what data was collected and whether it is usable.
It can be observed from the plots that data is within the normal ranges expected for gaze
points on the screen and for pupil sizes. In addition, the correlation between the data of
the left and the right eye is very strong which suggests that the data that was collected
is usable. The cognitive or emotional interpretation of the data is not discussed in this
project as the focus of the project is the collection of biometric data. From these results, it
can be suggested that the collection of pupil size and gaze data is possible with this setup
and the data is usable for further analysis.
46
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:55==
7.2.2
Eyes recognized by the eye tracker
Figures 7.9 to 7.11 present the amount of time the eye tracker could detect an eye during
gameplay. Each diagram presents the separation of the left and right eye of a participant.
The possible values are 0 if the eye is not detected and 1 if the eye is detected by the
hardware. The value of 0 means that there is not enough data or bad quality eye image,
that cannot be used to calculate the data for gaze positions, pupil size, etc. This value
can be caused also by inconsistency in the calculations that could be caused by internal
or external noise [51]. These examples in the figures below 7.9­7.11 show that data can
be collected, however, there are some gaps in the data collection shown with 0 values.
Data of the left eye is plotted in blue and data of the right eye is plotted in orange on the
diagrams.
In the following three examples, the correlation coefficients between the recordings of the
left and the right eye are 0.84, 0.53, and 0.58 respectively. This suggests a moderate
positive association between the left and the right eye measurements.
Figure 7.9: Participant A
Eyes visibility presented as boolean values (0,1) on the y­axis.The x­axis represents the
time of gameplay. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right eye
are marked with orange.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 7.10: Participant B
Eyes visibility presented as boolean values (0,1) on the y­axis.The x­axis represents the
time of gameplay. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right eye
are marked with orange.
Figure 7.11: Participant C
Eyes visibility presented as boolean values (0,1) on the y­axis. The x­axis represents
the time of gameplay. Results of the left eye are marked in blue and results of the right
eye are marked with orange.
Results show that the correlation between gaze detection of both eyes is strong to mod­
erate in these examples. This could suggest that it is more difficult for the eye tracker to
detect gaze, but once it is collected data for gaze points and pupil sizes can be calculated
quite well.
Correlation of data between left and right eye
To understand better the data and assess its quality the correlation between recordings
of the right and the left eye was calculated. Correlation between left and right eye data
48
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:57==
was calculated and aggregated for all participants in table 7.12. It was calculated for the
pupil sizes of the left and right eye, gaze points of the left and right eye on the X and
Y axis, and gaze validity of both eyes. In addition, Figure 7.13 visualizes the minimum,
maximum, and average correlations from the table.
Figure 7.12: Aggregated data of all participants. The table shows the correlation coef­
ficient between the left and right eye for different eye parameters tracked. The last row
displays the mean correlation for the parameter.
Figure 7.13 shows the minimum, maximum and mean correlations between records of
left and right eye data. It can be seen that pupil sizes are very strongly correlated with an
average correlation coefficient (R2) of 0.92. In addition, gaze points on the X and Y axes
are also very strongly correlated with average coefficients of 0,90 and 0,95. On the other
hand, the mean gaze origin correlation is moderate with a coefficient of 0,45
Figure 7.13: Correlation between eye tracker parameters for all participants. The diagram
displays the maximum, minimum and mean correlations for the different eye parameters.
Percentage of usable biometric data
The next figures 7.14 ­ 7.16 display the percentage of usable data recorded by the eye
tracker during gameplay for the different parameters. The three diagrams are again repre­
sentations of the same three participants with some of the better results used as examples
before. It can be seen that in figure 7.14 there is 51.2% usable data for the right pupil,
42.6% usable data for the left pupil, 51.2% usable data recorded for the gaze point of the
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
49
==PAGE:58==
right eye, 42.5% usable data for the left eye gaze point, 66.8% of the time the right eye
was recognized 63.7% of the time the left eye was recognized for participant A. Figures
7.15 and 7.16 show the percentage of usable data for participant B and C, respectively.
Figure 7.14: Participant A
Percentage of usable eye data during gameplay for the different parameters
Figure 7.15: Participant B
Percentage of usable eye data during gameplay for the different parameters
50
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:59==
Figure 7.16: Participant C
Percentage of usable eye data during gameplay for the different parameters
It can be seen that the largest percentage of usable data is collected for the detection
of gaze. This is understandable because gaze points and pupil sizes are calculated and
extracted once the gaze is detected. It appears that collecting eye and gaze data is
possible, however, it is hard to collect usable data for the whole time of playing the game
with this setup.
One of the reasons for the missing data is because of inconsistent data rows being saved
while writing to the file. These inconsistent data rows were discarded during the pre­
possessing stage. In the example of participant A this accounts for only 2% of the time,
and at the other time, the tracker did not find the participants’ eyes. The percentage of
inconsistency for the three participants is between 2 to 7%.
Figure 7.17: Reasons for missing data for participant A
Percentage of usable biometric data for all participants
To gain a better overview of eye­tracking data for all participants, all results were collected
together and analyzed. Figure 7.18 shows the percentage of valid data of the collection
of all participants playing the game. It is visible that the eye tracker was able to detect
the right and the left eye respectively 67% and 61 % of the time. The gaze points were
calculated for the right and left eyes at 35% and 37% respectively of the time. The pupil
sizes of the right eye were recorded for 36% of the time and the left eye was recorded for
38% of the time for all of the participants combined.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 7.18: Percentage of good recorded data during gameplay of all participants
The percentage of data lost because of inconsistency while writing accumulates to 16,6%
for all participants combined as shown in figure 7.19.
Figure 7.19: Reasons for missing data for all participants combined
The maximum, minimum and mean percentage of usable data is calculated for all partic­
ipants is visualized in figure 7.20. The mean percentage of usable data is 54,49%. The
maximum percentage of usable data collected during gameplay was 91,45% and the min­
imum is 23,7%. This suggests that on average a bit over half of the time of the gameplay,
the eye tracker was able to recognize gaze data.
52
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:61==
Figure 7.20: Percentage of usable recorded eye data
The minimum and maximum percentage of data collection is rather in both extremes which
could signify that collecting biometric data is also dependent on external factors, for ex­
ample, the participant playing the game. An important consideration is that the biometrics
collection is tested on children who are in an unfamiliar environment of the waiting area
of the hospital. In addition, the test was done in a public space which could also distract
the attention of a young child who is potentially anxious of possible procedures.
While these results are not ideal, and more testing is needed to validate this method of
collecting biometrics, it is still a viable way of collecting biometric data during gameplay
of children awaiting hospital treatment.
Frequency of data recordings
The frequency of receiving data can also inform about the quality of the recorded data
and how dependable are the eye­tracking logs.
The tobii­research library records device timestamps that is the timestamps recorded by
the eye tracker hardware ­ called device timestamps. In addition, it records the system
timestamp which is the time that the computer received the eye­tracking recordings, and is
automatically synchronized with the device timestamp. After analyzing the device times­
tamp it was observed that the hardware records data in the interval of [0; 0.01]seconds.
On most installations, the difference between the system timestamp and when the pack­
age is injected into the stream outlet is small.
Figure 7.21a displays a normalized histogram of the distribution of delays between eye
tracker recordings recorded by the computer receiving the eye tracker data as a stream
using the callback defined in the Tobii library. The values in the x­axis are the time in
seconds. Outliers that diluted the visual clarity of the plot in the first and last 10% quantile
in the data were discarded.
The resulting diagram shows that the mean time between eye tracker recordings is 0.01
seconds. And 60% of the data was recorded within ­1 and 1 second. The standard devi­
ation is 2,38, and the normal distribution is drawn with a red line. This suggests that there
is a higher probability that delays in recording eye tracking data lie within ±4,76 seconds.
The skewness of the data is 0.03, it is close to zero and suggests very slight rightward
(positive) skewness and the distribution is almost symmetrical.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) Spread of time between eye tracker recording in
seconds, recorded in the order the tobii­reseach library
callback returned data received from the eye tracker.
Outliers in the first and last 10% quintile were removed from
the diagram for better visual clarity.
(b) Spread of time between eye tracker recording in
seconds. The figure presents the central area of figure
7.21a in the range ­40 milliseconds to 40 milliseconds. Data
was recorded in the order the tobii­reseach library callback
captured the data from the eye tracker.
Figure 7.21: Spread of time between eye tracker recording in seconds.
Figure 7.21b presents a zoomed­in version of figure 7.21a, where the time between
recordings is limited to ­40 milliseconds to 40 milliseconds. In this diagram, it can be
seen that the spread of time between saved recordings is slightly asymmetrical. The his­
togram shows that the distribution of recording times is left­skewed. It is still unimodal,
the mean, the mode and the median are 0.01 this suggests that data was recorded and
saved rather consistently. The fact that there are negative times between recordings sug­
gests that when data was streamed to the computer, small delays were introduced and
the order of data was slightly shuffled. However, the mean delay of the received stream
of data is 0.01 seconds between recordings, therefore it could be suggested that the data
received in the computer was recorded consistently.
Results and analysis artefacts can be seen in detail in Appendix A.10.
7.2.3
Heart data
Data was also collected by the Empatica 4 wristband. All participants in the study agreed
to wear the wristband while playing the game. However, the wristband lost connection
while one participant was playing, and the charger device was placed on the wristband
which affected the results. The device lost battery power while 2 participants were playing.
54
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:63==
One of the better examples of the participants can be seen in figure 7.22. It is visible that
the heart rate data collection is not consistent at all at the end of the session. Whenever
the wristband is not able to collect data, it tries to connect the good data points that it has
together, therefore the data doesn’t seem consistent. This could be caused because of
loose contact of the wristband with the wrist of the child while moving their hand.
Figure 7.22: An example of biometrics collected by Empatica wristband
Figure 7.23 shows the percentage of available data for the time of gameplay. It can be
seen that the BVP, EDA, accelerometer, and temperature data have a mean of 94%, 84%,
93%, and 89% respectively. However, the average percentage of available data for the
heart rate is only 39%.
Figure 7.23: Percentages of usable data recorded from the Empatica wristband
It can be concluded that collecting heart data such as blood volume pulse (BVP) with
the Empatica wristband could be feasible. Electrodermal activity (EDA), and temperature
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
55
==PAGE:64==
could also be collected using the Empatica wristband. However, heart rate data collection
with the Empatica wristband is not very reliable as the mean percentage of collected data
during gameplay is 39%.
The results discussed here concern only the availability of recorded data and do not dis­
cuss the quality of the collected data since such analysis requires a medical background
or a deeper understanding of the physiological processes of the human body and such
analysis is not part of the scope of this project.
7.3
Usability and User experience
7.3.1
Usability
Usability was measured by recording the success of executed tasks. It was observed that
overall the majority of children were able to execute tasks of the game successfully. It was
also seen that children aged 4­5 occasionally needed help to understand and complete
tasks presented by the game. On the other hand, children aged 7 and above were more
comfortable playing the game and executing the task expected of them.
The following diagram figure 7.24 presents the success rate of task execution. The order
of the tasks in the game was the following: first is the Mountain scene, then the Orange
garden, then the Forest and the Beach. The Mountain scene is similar to the Forest scene
and the Orange garden is similar to the Beach scene. These results show that half of the
kids can execute successfully the task in the Mountain scene (7 out of 15). Out of the 15
children, 8 can execute successfully all of the breathing exercises in the Forest scene.
There is a larger variance in the number of takes completed in the Mountain scene than
in the Forest scene. More kids can execute better the Forest scene in comparison to the
Mountain scene. This could mean that there is a learning effect. Children are initially intro­
duced to the deep breathing exercises in the Mountain scene and this is new information
for them therefore it is harder to complete successfully all the tasks. However, once they
have learned the Mountain scene exercises they perform better with similar exercises in
the Forest scene.
For the Orange Garden, the children were able to execute correctly the progressive mus­
cle relaxation exercise was 13 out of 15. For the Beach scene again 13 out of 15 children
were able to execute the all tasks of the Beach scene. It can be observed again that
in general children perform better in the PMR exercises, however, the testing sample is
not large enough to conclude whether the PMR exercises are considered harder than the
deep breathing exercises.
56
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:65==
Figure 7.24: Success rate of executing CBT exercises
Satisfaction was measured by asking the question ”Would you recommend/tell about the
game to your friends?” or ”Will you tell about the game to your friends?”. All of the chil­
dren were interested and excited to play the game when they were presented with it. All
of the children who managed to finish the game and were asked the questions answered
positively and said that they would tell their friends about the game. Also after completing
the game some of the kids went to tell about the game right away to their older siblings
or parents if they were not present during gameplay.
7.3.2
Game Continuation
At the end of the gameplay, children had the opportunity to click on the air balloon to con­
tinue playing the game. In addition, the children were asked ”Would you like to continue
playing the game?”. It was observed that it was mostly children in the age range of 5­7
who were interested in playing again the same game. The diagram shows that 7 out of
15 participants responded to this question positively. Figure 7.25 summarizes the results
of this test. When talking with some of the children after playing the game, one of them
aged 9 replied ”I would continue playing if there were more different levels.” From personal
observation, it could also be noted that some of the children felt like they had completed
the game and there is no need to play it again. Perhaps adding more and different levels
could increase the game continuation desire.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 7.25: Game continuation statistics
7.3.3
Adherence
Adherence is also important to understand if children can execute the CBT exercises
in synchronization with the game. Adherence to the game was measured by recording
the respiration rate of the children while doing the deep breathing CBT exercise in the
game. Because of technical challenges, the respiration rate was recorded only while
children were doing the deep breathing exercises and not during the whole gameplay.
The intended respiration rate was 16 and the average respiration rate for all of the children
is 17. The normal respiration rate for children aged 5­12 is 16­30. This could indicate that
while following the game children were able to slow down their breathing as part of the
deep breathing exercise they were presented with. The results suggest that the average
breathing rate of the participants is comparable to what was expected in the game. The
success rate of the PMR exercises shows that children were able to follow the instructions
in the game and do the tasks in synchronization with the game.
7.3.4
Anxiety levels
Anxiety was measured before and after the children played the game while waiting in the
waiting area of the hospital for a procedure. For these results, only children who tested
the game in the hospital were accounted for. Anxiety was measured with VAS before and
after playing the game and even children and their parents were rather calm while waiting
in the waiting area 7.26 shows very slight changes in reported anxiety. This was also the
case because the children who were present in the hospital and agreed to play the game
were rather relaxed and didn’t feel much anxiety, discomfort, or pain. In the interview
after playing the game, one of the children commented on the game: ”The game is very
calming.” which could mean that the game had a positive effect on the child.
58
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:67==
Figure 7.26: Anxiety measured with VAS before and after gameplay by child and parent.
Data points only evaluate discrete numbers. Results were overlapping and were not vis­
ible therefore a small noise was introduced, so that all data points were visible on the
diagram.
Figure 7.27: Anxiety measured with VAS before and after gameplay by child and parent
Figure 7.27 shows the difference in anxiety recorded using the mYPAS scale before and
after gameplay. It displays that there is no measurable change in the average results
measured before and after playing the game.
Even though the results don’t show a visible effect on anxiety levels, it cannot be con­
cluded whether the game reduces the anxiety of the children playing the game, because
the children that tested the game were already calm.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:69==
8
Discussion
This chapter discusses the findings of this thesis regarding the research questions and
the main problem statement: How can biometric data be collected while playing a mobile
game application for reducing children’s anxiety while awaiting hospital treatment?
This chapter also addresses limitations in this study.
8.1
Findings
How can biometric data be collected while playing a mobile game application for
reducing children’s anxiety while awaiting hospital treatment?
This study explored collecting of biometric data of children playing a serious game while
waiting for treatment in the hospital. The specific biometrics that were addressed are pupil
size, gaze points, gaze detection, heart rate (HR) and blood volume pulse (BVP). This was
done using a Tobii 4C eye tracker device for collecting eye and gaze data and the Em­
patica E4 wristband was used to collect heart data. The game was developed with Unity
game engine. Eye tracking collection was started as a process running in the background
of the game, using the Tobii SDK for Python, to collect the raw eye data. Even though
eye­tracking data was collected separately from the game, this process was started when
the game started to ensure the data was collected during gameplay. Collected data was
saved locally to the computer running the game. Heart data collection was started sep­
arately from the game, using the Empatica client application and data was saved to the
cloud using the Empatica E4 Connect cloud and was manually stored locally for further
analysis. The eye tracker was interacting with the game using the Tobii SDK for Desktop
to provide an interactive way to notify users whenever they are out of the visibility area of
the eye tracker. This setup was tested on different occasions with 17 children in private
arrangements and the pediatric department of the Herlev Hospital. Biometrics data such
as pupil sizes, gaze points, gaze detection, heart rate, and BVP were successfully col­
lected while children were playing a serious game prototyped previously by Kjeldsen[2],
Meyer and Folmer[3]. Based on the testing conducted so far, it is evident that the solution
has some limitations. Further testing with a larger sample of children is necessary to ac­
quire additional insights and enhance the solution. While perhaps not ideal, this setup is
a viable way of collecting biometrics of children playing a mobile application game while
awaiting hospital treatment.
What is the percentage of usable biometric data collected from participants
during the study?
According to the results and analysis, it was observed that the collection of effective chil­
dren’s biometric data on pupil size, gaze patterns and heart data is very different for the
different children. While for some children eye and gaze data was collected for a little over
90% of the time of gameplay, for other children this was only 23% of the time. The aver­
age percentage of collected gaze data for a participant is 54,49%. When all participants’
data was combined, 67% of the time of play the eye tracker was able to recognize the
right eye gaze and 61% was able to recognize the left eye. The right pupil was recognized
36% of the time and the left was recognized 38% of the time. The gaze on the display
area was recognized at 35% and 37% for the right and the left eye respectively. Even
though 16% of all data were discarded with the initial prepossessing, still the main reason
for having a low percentage of collected data is that the eye tracker could not detect the
eyes of the participants. Some of the potential reasons as to why the eye tracker could
not recognize the eyes are perhaps the children are often very active and move around,
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
61
==PAGE:70==
they often lose focus quickly or they place their hands in front of the eye tracker or their
face.
The average percentage of collected data during gameplay for a participant from the Em­
patica wristband for the blood volume pulse was 94.8% and for the heart rate was 39.9%.
Testing with the Empatica wristband proved that perhaps this tool is not very reliable,
especially for collecting heart rate data. Some of the problems that affected the data
collection of the tool were Bluetooth connection issues, the wristband ran out of power
during sessions and the charger piece was attached to the wristband and prevented from
collecting data.
To what extent can biometric data, including information on eye movements, gaze
patterns, and heart rate, be effectively collected during gameplay?
The reliability of the data collection method was evaluated by visualising the data to un­
derstand better if the collected data was within the normal range. Collected data of gaze,
pupil sizes, and blood volume pulse were visualised and appeared to be within the ac­
ceptable ranges. However, the heart rate data collected by the Empatica wristband was
not always dependable, since it appeared that some of the data points in the session were
missing and this affected the visual representation of the data. The eye tracker recorded
data every 0 to 0,01 seconds and the data was streamed to the receiving device with a
mean time of 0.01 seconds between recordings and standard divination of 2.38 seconds.
Data collection soundness was also evaluated by the correlation between the right and
the left eye of participants. The average correlation between left and right pupil size was
0,92, for gaze points on display for the X­axis was 0,90, for gaze points for the Y­axis was
0,96 and for gaze origin was 0,45. This shows that the correlation between the left and
right eye for pupil size and gaze points is very strong, however, it is moderate for gaze
detection.
In the context of the game, do children demonstrate the ability to engage in
gameplay, and what are their preferences and responses to the game?
The usability of the game was assessed by the success rate of execution of the tasks
within the game. Out of the 15 children, 7 were able to complete all tasks in the Mountain
scene, 8 were able to complete all tasks in the Forest scene, 13 were able to do all of the
tasks in the Orange Garden and 13 were able to do all of the tasks in the Beach scene. It
was observed that the children were able to learn how to do the deep breathing exercise
because they were able to perform better on the Forest game scene than on the Mountain
scene. Satisfaction was measured by asking the question ”Would you recommend the
game to your friends?” and all participants responded positively to the question. Game
continuation desire was however not very strong as 7 out of 15 children wanted to continue
playing the game. One of the children commented that she would continue playing if the
game had more levels/tasks to do. Based on the testing it is visible that some areas need
improvements and further testing, such as adding more levels to the game and swapping
the order of tasks to assess whether this would result in a better success rate. However,
overall children were able to interact and engage with the game.
How effectively can participants perform the deep breathing and progressive
muscle relaxation exercises as part of the game?
Adherence to the deep breathing exercises in the game was assessed by measuring
the respiration rate of the children. It was observed that the average respiration rate
while doing the exercise was 17 and the expected respiration rate was 16. Even though
respiration rate was measured only during the breathing exercises and not for the whole
time of playing the game, the results could still suggest that the children were able to slow
down their breathing as part of the deep breathing exercise. Adherence to the progressive
muscle relaxation exercises was also good since the success rate for the exercises was
62
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:71==
high as 13 out of 15 children were able to successfully execute the exercises.
8.2
Reflections and Recommendations
As previously stated in the results and findings it was visible that gaze tracking was hard
to obtain since it was collected 67% and 61% of the time for the right and the left eye
respectively. However, there were not enough test participants and evidence to conclude
whether there was an additional external or internal reason causing the eye tracker to not
recognize the eyes of the participants. This needs to be investigated further with more
participants and perhaps in different environments.
One of the things that did not work as exactly as intended was the saving of eye­tracking
data. As it is visible in the results section, 16% of data was lost in the preprocessing stage
of the analysis, because there was inconsistency in the data. This was due to occasional
threading issues while data was streamed from the eye tracker to the computer. However,
since the problem appeared occasionally, it was discovered in a later stage of the testing
and because of the time constraints of the project, was not addressed. Therefore, it would
be essential that this issue is addressed in future development of the software.
8.3
Limitations
One of the limitations during testing was that the Empatica wristband was unreliable when
collecting heart rate data. Whenever the client app started the session recordings, the app
appeared to collect data as expected, however only when data was analysed later was it
apparent that the heart rate collection was poor.
Another issue that was encountered was that the Tobii eye tracker was placed at the
bottom of the screen of the laptop that the children played on. The game was made to
expect touch interactions and therefore children’s hands that touched the screen were
occasionally blocking the visibility of the eye tracker that was attached to the bottom of
the screen. However, there was nothing to be done in this testing setup because this is
the only way that this particular eye tracker device can be positioned on the computer.
Recruiting test participants was often difficult, especially in the target age group of 5­8 in
the hospital. The game was tested only with 12 children in the age range of 5 to 9 in the
hospital and 3 children in the age range of 5­11 in a private appointment. This is not ideal
and could be improved as a future work of the project.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
63
==PAGE:72==
9
Future work
This chapter investigates the possible areas of improvement that could be investigated
outside of the scope of the project.
An improvement in the future would be to test the collection of biometric data with different
tools. For example, the eye tracker that was used for this setup was a gaming eye tracker
and not a research eye tracker. It would be interesting to investigate how the hardware
affects the quality and quantity of collected usable data. The positioning of the eye tracker
is also something that could be experimented with because, in the current setup, the
interaction of the children could potentially block the visibility of the eye tracker.
In addition, it could be experimented with different heart rate monitoring devices or tools
since the Emaptica wristband proved to be occasionally unreliable in collecting heart rate
data. This could also be caused because the wristband needs to be quite tight in the wrist,
but children were not comfortable wearing it very tight. Therefore it could be interesting
to investigate other devices. It would also be interesting to experiment with starting the
heart rate recording sessions with the game when the participant starts playing and saving
recorded data directly on the device instead of saving it first to the cloud as is currently
done. This could potentially save time in post­processing and potentially allow for run­time
analysis of the biometrics.
Another improvement for future work is to improve the script that is responsible for saving
eye­tracking data to disc. The tobii­reseach SDK provided raw data from the eye tracker
as a stream. It was observed that data streaming was rarely disrupted, so it would be
better to add extensive logging in the background to check what is disrupting the stream­
ing. In addition, a thread­safe mechanism should be added to the program that streams
and saves data. It was observed that occasionally the streaming and writing data to disc
threads were competing for resources and as a result, some records were corrupted. The
tunnel interaction that was made to guide children’s focus back to the screen and the vis­
ible area of the eye tracker was not thoroughly tested because of the limited time of the
project. However, for future work on this project, it would be better to investigate how are
children reacting to the tunnel and how it could be improved.
A possible future work is to add a run­time analysis of biometric data in connection to
anxiety. This could be very useful for the nurses in the pediatric department since they
are currently lacking a tool to aid them in assessing children’s anxiety. However, this could
be very complex since it requires a deep understanding of the physiological processes of
the human body.
Furthermore, ideally, the data collection would be tested with a larger number of partic­
ipants. Testing with more children would give more insight and feedback as to how the
test setup, game design and usability could be improved.
64
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:73==
10
Conclusion
This project aimed to investigate how could biometric data be collected while children
awaiting hospital treatment are playing a mobile game. As part of the study, an interac­
tive mobile game was developed that contains cognitive behaviour therapy exercises to
reduce the anxiety of the children awaiting hospital treatment.
Through literature review, interviews and observations, it was investigated that serious
games have a positive effect in reducing children’s anxiety in the hospital and biofeedback
is proven to help in understanding and addressing anxiety. The following biometrics were
chosen to be collected: pupil size, gaze data, and heart rate and blood volume pulse data.
The developed game initiates eye and gaze biometrics collections in the background of
the game while the children are playing the game. This is done utilizing a Tobii 4C eye
tracker device. Heart data is collected independently of the game using the Empatica E4
wristband. Collected data is stored locally for further analysis.
The game and biometrics collection were tested in the pediatric department of Herlev
Hospital and private arrangements with a total number of 15 children in the age group of
5­11. During testing, it was demonstrated that usable eye­tracking data was collected 67%
of the time for the right eye and 61% for the left eye. Pupil size was detected at 36% and
38% of the time for the right and the left eye respectively. Gaze points on the screen were
identified at 35% and 37% of the time of gameplay. The mean correlation between data of
the left and the right eye for pupil size was 0.92. The mean correlation between data from
the right and the left eye was 0.90 for the gaze points on the X­coordinate and 0.96 for
the Y­coordinate, however the mean correlation for the left and right gaze detection was
0.45. Eye tracking data was collected and stored with a mean frequency of 0.01 seconds.
The mean percentage of collected heart rate data for the time of the gameplay was 39%
and the mean percentage of blood volume pulse was 94% of the gameplay time.
Testing the CBT game showed that the game was engaging and interesting for children
aged 5­11. Out of the 15 children, 13 were able to execute all of the PMR exercises, and
7 were able to execute all of the deep breathing exercises, which suggests they were
able to perform CBT exercises effectively. However, the results did not show any visible
reduction in anxiety since the children who agreed to test the game were already calm.
While more testing is required to determine the usability, and effectiveness of the game,
this solution provides a viable way of collecting biometric data during game playing of
children awaiting hospital treatment.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Illustrations by Storyset. URL: https://storyset.com/.
[2]
Emilie Kjeldsen. “Development of a UX/UI design to assess and respond to state
anxiety children in the emergency department, Udvikling af UX/UI design til at bedømme
og reagere på angst i børn på skadestuen”. und. 2023.
[3]
Signe Marie Meyer and Emil Folmer. “Reducing children’s anxiety in hospital waiting
areas through a user centric system design, Reducering af ængstelighed hos børn i
venteområder på hospitaler ved brug af et brugercentrisk systemdesign”. und. 2023.
[4]
Marja Salmela, Sanna Salanterä and Eeva Aronen. “Child­reported hospital fears
in 4 to 6­year­old children”. eng. in: Pediatric Nursing 35.5 (2009), pages 269–276,
303. ISSN: 00979805.
[5]
Sian Ferguson. Monitoring stress: 5 methods for stress measurement. december
2022. URL: https://www.healthline.com/health/stress/stress-measurement#:~:text=
Heart % 20rate % 20variability % 20(HRV ) %20analysis , time % 20period % 20between %
20heartbeats%20changes..
[6]
URL: https://support.empatica.com/hc/en- us/articles/115000198283- What- is-
electrodermal-activity-.
[7]
Ernest S. Barratt. “Impulsiveness and anxiety: Information processing and elec­
troencephalograph topography”. in: Journal of Research in Personality 21.4 (1987),
pages 453–463. ISSN: 0092­6566. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-6566(87)
90032-8. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0092656687900328.
[8]
Adam M. Perkins andothers. “A facial expression for anxiety.” in: Journal of Person­
ality and Social Psychology 102.5 (2012), pages 910–924. DOI: 10.1037/a0026825.
[9]
Douglas Heaven. “Why faces don’t always tell the truth about feelings”. in: Nature
578.7796 (2020), pages 502–504. DOI: 10.1038/d41586-020-00507-5.
[10]
Supportive hand­holding attenuates pupillary responses to stress in adult couples
— ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. [Accessed 09­01­2024]. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC6386442/#:~:text=Pupillometry%20is%20an%20innovative%
20procedure,dilate%3B%20this%20occurs%20within%20200ms..
[11]
Robert J. Snowden andothers. “The pupil’s response to Affective Pictures: Role of
Image Duration, habituation, and viewing mode”. in: Psychophysiology 53.8 (2016),
pages 1217–1223. DOI: 10.1111/psyp.12668.
[12]
Rebecca B. Price andothers. “Sustained neural alterations in anxious youth per­
forming an attentional bias task: A pupilometry study”. eng. in: Depression and Anxi­
ety 30.1 (2013), pages 22–30. ISSN: 15206394, 10914269. DOI: 10.1002/da.21966.
[13]
Michael Rigby, Grit Kühne and Shalmali Deshpande. “E­health as the enabler of pri­
mary care for children”. in: Issues and Opportunities in Primary Health Care for Chil­
dren in Europe (2019), pages 283–301. DOI: 10.1108/978-1-78973-351-820191017.
[14]
Nico King. Serious games guide: Everything you need to know in 2021. august
2022. URL: https://www.chaostheorygames.com/blog/serious-games-guide-everything-
you-need-to-know-in-2021.
[15]
Federica Tozzi andothers. “eHealth interventions for anxiety management targeting
young children and adolescents: Exploratory review”. eng. in: Journal of Medical
Internet Research 20.5 (2018). byeditorGunther Eysenbach, e5. ISSN: 25616722,
14388871, 14394456. DOI: 10.2196/pediatrics.7248.
[16]
URL: http://www.prisma-statement.org/.
[17]
URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
67
==PAGE:76==
[18]
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
[19]
URL: https://scholar.google.com/.
[20]
Lucas E. Matthyssens andothers. “A pilot study of the effectiveness of a serious
game CliniPup® on perioperative anxiety and pain in children”. eng. in: Journal of
Pediatric Surgery 55.2 (2020), pages 304–311. ISSN: 15315037, 00223468. DOI:
10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2019.10.031.
[21]
Jo Vrancken, Liesbeth De Gryse and Annemie I.F. Spooren. “HospiAvontuur: devel­
opment of a serious game to help young children and their parents during the prepa­
ration for an admission at the hospital for elective surgery”. eng. in: Behaviour and
Information Technology 40.2 (2021), pages 134–145. ISSN: 13623001, 0144929x.
DOI: 10.1080/0144929X.2019.1673821.
[22]
URL: https://mindbytes.be/our-work/seres-clinipup/.
[23]
URL: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.polygoat.hospiadventure&
hl=da&gl=US&pli=1.
[24]
Hiran Thabrew andothers. “A Cognitive Behavioral Therapy , Biofeedback­, and
Game­Based eHealth Intervention to Treat Anxiety in Children and Young Peo­
ple with Long­Term Physical Conditions (Starship Rescue): Co­design and Open
Trial”. eng. in: Jmir Serious Games 9.3 (2021). byeditorNabil Zary, e26084. ISSN:
22919279. DOI: 10.2196/26084.
[25]
Leonardo Schenck andothers. “Development of a smartphone virtual reality game
to support the radiation therapy of children and adolescents in proton centers”. eng.
in: Frontiers in Pediatrics 11 (2023), page 1163022. ISSN: 22962360. DOI: 10.3389/
fped.2023.1163022.
[26]
Dai Jie Yang andothers. “Development of a Therapeutic Video Game With the
MDA Framework to Decrease Anxiety in Preschool­Aged Children With Acute Lym­
phoblastic Leukemia: Mixed Methods Approach”. eng. in: Jmir Serious Games 10.3
(2022). byeditorNabil Zary, e37079. ISSN: 22919279. DOI: 10.2196/37079.
[27]
URL: https://www.rigshospitalet.dk/english/news-and-media/news/Pages/2018/
march/specially-designed-virtual-reality-game-for-children-who-are-afraid-of-needles.
aspx.
[28]
Amy Dunn andothers. “A novel clinician­orchestrated virtual reality platform for dis­
traction during pediatric intravenous procedures in children with hemophilia: Ran­
domized controlled trial”. eng. in: Jmir Serious Games 7.1 (2019). byeditorGunther
Eysenbach, e10902. ISSN: 22919279. DOI: 10.2196/10902.
[29]
Arja Rantala andothers. “A gamified mobile health intervention for children in day
surgery care: Protocol for a randomized controlled trial”. eng. in: Nursing Open 9.2
(2022), pages 1465–1476. ISSN: 20541058. DOI: 10.1002/nop2.1143.
[30]
Brynja Ingadottir andothers. “Developing a Health Game to Prepare Preschool
Children for Anesthesia: Formative Study Using a Child­Centered Approach”. eng.
in: Jmir Serious Games 10.1 (2022). byeditorNabil Zary, e31471. ISSN: 22919279.
DOI: 10.2196/31471.
[31]
Suzanne R. Wintner andothers. “Evaluation of a scalable online videogame­based
biofeedback program to improve emotion regulation: A descriptive study assessing
parent perspectives”. eng. in: Internet Interventions 28 (2022), page 100527. ISSN:
22147829. DOI: 10.1016/j.invent.2022.100527.
[32]
Kimberly Burkhart, Elizabeth Mason and Rina Lazebnik. “Stress Management In­
tervention: A Pilot Evaluation in an Urban Adolescent Medicine Clinic”. eng. in:
Clinical Pediatrics 57.6 (2018), pages 700–705. ISSN: 19382707, 00099228. DOI:
10.1177/0009922817733704.
[33]
URL: https://wilddivine.com/pages/sales#shopify-section-sales-left-image.
68
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:77==
[34]
andothers. “The Efficacy of Virtual Reality Game Preparation for Children Sched­
uled for Magnetic Resonance Imaging Procedures (IMAGINE): Protocol for a Ran­
domized Controlled Trial”. eng. in: Jmir Research Protocols 11.6 (2022). byeditorTiffany
Leung, e30616. ISSN: 19290748. DOI: 10.2196/30616.
[35]
URL: https://thoughttechnology.com/biofeedback/.
[36]
The double diamond: URL: https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/our-resources/the-
double-diamond/.
[37]
Eric Ries. The Lean Startup: How Today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation
to create radically successful businesses. Currency, 2017.
[38]
Robert C. Martin. Agile Software Development: Principles, patterns, and practices.
Pearson, 2014.
[39]
H. Rex Hartson and Pardha S. Pyla. The UX book: Agile UX design for a quality
user experience. Morgan Kaufmann, 2019.
[40]
Henrik Schønau­Fog and Thomas Bjørner. ““sure, I would like to continue””. in:
Bulletin of Science, Technology amp;amp; Society 32.5 (2012), pages 405–412.
DOI: 10.1177/0270467612469068.
[41]
Jong­Hyuk Lee andothers. “Effect of behavioral intervention using smartphone ap­
plication for preoperative anxiety in pediatric patients”. in: Korean Journal of Anes­
thesiology 65.6 (2013), page 508. DOI: 10.4097/kjae.2013.65.6.508.
[42]
URL: https://paincarelabs.com/buzzy.
[43]
Joseph Sibony. The Best Gaming Engines for 2023. december 2023. URL: https:
//www.incredibuild.com/blog/top-gaming-engines-you-should-consider.
[44]
URL: https://help.tobii.com/hc/en-us/articles/213414285-Specifications-for-the-
Tobii-Eye-Tracker-4C.
[45]
Tobii Developer Zone. july 2021. URL: https://developer.tobii.com/pc-gaming/unity-
sdk/.
[46]
Baekgaard. Baekgaard/tobiilsl: Lab streaming layer tobii pro SDK acquisition/stream
outlet. URL: https://github.com/baekgaard/tobiilsl.
[47]
URL: https://tina5kovas-team.monday.com/.
[48]
URL: https://connect.tobii.com/s/article/measuring-pupil-size?language=en_US.
[49]
URL: https://developer.tobiipro.com/commonconcepts/gaze.html.
[50]
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK381/.
[51]
URL: https://developer.tobiipro.com/commonconcepts/validitycodes.html.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:79==
A
Appendix
A.1
PRISMA flow diagram and Validation tables
The PRISMA search worksheet, PRISMA flow diagram and Validation tables can be seen
below.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
71
==PAGE:80==
Desk research  
Research question 
What serious games have been used for reducing children’s anxiety while treated in hospital? 
Considered keywords for literature review. 
The following keywords were brainstormed and considered for the creation of the search 
strings. 
• 
Pediatric anxiety 
• 
Children's anxiety assessment 
• 
Hospital-related anxiety 
• 
Physiological biometrics 
• 
Mobile game application 
• 
Digital health interventions 
• 
Healthcare technology 
• 
Child life programs 
• 
Biometric data collection 
• 
Wearable sensors 
• 
Mobile health apps 
• 
Pediatric healthcare experience 
• 
Anxiety management in pediatrics 
• 
Hospital waiting room anxiety. 
• 
Pediatric patient experience 
• 
Stress measurement tools 
• 
Mobile interventions for anxiety 
• 
Child-friendly healthcare technologies 
• 
Interactive healthcare for children 
 
Common topics/words removed from title: 
Dentist, Dental, Diabetes, Autism 
 
Possible exclusion criteria: 
Journals older than 10 years, non-English Journals, Adult test group 
 
Selected search words for literature review 
Search words were adjusted slightly according to the standard of the databases. The following 
search words were used in the following databases. 
 
==PAGE:81==
DTU Findit, PubMed 
hospital AND children AND "serious game" AND (anxiety OR fear) 
hospital children game anxiety biofeedback 
 
Google Scholar 
hospital AND (children OR pediatric) AND "serious game"   AND anxiety  -diabetes -autism -
adult 
 
 
PRISMA flow diagram 
 
==PAGE:82==
Biofeedback Serios games dealing with anxiety. 
 
Game 
Authors 
Year of 
publication 
Purpose 
Biofee
dback 
Age 
group 
Type of 
source 
Method 
Summary points 
Starship 
Rescue 
Mobile 
app 
game 
Thabrew et 
al. [2] 
2021 
Evaluate the acceptability and usability 
of a cognitive behavioural therapy and 
biofeedback-based, 5-module eHealth 
game called Starship Rescue and to 
address anxiety 
wrist 
based 
Scosch
e 
Rhyth
m Plus 
heart 
rate 
monit
or 
10-17 
Journal 
article 
Open trial, 
quantitative analysis, 
qualitative analysis 
Starship Rescue as an acceptable, 
usable, and effective eHealth 
intervention for treating anxiety in 
young people with long-Term 
physical conditions. 
IMAGINE 
VR game 
Le May et al. 
[3] 
2022 
The aim is to address feasibility and 
acceptability of preprocedural IVR 
game preparation for anxiety 
management during MRI procedures 
and examine the efficacy of IVR game 
preparation compared with usual care 
for the management of procedural 
anxiety during MRI scans. 
headp
osition 
from 
the 
heads
et , 
heart 
rate, 
skin 
condu
ctance 
hand 
tempe
rature 
muscle 
tensio
n 
7 -17 
Journal 
article 
 field test, randomized 
controlled trial  
 alternative method for anxiety 
management to better prepare 
patients for an awake MRI 
procedure. The biofeedback will help 
predict which children are more 
responsive to this type of 
intervention. 
==PAGE:83==
Mightier 
 
 
 
Wintner et 
al. [4] 
2022 
e-mental health program that includes 
biofeedback video games that help 
children build emotion regulation skills 
by demonstrating and prompting 
children to practice bodily focused 
emotion regulation techniques 
armba
nd-
affixed 
heart 
rate 
monit
or 
3-19 
60%-
>7-11 
Journal 
article 
Coaching calls, 
quantitative data 
analyses of passively 
collected gameplay 
data and closed-ended 
survey, qualitative 
thematic coding of 
parent responses to 
open-ended questions 
during coaching calls 
demonstrates that families are able 
to engage with this type of child e-
mental health app for several hours 
of play over several months, and that 
parents and caregivers have seen 
signs that the e-mental health app is 
effective in helping children 
strengthen their emotion regulation 
skills. 
Prototyp
e for 
deep 
breating 
Petersen et 
al. [6] 
2020 
 Describe a simple biofeedback 
method for quantifying breathing 
compliance in a mobile smartphone 
app. 
Pulse 
oximet
ry 
sensor
-heart 
rate 
5-17 
Journal 
article 
smartphone app was 
developed that 
combined pulse 
oximetry with an 
animated protocol for 
paced deep breathing 
PPG as biofeedback for deep 
breathing in children is a feasible 
approach and that a single universal 
threshold in HR-I:Esync ratio of 1.1 
will be sufficient to encode real–time 
feedback in the app. 
Use of 
Wild 
Divine 
game 
Burkhart et 
al. [7] 
2018 
One-time stress management 
intervention results in a decrease in 
subjective distress. 
Heart 
rate 
monit
or in 
the 
ear 
11 -21 
Journal 
article 
Pre- and post-
intervention 
questionnaires 
One-time stress management 
intervention results in a decrease in 
subjective distress. One-time stress 
management intervention can be 
beneficial for patients and easily 
incorporated within a primary care 
setting 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 
==PAGE:84==
[1] Matthyssens, Lucas E., Amber Vanhulle, Lara Seldenslach, Geert Vander Stichele, Marc Coppens, and Eline Van Hoecke. 2020. “A Pilot Study of 
the Effectiveness of a Serious Game CliniPup® on Perioperative Anxiety and Pain in Children.” Journal of Pediatric Surgery 55 (2): 304–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2019.10.031. 
 
[2] Thabrew, Hiran, Karolina Stasiak, Harshali Kumar, Tarique Naseem, Christopher Frampton, and Sally Merry. 2021. “A Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy , Biofeedback-, and Game-Based EHealth Intervention to Treat Anxiety in Children and Young People with Long-Term Physical Conditions 
(Starship Rescue): Co-Design and Open Trial.” Edited by Nabil Zary. Jmir Serious Games 9 (3): e26084. https://doi.org/10.2196/26084. 
[3] Le May, Sylvie, Christine Genest, Nicole Hung, Maxime Francoeur, Estelle Guingo, Julie Paquette, Olivier Fortin, and Stéphane Guay. 2022. “The 
Efficacy of Virtual Reality Game Preparation for Children Scheduled for Magnetic Resonance Imaging Procedures (IMAGINE): Protocol for a 
Randomized Controlled Trial.” Edited by Tiffany Leung. Jmir Research Protocols 11 (6): e30616. https://doi.org/10.2196/30616. 
[4] Wintner, Suzanne R., Sarah E. Waters, Alyssa Peechatka, Joseph Gonzalez-Heydrich, and Jason Kahn. 2022. “Evaluation of a Scalable Online 
Videogame-Based Biofeedback Program to Improve Emotion Regulation: A Descriptive Study Assessing Parent Perspectives.” Internet Interventions 
28: 100527. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2022.100527. 
[6] Petersen, Christian L, Matthias Görges, Evgenia Todorova, Nicholas C West, Theresa Newlove, and J Mark Ansermino. 2020. “Feasibility of Using 
a Single Heart Rate-Based Measure for Real-Time Feedback in a Voluntary Deep Breathing App for Children: Data Collection and Algorithm 
Development.” Edited by John Pearson. Jmir Perioperative Medicine 3 (2): e16639. https://doi.org/10.2196/16639. 
[7] Burkhart, Kimberly, Elizabeth Mason, and Rina Lazebnik. 2018. “Stress Management Intervention: A Pilot Evaluation in an Urban Adolescent 
Medicine Clinic.” Clinical Pediatrics 57 (6): 700–705. https://doi.org/10.1177/0009922817733704. 
 
 
 
Serios games in health care dealing with anxiety. 
Game 
Authors 
Year of 
publication 
Purpose 
Age group 
Type of 
source 
Method 
Summary points 
Triumf game 
 
Rantala et 
al [8] 
2022 
describe a study protocol for a 
randomized controlled trial which will 
 7–12 
Journal 
article 
ongoing 
randomized 
Triumf is based on the self-
determination theory of motivation 
==PAGE:85==
evalu-ate the effectiveness of a 
gamified mobile health intervention 
for children in whole day surgery 
care. 
controlled trial 
and behaviour change. 
The studi is ongoing. If the solution 
is found to be effective at reducing 
children's anxi-ety and fear in the 
pre-operative setting, it could be 
used to educate children about 
their day surgery treatment so that 
they could be more comfortable 
without their parents 
Xploro 
 
 
Bray et al. 
[9] 
2020 
assess the acceptability of the Xploro 
DTx and examine its impact on 
children and their parent’s procedural 
knowledge, procedural anxiety, and 
reported experiences when attending 
a hospital for a planned procedure. 
8-14 
Journal 
article 
mixed methods 
design with 
quantitative 
measures and 
qualitative data 
collected 
sequentially 
from a group of 
children. 
Children and their parents 
completed self-report measures 
(perceived knowledge, procedural 
anxiety, procedural satisfaction, and 
procedural involvement) at 
baseline, preprocedure, and 
postprocedure.  
The children in the intervention 
group also reported significantly 
higher levels of perceived 
procedural knowledge 
preprocedure than those in the 
standard group. parents, those with 
access to the Xploro intervention 
reported significantly lower levels of 
procedural anxiety preprocedure 
than those who did not. children 
stated that they enjoyed using the 
intervention, it was fun and easy to 
use, and they felt that it had 
positively influenced their 
experiences of coming to the 
hospital for a procedure. 
CliniPup® 
Mobile app 
game 
 
Educational 
Matthyssens 
et al. [1] 
2020 
Reducing preoperative anxiety in 
children 
4-11 
Journal 
article 
 A prospective 
randomized 
controlled pilot 
trial 
a significant reduction in 
preoperative anxiety after playing 
the game 
==PAGE:86==
game 
Saving the 
Animals’ 
Planet 
 
Educational, 
therapeutic 
video games  
(TVG) 
Yang et al. 
[10] 
2022 
The purpose of this study was to 
develop a TVG using the popular 
Mechanics, Dynamics, and Aesthetics 
(MDA) framework for game design 
and to investigate the effect of this 
therapeutic video games (TVG) on 
the reduction of therapy-related 
anxiety among preschool-aged 
children with acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (ALL). 
3-5 
Journal 
article 
 A randomized 
controlled trial. 
(1)develop a 
TVG (2) test 
the reliability of 
the TVG 
among three 
certified 
children’s art 
therapists, (3) 
evaluate the 
reduction of 
therapy-related 
anxiety among 
participants 
after using the 
TVG for 6 
weeks, using a 
two-group, 
stratified at a 
medical center 
in northern 
Taiwan. 
This research provides evidence 
that using a TVG can decrease 
anxiety in preschool-aged children 
with ALL in Taiwan. The TVG could 
be used to support clinical 
professionals before they perform 
invasive therapies.  
Grow it! 
Dietvorst et 
al [11] 
2022 
The app consists of the experience 
sampling method (ESM) to monitor 
thoughts, behaviors,and emotions in 
daily life to enhance self-insight and daily 
cognitive behavioral therapy–based 
challenges to promote adaptivecoping. 
12-25 
Journal 
article 
iterative game 
design process 
combined with 
an agile 
method to 
develop 
ggamified ESM app that both 
measures individual differences in 
emotional dynamics and offers an 
integrated cognitive behavioural 
therapy–based interventionn. 
Grow It! app was co-designed with 
adolescent end users to increase 
participant engagement and 
adherence 
Whack-a-Mole 
Diaz-
Romero et 
al [12] 
2021 
Use of electroencephalography (EEG), 
electrooculography (EOG), and kinematic 
motion data captured through wearable 
Age>18 
Journal 
article 
 
results suggest that EEG, EOG bio 
signals, and kinematic motion data 
were acquired by using off-the-shelf 
==PAGE:87==
sensors to classify 
emotional states, while individuals are 
playing a serious com- 
puter game (Whack-a-Mole 
wearable sensors (i.e., OpenBCI 
headsets and JINS MEME eyewear) in 
combination with machine-learning 
techniques, such as the EC, could be 
used to classify emotional states, while 
individuals are playing the Whack-a-
Mole game 
Mina and the 
Land of 
Dreams 
Ingadottir et 
al . [13] 
 
describe the development and usability 
of a computer-based educational health 
game intended for preschool children to 
prepare them for upcoming anesthesia. 
4-6 
Journal 
article 
child (user)-
centered study 
design was 
used to 
develop and 
test the 
usability of the 
game 
Preschool children can inform game 
design through playful workshops 
about health-related subjects that they 
are not necessarily familiar with but 
that are relevant for them. The game’s 
usability was improved with the 
participation of the target group, and 
the game is now ready for clinical 
testing. 
HospiAvontuur Vrancken et 
al [14] 
2021 
the development of HospiAvontuur, a 
game for a smartphone or a mobile 
device, is described. The objective of 
the game is to inform young children 
(age group 4–7 years old) and their 
parents about an upcoming hospital 
admission for elective surgery. 
4–7  
Journal 
article 
the prototype 
version and the 
beta version of 
the game were 
tested with 
children of the 
age group. 
The final version of HospiAvontuur 
is a game to inform children and 
their parents for an upcoming 
admission at the hospital for 
elective surgery. The game was 
tested and optimised according to 
stakeholders feedback. 
VR games 
Dunn et al 
[15] 
2019 
create a VR platform that would be 
used for pediatric hemophilia care, 
allow clinician orchestration, and be 
safe and feasible to use for distraction 
during IV procedures performed as 
part of complex health care. 
6-18 
Journal 
article 
Randomized 
Controlled Trial 
The orchestrated, VR environment 
could be developed and safely 
used during pediatric hemophilia 
care for distraction during IV 
interventions. This platform has the 
potential to improve patient 
experience during medical 
procedures. 
 
VR game 
Schenck et 
al [17] 
2023 
 the aim of reducing this stress and 
anxiety, a virtual-reality (VR) game, 
8–13 
Journal 
article 
the VR game, 
patients could 
This exploratory study 
demonstrated the specification, 
==PAGE:88==
which can be used by patients prior to 
treatment, was developed and 
evaluated in a proton therapy center. 
interact with 
modeled 
equipment of 
the treatment 
room and hear 
the reportedly 
stress-inducing 
sounds in a 
stress-free 
environment 
prior to the 
treatment. The 
VR game was 
evaluated in a 
second series 
of interviews 
with patients. 
implementation and safe 
application of a VR game dedicated 
to young proton therapy patients. 
Initial anecdotal evidence 
suggested that the VR gaming 
experience was well received and 
found to be helpful when preparing 
young patients for radiation therapy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
References 
[0] Ünver, Seher, Özlem Güray, and Seda Aral. 2021. “The Effects of Game Intervention on Postoperative Anxiety and Pain Levels in Children: A 
Randomized Controlled Study.” Journal of Pediatric Research 8 (2): 116–23. https://doi.org/10.4274/jpr.galenos.2020.92259. 
 
[8] Rantala, Arja, Anna Leena Vuorinen, Jonna Koivisto, Heidi Similä, Otto Helve, Pekka Lahdenne, Minna Pikkarainen, Kadri Haljas, and Tarja Pölkki. 
2022. “A Gamified Mobile Health Intervention for Children in Day Surgery Care: Protocol for a Randomized Controlled Trial.” Nursing Open 9 (2): 
1465–76. https://doi.org/10.1002/nop2.1143. 
 
[9] Bray, Lucy, Ashley Sharpe, Phillip Gichuru, Peter Marc Fortune, Lucy Blake, and Victoria Appleton. 2020. “The Acceptability and Impact of the 
Xploro Digital Therapeutic Platform to Inform and Prepare Children for Planned Procedures in a Hospital: Before and after Evaluation Study.” Edited 
by Gunther Eysenbach. Journal of Medical Internet Research 22 (8): e17367. https://doi.org/10.2196/17367. 
 
[10] Yang, Dai Jie, Meng Yao Lu, Chi Wen Chen, Pei Ching Liu, and I. Ching Hou. 2022. “Development of a Therapeutic Video Game With the MDA 
Framework to Decrease Anxiety in Preschool-Aged Children With Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia: Mixed Methods Approach.” Edited by Nabil Zary. 
Jmir Serious Games 10 (3): e37079. https://doi.org/10.2196/37079. 
[11] Dietvorst, Evelien, Michelle A. Aukes, Jeroen S. Legerstee, Annabel Vreeker, Micah M. Hrehovcsik, Loes Keijsers, and Manon H.J. Hillegers. 
2022. “A Smartphone Serious Game for Adolescents (Grow It! App): Development, Feasibility, and Acceptance Study.” Jmir Formative Research 6 (3): 
e29832. https://doi.org/10.2196/29832. 
 
[12] Diaz-Romero, Dillam Jossue, Adriana Maria Rios Rincon, Antonio Miguel-Cruz, Nicholas Yee, and Eleni Stroulia. 2021. “Recognizing Emotional 
States with Wearables While Playing a Serious Game.” Ieee Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 70: 9354688. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2021.3059467. 
 
==PAGE:90==
[13] Ingadottir, Brynja, Elina Laitonen, Adalheidur Stefansdottir, Anna Olafia Sigurdardottir, Berglind Brynjolfsdottir, Heidi Parisod, Johanna Nyman, et 
al. 2022. “Developing a Health Game to Prepare Preschool Children for Anesthesia: Formative Study Using a Child-Centered Approach.” Edited by 
Nabil Zary. Jmir Serious Games 10 (1): e31471. https://doi.org/10.2196/31471. 
 
[14] Vrancken, Jo, Liesbeth De Gryse, and Annemie I.F. Spooren. 2021. “HospiAvontuur: Development of a Serious Game to Help Young Children and 
Their Parents during the Preparation for an Admission at the Hospital for Elective Surgery.” Behaviour and Information Technology 40 (2): 134–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2019.1673821. 
 
[15] Dunn, Amy, Jeremy Patterson, Charmaine F. Biega, Alice Grishchenko, John Luna, Joseph R. Stanek, and Robert Strouse. 2019. “A Novel 
Clinician-Orchestrated Virtual Reality Platform for Distraction during Pediatric Intravenous Procedures in Children with Hemophilia: Randomized 
Controlled Trial.” Edited by Gunther Eysenbach. Jmir Serious Games 7 (1): e10902. https://doi.org/10.2196/10902. 
 
[16] Jones, Kathryn Elizabeth, Fernando Loizides, Parisa Eslambolchilar, Ilona Johnson, Shannu Bhatia, Owen Crawford, McClaine C. Beirne, Raj 
Chand, Laura Vuilleumier, and Idunah Araneta. 2019. “Reducing Anxiety for Dental Visits.” Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Including Subseries 
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11749: 659–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29390-1_57. 
 
 [17] Schenck, Leonardo, Christian Bäumer, Björn Ross, Gabriele Schäfer, Nicole Stember, Heike Thomas, Stefan Stieglitz, and Beate Timmermann. 
2023. “Development of a Smartphone Virtual Reality Game to Support the Radiation Therapy of Children and Adolescents in Proton Centers.” 
Frontiers in Pediatrics 11: 1163022. https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1163022. 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
A.2
Hospital visit and Interview
Notes and reflections from the hospital visit and interview with Gitte Würtz can be seen
below.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
83
==PAGE:92==
Semi-structured Interview with researcher and nurse Gitte Würtz 
1. What are typical patients in PED in Herlev Hospital? 
• 
The pediatric department treats children aged 0 to 18. Children in the age group 
0-2,5 are treated the most. However, the most difficult age to handle is 4-7, 
because they can understand some of what is happening but not fully and 
cannot express their feelings. 
 
2. What are some of the distracting tools that are already used in the hospital when 
children are anxious or upset? 
• 
“Kids fear what they don't know. There are many different types of 
distractions, for example, VR glasses (some different games), Screens, 
YouTube, DR channels, clowns, BuzzyBee, toys, and Lidocaine plasters to 
numb the skin area for example for needle procedures. 
 
3. How is children's anxiety already measured in the PED? 
• 
“Currently, anxiety is not measured or considered in Herlev Hospital. There 
are tools to only measure pain levels for example 6 pictures WOMG Baker 
Pain scale, Visual Analog Scale, FLACC (The Face, Legs, Activity, Cry and 
Consolability (FLACC) scale is an observational pain scale)” 
 
4. How do nurses usually react to anxious children? 
• 
According to Gitte, every nurse has an individual approach, and it is very much 
connected with experience and personality. She said that most of the nurses 
currently are young, and it is sometimes challenging to deal with very anxious 
children. Therefore, according to her, there is a need for external tools to help 
them assess and reduce children’s anxiety. 
 
5. What is the typical patient flow in PED? 
• 
The patient either calls the emergency phone or is referred by their general 
practitioner. After they arrive at the PED, they register at the reception desk. Then 
they are triaged. Pulse and respiration and other vitals are checked, sometimes 
painkillers are given if needed. Then they are either treated or accepted for 
emergency procedures or they need to wait in the waiting area for further 
examination and treatment. The latter process could take up to 4 to 6 hours. 
Sometimes children are accepted in the hospital for 16 or 24 hours for 
observation. 
 
Fly on-the-wall observations. 
 
After the interview, Gitte gave my colleague Melinda Mader and me a tour around the 
PED in Herlev Hospital. This was a good opportunity to use the technique Fly on the 
wall.  We could observe the nurses, and the children arriving and being treated. We also 
had the opportunity to stay a while in the waiting area and observe the children waiting 
for procedures. 
The following pictures were taken while taking the tour and observing the people and 
environment around us.  
==PAGE:93==
 
We were also shown the private hospital rooms where children are received for 
emergency treatment, recovery, or overnight stay. 
The waiting area also had large fish aquariums that were also a distraction tool for the 
children in the PED.  
 
By observing the children in the waiting area, we could see that some of the parents had 
brought additional materials for coloring or drawing for their children. From a brief 
conversation with a parent, we understood that the waiting time was very long, 
especially for the children. According to her there should be different ways of distracting 
and entertaining the children. 
 
It was also visible that many of the children were very active while waiting for treatment. 
Even though they were in some pain or discomfort they were walking around and 
touching different objects or the walls and the aquarium. There were also some children 
that were visible in discomfort or anxious and stayed quietly with their parents. Some 
kids were also playing games on their parent’s mobile phones or tablets. 
 
Figure 1 Private hospital room 
 
Figure 2 Tablet available in the private hospital room. 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
Figure 3 Donated toys for the children in the hospital and other distraction tools. 
==PAGE:95==
 
Figure 4 Screens with patient overview for the nurses 
==PAGE:96==
 
Figure 5 Waiting are in the PED Herlev Hospital 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
A.3
Stakeholders meeting and presentations
Notes and reflections from the meeting with the stakeholders can be seen below.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
89
==PAGE:98==
Project presentation and stakeholders meeting 
 
Stakeholders: 
Researchers: Gitte Maria Flyger Würtz, Per Bækgaard, Michael Deininger 
Nurse: Hanne Konradsen 
Students: Emilie Kjeldsen, Pranjal Garg, Signe Meyer, Emil Folmer, Jiajing Zhang 
• 
The meeting’s focus was for Emilie Kjeldsen and Pranjal Garg to present their projects and 
findings on the problem of assessing and reducing anxiety in the PED. 
The following images present some of the main points in the presentation of Emilie Kjeldsen. 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
The following figures display some of the main learnings from the presentation of Pranjal: 
 
 
In addition, in a brief discussion after the presentation, nurse Hanne explained that children are 
often anxious because they are unfamiliar with the environment of the hospital and the procedures 
==PAGE:100==
that they need to undertake. It was discussed that creating a solution that could educate them as 
well as assess their anxiety and reduce it would be beneficial. 
==PAGE:101==
A.4
Affinity Diagram
The Affinity diagram can be seen below.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
93
==PAGE:102==
==PAGE:103==
A.5
Test Plan
The Test plan can be seen below.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
95
==PAGE:104==
UX Testing Plan:  
Objectives: 
1. Evaluate the usability and user experience of the mobile game application designed 
to collect physiological biometrics for assessing children's anxiety in a hospital 
setting. 
2. Identify usability issues, assess the effectiveness of game mechanics, and gather 
feedback to improve the application's functionality and user experience. 
Participants: 
• 
Target Audience: Children aged 4-8 (representative of potential users awaiting 
hospital treatment) 
• 
Minimum of 5 participants, ensuring diverse demographics and gaming experience 
levels. 
Testing Environment: 
• 
Location: A designated quiet area within the hospital or a child-friendly space 
conducive to testing. 
• 
Equipment: Laptop with touch screen functionality (to simulate tablet/ iPad) with the 
game application installed and connected eyetracker and  
• 
Facilitator: UX researcher or tester experienced in working with children. 
Testing Methodology: 
Pre-Test Preparation: 
1. Obtain ethical approvals and parental consent for involving children in testing 
activities. https://forms.gle/w6pgNqWgEmBgPkXu9  
2. Prepare the testing space with necessary equipment and ensure a comfortable 
environment. 
Testing Sessions: 
1. Introduction: 
• 
Welcome the child and their parent or guardian, if present. Explain the 
purpose of the test and ensure the child's comfort. 
• 
Evaluate child’s anxiety using the mYPAS template. 
• 
Ask the child to evaluate anxiety level using the VAS scale. 
• 
Ask parent/ nurse to evaluate anxiety level using the VAS scale. 
 
2. Icebreaker Activity: 
• 
Engage the child in a brief icebreaker activity or conversation to build rapport. 
3. Testing Tasks: 
• 
Present a series of tasks within the game application, focusing on: 
• 
Navigating the game interface 
• 
Completing specific game tasks related to anxiety assessment 
• 
Interacting with features for biometric data collection 
4. Data Collection: 
• 
Gather data through observations, note-taking, and audio/video recording 
(with consent). 
• 
Take notes of successful tasks and moments when the child requests help 
==PAGE:105==
• 
Encourage children to think aloud during gameplay to understand their 
thought processes and reactions. 
• 
Evaluate child’s anxiety using the mYPAS template. 
 
5. Post-Test Interview: 
• 
Conduct a brief interview to gather qualitative feedback: 
• 
Ask about their overall experience with the game. 
• 
Inquire about any challenges or difficulties encountered. 
• 
Seek suggestions for improvement and features they liked/disliked. 
6. Parental Involvement: 
• 
If parents are present, conduct a separate interview to gather their 
perspectives and observations regarding their child's interaction with the 
game. 
• 
Ask parent/ nurse to evaluate anxiety level using the VAS scale. 
 
Post-Test Activities: 
1. Data Analysis: 
• 
Review observations, notes, and recordings to identify usability issues, 
patterns, and user preferences. 
• 
Summarize qualitative feedback and key insights. 
2. Report Compilation: 
• 
Create a comprehensive report detailing findings, including identified issues, 
user feedback, and recommendations for improving the application. 
3. Iterative Design: 
• 
Implement necessary changes and improvements based on the gathered 
feedback and insights. 
• 
Prepare for subsequent rounds of testing to validate changes and 
enhancements. 
Ethical Considerations: 
• 
Ensure confidentiality and anonymity of participants' data. 
• 
Respect participants' rights and privacy throughout the testing process. 
Continuous Improvement: 
• 
Conduct iterative testing cycles to refine the application iteratively, integrating 
feedback from each round of testing. 
 
 
 
 
 
Icebreaker Activity: "Name and Share" 
==PAGE:106==
Objective: To encourage interaction, familiarize children with each other, and create 
a comfortable atmosphere at the beginning of the UX testing session. 
Instructions: 
1. Make sure the child is positioned comfortably. 
2. Introduce the activity: "We're going to play a fun game to get to know each other!" 
3. Begin by stating your own name and sharing something you like, for example, "My 
name is Tina, and I like to play the flute." 
4. Prompt the child to introduce themselves by saying their name and sharing 
something they enjoy doing or a favorite thing, like a hobby or favorite food. 
Facilitator's Role: 
• 
Lead by example: Start the activity by sharing your name and something you like, 
setting a positive tone for the activity. 
• 
Encourage participation: Help shy or hesitant children by offering support and gentle 
encouragement to share. 
• 
Listen attentively: Show interest in each child's contribution, offering positive 
reinforcement and asking follow-up questions to engage them. 
Benefits: 
• 
Promotes interaction: Allows children to introduce themselves in a fun and relaxed 
setting. 
• 
Encourages communication: Helps children feel more comfortable and open to 
participation in the testing session by creating a friendly environment. 
• 
Builds rapport: Establishes a sense of camaraderie among the children and with the 
facilitator, fostering a positive atmosphere. 
 
 
 
Qualitative Interview Script: 
Introduction: 
• 
Interviewer: Hi there! Thank you for playing the game with us. I'd love to hear what 
you thought about it. Is it okay if we chat for a little bit? 
Establishing Comfort: 
• 
Interviewer: Can you tell me your name? What do you like to do for fun? What 
games do you play or what tv shows do you like to watch? 
==PAGE:107==
Game Experience: 
• 
Interviewer: What did you think about the game you played today? Did you like it? 
Why or why not? 
• 
What was your favorite part of the game? What part did you find a little bit tricky? 
 
Engagement:  
• 
Interviewer: “Do you want to continue playing?”  
• 
If yes, why are you motivated to continue playing the game?” (Exiting characters, Problem 
solving, Touch, Visual/Sounds, Feel Relief, Participation) 
Ease of Playing the Game: 
• 
Interviewer: Were there things in the game that were easy to do? What was the 
easiest thing for you? 
• 
Was it easy to do the breathing/squieezing exercise?  
• 
Follow-up: Were there any parts that were a little bit hard? What was hard about 
them? 
Suggestions and Ideas: 
• 
Interviewer: If you could change something in the game to make it more fun or 
better, what would you change? 
• 
Follow-up: Is there anything else you would like to add about the game that we 
haven't talked about yet? 
Wrapping Up: 
• 
Interviewer: Thank you so much for sharing your thoughts with me! You did a great 
job playing the game and telling me about it. Is there anything else you want to say 
before we finish? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Modified Yale Preoperative Anxiety Scale (mYPAS) template 
==PAGE:108==
Link to mYPAS assessment: https://forms.gle/M66AZd8dbNcK7jM3A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:109==
VAS template 
 
==PAGE:110==
A.6
Link to source code
The following link points to the source code of the game.
https://lab.compute.dtu.dk/anxiety/mitigation­game
A.7
Test results from initial prototype
The test results from the testing of the initial prototype can be seen below.
102
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:111==
Results from the Initial test: 
  
The parents of the participants consent verbally that their children can play the game. 
Introduction 
Participants were briefly introduced to the game.  
Tasks: 
The participants were asked to play the game and perform the tasks within the game. 
The first task was to listen and follow the Hospital's Introduction of the game. 
The second task was to do muscle relaxation exercises in the orange garden. 
Ideally, the third task was to do a breathing exercise on the Mountain, however, due to technical 
reasons, this task was skipped. 
Equipment used: 
The participants were presented with the game on a laptop with touchscreen functionality. 
However, children were used to using a computer with a mouse so they used it as well as a laptop 
using the touchpad. In addition, there was an object representing an orange that could be squeezed 
and a windmill made from paper. 
Participants: 
·    Participant 1: 9-year-old girl, very active 
Notes: 
• 
The child expressed an interest to try the game. (The parent was present in the next room) 
• 
The child speaks and understands Danish.  
• 
The child completed the game introduction and the orange garden.  
From observations of the behaviour of the child, it was noted that she was impatient with the audio 
explanations of the game and wanted to move quickly through the game. She was distracted a 
couple of times due to the environment around her, but she was able to complete the task of the 
game she was presented with. From the time spent with her before the game, it was visible that she 
was comfortable using a mobile device (phone) and she was also very fast at using it. 
After finishing the orange garden level, the child commented that the game was “boring” for her, 
but she was not able to explain in detail why she found it boring. 
==PAGE:112==
 
 
·    Participant 2: 5-year-old girl 
• 
The child expressed interest in trying the game. (The parent was present in the next room) 
• 
The child speaks and understands Danish.  
• 
The child successfully completed the introduction and started the orange garden 
 
The gameplay was interrupted because they had to leave, but the girl expressed a wish to continue 
playing. 
She was also distracted occasionally whenever there was a longer audio explanation in the game, 
but she could regain focus. It was observed that it was harder for her to find smaller objects (such as 
oranges) on the screen, so she needed assistance to finish tasks. She was asked during playing if she 
understood the audio and what she needed to do, she understood everything, but sometimes she 
was a little confused about what to do next. 
  
However, due to time constraints, the parents of the participants could not give their feedback on 
the game. 
  
==PAGE:113==
 
 
  
  
  
 Summary of results: 
 
Metric 
Participant 1 
Participant 2 
Usability 
 
Success rate 
Task 1  completed Task 1 completed, but help required 
Task 2  completed Task 2 completed, but help required 
Engagement Game continuation no 
yes 
 
  
  
  
==PAGE:114==
  
Recorded data from eye tracker. 
 
  
  
From the pupil dilation, it can be seen that the first participant was more focused on performing the 
tasks in the game and was less distracted, which is also due to the age difference. On the other 
hand, participant 2 was more distracted and was more often away from the screen, therefore there 
is less recorded pupil data. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
A.8
Test results from the refined prototype
The test results from the testing of the refined prototype can be seen below.
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
107
==PAGE:116==
 
Qualitative questions 
 Experience: 
• 
Interviewer: What did you think about the game you played today? Did you like it? 
Why or why not? 
• 
What was your favorite part of the game? What part did you find a little bit tricky? 
 
Engagement:  
• 
Interviewer: “Do you want to continue playing?”  
• 
If yes, why are you motivated to continue playing the game?” (Exiting characters, Problem 
solving, Touch, Visual/Sounds, Feel Relief, Participation) 
 
Ease of Playing the Game: 
• 
Interviewer: Were there things in the game that were easy to do? What was the easiest 
thing for you? 
• 
Was it easy to do the breathing/squeezing exercise?  
• 
Follow-up: Were there any parts that were a little bit hard? What was hard about 
them? 
 
Suggestions and Ideas: 
• 
Interviewer: If you could change something in the game to make it more fun or better, 
what would you change? 
• 
Follow-up: Is there anything else you would like to add about the game that we haven't 
talked about yet? 
 
 
Results: 
Participant1: 11-year-old girl 
• 
Understands Danish 
• 
Managed to do all the CBT exercises. 
o Mountain 5/5 
o Orange garden 3/3 
o Forest: 5/5 in sync 
o Beach 3/3 
• 
Managed to follow the introduction and final scene. 
• 
Requested help only one time.  
• 
Notes:  
o she found the game fun, she was very concentrated on the game,  
==PAGE:117==
o She liked having a purpose and having to finish tasks to continue playing and 
receiving rewards.  
o She liked that the rewards were food. 
o She said she would continue playing the game again. 
o Improvements: more touch interactions like drag and drop and not only clicks 
o 15 minutes to finish the game. 
Participant 2: 7-year-old girl 
• 
Understands Danish 
• 
Managed to do the CBT exercise. 
o Mountain 3/5 
o Orange garden 3/3 
o Forest 4/5 
o Beach 3/3 
• 
Managed to follow the introduction and final scene. 
• 
Requested help.  
o On the introduction when needed click the red sofa 
o Finding the nest in the fog was not clear what to look for. 
o Clicking on Danny to start blowing. 
• 
Notes: 
o She liked the game; she liked squeezing the orange.  
o She said she would recommend the game to a friend. 
o There was a technical problem, that was hard to find objects with free swiping. 
o 12 min to finish. 
Participant 3: 5-year-old boy 
• 
Understands Danish 
• 
Managed to do the CBT exercise. 
o Mountain 1/5 – initially he didn’t realize he needed to do it in sync and breathe in, 
but his sibling told him to breathe in first. 
o Orange garden 3/3 
o Forest 4/5 
o Beach 3/3 
• 
Managed to follow the introduction and final scene and select the correct object.  
• 
Notes: 
o He thinks the game is fun. 
o He would recommend it to a friend. 
o He would try playing again. – he even played again the mountain 3 times, because he 
didn’t understand that he needed to click on next level. 
o 18min to finish the game. 
 
==PAGE:118==
A.9
Test results from the final prototype
The test results from the testing of the final prototype can be seen below.
110
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:119==
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
==PAGE:122==
==PAGE:123==
==PAGE:124==
==PAGE:125==
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
==PAGE:128==
A.10
Test results and analysis
120
Collecting physiological biometrics while using mobile game application for assessment of children’s
anxiety awaiting hospital treatment
==PAGE:129==
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
==PAGE:132==
==PAGE:133==
==PAGE:134==
==PAGE:135==
==PAGE:136==
==PAGE:137==
==PAGE:138==
==PAGE:139==
==PAGE:140==
==PAGE:141==
==PAGE:142==
==PAGE:143==
==PAGE:144==
==PAGE:145==
==PAGE:146==
==PAGE:147==
==PAGE:148==
==PAGE:149==
==PAGE:150==
==PAGE:151==
==PAGE:152==
==PAGE:153==
==PAGE:154==
==PAGE:155==
==PAGE:156==
==PAGE:157==
==PAGE:158==
==PAGE:159==
==PAGE:160==
==PAGE:161==
==PAGE:162==
==PAGE:163==
==PAGE:164==
==PAGE:165==
==PAGE:166==
==PAGE:167==
==PAGE:168==
==PAGE:169==
==PAGE:170==
==PAGE:171==
==PAGE:172==
==PAGE:173==
==PAGE:174==
==PAGE:175==
==PAGE:176==
==PAGE:177==
==PAGE:178==
==PAGE:179==
==PAGE:180==
==PAGE:181==
==PAGE:182==
==PAGE:183==
==PAGE:184==
==PAGE:185==
==PAGE:186==
==PAGE:187==
==PAGE:188==
==PAGE:189==
==PAGE:190==
==PAGE:191==
==PAGE:192==
==PAGE:193==
==PAGE:194==
==PAGE:195==
==PAGE:196==
==PAGE:197==
==PAGE:198==
==PAGE:199==
==PAGE:200==
==PAGE:201==
==PAGE:202==
==PAGE:203==
==PAGE:204==
==PAGE:205==
==PAGE:206==
==PAGE:207==
==PAGE:208==
==PAGE:209==
==PAGE:210==
==PAGE:211==
==PAGE:212==
==PAGE:213==
==PAGE:214==
==PAGE:215==
==PAGE:216==
==PAGE:217==
==PAGE:218==
==PAGE:219==
==PAGE:220==
==PAGE:221==
==PAGE:222==
==PAGE:223==
==PAGE:224==
==PAGE:225==
==PAGE:226==
==PAGE:227==
==PAGE:228==
==PAGE:229==
==PAGE:230==
==PAGE:231==
==PAGE:232==
==PAGE:233==
==PAGE:234==
==PAGE:235==
==PAGE:236==
==PAGE:237==
==PAGE:238==
==PAGE:239==
==PAGE:240==
==PAGE:241==
==PAGE:242==
==PAGE:243==
==PAGE:244==
==PAGE:245==
==PAGE:246==
==PAGE:247==
==PAGE:248==
==PAGE:249==
==PAGE:250==
==PAGE:251==
==PAGE:252==
==PAGE:253==
==PAGE:254==
==PAGE:255==
==PAGE:256==
==PAGE:257==
==PAGE:258==
==PAGE:259==
==PAGE:260==
==PAGE:261==
==PAGE:262==
==PAGE:263==
==PAGE:264==
==PAGE:265==
==PAGE:266==
==PAGE:267==
==PAGE:268==
==PAGE:269==
==PAGE:270==
==PAGE:271==
==PAGE:272==
==PAGE:273==
==PAGE:274==
==PAGE:275==
==PAGE:276==
==PAGE:277==
==PAGE:278==
==PAGE:279==
==PAGE:280==
==PAGE:281==
==PAGE:282==
==PAGE:283==
==PAGE:284==
==PAGE:285==
==PAGE:286==
==PAGE:287==
==PAGE:288==
==PAGE:289==
==PAGE:290==
==PAGE:291==
==PAGE:292==
==PAGE:293==
==PAGE:294==
==PAGE:295==
==PAGE:296==
==PAGE:297==
==PAGE:298==
==PAGE:299==
==PAGE:300==
==PAGE:301==
==PAGE:302==
==PAGE:303==
==PAGE:304==
==PAGE:305==
==PAGE:306==
==PAGE:307==
==PAGE:308==
==PAGE:309==
==PAGE:310==
==PAGE:311==
==PAGE:312==
==PAGE:313==
==PAGE:314==
==PAGE:315==
==PAGE:316==
==PAGE:317==
==PAGE:318==
==PAGE:319==
==PAGE:320==
==PAGE:321==
==PAGE:322==
==PAGE:323==
==PAGE:324==
==PAGE:325==
==PAGE:326==
==PAGE:327==
==PAGE:328==
==PAGE:329==
==PAGE:330==
==PAGE:331==
==PAGE:332==
==PAGE:333==
==PAGE:334==
==PAGE:335==
==PAGE:336==
==PAGE:337==
==PAGE:338==
==PAGE:339==
==PAGE:340==
==PAGE:341==
==PAGE:342==
==PAGE:343==
==PAGE:344==
==PAGE:345==
==PAGE:346==
==PAGE:347==
==PAGE:348==
==PAGE:349==
==PAGE:350==
==PAGE:351==
==PAGE:352==
==PAGE:353==
==PAGE:354==
==PAGE:355==
==PAGE:356==
==PAGE:357==
==PAGE:358==
==PAGE:359==
==PAGE:360==
==PAGE:361==
==PAGE:362==
==PAGE:363==
==PAGE:364==
==PAGE:365==
==PAGE:366==
==PAGE:367==
==PAGE:368==
==PAGE:369==
==PAGE:370==
==PAGE:371==
==PAGE:372==
==PAGE:373==
==PAGE:374==
==PAGE:375==
==PAGE:376==
==PAGE:377==
==PAGE:378==
==PAGE:379==
==PAGE:380==
==PAGE:381==
==PAGE:382==
==PAGE:383==
==PAGE:384==
==PAGE:385==
==PAGE:386==
==PAGE:387==
==PAGE:388==
==PAGE:389==
==PAGE:390==
==PAGE:391==
==PAGE:392==
==PAGE:393==
==PAGE:394==
==PAGE:395==
==PAGE:396==
==PAGE:397==
==PAGE:398==
==PAGE:399==
==PAGE:400==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
