==PAGE:1==
 
DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION OF 
WHOLE-CELL METABOLITE 
BIOSENSORS  
Johan Peter Bredal Jørgensen, s184145 
Master Thesis (30 ECTS), MSc Biotechnology  
January 22nd, 2024 
 
Supervisors: 
Morten Lindqvist Hansen 
Lars Jelsbak 
Morten Dencker Schostag 
 
Microbiome Interactions and Engineering Group 
DTU Bioengineering  
Technical University of Denmark 
==PAGE:2==
 
DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION OF WHOLE-CELL METABOLITE BIOSENSORS 
i
Acknowledgments  
I would like to thank Morten LH and Lars for providing me with the opportunity to do this 
incredibly exciting thesis, you gave me a great opportunity for me to expand my knowledge within 
the field of synthetic biology and introduce me to a bunch of cool new methods. The amount of time 
and effort Morten LH put into my learning through discussions, teaching, and guidance in the lab is 
truly astonishing, it must have taken a fair bit of patience to sketch me the mechanism of allelic 
exchange three times. I would also like to thank Morten DS for introducing me to the magic of qPCR 
and for great inputs throughout my project. I would like to thank the entire MIE group for always 
being super helpful with anything and everything. 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION OF WHOLE-CELL METABOLITE BIOSENSORS 
ii
Abstract 
Whole-cell biosensors have been proven to be effective tools in the in-situ detection of metabolites, 
and with the detection of metabolites, the opportunity for an improved understanding of microbiomes 
opens. Here the potential of whole-cell biosensors for the in-situ detection of soil metabolites is 
explored. This is done to gain an understanding of how the soil microbiome interacts with itself and 
plants, with the hope of engineering the microbiome to improve the health of plants. To do this, 
already constructed biosensors were transferred from their original host E. coli to the soil-relevant 
bacterium Pseudomonas putida KT2440. The four biosensors chosen were designed to detect 2,4-
diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG), Tetracycline, Pyoluteorin, and Salicylate. Upon the host switch to 
P. putida, it was observed that the biosensor functioned, but not as effectively as they had done in E. 
coli. Steps were then taken to improve the functionality of the biosensor, but the root of the issue was 
never identified. Lastly, it was also found that while the biosensor was functional in media, it showed 
no response to in a soil environment. This study thus both explores the usage of whole-cell metabolite 
biosensors for the detection of soil metabolites, highlights central issues in the application of these, 
and discussed what steps could be taken to improve their function. 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION OF WHOLE-CELL METABOLITE BIOSENSORS 
iii
Table of Contents 
Acknowledgments ....................................................................................................... i 
Abstract ....................................................................................................................... ii 
Table of Contents .................................................................................................................... iii 
Chapter 1: 
Introduction ...................................................................................... 2 
1.1 
Soil and plant metabolites: ............................................................................................. 3 
1.2 
Principles of whole-cell biosensors: ............................................................................... 6 
1.3 
What other methods of metabolite detection do we have? ........................................... 10 
1.4 
Integrases and Genetic memory devices: ..................................................................... 11 
1.5 
Background of this study: ............................................................................................ 14 
1.6 
Why this study, aims and outline: ................................................................................ 17 
Chapter 2: 
Results.............................................................................................. 19 
2.1 
Using qpcr for barcode detection ................................................................................. 19 
2.2 
Transferring biosensors to P. putida and testing .......................................................... 28 
2.3 
Testing the DAPG biosensor in complex environments .............................................. 34 
2.4 
Elucidating prophage interference with biosensor function ......................................... 37 
Chapter 3: 
Discussion ........................................................................................ 44 
3.1 
The effectiveness of qPCR ........................................................................................... 44 
3.2 
How did the biosensors function in P. putida compared to E. coli? ............................ 44 
3.3 
Why does the biosensor not function in soil or the rhizosphere of wheat? .................. 46 
3.4 
Why do we still see a reverse flip after the deletion of prophage regions? .................. 47 
3.5 
Challenges with this whole-cell biosensor system? ..................................................... 49 
3.6 
A future perspective on whole-cell biosensors: ........................................................... 51 
Chapter 4: 
Conclusion ....................................................................................... 52 
Chapter 5: 
Materials and Methods .................................................................. 53 
5.1 
Construction of barcodes for insertion in P. putida: .................................................... 53 
5.2 
Inserting barcodes into P. putida: ................................................................................ 53 
5.3 
Barcode detection, endpoint PCR ................................................................................ 54 
5.4 
Barcode detection, qPCR: ............................................................................................ 55 
5.5 
qPCR standard curves, liquid media: ........................................................................... 55 
5.6 
Tn7 tagging of P. putida strains with GFP and mKate: ............................................... 56 
5.7 
qPCR standard curve, non-sterile soil: ......................................................................... 56 
5.8 
qPCR standard curve, Direct soil extraction: ............................................................... 57 
==PAGE:5==
 
DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION OF WHOLE-CELL METABOLITE BIOSENSORS 
iv
5.9 
qPCR barcode strain mix control experiment, non-sterile soil: ................................... 57 
5.10 qPCR barcode strain mix control experiment, sterile soil with growth: ...................... 58 
5.11 Testing orthogonality of Barcode-Primer pairs ............................................................ 58 
5.12 Chromosomal integration of biosensors into P. putida: ............................................... 58 
5.13 Biosensor assay in LB: ................................................................................................. 59 
5.14 Determining the survivability of P. putida in sterile soil: ............................................ 60 
5.15 Biosensor assay in soil: ................................................................................................ 60 
5.16 Biosensor assay on wheat roots and root imaging: ...................................................... 60 
5.17 Phage deletion in P. putida: ......................................................................................... 61 
5.18 Cloning arabinose biosensor on pTn7 and pSEVA231: ............................................... 62 
5.19 Flow cytometry biosensor assay: ................................................................................. 63 
5.20 Strains ........................................................................................................................... 64 
5.21 Plasmids ....................................................................................................................... 67 
Bibliography ............................................................................................................. 68 
Appendices ................................................................................................................ 75 
  
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
2 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
The soil microbiome is a diverse environment with a large microbial diversity including bacteria, 
fungi, protozoans, and nematodes, many of these are directly associated with plants and can be 
categorized as either commensal, beneficial, or pathogenic to the host plant1. Microbes have 
developed specific mechanisms to control their relationship with plants and other microbes. Central 
to the interaction mechanism is the secretion and uptake of chemical signals and bioactive molecules2. 
While many bacteria positively interact with plants, there are also bad players. These bad players are 
the plant pathogens, who make their living on killing and feeding on the roots, leaves, and fruits of 
plants. It is estimated that 21.5% of wheat crops are lost due to pathogens and pests3. By developing 
methods for combatting bacterial pathogens, there is thus a huge potential to maximize both food 
production and economic gain for farmers. Several bacteria have already naturally developed methods 
for combatting many of the pathogens which target plants, these are collectively termed biocontrol 
bacteria4,5. Bacteria for use as biocontrol strains are already commercially available for the treatment 
of a variety of pathogen-caused plant diseases. There are however certain problems surrounding 
biocontrol products today, namely their inconsistency in acting as biocontrol agents when applied to 
the field, and the identification of bacteria with biocontrol capabilities5.  
Microbiomes are complicated in themselves but add on all metabolites produced and secreted by the 
microbiome, and how they interact, and understanding it becomes infinitely complex. A tool that has 
been used to gain a better understanding of the metabolite-mediated interaction in microbiomes is the 
whole-cell biosensors. In short, a whole-cell biosensor is a bacterium that has been genetically 
engineered to sense specific metabolites and process the input into an output that can be detected by 
researchers6. This study aims to expand upon work already done on whole-cell biosensors to improve 
their application possibilities in the in-situ detection of soil metabolites. This is done by creating 
whole-cell biosensors using soil-relevant bacteria and allowing for the detection of output without 
the need to recover living cells. 
By designing whole-cell biosensors specific to molecules that are thought to be key metabolites in 
the soil microbiome, we will expand our understanding of the soil microbiome. This knowledge of 
which will help us optimize the potential of natural biocontrol strains in agriculture to improve our 
food production.   
==PAGE:7==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
3 
1.1 
SOIL AND PLANT METABOLITES: 
The work here is based on metabolites that are found in the soil microbiome. This study is based on 
Nørgaard et al. (2023)7 with previous work on designing biosensors focused on four metabolites, 
namely 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG), Tetracycline, Pyoluteorin, and Salicylate (Figure 1). 
These four metabolites will be presented here. It will also introduce why whole-cell biosensors for 
each of these compounds will aid in our understanding of the soil microbiome and its interactions 
with plants.  
 
Figure 1: The four metabolites for which whole-cell biosensors were created in Nørgaard et al. (2023). 2,4-
diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG), Tetracycline, Pyoluteorin, and Salicylate. DAPG, tetracycline, and pyoluteorin are all 
antibiotics, while salicylate is a plant hormone. Here salicylate is shown as de-protonated salicylic acid, but salicylate 
covers salicylic acid and its salt and ester derivatives. 
DAPG: 
DAPG is a broad-spectrum antibiotic produced by several species of the Pseudomonas genus. It is 
one of the more studied metabolites produced by Pseudomonas and has been shown to be a key factor 
in the biocontrol capabilities of Pseudomonas8,9. Interestingly, DAPG has also been shown to possess 
a broad anti-cancer activity towards lung, breast, and leukemic cancer in vitro10. Most relevant for 
this study is DAPGs' proven ability to inhibit a range of fungal and bacterial plant pathogens.  
As an antifungal, DAPG has been shown to suppress the fungi Thielaviopsis basicola which is the 
causative agent of black root rot of the tobacco plant. The antifungal properties of DAPG towards T. 
basicola were identified by analyzing soil with natural suppressive activity against the pathogen and 
comparing it with non-repressive soil. In the repressive soil, an enrichment of fluorescent 
pseudomonads producing DAPG was identified11. DAPG has also shown anti-fungal properties 
==PAGE:8==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
4 
towards the plant pathogen Gaeumannomyces graminis var. tritici that causes take-all in wheat. Take-
all in wheat has been described as the most damaging root disease and can cause crop losses upwards 
of 50%12. DAPG was identified as a central metabolite in the combat of G. graminis var. tritici 
mediated Take-all in wheat from the study of Take-all decline (TAD). TAD is a natural phenomenon 
where there is a spontaneous decline in Take-all disease. TAD is described to be the recruitment of 
soil bacteria to combat the pathogen and it was found that essential to this was the recruitment of 
DAPG-producing Pseudomonads13. As an antibacterial agent, DAPG has been shown to be active 
against Ralstonia solanacearum which causes tomato bacterial wilt. This was proven by engineering 
P. fluorescens P2 to overproduce DAPG, which caused a reduction in bacterial wilt14.  
The studies above, which are used to determine the effect of DAPG as a plant pathogen, infer from 
the presence of DAPG-producing Pseudomonads that DAPG is the control agent. With a whole-cell 
biosensor, we can determine whether the Pseudomonads produce DAPG in soil and if the DAPG is 
bioavailable to the microbiome and plant pathogens. The many-faceted abilities of DAPG in 
biocontrol have already sparked interest in the identification of DAPG producers for application in 
plant protection15. 
Tetracycline: 
Tetracyclines as a group are some of the most widely used antibiotics and have seen application in 
both livestock and humans. Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum antibiotics that, in humans, are used to 
treat a range of illnesses caused by bacteria, such as urinary tract infections (UTIs), eye infections, 
and sexually transmitted diseases16,17. As mentioned, tetracyclines also see use in agriculture for the 
treatment of livestock, but it is also used for growth promotion of livestock18. While the use of 
antibiotics, hereunder tetracyclines, has declined in Europe over the past years, countries like the US 
still heavily use tetracyclines19. When tetracyclines are used in livestock, residues are readily released 
through the manure onto fields, where the antibiotic is free to interact with the soil microbiome. The 
broad-spectrum antibiotic released to soil has in several studies been shown to increase the spread of 
resistance genes. As indicated by the fact that tetracyclines are used to treat human diseases, the 
increased spread of resistance genes for tetracyclines poses a significant threat to human health20. 
Whole-cell biosensors for the detection of tetracyclines in milk, poultry, and fish have already been 
developed to control the release of tetracyclines and hereby limit the spread of resistance17. 
In this study, we focus on the soil microbiome, and to understand the relevance of tetracycline in soil 
microbiomes, we need to understand the origin of tetracycline. Tetracyclines were first identified in 
==PAGE:9==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
5 
the 1940s and produced by soil bacteria of the genus Streptomyces21. More recent studies show that 
the majority of natural producers of tetracycline have been isolated from soil. It was therefore 
suspected that the emergence of antibiotic resistance genes for tetracyclines is a natural phenomenon. 
The production of tetracycline from soil isolates has mainly been shown when grown in rich media, 
and it is not certain that soil conditions allow for the production of tetracycline22. Thus, by creating a 
whole-cell biosensor for the detection of tetracyclines, we can determine whether tetracycline is 
produced in a soil environment, and if it is released and met by members of the microbiome. The 
biosensor can further be used to aid in understanding under what conditions tetracycline is produced 
and what effect it has on the composition of the microbiome. 
Pyoluteorin: 
Pyoluteorin is like DAPG a metabolite produced by Pseudomonads but is a far less studied metabolite 
than DAPG. Pyoluteorin is an antibiotic that has been shown to have broad antibacterial activity 
against both gram positives and gram negatives23. The production of pyoluteorin from P. protegens 
Pf-5 has been shown to both suppress the growth and pathogenicity of the bacterial maize pathogen 
Pantoea ananatis, which causes brown rot on the leaves24. Pyoluteorin has further shown anti-fungal 
activity when produced by the same P. protegens Pf-5 strain against Botrytis cinerea. In the study, B. 
cinerea infected Cannabis sativa crops and caused gray mold disease, which the introduction of the 
Pf-5 control strain could limit. However, knocking out the production of pyoluteorin from Pf-5, its 
biocontrol effect upon B. cinerea dropped significantly25. With the results shown here, the biocontrol 
applications of pyoluteorin look promising and seem to be an understudied metabolite. A whole-cell 
biosensor for the detection of pyoluteorin will help in determining under what conditions pyoluteorin 
is expressed and push forward our understanding of what biocontrol possibilities pyoluteorin has. 
Salicylate: 
In contrast to the three metabolites described above, salicylate is produced by plants and not microbes. 
In this study, we refer to salicylic acid and its salts collectively as salicylate. Salicylate has been used 
for a long time to treat humans, due to its effective use as an anti-inflammatory and antipyretic (fever-
lowering) drug26. The effects of salicylate were first described by the Sumerians around 4000 years 
ago when they noticed the medicinal effects of willow bark, which contains significant concentrations 
of salicylate27,28. Salicylates act as plant hormones and play a vital role in the activation of systems 
geared to combat both biotic and abiotic stresses inflicted upon the plant29. The production of 
salicylate has been shown to both cause hardening of the plant cell wall and significantly increase the 
expression of several phytohormones involved with plant defense mechanisms26. Studies have also 
==PAGE:10==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
6 
shown that salicylate is instrumental in the activation of biocontrol bacteria in response to pathogen 
attack. Upon colonization of the plant pathogen P. syringae pv tomato on the plant Arabidopsis 
thaliana, a root colonizing P. fluorescens biocontrol strain was able to limit the pathogenicity of P. 
syringae. However, it was found that a functional salicylate production was needed for this biocontrol 
effect to take place30. With the study presented above, it is difficult to determine whether the 
biocontrol abilities of P. fluorescens are recruited directly from salicylate, or rather salicylate which 
induces the expression of a phytohormone which then causes the effect. With a whole-cell biosensor 
specific for salicylate we can determine whether salicylate is only an internal regulator in the plant, 
or it is released and made bioavailable to the microbiome.  
 
1.2 
PRINCIPLES OF WHOLE-CELL BIOSENSORS: 
 
The focus of this study is the application of whole-cell biosensors for application in a soil 
environment. In general, whole-cell biosensors are based on the principle of taking a bacterium, and 
genetically engineering it with a circuit that allows it to detect specific biotic or abiotic conditions 
and reports on this31. The concept of whole-cell biosensors is not new, with the first published 
biosensor being described in the 1970s and proved to be a cheap alternative to the enzyme-based 
sensor primarily in use. The whole-cell biosensors were, at the time, not able to compete with the far 
more developed enzyme-based sensor in both selectivity and sensitivity6. Thus, while whole-cell 
biosensors opened for the use of a promising new tool, much research was still needed to optimize 
the use of whole-cell biosensors for effective use. And much research is exactly what has happened 
since the 1970s. 
In the following, the principles behind the elements of a whole-cell biosensor will be described. A 
Whole-cell biosensor generally consists of 3 elements, the sensor, the processor, and the reporter 
(Figure 2). The Sensor which senses a specific signal, then activates the processing unit, also referred 
to as the transducer. The objective of the processor is to convert the signal sensed by the sensor into 
an output that we can detect, termed the reporter. These components are outlined in the figure below 
with variations on how each of these components may look.  
==PAGE:11==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
7 
 
Figure 2: The figure shows the general components of a whole cell biosensor. Whole-cell biosensors can sense a variety 
of signals such as metabolites, ions, etc. The signals are sensed either by transcription-based elements such as activators 
or repressors or two-component systems that use membrane-bound proteins to sense a signal outside the cell and 
activate an internal response regulator. The signal is then processed through the expression of genes to activate a 
reporter. The sensor can also process the signal using genetic logic based on a combination of inputs. The figure is 
made from Liu et al. (2022)32, Saltepe et al. (2018)33, and Lopreside et al. (2019)31   
Signal: 
Whole-cell biosensors have been developed to detect a wide array of biotic and abiotic factors. There 
have been biosensors developed for the detection of metabolite, temperature, light, ions, and pH 
among other signals. The ability to detect metabolites has been used in whole-cell biosensors to create 
strains that were able to aid in the discovery of new antibiotics. This was done by creating biosensors 
which report upon inhibition of cell-wall synthesis, allowing for a quick and fast way of screening 
compounds34,35. The detection of heavy metal ions has seen much interest in the detection of 
contaminated soils32,36,37. With increasing industry, mining, and agriculture, an increase has been seen 
in the release of heavy metals into natural environments where they often have detrimental effects on 
ecosystems. Conventional methods of detection of heavy metals rely mostly on spectrometry-based 
methods, but by using whole-cell biosensors it can be shown that these heavy metals are 
bioavailable36. Bioavailability is one of the key parameters that whole-cell biosensors can help us 
determine and define not only if a certain compound is present, but more importantly, whether it is 
==PAGE:12==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
8 
available for microbe. This will be especially important for detecting soil metabolites as these can 
readily be locked away from the microbes in the soil matrix. 
Sensor: 
One of the main challenges when designing a whole-cell biosensor is identifying or constructing an 
element that targets an inducer and can be used to initiate a signal. It is further the sensor that is 
mainly responsible for the specificity and sensitivity of the biosensor36. However as microbes are 
extremely diverse and have evolved to be able to adapt to a magnitude of different conditions, specific 
regulatory elements can often be found. The most basic sensors are the ones based on activators and 
repressors which specifically bind to the inducer. Upon binding of the inducer, the activator will bind 
to its promoter sequence to recruit the transcriptional apparatus and initiate the transcription of a gene 
of interest. For a repressor, the inducer will function as an anti-repressor and upon binding be released 
from its binding site and freeing a promoter to initiate the expression of a gene of interest6,38,39.  
Two-component systems are also utilized to sense, they consist of a membrane-bound sensor kinase 
protein and a response regulator. The membrane protein senses the inducer outside the cell and 
activates the response regulator by phosphorylation, which in turn induces gene expression38. The 
two-component system has for example been used to create an E. coli which is able to respond to red 
light40.  
The focus here has been on transcriptional sensors, it should be noted that both translational and 
posttranslational sensors do exist. Translational biosensors are mainly based around riboswitches that 
control expression by conformational changes upon inducer binding41. Posttranslational sensors are 
constitutively expressed proteins that only become activated upon binding of the inducer to, for 
example, emit light38. A biosensor that takes its signal from a temperature change was developed by 
taking the λ repressor which is temperature sensitive and using that as the sensor in an E. coli-based 
biosensor42. 
Processor: 
The most common and basic processor function occurs when the activator has met the inducer or the 
repressor reliefs binding of the promoter, and it is simply a gene expression. The biosensor can be 
constructed with specific logic gates that only process a response if another condition is met (AND 
gate) or can process different signals into the same response (OR gate)33.  
==PAGE:13==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
9 
Reporter: 
Fluorescence: One of the great advances in synthetic biology was the discovery of the GFP protein 
from the jellyfish Aequorea victoria. Derivatives of this protein have allowed the use of fluorescent 
protein across the color spectrum. In short, a fluorescent protein functions by exciting it with a specific 
wavelength of light, with the result of an emitting light at another specific wavelength. These amazing 
proteins are widely used in whole-cell biosensors today43. By utilizing fluorescent proteins, the 
response can further be detected by flow cytometry and excitation microscopy. 
Bioluminescence: lux operons from Vibrio fischeri, Photobacterium leiognathi, Vibrio harveyi have 
been identified which codes for bioluminescent genes and have been used as reporters in whole-cell 
biosensors44. Bioluminescent genes encode for luciferase which are enzymes catalyzing the 
oxidization of the compound flavin mononucleotide and in the process emitting light45. 
Colorimetric: The LacZ protein encoded in the lac operon from E. coli is a β-galactosidase enzyme. 
When the LacZ protein is used as the reporter in a whole-cell biosensor in media containing X-gal, it 
allows for easy visual identification. LacZ further has the advantage over gfp and lux-based reporters 
that it does not need oxygen to be produced31,44.  
Genetic memory: The reporter can be a permanent alteration in the genome of the whole-cell 
biosensors. This can be mediated by the expression of an integrase which causes a permanent flip of 
a genetic memory device46. This reporter type is central to this study and will be further elaborated 
on in the following. 
1.2.1 Defining the parameter of a biosensor: 
Several key benchmarks are used to define the dynamics of a whole-cell biosensor, which will be 
presented here. Above the elements of a whole-cell biosensor was presented, it is important to notice 
that these elements are not just simply put into a cell, they are all under control of their own promoter. 
The activity of each promoter controls how strong the expression of each element is and has a huge 
impact on the key parameters defined for a biosensor. 
==PAGE:14==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
10 
 
Figure 3: The response curve of a biosensor defines certain key parameters used to evaluate the biosensor. The leakiness 
of the biosensor is the signal output without inducer. The limit of detection is the lowest concentration of inducer that 
gives a signal higher than base leakiness. The dynamic range is difference in response from leakiness to the highest 
possible output. 
The three key parameters of a whole-cell biosensor are the leakiness, the limit of detection, and the 
dynamic range (Figure 3). The leakiness of the biosensor defines the response when no inducer is 
present. The limit of detection is the smallest amount of inducer which causes a response. The 
dynamic range is the difference in response from the base level to the maximum response31,47.  Often 
the desired parameters of a response curve are low leakiness and a high dynamic range. The desired 
limit of detection will vary based on the application. In order to obtain a biosensor with desirable 
parameters, tuning of the biosensor is needed. Tuning involves turning up and down the expression 
of key genes in the biosensor circuit, for example for a leaky system, the expression of the repressor 
could be increased48,49. 
 
1.3 
WHAT OTHER METHODS OF METABOLITE DETECTION DO WE HAVE? 
Today the use of mass spectrometry-based identification is widely applied for the identification of 
metabolites. By using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) a thorough analysis of 
metabolites can be determined from a sample. The first step in LC-MS is extraction of metabolites 
from a sample, this is done to limit the interference by the sample matrix. After extraction, the sample 
is run through chromatography where its constituents are separated, usually based on polarity. The 
==PAGE:15==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
11 
constituents are then transferred to a mass analyzer where the mass-to-charge ratio is determined. 
From the mass-to-charge ratios the metabolites in the sample can be determined50.  
If you want knowledge of spatial distribution of metabolites you can use matrix-assisted laser 
desorption ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI). MALDI-MSI can be used to detect 
metabolites in a thin section of biological tissue by ionizing the sample using a laser followed by 
detection of the mass-to-charge ratio. By running the laser across the entire surface of the sample and 
logging where on the sample each metabolite was found, a map of the distribution of each metabolite 
can be created51,52.  
The issue with both LCMS and MALDI-MSI is the inability to detect the production of soil 
metabolites in-situ. This problem can be solved by a whole-cell biosensor which can be inoculated 
into soil and determine if specific soil metabolites are being produced, and if they are bioavailable to 
the microbiome. 
1.4 
INTEGRASES AND GENETIC MEMORY DEVICES: 
The use of bacteriophage elements in synthetic biology has proven useful for synthetic biologists in 
their ability to target and modify specific regions of a genome. Bacteriophages, or simply phages, are 
viruses that infect bacterial cells, they do this to hijack the cells with the intention of using the 
bacterium metabolic machinery to replicate and spread53. Viruses are widespread indicated by them 
being the most abundant biological entity in existence, most common of the viruses are the phages 
that are thought to outnumber bacteria 1:1053,54. A phage infection begins by the phage binding to 
surface recognition sites on the bacteria, followed by injection of the phage genome. Upon entering 
the bacteria, the action of the phage is determined by whether the phage is virulent or temperate. A 
virulent phage is strictly lytic, this means that upon infection it will immediately take over the host to 
replicate, lyse the cell, and spread. If the phage in turn is a temperate phage, it has a choice. The 
temperate phage can immediately initiate the lytic cycle as the virulent phage, or it can go into the 
lysogenic stage. During lysogeny the phage integrates itself on the genome of the bacteria and 
becomes a prophage (Figure 4). The phage can stay in the genome and replicate with the bacteria for 
many generations, and in certain cases genes are also expressed from the prophage. The prophage can 
switch to the lytic cycle in response to external stress or randomly, this is initiated by the excision of 
the prophage from the bacterial genome53,55,56. The ability of a temperate phage to integrate on the 
bacterial chromosome is controlled by a site-specific action mediated by a class of proteins called the 
integrases. The integrase is expressed from the phage upon infection, and catalysis a recombination 
==PAGE:16==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
12 
event between a specific attachment site on the phage called the attP and a specific attachment site 
on the bacterial genome called the attB site. The sequences of attP and attB sites are specific to the 
phage. The recombination event mediates the integration of the phage onto the bacterial genome 
flanked by new attachment sites named the attL and attR57. When switching to the lytic lifestyle the 
excision of the phage is also catalyzed by the integrase, the ability to excise the phage is controlled 
by a protein called the Recombination Directionality Factor (RDF)58. The expression of the RDF thus 
controls when the phage should go lytic and can be controlled by a variety of external factors, such 
as stress on the host bacterium57. 
 
 
Figure 4: When a temperate bacteriophage goes into the lysogenic life cycle, it integrates into the genome of the 
infected bacterium. This integration is mediated by a phage-encoded integrase. The integrase catalysis a recombination 
event between an attachment site on the phage called attP and an attachment site on the bacteria attB. Upon integration, 
new attachment sites are form, attL and attR. When the bacteriophage exists in the lysogenic cycle and goes lytic, an 
excision event occurs. The excision of the phage is again catalyzed by integrase but crucially only possible with a 
Recombination Directionality Factor (RDF). The RDF is expressed from the phage upon external factors such as stress 
and control when the phage should go lytic. 
Two known classes of integrase proteins exist, the serine integrases and the tyrosine integrases. The 
main differences will be described here and shown in Figure 5. Tyrosine integrases are named for 
==PAGE:17==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
13 
their catalytic residue, which is a tyrosine, they catalyze the recombination event by the formation of 
a Holliday junction and resolving this. Tyrosine integrases have overlap regions of 6-8 bp, on the attB 
site the overlap region is flanked by imperfect inverted repeats, on the attP site the overlap region is 
extended with multiple binding sites for the integrase, and cofactors. Serine integrases have a serine 
as the catalytic residue, and functions by creating a 2 bp staggered cut at the attB/P sites, followed by 
rotation and ligation. Serine integrases have overlap regions of 3-12 bp. The attB and attP sites are 
only occasionally flanked by repeats57.   
 
Figure 5: Two known types of integrases exist, the serine integrase and the tyrosine integrase. They both perform the 
same event, which is a recombination, but the mechanism of how it is performed varies. A serine integrase makes 
staggered cuts in the DNA strand and through a subunit rotation and ligation make a recombination. Tyrosine integrase 
has tyrosine as its catalytic residue and makes the recombination by forming and resolving a Holliday junction. Made 
from Olorunniji et al. and Fogg et al.53,59 
The function of integrases has been used to create genetic memory devices in bacteria. By cloning a 
strain with both an attP and attB site and giving it an integrase, you can make a piece of DNA be 
excised from the genome. However, if clone the attP/B sites to face each other you can also make a 
piece of DNA flip (Figure 6). 
==PAGE:18==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
14 
 
Figure 6: The basic function of a genetic memory device utilizes the attachment sites from phage integration onto 
bacterial genomes. By pointing the attachment sites towards each other the function altered from an integration/excision 
to a flip. Using this system with a whole-cell biosensor that expresses an integrase upon induction, creates a genetic 
change to the genome that can be measured through sequencing or site specific PCR.   
These genetic memory devices were for example used by Yang et al. (2014)46 to create large genetic 
memory arrays. In this array several genetic memory devices were set up next to each other with 
different DNA spacers between the attB/P. As we know, integrases are specific to their attB/P sites, 
therefore it is possible to make a biosensor strain which expressed different integrases in response to 
different signal, causing the flip of specific genetic memory devices. 
 
1.5 
BACKGROUND OF THIS STUDY: 
This study is a continuation of work done by Morten Lindqvist Hansen (MLH) and Jens-Jakob Krogh 
Nørgaard (JJN), they are collectively cited by JJNs thesis as ‘Nørgaard et al. (2023)’. Both have also 
continued work on biosensors, strains not created for the reference above, are noted in the strain list 
by their initials. I will here outline the whole-cell biosensors system which was devised by Nørgaard 
et al. (2023). Five biosensors were created for detection of the metabolites: DAPG, Tetracycline, 
Pyoluteorin, Salicylate and Naringenin. The Naringenin biosensor was never sufficiently optimized 
and was thus left out of this study early. All the biosensors use the same reporter system (Figure 7), 
which is a two-fluorophore system. The first fluorophore is mKate which is constitutively expressed 
and the second is GFP which is located between the attachment sites of an integrase and functions as 
a genetic memory device as introduced above.  
==PAGE:19==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
15 
 
Figure 7: The figure shows the Reporter 12 system from Nørgaard et al. (2023). The reporter is used in a whole-cell 
biosensor that upon induction expresses an integrase. The reporter ensures that all biosensor cells are expression the red 
fluorescence constitutively, and upon induction the integrase will cause a flip of the GFP gene to also express that.  
The two-fluorophore system makes all biosensor cells red, and upon meeting the intended inducer, 
the integrase will be expressed, which will in turn flip the GFP gene and turn it on. This system allows 
for an optimized detection of biosensor using flow cytometry. In a flow cytometer the entire 
population can be quantified as all the cells in the sample being red and the inducer response can be 
quantified by all the red cells which are also green.  
==PAGE:20==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
16 
 
 
Figure 8: The biosensors from Nørgaard et al. (2023) consist of a regulatory element under the control of a constitutive 
promoter that controls the expression of an integrase. The regulators phlF, tetR, and pltZ are all repressors and nahR is 
an activator. The figures show the biosensors in their induced state which means their metabolites are present and the 
integrase is expressed.  
In Figure 8 the sensor and processor of the biosensors are shown. Each biosensor is shown in its 
induced state, indicating that phlF, tetR, and pltZ are all repressors and nahR is an activator. This 
means that when these biosensors are induced, it will cause the expression of an integrase, which in 
turn will cause the activation of GFP in the reporter system shown above. In this system the 
integrase12 is used, this nomenclature comes from Yang et al. (2014)46 and is the same integrase12 
gene used by them.   
 
==PAGE:21==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
17 
1.6 
WHY THIS STUDY, AIMS AND OUTLINE: 
Previous work in this lab on biosensors has been in E. coli, which is a great strain for genetic 
engineering and laboratory experiments. But since these biosensors are developed to sense soil 
metabolite, it would be beneficial to have these biosensors in a soil-relevant bacterium, which led to 
the main aim of this thesis which is: optimizing the whole-cell biosensors designed by Nørgaard et 
al. for application in soil and plant root environments.  
In Nørgaard et al. (2023), the reporter used was a fluorescent marker based on the principles of genetic 
memory. The strength of a fluorescent based reporter is the induction of the biosensor can easily be 
determined by excitation of the fluorophore by a microscope or using flow cytometry. Flow cytometry 
is especially useful as it is a fast and relatively cost-effective method of detecting the flip rate of the 
biosensor. The downside of a fluorescent based reporter however is the need to recover intact cells, 
which proves difficult when the biosensor is applied in-situ in soil. This fact is also proven by many 
soil-specific biosensors only being applied to soil extracts, allowing them to grow in liquid media.   
The issues of the biosensor host strain and reporter not being optimal for soil condition gave rise to 
the aims of this study which is as follows: 
1. Construction of a catalogue barcode-based whole-cell biosensor in P. putida. 
The biosensor host will be switched to P. putida as it is a soil relevant bacterium and therefore 
more useful in the in-situ detection of soil metabolites. Furthermore, the biosensors reporter 
will be switched to a simple barcode. By using barcodes, it allows the detection of the reporter 
from DNA, this means that detection can be performed by DNA extraction from soil followed 
by qPCR or sequencing. Initially barcodes will be cloned into P. putida in preparation for 
integration of the biosensor. In the system designed here we will create one strain for each 
biosensor to limit the protein burden of the biosensor. This means that each biosensor strain 
will receive a unique barcode.  
2. Testing of genetic memory barcodes in P. putida using qPCR. 
==PAGE:22==
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
18 
A version of the flipped (attL/R) barcode will also be cloned, and together with its non-flipped 
(attB/P) counterpart it will be used to determine whether qPCR is effective in identifying and 
quantifying barcodes, both in simple media conditions and in more complex soil conditions. It 
will also be determined if qPCR can be used to quantify different barcodes from the same 
sample, as one of the end goals of these whole-cell biosensors is creating a cocktail that allows 
for tandem identification of metabolites. 
Quantitative PCR (qPCR) is a method for quantifying a specific DNA region from a sample by 
creating primers that bind to that region. As the name implies, it is a PCR based method that 
after each PCR cycle measures fluorescence based on how much DNA is in the sample. After 
a certain number of cycles the fluorescence will cross a threshold of, the amount of cycles it 
takes for the qPCR to reach this threshold is called the Cq value. The more DNA in the sample, 
the faster the threshold will be reached and the Cq value will be lower. By measuring the Cq 
value of samples with a known amount of DNA (or cells) a standard curve can be created to 
quantify the population based on the Cq value60. 
In this project standard curves will be created to quantify the populations of flipped to non-
flipped barcode to determine the response of the whole-cell biosensors. 
3. Testing and characterization of the barcode-based biosensor with qPCR. 
The biosensor from Nørgaard et al. (2023) is then transferred to P. putida carrying barcode 
reporters. Hereafter they will be tested to determine if the biosensors function in the new host, 
and if the dynamics of the biosensors are equivalent to that seen in E. coli. It will also be tested 
if the biosensors can be used in a cocktail where the response from each of the biosensors can 
be determined. 
4. Test the biosensor in soil and with plants. 
Lastly, it is tested whether the biosensors can be applied in complex environments such as in 
bulk soil and in conjunction with plants.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
19 
Chapter 2: Results 
2.1 
USING QPCR FOR BARCODE DETECTION 
This study aims to utilize DNA barcodes as the reporting part of genetic memory devices. The concept 
of this genetic memory is derived from the study by Yang et al., (2014)46. By using barcodes as the 
reporter, we induce a unique permanent genetic marker in the bacteria, which can be measured by 
using site-specific qPCR or through amplicon sequencing. Additionally, it allows for detection of 
multiple small molecules simultaneously, as each system would be equipped with a unique DNA 
barcode. The sensor part of the biosensor functions exactly as in Nørgaard et al., 20237, by the 
bacteria meeting an inducer, causing the expression of a serine integrase, which in turn catalyzes a 
flip of the attB/P configuration to the attL/R configuration (See Figure 9). However, instead of 
flipping a GFP gene causing the cells to turn green, it simply flips a random 50-base pair DNA 
sequence. 
 
Figure 9: The genetic memory device from Yang et al. (2014) has here been designed with a metabolite specific 
barcode of 50 bp. By placing the barcode between the attB/P sites with a biosensor that expresses an integrase upon 
induction, the reporter will be a flip of the barcode. This can then be measured by sequencing or qPCR to detect a 
flipped barcode. 
By changing the 50-base pair DNA sequence, we can create reporters that are specific to the inducer 
which they sense. The site-specific qPCR is then performed by using barcode-specific primers to 
==PAGE:24==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
20 
differentiate between the different barcodes and running two qPCR reactions, one with a primer 
targeting the Non-flipped barcode and one with a primer targeting the Flipped barcode.  
2.1.1 Cloning of biosensor-specific barcodes and a flipped control in P. putida ∆Phages with 
allelic replacement 
To use the barcodes as genetic memory devices the barcodes needed to be cloned into P. putida 
∆Phages strain. The ∆Phages strain is a P. putida KT2440 which has 4 prophage regions removed61, 
this strain was utilized to ensure no RDF factors are present in the biosensor. Serine integrases 
originate from bacteriophages, where they catalyze the integration of phage DNA into the bacterial 
chromosome, allowing the phage to enter a lysogenic lifestyle. We know from previous work on 
serine integrases that excision of phages and entry into a lytic lifestyle is only possible with the aid 
of an additional protein factor; an RDF. In this reporter setup, an excision reaction would result in a 
reverse flip of the barcode. Barcodes were inserted into P. putida in the PP_1035 site62 through the 
use of allelic replacement (Figure 10)63. Allelic replacement is a homology-based alteration of the 
genome where a homology region upstream and downstream of the insertion site is used to alter the 
genome between the homology regions. The homology regions are inserted into the pK18msB 
plasmid, with any genetic alteration between the homology regions. It is a two-step recombination 
reaction beginning with the first crossover, where the entire plasmid is inserted on the chromosome, 
followed by a second crossover which either reverts the strain to wildtype or incorporates the genetic 
alteration. Thus, barcodes were inserted into P. putida by performing allelic replacement with 
homology regions up- and downstream of the PP_1035 site with the barcode between the homology 
regions.  
==PAGE:25==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
21 
 
Figure 10: The method of genetic engineering of Pseudomonas based on the method from Hmelo et al. (2015)63 is based 
on a two-step method to integrate a sequence. Here the integration of a barcode is shown. A plasmid containing the 
barcode is flanked by homology region for the locus of insertion is cloned. This plasmid conjugated into the recipient 
strain and here a crossover event occurs to integrate the entire plasmid. After integration the plasmid a second crossover 
event can occur, isolates for which this occurs is selected for. The second crossover event has 2 possible outcomes, 
either the bacteria revert to wildtype or the plasmid backbone is excised leaving the barcode. 
This method was used to integrate 5 different barcodes into separate P. putida ∆Phages strains, 
assigning one barcode to each of the biosensors previously designed (Nørgaard et al. (2023)7). The 
sequences of each of the five barcodes are shown in Appendix A. A visual representation of each of 
each of the five barcodes with binding of each of their respective barcode specific primers is shown 
below (Figure 11): 
==PAGE:26==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
22 
 
Figure 11: For each of the whole-cell biosensors a specific 50 bp barcode region is used. Each of these barcodes have a 
barcode specific primer. By running a PCR/qPCR with the barcode specific primer and primer Pr134 the non-flipped 
barcode can be detected. If induced the barcode will flip and this can then be detected with the barcode specific primer 
and primer Pr133. 
This method of inserting barcodes was further used to create P. putida ∆Phages strain with a flipped 
version of the DAPG-assigned barcode, named the flipped control. This flipped control strain is 
needed in the evaluation of using qPCR to detect barcodes, as all the initial tests with qPCR will be 
performed without a sensor element present. By having Non-flipped and Flipped control barcoded 
strains, we are able to create standard curves to determine the relationship between the Cq value and 
CFU/mL, which can be used to estimate the sensitivity and specificity of the qPCR. 
2.1.2 qPCR can be used to quantify barcoded P. putida strains in liquid cultures. 
To test the effectiveness of utilizing qPCR for quantification of barcoded P. putida strains, two strains 
were created. The first is with an attB/P (Non-flipped) barcode inserted into the PP_1035 site, and 
the second is the same barcode but cloned to mimic the attL/R (Flipped control) configuration. When 
running qPCR quantification of barcoded strains, all experiments were run in two parallel qPCR 
reactions, the first with primers specific for the Non-flipped barcode and the second with primers for 
the flipped barcode. The Non-flipped and Flipped strains carried no integrase and thus should keep 
==PAGE:27==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
23 
their conformation. Initially, these two strains were used to make standard curves that could predict 
the CFU/ml in a sample from the Cq value given by the qPCR. By using these standard curves, the 
population which had a flipped barcode can be quantified. The standard curves were created by 
running qPCR on 3-time 10x dilutions of bacteria and from CFU counting inferring the expected 
number of CFU/mL in the dilution. The standard curves for quantification of bacteria in liquid culture 
from a microtiter plate are shown in Figure 12.    
 
Figure 12: Strains with non-flipped and flipped barcodes were grown for 24 hours in liquid media, followed by CFU 
counting on agar plates and DNA extraction by boiling. The boil lysate was serially diluted, and 3 dilutions were used 
as template DNA in a qPCR. From the CFU counting the CFU/ml could be calculated for the dilutions used in the 
qPCR. The Cq values from the qPCR were plotted against the CFU/mL, and this was used to create a standard curve. 
Each dilution was made in triplicates.  
For a good standard curve, we want an efficiency ~90-110% and the R2 value >0.95. For the Non-
flipped barcode a qPCR efficiency of 57.47% was obtained with an R2 value of 0.99. For the flipped 
barcode a qPCR efficiency of 65.84% was obtained with an R2 value of 0.979. The model fitted well 
with the data indicated by the R2 values, however there seemed to be an issue with the efficiency of 
the qPCR, which will be elaborated on later. While the model was not optimal, it was decided that 
the qPCR could be used to detect the barcode P. putida strains in a broad range of Cq values. It was 
seen that the primers only gave a signal when paired with their correct barcode (data not shown), 
showing the qPCR can accurately tell the two barcodes apart. Taken together, this meant that qPCR 
with the standard curves produced here, could be used effectively to quantify the flipped and non-
flipped population of biosensors in a microtiter experiment.  
2.1.3 qPCR can effectively be used to quantify barcoded putida strains in soil. 
Later we would like to perform biosensor experiments in both bulk soil and with plant roots. To 
determine the flip rate in these complex environments, we also needed to create standard curves. One 
==PAGE:28==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
24 
could argue that the standard curves from the liquid cultures could be used for quantifying the 
barcodes, but with standard curves specific for soil we eliminate the extraction bias and thus it would 
be possible to determine CFU per gram of soil. Standard curves were created from two methods of 
extracting DNA from soil. The first method is the supernatant method where salt water is used to 
solubilize the bacteria, this had previously been used to extract bacteria from soil for flow 
cytometry64. The supernatant method was initially used here as it allowed agar plating of the bacteria. 
DNA extraction directly from soil was later used, as it reduced the extraction bias of needing to 
suspend the cells in the supernatant, thus it also had standard curves created.  
Standard curves from the supernatant method were created by extracting DNA from the supernatant 
and plating for CFU counting. The CFU/mL was then used to calculate the CFU/g soil, with the 
assumption that all bacteria in the soil had been transferred to the supernatant. From this, the Cq 
values from the qPCR of several dilutions were plotted against the CFU/g soil, and through linear 
regression, the standard curves were created. The result is shown in Figure 13. 
 
Figure 13: Strains with non-flipped and flipped barcodes were inoculated into and immediately extracted by solubilizing 
the cells. This was followed by CFU counting on agar plates and DNA extraction. The DNA was serially diluted, and 3 
dilutions were used as template DNA in a qPCR. From the CFU counting the CFU/ml could be calculated for the 
dilutions used in the qPCR. The Cq values from the qPCR were plotted against the CFU/mL, and this was used to create 
a standard curve. Each dilution was made in triplicates.  
For the Non-flipped barcode a qPCR efficiency of 92.09% was obtained with an R2 value of 0.89. 
For the flipped barcode a qPCR efficiency of 77.71% was obtained with an R2 value of 0.985. The 
model for the non-flipped barcode did not fit optimally with the data indicated by the R2 values, 
however, the efficiency had improved. For the flipped barcode the data fitted better, but the efficiency 
was again lower, however still better than for the liquid culture. 
To obtain standard curves for direct soil extraction, we initially determined the CFU/g soil by 
measuring CFU/ml of the inoculant. Directly after inoculating the soil, we extracted DNA for qPCR. 
==PAGE:29==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
25 
The Cq values from the qPCR of several dilutions were plotted against the CFU/g soil and through 
linear regression the standard curves were created, the result is shown in Figure 14. 
 
 
Figure 14: Strains with non-flipped and flipped barcodes were inoculated into sterile soil and DNA was extracted from 
the soil. Simultaneously the inoculant was plated for CFU counting. The DNA was serially diluted, and 3 dilutions were 
used as template DNA in a qPCR. From the CFU counting the CFU/ml could be calculated for the dilutions used in the 
qPCR. The Cq values from the qPCR were plotted against the CFU/mL, and this was used to create a standard curve. 
Each dilution was made in triplicates.  
For the Non-flipped barcode a qPCR efficiency of 105.49% was obtained with an R2 value of 0.98. 
For the flipped barcode a qPCR efficiency of 109.80% was obtained with an R2 value of 1.0 
(rounded). The models for direct soil extraction were significantly better than the previous ones and 
showed great results in predicting the CFU/g soil from the barcode detection with qPCR. 
From the results of the standard curves from the soil, it was determined that it is possible to quantify 
barcodes using both the supernatant and the direct extraction method. Taken together this indicates 
that we can use barcodes as the reporter in the P. putida biosensor.  
2.1.4 qPCR can effectively be used to determine the flip rate of barcodes in soil. 
To determine the sensitivity of the qPCR detection method, an experiment was set up where the non-
flipped and flipped barcode strains were mixed in various ratios and inoculated into the soil. At both 
0 hours and 24 hours, the DNA was extracted using the supernatant method and measured with qPCR. 
The Cq values from the qPCR were then used together with the standard curves above to determine 
the artificial flip rate of each mix.  
==PAGE:30==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
26 
 
 
Figure 15: Non-flipped and Flipped barcode strains were inoculated into soil at varying ratios to determine whether the 
qPCR would accurately be able to determine the flip rate of a biosensor. The result shows the x-axis with the 7 different 
ratios created, the first value is the mixed non-flipped proportion and the second is the flipped proportion. Thus, every 
ratio on the x-axis is one experiment. The stippled line shows the predicted percentage in the mix, while the solid line 
shows the measured percentage. 
From the result it is seen that qPCR accurately predicts the flip rate across all the tested values, 
indicating a high sensitivity. It is further seen that the result does not change over time, meaning that 
the configuration of the barcode is stable in the soil for at least 24 hours. The result here shows that 
barcodes are an effective reporter when used together with qPCR.  
2.1.5 Different genetic barcodes are orthogonal with qPCR primes.  
One of the end goals with the P. putida biosensors is to use the biosensors in a cocktail where several 
different whole-cell biosensors are mixed before being inserted into the environment for metabolite 
detection. While all reporter barcodes have the same basic structure, the genetic code between the 
attB/P is specific for the individual biosensor. With each biosensor having separate barcodes, we can 
determine the flip-rate of each biosensor and thus the presence of each of the specific metabolites. 
The primers for qPCR were designed as follows: Two primers were kept identical for all sensors (one 
up and one downstream of the barcode), whereas an additional primer was designed for each sensor 
that would anneal in the middle of the 50bp barcode. An experiment was set up to determine if each 
of these barcode-specific primers were orthogonal to each other, meaning that only a qPCR signal is 
seen when the correct primer is used together with the corresponding barcode. Five barcodes were 
assigned to the five metabolites for which biosensors had been made in E. coli, namely, DAPG, 
Naringenin, Tetracycline, Pyoluteorin, and Salicylate. The DAPG barcode is the same as used above 
to determine the usability of qPCR for barcode detection. While the naringenin barcode was assigned, 
no further work on this biosensor was done in this study. The sequences of all barcodes are shown in 
Appendix A. Each barcode was inserted into separate P. putida ∆Phages strains using allelic 
==PAGE:31==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
27 
replacement, as described for the DAPG barcode. These were then grown O/N in LB and a qPCR 
with each of the barcode-specific primers was run for each of the barcode strains. From the qPCR, 
the CFU/ml was calculated using the stand curves for liquid media. The percentage of the total 
population for each of the barcode primers was calculated, and the result is shown in figure 16. 
 
Figure 16: The result shows five columns, one for each of the barcode strains. For each of the five barcode strains, five 
qPCR reactions were run, one for each of the barcode-specific primers, see Figure 11. This was done to test if the 
primers designed for each barcode exclusively gave a signal for their intended barcode.  
For the majority of the orthogonality tests the qPCR reaction gave no signal, suggesting the primers 
are completely orthogonal to their respective barcodes. It was seen that the naringenin primer was 
able to pick up a signal corresponding to 0.03% of the population when using the DAPG barcode 
strains and 0.01% when using the Salicylate barcode strain. The percentages in crosstalk are so low 
that it will never affect the conclusion of a biosensor assay, and it is very likely to be false positives. 
It is thus determined that there is no consequential crosstalk between non-specific barcode primers 
and barcodes. This means that further experiments of making biosensor cocktails followed by the 
determination of specific barcodes of each of the biosensor strains using qPCR is possible. However, 
it is important to mention that here only the orthogonality of the barcodes in the attB/P (non-flipped) 
orientation was tested. For a perfect orthogonality assay, we should have cloned flipped-controls of 
==PAGE:32==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
28 
all of the barcodes and included these in the assay. It was decided that the large amount of work 
associated with cloning flipped controls was not strictly needed, since this experiment showed no 
significant crosstalk, and thus it is likely not a common issue, and any crosstalk with the flipped 
barcodes would immediately present itself in the controls when running biosensor assays.  
2.2 
TRANSFERRING BIOSENSORS TO P. PUTIDA AND TESTING 
2.2.1 Biosensors were successfully transferred to P. putida by utilizing Tn7 cloning. 
The biosensors that were developed by Nørgaard et al., (2023)7 for DAPG, Tetracycline, Pyoluteorin, 
and Salicylate were created and tested in E. coli. One of the main objectives of this study is the transfer 
of these biosensors to the more soil-relevant bacteria of P. putida, which is expected to behave like 
an indigenous member of the soil and plant root communities. This means that P. putida biosensors 
will help in determining if these metabolites are bioavailable to members of these communities. The 
biosensors created by MLH and JJN were originally cloned onto the pSEVA231 plasmid65,66. 
However, in this study we aim to chromosomally integrate the biosensors to eliminate any issues of 
both plasmid number instability and total plasmid loss. Plasmid persistence is normally kept by 
having an antibiotic resistance gene on the plasmid and growing the bacteria in media supplemented 
with this antibiotic. In complex environments, it is more difficult to maintain the antibiotic pressure 
needed for plasmid persistence, and if the bacteria are assayed with natural community members the 
use of antibiotics is likely detrimental to the experiment.   
To integrate the biosensors on the chromosome of P. putida, the Tn7 transposon-mediated integration 
into the Tn7 locus on the P. putida genome was utilized67. Through Golden Gate cloning68–71 each 
biosensor was transferred from the pSEVA231 plasmid to the pTn7-M plasmid. The biosensor was 
inserted into the Tn7 locus of P. putida by use of quad-parental mating. From previous work, it was 
found that the leakiness of the biosensor was reduced when adding a degradation tag to the integrase 
(JJN KILDE). The need for a degradation tag was tested by cloning a version of the biosensor both 
with and without a degradation tag. A biosensor with a degradation tag is annotated with ‘_LVA’ 
which is the sequence of the degradation tag that Nørgaard et al., 20237 showed was needed for the 
proper function of the biosensor. The DAPG (PhlF_LVA) biosensor had already been cloned into P. 
putida by MLH and the naringenin biosensor had not yet finished optimization in E. coli and was thus 
omitted. This means that these six biosensors were attempted cloned into P. putida: 
o 
TetR 
o 
TetR_LVA 
==PAGE:33==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
29 
o 
NahR 
o 
NahR_LVA 
o 
PltZ 
o 
PltZ_LVA 
The biosensors were cloned into the strains P. putida ∆Phages strains with biosensor-specific 
barcodes. After attempted integration of the biosensors, they were verified by sequencing the Tn7 
locus on the P. putida genome. Of the six biosensors that were attempted integrated into P. putida, 
only the TetR failed to be integrated into P. putida after two attempts. It was already expected that 
the biosensor versions with degradation tags were needed, as this had been shown by JJN for E. coli, 
thus no further attempts at integrating the non-tagged TetR biosensor were made. The results here 
show that the transfer of biosensors from E. coli to P. putida via chromosomal integration using the 
pTn7 plasmid is possible. These biosensors are now ready for further testing to verify their leakiness 
and later their ability to respond to their intended metabolites.     
2.2.2 Biosensors need a degradation tag to limit the leakiness of the biosensor. 
It was tested whether the use of degradation tags is needed in P. putida as they are in E. coli. As the 
biosensors are cloned into P. putida strains with biosensor-specific barcodes already integrated, a 
simple end-point PCR was performed with primers for each non-flipped and flipped barcode for each 
strain. This was performed after 24 hours of growth in LB with no inducer. If any of the biosensors 
are leaky, the integrase will be expressed and flip the barcode, thus a non-leaky biosensor is identified 
by no band showing for the flipped barcode PCR. This is an important experiment as a leaky biosensor 
is detrimental to the basic function of the biosensor which should only flip the barcode when exposed 
to the metabolite for which it is designed.   
==PAGE:34==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
30 
 
Figure 17: After cloning the biosensors into P. putida, a PCR reaction was run to determine if there was leakiness of the 
biosensor causing unintended flip of the barcode. For each biosensor two variants were clone, one without a degradation 
tag on the integrase and one with. The degradation tag is annotated as _LVA. By running both a PCR for non-flipped 
and flipped barcode, it was seen that an _LVA tag was essential to not have a leaky system.  
The result of the barcode orientation PCR is shown in Figure 17, here it is seen that the PltZ and 
NahR biosensors without degradation tag give bands for the PCR when targeting the non-flipped 
barcode and the flipped barcode. Bands for both barcode orientations show that the biosensor is leaky, 
causing expression of the integrase which flips the barcode for a significant part of the population. 
For all the biosensors with the LVA degradation tag, strong bands are only seen for the non-flipped 
barcode. This indicates that the leakiness of the biosensor has been greatly reduced by the addition of 
the degradation tag. While this is a simple test that is unlikely to show low levels of leakiness. But 
from the results shown, it is clear that further work with the biosensors should be done with the 
degradation-tagged versions of the biosensors.  
 
2.2.3 Biosensors from E. coli respond to metabolites and flip the barcode in liquid media. 
The biosensors were tested in their ability to respond by growing in LB with increasing concentrations 
of inducer. This was done to determine if the biosensor functions when being transferred from E. coli 
==PAGE:35==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
31 
to P. putida. It is also important to test if the sensitivity of the biosensor is comparable to that of the 
E. coli biosensors, as it is very likely that the transport of the inducers varies between the two 
organisms. After 24 hours of growth, the flip rate was quantified by determining the Cq value for 
each barcode orientation. These values were subsequently used to determine the corresponding 
CFU/mL from the standard curves created above. The standard curves for the DAPG barcode were 
used for all biosensors, as flipped control versions were not cloned for the other barcodes.  
 
Figure 18: The response curves for the four biosensors from Nørgaard et al. when transferred to P. putida ∆Phages by 
chromosomal integration mediated by Tn7. The experiments were run in liquid cultures with increasing concentrations 
of inducer and the flip rate (response) was determined from qPCR of the barcode report element. For each concentration 
triplicates were assayed, the average response is shown as the black dot and the standard deviation is shown as T-bars. 
The lines between the averages are only for visual effect. 
All biosensors were able to respond to the inducer in varying degrees. The PhlF_LVA and TetR_LVA 
biosensors had a max flip rate of approximately 80% at respectively 10 µM DAPG and 100 nM 
tetracycline. Both PhlF_LVA and TetR_LVA showed a decrease in the flip rate at higher 
concentrations of inducer. The decrease in flip rate at increasing levels of induction was not seen in 
E. coli (JJN KILDE), and thus it must be a characteristic associated with switching to a new host 
organism. This characteristic of the biosensor in P. putida is very undesirable as it makes the 
biosensor result unpredictable. We hypothesized that an RDF (recombination directionality factor) 
==PAGE:36==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
32 
may be present in P. putida ∆Phages strain which is expressed under the stress of producing high 
levels of integrase (i.e. at high concentration of inducer). As explained in the introduction, the 
expression of an RDF causes a reverse flip for the reporter setup here. Thus, the presence of such an 
RDF could be expected to cause reverse flips of the barcode and would therefore result in lower levels 
of flipped population at high inducer concentrations. This issue was already predicted, which is why 
the P. putida ∆Phages strains were utilized. The ∆Phages strain has four known prophage regions 
knocked out61 and was then predicted to carry no further RDF factor, which from the results shown 
was likely wrong. Further work will be done to attempt to eliminate this issue and will be expanded 
upon later.     
The PltZ_LVA biosensor was able to reach a flip rate of approx. 30% at the max induction used here 
which was 40µM. In E. coli the max induction used was 10 µM where 100% of the population had 
flipped. This means that the PltZ_LVA biosensor is significantly less sensitive to pyoluteorin in P. 
putida than in E. coli. The flip rate of the PltZ_LVA biosensor shows no peak and is thus likely to 
increase its flip rate further with an increased pyoluteorin concentration, this was not tested due to a 
limited supply of pyoluteorin. The result of the PltZ_LVA biosensor shows that this biosensor needs 
optimization to increase its sensitivity in P. putida.  
The NahR_LVA biosensor also needed more inducer to begin flipping than in E. coli, again showing 
lower sensitivity. The NahR_LVA biosensor reached a max flip rate of 50% at 0.25mM salicylate. 
After increasing the salicylate concentration even higher, the flip rate dropped significantly again.  
2.2.4 Biosensors cocktail  
One of the application improvements of using barcodes instead of a fluorescence-based reporter is 
the ability to differentiate which reporter has been activated. In this experiment, we wanted to prove 
this fact by creating a biosensor cocktail and seeing if we could determine and differentiate the signal 
from each biosensor under induction. The experiment was performed by first creating the biosensor 
cocktail with the DAPG, tetracycline, pyoluteorin, and salicylate biosensor strains, and then inducing 
each biosensor separately in LB. The flip rate of each biosensor in the cocktail was then determined 
by running qPCR reactions with all barcode-specific primers and determining the CFU/mL of the 
non-flipped and flipped barcodes for all biosensors. When analyzing the data, an issue with the DAPG 
flipped barcode qPCR was noticed, this issue persisted when repeating the experiment, thus no data 
is available for induction with DAPG. This also means that the data shown here for the PhlF_LVA 
biosensor should only be considered cautiously. 
==PAGE:37==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
33 
 
Figure 19: To test if the application of a biosensor cocktail is feasible a biosensor mix was created and in separate 
reaction induced one by one, followed by response detection by qPCR. The four charts shoe the biosensor mix being 
induced by the three different inducers and a control (DAPG induction not shown). In each chart there are four stacked 
bars, one for each biosensor in the mix. Each stacked bar shows the population of non-flipped (blue) to flipped (orange) 
and the number above shows the response in percentage.   
The result of the biosensor cocktail assay is shown above. Each plot shows the biosensor cocktail 
being exposed to different inducers and a control. Each stacked bar shows the Non-flipped and flipped 
proportion of the population. The number above each bar shows the percent of the population which 
is flipped. Immediately it was noticed that there was a big difference between the CFU/mL of each 
biosensor, we decided to not normalize each biosensor but simply mixed 100x dilutions of each, 
which could explain this. It is seen that no response is seen for the control with no inducer and for the 
three experiments where an inducer is added, only the induced biosensor strain in the cocktail 
responds. It is also seen that for each of the induced strains, they reach similar flip rates as they did 
when induced alone (Figure 18), this means that the biosensor sensitivity does not decrease by being 
in the cocktail. 
==PAGE:38==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
34 
It looks like the CFU/mL is lower for the TetR_LVA biosensor strain in the cocktail when induced, 
a simple T-test was performed comparing the total CFU/mL (Both non-flipped and flipped) of the 
induced strain to the CFU/mL of the control. The T-test showed that the TetR_LVA biosensor had a 
significantly lower CFU/mL when induced compared to the control. For PltZ_LVA the CFU/mL 
increases (not significantly) and the NahR_LVA is approximately the same when induced compared 
to the control. When induced with salicylate the CFU/mL of TetR_LVA and PltZ_LVA was heavily 
increased, which is why the NahR_LVA biosensor looks so low.  
From the results above, it is clear that we can measure each biosensor in a biosensor cocktail and 
determine the flip rate of each biosensor in the cocktail. This means that the use of a biosensor cocktail 
to measure the presence of several different metabolites is possible.   
2.3 
TESTING THE DAPG BIOSENSOR IN COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTS 
One of the major reasons for switching the host of the biosensor to P. putida was that this organism 
lives like a member of the natural soil community, and it is in this community we want to determine 
if specific metabolites are present at bioavailable levels. It is therefore also important to determine if 
the biosensors function in soil communities. All previous work on the biosensor has been performed 
in simple liquid LB assays where the ability to grow and what proteins are expressed will inevitably 
differ from that of soil assays. It was decided that the PhlF_LVA biosensor would be used for initial 
testing of the biosensor in complex environments, as it is for this strain the standard curves above 
have been made, and it showed relatively fine flip-rate dynamics. 
2.3.1 The DAPG biosensor is not able to respond to natural levels of DAPG in bulk soil. 
Initially, it was tested whether the PhlF_LVA biosensor strain was able to respond to added DAPG 
in bulk soil. For soil induction tests, sterile soil was used to eliminate any production of the DAPG 
from natural soil community members. The sterile soil was obtained by gamma radiation, with a 
nominal dose of 15 kGy. Initially, it was tested whether P. putida would be able to survive in the 
sterile soil, this was done by introducing P. putida to the sterile soil, and with 24-hour time intervals 
cells were extracted and plated for CFU/g soil determination. The result of this is shown below. 
==PAGE:39==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
35 
 
Figure 20: The figure shows the survivability of P. putida ∆Phages in sterile soil (gamma radiated). The survivability 
was determined by inoculating bacteria in soil and allowing them to incubate for a set amount of time, followed by 
solubilization of the cells and plating for CFU counting. 
From the result, it is seen that after introduction to the sterile soil, the CFU/g soil drops considerably, 
but is after that stable. It is thus considered that P. putida can survive in the sterile soil, but it is not 
able to an exponential growth phase. However, since P. putida can inhabit the sterile soil without a 
total population crash, the ability for a P. putida biosensor to respond to inducers was tested.  
DAPG was added in increasing concentrations from a stock solution to 1 gram of sterile soil before 
inoculation with the PhlF_LVA biosensor. The concentrations of DAPG in the soil were selected 
based on the article by Bonsall et al., 199772 which determined the concentration of DAPG in the 
rhizosphere of roots with adhering soil after treatment with a DAPG-producing P. fluorescens to be 
around 2 µg/g root. We chose to measure the flip rate both around this ‘natural’ level and significantly 
higher. After 24 hours of growth, DNA was extracted from the soil and qPCR was run to determine 
the flip-rate of the PhlF_LVA biosensor. The result is shown in the Figure below:  
==PAGE:40==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
36 
 
Figure 21: The PhlF_LVA biosensor was tested to see if it would be able to respond in sterile soil. The soil was 
supplemented with increasing concentrations of DAPG. Each concentration was tested in triplicates. After 24 hours, 
DNA was extracted from the soil to determine the response using qPCR to quantify the barcode population of non-
flipped to flipped. 
From the result, it is seen that none of the tested concentrations of DAPG could induce a flip in the 
PhlF_LVA biosensor in sterile soil. It could be that the sensitivity of the biosensor is lower in soil 
than what had been observed in liquid cultures, but we here have a much higher concentration of 
DAPG than what had previously been observed under similar conditions. A previous study 
determined that the concentration of DAPG in soil declined rapidly with a half-life of 6 hours due to 
binding with soil and root particles or through degradation73. So it might be that when DAPG is added 
only at the beginning of the assay, it is degraded or sequestered before the added biosensor exits lag-
phase.   
2.3.2 The DAPG biosensor is not able to respond to natural levels of DAPG when growing at 
wheat roots. 
It was hypothesized that the growth in bulk soil of P. putida was limited and that growth likely is 
needed for the proper function of the biosensor. It was therefore tested whether the biosensor would 
function on the roots of wheat plants. On the roots we expected there to be secretion of nutrient rich 
root exudate to the bacteria which would increase its growth74. The increased growth would in turn 
give the biosensor a better chance of functioning. Four conditions were tested, the first was wheat 
inoculated with PhlF_LVA biosensor in potting soil, the second was wheat inoculated with 
PhlF_LVA biosensor in potting soil spiked with DAPG, the third was wheat inoculated with 
PhlF_LVA biosensor as a second bacterium (P. kilonensis) which was known to produce DAPG in 
==PAGE:41==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
37 
potting soil, and the fourth was wheat in potting soil. After 7 days the wheat plants were removed, 
and DNA extracted from the rhizosphere of the plant to quantify the flip rate in each experiment.  
The flip rate of each experiment is shown below together with the standard deviation:   
Sample: 
Flip-rate 
Std. dev 
Wheat + PhlF_LVA 
2,27% 
0,6% 
Wheat + PhlF_LVA + DAPG  
3,49% 
1,8% 
Wheat + PhlF_LVA + P. kilonensis  
1,03% 
0,3% 
Wheat  
0,00% 
0,0% 
While the flip-rate was higher after the addition of DAPG, a T-test revealed that it was not significant. 
With the addition of P. kilonensis the flip rate was even lower than the control. Taken together this 
means that the growth on the root of wheat under the conditions here did not improve the function of 
the biosensor. Further research must be done to elucidate the problems with the biosensor in soil as it 
is imperative that it functions in complex environments. 
The qPCR showed that barcode DNA was in the rhizosphere, but to determine that P. putida indeed 
grows on the root of wheat a GFP tagged strain was inoculated on the roots. After 7 days of growth 
the roots were imaged (see Appendix B), it was however not possible to distinguish between the 
uninoculated wheat and the inoculated wheat. 
2.4 
ELUCIDATING PROPHAGE INTERFERENCE WITH BIOSENSOR FUNCTION 
Initial testing of the serine-integrase-based biosensor in P. putida showed a characteristic that we 
described as a ‘reverse flip’ at high concentrations of inducer (see Figure X). We did not understand 
the biology behind this but suspected that prophage elements on the genome of P. putida induced the 
reverse flip. Looking at the native function of serine integrases in (Figure X), they not only allow for 
the integration of phages onto the genome but with an RDF factor, allow for phage excision and 
initiation of its lytic cycle. What we describe as a reverse flip corresponds to what natively is a phage 
excision (an attL/R configuration, reverting to an attB/P). Thus, we hypothesized that at high levels 
of inducer, the increased stress of expressing the integrase causes an RDF factor from a prophage 
located in P. putida to be expressed, resulting in the serine integrase reverse flipping the attL/R 
configuration to the attB/P. To create an optimal whole-cell biosensor, it would be optimal to 
eliminate any reverse flipping as we do not completely understand under what conditions the reverse 
==PAGE:42==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
38 
flip is initiated. This means that in complex environments there is likely more stress causing a higher 
reverse flip rate than seen in the simple LB tests performed here. It is therefore crucial for a fully 
functional and predictable biosensor that we eliminate any reverse flip activity.  
2.4.1 An arabinose biosensor carried on the pSEVA231 plasmid or chromosomally integrated 
functions in P. putida but is significantly less sensitive. 
To improve the biosensor dynamics, the prophage interference with serine integrase biosensors was 
analyzed using the arabinose biosensor described in Yang et al., 201446 The reason for switching to 
an arabinose biosensor was to be able to compare the dynamics of the biosensor to that of Yang et 
al., 2014 and to limit any potential stress from the inducers for which biosensors had already been 
designed.  
It was further tested whether a biosensor carried on a plasmid showed better response dynamics than 
a chromosomally integrated sensor. To this end, two arabinose biosensors were created. The 
arabinose biosensor was cloned onto the pSEVA231 and pTn767 plasmids using golden gate cloning 
and transformed into chemically competent E. coli CC118 λpir. The pSEVA231-AraC plasmid was 
conjugated to P. putida with tri-parental mating, and the pTn7-AraC plasmid was used to 
chromosomally integrate the sensor in the Tn7 site on P. putida using quad-parental mating.  
The arabinose biosensors were inserted into P. putida strains with the fluorescence-based reporter-12 
system designed by MLH. Briefly, the reporter-12 system carries a constitutively expressed mKate 
gene and a GFP gene located between the attB/P sites, however, in the opposite orientation in relation 
to its respective promoter. When the integrase is expressed the GFP gene is flipped and expressed, 
causing the cell to turn green. With this system, it is possible to do flow cytometry where all red cells 
are gated as biosensor cells and the flipped population is identified by a second gate which identifies 
green cells within the population of red cells that have responded to the inducer in question. The 
reason for switching back to the older fluorescence-based system is the higher throughput and there 
was no need for the higher sensitivity or the ability to recover cells from complex environments which 
qPCR gives. 
To initially verify that the arabinose biosensor functions in a P. putida strain, KT2440-Reporter12 
with pSEVA231-AraC and Tn7-AraC was tested by plating on LB agar supplemented with 50 mM 
arabinose, followed by verification of both red and green fluorescence of the colonies. This qualitative 
experiment showed that both biosensor variants turned green in response to arabinose. However, the 
pSEVA231-carrying biosensor did show a seemingly higher fluorescence under the microscope, 
==PAGE:43==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
39 
indicating a more sensitive biosensor. Switching to a microtiter assay with quantification using flow 
cytometry, it was identified that the flip rates were very low at the induction levels used in Yang et 
al., 2014, especially for the Tn7 biosensor. This shows that the sensitivity of the biosensor is worse 
in P. putida. The lower sensitivity of the biosensor meant that higher concentrations of arabinose 
were needed, with Yang et al., 2014 using 1mM at max induction we needed 100mM arabinose. Even 
at the higher concentrations of arabinose the Tn7 biosensor still only showed very little flip activity 
(Appendix C), it was therefore decided to continue with the pSEVA231 biosensor.  
With the functional arabinose biosensor on the pSEVA231 plasmid, it can now be used to test the 
effect of deletion of various prophage elements in the P. putida genome. The reason for Tn7 having 
lower sensitivity than pSEVA231 makes sense because the AraC is an activator75 and in the Tn7 
biosensor only one copy is present while the pSEVA231 variant is a medium copy-number plasmid 
with 30-40 copies pr. Pseudomonas cell76.  
2.4.2 Testing the deletion of four prophage regions in P. putida  
It was predicted that there might be interference from prophage elements with the function of the 
biosensor, this is why the P. putida-∆Prophages strain obtained from Esteban (KILDE) was used to 
construct the biosensors for the DAPG, Tetracycline, Pyoluteorin, and salicylate. From the data 
shown above, the biosensors show reverse flip activity at high inducer concentrations. This means 
that the deletion of the prophage region does not eliminate the reverse flip activity. We were interested 
in identifying which of the prophage regions caused the improvement in the flip dynamics of the 
biosensor to understand which strategies need to be employed to improve the function of our 
biosensors further.  
The ∆Prophages strain was created by identifying and knocking out 4 prophage regions61 named ∆P1-
4, and it was initially these 4 regions that would separately be assayed to determine their effect on the 
biosensor flip dynamics. After inspection of the prophage variants, it was identified that a few 
prophage genes up and downstream of the prophage 2 region had remained. The remaining genes 
around prophage region 2 were deleted by allelic replacement. The variant with the total deletion of 
the prophage 2 region was named P2del and was created in the ∆Prophages and the ∆P2 background 
strains. With the wildtype KT2440 strains, this gave a total of 8 strains to be assayed for 
improvements in the flip dynamics.  
All 8 strains were tagged with the reporter-12 system and subsequently conjugated with the 
pSEVA231-AraC biosensor plasmid. The biosensor strains were grown in LB with increasing 
==PAGE:44==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
40 
concentrations of arabinose for 24 hours followed by measuring with flow cytometry. The result is 
shown in figure 22. 
 
Figure 22: The arabinose biosensor from Yang et al. (2014) was cloned into P. putida strains with deletions of various 
prophage elements to determine if any of these caused interference with the function of the biosensor. The reporter is 
fluorescence based and the response was determined by flow cytometry. 
From the results above it was seen that KT2440 has a higher reverse flip rate than the ∆Phages strain 
as predicted (Figure 22.A). But it is also clear that under the conditions of this experiment, we still 
see a reverse flip for the ∆Phages strain which is undesirable for a whole-cell biosensor.  
It is also seen that the ∆Phages-P2del (Figure 22.G) strain behaves very far from what would have 
been predicted by looking at the ∆Phages (Figure 22.F) strain and the P2-P2del (Figure 22.H) which 
are its closest relatives, as it flips much lower and very strongly reverse flips. It is difficult to 
determine a reasonable explanation for why ∆Phages-P2del performs so poorly when its flip dynamic 
is considerably different from the other strains, an explanation could be a mutation in the strain, 
potentially in the integrase gene severely hampering its activity. It is of course possible that this exact 
combination of gene deletions is detrimental to the function of the arabinose biosensor, but it is found 
highly unlikely. A reproduction of the strain and experiment should be performed before conclusions 
on the ∆Phages-P2del are made.   
The result from ∆P1 (Figure 22.B) shows no reverse flip activity and reaches almost a 100% flip rate, 
which is a desirable dynamic for the biosensor, but curiously the ∆Phages strain does not reach as 
==PAGE:45==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
41 
high a flip rate and shows reverse flip. As described above, ∆Phages carries the ∆P1, and any potential 
RDF removal from the deletion of the ∆P1 region should also apply to the ∆Phages strain. It is seen 
that ∆P2, -3, and -4 all show a higher reverse flip than ∆Phages, this could indicate that the positive 
effect of deleting the P1 region was decreased by the deletion of one or more of the other prophage 
regions. This indicates that it is not an effect of deleting an RDF from one of the prophage regions. 
A new hypothesis that could explain this effect is that the prophage regions interfere with the copy 
number of the pSEVA231 plasmids, and the dynamic is improved by altering the number of AraC 
and Integrase-12 genes compared to the reporter-12 site. If this hypothesis is correct, it means that 
tuning of the expression of the AraC and Integrase-12 promoters could alleviate the reverse flip 
activity when the biosensors are carried in the Tn7 site, which is the case for the metabolite 
biosensors. The hypothesis was not further investigated in this study, but it was decided that further 
investigation of the prophage interference should be done with a chromosomal Tn7 biosensor, as the 
pSEVA231 biosensors were too unpredictable. When testing the assays with the fluorescence 
reporter, it is also difficult to determine if the drop in flip rate at increasing concentration is due to 
reverse flip or increasing stress, which could also affect the strains' ability to produce integrase and 
with this hinder the function of the reporter. Considering this, improved systems to determine a true 
reverse flip need to be utilized.  
2.4.3 Identification and deletion of new prophage elements in P. putida 
As the ∆Phages strain still showed reverse flip activity, an unknown RDF could be hiding on the 
chromosome outside the prophage regions and causing the reverse flip. It was decided to further 
investigate whether other RDF genes were present in the genome of P. putida, besides the ones 
located in the prophage regions already knocked out. RDFs in the P. putida genome were identified 
by performing a ‘Translated BLAST (tblastn)77,78’ against a database of known RDF genes (Lewis et 
al., 200158). Two genes in the P. putida genome showed similarity to known RDF genes, namely 
PP_4151 and PP_5527. It was decided that these genes were to be knocked out of the ∆Phages-P2 
background strain as this also had all other identified prophage elements knocked out. The genes were 
first attempted knocked out by using I-SceI-assisted allelic replacement79,80, which proved effective 
for the deletion of PP_5527, but not PP_4151. The deletion of PP_4151 was then attempted with a 
two-step allelic exchange with sucrose counter selection63 which, after several attempts, proved 
successful. However, due to time constraints, it was only possible to verify the gene deletion and not 
test it. 
==PAGE:46==
 
Chapter 2: Results 
42 
2.4.4 Testing the effect of deletion of new prophage elements in P. putida shows no altered flip 
dynamic. 
The strain with the potential RDF gene PP_5527 deleted was assayed together with the ∆Phages and 
∆Phages-P2del strains to determine if PP_5527 was an RDF causing reverse flip of the biosensor. It 
was decided to move to the DAPG biosensor for assaying the effect of prophage elements, as it is 
chromosomally integrated and has already been shown to work decently in the P. putida ∆Phages 
strain. It was also determined to use the barcode system developed here as it allowed for using the 
flipped control variant to prove that reverse flip occurs. By cloning the biosensor into strains with the 
attL/R barcode we can assuredly prove that a reverse flip occurs if we after induction see a population 
with the attB/P configuration. This means six strains were assayed to determine the elimination or 
reduction of reverse flip activity:  
o 
∆Phages attB/P 
o 
∆Phages attL/R  
o 
∆Phages-P2 attB/P  
o 
∆Phages-P2 attL/R  
o 
∆Phages-P2-5527 attB/P  
o 
∆Phages-p2-5527 attL/R 
A reduction in reverse flip is identified by no drop in flip rate at increasing concentrations of inducer, 
this is identified from the attB/P strains. Furthermore, if a true reverse flip occurs, this will be 
identified from the attL/R strains which will revert to the attB/P configuration.  The strains were 
tested at increasing concentrations of DAPG in LB, the results are shown in the table below. 
 
Table 1, The result of running a biosensor assay to determine the effect of deletion prophage elements using the 
PhlF_LVA biosensor and barcode reporter. Each of the three different strains were cloned with a non-flipped attB/P 
barcode and a flipped attL/R barcode. The attB/P barcode was used to test standard response, while the attL/R was used 
to identify reverse flip. The attL/R strain will begin with a response of 100% and any decrease in this will prove that 
reverse flip is occurring. The response is calculated from triplicates and the with +/- one standard deviation. 
==PAGE:47==
 
Chapter 1:  
43 
The results show that at increasing concentration of DAPG, the flip rate of the attB/P strains increases, 
as seen previously, though to a lower max flip rate than before for reasons unknown. It is also seen 
that the attL/R strains all show no reverse flip when DAPG is absent, but when the DAPG 
concentration is increased, the attL/R barcodes reverse flip to the attB/P configuration, proving that 
there is reverse flip activity. The results of the attL/R strains suggest that the deletion of the extra P2 
region and the deletion of the PP_5527 gene did not affect the strains' ability to reverse flip. By 
running a T-test it was further proved that both the ∆Phages-P2 and ∆Phages-p2-5527 strains were 
not significantly different from the ∆Phages strain. The T-test showed no difference at the 
concentrations 10, 25, and 50 µg/mL DAPG, for both the attB/P and attL/R strains.  
Taken together, these results show that we have not identified an RDF that causes the reverse flip in 
the ∆Phages deletion, in the accessory p2 region, or the PP-5527 gene.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
44 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
This study aimed to take the biosensors developed for soil metabolites and transfer them into the soil 
relevant host bacterium P. putida KT2440. Together with the host transfer, the reporter was also 
changed. Instead of using a fluorescence-based system to detect whether the inducer is present, a 
barcode system was utilized for detection using qPCR. During the testing of the biosensors in P. 
putida, it was discovered that at increasing concentrations of inducer, the flip rate of the biosensor 
dropped. Further work was carried out to elucidate this unwanted trait in the hopes of eliminating it. 
3.1 
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF QPCR 
The integration of barcodes into P. putida using allelic replacement with the protocol described here 
proved to be an effective method. However, it was a time-consuming protocol, and not optimized for 
high throughput. With the simple primers designed it was proven that cells containing the barcodes 
could be quantified with qPCR and the flip rate of a biosensor could be determined. It was however 
observed that the efficiency of the qPCR standard curves was quite low for liquid cultures and 
acceptable for the two soil methods. Generally, for a qPCR standard curve, we want an efficiency 
~90-110% and the R2 value >0.95. For liquid extraction the efficiency was around 60%, but better 
for the soil extraction methods. The efficiency of qPCR can be affected by the presence of PCR 
inhibitors in the sample matrix81,82. Other members of the Pseudomonas genus are known to produce 
PCR inhibitors, namely P. aeruginosa which is closely related to P. putida KT244083–85. This points 
to P. putida also producing PCR inhibitors. The PCR inhibitors are not removed in assays with liquid 
cultures where the template DNA is obtained through boiling the cells. But in soil samples, the DNA 
is extracted using a commercial DNA extraction kit, which reduces the amount of impurities in the 
sample matrix, hereunder PCR inhibitors, and improves the efficiency of the qPCR. Thus, for future 
experiments with P. putida, care should be taken when obtaining DNA to limit the amount of PCR 
inhibitors in the template DNA. This could be improved by the use of the commercial kit for the 
liquid culture??  
3.2 
HOW DID THE BIOSENSORS FUNCTION IN P. PUTIDA COMPARED TO E. COLI? 
The biosensors for DAPG (PhlF_LVA), Tetracycline (TetR_LVA), Pyoluteorin (PltZ_LVA), and 
Salicylate (NahR_LVA) were successfully transferred onto pTn7 plasmids followed by integration 
==PAGE:49==
 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
45 
on the chromosome of P. putida. All four biosensors showed an ability to report on their given 
inducer, but with varying results. However, the fact that all four biosensors did respond to their 
inducer shows that uptake of all these compounds occurred successfully. Furthermore, when barcodes 
are flipping shows that the integrase gene is expressed correctly. Lastly, the LVA tagging of the 
integrase protein reduces leakiness below detection. Taken together, this means that in broad terms 
the transfer of the biosensors to P. putida was successful, it shows promising results as a biosensor 
host. However, there is still more work to be done to optimize the biosensors in P. putida, which will 
be outlined here.  
Of the four biosensors, the DAPG and Tetracycline performed the best, these were both able to 
respond with similar dynamics and sensitivity as what had been seen in E. coli (Nørgaard et al. (2023) 
). There was however a significant drop in the flip rate at higher concentrations of inducer, which will 
be discussed later. 
The PltZ_LVA biosensor was shown to be able to respond to pyoluteorin, it was however far less 
sensitive than in E. coli (Nørgaard et al. (2023)). The explanation for this is likely that the pltZ gene 
used for this biosensor is codon optimized for P. protegens (its original host organism), which meant 
that it needed a stronger ribosomal binding site (RBS) to function in E. coli (MLH). As P. protegens 
is closely related to P. putida, the expression of the PltZ repressor was likely much stronger, 
decreasing the sensitivity of the biosensor. To improve the dynamics of this biosensor, the RBS site 
likely needs to be tuned to decrease expression of the repressor. By tuning the expression of the PltZ 
repressor, it is expected that the pyoluteorin will show similar dynamics to the DAPG and tetracycline 
biosensors. 
The NahR_LVA biosensor was less sensitive than in E.coli, it did not reach a particularly high flip 
rate, and its reverse flip activity was very significant. All this shows that the NahR_LVA biosensor 
performed the worst of all the biosensors tested here. For the NahR_LVA biosensor, an important 
factor is that NahR is an activator, whereas the three other biosensors are based on repressors86. While 
the exact reason for the poor response dynamics of the NahR_LVA is not known, a suggestion could 
be that the activator induces the expression of the integrase stronger compared to the repressors. With 
a stronger expression from the activator of the integrase, there is a higher stress on the cells, which 
we hypothesize is causing the reverse flip. A solution to this could be tuning the expression of the 
integrase from the NahR promoter to decrease its expression. Another solution would be to not use 
activators and instead look for a repressor that interacts with salicylate. 
==PAGE:50==
 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
46 
Even when ignoring reverse flip activity, a difference between the flip dynamics in P. putida 
compared to E. coli was seen for the PltZ_LVA and NahR_LVA biosensors (Nørgaard et al. (2023)). 
This is not optimal as we would like to perform all construction and tuning of the biosensors in E. 
coli before transferring to P. putida to simplify the process. With the results shown here, it is clear 
from the PhlF_LVA and TetR_LVA biosensors that it is possible to construct a biosensor that 
performs very similarly in P. putida and E. coli. However, we need a better understanding of why 
some biosensors perform more predictably than others to optimize the construction of new biosensors.  
3.3 
WHY DOES THE BIOSENSOR NOT FUNCTION IN SOIL OR THE RHIZOSPHERE 
OF WHEAT?  
It was found that the PhlF_LVA biosensor is not functional in either soil or when inoculated onto 
wheat roots. The induction of the DAPG biosensor was tested in two ways, with the direct addition 
of DAPG from a methanol diluted stock to soil, and by co-inoculating the wheat with a DAPG 
producing bacterium. For a biosensor whose task is to detect these metabolites in situ, it is vitally 
important that it functions in soil and the rhizosphere. In this study, it was not possible to do much 
experimental investigation into why the biosensors did not function in these complex environments. 
In the following, ideas for constructing a biosensor that functions in soil are presented.  
The integrase translates the inducer signal picked up by the PhlF protein and activates the reporter by 
flipping the barcode. The lack of barcode flipping is likely explained by the lack of expressing the 
integrase. This could be explained by the transcription apparatus of the integrase not being active, or 
there being no DAPG available to the bacterium. The transcription apparatus could be inactivated 
either by too strong binding by the PhlF repressor or too low expression from the integrase promoter. 
Too strong inhibition from the PhlF repressor could be limited by decreasing the expression of the 
repressor, but this comes with the risk of creating a leaky system where the integrase is expressed 
without induction by DAPG. It is also possible that the sigma factor which is responsible for 
expressing the integrase is less active in soil than in liquid media. Thus, by testing alternative 
promotors with corresponding alternative sigma factors with higher activity in a soil environment, 
the expression of the integrase should increase, creating a functional biosensor system.  
The problem of expression of the integrase in soil was already considered in the bulk soil experiment. 
Therefore, the biosensor was tested in the rhizosphere under the assumption that root exudates would 
improve the growth of P. putida and hereby increase the expression of the integrase. As mentioned, 
this did not work, thus begging the question of whether P. putida was growing on roots. P. putida 
==PAGE:51==
 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
47 
barcodes were detected in the qPCR of the wheat rhizosphere, but as this included a significant 
amount of attached soil, it was not possible to determine whether P. putida was growing on the roots 
of wheat, where the root exudate concentration would be highest. From microscopy of the wheat 
roots, it was not possible to detect fluorescent P. putida KT2440 directly on the roots of wheat. 
Although the method of root microscopy presented here was likely not optimal for the detection of 
bacteria on roots as a significant amount of soil was still attached during imaging. This experiment 
should be repeated with steps optimizing the sample prep of the root for better imaging. P. putida has 
further been described in the literature to inhabit the roots of several plants, hereunder wheat87–90. To 
verify that P. putida KT2440 can inhabit the root of wheat, the inoculated seed could be grown in 
sterile soil to limit competition and imaged using a confocal microscope which can identify single 
cells on and in the roots91. 
For the biosensor to respond to DAPG in soil, the DAPG needs to be bioavailable to the bacterium. 
This is of course the entire principle behind the whole-cell biosensor, with the potential explanation 
that DAPG is either degraded or bound in the soil matrix. In a paper by Kwak et al. 201273, they found 
that the half-life of DAPG in soil was 6 hours, meaning DAPG might not be present in our assay. In 
the wheat assay, the biosensor was also grown together with P. kilonensis as a natural producer of 
DAPG. It is however far from certain that it produced DAPG under these conditions, and in high 
enough concentrations or spatially where the biosensor grew. It would be beneficial to perform LC-
MS analysis on the soil and rhizosphere to determine whether DAPG is present. The PhlF_LVA 
biosensor was the only one tested in soil due to DAPG being relatively inexpensive, we could also 
test the arabinose biosensor in soil as it is similarly inexpensive. This would show whether what was 
seen for the DAPG biosensor is a characteristic of the availability of the inducer or the function of 
the biosensor.  
3.4 
WHY DO WE STILL SEE A REVERSE FLIP AFTER THE DELETION OF 
PROPHAGE REGIONS? 
When moving the biosensors into P. putida from E. coli, an undesirable trait was observed. Under 
increasing concentrations of inducer, the flip rate would rise, but after a certain threshold, the flip rate 
would once again drop. This trait was termed a ‘reverse flip’. As stated above, we hypothesized that 
this reverse flip was caused by an RDF located on the chromosome of P. putida. At high levels of 
inducer, the expression of the integrase would cause stress on the cell causing this RDF to be 
expressed. Strains obtained from Martínez-García et al. (2015)61 with four deleted prophage regions 
were tested as it was predicted that a potential RDF would be located in a prophage, but they showed 
==PAGE:52==
 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
48 
no change in the reverse flip activity. An alignment of known RDF genes against the P. putida 
genome revealed 2 RDF genes, that were not located in the 4 prophage regions, namely the genes 
PP_4151 and PP_5527. Here it was proved that PP_5527 also was not an RDF responsible for the 
reverse flip activity. 
It was not able to test the effect of the deletion of PP_4151. From Rosendahl et al. 202092 it was found 
that PP_4151 functions as an antitoxin in a Toxin-Antitoxin system in P. putida. The toxin in the 
Toxin-Antitoxin is PP_4152 which lies immediately downstream of PP_4151. The function of 
PP_4151 as an antitoxin is likely also the reason why it proved so difficult to delete, supported by 
Rosendahl et al. 202092 where they were unable to delete PP_4151. It is very possible that the success 
in deleting PP_4151 was due to a random mutation eliminating the toxicity of PP_4152. An attempt 
to delete both PP_4151 and PP_4152 simultaneously should be made to increase the chances of 
deletion and make a strain with no adverse mutations. It is somewhat unlikely that PP_4151 should 
have the activity of both an antitoxin and an RDF, but since it did align with known RDF genes, it is 
not impossible, and the strain with the gene deletion of PP_4151 should still be tested for reduced 
reverse flip activity.  
Reverse flip has also been described elsewhere. In the preprint, Kalvapalle et al. 202393 perform a 
study very similar to that presented here. They take the arabinose biosensor from Yang et al. 201446 
and integrate it into a Pseudomonas strain with a fluorescence reporter. They use the integrase 8 from 
Yang et al. (2014)46, while we here use the integrase 12. At increasing concentrations of arabinose, 
they saw an increase in their ON-state (equivalent to our flipped-state) until a threshold was reached 
whereafter the ON-state decreased, exactly as was observed in this study with the reverse flip. They 
limited their reverse flip by switching from a fluorescence-based reporter to a barcode-based system, 
like that used here. They concluded that the decrease in ON-state at higher concentrations of inducer 
was due to the increased protein burden of expressing the fluorescence protein. The increased protein 
burden in turn negatively selects for the population of ON-state cells. In this study the barcode system 
is already utilized, thus there is no protein burden from the reporter, however, there is still a protein 
burden from the expression of the integrase and AraC activator. Of the two proteins, the integrase is 
most likely to be the cause of protein burden, as it is the expression of this gene which increases with 
increasing inducer concentrations. It is thus not certain that reverse flip is an effect of RDF expression, 
and it could be decreased by reducing the burden of expressing the integrase. 
==PAGE:53==
 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
49 
From Table 1 it is seen that the attL/R strain can truly reverse flip under high concentrations of 
inducer, and from the theory of serine integrases and RDF, we know that reverse flip (phage excision) 
can only occur in the presence of an RDF94–96. This suggests that there must therefore still be an RDF 
present in P. putida. From Table 1 it is seen that reverse flip only causes a few percent of the 
population to reverse flip, but the attB/P strains show a decrease in flip rate much higher than this. 
From the theory on RDFs, it is also known that RDF proteins bind to integrase proteins and inhibit 
the flip (Phage integration)94. It is therefore suggested that the decrease in flip rate is a combination 
of flip inhibition, as well as active reverse flip. The reverse flip activity being caused by an RDF is 
further supported by the biosensors in E. coli DH10B never has shown reverse flip activity, while E. 
coli CC118 does show reverse flip activity7(MLH & H. A. Malmberg, unpublished). This indicates 
that the reverse flip is not an intrinsic trait of the biosensor system, but rather an effect caused by the 
host, such as carrying an RDF.   
With the knowledge from this study and literature, it is not possible to determine whether the reverse 
flip activity seen here is caused by the protein burden of the integrase, or an RDF still located on the 
genome of P. putida. Further experiments should be performed to test each of these hypotheses. With 
serine integrase becoming an increasingly utilized tool within synthetic biology97–99, we must 
understand the adverse interactions that are associated with them.  
3.5 
CHALLENGES WITH THIS WHOLE-CELL BIOSENSOR SYSTEM? 
With the work presented here, it is clear that further work needs to be done to construct an effective 
biosensor for the detection of soil metabolites. However, we have also shown that the transfer of a 
biosensor to a new host is possible, and the biosensor does work in the host. Here three main 
challenges are presented that need to be addressed if P. putida is going to be a successful host for the 
biosensor: 
o 
Limit reverse flip. 
o 
Ensure biosensor functionality in soil. 
o 
Reduce the burden of expressing the integrase. 
Here P. putida was chosen as it was a soil-relevant bacterium and a significant amount of genetic 
engineering had been done with this strain, meaning that the genetic toolbox was large. However, as 
reverse flip seems to be a host-specific trait that is not completely understood, it might be favorable 
to investigate the use of other biosensor hosts. New hosts could be identified as natural isolates from 
the roots of the investigated plant. By using a natural isolate, the whole-cell biosensor would already 
==PAGE:54==
 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
50 
be an established member of the microbiome and have a better chance of colonizing. A tool developed 
by Brophy et al.100 is capable of chromosomally integrate genetic elements in a large diversity of 
bacteria by using a generalized transposon technology (Xport)100. Such a tool could be utilized here 
to quickly integrate both reporter and integrase system in conjunction with a diverse suite of 
culturable microorganisms from soil samples. By switching the host, we might be able to identify a 
suitable plant-associated host, which also does not have reverse flip activity. Hereby, we might be 
able to eliminate the two first limitations described above.  
If we wish to continue with P. putida, we need to understand why the reverse flip occurs. We so far 
suspected an RDF to cause the reverse flip, but have not yet proven this. The hypothesis was that 
stress from a higher expression of the integrase caused an RDF to be expressed. However, no RDF 
causing this has been identified, suggesting that other hypotheses should be tested. It could be that 
the reverse flip activity is an intrinsic catalytic trait of the integrase. And that this has not yet been 
identified because we here see protein concentrations much higher than what is occurring naturally. 
An experiment should be performed to determine if stressing the cell with other methods than 
expressing the integrase also causes the reverse flip activity at lower induction levels where we 
previously have not seen reverse flip activity. From Yang et al. 201446 several integrases with their 
respective attB/P sites were identified, of which integrase 12 was used in this study. If it is an RDF 
that is causing the reverse flip, it is very possible that switching the integrase to one of the others 
could eliminate the reverse flip. However, the specificity of RDFs to integrases is not known.  
To improve the functionality of the biosensor in soil the gene expression pattern in soil for P. putida 
should be investigated. It is not certain that the promoter expressing the integrase is active in a soil 
environment where the stress on the cell is undoubtedly higher. By switching the promoter to one that 
is more active in the stationary phase of cell growth, the integrase might have a higher chance of 
being expressed in soil. This in turn might limit the function of the biosensor in a standard liquid 
assay, meaning that it might not be possible to create a widely applicable biosensor.  
Lastly, many of the issues with the biosensor are thought to stem from the burden of expressing the 
integrase. As the system is designed now, the integrase is expressed continuously whenever the 
inducer is met by the bacteria, even after the barcode has flipped. To limit the stress after the flip 
where the integrase is no longer needed, a system could be designed so the integrase is under the 
control of two operators. The first operator would be the one that is under the control of the 
metabolite-specific regulator as presented here, the second operator would be specific to a different 
==PAGE:55==
 
Chapter 3: Discussion 
51 
repressor, and this second repressor should be expressed upon flipping the attB/P region to the attL/R. 
Thus, after a flip has occurred, the second repressor is expressed and turns off integrase expression, 
even in the presence of inducer relieving the repression of the first repressor.  
3.6 
A FUTURE PERSPECTIVE ON WHOLE-CELL BIOSENSORS: 
Whole-cell biosensors are currently a widely researched subject and have been for several years as it 
has proven to be an exciting tool for molecular- and microbiologists6. And with the ability to 
determine which metabolites are sensed by the microbiome, we can take a great step in understanding 
it. With a better understanding of the microbiome, we stand a better chance at harvesting the beneficial 
traits of a healthy microbiome in the combat against plant pathogens. As biosensors are genetically 
modified organisms, the ability to employ them in natural environments is very restricted. While we 
can take ‘natural’ environments into the lab on smaller scales, as shown here with wheat, it would be 
beneficial to be able to measure the presence of metabolites directly. A possible solution to this 
problem has already been put forth39, where whole cell biosensors are used in collaboration with 
nano-material technology. The nanomaterial is suggested to be used to completely in case the bacteria 
allowing it to interact with the natural environment while preventing any GMO material from being 
released. Even without the ability to use biosensors in natural environments, it is still a very useful 
tool in detecting whether metabolites are available to the microbiome and will also in the future help 
us to understand how bacteria and their secreted chemistry affect both neighboring microorganisms, 
as well as the growth of plants. Whole-cell biosensors can give us a better understanding of which 
compounds improve the health and growth of plants. By knowing which compounds are beneficial, 
we can improve our ability to screen for natural isolates with plant-beneficial activity. 
Here the response of the biosensor has been a simple flip of a barcode which allowed us to detect 
whether a specific metabolite was sensed by the bacterium. We can easily change this response to 
make the bacteria express a gene that interacts with the environment of the bacteria for probiotic 
purposes. In a study by Saeidi et al. (2011)101 they created an E. coli biosensor to detect the quorum-
sensing compound AHL from the pathogen P. aureginosa. Upon detection of AHL, the E. coli would 
produce several compounds that were targeted toward the eradication of P. aureginosa. A similar 
system could be devised for the biosensors described here. For example, salicylate is produced by 
plants upon pathogen infection to activate disease resistance102, by coupling the salicylate biosensor 
to the expression of genes involved in biocontrol, the pathogen infection can be limited or eradicated, 
and hereby promoting the growth and survival of the plant.     
==PAGE:56==
 
Chapter 4: Conclusion 
52 
Chapter 4: Conclusion 
This study aimed to optimize the whole-cell biosensors designed by Nørgaard et al. for application in 
soil and root environments. To achieve this goal, the biosensors were transferred into a new host, the 
soil-relevant Pseudomonas putida KT2440. Together with this, the reporter was switched from a 
fluorescence-based reporter to a barcode-based reporter to determine response by qPCR or 
sequencing of extracted DNA. Initially, the detection and quantification of barcodes using qPCR was 
evaluated by determining the specificity and sensitivity of barcode detection in both liquid media and 
the more complex environment of soil. Here it was found that qPCR could be used to quantify the 
response of a barcode-based reporter, although the extraction of DNA from samples needs 
optimization. Following this, the metabolite biosensors were evaluated to determine if and how they 
functioned in P. putida. Here it was found that all the biosensors were able to respond to their 
respective metabolites in varying degrees, and it was concluded that optimization of some of the 
biosensors would be needed. It was also found that at high concentrations of inducer, the response 
began to drop, this was termed ‘reverse-flip’ and was attributed to a recombination directionality 
factor (RDF) being present in P. putida. Thus, the genome of P. putida was screened for potential 
RDF genes, and these were knocked out. It was however not possible to identify an RDF responsible 
for the reverse flip. When testing the DAPG biosensor in soil, it was found that it was not able to 
respond, showing the optimization of the biosensor is needed for the in-situ detection of metabolites. 
The work presented here shows that the host switch of a whole-cell biosensor is possible, but that the 
switch to a soil-relevant bacterium does not necessarily mean that the biosensor will function in a soil 
environment. Future design work on the biosensors should ensure that they are optimized for the 
condition met in the soil where they will see their intended use. This includes ensuring the expression 
of key elements is active in soil and reduction of stress upon the cell. 
  
==PAGE:57==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
53 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
5.1 
CONSTRUCTION OF BARCODES FOR INSERTION IN P. PUTIDA: 
Before this project, the pK18msB plasmids with homology regions for the PP-1035 site with the 
DAPG, Tetracycline, and Naringenin barcodes had already been created by MLH. Barcodes were 
altered by running tailed PCR reactions on the pK18msB plasmids with barcodes, where the tails 
defined the sequence of the new barcode. During this work, the DAPG Flipped control and salicylate 
barcodes were cloned. An O/N of the E. coli λpir CC118 + pK18msB-HR1/2(PP_1035)-attB/P was 
made in 5 mL LB + 25 µg/mL kanamycin. The pK18msB plasmid was isolated with the 'macherey-
nagel Plasmid Purification’ kit from 2 mL O/N culture, following the standard protocol. Phusion PCR 
reaction was run with primers to create the Flipped barcode (Pr214+Pr215) and Salicylate barcode 
(Pr199+Pr200), followed by a DpnI treatment. The PCR products were purified with 'macherey-nagel 
gel and PCR clean-up', following the standard protocol. The plasmid was cloned with Golden Gate 
cloning using a BsaI-T4 ligase mix. The ligated pK18 plasmids were transformed into chemically 
competent E. coli CC118 λpir (the preparation of which is shown in Appendix D), by transferring 5µl 
ligation mix to 50µl cells, followed by flicking the tube gently and transferring to ice for 30 minutes. 
After 30 minutes on ice, the transformation mix was heat shocked for 1 minute at 42°C, before putting 
the mix back on ice. 450 µL LB was added to the mix and the cells were left to recover for 1 hour at 
30°C before plating on LB with 10 µg/mL gentamicin O/N. A colony PCR with barcode-specific 
primers was used to screen for the integration of the plasmids in the E. coli strains. Positive 
transformants were verified by sequencing with primer 131.  
5.2 
INSERTING BARCODES INTO P. PUTIDA: 
Barcodes with flanking integrase attachment sites were integrated into P. putida strains by utilizing 
allelic replacement, as described in Hmelo et al. 201563. O/N of the recipient Pseudomonas strain, the 
donor E. coli CC118 λpir strain carrying the pK18-Barcode plasmid and the E. coli HB101 with 
pRK600 helper strain were prepared. The three O/N cultures were washed twice by centrifuging at 
10.000 RPM for 1 minute and resuspending in 0.9% NaCl. After washing, the cell density of each 
was set to OD600=1.0 in 0.9% NaCl. The recipient, donor, and helper were mixed in equal amounts 
to a final volume of 1 mL and centrifuged at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute, the supernatant was discarded. 
The pellet was resuspended in the remaining liquid and 20µl was spotted onto an LB plate, where it 
==PAGE:58==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
54 
was allowed to incubate O/N at 30°C. The spot was scraped off the LB plate, resuspended in 1 mL 
0.9% NaCl, plated onto Pseudomonas Isolation Agar (PIA) containing 50 µg/ml kanamycin, and 
incubated O/N at 30°C. Colonies were restreaked onto PIA containing 50 µg/ml kanamycin and 
incubated O/N at 30°C. A single colony was picked and inoculated into 5 mL LB and incubated O/N 
at 30°C with 200 RPM shaking. The O/N was plated on LB+sucrose plates (Appendix E) and 
incubated O/N at 30°C. Colony PCR was performed in 25 µl reactions with 1 µl template DNA and 
primers Pr191-192 to verify the integration of the barcode. The PCR product was run on a 0.8% 
agarose gel and visualized under UV. Positive PCR fragments were cut out of the gel and purified 
with 'macherey-nagel gel and PCR clean-up', with the alteration that the gel fragment was not 
weighed, but simply added to 500µl 'Binding Buffer NTI'. Successful gel purification was verified by 
measuring the DNA concentration using Nanodrop with the protocol for double-stranded DNA. The 
purified products were sent for sequencing with primer Pr131 to identify the proper insertion of the 
barcode into the Pseudomonas strain.  
5.3 
BARCODE DETECTION, ENDPOINT PCR 
To detect the barcode orientation using endpoint PCR, 1 part bacterial culture was added to 3 parts 
MilliQ water and boiled for 20 minutes to obtain boil lysate. The boil lysate was centrifuged for 5 
minutes at 13.000 G and the supernatant was used as template DNA. The template DNA was added 
to two PCR reactions, the first with primers Pr134 and Pr135 to detect the Non-flipped barcode and 
the second with primers Pr133 and Pr135 to detect the flipped barcode. The PCR program was as 
follows:  
PCR programme 
 
95°C 
3 min 
 
95°C 
30 sec 
30 
cycles 
60°C 
30 sec 
72°C 
1 min 
72°C 
5 min 
 
4°C 
Hold 
 
The PCR product is run on a 2% agarose gel for 20 minutes at 100V and then imaged. 
==PAGE:59==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
55 
5.4 
BARCODE DETECTION, QPCR: 
The quantification of barcodes was performed with qPCR. Template DNA was isolated differently 
based on the specific experiment, which is described elsewhere. The qPCR reaction was run with 
10µl Luna® Universal qPCR Master Mix (NEB), 2µl template DNA, 1µl each of forward and reverse 
primer (5µM), and 7 µl MilliQ. For each sample two qPCR reactions were run, one to detect and 
quantify the non-flipped barcode and one to detect the Flipped barcode. To detect the non-flipped 
barcode, primer Pr134 and the barcode-specific primer were used. To detect the Flipped barcode, 
primer Pr133 and the barcode-specific primer were used. The qPCR reactions were run on a Bio-Rad 
CFX Opus 96 qPCR machine (Bio-Rad, Denmark) with the scan mode for FAM. The qPCR protocol 
was as follows:  
Protocol: 
o 
1: 95.0°C for 1 min 
o 
2: 95.0°C for 15 sec 
o 
3: 60.0°C for 30 sec 
o 
Plate Read 
o 
4: GOTO 2, 39 more times 
o 
5: Melt Curve 65.0°C to 95.0°C: Increment 0.5°C 5 sec. 
o 
Plate Read 
The data was analyzed using Bio-Rad CFX Maestro Software version 2.3 to define thresholds and 
obtain Cq values for each sample.  
5.5 
QPCR STANDARD CURVES, LIQUID MEDIA: 
P. putida-attB/P (DAPG barcode, Non-flipped) and P. putida-attL/R (DAPG barcode, Flipped) were 
grown O/N in 5mL LB in triplicates. Each strain was diluted 100x in LB transferred to a microtiter 
plate and incubated O/N at 30°C. Each strain was serially diluted to 107. The 105-107 dilutions were 
plated onto LB and incubated O/N at 30°C followed by CFU counting. Dilutions 102-105 were used 
for qPCR barcode detection as described above. Standard curves were constructed by calculating the 
predicted CFU/mL in the qPCR samples from the CFU counts for each biological replicate and Log-
Transforming these. The predicted CFU/mL in each sample was plotted against the Cq values 
obtained from the qPCR. Linear regression was then performed in Excel, creating a model predicting 
the Log(CFU/ml) for a given Cq value for both attB/P and attL/R.  
==PAGE:60==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
56 
5.6 
TN7 TAGGING OF P. PUTIDA STRAINS WITH GFP AND MKATE: 
Tagging of Pseudomonas strains was performed as described in Zobel 201567. An O/N of the recipient 
Pseudomonas strains (P. putida-attB/P (DAPG barcode, Non-flipped) and P. putida-attL/R (DAPG 
barcode, Flipped)), the donor strain (E. coli λpir CC118 with either pBG42-gfp or pBG42-mKate), 
the Helper strain (E. coli HB101 with pRK600), and the transposase strain (E.coli DH5α with pTNS2) 
was prepared in 5 mL LB with appropriate antibiotic selection. 1 mL of each strain was washed twice 
by centrifuging at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute, discarding the supernatant, and resuspending in 1 mL 
0.9% NaCl. The washed cultures were set to OD600=1 and mixed in equal amounts to a final volume 
of 1 mL. The culture mix was centrifuged at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute, and the pellet was resuspended 
in approximately 20µl supernatant and spotted onto an LB plate following incubation at 30°C O/N. 
The bacterial spot was scraped off the LB plate and suspended in 0.9% NaCl. The bacterial suspension 
was plated onto PIA with 25 µg/ml gentamicin and incubated at 30°C O/N. Tagged strains were 
verified under the fluorescent microscope. 
5.7 
QPCR STANDARD CURVE, NON-STERILE SOIL: 
P. putida-attB/P-Tn7::gfp and P. putida-attL/R-Tn7::mKate were grown O/N in 5mL LB with 25 
µg/mL gentamicin, each in triplicates. The O/N cultures were washed twice by centrifuging at 10.000 
RPM for 1 minute, discarding the supernatant, and resuspending in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl and set to 
OD600=1. 600 µl of the culture was transferred to falcon tubes containing 1 gram of non-sterile soil. 
0.9% NaCl was added to the falcon tube up to 6 mL, ensuring no dry lumps of soil remained. The 
falcon tube was vortexed at the highest setting for 1 minute and then allowed to settle for 2 minutes. 
100 µl of the soil supernatant was taken and plated onto PIA + gentamycin (25µg/ml) + Nystatin 
(50µg/mL, dissolved in DMSO) and incubated at room temperature for 72h, followed by CFU 
counting. 500 µl of the soil supernatant was taken for DNA extraction using DNeasy PowerSoil Pro 
Kit, following the standard protocol and eluding in 50µl elution buffer. The extracted DNA was 
diluted in MilliQ to 101, 102, and 103, these three dilutions were used as template DNA for a barcode 
detection qPCR, as described above. Standard curves were constructed by calculating the predicted 
CFU/mL in the qPCR samples from the CFU counts for each biological replicate and Log-
Transforming these, this was plotted against their Cq values obtained from the qPCR. Linear 
regression was then performed in Excel, creating a model predicting the Log(CFU/ml) for a given Cq 
value for both attB/P and attL/R.  
==PAGE:61==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
57 
5.8 
QPCR STANDARD CURVE, DIRECT SOIL EXTRACTION: 
P. putida-attB/P-Tn7::gfp and P.putida-attL/R-Tn7::mKate were grown O/N in 5mL LB with 25 
µg/mL gentamicin, each in triplicates. The O/N cultures were washed twice by centrifuging at 10.000 
RPM for 1 minute, discarding the supernatant, and resuspending in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl and set to 
OD600=1. The OD600=1 bacteria was serially diluted and plated on agar for CFU counting after 
incubation. 100µl of the culture was transferred to falcon tubes containing 1 gram of non-sterile soil 
and 225µl 0.9% NaCl. The falcon tube was vortexed until no dry soil remained. Approximately 
200mg soil was precisely weighed  and was taken for DNA extraction using DNeasy PowerSoil Pro 
Kit, following the standard protocol and eluding in 50µl elution buffer. The extracted DNA was 
diluted in MilliQ to 101, 102, and 103, these three dilutions were used as template DNA for a barcode 
detection qPCR, as described above. Standard curves were constructed by calculating the predicted 
CFU/mL in the qPCR samples from the CFU counts for each biological replicate and Log-
Transforming these, this was plotted against their Cq values obtained from the qPCR. Linear 
regression was then performed in Excel, creating a model predicting the Log(CFU/ml) for a given Cq 
value for both attB/P and attL/R.  
 
5.9 
QPCR BARCODE STRAIN MIX CONTROL EXPERIMENT, NON-STERILE SOIL: 
P. putida-attB/P-Tn7::gfp and P.putida-aatL/R-Tn7::mKate were grown O/N in 5mL LB with 25 
µg/mL gentamicin. The O/N cultures were washed twice by centrifuging at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute, 
discarding the supernatant, and resuspending in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl and set to OD600=1. The Non-
flipped and flipped strains were mixed in the desired ratios (100/0, 95/5, 75/25, 50/50, 25/75, 5/95, 
0/100, and 0/0, where the first number is percentage non-flipped and the second is flipped) in 
Eppendorf tubes, and 600 µl of the mix was transferred to falcon tubes containing 1 gram of non-
sterile soil. 0.9% NaCl was added to the falcon tube up to 6 mL, ensuring no dry lumps of soil 
remained, the falcon tube was centrifuged at the highest setting for 1 minute, and then allowed to 
settle for 2 minutes. 500 µl of the soil supernatant was taken and total DNA was extracted using 
DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit, followed by qPCR barcode detection as described above. 
==PAGE:62==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
58 
5.10 QPCR BARCODE STRAIN MIX CONTROL EXPERIMENT, STERILE SOIL WITH 
GROWTH: 
We wanted to determine whether the barcode orientation was also stable in soil under growth of the 
bacterium. As the soil environment inevitably changes the gene expression and we wanted to show 
that none of these interfered with the barcode. Thus a P. putida-attB/P-Tn7::gfp and P.putida-aatL/R-
Tn7::mKate were grown O/N in 5mL LB with 25 µg/mL gentamicin. The O/N cultures were washed 
twice by centrifuging at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute and resuspending in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl. The washed 
cultures were set to OD600=0.1 in 0.9% NaCl, and the strains were mixed in the desired ratios in 
Eppendorf tubes, 100 µl of the mix was transferred to falcon tubes containing 1 gram of sterile soil 
(Gamma radiated to a nominal dose of 15 kGy) and 225 µl 0.9% NaCl (The control contained 325 µl 
0.9% NaCl). The inoculated soil was left to incubate at room temperature for 48 hours. After 48 hours 
the soil was sampled by adding 3.5 mL 0.9% NaCl, centrifuging at the highest setting for 1 minute, 
and allowed to settle for 1 hour. 500 µl of the soil supernatant was taken and total DNA was extracted 
using DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit, followed by qPCR barcode detection as described above.  
5.11 TESTING ORTHOGONALITY OF BARCODE-PRIMER PAIRS 
Barcoded Pseudomonas strains were inoculated into 5 mL LB and grown O/N at 30°C in triplicates. 
15 µl bacterial culture was added to 45 µl MilliQ water and boiled for 20 minutes to obtain boil lysate. 
The boiled lysate was used as the template DNA for the qPCR reaction. Each strain was subjected to 
qPCR barcode detection with primer Pr135, Pr201, Pr202, Pr203, and Pr204.  
5.12 CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRATION OF BIOSENSORS INTO P. PUTIDA: 
E. coli CC118 λpir+pTn7-M and the E. coli CC118 λpir+pSEVA231_Biosensor strains were grown 
O/N in LB with appropriate antibiotics, followed by plasmid purification with the 'macherey-nagel 
Plasmid Purification’ kit from 2 mL O/N culture, following the standard protocol. The pTn7-M 
plasmid was PCR amplified with the primers Pr177 and Pr245_old to amplify the backbone and add 
restriction sites, while the pSEVA_biosensor plasmids were PCR amplified with primers Pr174 and 
Pr56 to amplify the biosensor and add matching restriction sites. The PCR was run in 50 µl reactions 
using Phusion polymerase (Appendix F). The pTn7-M PCR product was run on a 0.8% agarose gel 
and purified with 'macherey-nagel gel and PCR clean-up', using the protocol for gel cleanup, with the 
alteration that the gel fragment was not weighed, but simply added to 500µl 'Binding Buffer NTI'. 
The pSEVA231_biosensor PCR products were verified by running 3µl on a 0.8% agarose gel 
==PAGE:63==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
59 
followed by gel imaging checking for the correct size of the fragments, followed by purification of 
the unused PCR product with 'macherey-nagel gel and PCR clean-up' using the protocol for PCR 
clean-up. The concentrations of all purified PCR products were measured with the Nanodrop 
spectrophotometer. A restriction digest was performed with all purified PCR products with XbaI and 
SacI in 40 µl reactions (Appendix G). All digested PCR products were purified with 'macherey-nagel 
gel and PCR clean-up' using the protocol for PCR clean-up, followed by DNA concentration 
determination with the Nanodrop spectrophotometer. Biosensor PCR products were ligated onto the 
pTn7 backbone facilitated by the T4 ligase in 10 µl reactions, with an equal concentration of backbone 
to the biosensor. The ligated pTn7_biosensor plasmids were transformed into chemically competent 
E. coli CC118 λpir (the preparation of which is shown in Appendix D), by transferring 5µl ligation 
mix to 50µl cells, followed by mixing by flicking and transferring to ice for 30 minutes. After 30 
minutes on ice, the transformation mix was heat shocked for 1 min at 42°C, before putting the mix 
back on ice. 450 µL LB was added to the transformation mix and the cells were allowed to recover 
for 1 hour at 37°C with 600RPM shaking. After recovery, the conjugants were plated on LB + 10 
µg/ml gentamicin and kept O/N at 37°C. Colonies were restreaked on LB + 10 µg/ml gentamicin and 
prepared for colony PCR by boiling for 20 minutes in 20 µl MilliQ. The colony PCR was performed 
with primers Pr218 and Pr219 followed by gel electrophoresis on a 1% agarose gel and imaging of 
the gel. A positive insertion of the biosensor was identified by a PCR product of around 2600 bp. 
Four of each of the restreaked positive transformants were grown in LB + 10 µg/ml gentamicin O/N 
followed by plasmid purification with the 'macherey-nagel Plasmid Purification’(KILDE) kit from 2 
mL O/N culture. The purified plasmids were sent for sanger sequencing with both primers Pr218 and 
Pr219 for verification of proper insertion. Biosensors were integrated into the Tn7 site as described 
for GFP and mKate tagging.  
5.13 BIOSENSOR ASSAY IN LB: 
O/N cultures of biosensor strains were prepared in triplicates by inoculating the biosensor strain into 
5 mL LB with 25 µg/ml gentamicin. The inducer (DAPG in methanol, Tetracycline in water, 
Pyoluteorin in DMSO, or Salicylate in water) was added to LB in 2x the final concentration, and 
100µL was transferred to a 96-well plate.  The O/N cultures were diluted 50x in LB + gentamicin (25 
µg/µl) and 100µL was added to the 96-well microtiter plate, giving a final culture dilution of 100x. 
The microtiter plate was covered with a breathable membrane and incubated at 30°C with 600RPM 
shaking. After 20 hours cultures were diluted 100X in MilliQ, and 15 µL diluted culture was added 
==PAGE:64==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
60 
to 45 µL MilliQ, followed by boiling for 20 minutes to obtain DNA. This was followed by a barcode 
detection qPCR, the procedure of which is described above. The obtained Cq values from the qPCR 
were used to determine the CFU/mL of the biosensor with non-flipped and flipped barcodes from the 
standard curves created prior.  The ratio of non-flipped to flipped barcodes was used to determine the 
flip rate of the biosensor.    
5.14 DETERMINING THE SURVIVABILITY OF P. PUTIDA IN STERILE SOIL: 
O/N cultures of the P. putida ∆Phages GFP strain were prepared in triplicates in 5 mL LB with 
selective antibiotics. The O/N cultures were washed twice by centrifugation at 10.000 RPM, 
decanting, and resuspending in 0.9% NaCl. The washed culture was set to OD600=1 and 100 µL 
were inoculated into 1 gram of sterile soil (gamma radiated at 15 kGy) together with 225 µL 0.9% 
NaCl. Simultaneously, the washed OD600=1 bacteria were plated on LB and incubated O/N to 
determine the inoculated CFU/g soil. Three soil samples were inoculated for each triplicate, allowing 
for destructive sampling at 24, 48, and 72 hours. Sampling was performed by adding 3.5 mL 0.9% 
NaCl to the inoculated soil, vortexing for 1 minute at maximum speed, and allowing the soil to settle 
for 1 hour. After 1 hour the supernatant was diluted in 0.9% NaCl and plated onto Pseudomonas 
Isolation agar with antibiotics for CFU counting.  
5.15 BIOSENSOR ASSAY IN SOIL: 
P. putida ∆Phages-P2 DAPG biosensor strain was grown O/N in 5 mL LB with selective antibiotics 
in triplicates. The O/N cultures were washed twice by centrifugation at 10.000 RPM, decanting, and 
resuspending in 0.9% NaCl. The washed culture was set to OD600=1 and 100 µL were inoculated 
into 1 gram of sterile soil (gamma radiated at 15 kGy) with 225 µL 0.9% NaCl and DAPG from a 
methanol stock in increasing concentrations, followed by vortexing for 1 minute at maximum speed. 
The inoculated soil was allowed to incubate for 24 hours at room temperature. After 24 hours the 
DNA was extracted from the soil using the ‘DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit’, following the standard 
protocol and eluding in 50µl elution buffer. The extracted DNA was diluted 10 times in MilliQ in 
preparation for qPCR barcode detection described above.  
5.16 BIOSENSOR ASSAY ON WHEAT ROOTS AND ROOT IMAGING:  
Wheat berries were sprouted on a wet paper towel for 2 days. P. putida ∆Phages-P2 DAPG biosensor, 
P. putida GFP, and P. kilonensis strains were grown O/N in 5 mL LB in triplicates. The O/N cultures 
were washed twice by centrifugation at 10.000 RPM, decanting, and resuspending in 0.9% NaCl. The 
==PAGE:65==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
61 
OD600 of the washed cultures was set to 0.1. For the wheat experiments with inoculated wheat, the 
sprouted wheat berries were submerged in bacterial culture and allowed to drip for a few seconds 
before planting. Soil with DAPG was prepared by weighing potting soil and adding DAPG from a 
methanol stock in a 50 mL falcon tube, followed by vortexing for 20 minutes (Method derived from 
Ma et al.  201917). The sprouted wheat berries were planted in potting soil in plant boxes (Pittroff et 
al. 2024, unpublished), and grown in the plant chamber for 7 days (cycles of 16 hours of light at 24°C 
and 8 hours dark at 20°C). After growth, plants were imaged in the plant boxes, followed by removal 
of the plant from the soil. Loose soil sticking to the roots was lightly shaken off. Extracted plants 
were imaged again, followed by weighing the entire plant and then weighing the roots alone.  
For wheat inoculated with biosensor bacteria, a small piece of root was cut off, DNA was extracted 
from the roots using the ‘DNeasy Plant Pro’ kit, and the extracted DNA was used as template DNA 
for qPCR barcode detection, as described above.   
For wheat inoculated with P. putida GFP, a small root segment was cut off and placed on a 
microscope slide with a cover glass. The root was imaged using a stereomicroscope (Carl Zeiss Axio 
Zoom V16) using filters for GFP. Image analysis was performed in FIJI103. 
5.17 PHAGE DELETION IN P. PUTIDA: 
5.17.1 I-SceI-assisted gene deletion (Method from; Volke 2020 and Volke 2021)79,80: 
The pSNW2 plasmids with homology regions up and downstream of both PP_4151 and PP_5527 
were cloned by MLH. O/N cultures of the recipient Pseudomonas strain, the donor E. coli DH5α-pir 
strain carrying the pSNW2 plasmids and the E. coli HB101 with pRK600 helper strain were prepared. 
O/N cultures were washed twice by centrifuging at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute and resuspending in 
0.9% NaCl. OD600 was set to 1.0 in 0.9% NaCl. The recipient, donor, and helper were mixed in 
equal amounts to a final volume of 1 mL and centrifuged at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute, the supernatant 
was discarded. The pellet was resuspended in approximately 20µl spotted onto an LB plate and left 
to incubate O/N at 30°C. The spot was scraped off the LB plate, resuspended in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl 
plated onto PIA containing 50 µg/ml kanamycin, and incubated O/N at 30°C. Positive insertions were 
identified as green colonies and verified with PCR. 
O/N cultures of the recipient Pseudomonas strain and E. coli HB101 with pRK600 helper strain were 
prepared in LB, while the donor E. coli pir7 + pQure-6High was prepared in LB with gentamicin 
(8µg/ml) and 2mM 3-methylbenzoate. O/N cultures were washed twice by centrifuging at 10.000 
==PAGE:66==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
62 
RPM for 1 minute and resuspending in 0.9% NaCl. OD600 was set to 1.0 in 0.9% NaCl. The recipient, 
donor, and helper were mixed in equal amounts to a final volume of 1 mL and centrifuged at 10.000 
RPM for 1 minute, the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was resuspended in approximately 20µl 
spotted onto an LB plate with 2mM 3-methylbenzoate and left to incubate O/N at 30°C. The spot was 
scraped off the LB plate, resuspended in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl plated onto PIA containing 25 µg/ml 
gentamicin and 2mM 3-methylbenzoate, and the plate was incubated O/N at 30°C. Positive insertions 
were identified as solely red colonies and the gene deletions were verified with PCR, to determine 
the correct band size. The positive colonies were cured of the pQure plasmid by inoculation in LB 
O/N and plating on LB agar O/N, cured colonies were identified as white. Cured colonies underwent 
colony PCR, were run on a 0.8% gel, and underwent gel cleanup with 'macherey-nagel gel and PCR 
clean-up'. The purified PCR product was sent for sequencing. 
 
5.17.2 Allelic replacement (Method from Hmelo 2015) 63: 
The pK18msB plasmid with homology regions up and downstream of PP_4151 was cloned by MLH. 
O/N cultures of the recipient Pseudomonas strain, the donor E. coli CC118 λpir strain carrying the 
pK18msB plasmid and the E. coli HB101 with pRK600 helper strain were prepared. O/N cultures 
were washed twice by centrifuging at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute and resuspending in 0.9% NaCl. 
OD600 was set to 1.0 in 0.9% NaCl. The recipient, donor, and helper were mixed in equal amounts 
to a final volume of 1 mL and centrifuged at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute, the supernatant was discarded. 
The pellet was resuspended in approximately 20µl spotted onto an LB plate and left to incubate O/N 
at 30°C. The spot was scraped off the LB plate, resuspended in 1 mL 0.9% NaCl plated onto PIA 
containing 50 µg/ml kanamycin, and incubated O/N at 30°C. Insertion of the plasmid was verified 
with PCR. A positive colony was inoculated into LB O/N at 30°C, followed by plating on LB + 
sucrose (Appendix E). Successful gene deletion candidates were identified by colony PCR across the 
deleted gene, followed by gel electrophoresis on a 1% gel and imaging. Gene deletions were verified 
by sequencing. 
5.18 CLONING ARABINOSE BIOSENSOR ON PTN7 AND PSEVA231:  
Primers for the golden gate reaction joining the arabinose biosensor from the pIntegrase12 plasmid46 
to the backbone of the pTn7-M and pSEVA231 plasmids were created using the ‘NEBridge® Golden 
==PAGE:67==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
63 
Gate Assembly Tool, version 2.10.0’1. O/N cultures of E. coli CC118 λpir pTn7-M, E. coli CC118 
λpir pSEVA231, and E. coli TOP10 pIntegrase_12 were prepared in 5 mL LB with antibiotics. 
Plasmids were purified from O/N cultures using 'macherey-nagel Plasmid Purification’ kit from 2 
mL. DNA was amplified with Phusion PCR in 25 µl reactions, pSEVA231 and pTn7-m with primers 
247 and 248 to amplify the backbone, and pIntegrase12 with primers Pr249 and Pr250 to amplify the 
AraC-Int12 arabinose biosensor. 1 µl DpnI was added to the PCR products and allowed to incubate 
for 1 hour at 37°C. 5 µl DpnI treated PCR product was run on a 0.8% agarose gel and imaged for size 
verification, and the remaining 20 µl was purified with 'macherey-nagel gel and PCR clean-up'. The 
AraC-Int12 biosensor was ligated onto both the pSEVA231 and pTn7 backbone using a BsaI-HF 
mediated restriction ligation. The ligated plasmids were transformed into chemically competent E. 
coli CC118 λpir, for method see section above. The plasmids were verified by sequencing. pTn7-
AraC-Int12 biosensors were integrated into the Tn7 site as described above.  
pSEVA231-AraC-Int12 was conjugated into P. putida with tri-parental mating. O/N of the recipient 
Pseudomonas strain, the donor E. coli CC118 λpir carrying the pSEVA231-AraC-Int12 plasmid, and 
the E. coli HB101 with pRK600 helper strain were prepared. The three O/N cultures were washed 
separately twice by centrifuging at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute and resuspending in 0.9% NaCl. After 
washing each culture was set to OD600=1.0 in 0.9% NaCl. The recipient, donor, and helper were 
mixed in equal amounts to a final volume of 1 mL and centrifuged at 10.000 RPM for 1 minute 
discarding the supernatant. The pellet was resuspended in approximately 20µl spotted onto an LB 
plate and allowed to incubate O/N at 30°C. The spot was scraped off the LB plate, resuspended in 1 
mL 0.9% NaCl, and plated onto PIA containing 50 µg/ml kanamycin and incubated O/N at 30°C. 
Positive colonies were verified with colony PCR using primers PS1 and PS2.  
5.19 FLOW CYTOMETRY BIOSENSOR ASSAY: 
O/N cultures of the P. putida biosensor strains were prepared in 5 mL LB with antibiotics. O/N 
cultures were diluted 100X in LB with an inducer in a 96-well microtiter plate. The microtiter plate 
was covered with a breathable membrane and incubated at 30°C with 600RPM shaking. After 20 
hours, 2 µl culture was added to 198 µl 0.9% NaCl. The diluted culture was measured using the 
MACSQuant® VYB Flow Cytometer (Miltenyi Biotec). Flow cytometry data was analyzed using 
FlowJo™ v10.9 Software (BD Life Sciences). 
 
 
1 https://goldengate.neb.com/#!/ 
==PAGE:68==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
64 
5.20 STRAINS 
Cm=chloramphenicol, Km=kanamycin, Gm=gentamicin, Amp=ampicillin, the number is µg/ml. 
Strain 
Genotype 
Selection 
Source 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages OR ΔPhages 
  
Martínez-García61 
E. coli HB101 
pRK600 
Cm10 
Plasmid mobilizer 
E. coli λpir CC118 
pK18msB-HR1/2(PP_1035) -attB/P(Naringenin 
barcode) 
Km50 
MLH 
E. coli λpir CC118 
pK18msB-HR1/2(PP_1035) 
-
attB/P(Tetracycline barcode) 
Km50 
MLH 
E. coli λpir CC118 
pK18msB-HR1/2(PP_1035) -attB/P(Pyoluteorin 
barcode) 
Km50 
MLH 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages + attB/P (DAPG barcode 
@PP_1035) 
  
MLH 
E. coli TOP10 
pSEVA231-Int12-pltZ_RBS20x 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pK18msB-HR1/2(PP_1035)-attL/R 
(DAPG 
barcode flipped control) 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages + attB/P (DAPG barcode 
@PP_1035) + Tn7::Int12_LVA-phlF 
Gm25 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pTn7-M 
Gm10 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-Int12-pltZ_ 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-Int12-pltZ_LVA 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-Int12-NahR 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-Int12-NahR_LVA 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-Int12-TtgR 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-Int12-TtgR_LVA 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-Int12-TetR 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-Int12-TetR_LVA 
Km50 
Nørgaard et al. 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P (Pyoluteorin barcode) 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P (Tetracycline barcode) 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P (Naringenin barcode) 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages + attB/P (DAPG barcode 
@PP_1035) + pSEVA231-Int12-phlF-LVA 
Km50 
MLH 
E. coli λpir CC118 
pTNS2 
Amp100 
Transposase 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del-attB/P (DAPG barcode) 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del+attL/R (DAPG barcode) 
  
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pBG42-mKate 
Gm10 
Zobel et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pBG42-gfp 
Gm10 
Zobel et al. 
==PAGE:69==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
65 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P 
(Pyoluteorin 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-pltZ 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(Tetracycline 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-pltZ_LVA 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(Naringenin 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-TetR_LVA 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(Naringenin 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-TtgR 
Gm25 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pTn7-Int12-PltZ 
Gm10 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pTn7-Int12-PltZ_LVA 
Gm10 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pTn7-Int12-NahR 
Gm10 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pTn7-Int12-NahR_LVA 
Gm10 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pTn7-Int12-TtgR 
Gm10 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pTn7-Int12-TetR_LVA 
Gm10 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del-attB/P(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::GFP 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del-attB/P(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::mKate 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del+attL/R(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::GFP 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del+attL/R(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::mKate 
Gm25 
This study 
E. coli TOP10 
pIntegrase_12 
Km50 
Yang et al. 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attL/R(DAPG barcode) 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-PhlF_LVA 
Gm25 
JJN 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attL/R(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-PhlF_LVA 
Gm25 
JJN 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del-attB/P(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-PhlF_LVA 
Gm25 
JJN 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del-attL/R(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-PhlF_LVA 
Gm25 
JJN 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pSEVA231-AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pTn7-AraC_Int12 
Gm10 
This study 
E. coli CC118 λpir 
pK18msB_R6K-HR1_2(PP_1035)-Rep12 
Km50 
MLH 
P. putida KT2440 
WT 
  
WT 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage1 
  
Martínez-García61 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage2 
  
Martínez-García61 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage3 
  
Martínez-García61 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage4 
  
Martínez-García61 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del 
  
JJN 
==PAGE:70==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
66 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage2-P2del 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
WT_Rep12 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage1_Rep12 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage2_Rep12 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage3_Rep12 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage4_Rep12 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages_Rep12 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del_Rep12 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage2-P2del _Rep12 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
WT_Rep12+Tn7::AraC_Int12 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage1_Rep12+Tn7::AraC_Int12 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage2_Rep12+Tn7::AraC_Int12 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage3_Rep12+Tn7::AraC_Int12 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage4_Rep12+Tn7::AraC_Int12 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages_Rep12+Tn7::AraC_Int12 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del_Rep12+Tn7::AraC_Int12 Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage2-P2del _Rep12+Tn7::AraC_Int12 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
WT_Rep12+pSEVA-AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage1_Rep12+pSEVA-AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage2_Rep12+pSEVA-AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage3_Rep12v+pSEVA-AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage4_Rep12+pSEVA-AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages_Rep12+pSEVA-AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del_Rep12+pSEVA-
AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
ΔPhage2-P2del _Rep12+pSEVA-AraC_Int12 
Km50 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-NahR 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-NahR_LVA 
Gm25 
This study 
E. coli pir7 
pQure-6High 
Gm10 
+ 
2mM 
3-
mBz 
 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del-Δ5527-attB/P(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-PhlF_LVA 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-P2del-Δ5527-attL/R(DAPG 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-PhlF_LVA 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(Salicylate barcode) 
  
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(Salicylate 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-NahR 
Gm25 
This study 
P. putida KT2440 
Δall-prophages-attB/P(Salicylate 
barcode)+Tn7::Int12-NahR_LVA 
Gm25 
This study 
==PAGE:71==
 
Chapter 5: Materials and Methods 
67 
 
5.21 PLASMIDS 
Num 
Name 
Sequence (5'-3') 
Tm 
(°C) 
56 
Pr56_pInt12_SacI_fw 
ATCGAgagctccttaacgatcgttggctg 
62 
131 
Pr131_AttB12_SacI_fw 
tatatGAGCTCtatttatattttccaaatggattttgcagattccc 
62 
133 
Pr133_Int12_fw 
gatctgagcgtaagttgaaatatg 
55 
134 
Pr134_Int12_rev 
gttactaaaacaactggtcaagttc 
55 
135 
Pr135_Int12_flipper 
gcactaggaagaattccgaag 
55 
174 
Pr174_pInt12-
Repressor_XbaI_rev 
ATCGAtctagaccagggttttcccagtcacgac 
66 
177 
Pr177_SEVA231-XbaI_fw 
ATCGAtctagacgactagtcttggactcctgttg 
62 
191 
Pr191_PP1035-seq_fw 
GGACCTGGAGAATGCCGAAAAG 
60 
192 
Pr192_PP1035-seq_rev 
TCCAACGAACTGGCGATGAAC 
60 
199 
Pr199_Sali-spacer_fw 
Ggctacggtctccatgtgcgcagcgggcatcaaatctttttgttaa 
ccacataaacataaatgg 
70 
200 
Pr200_Sali-spacer_rev 
Ggctacggtctccacatctagttaatgtccgcaagactcttaaatttt 
aatagcagttgtgtc 
65 
201 
Pr201_Tet-flipper 
atgaggctgcctgagatc 
56 
202 
Pr202_Pyo-flipper 
ctatcgcgataattccatatcg 
54 
203 
Pr203_Narin-flipper 
caatgcaccggtttgtgc 
57 
204 
Pr204_Sali-flipper 
acatctagttaatgtccgcaag 
55 
214 
Pr214_DAPG-arti-flip_fw 
Ggctacggtctctagtgcgcgaccgacggagtgttcctctgggtta 
Accacataaacataaatggtacaactaatgtctacccagtgacacaa 
ctaac 
74 
215 
Pr215_DAPG-arti-flip_rev 
Ggctacggtctctcactaggaagaattccgaaggtcccttaaatttta 
atagcagttgtgtcactatttaggtggcacctgtaccacccatag 
71 
218 
Pr218 
ccgaacaggcttatgtcaag 
55 
219 
Pr219_pTn7_rep-seq_rev 
aaattgcccgtcgtattaaag 
54 
245_old  Pr245_SEVA231_SacI_rev ACTGAgagctcgaattcgcgcg 
59 
247 
Pr247_SEVA_fwd 
ggctacggtctcataaGTCGTGACTGGGAAAACC 
CTGGCG 
66 
248 
Pr248_SEVA_rev 
ggctacggtctcgccgtcaagttgtcataaGCCGCGGCCT 
AGGCGGCC 
75 
249 
Pr249_Int12-araC_fwd 
ggctacggtctcgACGGCTACATCATTCACTTTT 
TC 
57 
250 
Pr250_Int12-araC_rev 
ggctacggtctcacTTAGAATTTAAAGTGAATAT 
TGTTAATATCC 
54 
PS1  
PS1  
AGGGCGGCGGATTTGTCC 
63 
PS2 
PS2 
GCGGCAACCGAGCGTTC 
62 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
Bibliography 
68 
Bibliography 
1. 
Kenny DJ, Balskus EP. Engineering chemical interactions in microbial communities. Chem 
Soc Rev. 2018;47(5):1705-1729. doi:10.1039/c7cs00664k 
2. 
Scherlach K, Hertweck C. Mediators of mutualistic microbe-microbe interactions. Nat Prod 
Rep. 2018;35(4):303-308. doi:10.1039/c7np00035a 
3. 
Savary S, Willocquet L, Pethybridge SJ, Esker P, McRoberts N, Nelson A. The global burden 
of pathogens and pests on major food crops. Nat Ecol Evol. 2019;3(3):430-439. 
doi:10.1038/s41559-018-0793-y 
4. 
Chauhan P, Sharma N, Tapwal A, et al. Soil Microbiome: Diversity, Benefits and Interactions 
with Plants. Sustainability (Switzerland). 2023;15(19). doi:10.3390/su151914643 
5. 
Bonaterra A, Badosa E, Daranas N, Francés J, Roselló G, Montesinos E. Bacteria as Biological 
Control 
Agents 
of 
Plant 
Diseases. 
Microorganisms. 
2022;10(9). 
doi:10.3390/microorganisms10091759 
6. 
Moraskie M, Roshid MHO, O’Connor G, et al. Microbial whole-cell biosensors: Current 
applications, challenges, and future perspectives. Biosens Bioelectron. 2021;191. 
doi:10.1016/j.bios.2021.113359 
7. 
Jens-Jakob Krogh Nørgaard. Construction and Test of Genetic Biosensors for Detection of 
Secondary Metabolites. Technical University of Denmark; 2023. 
8. 
McSpadden Gardener BB. Diversity and ecology of biocontrol Pseudomonas spp. in 
agricultural systems. In: Phytopathology. Vol 97. ; 2007:221-226. doi:10.1094/PHYTO-97-2-
0221 
9. 
Weller DM. Pseudomonas biocontrol agents of soilborne pathogens: Looking back over 30 
years. In: Phytopathology. Vol 97. ; 2007:250-256. doi:10.1094/PHYTO-97-2-0250 
10. 
Veena VK, Kennedy K, Lakshmi P, Krishna R, Sakthivel N. Anti-leukemic, anti-lung, and 
anti-breast cancer potential of the microbial polyketide 2, 4-diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG) 
and its interaction with the metastatic proteins than the antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins. Mol Cell 
Biochem. 2016;414(1-2):47-56. doi:10.1007/s11010-016-2657-6 
11. 
Ramette A, MoÃ«nne-Loccoz Y, DÃ©fago G. Prevalence of fluorescent pseudomonads 
producing antifungal phloroglucinols and/or hydrogen cyanide in soils naturally suppressive 
or conducive to tobacco black root rot. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2006;44(1):35-43. 
doi:10.1111/j.1574-6941.2003.tb01088.x 
12. 
Palma-Guerrero J, Chancellor T, Spong J, et al. Take-All Disease: New Insights into an 
Important 
Wheat 
Root 
Pathogen. 
Trends 
Plant 
Sci. 
2021;26(8):836-848. 
doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2021.02.009 
13. 
Raaijmakers JM, Weller DM. Natural Plant Protection by 2,4-Diacetylphloroglucinol-
Producing Pseudomonas Spp. in Take-All Decline Soils. Vol 11.; 1998. 
14. 
Zhou TT, Li CY, Chen D, Wu K, Shen QR, Shen B. PhlF- mutant of Pseudomonas fluorescens 
J2 improved 2,4-DAPG biosynthesis and biocontrol efficacy against tomato bacterial wilt. 
Biological Control. 2014;78:1-8. doi:10.1016/j.biocontrol.2014.07.006 
15. 
Hansen ML, He Z, Wibowo M, Jelsbak L. A Whole-Cell Biosensor for Detection of 2,4-
Diacetylphloroglucinol (DAPG)-Producing Bacteria from Grassland Soil MICROBIAL 
ECOLOGY.; 2021. https://journals.asm.org/journal/aem 
16. 
Leigh 
Ann 
Anderson 
PharmDL 
updated 
on 
J 
19, 
2023. 
https://www.drugs.com/article/antibiotics.html#tetracyclines. 
==PAGE:73==
 
Bibliography 
69 
17. 
Ma Z, Liu J, Li H, et al. A Fast and Easily Parallelizable Biosensor Method for Measuring 
Extractable 
Tetracyclines 
in 
Soils. 
Environ 
Sci 
Technol. 
2020;54(2):758-767. 
doi:10.1021/acs.est.9b04051 
18. 
Kumar K, C. Gupta S, Chander Y, Singh AK. Antibiotic Use in Agriculture and Its Impact on 
the Terrestrial Environment. Advances in Agronomy. 2005;87:1-54. doi:10.1016/S0065-
2113(05)87001-4 
19. 
Granados-Chinchilla F, Rodríguez C. Tetracyclines in Food and Feedingstuffs: From 
Regulation to Analytical Methods, Bacterial Resistance, and Environmental and Health 
Implications. J Anal Methods Chem. 2017;2017. doi:10.1155/2017/1315497 
20. 
Popowska M, Rzeczycka M, Miernik A, Krawczyk-Balska A, Walsh F, Duffy B. Influence of 
soil use on prevalence of tetracycline,streptomycin, and erythromycin resistance and 
associated resistance genes. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012;56(3):1434-1443. 
doi:10.1128/AAC.05766-11 
21. 
Chopra I, Roberts M. Tetracycline Antibiotics: Mode of Action, Applications, Molecular 
Biology, and Epidemiology of Bacterial Resistance. Microbiology and Molecular Biology 
Reviews. 2001;65(2):232-260. doi:10.1128/mmbr.65.2.232-260.2001 
22. 
Hansen LH, SÃ¸rensen SJ. Detection and quantification of tetracyclines by whole cell 
biosensors. 
FEMS 
Microbiol 
Lett. 
2000;190(2):273-278. 
doi:10.1111/j.1574-
6968.2000.tb09298.x 
23. 
Lacerna NM, Miller BW, Lim AL, et al. Mindapyrroles A-C, Pyoluteorin Analogues from a 
Shipworm-Associated 
Bacterium. 
J 
Nat 
Prod. 
2019;82(4):1024-1028. 
doi:10.1021/acs.jnatprod.8b00979 
24. 
Gu Q, Qiao J, Wang R, et al. The Role of Pyoluteorin from Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5 in 
Suppressing the Growth and Pathogenicity of Pantoea ananatis on Maize. Int J Mol Sci. 
2022;23(12). doi:10.3390/ijms23126431 
25. 
Balthazar C, St-Onge R, Léger G, Lamarre SG, Joly DL, Filion M. Pyoluteorin and 2,4-
diacetylphloroglucinol are major contributors to Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5 biocontrol 
against 
Botrytis 
cinerea 
in 
cannabis. 
Front 
Microbiol. 
2022;13. 
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2022.945498 
26. 
Sykes EME, White D, McLaughlin S, Kumar A. Salicylic acids and pathogenic bacteria: new 
perspectives on an old compound. Can J Microbiol. Published online January 1, 2023. 
doi:10.1139/cjm-2023-0123 
27. 
Tawfeek N, Mahmoud MF, Hamdan DI, et al. Phytochemistry, Pharmacology and Medicinal 
Uses of Plants of the Genus Salix: An Updated Review. Front Pharmacol. 2021;12. 
doi:10.3389/fphar.2021.593856 
28. 
Arif H AS. Salicylic Acid (Aspirin) [Updated 2023 Jul 5]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure 
Island 
(FL): 
StatPearls 
Publishing; 
2023 
Jan-. 
. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK519032/. 
29. 
War AR, Paulraj MG, War MY, Ignacimuthu S. Role of salicylic acid in induction of plant 
defense system in chickpea (cicer arietinum l). Plant Signal Behav. 2011;6(11):1787-1792. 
doi:10.4161/psb.6.11.17685 
30. 
van de Mortel JE, de Vos RCH, Dekkers E, et al. Metabolic and transcriptomic changes 
induced in arabidopsis by the rhizobacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens SS101. Plant Physiol. 
2012;160(4):2173-2188. doi:10.1104/pp.112.207324 
31. 
Lopreside A, Wan X, Michelini E, Roda A, Wang B. Comprehensive Profiling of Diverse 
Genetic Reporters with Application to Whole-Cell and Cell-Free Biosensors. Anal Chem. 
2019;91(23):15284-15292. doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.9b04444 
==PAGE:74==
 
Bibliography 
70 
32. 
Liu C, Yu H, Zhang B, et al. Engineering whole-cell microbial biosensors: Design principles 
and applications in monitoring and treatment of heavy metals and organic pollutants. 
Biotechnol Adv. 2022;60. doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2022.108019 
33. 
Saltepe B, Kehribar EŞ, Su Yirmibeşoǧlu SS, Şafak Şeker UÖ. Cellular Biosensors with 
Engineered Genetic Circuits. ACS Sens. 2018;3(1):13-26. doi:10.1021/acssensors.7b00728 
34. 
Wang H, Sheng Y, Ou Y, et al. Streptomyces-based whole-cell biosensors for detecting diverse 
cell 
envelope-targeting 
antibiotics. 
Biosens 
Bioelectron. 
2024;249. 
doi:10.1016/j.bios.2024.116004 
35. 
Galarion LH, Mitchell JK, Randall CP, O’neill AJ. An extensively validated whole-cell 
biosensor for specific, sensitive and high-throughput detection of antibacterial inhibitors 
targeting cell-wall biosynthesis. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. 2023;78(3):646-655. 
doi:10.1093/jac/dkac429 
36. 
Zeng N, Wu Y, Chen W, Huang Q, Cai P. Whole-Cell Microbial Bioreporter for Soil 
Contaminants Detection. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021;9. doi:10.3389/fbioe.2021.622994 
37. 
Wang D, Zheng Y, Wei L, et al. A signal-amplified whole-cell biosensor for sensitive detection 
of Hg2+ based on Hg2+-enhanced reporter module. J Environ Sci (China). 2020;96:93-98. 
doi:10.1016/j.jes.2020.03.020 
38. 
Wen KY, Rutter JW, Barnes CP, Dekker L. Fundamental Building Blocks of Whole-Cell 
Biosensor Design. In: Handbook of Cell Biosensors. Springer International Publishing; 
2020:1-23. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-47405-2_181-1 
39. 
Chen S, Chen X, Su H, Guo M, Liu H. Advances in Synthetic-Biology-Based Whole-Cell 
Biosensors: Principles, Genetic Modules, and Applications in Food Safety. Int J Mol Sci. 
2023;24(9). doi:10.3390/ijms24097989 
40. 
Levskaya A, Chevalier AA, Tabor JJ, et al. Engineering Escherichia coli to see light. Nature. 
2005;438(7067):441-442. doi:10.1038/nature04405 
41. 
Khalil AS, Collins JJ. Synthetic biology: Applications come of age. Nat Rev Genet. 
2010;11(5):367-379. doi:10.1038/nrg2775 
42. 
Gardner TS, Cantor CR, Collins JJ. Construction of a Genetic Toggle Switch in Escherichia 
Coli. Vol 403.; 2000. www.nature.com 
43. 
Sagi E, Hever N, Rosen R, et al. Fluorescence and bioluminescence reporter functions in 
genetically modified bacterial sensor strains. In: Sensors and Actuators, B: Chemical. Vol 90. 
; 2003:2-8. doi:10.1016/S0925-4005(03)00014-5 
44. 
Hansen LH, Sørensen SJ. The use of whole-cell biosensors to detect and quantify compounds 
or 
conditions 
affecting 
biological 
systems. 
Microb 
Ecol. 
2001;42(4):483-494. 
doi:10.1007/s00248-001-0025-9 
45. 
STEWART GSAB, WILLIAMS P. lux genes and the applications of bacterial 
bioluminescence. J Gen Microbiol. 1992;138(7):1289-1300. doi:10.1099/00221287-138-7-
1289 
46. 
Yang L, Nielsen AAK, Fernandez-Rodriguez J, et al. Permanent genetic memory with >1-byte 
capacity. Nat Methods. 2014;11(12):1261-1266. doi:10.1038/nmeth.3147 
47. 
Berepiki A, Kent R, MacHado LFM, Dixon N. Development of High-Performance Whole Cell 
Biosensors Aided by Statistical Modeling. ACS Synth Biol. 2020;9(3):576-589. 
doi:10.1021/acssynbio.9b00448 
48. 
Ang J, Harris E, Hussey BJ, Kil R, McMillen DR. Tuning response curves for synthetic 
biology. ACS Synth Biol. 2013;2(10):547-567. doi:10.1021/sb4000564 
49. 
Zhou GJ, Zhang F. Applications and Tuning Strategies for Transcription Factor-Based 
Metabolite Biosensors. Biosensors (Basel). 2023;13(4). doi:10.3390/bios13040428 
==PAGE:75==
 
Bibliography 
71 
50. 
Zhou B, Xiao JF, Tuli L, Ressom HW. LC-MS-based metabolomics. Mol Biosyst. 
2012;8(2):470-481. doi:10.1039/c1mb05350g 
51. 
Bourceau P, Geier B, Suerdieck V, et al. Visualization of metabolites and microbes at high 
spatial resolution using MALDI mass spectrometry imaging and in situ fluorescence labeling. 
Nat Protoc. 2023;18(10):3050-3079. doi:10.1038/s41596-023-00864-1 
52. 
Bouslimani A, Sanchez LM, Garg N, Dorrestein PC. Mass spectrometry of natural products: 
Current, emerging and future technologies. Nat Prod Rep. 2014;31(6):718-729. 
doi:10.1039/c4np00044g 
53. 
Fogg PCM, Colloms S, Rosser S, Stark M, Smith MCM. New applications for phage 
integrases. J Mol Biol. 2014;426(15):2703-2716. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2014.05.014 
54. 
Hambly E, Suttle CA. The viriosphere, diversity, and genetic exchange within phage 
communities. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2005;8(4):444-450. doi:10.1016/j.mib.2005.06.005 
55. 
Clokie MRJ, Millard AD, Letarov A V., Heaphy S. Phages in nature. Bacteriophage. 
2011;1(1):31-45. doi:10.4161/bact.1.1.14942 
56. 
Gummalla VS, Zhang Y, Liao Y Te, Wu VCH. The Role of Temperate Phages in Bacterial 
Pathogenicity. Microorganisms. 2023;11(3). doi:10.3390/microorganisms11030541 
57. 
Groth AC, Calos MP. Phage integrases: Biology and applications. J Mol Biol. 
2004;335(3):667-678. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2003.09.082 
58. 
Lewis JA, Hatfull GF. SURVEY AND SUMMARY Control of Directionality in Integrase-
Mediated Recombination: Examination of Recombination Directionality Factors (RDFs) 
Including Xis and Cox Proteins. Vol 29.; 2001. www.pitt.edu/~gfh/rdf.html. 
59. 
Olorunniji FJ, Rosser SJ, Stark WM. Site-specific recombinases: molecular machines for the 
Genetic Revolution. Biochemical Journal. 2016;473(6):673-684. doi:10.1042/BJ20151112 
60. 
Kralik P, Ricchi M. A basic guide to real time PCR in microbial diagnostics: Definitions, 
parameters, and everything. Front Microbiol. 2017;8(FEB). doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.00108 
61. 
Martínez-García E, Jatsenko T, Kivisaar M, de Lorenzo V. Freeing Pseudomonas putida 
KT2440 of its proviral load strengthens endurance to environmental stresses. Environ 
Microbiol. 2015;17(1):76-90. doi:10.1111/1462-2920.12492 
62. 
Chaves JE, Wilton R, Gao Y, et al. Evaluation of chromosomal insertion loci in the 
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 genome for predictable biosystems design. Metab Eng Commun. 
2020;11. doi:10.1016/j.mec.2020.e00139 
63. 
Hmelo LR, Borlee BR, Almblad H, et al. Precision-engineering the Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
genome 
with 
two-step 
allelic 
exchange. 
Nat 
Protoc. 
2015;10(11):1820-1841. 
doi:10.1038/nprot.2015.115 
64. 
Hansen LH, Ferrari B, Sørensen AH, Veal D, Sørensen SJ. Detection of oxytetracycline 
production by Streptomyces rimosus in soil microcosms by combining whole-cell biosensors 
and 
flow 
cytometry. 
Appl 
Environ 
Microbiol. 
2001;67(1):239-244. 
doi:10.1128/AEM.67.1.239-244.2001 
65. 
Silva-Rocha R, Martínez-García E, Calles B, et al. The Standard European Vector Architecture 
(SEVA): A coherent platform for the analysis and deployment of complex prokaryotic 
phenotypes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41(D1). doi:10.1093/nar/gks1119 
66. 
Martínez-Garćía E, Aparicio T, Goñi-Moreno A, Fraile S, De Lorenzo V. SEVA 2.0: An 
update of the Standard European Vector Architecture for de-/re-construction of bacterial 
functionalities. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015;43(D1):D1183-D1189. doi:10.1093/nar/gku1114 
67. 
Zobel S, Benedetti I, Eisenbach L, De Lorenzo V, Wierckx N, Blank LM. Tn7-Based Device 
for Calibrated Heterologous Gene Expression in Pseudomonas putida. ACS Synth Biol. 
2015;4(12):1341-1351. doi:10.1021/acssynbio.5b00058 
==PAGE:76==
 
Bibliography 
72 
68. 
Engler C, Kandzia R, Marillonnet S. A one pot, one step, precision cloning method with high 
throughput capability. PLoS One. 2008;3(11). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003647 
69. 
Engler C, Gruetzner R, Kandzia R, Marillonnet S. Golden gate shuffling: A one-pot DNA 
shuffling method based on type ils restriction enzymes. PLoS One. 2009;4(5). 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0005553 
70. 
Engineering B, Lee JH, Skowron PM, Rutkowska SM, Hong SS, Kim SC. NENETIC ALYSIS 
Sequential Amplification of Cloned DNA as Tandem Multimers Using Class-IIS Restriction 
Enzymes. Vol 13.; 1996. 
71. 
Padgett KA, Sorge JA. Creating Seamless Junctions Independent of Restriction Sites in PCR 
Cloning ( Recombinant DNA; Type-IIS Restriction Endonuclease; Eam1104I; Amplimer; 5-
Methyl-DCTP). Vol 168.; 1996. 
72. 
Bonsall RF, Weller DM, Thomashow LS. Quantification of 2,4-Diacetylphloroglucinol 
Produced by Fluorescent Pseudomonas Spp. In Vitro and in the Rhizosphere of Wheat. Vol 
63.; 1997. https://journals.asm.org/journal/aem 
73. 
Kwak YS, Bonsall RF, Okubara PA, Paulitz TC, Thomashow LS, Weller DM. Factors 
impacting the activity of 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol-producing Pseudomonas fluorescens 
against take-all of wheat. Soil Biol Biochem. 2012;54:48-56. doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2012.05.012 
74. 
Oppenheimer-Shaanan Y, Jakoby G, Starr ML, et al. A dynamic rhizosphere interplay between 
tree roots and soil bacteria under drought stress. Elife. 2022;11. doi:10.7554/ELIFE.79679 
75. 
Miyada CG, Stoltzfus L, Wilcox G. Regulation of the AraC Gene of Escherichia Coli: 
Catabolite Repression, Autoregulation, and Effect on AraBAD Expression (CAMP Receptor 
Protein/in Vitro Transcription/DNase I Protection/Oligonucleotide-Directed Mutagenesis). 
Vol 81.; 1984. 
76. 
Cook TB, Rand JM, Nurani W, Courtney DK, Liu SA, Pfleger BF. Genetic tools for reliable 
gene expression and recombineering in Pseudomonas putida. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 
2018;45(7):517-527. doi:10.1007/s10295-017-2001-5 
77. 
Altschup SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool. 
Vol 215.; 1990. 
78. 
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, et al. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A New 
Generation of Protein Database Search Programs. Vol 25. Oxford University Press; 1997. 
https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/25/17/3389/1061651 
79. 
Volke DC, Friis L, Wirth NT, Turlin J, Nikel PI. Synthetic control of plasmid replication 
enables target- and self-curing of vectors and expedites genome engineering of Pseudomonas 
putida. Metab Eng Commun. 2020;10. doi:10.1016/j.mec.2020.e00126 
80. 
Volke DC, Wirth NT, Nikel PI. Rapid genome engineering of pseudomonas assisted by 
fluorescent markers and tractable curing of plasmids. Bio Protoc. 2021;11(4). 
doi:10.21769/BioProtoc.3917 
81. 
Sidstedt M, Rådström P, Hedman J. PCR inhibition in qPCR, dPCR and MPS—mechanisms 
and solutions. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2020;412(9):2009-2023. doi:10.1007/s00216-020-02490-
2 
82. 
Svec D, Tichopad A, Novosadova V, Pfaffl MW, Kubista M. How good is a PCR efficiency 
estimate: Recommendations for precise and robust qPCR efficiency assessments. Biomol 
Detect Quantif. 2015;3:9-16. doi:10.1016/j.bdq.2015.01.005 
83. 
Schwartz T, Volkmann H, Kirchen S, et al. Real-time PCR detection of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa in clinical and municipal wastewater and genotyping of the ciprofloxacin-resistant 
isolates. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2006;57(1):158-167. doi:10.1111/j.1574-6941.2006.00100.x 
==PAGE:77==
 
Bibliography 
73 
84. 
Kampers LFC, Koehorst JJ, van Heck RJA, Suarez-Diez M, Stams AJM, Schaap PJ. A 
metabolic and physiological design study of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 capable of 
anaerobic respiration. BMC Microbiol. 2021;21(1). doi:10.1186/s12866-020-02058-1 
85. 
Nelson KE, Weinel C, Paulsen IT, et al. Complete Genome Sequence and Comparative 
Analysis of the Metabolically Versatile Pseudomonas Putida KT2440. Vol 4.; 2002. 
http://www.tigr.org 
86. 
Schell MA, Wender PE. Identification of the NahR Gene Product and Nucleotide Sequences 
Required for Its Activation of the Sal Operon. Vol 166.; 1986. 
87. 
Planchamp C, Glauser G, Mauch-Mani B. Root inoculation with Pseudomonas putida KT2440 
induces transcriptional and metabolic changes and systemic resistance in maize plants. Front 
Plant Sci. 2015;5(JAN). doi:10.3389/fpls.2014.00719 
88. 
Costa-Gutierrez SB, Lami MJ, Santo MCC Di, et al. Plant growth promotion by Pseudomonas 
putida KT2440 under saline stress: role of eptA. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 
2020;104(10):4577-4592. doi:10.1007/s00253-020-10516-z 
89. 
Turnbull GA, Morgan JAW, Whipps JM, Saunders JR. The role of motility in the in vitro 
attachment of Pseudomonas putida PaW8 to wheat roots. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 
2006;35(1):57-65. doi:10.1111/j.1574-6941.2001.tb00788.x 
90. 
Martínez-Gil M, Yousef-Coronado F, Espinosa-Urgel M. LapF, the second largest 
Pseudomonas putida protein, contributes to plant root colonization and determines biofilm 
architecture. Mol Microbiol. 2010;77(3):549-561. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07249.x 
91. 
Bünger W, Jiang X, Müller J, Hurek T, Reinhold-Hurek B. Novel cultivated endophytic 
Verrucomicrobia reveal deep-rooting traits of bacteria to associate with plants. Sci Rep. 
2020;10(1). doi:10.1038/s41598-020-65277-6 
92. 
Rosendahl S, Tamman H, Brauer A, Remm M, Hõrak R. Chromosomal toxin-antitoxin 
systems in Pseudomonas putida are rather selfish than beneficial. Sci Rep. 2020;10(1). 
doi:10.1038/s41598-020-65504-0 
93. 
Kalvapalle PB, Sridhar S, Silberg JJ, Stadler LB. Long duration environmental biosensing by 
recording analyte detection in DNA using recombinase memory. bioRxiv. Published online 
January 1, 2023:2023.08.10.552812. doi:10.1101/2023.08.10.552812 
94. 
Olorunniji FJ, McPherson AL, Rosser SJ, Smith MCM, Colloms SD, Marshall Stark W. 
Control of serine integrase recombination directionality by fusion with the directionality factor. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2017;45(14):8635-8645. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx567 
95. 
Breu¨ner A, Breu¨ner B, Hammer K. Novel Organization of Genes Involved in Prophage 
Excision Identified in the Temperate Lactococcal Bacteriophage TP901-1. Vol 181.; 1999. 
96. 
Ramaswamy KS, Carrasco CD, Fatma T, Golden JW. Cell-type specificity of the Anabaena 
fdxN-element rearrangement requires xisH and xisI. Mol Microbiol. 1997;23(6):1241-1249. 
doi:10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.3081671.x 
97. 
Ba F, Zhang Y, Wang L, Liu WQ, Li J. Applications of Serine Integrases in Synthetic Biology 
over the Past Decade. SynBio. 2023;1(2):172-189. doi:10.3390/synbio1020012 
98. 
Merrick CA, Zhao J, Rosser SJ. Serine Integrases: Advancing Synthetic Biology. ACS Synth 
Biol. 2018;7(2):299-310. doi:10.1021/acssynbio.7b00308 
99. 
Brown WRA, Lee NCO, Xu Z, Smith MCM. Serine recombinases as tools for genome 
engineering. Methods. 2011;53(4):372-379. doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2010.12.031 
100. Brophy JAN, Triassi AJ, Adams BL, et al. Engineered integrative and conjugative elements 
for efficient and inducible DNA transfer to undomesticated bacteria. Nat Microbiol. 
2018;3(9):1043-1053. doi:10.1038/s41564-018-0216-5 
101. Saeidi N, Wong CK, Lo TM, et al. Engineering microbes to sense and eradicate Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, a human pathogen. Mol Syst Biol. 2011;7. doi:10.1038/msb.2011.55 
==PAGE:78==
 
Bibliography 
74 
102. Klessig DF, Tian M, Choi HW. Multiple targets of salicylic acid and its derivatives in plants 
and animals. Front Immunol. 2016;7(MAY). doi:10.3389/fimmu.2016.00206 
103. Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, et al. Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-
image analysis. Nat Methods. 2012;9(7):676-682. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2019 
  
'Figures created with BioRender.com' 
. 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
Appendices 
75 
Appendices 
Appendix A 
The barcode sequences: 
Below are the sequences of the five barcodes used in 5’-3’. 
DAPG: 
gggaccttcggaattcttcctagtgcgcgaccgacggagtgttcctctgg 
Tetracycline: 
ttctagaggatctcaggcagcctcatgctgatcgccaaggcaatggtgct 
Pyoluteorin: 
tgtacgatatggaattatcgcgataggatacgacctctaatgttcacaac 
Naringenin: 
aggcatccgcacaaaccggtgcattggttaagactgaagtataccaacgc 
Salicylate: 
gagtcttgcggacattaactagatgtgcgcagcgggcatcaaatcttttt 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
Appendices 
76 
Appendix B 
Root imaging: 
 
The figure shows the roots of wheat which has been grown for 7 days. In the control the wheat has had no bacteria 
added. In the right the wheat sprouts were inoculated with GFP tagged P. putida KT2440 prior to seeding. Images were 
taken with a stereomicroscope. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
Appendices 
77 
Appendix C 
Tn7 integrated arabinose P. putida biosensor strains with deletions of prophage regions. 
 
The figure shows the result of assaying P. putida with varying deletions of prophage regions using an arabinose 
biosensor integrated into the Tn7 site. The x-axis shows the concentration of arabinose, while the y-axis shows the 
response. As can be seen there is only a very slight response to arabinose. 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
Appendices 
78 
Appendix D 
Heat shock competent cells protocol: 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
Appendices 
79 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
Appendices 
80 
Appendix E 
Preparation of LB + sucrose plates 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
Appendices 
81 
Appendix F 
50 µl Phusion PCR, reagents and PCR programme 
 
Primers are in 5 µM. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
Appendices 
82 
Appendix G 
FastDigest PCR reagents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
