==PAGE:1==
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face
Attractiveness
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Jesper Blak
Rasmus Stilling Christensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
+45 4525 3031, www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been made over the course of five months at DTU Compute, at the de­
partment for Computer Science and Engineering in partial fulfilment for the degree Master
of Science (MSc) in Engineering. In addition this thesis was created in collaboration with
the da/sec group.
This thesis investigate the potential respecting face attractiveness can have on the per­
formance of a D­MAD method.
Jesper Blak ­ s165740
Rasmus Stilling Christensen ­ s174112
ii
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In modern society, facial recognition has become more prevalent. Its uses include au­
tomatic border control and verification of documents without human oversight. For this
reason facial recognition has become a more attractive target for cyberattacks.
One such attack targeting face recognition, is known as morphing attacks. Morphing
attacks consist of generating a morphed image, which is sufficiently close to multiple dif­
ferent people’s facial biometric data. Thus allowing several people to use the same image
for verification.
To combat morphing attacks, there is a need for automatic detection of morphed images.
In this project, we displayed a correlation between images being morphed, and the per­
ceived beauty of those images. This is due to mathematical average­looking faces being
more attractive, and morphing techniques averaging out the facial features of the images
being morphed. Using this tendency of morphing techniques, a new method for detecting
morphed images was created, by combining a convolutional neural network trained on
beauty scores of images, together with an existing differential morphing attack detection
method.
The performance analysis of this new method shows that facial beauty information has the
potential to improve existing morphing attack detection methods. Currently, this method
has some problems which need to be addressed before it can outperform existing meth­
ods. With clear shortcomings of the new method related to more challenging optimization,
and difficulty handling morphing methods which does not attempt to reduce artifacts in the
morphed images.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We want to thank our supervisors Christian D. Jensen, Christoph Busch and Juan Tapia,
for assisting us and giving us the opportunity to work on this project. Hosting weekly or
bi­weekly meetings helped us make sure that we kept our focus were it needed to be. We
also want to thank the da/sec Team for allowing us to use their libraries, repositories and
resources.
We would also like to give a big thanks to Daniel Fischer for keeping up with all of our
sometimes not so wise questions, and helping us troubleshoot technical issues.
Lastly, we also want to thank our family for their support, understanding and tolerance.
iv
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Chapters Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Biometric Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Face Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Morphed images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Morphing Attack Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.5
Support Vector Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.6
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.7
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Related Work
21
3.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Method
23
4.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Performance of Beautyfeatures and Beautyscoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Incorporation of Beauty Scoring Into Existing Differential Morphing Attack
Detection (D­MAD) Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Data and Discussion
29
5.1
Beauty Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Combination of Beauty Vectors and hdadfr
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6
Conclusion
43
7
Future Work
45
7.1
Improvements to Integration of Beauty Scoring with D­MAD . . . . . . . . . 45
7.2
More Information About Different Morphing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Bibliography
47
A Appendix A
51
A.1 Tables and graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.2 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
BPCER Bona Fide Classification Error Rate
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
D­MAD Differential Morphing Attack Detection
DCNN Deep Convolutional Neural Network
DNN Deep Neural Network
EER Equal Error Rate
eMRTD electronic Machine Readable Travel Documents
FATE Face Analysis Technology Evaluation
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission
ISO International Organization for Standardization
MAD Morphing Attack Detection
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
NN Neural Network
PCA Principal Component Analysis
RBF Radial Basis Function
ReLU rectified linear unit
S­MAD Single­image Morphing Attack Detection
SVM Support Vector Machine
USSR Detection Error Tradeoff
VDCNN Very Deep Convolutional Neural Network
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Facial recognition systems are used for automatic identification in a wide range of areas,
such as for validating the holder of passports, travel documents and driver licenses. With
an increase in the use of facial recognition systems, especially in document verification
and border control, there is a larger incentive for malicious attacks targeting facial recog­
nition systems, such as morphing attacks. To prevent morphing attacks, the use and
improvement of Morphing Attack Detection (MAD) methods is needed.
Morphing attacks consist of two or more pictures of different faces being morphed together
to create a single image with similarities to all contributing individuals. A face recognition
software may then falsely identify the morphed images, as one or more of the faces used
to generate the morphed image. It has been shown that when two faces are morphed to­
gether, the resulting morphed face will appear more beautiful for some beauty metrics[1].
It is this characteristic of morphing that we wish to exploit. By measuring the facial at­
tractiveness and subsequently combining it with an existing MAD method, we hope to
improve the morph detection performance. There exist multiple different types of MAD
methods, in this project however, we will focus on Differential Morphing Attack Detection
(D­MAD). Which is a method that compares a trusted image to a suspected image, and
based on this comparison attempts to determine if the suspected image is morphed.
There exist many papers on how to evaluate the beauty of a facial image using Con­
volutional Neural Network (CNN) for deep learning [2][3][4][5], to create a model that can
score how beautiful a facial image is. There are also several papers that uses machine
learning on extracted features from facial images to calculate the beauty score[6][7]. In
this project, we are hoping to find a method for evaluating facial beauty, which has the
potential when combined with an existing D­MAD method to improve its performance for
identifying morphed images.
1.1
Research Questions
This thesis aims to use beauty scoring for morphing attack detection. To do so, we wish
to answer the research questions listed below:
• What aspects of facial beauty have the most potential for identifying a morphed
image?
• Can beauty scoring be used in conjunction with existing morphing attack detection
to improve detection performance?
• How can beauty scoring best be used to improve morphing attack detection methods
performance?
1.2
Thesis Contribution
We found a method for evaluating facial beauty, which has clear potential for use in D­
MAD methods. We found that beauty­based D­MAD has promising prospects, since the
method performs better on higher­quality morph images without artifacts, which the ex­
isting D­MAD method used in this work had difficulty with. We identified which problems
there currently exist for beauty­based D­MAD, thereby laying the foundations for future
development of beauty­based D­MAD techniques.
2
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Thesis Chapters Overview
Below is a list and a small description of the upcoming chapters which this thesis is divided
into:
Chapter 2 provides the reader with an understanding of the concepts used in this thesis,
including face recognition, Beauty scoring, Morphing images, Morphing attack detection,
Artificial neural networks, etc.
Chapter 3 summarises related work in the fields of beauty scoring and Morphing Attack
Detection, while also presenting datasets that were created to help these two fields.
Chapter 4 describes our methods for evaluating the performance/potential of the beauty
scoring algorithm as a D­MAD algorithm, how we fuse it with the D­MAD method, and
how we evaluate the combined method.
Chapter 5 shows our results from our tests and contains our discussion on the data that
we have created.
Chapter 6 concludes our findings in this project in which we will attempt to answer the
initial research question.
Chapter 7 have our future work opportunities, ideas and problems that became out of the
scope of this project.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
The purpose of this chapter is to describe and give the fundamentals of face recognition,
morphing, MAD, CNN and other needed backgrounds knowledge used in this work.
2.1
Biometric Systems
Authentication is one of the important aspects of most security systems. To authenticate
a user and allow or disallow access, the system will use one of the three authentication
factors which are the following as covered in [8]:
• Something you have ­ This can be a key card, a physical authenticator key, or other
physical items that function similarly to a key. The downside of these items is that
they can be stolen, lost or copied. As they usually don’t have any direct connection
to the user they were given to. Any user that attains one of them can gain access
to the system they are supposed to protect.
• Something you know ­ Things you know, include passwords, pin codes and other
secrets that the user needs to remember. While these can not be stolen the same
way a key could, they can still be told to other people and lost if the person forgets
them. Due to the increased power of password crackers, the passwords that users
need to remember have become longer and more complex. Most firms also require
that passwords must be changed frequently, all of this makes passwords somewhat
inconvenient.
• Something you are ­ These are characteristic traits that are inherent to a person,
some of the biometric modes are fingerprints, iris scans, DNA, appearance etc.
While this can provide more secure authentication it is also more prone to errors,
inaccuracy and imprecision. It is in this category that face recognition resides, which
we will go into further detail in section 2.2
Not all biometrics are equally good, and some perform better or worse at certain aspects.
These factors are listed below and have been defined in [9].
• Universality ­ The biometric trait should be something that all or at least most people
have.
• Uniqueness ­ The biometric trait should be unique for each person so that the trait
is distinguishable from one person to another.
• Permanence ­ How persistent and constant is the trait, the reference images should
not need to be updated often.
• Collectability ­ How easy and reproducible is it to measure the trait.
• Performance ­ How fast can the measurement be completed and how precise and
reproducible is it.
• Acceptability ­ It should be socially acceptable to ask people to have the trait mea­
sured.
• Circumvention ­ How difficult is it to spoof, circumvent, or bypass.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Face Recognition
As this report focuses on the detection of morphed faces, it is important to know both
how face recognition works, but also why it is one of the most commonly used biometric
methods. For humans in everyday life, face recognition is the primary way of identifying
a person, and is done so with little to no effort. Using the criteria from chapter 2 we can
evaluate face recognition.
• Universality ­ Most if not all individuals have facial traits that can be used for face
recognition purposes, though some medical exceptions might reduce the perfor­
mance of a face recognition system.
• Uniqueness ­ In general people’s faces are unique and individuals can be differen­
tiated using only their faces. However, there are cases where people have close
or similar faces, which mostly occur between family members and identical twins.
This has caused problems for face recognition, and solutions have been made for
the sole purpose of solving this [10].
• Permanence ­ Facial traits do change over time, and can only be used for short
to medium periods due to aging, surgical change or injuries. If a face recognition
system is used for long­term purposes, updating the reference images is required.
• Collectability ­ The collection of face images requires no physical contact with the
capture device, is non­intrusive, and very quick.
• Performance ­ While the performance of face recognition has seen a significant
improvement over the years, algorithms still suffer from non­optimal conditions such
as high pose angle to the capture device or poor lighting.
• Acceptability ­ The collection of facial features is generally considered socially ac­
ceptable as people have become accustomed to being identified by their face. How­
ever there still are some concerns about the privacy of having their facial features
stored in a database.
• Circumvention ­ Face recognition is victim to a serious number of spoofing attacks
[11], and countermeasures against these attacks are necessary to defend against
them. This thesis looks into improving one of these countermeasures.
The process of face recognition can be separated into these four overall steps based on
[12].
• Face and Landmark Localization
In the first step, the face is detected and located, this can be from an image that also
includes a larger scene with other objects. The landmarks of the face will also be
located, which can include eyes, mouth, nose, chin, eyebrows etc, these landmarks
will then be used in further steps.
• Face Normalization
During face normalization, the image is prepared/enhanced to increase the perfor­
mance of the feature extraction in the next step. Here the face can be cropped (to
remove unnecessary elements such as the background), aligned (change the roll
angle), warped (Compensate for pitch and yaw angle) or normalized to accommo­
date for illumination etc.
• Feature Extraction
Here the feature vector is extracted. This can be calculated and represented in
6
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:15==
various ways such as using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) using eigenfaces
or a feature vector from deep learning.
• Feature Comparison
In the last step, the feature vector is compared to either one or multiple other feature
vectors in a database. It will be compared 1:1 if the identification is already known
but not trusted and must therefore be verified. Here the face recognition system with
output true or false depending on it reaching a certain threshold. In case the identity
is unknown, the system can search through a database, and output the identities of
the people, if any, whose similarity score is above a given threshold.
2.2.1
RetinaFace
RetinaFace is a face detection software and while its primary functions have been de­
scribed in the first category above (Face and Landmark Localization), it also has additional
functions. It can detect the face and encapsulate it with a bounding box, locate landmarks
and create a 3D mesh [13]. Using this it can estimate face pose and do 3D reconstruction
to further increase the performance of a face recognition.
2.2.2
ArcFace
ArcFace is a loss function such as CosFace, SphereFace and Softmax loss. Loss func­
tions are used to help train Deep Neural Network (DNN) by assessing the difference
between the predicted values and the ground truth values. ArcFace makes use of an
additive angular margin, which helps create smaller intra­class distances and larger inter­
class distances. ArcFace is also sometimes used to refer to facial recognition models that
are trained using this loss function. The ArcFace loss function is:
Ln = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
log
(
es·cos(θyi)
es·cos(θyi) + ∑
j̸=yi es·cos(θj)
)
Where:
• N is the number of samples in the mini­batch.
• s is a scaling parameter.
• θi is the angle between the feature vector of the i­th sample and its corresponding
class center in the feature space.
• yi is the true class label of the i­th sample.
2.2.3
Beauty Scoring
To quantify how beautiful a person is, we will be using the concept of beauty score. The
more beautiful an image of a person is considered, the higher that image’s beauty score is.
Many studies delve into what makes a person beautiful, and many different approaches
for evaluating such beauty of a facial image.
2.2.4
What is considered beautiful
There are many different papers on what defines a face’s beauty. Some of the things that
have been determined to make a face appear more beautiful or aesthetically pleasing
are facial symmetry [14] [15], average looking faces [1] [16] and facial proportions which
adhere to the golden ratio [15].
2.2.5
Machine learning based beauty scoring
A method for computers to automatically evaluate facial beauty, is to use facial recognition
software to landmark a facial image. This can be used to calculate facial symmetry, differ­
ent ratios in the face, Hu’s invariant moments and generate a Gray­Level Co­Occurrence
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
7
==PAGE:16==
Matrix. Machine learning algorithms can also be used to analyze and calculate beauty
scores based on a training set as done by Iyer et al [6].
2.2.6
CNN­based beauty scoring
Another approach for identifying the beauty score of an image is to use CNN. This works
by training the CNN on a dataset of images that has been assigned a beauty score be­
forehand, such as the SCUT­FBP5500 dataset [2]. This allows for the CNN model, which
has been trained on beauty scores assigned by individuals, to attempt to assign a beauty
score that matches what the individuals who assigned the beauty scores in training would
give the image.
2.2.7
Image moments
Image moments are descriptors for pixel intensities and changes in pixel intensities within
an image. These moments can be categorized into 2 types, raw moments and central
moments. The raw moments describe the overall brightness and pixel distribution of an
image. Given a function f(x, y) which describes the pixel intensities on the image in the
(x, y) position, the raw moments Mpq can be calculated as:
Mpq =
∑
x
∑
y
xpyqf(x, y)
Central moments are used to describe spatial characteristics, center of intensive and the
orientation of the image. Central moments µpq can be calculated as follows:
µpq =
∑
x
∑
y
(x −¯x)p(y −¯y)qf(x, y)
Where ¯x = M10
M00
and ¯y = M01
M00
2.2.8
Hu’s moments
Hu’s moments[17] can be calculated from normalized central moments ηpq which are cal­
culated as:
ηpq =
µpq
µ
(
1+p + q
2
)
00
The formula’s for Hu’s 7 moments are:
hu1 = η20 + η02
hu2 = (η20 −η02)2 + 4η2
11
hu3 = (η30 −3η12)2 + (3η21 −η03)2
hu4 = (η30 + η12)2 + (η21 + η03)2
hu5 = (η30 −3η12)(η30 + η12)(η30 + η12)2 −3(η21 + η03)2
+ (3η21 −η03)(η21 + η03)[3(η30 + η12)2 −(η21 + η03)2]
hu6 = (η20 −η02)[(η30 + η12)2 −(η21 + η03)2] + 4η11(η30 + η12)(η21 + η03)
hu7 = (3η21 −η03)(η30 + η12)[(η30 + η12)2 −3(η21 + η03)2]
−(η30 −3η12)(η21 + η03)[3(η30 + η12)2 −(η21 + η03)2]
The special properties of these moments, and the reason they are often referred to as
Hu’s invariant moments, are:
8
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:17==
• Translation Invariance.
• Rotation Invariance.
• Scale Invariance.
• Reflexion invariance, with the exception of the 7th moment changing sign.
2.3
Morphed images
A morphed image is an image that has been generated by combining the facial images of
multiple individuals in a single image. This is usually achieved by taking two or more im­
ages of different individuals and merging their facial images. This is normally performed
using dedicated software for facial morphing, which tries to blend the 2 images. Such
that they can both be verified when compared to probe images of the individual who con­
tributed to the morph. This is possible since face recognition, needs some tolerance for
variation in the compared facial features, as people can change over time.
2.3.1
Purpose of morphed images
The goal of generating a morphed image can be for research purposes or for more ma­
licious purposes such as allowing multiple people to use the same image identification.
This creates a significant security threat in airports or other places where electronic Ma­
chine Readable Travel Documents (eMRTD) are used[18].
2.3.2
How are morphed images generated
Morphed images are created by merging multiple images of different people together to
create a facial image that is similar to the original people. This morph can then be used
to attack facial recognition systems. This process usually includes the following steps,
which can also be seen on fig. 2.1:
• Landmark images of morphing subjects
• Triangulate landmarked images
• Warp triangles to match sizes between morphing subject images
• Merge warped triangles
• Color blending
Figure 2.1: Model showing the steps in creating a morphed image
OpenCV
An example of how it is done is given in ”Face Morph Using OpenCV — C++ / Python” by
Satya Mallick[19], which is also what the images morphed by Opencv in our datasets are
generated based on [20].
1. Landmarks are detected using dlib and shapepredictor for 68 landmarks. In addition
to this, landmarks are added at the corners of the image, halfway point between
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Landmarked images of Hillary Clinton and Ted Cruz from ”Face Morph Using
OpenCV — C++ / Python” by Satya Mallick[19]
those corners and a few more points are added around the head and neck, resulting
in a total of 80 landmarks. As can be seen in fig. 2.2.
2. Delaunay triangulation is done from the landmarks found in step 1 to get 149 tri­
angles from the morph subjects, which function as regions to be merged into each
other in the morphed image. Images with Delaunay triangles can be seen in fig. 2.3.
3. The affine transformation which maps the corners of the triangles, found in step 2, to
the corners of newly generated triangles in the morphed image from the 2 morphing
subjects.
4. The triangles are then warped to fill the same size so that pixels can be mapped
from both images.
5. The intentsity of each pixel in the morphed image is then calculated as:
M(xm, ym) = (1 −α)I(xi, yi) + αJ(xj, yj)
Where I(xi, yi) and J(xj, yj) are the intensities of the pixels in morphing subject i
and j, α ∈[0, 1] is how much each image should contribute(for α = 0 only image i
would be used to generate the morphed image). This results in the morphed image
being created as can be seen in fig. 2.4
The datasets of morphed images which we are using, also contain images morphed using
OpenCV, but the landmarks used are 76 instead of 80, as shown on the images, since the
process for generating has to be fully automated. This results in 68 landmarks from dlib,
4 landmarks in the corners and 4 landmarks in the middle of each edge of the image.
FaceFusion
Facefusion is an algorithm which uses dlib for landmarking with 68 landmarks and Delay­
nay triangulation to generate the triangles for triangulation and then does the warping and
blending. The background of the image is averaged between the 2 morphing subjects.
After generating the morph, additional blending of the first morphing subject is done in
specific regions (eyes, nostrils, hair) to hide artifacts. As a whole, the morph generated
from FaceFusion has relatively few artifacts in the image.[21]
10
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Delaunay triangles from ”Face Morph Using OpenCV — C++ / Python” by
Satya Mallick[19]
Figure 2.4: Morphed image and morphing sources from Hillary Clinton and Ted Cruz ”Face
Morph Using OpenCV — C++ / Python” by Satya Mallick[19]
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5: A comparison between dlib and STASM landmarks from:”Comparison of vari­
ous landmark detecting techniques in the context of forensic facial recognition.” by Wouter
Pool [23]
FaceMorpher
FaceMorpher is an open­source morphing tool. It functions very close to the OpenCV
morpher, but allows for the use of STASM or dlib for landmark detection. It still uses
Delaunay triangles generated from the landmarks to blend the pixels. There are a sig­
nificant number of artifacts in the generated images, and the area outside the detected
landmarks is averaged between the morphed images resulting in even more artifacts. The
datasets of morphed images used in this project have been morphed with the version of
FaceMorpher using STASM for landmarking. The differences between dlib and STASM
landmarking methods can be seen in fig. 2.5.[22]
UBO­morpher
UBO­morpher is a morphing tool created by the University of Bologna which is used in
”Face Demorphing” by Ferrara, Matteo and Franco, Annalisa and Maltoni, Davide[24].
This tool uses dlib for landmark detection, triangulation, averaging and blending. UBO­
morpher uses the background of one of the initial images to avoid artifacts in the back­
ground. There is a tendency for edges to be visible in the image from the color blending,
as can be seen in fig. 2.6.
2.3.3
Delaunay Triangulation
Triangulation is the concept of covering an area with triangles. Delaunay triangulation is
a specific method for triangulation based on a given set of points. In this triangulation, for
any given set of points, the circumcircle of each triangle contains no other points from the
set. This distinctive criteria ensures that the resulting triangulation minimizes the occur­
rence of acute angles. An example of a Delaunay triangulation from a set of landmarks
can be seen in fig. 2.3.
2.4
Morphing Attack Detection
MAD is the act of identifying whether an image is morphed or not. There are 2 different
scenarios for morphing attack detection, either only the suspected morphed images is
available and Single­image Morphing Attack Detection (S­MAD) can be used to identify
if the image has been morphed. This would be the case for online submission of a facial
image or other scenarios where there is not a live image available. The other scenario
12
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.6: Images generated by different morphing techniques of the same subjects from
the FRGC dataset[25]
is where live images are available to compare with an image that is suspected to be
morphed, this is referred to as D­MAD. The difference can be seen in fig. 2.7.
Different methods can be used to identify a morphed image, as mentioned in section 2.3
some morphing methods leave artifacts or other imperfections in the merging of the mor­
phed image. These artifacts can be found with different image analysis techniques such
as histogram analysis, frequency domain analysis, edge detection and deep learning. In­
consistent lighting, as can be seen in the UBO and FaceFusion images in fig. 2.6, is a
possible indicator of a morphed image. Differences in the texture of an image can also
be used to look for morphed images. Current solutions for S­MAD and D­MAD employ
deep learning and CNN models for identifying morphed images. From the table seen
in [26], the top performing algorithm is the secunet algorithms, but they are not publicly
available. The hdadfr, hdamag and hdaarcface however, are all CNN based algorithms
that have been made by Hochschule Darmstadt University of Applied Sciences, which we
are collaborating with for this project. The D­MAD algorithm which we will be using for this
project to improve upon is the hdadfr, which is a CNN­based D­MAD that uses ResNET50
with ArcFace loss function trained on the LFW dataset[27], and support vector machine
(Support Vector Machine (SVM)) for classification.
2.4.1
Hochschule Darmstadt ­ dfr D­MAD
The method follows the standard pipeline for a D­MAD method which can be seen in
fig. 2.7. The feature extraction is done by an ArcFace model, generated from training
with ResNET50 on the LFW dataset[27], which extracts Arcface feature vectors from the
images.
The difference metric used is calculated using the difference between the feature vectors
of the trusted image and the suspected image. This results in a 512 element differential
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.7: Difference between the S­MAD and D­MAD pipeline
feature vector, which is standard scaled and classified based on a SVM model. This SVM
model has been trained on differential feature vectors from datasets of morphs generated
from FRGC and FERET datasets using the morphing techniques FaceFusion, FaceMor­
pher, OpenCV and UBO explained in section 2.3. The SVM model training has been
configured to give a probability of whether an image is morphed or not. This means that
during testing the threshold can be set at different values to test at specific error rates,
such as Bona Fide Classification Error Rate (BPCER)=10% and 1%. The threshold is a
value that determines whether the probability given by the SVM should classify the sus­
pected image as a morph or not. The parameters used for generating the SVM model are
(C = 1.0, γ = (nfeatures)−1), and using Radial Basis Function (RBF) as kernel function
which is explained in section 2.5.
2.4.2
Performance comparison of different S­MAD and D­MAD
The performance of S­MAD and D­MAD algorithms are evaluated against different datasets
of morphed and unmorphed images [28] [26]. The evaluation is based on how many mor­
phed images are detected with a specified BPCER, usually 1% and 10%, as done by
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in theirFace Analysis Technology
Evaluation (FATE) MORPH. The better the detection of morphs at the given BPCER, the
better the performance of the S­MAD or D­MAD method. While other metrics such as
Equal Error Rate (EER) can also be used, they are not as highly valued, since practical
usage of S­MAD or D­MAD methods in places like passport control has a low BPCER as
a requirement.
2.5
Support Vector Machine
SVM, is a supervised learning algorithm, which can be used for classification and regres­
sion. It has many uses, but we will focus on its use for the classification of morphed and
bona fide images. It works by being given a set of vectors each labeled as a class, and
then based on these vectors, SVM will attempt to find a hyperplane that best separates
the classes. The hyperplane found by SVM is chosen based on the largest possible mar­
14
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:23==
gin, defined as the distance between the hyperplane and the nearest support vector from
each class. Support vectors are the data points that lie closest to the decision boundary
for finding the ideal hyperplane.
2.5.1
Kernel functions
In cases where the data given to SVM is not easily separable, it is possible to use a kernel
trick, to map the data to a higher­dimensional space. The most commonly used kernel
functions k(u, v) for this are:
• Linear:
k(u, v) = uT v
• Polynomial:
k(u, v) = (γuT v + coef0)degree
• RBF or Gaussian:
k(u, v) = exp(−γ|u −v|2)
• Sigmoid:
k(u, v) = tanh(γuT v + coef0)
With RBF being a common choice for handling image data, such as latent vectors from
CNN models. With this hyperplane generated, it is possible to classify new vectors into
one of the classes, such as morphed and unmorphed images.
2.5.2
Cost and regularization
Another feature of SVM is the ability to vary the cost and regularization. These factors can
allow for more complex decision boundaries by increasing the cost, or avoid overfitting by
reducing the cost and thereby forcing SVM to not create too well­fitting boundaries. This
means that to prevent overfitting a low cost such as c = 1 is often used, as it results in a
lower decrease in classification performance on unfamiliar data.
2.5.3
Soft­margin
SVM also has modes that use a soft­margin to intentionally allow for a certain amount
of misclassification, which can be used in cases where there is a large overlap between
different classes.
2.6
Neural Networks
A CNN is similar to a Neural Network (NN) but optimized for images, it is important to first
understand what a NN is.
A neural network is to some extent inspired by biology and how a human brains work.
An NN consists of several layers which are made of nodes(neurons), these nodes are
connected to other nodes in the previous and next layer as seen from fig. 2.8. A neural
network can be separated into these different layers and terms:
• Input layer
This is the first layer of nodes that initially gains the data and connects to the next
layer of nodes.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
15
==PAGE:24==
• Hidden layer
The layers between the input and output layers are called hidden layers. The nodes
in the layers are connected at their edges to the nodes of the next layers, these
connections have weights that are applied followed by an activation function. When
training an artificial neural network it is these weights that are changed and opti­
mised. The activation function is used to add non­linearity into the neural network.
If no activation function is used or if the activation function is linear the entire NN
can be expressed with a single hidden layer, which will reduce the potential a NN
can have. While a NN often only contains a few hidden layers, there are more com­
plicated artificial neural called DNN which often contain several hidden layers.
• Output layer
The last layer of the NN is the output layer which receives the data from the last
hidden layer. This layer has different functions depending on what the NN is used
for, but the purpose of the output layer is to transform the information into a format
that suits the needs of the task. For classification, the output layer often has a single
neuron for each class, and the neuron with the highest value determines what the
object will be classified as.
The values are often transformed with the use of Softmax which sets all the values
between 0 and 1 and makes the vector sum up to 1. Thereby giving a probability
vector of the classes. The softmax formula is used for every element zi in the final
vector.
Softmax(z)i =
ezi
∑k
j=1 ezj
Figure 2.8: Diagram showing the structure of a simplified feed­forward neural network
16
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:25==
2.7
Convolutional Neural Networks
While CNNs are similar to traditional neural networks there are some important differ­
ences, a CNN has another structure that can contain the following layers.
2.7.1
Convolution Layer
The Convolution Layer which gives CNN its name involves performing a convolution with
a kernel over an input, to extract the activation map. A kernel/filter is spatially a relatively
small matrix compared to the dimensions of the input. The kernel will traverse the input,
which is an image in our case and calculate the activation map. The calculation is made
by paring up and multiplying the cells/pixel in the kernel with the current area from the
input image, taking the sum and storing the result in the activation map. An example can
be seen in fig. 2.9 where the current calculation being made is 0 · (−0.25) + 0 · (−0.5) +
0 · (−0.25) + 0 · 0 + 1 · 0 + 1 · 0 + 0 · 0.25 + 0 · 0.5 + 1 · 0.25 = 0.25
While this kernel only detects a specific simple pattern, multiple different kernels or filters
can convolve over the input, each set to detect their own specific pattern. When the out­
put goes through to the next convolutional layer, this next layer will be able to detect more
complicated patterns. The Kernels inside a CNN optimize their pattern during the training
to increase the overall performance of the CNN.
After the convolution, a non­linear function is often used, such as sigmoid, Tanh and
rectified linear unit (ReLU). Sigmoid functions are non­linear functions that have a char­
acteristic S­shape curve. The Sigmoid activation function outputs only values between 0
and 1. The Tanh function is also a sigmoid function, but its curve is centered around 0 and
exits between ­1 and 1 on the y­axis. The last common activation function is the ReLU
function which returns the same input as output if the input is positive or the number 0 if
the input is negative. The ReLU function is defined simply as ReLU(x) = max(0, x).
Figure 2.9: Diagram showing an active convolution of a 3*3 horizontal edge detecting
kernel on a 6*6 input image with a stride of 1
2.7.2
Pooling layer
The Pooling layer is usually placed after the activation function has been applied. The
pooling layer is used due to two main benefits, the first benefit is to reduce the number
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
17
==PAGE:26==
of dimensions. Decreasing the amount of data helps reduce the complexity, thereby re­
ducing the amount of computation needed. The second benefit it provides is resistance
to translation of features, this means that a pattern can still be detected despite it being
located at another place. The most common pooling techniques are max pooling and
average pooling.
• Average pooling
Average pooling takes the average of the given region. If fig. 2.10 had used average
pooling instead, the top left (lightblue) region would be calculated as (1 + 5 + 15 +
4 + 31 + 50 + 2 + 3 + 15)/9 = 14.
• Max pooling
When using max pooling, only the largest value of a region is fed to the next layer.
This can be seen from fig. 2.10 where each region is colored with the corresponding
color for the output. In the top left region (lightblue) the biggest data point is 50 and
is therefore outputted to the next layer.
Figure 2.10: Max pooling using a (3x3) pooling area and a (3,3) stride
2.7.3
Fully Connected Layer
In a fully connected layer, all it’s nodes are fully connected to all nodes in the previous
and the next layer. Since each of these connections have their own weight, the fully
connected layer can make the CNN substantially more complicated. For this reason, the
fully connected layer is often placed after both the Convolution Layer and the Pooling
layer, since the pooling layer helps by reducing the amount of dimensions. Where the
Convolution layer searches for patterns relatively locally in the image, the fully connected
layer can search for patterns globally as all the nodes are connected.
18
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:27==
2.7.4
VGG16
VGG16 is a Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) and as the name suggests has
16 layers [29]. Of these 16 layers, 13 are convutional layers and 3 are fully connected
layers described in section 2.7.3. VGG16 convolutional layers use a kernel of 3x3 as seen
in fig. 2.9. After the second, fourth, seventh, tenth and thirteenth convolutional layer the
VGG16 uses a max pooling layer, see section 2.7.2. VGG16 uses the activation function
ReLU (section 2.7.1), after each convolution layer and each fully connected layer. The
last three layers are fully connected layers and each has 4096 neurons, this means that
between each of these layers, there are 4096·4096 = 16, 777, 216 connection/weights. The
last step of the VGG16 is to use the softmax function to create a probability distribution.
2.7.5
ResNet50
ResNet50 is also a DCNN like VGG16 but it does contain some significant differences like
it being a residual network. As the name suggests, ResNet50 has 50 layers, 48 of which
are convolutional layers, one is a MaxPool layer, and the last one is the average pool layer.
But having this amount of layers does come with some disadvantages, as training very
deep neural networks can be difficult. Very Deep Convolutional Neural Network (VDCNN)
has the problem of vanishing gradients, which occur during backpropagation. To avoid
this problem ResNet50 uses residual connections, these connections that allow the input
from a layer to flow around to a deeper layer. The next layer can use both the input and
output of the previous block. This next block can then learn to either discard the output
of the previous block or rely more on it. This essentially allows the gradient to flow more
easily through the network reducing the risk of vanishing or exploding gradient.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:29==
3
Related Work
3.1
Related Work
In 1990 Judith H. Langlois and Lori A. Roggman [16] published an article, about the digital
combination of 16 different faces being perceived as more beautiful than the individual
faces. Based on this paper Tim Valentine et al. [1], published an article in 2004 where
multiple tests had been made on how the averaging of female faces affected the perceived
beauty of those faces. Valentine et al. found that an average­looking face was more
attractive.
3.1.1
Beauty Scoring
For beauty scoring, Lingyu Liang et al. published in 2018 the SCUT­FBP5500 dataset
of 5500 facial images with 60 volunteers rating all the images on a scale of 1 to 5. The
purpose of the SCUT­FBP5500 dataset is to teach AI to evaluate beauty. This was also
shown in a paper by testing some existing deep learning models on the dataset[2]. An­
other such dataset called FRLL, also includes attractiveness scores for individuals[30].
Severely deep learning CNN models have made use of these and likewise datasets, to
improve their facial beauty prediction/scoring performance[2][3][4][5]. Nir Diamant et al.
created a method for generating or beautifying facial images to a specified beauty score,
that paper also included CNN based beauty scoring functionality[31]. Other methods
for beauty scoring have also been used such as using landmarks and calculating ratios
and symmetry for a face image. These have also used data from the SCUT­FBP5500
dataset[6][7]. Tharun J. Iyer et al. extract data from images in the form of Gray Level Co­
variance Matrix and calculate Hu’s moments, to see if this can improve the performance
of machine learning algorithms[6].
3.1.2
Morphed image dataset
In 2020 Ulrich Scherhag et al. created datasets from the morphing algorithms FaceFusion,
FaceMorpher, OpenCV and UBO￿Morpher, which can be used to benchmark existing
MAD methods.[32] The morphed images are generated from the FERET and FRGCv2
datasets[25][33]. The FRLL­morphs and AMSL Face Morph Image data set are datasets
of morphed images made for research purposes, and are generated from non­morphed
datasets: FRLL, FERET and FRGC [25][30][33][34][35][36].
3.1.3
Morphing Attack Detection
In 2019 U. Scherhag et al. published a MAD survey on the existing scientific literature
on the topic, which also presents a categorization of MAD methods and metrics to evalu­
ate MAD methods[37]. ArcFace and MagFace are models for interpreting facial images,
which can also be used for morphing attack detection [38][39].
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:31==
4
Method
In this section, we will explain the methods we used to identify whether facial beauty of
images can be used to detect morphed images, and how we used facial beauty in an
attempt to improve upon an existing D­MAD method.
4.1
Datasets
For testing and training neural networks, we will be using three different image datasets.
For training beauty scoring models, the image dataset SCUT­FBP5500 [2] will be used.
The dataset contains 5500 frontal facing images which have been graded on a scale of 1
to 5 by 60 different individuals. The dataset consists of an even distribution of male and
female images, 4000 images of Asians and 1500 images of Caucasians.
For training models to identify morphed images, and evaluating the performance of D­
MAD methods, we will be using the 2 datasets FERET [33] and FRGC [25] and morphed
images generated from these datasets. The morphed images used are made by the
following morph generators: FaceMorpher, FaceFusion, OpenCV or UBO, which are ex­
plained in section 2.3. The exact number of subjects and morphed images can be seen
in table 4.1, where the same subjects are used for generating morphs for each morphing
method.
4.2
Performance of Beautyfeatures and Beautyscoring
When performing tests where landmark detection was necessary, RetinaFace was used
to improve the performance of dlib’s [40] landmark detection.
4.2.1
Beauty features
Based on the paper ”Machine Learning­Based Facial Beauty Prediction and Analysis of
Frontal Facial Images Using Facial Landmarks and Traditional Image Descriptors” [6],
ratios between sets of landmarks and Hu’s invariant moments can be used to calculate
facial beauty using machine learning. We decided to test if these ratios and Hu’s Moments
had any relation to images being morphed or not, and whether they seemed promising
for improving D­MAD methods.
Facial ratios
To calculate the facial ratios, dlib’s landmark detection was used to detect 68 facial land­
marks, with a pre­trained model for shape prediction [41]. Based on these landmarks,
16 different ratios were calculated, based on the ratios used for beauty scoring in Iyer et.
al.[6].
Database
Subjects
Male
Female
Bonafide
Morphs
Trusted images
FERET
529
329
200
529
529
786
FRGC
533
231
302
984
964
1723
Table 4.1: Amount of subjects and number of images of morph datasets
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
23
==PAGE:32==
Number
Description
Ratio
1.
Eyebrows
d(17,21)/d(22,26)
2.
Lower Lip
d(48,57)/d(54,57)
3.
Upper Lip
d(48,51)/d(51,54)
4.
Nose
d(31,33)/d(33,35)
5.
Eyes
d(36,39)/d(42,45)
Table 4.2: Symmetry ratios
Number
Description
Ratio
6.
Under Eyes/Interocular
d(avg(40,41),avg(46,47))/d(39,42)
7.
Under Eyes/Nose Width
d(avg(40,41),avg(46,47))/d(31,35)
8.
Mouth Width/Interocular
d(48,54)/d(39,42)
9.
Upper Lip­Jaw/Interocular
d(8,51)/d(39,42)
10.
Upper Lip­Jaw/Nose Width
d(8,51)/d(31,35)
11.
Interocular/Lip Height
d(39,42)/d(51,57)
12.
Nose Width/Interocular
d(31,35)/d(39,42)
13.
Nose Width/Upper Lip Heigth
d(31,35)/d(51,62)
14.
Interocular/Nose Mouth Heigth
d(39,42)/d(33,51)
15.
Eyebrows­Nose/Nose­Jaw
d(avg(21,22),33)/d(8,33)
16.
Interocular/Nose Width
d(39,42)/d(31,35)
Table 4.3: Non­Symmetry ratios
Figure 4.1: Image showing 68 landmarks and their positions, created by Brandon Amos
of CMU who works on OpenFace.
24
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.2: Model showing the D­MAD method based on facial ratios, Hu’s moments and
beauty score
For symmetry ratios, facial symmetry is considered more beautiful, and therefore symme­
try ratios close to 1 are more beautiful than an image with symmetry ratios further from 1.
For the non­symmetry ratios the golden ratio(1.618) is supposed to be considered more
beautiful based on Iyer et. al.[6] or for the sake of identifying morphed images, these ratios
should be closer to the average average[16]. To use these ratios for identifying morphed
images, we derived a handcrafted D­MAD method, where the suspected morphed image
is compared to a trusted image, and if the suspected morph is closer to 1 in symmetry
ratios or closer to the average for non­symmetry ratios, these would indicate the image is
more likely to be a morphed image. The performance of these ratios will be tested as a
standalone D­MAD method, and in conjunction with a CNN based beauty scoring model
to identify morphed images.
Hu’s Invariant moments
Hu’s moments are calculated from morphed and unmorphed images using the OpenCV
library, and are used to attempt to identify whether an image is morphed. This is tested as
a standalone D­MAD method and used in conjunction with facial ratios and beauty scoring
to best identify morphed images.
4.2.2
Beauty scoring
To evaluate the beauty of facial images, we use a VGG16 model trained on the SCUT­
FBP­5500 dataset. The same method is used in Beholder GAN [31], which runs for 10
epochs. We use this to create VGG16 models which the last layer contains 60 neurons,
where each neuron corresponds to the 60 different people giving ratings in the SCUT­
FBP­5500 dataset. To evaluate the beauty score of a given image, the ratings of the
60 neurons are averaged to give a single beauty score for the image. When identifying a
morphed image, we look for an increase in the average beauty score, between the trusted
image and the suspected morphed image.
4.2.3
Combination of facial ratios, Hu’s moments and beauty score
When creating a D­MAD method based on the facial ratios, Hu’s moments and beauty
score, we created a method for varying the weights of each different value. The score
comparison part of fig. 4.2 allows for removing parts of the evaluation criteria to identify
which are helpful when trying to identify a morphed image. Values of facial ratios, Hu’s
moments and beauty scores were calculated and extracted from images for FRGC and
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
25
==PAGE:34==
FERET to find patterns in the values for unmorphed and morphed images. Based on
these observations, calculations for a handcrafted D­MAD method were created. This D­
MAD method was tested with the inclusion and exclusion of facial ratios, Hu’s moments
and beauty scores, to find which method is best suited for identifying a morphed image.
Since this was meant as a test for identifying which elements would make sense to in­
clude in the incorporation of beauty score into an existing D­MAD method, optimization of
parameters used in the handcrafted method was not prioritized.
From the statistical analysis of beauty score, symmetry ratios, non­symmetry ratios and
Hu’s moments as seen in chapter 5, we found the following tendencies which we wanted
to test for use in D­MAD:
• Beauty score calculated from a VGG16 model trained on SCUT­FBP­5500 is higher
for morphed images compared to unmorphed images fig. 5.5 fig. 5.6.
• The standard deviation of symmetry ratios, non­symmetry ratios, and the 1st, 2nd,
3rd and 4th Hu’s moments, were higher in unmorphed images fig. 5.1 fig. 5.2 fig. 5.4.
Based on these observations, the score comparison in fig. 4.2 was devised as:
score =
5
∑
n=1
rn · wsym +
16
∑
n=6
rn · wnonsym +
4
∑
n=1
Hun · wHu + (bssus −bstrusted) · wbs
Where rn are the ratios seen in table 4.2 and table 4.3, and then turned into a boolean
whether the given ratio for the suspected image is closer to the mean. Hun are Hu’s
moments as booleans, showing whether the given Hu’s moment for the suspected image
is closer to the mean. bssus and bstrusted are the beauty scores of the suspected and
trusted image calculated as an average of the 60 scores from the VGG16 model trained
on SCUT­FBP­5500. wsym, wnonsym, wHu and wbs are the weights for symmetry ratios,
non­symmetry ratios, Hu’s moments and beauty score.
The choice of converting the ratios impact on the score to booleans multiplied with a
weight, were due to the high variance in their deviation values. We did not prioritize the
normalization of these features, as they were deemed not to have a significant potential
for D­MAD when compared to the CNN based beauty score, and were only tested for
possible improvement of the VGG16 beauty scores D­MAD performance.
Testing was done on the FRGC and FERET dataset with configurations of only 1 weight
being different from 0, to identify the performance of each feature and a combined test
with the following weights:
wsym = 1
wnonsym = 0.5
wHu = 0.5
wbs = 5
The main goal of the combined test was to identify whether including the ratios and Hu’s
moments could improve the performance of the beauty score, which means that optimiza­
tion the different weights for the combined test was not prioritized.
26
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:35==
4.3
Incorporation of Beauty Scoring Into Existing D­MAD
Techniques
Based on the testing of facial ratios, Hu’s moments and beauty score chapter 5. We
found that the addition of facial ratios and Hu’s moments did not improve the performance
of morph detection when compared to using the VGG16 model’s beauty score alone.
From this, we decided to focus the improvement of existing D­MAD methods on using
CNN­based beauty scoring only. The idea for improving D­MAD methods we decided
to focus on, is incorporating the latent vectors from the VGG16 models trained on the
SCUT­FBP­5500 models into existing D­MAD methods. By consulting the da/sec group
at Hochschule Darmstadt, the D­MAD method we decided to improve upon was chosen
to be hdadfr covered in section 2.4.1.
4.3.1
Latent vectors from beauty scoring trained CNN
Our chosen approach for improving the hdadfr D­MAD, which uses the ArcFace feature
vectors, is to also include the latent vector from the last layer a VGG16 model trained on
SCUT­FBP­5500. The method we used to create a model, is by removing the last layer
of the VGG16 model used in section 4.2.2, this results in a CNN model which takes an
image and gives a vector of length 4096.
4.3.2
Combination of ArcFace and beauty scoring
For integrating the latent vectors from the VGG16 model, together with the ArcFace vec­
tors. The steps for calculating the probability of an image being morphed are:
1. Extract ArcFace feature vectors and VGG16 latent vectors from the trusted image
and the suspected morph.
2. Calculate a difference vector of length 4608 (512 from the ArcFace feature vector
and 4096 from the VGG16 latent vector) from the differences between vectors from
the trusted image and the suspected morph.
3. StandardScale the difference vector.
4. Use a SVM model to calculate a probability from the scaled difference vector for the
suspected morph to be a morphed image.
The svm model needs to be trained on scaled difference vectors from both bonafide im­
ages compared to trusted images and morphed images compared to trusted images.
4.3.3
Performance comparison
We tested the performance of hdadfr explained in section 2.3, which uses only ArcFace
feature vectors trained with ResNET50 on the LFW dataset for identification of morphed
images and our implementation, which uses a difference vector calculated ArcFace fea­
ture vectors and the latent vector from a the last layer of a VGG16 model trained on
SCUT­FBP­5500.
4.3.4
Performance comparison to hdadfr
Testing was done using difference vectors generated from FERET and FRGC. Since nei­
ther dataset contains a huge amount of images, these datasets include comparisons from
morphed images to both subjects of the morph. There are also some individuals with mul­
tiple trusted and bona fide images as seen in section 4.1, these duplicate images were
also used to generate difference vectors to get sufficient data to train SVM properly. This
results in not perfectly independent data points for training, but large improvements to
the SVM model’s performance due to an increased volume of training data. This will not
impact the data’s usage for testing, but it is not necessarily ideal for training the SVM
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 4.4: Amount of difference vectors from each dataset and each type of morph, used
for training SVM models
FERET
FRGC
Bona fide
700
1400
FaceFusion
1400
1400
FaceMorpher
1400
1400
OpenCV
1400
1400
UBO
1400
1400
models, with FRGC data being especially affected by this tendency. Subsets of differ­
ence vectors were used to allow for an equal amount of difference vectors from each
dataset, except bona fide images from FERET, as it was not possible to create enough
unique difference vectors. The configuration for training the SVM model for both hdadfr
and our method using ArcFace + beauty vectors, is to use the libsvm software[42] with
the following configuration:
• svm_type: C­SVC
• kernel_type(kernel function): RBF
• γ =
1
numfeatures
which is γ =
1
512 for hdadfr and γ =
1
4608 for hdadfr with beauty
vectors
• C­SVC cost: 1
• cachesize: 100MB
• tolerance of termination criteria: ϵ = 0.1
• shrinking heuristic: enabled
• probability estimates: enabled, to get a probability of the image being morphed
which can be used for calculating EER and performance at BPCER= 10% and
BPCER= 1%
• weight: tested with equal weight of all classes for FERET and FRGC and with bona
fide images (class 0) weighted at 2 for FERET to compensate for lower amount of
bona fide difference vectors.
28
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:37==
5
Data and Discussion
In this chapter, we will show the result of our experimentation, along with an analysis and
discussion of the results.
5.1
Beauty Features
5.1.1
Hu’s Invariant moments
We have calculated the mean and standard deviation of Hu’s moments for all images in
the two databases FERET and FRGC in fig. 5.1.
(a) Hu’s moments means for FERET
(b) Hu’s moments standard deviation for FERET
(c) Hu’s moments means for FRGC
(d) Hu’s moments standard deviation for FRGC
Figure 5.1: Graphs showing the mean and standard deviation for each of Hu’s moments
on the bona fide and morphed images for either FERET or FRGC
Discussion of Hu’s Moments
There is a significant variation in the mean values between the different morphing methods
for Hu’s moments 5 through 7. But from both fig. 5.1d and fig. 5.1b we can see that those
same moments have a high standard deviation that is very similar between the morphed
and bona fide images. Therefore bona fide images do not show distinctive tendencies
when compared to the morphed images for these moments. This makes them less re­
liable at distinguishing between morph and bona fide than the first four Hu’s moments,
therefore they were excluded from the handcrafted D­MAD method.
While the results from fig. 5.1 do not look promising for the performance of Hu’s moments
for detecting morphed images, fig. 5.1d shows some difference in the behavior of Hu’s
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
29
==PAGE:38==
1st to 4th moment, thus we decided to include them when creating a handcrafted model,
to see if the higher standard deviation of Hu’s moments has potential in D­MAD.
5.1.2
Symmetry ratios
The symmetry ratios calculated from the landmark of a face can determine how symmet­
rical that face is. How we calculate the 5 symmetry ratios can be seen in table 4.2. We
have calculated the mean and standard deviation for each of the symmetry ratios for all
bona fide and morphed images shown for both FERET and FRGC shown in fig. 5.2
(a) The 5 symmetry ratios mean from table 4.2
for FERET
(b) The 5 symmetry ratios standard deviation
from table 4.2 for FERET
(c) The 5 symmetry ratios mean from table 4.2
for FRGC
(d) The 5 symmetry ratios standard deviation
from table 4.2 for FRGC
Figure 5.2: Graphs showing the mean and standard deviation for each of the 5 symmetry
ratios on the bona fide and morphed images for either FERET or FRGC
30
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.3: Here two different images are shown for two different subjects as well as their
combined morph. The 5 symmetry ratios given for each image can be seen to vary wildly
even between images of the same subject
Discussion of symmetry ratios
In fig. 5.2a and fig. 5.2c we can see that there is a difference in the mean of the symmetry
ratio 2 and 3 between bona fide and the morphed images. But looking at the standard
deviation for these two symmetry ratios in fig. 5.2b and fig. 5.2d we can see that it would
be rather difficult to use these as D­MAD because of the high standard deviation. Even
images of the same person can have very different symmetry ratios as seen from fig. 5.3.
Focusing on just the first symmetry ratio in that figure it can be observed that subject A’s
two symmetrical ratios both fit within subject B’s and that the morph of the two subjects
have a symmetry ratio that is below the others.
However from both fig. 5.2b and fig. 5.2d we can notice that bona fide images have a
higher standard deviation than the morphed images. This supports the idea that morphing
images, averages the two faces and therefore have a symmetry closer to the average
person. This is why we want to look at whether the suspected morph is more symmetrical
as this could indicate an image being morphed.
5.1.3
Non­symmetry facial ratios
The non­symmetry ratios are also calculated from the landmarks of a face to determine
different ratios. How these ratios are calculated can be found in table 4.3. We have
calculated the mean and standard deviation for each of the non­symmetry ratios for all
bona fide and morphed images for both FERET and FRGC shown in fig. 5.4
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) The 11 non­symmetry ratios mean from ta­
ble 4.3 for FERET
(b) The 11 non­symmetry ratios standard devia­
tion from table 4.3 for FERET
(c) The 11 non­symmetry ratios mean from ta­
ble 4.3 for FRGC
(d) The 11 non­symmetry ratios mean from ta­
ble 4.3 for FRGC
Figure 5.4: Graphs showing the mean and standard deviation for each of the 11 non­
symmetry ratios on the bona fide and morphed images for either FERET or FRGC
Discussion of non­symmetry ratios
In the two graphs fig. 5.4a and fig. 5.4c we can unfortunately see that the mean for each
of the ratios are very close between the bona fide and the morphed images.
But just like in section 5.1.2 we can see from fig. 5.4b and fig. 5.4d that the standard devi­
ation is higher for each of the ratios. This indicates that morphing an image will converge
the ratios towards the mean, which is what we have used in our handcrafted D­MAD.
5.1.4
VGG16 model
We ran the trained VGG16 model on all of the images that we have gathered, this includes
FERET and FRGC for both morphed and bona fide images. These scores have been
separated into two graphs, one for each dataset, and have been further separated into
the different morphing and bona fide images fig. 5.5 fig. 5.6.
32
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.5: The average beauty score of FERET calculated using VGG16 models trained
on SCUT­FBP­5500[2], number of images can be seen in table 4.1
Figure 5.6: The average beauty score of FRGC calculated using VGG16 models trained
on SCUTFBP­5500[2], number of images can be seen in table 4.1
Discussion of beauty scores
From both of the two graphs, we can see the bona fide images tend to be rated with a lower
beauty score than the morphed images, this can be seen more prevalent in the graph with
the FRGC data set fig. 5.6. This tendency suggests that morphing two face images most
likely creates a face with a higher beauty score. Using this, if a suspected morph receives
a higher beauty score than the trusted image it is more likely to be a morphed image than
if the score was lower.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
33
==PAGE:42==
5.1.5
Comparing the Beauty Feature methods
To compare each of the methods described in section 5.1 and our own handcrafted method,
a Detection Error Tradeoff (USSR) curve has been made for each method. These have
been combined into two graphs, one for the FERET dataset fig. 5.7 and one for the FRGC
dataset fig. 5.8.
Figure 5.7: Graph showing the 5 methods USSR curves when used as D­MAD on the
FERET dataset. Illustrating the relation between BPCER and Morphing attack classifica­
tion error rate.
34
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.8: Graph showing the 5 methods USSR curves when used as D­MAD on the
FRGC dataset. Illustrating the relation between BPCER and Morphing attack classifica­
tion error rate.
Discussion of performance of handcrafted method
Since the three methods Hu moment, symmetry ratios and non­symmetry ratios give dis­
crete numbers, it can be a bit more tricky to see which method performs best. But here
the point of this experiment was not to determine if any of those three methods could
perform as well as the VGG16 and the Handcrafted method. But more so whether they
could be combined with beauty scoring to improve the morph detection performance, and
compare the performance of Hu’s moments, symmetry ratios and non­symmetry ratios,
to identify whether one of these had a higher likelihood of improving the performance of
the VGG16 model. From the results, we can see that all of them are equally lackluster
when not further processed, than checking whether the suspected image is further from
the average than the trusted image or not.
Comparing only VGG16 and the handcrafted method, it can be seen from fig. 5.8 that they
perform very similarly on the FRGC dataset. However, for the FERET dataset fig. 5.7
the handcrafted method performs better when BPCER> 50%. But as described in sec­
tion 2.4.2, NIST evaluation criteria are BPCER= 10% and BPCER= 1%. As the VGG16
outperforms the handcrafted method at these lower BPCER values, we choose to use
only VGG16 to improve upon the existing D­MAD method.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
35
==PAGE:44==
Table 5.1: Comparison of D­MAD methods using ArcFace and ArcFace+VGG16, trained
on subset of FERET.
Training data
Testing data
D­MAD method
FERET
FRGC
ArcFace
ArcFace+Beauty Vectors
Morphing method
Morphing method
EER
BPCER=10%
BPCER=1%
EER
BPCER=10%
BPCER=1%
FaceFusion
FaceFusion
3.11%
1.07%
6.36%
6.93%
4.36%
20.29%
FaceMorpher
2.50%
0.71%
4.43%
10.68%
11.36%
38.93%
OpenCV
2.82%
0.71%
4.57%
13.68%
17.71%
47.64%
UBO
3.39%
1.43%
7.50%
14.64%
20.64%
51.64%
FaceMorpher
FaceFusion
3.11%
1.07%
6.36%
6.71%
4.07%
21.79%
FaceMorpher
2.50%
0.71%
4.43%
10.54%
11.50%
40.79%
OpenCV
2.82%
0.71%
4.57%
13.79%
17.50%
49.00%
UBO
3.39%
1.43%
7.50%
14.89%
20.50%
53.14%
OpenCV
FaceFusion
3.50%
1.79%
12.00%
8.46%
7.93%
32.79%
FaceMorpher
2.32%
0.79%
5.50%
4.89%
2.14%
18.00%
OpenCV
2.29%
0.79%
5.57%
5.39%
2.43%
19.21%
UBO
3.43%
1.64%
10.36%
10.32%
10.57%
37.43%
UBO
FaceFusion
3.46%
1.79%
10.57%
5.68%
4.29%
14.43%
FaceMorpher
2.89%
0.71%
5.86%
5.25%
2.71%
13.00%
OpenCV
2.61%
0.64%
6.43%
5.25%
3.07%
13.36%
UBO
3.04%
1.43%
7.71%
5.75%
4.36%
13.86%
All
FaceFusion
3.32%
1.29%
9.07%
4.39%
2.29%
10.50%
FaceMorpher
2.61%
0.71%
5.29%
3.71%
1.43%
8.86%
OpenCV
2.54%
0.71%
5.14%
4.46%
1.93%
10.79%
UBO
3.32%
1.29%
8.07%
5.82%
4.07%
15.93%
5.2
Combination of Beauty Vectors and hdadfr
5.2.1
Performance comparison to hdadfr
In table 5.1, table 5.2 and table 5.3 the error rates of hdadfr using ArcFace feature vectors
and our method with ArcFace feature vectors and Beauty vectors can be seen. These
tables show the EER, and the error rates at BPCER= 10% and BPCER= 1% with EER
being a normal performance evaluation criteria for classification problems, and the spec­
ified BPCER values being the evaluation criteria used by NIST [26]. There are 3 different
tables, table 5.1 which contain the performance of SVM models trained on FERET data,
tested on FRGC data, without modification to the weight of bona fide images from FERET
to compensate for unbalanced training data. table 5.2 contains the performance of SVM
models trained on FERET data and tested on FRGC data, with bona fide images weighted
at 2 instead of 1 for morphed images to compensate for a smaller sample size of bonafide
images. table 5.3 contains the performance of SVM models trained on FRGC data, tested
on FERET data.
The DET curves shown in fig. 5.9, fig. 5.10 and fig. 5.11 shows the classification error
rates of hdadfr(ArcFace) and ArcFace+Beauty when trained on data including all morph­
ing techniques and tested on data including all morphing techniques.fig. 5.9 is made from
the same data as used in table 5.1, trained on all morphing techniques and tested on
FRGC data of all morphing techniques combined. fig. 5.10 is made from the same data
as used in table 5.2, trained on all morphing techniques and tested on FRGC data of all
morphing techniques combined.fig. 5.11 is made from the same data as used in table 5.3,
trained on all morphing techniques and tested on FERET data of all morphing techniques
combined.
36
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:45==
Table 5.2: Comparison of D­MAD methods using ArcFace and ArcFace+VGG16, trained
on a subset of FERET. Weigthed bona fide vectors (weigth = 2), to compensate for lower
amount of bona fide images.
Training data
Testing data
D­MAD method
FERET
FRGC
ArcFace
ArcFace+Beauty Vectors
Morphing method
Morphing method
EER
BPCER=10%
BPCER=1%
EER
BPCER=10%
BPCER=1%
FaceFusion
FaceFusion
2.93%
1.14%
6.50%
6.04%
3.71%
17.93%
FaceMorpher
2.32%
0.71%
4.14%
9.75%
9.71%
34.21%
OpenCV
2.61%
0.64%
4.43%
11.75%
14.29%
42.64%
UBO
3.25%
1.43%
7.00%
12.54%
17.21%
45.29%
FaceMorpher
FaceFusion
2.93%
1.14%
6.50%
5.54%
3.50%
17.79%
FaceMorpher
2.32%
0.71%
4.14%
9.82%
9.71%
34.07%
OpenCV
2.61%
0.64%
4.43%
11.75%
14.71%
42.57%
UBO
3.25%
1.43%
7.00%
12.61%
17.00%
45.14%
OpenCV
FaceFusion
3.89%
1.79%
12.29%
7.82%
6.43%
24.79%
FaceMorpher
2.39%
0.79%
6.00%
4.61%
1.57%
11.43%
OpenCV
2.39%
0.79%
6.00%
4.64%
2.07%
12.07%
UBO
3.64%
1.50%
11.36%
8.89%
8.50%
29.29%
UBO
FaceFusion
3.39%
1.71%
11.21%
4.46%
2.79%
10.50%
FaceMorpher
2.71%
0.57%
6.50%
3.54%
1.79%
9.86%
OpenCV
2.61%
0.64%
7.14%
3.75%
1.79%
10.21%
UBO
3.00%
1.50%
8.71%
4.54%
2.79%
9.71%
All
FaceFusion
3.11%
1.29%
9.64%
3.61%
1.36%
8.07%
FaceMorpher
2.50%
0.71%
5.71%
3.04%
0.93%
6.93%
OpenCV
2.43%
0.64%
5.93%
3.64%
1.21%
8.50%
UBO
3.25%
1.29%
8.79%
4.96%
2.86%
12.71%
Table 5.3: Comparison of D­MAD methods using ArcFace and ArcFace+VGG16, trained
on subset of FRGC.
Training data
Testing data
D­MAD method
FRGC
FERET
ArcFace
ArcFace+Beauty Vectors
Morphing method
Morphing method
EER
BPCER=10%
BPCER=1%
EER
BPCER=10%
BPCER=1%
FaceFusion
FaceFusion
1.50%
0.00%
2.50%
7.86%
5.86%
34.36%
FaceMorpher
1.50%
0.00%
2.50%
7.93%
6.00%
34.57%
OpenCV
1.36%
0.07%
2.14%
15.32%
21.00%
69.00%
UBO
1.50%
0.07%
2.79%
17.50%
23.64%
70.43%
FaceMorpher
FaceFusion
1.36%
0.00%
3.21%
11.93%
13.57%
39.71%
FaceMorpher
1.36%
0.00%
3.21%
12.07%
13.86%
40.00%
OpenCV
1.21%
0.07%
1.79%
11.89%
13.43%
41.29%
UBO
1.46%
0.07%
3.21%
16.71%
24.29%
57.07%
OpenCV
FaceFusion
1.43%
0.00%
3.57%
9.79%
9.86%
38.36%
FaceMorpher
1.43%
0.00%
3.57%
9.82%
9.93%
38.71%
OpenCV
1.11%
0.07%
1.79%
8.64%
7.71%
36.00%
UBO
1.39%
0.07%
3.21%
13.32%
16.50%
52.64%
UBO
FaceFusion
1.50%
0.07%
4.71%
8.93%
8.21%
35.29%
FaceMorpher
1.50%
0.07%
4.71%
9.00%
8.36%
35.29%
OpenCV
1.25%
0.07%
2.57%
10.14%
10.57%
42.36%
UBO
1.36%
0.07%
3.21%
9.39%
8.93%
39.57%
All
FaceFusion
1.21%
0.00%
2.64%
7.82%
5.93%
25.79%
FaceMorpher
1.21%
0.00%
2.64%
7.82%
6.00%
25.93%
OpenCV
1.25%
0.07%
2.07%
9.32%
8.50%
33.93%
UBO
1.32%
0.07%
2.36%
10.93%
11.93%
39.21%
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.9: DET curve showing a comparison of the performance of ArcFace and Arc­
Face+Beauty Vectors when trained on data including all morphing methods from FERET
and performance evaluated on data including all morphing methods from FRGC. Without
weighting the bona fide images from FERET for training.
Figure 5.10: DET curve showing a comparison of the performance of ArcFace and Arc­
Face+Beauty Vectors when trained on data including all morphing methods from FERET
and performance evaluated on data including all morphing methods from FRGC. With
weight= 2 for bona fide images from FERET.
38
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.11: DET curve showing a comparison of the performance of ArcFace and Arc­
Face+Beauty Vectors when trained on data including all morphing methods from FRGC
and performance evaluated on data including all morphing methods from FERET.
5.2.2
Performance of D­MAD methods on different morphing methods
Figure 5.12 and fig. 5.13 shows the performance of D­MAD methods on different mor­
phing techniques. fig. 5.12 shows how hdadfr (ArcFace based D­MAD) performs when
trained on data consisting of all morphing methods with weighted bona fide images from
FERET, and tested on FRGC with separation between its performance on different mor­
phing methods. fig. 5.13 shows how ArcFace+Beauty Vectors performs when trained on
data consisting of all morphing methods with weighted bona fide images from FERET, and
tested on FRGC with separation between its performance on different morphing methods.
5.2.3
Discussion of D­MAD performance
Comparison between ArcFace and ArcFace+Beauty Vectors
From the results of testing seen in table 5.1, table 5.2, table 5.3, fig. 5.9, fig. 5.10 and
fig. 5.11. It is quite clear that our implementation is not up to par with just using ArcFace
for D­MAD. There are some SVM models that when trained on FERET with weighted
bona fide images and images using all morphs or only morphs from UBO, where the
ArcFace+Beauty Vectors perform better than ArcFace for identification of images mor­
phed made with FaceFusion for BPCER=1%. It is also clear that when introducing larger
vectors for training SVM, the dimensions of the feature space increase, which results in
higher requirements for the quantity of training data. The FRGC data used for training,
which contains up to a larger amount of difference vectors of the same person, performed
significantly better when used to train on ArcFace feature vectors, while there was a huge
decrease in the performance when this data was used to train ArcFace+Beauty Vectors.
This is likely due to ArcFace being better at isolating the changes seen in the images
when the data consists of many comparisons of the same person. This feature of the
training data had the opposite effect on the ArcFace+Beauty Vectors. This can be at­
tributed to many different factors, such as the difference vectors from beauty not having
as easily distinguishable changes, when the difference vectors are calculated from differ­
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.12: Performance Comparison of ArcFace D­MAD on different morphing methods
when trained on FERET data including images of all morphing methods.
Figure 5.13: Performance Comparison of ArcFace+Beauty Vectors D­MAD on different
morphing methods when trained on FERET data including images of all morphing meth­
ods.
40
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:49==
ent images of the same individuals. Thereby difference vectors of the same person, are
less valuable as training data, when compared to difference vectors of unique individuals
for ArcFace+Beauty Vectors.
While it is disappointing that the performance of ArcFace is overall better than ArcFace+Beauty
Vectors, the different tendencies of the D­MAD methods and which training data benefits
the performance of the SVM models, show a potential for the use of CNN models trained
on beauty scores for D­MAD. It is also likely that a larger amount of training data would
be more beneficial for the ArcFace+Beauty Vectors when compared to ArcFace, as the
dimensionality of vector space in SVM is significantly larger.
Comparison between unweighted and weighted FERET data
A comparison between fig. 5.9 and fig. 5.10 can show us how the 2 D­MAD methods are
affected by adding weights to the bona fide vectors used for SVM when comparing the
performance of ArcFace between using weighted and unweighted bona fide feature vec­
tors for SVM when training on the FERET dataset. There are very few changes to the
performance of ArcFace, some error rates increase slightly, and some decrease slightly,
but overall the changes are insignificant. But on the SVM models using ArcFace+Beauty
Vectors, there is an improvement to every single error rate, when comparing the weighted
training data to the unweighted. This clearly shows that there is significant room for im­
provement in the performance of the ArcFace+Beauty Vectors D­MAD when configuring
with SVM and the balancing of weights or volume of training data, as the initial data is not
sufficient to properly optimize the SVM for the vectors used in ArcFace+Beauty Vectors.
This is another case where there is a clear separation in the tendencies of the 2 D­MAD
methods, showing that there are different strengths and weaknesses of the ArcFace and
the ArcFace+Beauty Vectors.
Performance comparison between different morphing methods
When comparing the performance of ArcFace for identifying morphs created using dif­
ferent methods, it is usually morphs generated from UBO and FaceFusion which are the
hardest to identify. This is likely due to those morphing methods both employing tech­
niques for reducing the amount of artifacts in the morphed image. UBO uses the back­
ground of one of the morphing subjects, while FaceFusion conducts additional blending
steps to reduce artifacts in certain facial regions. FaceMorpher and OpenCV both tended
to be the easiest to detect when using ArcFace, with the error rates usually being very
close to each other. These tendencies for ArcFace can be seen in fig. 5.12, fig. 5.9,fig. 5.9
and table 5.3.
For ArcFace+Beauty Vectors UBO is the only morphing method that is consistently the
hardest to identify morphed images from, except when trained on data containing only
morphs from UBO where the hardest varies between which dataset was used for training
and testing. This holds true for EER, BPCER= 10% and BPCER= 1%. When looking
at the easiest morphing method to identify using ArcFace+Beauty Vectors, there is some
variance between the different datasets and whether EER, BPCER= 10% or BPCER= 1%
is looked at. Interestingly Facefusion is the easiest morphing method to detect for a ma­
jority of the SVM models trained on FRGC. The only exception is the model trained on
OpenCV which performs best on OpenCV and the model trained on FaceMorpher when
looking at EER and BPCER= 10%, here OpenCV is easier to detect.
For SVM models trained on the FERET dataset, FaceFusion is easiest to detect on mod­
els trained on FaceFusion and FaceMorpher. The models trained on OpenCV perform
best on FaceMorpher and OpenCV. The models trained on UBO perform almost identi­
cally for detecting all morphing methods. And the models trained on all morphing methods
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
41
==PAGE:50==
performs the best on FaceMorpher. There is also a clear tendency for models trained on
UBO or all morphing methods to be overall better at identifying morphed images. The
performance of ArcFace+Beauty Vectors, performs slightly better than ArcFace for iden­
tifying FaceFusion morphed images when trained on FERET containing UBO images or
all morphing methods. These tendecies can be seen on fig. 5.13, fig. 5.9,fig. 5.10 and
table 5.3.
The strong performance in detecting FaceFusion images can be attributed to FaceFusion
involving a step for removing artifacts in some facial regions. While the better performance
when trained on UBO compared to other morphing methods is likely due to not merging
the backgrounds thereby avoiding artifacts in the background, which can confuse SVM
when training on ArcFace+Beauty Vectors. This is in clear contrast to the performance
of ArcFace which performed the best when there were many artifacts in the morphed im­
ages. The reason behind the good performance of ArcFace+Beauty Vectors when fewer
artifacts are involved, is likely due to the training data from SCUT­FBP5500 not containing
any artifacts resulting in the VGG16 model used to generate the beauty vector, not hav­
ing experienced artifacts in the training set. The strong performance of ArcFace+Beauty
Vectors on FaceFusion, which generates higher quality morphs than OpenCV and Face­
Morpher shows a lot of potential for the use of Beauty Vectors on higher quality morphing
techniques which include steps for removing artifacts in the facial region. It also shows
clear shortcomings of the VGG16 model with its lackluster handling of artifacts in images.
SVM training of ArcFace+Beauty Vectors
We can see in the results that ArcFace+Beauty Vectors required a larger amount of mor­
phed images in the training set, due to the large difference vectors used in the method.
This shortcoming is not detrimental to the use of beauty scoring for D­MAD, but more so
a shortcoming of the method we used for merging the beauty scoring into the ArcFace­
based D­MAD method. There are many different approaches for mitigating or completely
fixing this issue, such as improvements to the method by increasing the volume of training
data, or reducing the size of the latent vectors from the VGG16 model. For reducing the
size of the latent vectors, alternatives would be to either use a different CNN method than
VGG16 with fewer neurons in the last layer, or add another fully connected layer after the
final layer of VGG16 with fewer neurons.
Beauty vectors and artifacts
ArcFace+Beauty Vectors have a significantly better performance when trained on data
with fewer artifacts in the background of the images (UBO) and perform better on images
with fewer artifacts from morphing in the facial regions (FaceFusion). It is likely that the
ideal merging method of Beauty scores with existing D­MAD methods is not as simple
as just merging feature vectors from a CNN trained on beauty­scored images, but would
include steps for artifact detection or a step for identifying likely morphing method and then
using a suitable set of models for extracting feature vectors. More advanced and higher­
quality morphing techniques usually include steps for removing artifacts or techniques for
mitigating the artifacts generated in the morphing process, as artifacts are very obvious
signs of an image being processed and in our case morphed. This results in beauty score
D­MAD, used for detecting higher­quality morphing techniques, might not need to address
the issue of artifacts impacting the performance of D­MAD based on beauty scoring.
42
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:51==
6
Conclusion
Through this project, we found a clear relation between the perceived beauty of images
and whether they had been morphed or not, this tendency was also shown to be true for
all the morphed images used in this paper. From this relation, it was possible to use con­
volutional neural network models to analyze the beauty of images and use parts of these
models to help identify morphed images. The performance of other beauty assessment
methods, such as directly calculating facial symmetry or ideal facial ratios did not show
promise for complimenting information extracted using CNN models.
While our attempt at improving upon existing D­MAD methods did not improve the overall
performance. Our testing found that morphing techniques which include steps to reduce
artifacts were harder for the existing D­MAD method. This is an area where beauty­based
D­MAD excels. This also comes with the implication that the CNN model we trained on
a beauty scoring­based dataset which did not include any artifacts in the images, had
worse performance when the training data or suspected images included many artifacts
from the morphing process. The poor performance of the beauty­based D­MAD method
was particularly evident when trained on morphed image datasets containing significant
background artifacts, as opposed to datasets limited to artifacts within facial regions. For
the identification of morphed images, when images contained facial artifacts, the beauty
D­MAD method performed worse, while the existing D­MAD performed worse on morphs
without artifacts. This difference in the strengths and weaknesses of existing D­MAD
method and beauty­based D­MAD methods, shows significant potential for the use of
beauty score when attempting to identify morphed images from higher quality morphing
techniques, which do not have a lot of artifacts in the morphed images.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:53==
7
Future Work
7.1
Improvements to Integration of Beauty Scoring with
D­MAD
There is room for optimizations in the beauty scoring based D­MAD, which we made for
this project. Some things that we had hoped to improve upon if we had more time for the
project are:
• Testing of alternative CNN models for training on SCUT­FBP5500 or changes to the
VGG16 model we used resulting in fewer neurons in the last layer. This would be to
improve the performance when trained on smaller datasets. Alternatively a principal
component analysis could be done on the existing latent vectors, to identify which
values are the most important for classification of morphed images.
• Submission of beauty based D­MAD to NIST[26] for testing on unfamiliar morphing
methods.
• Testing alternative methods of merging beauty vectors with feature vectors from
existing D­MAD methods. Such as evaluating the morph probability of the suspected
image independently for both ArcFace and the beauty score trained CNN, and then
combining these morph probabilities afterwards.
There are also the possibility of looking into alternative pipelines for D­MAD, which in­
cludes beauty vectors in parts designed for detecting higher­quality morphed images with­
out artifacts. This could be a method that ran a bunch of different D­MAD methods and
then weighed outputs from the different D­MAD methods based on the values extracted
from the suspected image. Thereby only trusting beauty based D­MAD, when the image
does not include a significant amount of artifacts in the facial region.
7.2
More Information About Different Morphing Methods
In this project we saw a large variance in how hard the different morphing methods are to
detect, and differences in how different D­MAD methods perform on these different mor­
phing methods. International Organization for Standardization (ISO)/International Elec­
trotechnical Commission (IEC) is currently working on a standard: 20059 with the title
”Methodologies to evaluate the resistance of biometric recognition systems to morphing
attacks”. Information that would be relevant for this standard, are identification of the
attack potential and threat image of different morphing techniques and how different D­
MAD methods perform against those morphing techniques. There would also be a reason
to identify metrics for different morphing methods, such as artifacts, landmarks detection
techniques used for triangulation, etc. What we specifically ran into that had a large impact
on the performance of beauty­based D­MAD was artifacts in the background for training
and artifacts in the facial region for identification of morphs.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Tim Valentine, Stephen Darling, and Mary Donnelly. “Why are Average Faces At­
tractive? The Effect of View and Averageness on the Attractiveness of Female
Faces”. In: Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 11.3 (2004), pp. 482–487. DOI: 10 .
3758/BF03196599.
[2]
Lingyu Liang et al. “SCUT­FBP5500: A Diverse Benchmark Dataset for Multi­Paradigm
Facial Beauty Prediction”. In: (2018).
[3]
Lu Xu, Jinhai Xiang, and Xiaohui Yuan. “CRNet: Classification and Regression Neu­
ral Network for Facial Beauty Prediction”. In: Advances in Multimedia Information
Processing – PCM 2018. Ed. by Richang Hong et al. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2018, pp. 661–671. ISBN: 978­3­030­00764­5.
[4]
Lu Xu, Heng Fan, and Jinhai Xiang. “Hierarchical Multi­Task Network For Race,
Gender and Facial Attractiveness Recognition”. In: 2019 IEEE International Con­
ference on Image Processing (ICIP). 2019, pp. 3861–3865. DOI: 10.1109/ICIP.
2019.8803614.
[5]
Lu Xu and Jinhai Xiang. ComboLoss for Facial Attractiveness Analysis with Squeeze­
and­Excitation Networks. 2020. arXiv: 2010.10721 [cs.MM].
[6]
Tharun J. Iyer et al. “Machine Learning­Based Facial Beauty Prediction and Anal­
ysis of Frontal Facial Images Using Facial Landmarks and Traditional Image De­
scriptors”. eng. In: Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2021 (2021). Ed.
by Ezequiel López Rubio, p. 4423407. ISSN: 16875265, 16875273. DOI: 10.1155/
2021/4423407.
[7]
Thomas Abrahams and Doina Bein. “Analyzing Beauty by Building Custom Profiles
Using Machine Learning”. In: 2019 IEEE 9th Annual Computing and Communication
Workshop and Conference (CCWC). 2019, pp. 0372–0376. DOI: 10.1109/CCWC.
2019.8666528.
[8]
NIST. Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations.
2020. URL: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-
53r5.pdf.
[9]
Sharath Pankanti Anil K. Jain Ruud Bolle. Biometrics Personal Identification in Net­
worked Society. Kluwer Academic Publications, 1999.
[10]
Nisha Srinivas; Gaurav Aggarwal; Patrick J. Flynn; Richard W. Vorder Bruegge.
Analysis of Facial Marks to Distinguish Between Identical Twins. 2012. URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6228529.
[11]
Nesli Erdogmus; Sébastien Marcel. Spoofing Face Recognition With 3D Masks.
2014. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6810829.
[12]
Anil K. Jain. Stan Z. Li. Handbook of Face Recognition. Springer London, 2011.
URL: https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-0-85729-932-1#bibliographic-
information.
[13]
Jiankang Deng et al. “RetinaFace: Single­Shot Multi­Level Face Localisation in the
Wild”. In: 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR). 2020, pp. 5202–5211. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00525.
[14]
Gillian Rhodes et al. “Facial Symmetry and the Perception of Beauty”. In: Psycho­
nomic Bulletin & Review 5.4 (1998), pp. 659–669. DOI: 10.3758/BF03208842.
[15]
Arthur Swift and B. Kent Remington. “The Mathematics of Facial Beauty”. In: In­
jectable Fillers: Facial Shaping and Contouring. Remington Laser Dermatology Cen­
tre, The Westmount Institute of Plastic Surgery, 2019, pp. 29–61.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
47
==PAGE:56==
[16]
Judith H. Langlois and Lori A. Roggman. “Attractive Faces Are Only Average”. In:
Psychological Science 1.2 (1990), pp. 115–121. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.1990.
tb00079.x.
[17]
Ming­Kuei Hu. “Visual pattern recognition by moment invariants”. In: IRE Trans­
actions on Information Theory 8.2 (1962), pp. 179–187. DOI: 10.1109/TIT.1962.
1057692.
[18]
Matteo Ferrara, Annalisa Franco, and Davide Maltoni. “The magic passport”. In:
IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics. 2014, pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.1109/
BTAS.2014.6996240.
[19]
Satya Mallick. Face Morph Using OpenCV — C++ / Python. Learn OpenCV. URL:
https://learnopencv.com/face-morph-using-opencv-cpp-python/. Mar. 2016.
[20]
Ulrich Scherhag et al. “Face morph detection for unknown morphing algorithms and
image sources: a multi­scale block local binary pattern fusion approach”. In: IET
Biometrics 9.6 (2020), pp. 278–289. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-bmt.2019.
0206. eprint: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1049/iet-bmt.
2019.0206. URL: https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1049/iet-
bmt.2019.0206.
[21]
FaceFusion. http://www.wearemoment.com/FaceFusion/. Accessed: 26/01/2024.
[22]
Alyssa Quek. Face Morpher Repository. https://github.com/alyssaq/face_morpher/
tree/master. 2021.
[23]
Wouter Pool. Comparison of various landmark detecting techniques in the context
of forensic facial recognition. 2018. URL: http://essay.utwente.nl/77533/.
[24]
Matteo Ferrara, Annalisa Franco, and Davide Maltoni. “Face Demorphing”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 13.4 (2018), pp. 1008–1017.
DOI: 10.1109/TIFS.2017.2777340.
[25]
P.J. Phillips et al. “Overview of the face recognition grand challenge”. In: 2005
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR’05). Vol. 1. 2005, 947–954 vol. 1. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2005.268.
[26]
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Face Analysis Technology
Evaluation (FATE) MORPH. Tech. rep. National Institute of Standards and Technol­
ogy (NIST), 2023. URL: https://pages.nist.gov/frvt/html/frvt_morph.html.
[27]
Gary B. Huang et al. Labeled Faces in the Wild: A Database for Studying Face
Recognition in Unconstrained Environments. Tech. rep. 07­49. University of Mas­
sachusetts, Amherst, Oct. 2007.
[28]
Bologna Online Evaluation Platform (BOEP). Accessed: January 27, 2024. URL:
https://biolab.csr.unibo.it/fvcongoing/UI/Form/BOEP.aspx.
[29]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large­Scale Image Recognition”. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Rep­
resentations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7­9, 2015, Conference Track
Proceedings. Ed. by Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun. 2015. URL: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1409.1556.
[30]
Lisa DeBruine and Benedict Jones. “Face Research Lab London Set”. In: (Apr.
2021). DOI: 10.6084/m9.figshare.5047666.v5. URL: https://figshare.com/articles/
dataset/Face_Research_Lab_London_Set/5047666.
[31]
Nir Diamant et al. Beholder­GAN: Generation and Beautification of Facial Images
with Conditioning on Their Beauty Level. 2019. arXiv: 1902.02593 [cs.CV].
[32]
Ulrich Scherhag et al. Deep Face Representations for Differential Morphing Attack
Detection. 2020. arXiv: 2001.01202 [cs.CR].
48
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:57==
[33]
P. Jonathon Phillips et al. “The FERET Evaluation Methodology for Face­Recognition
Algorithms”. In: Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on
22 (Oct. 2000), pp. 1090–1104. DOI: 10.1109/34.879790.
[34]
Eklavya Sarkar et al. Vulnerability Analysis of Face Morphing Attacks from Land­
marks and Generative Adversarial Networks. 2020. arXiv: 2012.05344 [cs.CV].
[35]
Eklavya Sarkar et al. “Are GAN­based morphs threatening face recognition?” In:
ICASSP 2022 ­ 2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Sig­
nal Processing (ICASSP). 2022, pp. 2959–2963. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP43922.2022.
9746477.
[36]
Eklavya Sarkar et al. Vulnerability Analysis of Face Morphing Attacks from Land­
marks and Generative Adversarial Networks. 2020. arXiv: 2012.05344 [cs.CV].
[37]
Ulrich Scherhag et al. “Face Recognition Systems Under Morphing Attacks: A Sur­
vey”. In: IEEE Access 7 (2019), pp. 23012–23026. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.
2899367.
[38]
Jiankang Deng et al. “Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recogni­
tion”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 2019, pp. 4690–4699.
[39]
Qiang Meng et al. MagFace: A Universal Representation for Face Recognition and
Quality Assessment. 2021. arXiv: 2103.06627 [cs.CV].
[40]
Davis E. King. DLIB: A toolkit for machine learning and computer vision. http://dlib.
net/. 2022.
[41]
chanddu. Face Recognition Repository. https://github.com/chanddu/Face-Recognition/
tree/master. 2018.
[42]
Chih­Chung Chang and Chih­Jen Lin. “LIBSVM: A Library for Support Vector Ma­
chines”. In: ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 2.27 (2011),
pp. 1–27. URL: http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm.
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix A
A.1
Tables and graphs
A.1.1
Statistical data of symmetry ratios, non­symmetry ratios and Hu’s
moments
FERET
morphing method
bona fide
facefusion
facemorpher
opencv
ubo
symmetry ratio 1
0.994187
0.994636
0.995829
0.997173
0.994449
symmetry ratio 2
0.981251
0.977243
0.978224
0.97802
0.974325
symmetry ratio 3
0.992014
0.988059
0.990754
0.990166
0.988183
symmetry ratio 4
1.009323
1.009892
1.010483
1.01134
1.01024
symmetry ratio 5
1.008587
1.008516
1.009525
1.009792
1.008238
ratio 1
1.741138
1.739882
1.734046
1.738524
1.738953
ratio 2
2.236597
2.218204
2.221399
2.220181
2.227076
ratio 3
1.456427
1.459732
1.448511
1.460176
1.457047
ratio 4
1.3891
1.38962
1.37568
1.391165
1.38681
ratio 5
1.782443
1.770121
1.760924
1.775121
1.774872
ratio 6
2.420394
2.402406
2.367202
2.381591
2.404519
ratio 7
0.783259
0.78745
0.783459
0.785993
0.783756
ratio 8
5.206931
5.04109
5.031385
5.034765
5.045692
ratio 9
2.360013
2.330768
2.337161
2.325026
2.319957
ratio 10
0.950078
0.950682
0.952866
0.948507
0.950301
ratio 11
1.285796
1.27575
1.281688
1.277728
1.281403
moment 1
2.026224
1.900479
1.937077
1.905317
1.987099
moment 2
4.690058
4.395366
4.446729
4.394951
4.610868
moment 3
6.703909
6.260141
6.432542
6.299453
6.550905
moment 4
6.834798
6.367864
6.583646
6.438485
6.643132
moment 5
3.186362
4.451911
3.83269
3.483489
4.733714
moment 6
5.704081
5.025136
5.046316
5.57723
5.193681
moment 7
1.113133
0.616983
0.649108
0.674315
0.635071
Table A.1: Mean values of features from FERET images
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
51
==PAGE:60==
morphing method
bona fide
facefusion
facemorpher
opencv
ubo
symmetry ratio 1
0.078682
0.057527
0.05644
0.055817
0.056624
symmetry ratio 2
0.07971
0.057666
0.057535
0.058005
0.056832
symmetry ratio 3
0.092466
0.063482
0.06488
0.065196
0.064966
symmetry ratio 4
0.058196
0.045165
0.04484
0.042359
0.045666
symmetry ratio 5
0.032404
0.026647
0.025937
0.026099
0.024694
ratio 1
0.065945
0.058413
0.053914
0.052922
0.053694
ratio 2
0.181517
0.146821
0.142414
0.142807
0.143303
ratio 3
0.130689
0.104643
0.100526
0.102203
0.103143
ratio 4
0.119339
0.097079
0.092052
0.094921
0.095142
ratio 5
0.181365
0.141362
0.136782
0.139876
0.143204
ratio 6
0.55186
0.423472
0.39789
0.393541
0.406928
ratio 7
0.066028
0.053538
0.050398
0.051485
0.051483
ratio 8
1.360336
0.941966
0.942291
0.93441
0.957106
ratio 9
0.409365
0.30998
0.308908
0.299381
0.300516
ratio 10
0.093165
0.071197
0.070102
0.0717
0.071872
ratio 11
0.108317
0.08606
0.082651
0.083563
0.083971
moment 1
0.60187
0.586057
0.517263
0.528603
0.594243
moment 2
1.528345
1.459236
1.34919
1.378841
1.506782
moment 3
2.090686
2.029454
1.861051
1.872378
2.053405
moment 4
2.052535
2.019651
1.875726
1.863073
1.999671
moment 5
14.08412
12.77193
13.24875
13.07714
13.19882
moment 6
7.878399
7.650969
7.817123
7.21601
7.952268
moment 7
14.72388
13.80335
14.22872
13.93001
14.44794
Table A.2: Standard deviation of features from FERET images
52
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:61==
FRGC
morphing method
bona fide
FaceFusion
FaceMorpher
Opencv
UBO
symmetry ratio 1
1.002201
0.99987
0.998444
0.999393
1.000916
symmetry ratio 2
0.991442
0.986669
0.986225
0.987091
0.987402
symmetry ratio 3
0.993259
0.988183
0.984592
0.987903
0.988432
symmetry ratio 4
1.031867
1.034507
1.034201
1.034006
1.033127
symmetry ratio 5
1.011567
1.012663
1.013278
1.013158
1.013551
ratio 1
1.756939
1.753058
1.752604
1.753612
1.75179
ratio 2
2.321079
2.3201
2.328776
2.318078
2.318161
ratio 3
1.396173
1.390923
1.387432
1.393216
1.389698
ratio 4
1.43085
1.420406
1.415199
1.423953
1.418838
ratio 5
1.886309
1.877549
1.878048
1.87981
1.875226
ratio 6
2.338025
2.302945
2.286739
2.29518
2.306024
ratio 7
0.760778
0.758049
0.754762
0.758778
0.758044
ratio 8
4.710012
4.618423
4.596565
4.621913
4.632938
ratio 9
2.276514
2.253672
2.255911
2.251858
2.252213
ratio 10
0.928595
0.927593
0.926545
0.925894
0.927326
ratio 11
1.322844
1.324395
1.329751
1.322861
1.324382
moment 1
2.631982
2.712896
2.706035
2.724673
2.758844
moment 2
6.048027
6.194778
6.191738
6.232311
6.352443
moment 3
9.374189
9.640821
9.647844
9.723457
9.77539
moment 4
9.736521
9.993726
9.944427
10.06102
10.0797
moment 5
5.228569
4.957547
4.695672
4.190718
6.086403
moment 6
7.990771
8.13425
7.849065
7.809156
8.222528
moment 7
1.322761
1.562775
1.4369
2.16884
0.88608
Table A.3: Mean values of features from FRGC images
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
53
==PAGE:62==
morphing method
bona fide
FaceFusion
FaceMorpher
OpenCV
UBO
symmetry ratio 1
0.06663
0.049326
0.049379
0.0485
0.049125
symmetry ratio 2
0.071399
0.052489
0.052329
0.051636
0.052392
symmetry ratio 3
0.080437
0.059585
0.058876
0.058732
0.058897
symmetry ratio 4
0.055727
0.044497
0.044379
0.044212
0.044147
symmetry ratio 5
0.025485
0.020512
0.020176
0.020072
0.019883
ratio 1
0.07372
0.058083
0.056742
0.056654
0.057032
ratio 2
0.171657
0.139612
0.131243
0.13327
0.134512
ratio 3
0.121104
0.09069
0.090844
0.091113
0.091395
ratio 4
0.149524
0.11137
0.108338
0.111614
0.110222
ratio 5
0.193629
0.148888
0.138876
0.143518
0.144128
ratio 6
0.492722
0.350466
0.335293
0.349466
0.352344
ratio 7
0.061031
0.047917
0.045741
0.046727
0.047737
ratio 8
1.101443
0.77997
0.730819
0.775404
0.777119
ratio 9
0.34654
0.263825
0.264992
0.263237
0.261794
ratio 10
0.105572
0.081788
0.080244
0.081686
0.080837
ratio 11
0.105442
0.082937
0.079973
0.080727
0.08284
moment 1
0.691315
0.440831
0.44808
0.421735
0.357932
moment 2
1.534317
1.04871
1.066161
1.023755
0.925009
moment 3
2.596615
1.80629
1.903222
1.821121
1.613859
moment 4
2.728958
1.927022
2.020877
1.92322
1.793134
moment 5
19.57168
19.76864
19.81513
20.10367
19.61584
moment 6
10.74564
10.7545
10.93154
11.0863
10.83388
moment 7
20.38644
20.49865
20.49555
20.57392
20.69536
Table A.4: Standard deviation of features from FRGC images
54
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:63==
A.1.2
Tables and graphs about beauty score in FERET and FRGC
bonafide
facefusion
facemorpher
opencv
ubo
1.6­1.7
3
1
1.7­1.8
1
2
1
1
1.8­1.9
6
1
1
2
1.9­2
6
3
3
4
3
2­2.1
9
3
4
3
3
2.1­2.2
16
4
1
3
3
2.2­2.3
14
3
5
4
5
2.3­2.4
17
7
13
5
9
2.4­2.5
30
14
14
13
19
2.5­2.6
29
30
16
20
25
2.6­2.7
33
24
25
21
33
2.7­2.8
40
25
29
41
33
2.8­2.9
43
32
44
37
46
2.9­3
32
51
46
53
41
3­3.1
40
44
46
42
46
3.1­3.2
44
38
47
55
41
3.2­3.3
26
37
41
46
53
3.3­3.4
37
41
39
42
29
3.4­3.5
28
39
44
49
35
3.5­3.6
22
41
42
35
37
3.6­3.7
24
30
28
24
31
3.7­3.8
17
28
16
14
12
3.8­3.9
6
18
12
9
13
3.9­4
3
7
10
6
8
4­4.1
2
7
1
1
1
4.1­4.2
2
1
Table A.5: Distribution of beauty scores in FERET from VGG16 model trained on SCUT­
FB5500
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
55
==PAGE:64==
bonafide
facefusion
facemorpher
opencv
ubo
1.6­1.7
2
0
0
1.7­1.8
2
0
0
1.8­1.9
2
0
0
1.9­2
5
0
1
2­2.1
6
0
0
2.1­2.2
12
1
0
1
1
2.2­2.3
38
2
0
1
2.3­2.4
31
4
4
3
4
2.4­2.5
55
12
10
9
15
2.5­2.6
89
20
18
20
33
2.6­2.7
83
27
32
27
44
2.7­2.8
88
64
80
68
69
2.8­2.9
77
77
86
90
110
2.9­3
76
96
85
102
88
3­3.1
82
84
121
100
108
3.1­3.2
69
99
89
101
100
3.2­3.3
65
101
95
83
105
3.3­3.4
57
95
89
95
78
3.4­3.5
51
85
73
82
57
3.5­3.6
31
68
57
69
62
3.6­3.7
29
47
51
44
39
3.7­3.8
13
39
34
33
30
3.8­3.9
11
27
22
25
12
3.9­4
9
10
12
10
7
4­4.1
1
6
5
1
1
4.1­4.2
1
Table A.6: Distribution of beauty scores in FRGC from VGG16 model trained on SCUT­
FB5500
56
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.1: Accumulative distribution of beauty scores of FERET images from the data in
table A.7
Figure A.2: Accumulative distribution of beauty scores of FRGC images, data in table A.8
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
57
==PAGE:66==
accumulative rgv
bonafide
facefusion
facemorpher
opencv
ubo
1.6­1.7
3
0
1
0
0
1.7­1.8
3
1
3
1
1
1.8­1.9
9
2
3
2
3
1.9­2
15
5
6
6
6
2­2.1
24
8
10
9
9
2.1­2.2
40
12
11
12
12
2.2­2.3
54
15
16
16
17
2.3­2.4
71
22
29
21
26
2.4­2.5
101
36
43
34
45
2.5­2.6
130
66
59
54
70
2.6­2.7
163
90
84
75
103
2.7­2.8
203
115
113
116
136
2.8­2.9
246
147
157
153
182
2.9­3
278
198
203
206
223
3­3.1
318
242
249
248
269
3.1­3.2
362
280
296
303
310
3.2­3.3
388
317
337
349
363
3.3­3.4
425
358
376
391
392
3.4­3.5
453
397
420
440
427
3.5­3.6
475
438
462
475
464
3.6­3.7
499
468
490
499
495
3.7­3.8
516
496
506
513
507
3.8­3.9
522
514
518
522
520
3.9­4
525
521
528
528
528
4­4.1
527
528
529
529
529
4.1­4.2
529
529
529
529
529
Table A.7: Accumulative distribution of beauty scores in FERET from VGG16 model
trained on SCUT­FB5500
58
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:67==
accumulative
bonafide
facefusion
facemorpher
opencv
ubo
1.6­1.7
2
0
0
0
0
1.7­1.8
4
0
0
0
0
1.8­1.9
6
0
0
0
0
1.9­2
11
0
1
0
0
2­2.1
17
0
1
0
0
2.1­2.2
29
1
1
1
1
2.2­2.3
67
3
1
1
2
2.3­2.4
98
7
5
4
6
2.4­2.5
153
19
15
13
21
2.5­2.6
242
39
33
33
54
2.6­2.7
325
66
65
60
98
2.7­2.8
413
130
145
128
167
2.8­2.9
490
207
231
218
277
2.9­3
566
303
316
320
365
3­3.1
648
387
437
420
473
3.1­3.2
717
486
526
521
573
3.2­3.3
782
587
621
604
678
3.3­3.4
839
682
710
699
756
3.4­3.5
890
767
783
781
813
3.5­3.6
921
835
840
850
875
3.6­3.7
950
882
891
894
914
3.7­3.8
963
921
925
927
944
3.8­3.9
974
948
947
952
956
3.9­4
983
958
959
962
963
4­4.1
984
964
964
963
964
4.1­4.2
984
964
964
964
964
Table A.8: Accumulative distribution of beauty scores in FRGC from VGG16 model trained
on SCUT­FB5500
A.2
Code
A.2.1
Extraction of symmetry ratios, non­symmetry ratios and Hu’s
moments
1
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
2
from imutils import face_utils
3
import numpy as np
4
import argparse
5
import os
6
import cv2
7
import dlib
8
from retinaface import RetinaFace
9
import math
10
from skimage.color import rgb2hsv
11
from PIL import Image
12
os.environ['KMP_DUPLICATE_LIB_OK']='True'
13
14
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
15
parser.add_argument('--dataset', type=str)
16
opt = parser.parse_args()
17
print(opt)
18
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
59
==PAGE:68==
19
20
files = []
21
features = []
22
images_dir = "{0}/img".format(opt.dataset)
23
number_of_images = len(os.listdir(images_dir))
24
Tryfix = 0
25
26
for imf, file in enumerate(sorted(os.listdir(images_dir))):
27
Tryfix = 0
28
print("currently extracting from:")
29
print(file)
30
while (Tryfix <2):
31
32
#open image, transform and upload to gpu
33
#img = Image.open(os.path.join(images_dir ,file))
34
image = cv2.imread(os.path.join(images_dir ,file))
35
faces = RetinaFace.extract_faces(img_path=image, align = False)
36
face=faces[0].astype(np.uint8).copy()
37
if (Tryfix==1):
38
face=image
39
#makes copy which will not be landmarked
40
detector = dlib.get_frontal_face_detector()
41
predictor = dlib.shape_predictor("shape_predictor_68_face_landmarks.
dat")#change for 68/194
42
43
gray = cv2.cvtColor(face, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
44
rects = detector(gray, 1)
45
ar = [ [0]*2 for i in range(68)]#change for 68/194
46
for (i, rect) in enumerate(rects):
47
shape = predictor(gray, rect)
48
shape = face_utils.shape_to_np(shape)
49
count=0
50
for (x, y) in shape:
51
ar[count][0]=x
52
ar[count][1]=y
53
count=count+1
54
cv2.circle(face, (x, y), 1, (0, 0, 255), -1)
55
56
featureArray=[0]*26
57
58
#Symmetry ratios - aim for 1
59
if math.dist(ar[22],ar[26])!=0: featureArray[0]=math.dist(ar[17],ar
[21])/math.dist(ar[22],ar[26])
60
if math.dist(ar[54],ar[57])!=0: featureArray[1]=math.dist(ar[48],ar
[57])/math.dist(ar[54],ar[57])
61
if math.dist(ar[54],ar[51])!=0: featureArray[2]=math.dist(ar[48],ar
[51])/math.dist(ar[54],ar[51])
62
if math.dist(ar[35],ar[33])!=0: featureArray[3]=math.dist(ar[31],ar
[33])/math.dist(ar[35],ar[33])
63
if math.dist(ar[42],ar[45])!=0: featureArray[4]=math.dist(ar[36],ar
[39])/math.dist(ar[42],ar[45])
64
65
#non-Symmetry ratios - aim for 1.618(golden ratio)
66
ue=math.dist([(ar[40][0]+ar[41][0])/2,(ar[40][1]+ar[41][1])/2],[(ar
[46][0]+ar[47][0])/2,(ar[46][1]+ar[47][1])/2])
67
io=math.dist(ar[39],ar[42])
68
nw=math.dist(ar[31],ar[35])
69
mw=math.dist(ar[48],ar[54])
70
ulj=math.dist(ar[51],ar[8])
71
lh=math.dist(ar[51],ar[57])
72
ulh=math.dist(ar[51],ar[62])
73
nmh=math.dist(ar[33],ar[51])
60
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:69==
74
ebn=math.dist([(ar[21][0]+ar[22][0])/2,(ar[21][1]+ar[22][1])/2],ar
[33])
75
nj=math.dist(ar[33],ar[8])
76
77
if io!= 0:featureArray[5]=ue/io
78
if nw!= 0:featureArray[6]=ue/nw
79
if io!= 0:featureArray[7]=mw/io
80
if io!= 0:featureArray[8]=ulj/io
81
if nw!= 0:featureArray[9]=ulj/nw
82
if lh!= 0:featureArray[10]=io/lh
83
if io!= 0:featureArray[11]=nw/io
84
if ulh!= 0:featureArray[12]=nw/ulh
85
if nmh!= 0:featureArray[13]=io/nmh
86
if nj!= 0:featureArray[14]=ebn/nj
87
if nw!= 0:featureArray[15]=io/nw
88
89
#Hu's invariant moments
90
im = cv2.cvtColor(face, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
91
_,im = cv2.threshold(im, 128, 255, cv2.THRESH_BINARY)
92
moments = cv2.moments(im)
93
huMoments = cv2.HuMoments(moments)
94
for i in range(0,7):
95
if huMoments[i]!=0:huMoments[i] = -1* math.copysign(1.0, huMoments
[i]) * math.log10(abs(huMoments[i]))
96
featureArray[16+i]=huMoments[i][0]
97
98
rgb=faces[0].astype(np.uint8).copy()
99
hsv=rgb2hsv(rgb)
100
hue = hsv[:, :, 0]
101
saturation = hsv[:, :, 1]
102
value = hsv[:, :, 2]
103
104
featureArray[23]=hue.mean()
105
featureArray[24]=saturation.mean()
106
featureArray[25]=value.mean()
107
108
Tryfix=Tryfix+1
109
110
if (not( 0 in featureArray[0:22])):
111
Tryfix=Tryfix+2
112
113
if (imf % 1 == 0):
114
print('{0}/{1} images done'.format(imf+1,number_of_images))
115
116
117
files.append(file)
118
features.append(featureArray)
119
120
121
csv_features_lines = []
122
for j in range(0,number_of_images):
123
csv_features_lines.append('{0},{1},'.format(files[j],','.join(map(str,
features[j]))))
124
125
csv_mean_path = "{0}/features.csv".format(opt.dataset)
126
with open(csv_mean_path , "w") as csv_file:
127
for line in csv_features_lines:
128
csv_file.write(line)
129
csv_file.write('\n')
Listing A.1: Extraction of symmetry ratios, non­symmetry ratios and Hu’s moments
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
61
==PAGE:70==
A.2.2
Comparison of extracted beauty features
1
import numpy as np
2
import argparse
3
import os
4
import csv
5
import math
6
from pathlib import Path
7
8
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
9
parser.add_argument('--probe', type=str)
10
parser.add_argument('--reference', type=str)
11
parser.add_argument('--output',type=str)
12
opt = parser.parse_args()
13
print(opt)
14
15
16
def compare(probe,img):
17
symmetryWeight=1
18
ratioWeight=0.5
19
HuWeight=0.5
20
CNNWeight=5
21
tensorWeight=0
22
23
confidence=CNNWeight*5+tensorWeight*5*60
24
#calculating for symmetry ratios
25
for i in range (1,6):
26
if abs(float(probe[i]))-1>abs(float(img[i])-1):
27
confidence=confidence+symmetryWeight
28
#ratios
29
if abs(float(probe[7])) -1.749968648>abs(float(img[7]) -1.749968648):
30
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
31
if abs(float(probe[8])) -2.31204955 >abs(float(img[8]) -2.31204955):
32
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
33
if abs(float(probe[9])) -1.390246326 >abs(float(img[9]) -1.390246326):
34
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
35
if abs(float(probe[10])) -1.423877942 >abs(float(img[10]) -1.423877942):
36
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
37
if abs(float(probe[11])) -1.877284236 >abs(float(img[11]) -1.877284236):
38
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
39
if abs(float(probe[12])) -2.328479746 >abs(float(img[12]) -2.328479746):
40
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
41
if abs(float(probe[13])) -0.75762416 >abs(float(img[13]) -0.75762416):
42
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
43
if abs(float(probe[14])) -4.69293983 >abs(float(img[14]) -4.69293983):
44
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
45
if abs(float(probe[15])) -2.267905583 >abs(float(img[15]) -2.267905583):
46
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
47
if abs(float(probe[16])) -0.925636282 >abs(float(img[16]) -0.925636282):
48
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
49
if abs(float(probe[17])) -1.31758114 >abs(float(img[17]) -1.31758114):
50
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
51
#hu's moments
52
if abs(float(probe[18])) -2.625360586 >abs(float(img[18]) -2.625360586):
53
confidence=confidence+HuWeight
54
if abs(float(probe[19])) -6.032631601 >abs(float(img[19]) -6.032631601):#
maybe look for increase instead here?
55
confidence=confidence+HuWeight
56
if abs(float(probe[20])) -9.356833918 >abs(float(img[20]) -9.356833918):
57
confidence=confidence+HuWeight
58
if abs(float(probe[21])) -9.715296539 >abs(float(img[21]) -9.715296539):
59
confidence=confidence+HuWeight
60
62
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:71==
61
#compare beauty scores
62
confidence=confidence + (float(img[27])-float(probe[27]))*CNNWeight
63
64
#compare tensors
65
tensorDiff=[]
66
for i in range (30,len(probe)):
67
tensorDiff.append(float(img[i])-float(probe[i]))
68
69
for elem in tensorDiff:
70
confidence=confidence+tensorWeight*elem
71
72
73
confidence=confidence/(CNNWeight*10+symmetryWeight*6+ratioWeight*11+
HuWeight*4+60*10*tensorWeight)
74
return(confidence)
75
76
files = []
77
probe_dir = "{0}".format(opt.probe)
78
img_dir = "{0}".format(opt.reference)
79
80
with open(Path(probe_dir)/"features.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
81
probeFeatures = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
82
83
with open(Path(img_dir)/"features.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
84
refFeatures = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
85
86
with open(Path(probe_dir)/"Mean_Ratings.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
87
probeRatings = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
88
89
with open(Path(img_dir)/"Mean_Ratings.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
90
refRatings = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
91
92
with open(Path(img_dir)/"All_Ratings.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
93
imgTensorRatings = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
94
95
with open(Path(probe_dir)/"All_Ratings.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
96
probeTensorRatings = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
97
98
fullProbe=[]
99
for i in range(0,len(probeFeatures)):
100
fullProbe.append(probeFeatures[i]+[probeRatings[i][j] for j in [1,2,3]]+[
probeTensorRatings[i][k] for k in range(1,(len(probeTensorRatings[1])
-1))])
101
102
fullRef=[]
103
for i in range(0,len(refFeatures)):
104
fullRef.append(refFeatures[i]+[refRatings[i][j] for j in [1,2,3]]+[
imgTensorRatings[i][k] for k in range(1,(len(imgTensorRatings[1]) -1))
])
105
106
output=[]
107
for probe in fullProbe:
108
identityImg=probe[0].split("d")[0] #split by "d" for FRGC and "_" for
FERET
109
for ref in fullRef:
110
if ref[0].find(identityImg)!=-1:
111
#output.append([compare(probe,ref)])
112
output.append([probe[0],ref[0],compare(probe,ref)])
113
114
output_dir="{0}".format(opt.output)
115
with open(Path(output_dir), "w",newline='') as csv_file:
116
writer=csv.writer(csv_file)
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
63
==PAGE:72==
117
writer.writerows(output)
Listing A.2: Comparison of beauty features for FRGC data
1
import numpy as np
2
import argparse
3
import os
4
import csv
5
import math
6
from pathlib import Path
7
8
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
9
parser.add_argument('--probe', type=str)
10
parser.add_argument('--reference', type=str)
11
parser.add_argument('--output',type=str)
12
opt = parser.parse_args()
13
print(opt)
14
15
16
def compare(probe,img):
17
symmetryWeight=0.1 #1
18
ratioWeight=0.1 #0.5
19
HuWeight=0.5 #0.5
20
CNNWeight=5 #5
21
tensorWeight=0
22
23
24
confidence=CNNWeight*5+tensorWeight*5*60
25
#calculating for symmetry ratios
26
for i in range (1,6):
27
if abs(float(probe[i]))-1>abs(float(img[i])-1):
28
confidence=confidence+symmetryWeight
29
#ratios
30
if abs(float(probe[7])) -1.741137705>abs(float(img[7]) -1.741137705):
31
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
32
if abs(float(probe[8])) -2.236596978 >abs(float(img[8]) -2.236596978):
33
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
34
if abs(float(probe[9])) -1.456426585 >abs(float(img[9]) -1.456426585):
35
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
36
if abs(float(probe[10])) -1.389100139 >abs(float(img[10]) -1.389100139):
37
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
38
if abs(float(probe[11])) -1.782443175 >abs(float(img[11]) -1.782443175):
39
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
40
if abs(float(probe[12])) -2.420394169 >abs(float(img[12]) -2.420394169):
41
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
42
if abs(float(probe[13])) -0.783259237 >abs(float(img[13]) -0.783259237):
43
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
44
if abs(float(probe[14])) -5.206930755 >abs(float(img[14]) -5.206930755):
45
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
46
if abs(float(probe[15])) -2.360012744 >abs(float(img[15]) -2.360012744):
47
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
48
if abs(float(probe[16])) -0.950077917 >abs(float(img[16]) -0.950077917):
49
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
50
if abs(float(probe[17])) -1.285795662 >abs(float(img[17]) -1.285795662):
51
confidence=confidence+ratioWeight
52
#hu's moments
53
if abs(float(probe[18])) -2.026223563 >abs(float(img[18]) -2.026223563):
54
confidence=confidence+HuWeight
55
if abs(float(probe[19])) -4.690058188 >abs(float(img[19]) -4.690058188):
56
confidence=confidence+HuWeight
57
if abs(float(probe[20])) -6.70390922 >abs(float(img[20]) -6.70390922):
58
confidence=confidence+HuWeight
64
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:73==
59
if abs(float(probe[21])) -6.834798203 >abs(float(img[21]) -6.834798203):
60
confidence=confidence+HuWeight
61
confidence=confidence + (float(img[27])-float(probe[27]))*CNNWeight
62
#compare tensors
63
tensorDiff=[]
64
for i in range (30,len(probe)):
65
tensorDiff.append(float(img[i])-float(probe[i]))
66
67
for elem in tensorDiff:
68
confidence=confidence+tensorWeight*elem
69
70
71
confidence=confidence/(CNNWeight*10+symmetryWeight*6+ratioWeight*11+
HuWeight*4+60*10*tensorWeight)
72
return(confidence)
73
74
files = []
75
probe_dir = "{0}".format(opt.probe)
76
img_dir = "{0}".format(opt.reference)
77
78
with open(Path(probe_dir)/"features.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
79
probeFeatures = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
80
81
with open(Path(img_dir)/"features.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
82
refFeatures = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
83
84
with open(Path(probe_dir)/"Mean_Ratings.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
85
probeRatings = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
86
87
with open(Path(img_dir)/"Mean_Ratings.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
88
refRatings = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
89
with open(Path(img_dir)/"All_Ratings.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
90
imgTensorRatings = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
91
92
with open(Path(probe_dir)/"All_Ratings.csv", newline='') as csvfile:
93
probeTensorRatings = list(csv.reader(csvfile))
94
95
fullProbe=[]
96
for i in range(0,len(probeFeatures)):
97
fullProbe.append(probeFeatures[i]+[probeRatings[i][j] for j in [1,2,3]]+[
probeTensorRatings[i][k] for k in range(1,(len(probeTensorRatings[1])
-1))])
98
99
fullRef=[]
100
for i in range(0,len(refFeatures)):
101
fullRef.append(refFeatures[i]+[refRatings[i][j] for j in [1,2,3]]+[
imgTensorRatings[i][k] for k in range(1,(len(imgTensorRatings[1]) -1))
])
102
103
output=[]
104
for probe in fullProbe:
105
identityImg=probe[0].split("_")[0] #split by "d" for FRGC and "_" for
FERET
106
for ref in fullRef:
107
if ref[0].find(identityImg)!=-1:
108
#output.append([compare(probe,ref)])
109
output.append([probe[0],ref[0],compare(probe,ref)])
110
111
output_dir="{0}".format(opt.output)
112
with open(Path(output_dir), "w",newline='') as csv_file:
113
writer=csv.writer(csv_file)
114
writer.writerows(output)
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
65
==PAGE:74==
Listing A.3: Comparison of beauty features for FRGC data
A.2.3
Generation of testing input for NIST validation
1
import os
2
import argparse
3
from pathlib import Path
4
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
5
parser.add_argument('--probe', type=str, help='path to probe folder')
6
parser.add_argument('--morph', type=str, help='path to morph folder')
7
parser.add_argument('--output', type=str, help='path to savefile')
8
parser.add_argument('--dataset', type=str, help='FERET or FRGC')
9
parser.add_argument('--mfn', type=str, help='name of morph folder')
10
parser.add_argument('--unique', type=int,default=0, help='use only unique
morphing subjects')
11
args = parser.parse_args()
12
print(args)
13
14
dataset="{0}".format(args.dataset)
15
morphtype="{0}".format(args.mfn)
16
17
def generate_test_file(probe: str, morph: str, output_file: str, unique: int):
18
# Checking if probe exists and is a directory
19
if not os.path.exists(probe):
20
raise FileNotFoundError(f"Folder '{probe}' does not exist.")
21
if not os.path.isdir(probe):
22
raise IsADirectoryError(f"'{probe}' is not a directory.")
23
24
# Checking if morph exists and is a directory
25
if not os.path.exists(morph):
26
raise FileNotFoundError(f"Folder '{morph}' does not exist.")
27
if not os.path.isdir(morph):
28
raise IsADirectoryError(f"'{morph}' is not a directory.")
29
usedprobes=[]
30
# Creating the output file
31
try:
32
with open(output_file , 'w') as file:
33
# Getting the list of file names in probe
34
probe_files = os.listdir(probe)
35
# Getting the list of file names in morph
36
morph_files = os.listdir(morph)
37
# Matching the names of the files and writing combinations to the
output file
38
for img_probe in probe_files:
39
identityImg=""
40
if dataset=="FERET":identityImg=img_probe.split("_")[0]
41
if dataset=="FRGC":identityImg=img_probe.split("d")[0]
42
for img_morph in morph_files:
43
if img_morph.find(identityImg)!=-1 and not identityImg in
usedprobes:
44
file.write(f"../common/images/{dataset}/{morphtype}/{
img_morph} ../common/images/{dataset}/
bonafide_probe_RGB/{img_probe}\n")
45
if unique==1:
46
usedprobes.append(identityImg)
47
except PermissionError:
48
raise PermissionError(f"Permission denied while creating the output
file '{output_file}'.")
49
50
probe = "{0}".format(args.probe)
51
morph = "{0}".format(args.morph)
66
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:75==
52
output_file = "{0}".format(args.output)
53
unique = "{0}".format(args.unique)
54
55
generate_test_file(probe, morph, output_file ,unique)
Listing A.4: Generation of testing files
A.2.4
Calcuation of ERR and APCER when BPCER=10% and when
BPCER=1% from SVM output files
1
import math
2
import operator
3
from pathlib import Path
4
from ipywidgets import fixed, interact
5
import ipywidgets as widgets
6
import matplotlib.patches as mpatches
7
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
8
import numpy as np
9
import pandas as pd
10
from scipy.stats import describe , gaussian_kde
11
import seaborn as sns
12
from DET import DET
13
import os
14
import csv
15
%matplotlib inline
16
from sklearn.metrics import roc_curve
17
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
18
19
Topfolder = "/Users/jespe/Desktop/RunFolder/FRGC_unique/"
20
for folder in os.listdir(Topfolder):
21
subfolder = os.path.join(Topfolder , folder)
22
23
outputdir = os.path.join(subfolder ,"EER.csv")
24
25
with open(Path(outputdir), "w", newline='') as csv_file:
26
writer = csv.writer(csv_file)
27
labels = ["Pathname", "EER", "BPCER=0.2", "BPCER=0.1", "BPCER=0.01"]
28
writer.writerow(labels)
29
30
for file in os.listdir(subfolder):
31
if file.endswith(".txt") and not file.startswith("requirements") and
not file.startswith(".") and not file.startswith("bonafidetest")
and not file.startswith("FRGC") and not file.startswith("FERET")
and not file.startswith("performance"):
32
filepath = os.path.join(subfolder , file)
33
mated_score_file = open(os.path.join(subfolder ,"bonafidetest.txt")
, "r")
34
mated_score_file = mated_score_file.readlines()
35
nonmated_score_file = open(filepath , "r")
36
nonmated_score_file = nonmated_score_file.readlines()
37
38
output = ["", "", "", "", ""]
39
40
FRR = [20, 10, 1]
41
totalLines = float(len(mated_score_file))
42
i = 2
43
for number in FRR:
44
index = math.floor((totalLines / 100) * number)
45
index = index - 1
46
threshold = mated_score_file[index]
47
threshold = float(threshold)
48
49
total = len(nonmated_score_file)
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
67
==PAGE:76==
50
num = 0
51
for x in nonmated_score_file:
52
x = float(x)
53
if x > threshold:
54
num += 1
55
result = num / total * 100
56
output[i] = result
57
i = i + 1
58
59
# Calculate ERR
60
for line in mated_score_file:
61
threshold = float(line)
62
Rejects = 0
63
FRRTemp = 0
64
FARTemp = 0
65
for mline in mated_score_file:
66
mline = float(mline)
67
if mline < threshold:
68
Rejects = Rejects + 1
69
FRRTemp = Rejects / len(mated_score_file) * 100
70
Acceptance = 0
71
for nline in nonmated_score_file:
72
nline = float(nline)
73
if nline > threshold:
74
Acceptance = Acceptance + 1
75
FARTemp = Acceptance / len(nonmated_score_file) * 100
76
if FRRTemp > FARTemp:
77
break
78
79
output[0] = file
80
output[1] = (FARTemp + FRRTemp) / 2
81
print(output)
82
with open(Path(outputdir), "a", newline='') as csv_file:
83
writer = csv.writer(csv_file)
84
writer.writerow(output)
Listing A.5: Calculation of ERR and APCER when BPCER=10% and when BPCER=1%
68
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
==PAGE:77==
Morphing Attack Detection respecting Face Attractiveness
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
