==PAGE:1==
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and
distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with
application to tailing dams monitoring
Master Thesis
Pau Fabregat Carrascal
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algo­
rithm, with application to tailing dams monitoring
MsC Earth and Space Physics and Engineering
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Pau Fabregat Carrascal
Main supervisor:
John Peter Merryman Broncori (DTU)
Co­supervisor:
Paul Jacques Connetable (DHI)
In collaboration with: DHI
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Space Research and Technology, Ørsteds Plads,
105, Building 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.space.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I want to extend my most sincere gratitude to the following people, who have been a great
pillar either during this master’s thesis project or the whole duration of my master’s pro­
gramme at DTU Space.
Starting with my master thesis supervisor John Peter Merryman Broncori, who since day
one has had a close and warm relationship with me, encouraging me in every step of this
project. Thanks for your expertise, patience and ability to challenge and wake up curiosity
in students. You are a great mentor.
To Paul Jacques Connetable, my co­supervisor at DHI, who has been my first­ever con­
tact with the Remote Sensing industry. Thanks for showing so much interest in the project
and sharing your experience with me.
To the rest of the team at DHI, with whom I have shared working space for some weeks,
especially Kenneth Grogan, for proposing the application part of this master thesis.
To Jakob Ahl for all the help and expertise in PS­InSAR, and for sharing part of his work
with me for this project.
To all DTU Space professors, for their incredible educative tasks they displayed in every
lecture during my studies. Especially to Rasmus Tage Tonboe, for sharing his open­
research values with me.
To the people from Lyngby Judo & Ju­jutsu Klub, who have been my friends and first con­
tact with the Danish culture since my first day in Denmark. Thanks for your friendship and
good company.
A special thanks to all the friends who have accompanied me through these incredible
2 and a half years, and whom I can call my little family abroad: Rafael Parrado, Jiayun
Chen, Alejandro Pedersen, Manuel Fernandez and Thomas Taxis.
In particular, I want to thank Miquel Negre and Simon Köhn, with whom I have shared
my passion for Remote Sensing and tireless hours studying, laughing and enjoying each
other at DTU.
To my family and their unconditional love. Especially to my mother, for being my role
model in life and never preventing me from chasing and doing what I love.
To end, I want to thank my partner, Josefine Dovits, for everything she means to me.
Thanks for your tireless encouragement, respecting me, loving me and growing with me.
I cannot imagine a better life in which you are not there. And most important, thanks for
always double­checking my spelling mistakes
ii
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
2
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
SAR and InSAR principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Multi­temporal InSAR algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Phase Consistency and Phase­Linking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
PS­InSAR Processing Algorithm
13
3.1
Algorithm Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
PSDS­InSAR Processing Algorithm
27
4.1
Algorithm Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Analysis of the validation discrepancies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Testing scenario 1: Aarhus harbour subsidence
47
5.1
PS­ and PSDS­ InSAR analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
InSAR datasets comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6
Testing scenario 2: Cadia Tailings dam failure event
65
6.1
Introduction to tailings dams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.2
PS­InSAR analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7
Conclusions
87
Bibliography
89
A Appendix
91
A.1 Sentinel­1 SLC .SAFE files
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
1
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Ground surface deformation phenomena have a great effect on the stability of man­made
structures, often being the reason for structural failure. Therefore, ground motion moni­
toring is essential in fields such as structural engineering and urban planning to assess
the risks ground deformation poses to critical structures.
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) is a radar Remote Sensing (RS) tech­
nique able to generate maps of ground surface deformation by combining 2 or more SAR
acquisitions and exploring their phase differences.
Multi­temporal InSAR techniques provide the capability to deliver ground deformation time
series over periods ranging from days to years of slow­deformation phenomena. Their
accuracy varies depending on the radar instrument, but well­established InSAR­capable
satellites such as Sentinel­1 can estimate ground deformation down to a scale of mm/year
and up to m/day with a high degree of accuracy.
Among multi­temporal InSAR techniques, a well­established approach is Persistent Scat­
terers InSAR (PS­InSAR), which uses radar targets with a dominant scatterer in its resolu­
tion cell. Such targets often exhibit a highly coherent behaviour with a stable phase over
time, which can be translated to a high Signal­To­Noise­Ratio (SNR), providing a high
degree of accuracy and likeliness that the chosen target movement is caused by ground
surface motion phenomena.
Such targets are normally associated with man­made structures that return a stable backscat­
ter phase signal, mostly found in urban areas where their density is large.
Although PS­InSAR excels in urban areas such as cities and industrial sites, it is not able
to retrieve ground motion estimates from areas with a low PS density. Such areas are
mostly rural and vegetation­prone, which tend to have a higher density of radar targets
exhibiting a different scattering mechanism called Distributed Scatterers or DS.
DS are resolution cells with a distribution of equally strong elementary scatterers, tending
to have a low­to­medium SNR, often associated with physical targets undergoing time­
decorrelation phenomena, such as crops and forests. Although individually useless, pro­
cessing DS with spatiotemporal filtering techniques and combining them in DS clusters
increases their SNR at the expense of reducing their spatial resolution.
The combination of PS and DS targets in hybrid InSAR processing chains is a subject
that has been studied and developed for the past decade, with a well­established trend
to adapt DS phase information to a PS­like format and using a PS­InSAR processing
algorithm on both targets [1], [2], [3].
PSDS­InSAR methods have shown their potential for monitoring ground deformation in
regions with different PS and DS densities where PS­InSAR approaches are not able to
deliver a complete deformation overview. However, there is a margin for further research,
improvement and validation of the retrieval ground surface motion estimates exploiting
DS with PSDS­InSAR ‘processing algorithms.
In this master thesis, a PS­ and a PSDS­ InSAR algorithms are developed, implemented
and validated to understand in­depth how InSAR processing algorithms work and how
ground surface motion is estimated.
The development of the PS­InSAR algorithm serves as a baseline to develop the PSDS­
InSAR algorithm, which mainly consists of the processing stages to handle and adapt DS
targets’ phase information to a PS­like format.
2
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:6==
Both algorithms are validated using a synthetic interferometric data stack, simulating a
ground truth formation pattern that can be used as a known ground­truth to quantify the
accuracy of the algorithms’ estimates.
Upon validation, the monitoring capabilities of the developed algorithms are tested in 2
real scenarios where ground motion is known to affect critical infrastructures’ stability.
The data stack for each scenario is composed of an interferometric data stack derived
from Sentinel­1 SAR SLC acquisitions.
The first scenario consists of monitoring certain areas in the Aarhus Harbour, Denmark,
which is undergoing a known subsidence phenomenon. A pair of InSAR datasets contain­
ing deformation estimates of the area for the same period are available to compare the
developed algorithms’ estimates with and assess their performance based on the com­
parison.
The second scenario where the algorithms are tested is the monitoring of the tailings dam
failure event that occurred in Cadia, Australia, on the 9th of March 2018. Tailings dams
are large embankments storing byproducts of mining activities whose monitoring is crucial
to avoid the spill of such byproducts in a failure event scenario, normally being toxic and
dangerous for the environment and human lives.
The ground deformation estimates are compared with previous InSAR studies dealing with
the failure event, and deformation patterns for different assumptions of the deformation
direction of the tailings dam are studied and discussed.
The report structure for this master’s thesis starts with a theoretical background section
where the principles of SAR, and InSAR are introduced, as well as the state­of­the­art
and challenges related to the use of PSDS hybrid processing chains.
The development and validation using a synthetic data stack of both the PS­ and PSDS­
algorithms follow in the next 2 chapters.
The testing of the developed algorithms in the 2 real scenarios is introduced after the
algorithms’ development chapters, dividing the testing scenarios into individual chapters
The last chapter consists of a discussion of the work done throughout the master’s thesis
project and the conclusion related to the different areas it deals with.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
3
==PAGE:7==
4
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:8==
2
Theoretical Background
This chapter aims to introduce the concepts and working principles of radar, SAR imaging
and its derived technique InSAR and its use for ground motion estimation for readers who
are not familiar with them. Moreover, an overview of the PS­InSAR, DS­InSAR and PSDS­
InSAR techniques, which are the main algorithms used in this master’s thesis, is provided,
dealing with their state­of­the­art and mathematical formulation.
2.1
SAR and InSAR principles
Radars are active microwave instruments that are based on the principle of backscatter
phenomena. As the word suggests, back­scatter relates to the action of bouncing back, in
this case, related to the dynamics of ElectroMagnetic (EM) waves interacting with physical
bodies.
Radars transmit signals (EM waves) which bounce back against bodies in the path of their
trajectory, scattering part of the incident wave back to the instrument. The back­scattered
signal is received by the radar, which exploits both the changes in the received signal w.r.t
to the transmitted signal and the time delay between transmitting and receiving the signal
to infer information from the object that interacted with it.
The information that can be extracted from backscattered signals depends on the proper­
ties of the scatterer (reflectivity, roughness, composition, thickness..) and the instrument
(wavelength, emitted power, sampling frequency, antenna size,..). Therefore different
radar configurations are used to estimate different physical parameters.
A radar’s native spatial resolution depends on the size of its antenna and the distance it
is located from the target. Since the antenna size is bound to physical and technologi­
cal limits, the native spatial resolution from radars on airborne and satellite platforms is
largely reduced as the distance to the target increases.
SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar) is a technique able to increase the spatial resolution of
a radar instrument by emulating a large synthetic antenna aperture using several acqui­
sitions along the instrument’s trajectory, as shown in Figure 2.1.
SAR technology combined with scanning techniques can retrieve high­resolution SAR
imaging. SAR has been largely exploited and perfected for the past 30 years, especially
from satellite platforms, which benefit from the creation of the antenna synthetic aperture
from long distances.
Satellite missions carrying SAR instruments have helped develop multiple Earth science­
related fields: oceanography, cryosphere, hydrology, forestry, agriculture, weather fore­
casting, urban monitoring, seismology, volcanology, target detection, etc...
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
5
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2.1:
Synthetic Radar Antenna Aperture sketch borrowed from https://www.
earthdata.nasa.gov/learn/backgrounders/what-is-sar
Various Remote Sensing (RS) techniques have been derived from traditional SAR, each
of them focusing on an aspect of the SAR data. Interferometric SAR or InSAR is one of
them. InSAR exploits the information that can be extracted from pairs of SAR images over
the same area. Its main applications are the mapping of topography from which Digital
Elevation Models (DEM) are derived and ground surface motion monitoring. For the latter
application, a more appropriate name for the family of techniques that are used is DInSAR
(Differential Interferometric SAR) as it exploits the difference of the SAR acquisition pair.
One of the industry standards to deliver SAR imaging for its exploitation using InSAR
is the Single Look Complex (SLC) product. SAR SLC images are in radar coordinates
(slant range by azimuth plane) instead of Cartesian coordinates. Each pixel on the image
is represented by a complex (I and Q) signal, containing both the amplitude and the phase
information, which can be mathematically expressed as in Equation 2.1a.
An interferometric pair for any 2 SAR SLC acquisitions is formed by the product of 1 acqui­
sition by the conjugate of the second acquisition. Such operation results in a complex ex­
pression composed of the interferometric magnitude and the interferometric phase, which
can be expressed as the phase gradient between the 2 SAR images. The final expression
for an interferometric product can be expressed as in Equation 2.1c.
The ground deformation information is carried by the interferometric phase, although it
is mixed with other phase contributions from multiple sources, as expressed in Equa­
tion 2.2a. ϕflat and ϕtopo are related to the terrain topography and along with ϕdefo, which
contains the ground deformation information, are defined by the geometrical projection
of the radar coordinates (Ri
0 as the wave travelled path). ϕatm is caused by the Atmo­
spheric Phase Screening (APS) or noise caused by a frequency modulation of the carrier
frequency (fc) due to atmospheric disturbances. ϕdecorrelation is an additional noise phase
component which is largely related to all temporal decorrelation phenomena occurring be­
tween a pair of SAR acquisitions.
Each of the phase contributions is formed by the phase gradient of each contribution type
from the acquisition pair, as expressed in Equation 2.2b, where λ is the instrument wave­
length.
6
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:10==
Zi
SLC = |Zi
SLC| exp(−jϕi
SLC)
(2.1a)
ZInterf = Z1
SLC ∗Z2∗
SLC = |Z1
SLC ∗Z21
SLC| ∗exp(−j(ϕ1
SLC −ϕ2
SLC))
(2.1b)
= |Zinterf| ∗exp(−jϕinterf)
(2.1c)
ϕinterf =
[
(ϕflat + ϕtopo + ϕdefo) + (ϕatm) + (ϕdecorrelation)
]
mod2π
(2.2a)
=
[
−4π
λ (R1
0 −R2
0) −2πfc(τ 1
atm −τ 2
atm) + (ϕ1
b −ϕ2
b)
]
mod2π
(2.2b)
The −sign defined in both Equation 2.1c and Equation 2.2b indicates the convention to
define the sensed deformation w.r.t the Line­Of­Sight (LOS) of the SAR instrument. In
this case, a negative deformation indicates a ground displacement moving away from the
radar, while a positive deformation indicates a ground displacement towards the radar’s
LOS.
Notice also that in both equations in Equation 2.2 the phase expression is wrapped into
a 2π moduli, as it shows the [−π, π] range complex signals’ phase is restricted to. Such
restriction creates 2π ambiguities that need to be solved to correctly estimate the defor­
mation magnitude. They are commonly solved by unwrapping algorithms, which unwrap
the 2π moduli containing the wrapped phase both spatially (2 dimensions) and temporally
(number of acquisitions used in an interferometric data stack) by adding the correct num­
ber of phase cycles to each pixel of a SAR image.
Unwrapping algorithms will not be further explained in this chapter, as they are a whole
other field related to InSAR theory.
It has to be kept in mind the initial objective is to estimate the phase contribution carrying
the deformation information as accurately as possible. SAR pre­processing techniques
are normally used to minimize the effect of undesired phase contributions. Flattening
and topographic adjustment are applied to cancel and minimize the effect of ϕflat and
ϕtopo respectively while multi­looking and filtering techniques can be applied to reduce the
decorrelation noise component. Atmospheric noise ϕATM can be reduced using atmo­
spheric conditions knowledge.
In an ideal scenario, assuming a successful pre­processing performed during the inter­
ferometric pair stack formation, the only left component would be ϕdefor. However, that is
also assuming the SAR images have been acquired along an identical orbital track, which
does not occur in reality, having slightly different paths which cause a residual topographic
error contribution.
The differences in the orbital track between acquisitions are defined by the so­called spa­
tial baseline normal and perpendicular components, Bn and B⊥respectively. The geo­
metric relation between the spatial baseline and the topography is shown in Figure 2.2a.
The sensitivity of ϕDefor to ground motion is shown in Figure 2.2b.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
7
==PAGE:11==
(a) Sensitivity to the spatial baseline
(b) Sensitivity to ground motion
Figure 2.2: Sketches illustrating the sensitivity of an interferometric phase to the spatial
baseline between 2 SAR acquisitions (left) and ground motion (right).
The pre­processed phase contributions can be therefore be expressed by equation Equa­
tion 2.3, where the subscripts or superscripts 1, 2 represent the interferometric value of any
of the parameters carrying them, R is the range, θ is the look angle, δh is the topographic
height and dLoS is the deformation in the LOS direction. From a vector perspective, the
dLoS can be expressed as dLoS = ⃗D∗⃗
LoS, or the projected 3­dimensional on­going defor­
mation ⃗D projected in the 1­dimensional LOS
⃗
LoS direction the instrument measurements
is sensitive in.
ϕinterf = ϕtopo + ϕdefo
(2.3a)
=
[4π
λ
B1,2
⊥
R1,2sinθ1,2
δh1,2
]
TOPO
+
[4π
λ dLoS1,2
]
DEFOR
(2.3b)
Acquisition pairs with a small spatial baseline w.r.t their range and accurate information
of their orbital tracks, commonly available in current SAR satellite missions like ESA’s
Sentinel­1, can further simplify the interferometric phase expression by neglecting the
topographic error as in Equation 2.4, where δt1,2 is the temporal baseline between acqui­
sitions (time since acquisition #2 was taken w.r.t acquisition #1) and v1,2 the deformation
velocity or rate.
Analysis of InSAR­derived deformations often used the deformation rate.
ϕinterf = 4π
λ dLoS1,2 = 4π
λ δt1,2v1,2
(2.4a)
A last InSAR­related concept needs to be introduced before proceeding in this section:
coherence. The complex interferometric coherence (γ) is the complex cross­correlation
between a pair of SAR acquisitions. Its absolute value, also called interferometric coher­
ence, acts as a measure of statistical similarity between the 2 acquisitions. Its values
range from 0, meaning a non­existent similarity between the acquisitions, to 1, meaning
8
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:12==
a very similar set of radar returns between acquisitions.
The interferometric coherence can be mathematically expressed as in Equation 2.6, where
E is the expectation function and zi the SAR acquisitions In practice, coherence is esti­
mated using approximations like the so­called sample coherence, involving spatial filter­
ing, as expressed in Equation 2.6, where N is the number of pixels used to compute the
sample coherence for a certain pixel in a pair of SAR images.
The coherence of a pixel is affected by the decorrelation phenomena, both temporal and
spatial, scatterers inside the radar’s resolution cell undergo.
γ =
E(z1 ∗z∗
2)
√
E(|z1|2) ∗
√
E(|z2|2)
(2.5)
γsample =
∑N
i=1 z1i ∗z∗
2i
√∑N
i=1 |z1i|2 ∗
√∑N
i=1 |z2i|2
(2.6)
2.2
Multi­temporal InSAR algorithms
Multi­temporal InSAR algorithms focus on working with interferometric data stacks con­
taining more than 1 pair of SAR acquisitions, retrieving ground motion time series for long
periods. Most of the InSAR algorithms retrieving deformation time series use mainly 2
types of backscatter mechanisms: Persistent Scatterers (PS) and Distributed Scatterers
(DS).
PS are radar targets with a low noise component, therefore having a high Signal­to­Noise­
Ratio (SNR). They often correspond to radar’s resolution cell with a dominant scatterer,
which is constant over time. Therefore, PS often exhibit a robust and stable phase, from
which ground deformation estimates can be accurately retrieved given their low noise
contribution.
PS are normally associated with man­made structures with sharp edges, like buildings,
bridges, factories, towers, etc... Therefore, PS­InSAR algorithms excel in retrieving ground
deformation estimates in urban areas since they are prone to having a high PS density.
Various PS­InSAR algorithms have been developed during the last decades, using dif­
ferent approaches regarding their baseline configuration, PS selection criteria and target
deformation models. A complete overview of PS­InSAR, its evolution and state of the art
is documented in [4].
On the other hand, DS are resolution cells that contain a certain number of physically
equal origin scatterers rather than a dominant one. DS are normally located next to other
DS containing the same elementary scatterers inside them, sharing a backscattering sta­
tistical behaviour. They often exhibit a medium or low SNR and can only be exploited if a
sufficiently large group of adjacent, statistically homogeneous pixels (SHP), sharing the
same scattering mechanism and a similar deformation rate are combined, mitigating the
phase noise by statistical methods.
Physical targets associated with DS are field crops, forests, grasslands and other vegetation­
prone areas. These targets occupy large areas with a very similar spatial distribution of
individual scatterers (trees, or plants) and undergo time decorrelation phenomena with
the same origin (although uncorrelated among cells) such as vegetation growth and har­
vesting seasons.
Given the nature of DS, their exploitation in the InSAR field is primarily over rural or iso­
lated areas with a large extension of vegetation­prone areas.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
9
==PAGE:13==
Algorithms exploiting DS have existed since the first DInSAR algorithms were imple­
mented, evolving into algorithms such as the Small BAseline Subset (SBAS) [5] and its
improved versions.
PS­ and DS­ InSAR are used for different scenarios, depending on the target distribution
over the region of interest. Nonetheless, the approaches do not exclude each other, and
soon it was realised that exploring both backscatter mechanisms in the same InSAR algo­
rithm could bring great benefits in terms of data point coverage and range of applications.
Instead of combining PS and DS InSAR results post­processing using 2 different process­
ing chains, efforts were made to combine both approaches in a hybrid processing change.
Although different approaches have been studied for this purpose, the idea of processing
phase information from DS to a PS­like format gained popularity. Specifically, the use of
the full covariance matrix of DS targets as an estimator for an optimal weighted determin­
istic phase solution resulted in the development of a widely accepted and implemented
solution for combining PSDS­InSAR.
In [6], a review of the development timeline for the above­mentioned approach is offered,
as well as complementary information regarding the statistical properties of DS targets.
2.3
Phase Consistency and Phase­Linking
As mentioned above, one of the most well­established approaches to combine PS and
DS targets in a common hybrid processing chain is the use of the covariance matrix to
estimate a DS phase equivalent to the PS phase format. The solution can be separated
into 2 concepts: Phase Consistency and Phase­Linking.
The formulation used in the following explanation is inspired by the one introduced by [1].
2.3.1
Phase Consistency
The concept of Phase Consistency references the different properties of the interferomet­
ric phase information from PS and DS targets. The phase values of an estimated coher­
ence matrix of any pixel, (fx. computed using the sample coherence definition from Equa­
tion 2.6) correspond to spatially filtered interferometric phases, as expressed in Equa­
tion 2.7a, where k, j are 2 of the N SAR images forming the interferometric data stack.
The coherence matrix associated with an ideal PS is a singular matrix with just a non­zero
eigenvalue and associated eigenvector with all moduli 1, containing all the interferometric
phase information, as shown in Equation 2.7b. θ is, therefore, the phase vector of the N
acquisition.
In other words, for a deterministic radar target like a PS, the off­diagonal elements of the
coherence matrix are redundant, being able to reduce the dimensionality of the interfero­
metric phase into a phase vector of size N (1D). Therefore, it is said that PS targets meet
phase consistency condition, which is expressed as in Equation 2.8, where m, n, j any 3
acquisitions of the N SAR acquisitions forming the data stack.
However, DS targets do not hold such phase consistency, since the of­diagonal compo­
nents of their coherence matrix are not redundant and the coherence matrix is not singular.
This happens due to the decorrelation phenomena affecting DS targets, which lowers the
values of the interferometric coherence.
ˆΓ = γk,j ∗exp(jϕk,j)
(2.7a)
Γ(PS) = 1 ∗exp(jθ) ∗
(
1 ∗exp(jθ)
)H
(2.7b)
10 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:14==
̸ ( ˆ
Γnj) = ̸ ( ˆ
Γnm ∗
ˆ
Γ∗
mj),
n, m, j = 1, ...., N
(2.8a)
= θn −θj
(2.8b)
2.3.2
Phase­Linking
The Phase­Linking (PL) problem, as its name indicates, aims to link the interferometric
phase information of DS targets to a PS­like format and dimensionality by mitigating the
decorrelation processes affecting the DS targets and estimating the equivalent phase vec­
tor using regularization and optimization methods.
The differences between PL algorithms are attributed to the adopted phase optimization
method and the weighting criteria. In this particular case, the implementation proposed
by [7] and executed by [1] is explained, consisting of the use of the coherence matrix
as weighting criteria and an iterative minimization solver. Other worth­mentioning ap­
proaches that take complete or slight deviations w.r.t to the proposed method are [2] and
[3].
As mentioned earlier, DS are exploited by averaging large enough clusters of Statistically
Homogeneous Pixels (SHP), which enhances their SNR.
The covariance matrix of a spatially averaged DS cluster Ωcan be expressed as in Equa­
tion 2.9, where d(P) is the N acquisitions complex reflectivity time series for a pixel P, in
this case P being a DS.
To ease the framework for the following optimization procedure and the notation used in
[1], the coherence matrix of a DS pixel P is expressed as in Equation 2.10, where Θ is
an N by N diagonal matrix containing the values of the true phase as Θ = diag(exp(jθ)),
and Υ is a symmetric real­time matrix corresponding to the estimated coherence.
Under the assumption that all DS belonging to Ωare described by the same phase vector
θ, and therefore undergoing the same deformation process, the p.d.f of the SHP can be
expressed as in Equation 2.11.
C(P) = E[ddH] ≈1
|Ω|
∑
P∈Ω
d(P)d(P)H = ˆC
(2.9)
Γ(P) = ΘΥ−1ΘH
(2.10)
p(dΩ|θ) =
∏
P∈Ω
exp(−dH
P ΘΥ−1ΘHdP ) = exp(−trace(ΘΥ−1ΘH ˆΓ))
(2.11)
Under the assumption of Gaussian scattering, the Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimate
of θ is obtained by minimizing the absolute value of the p.d.f logarithm. By setting the
interferometric phase of the first image to zero, the optimal estimate of the N­1 phase
values expressed now as in Equation 2.12, is expressed in Equation 2.13. Λ being the
complex phase vector of the optimal phase values (Λ = exp(jλ)).
λ(P) =
[
0, λ2, ..., λN
]
(2.12)
ˆλ = argmaxλ
[
exp(ΛH(| ˆ
Γ−1| ◦ˆΓ)Λ)
]
= argminλ
[
ΛH(| ˆ
Γ−1| ◦ˆΓ)Λ
]
(2.13)
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
11
==PAGE:15==
A problem with this approach is to model the coherence matrix since the true coherence
matrix Υ is unknown. The absolute value of the estimated coherence matrix (|ˆΓ|) is often
used as an estimate of Υ.
As mentioned, the minimization of a non­linear function requires the use of an iterative
algorithm to solve the problem. A common choice in this PL approach is to use an opti­
mization algorithm like BFGS (Broydne­Fletcher­Goldfarb­Shanno), although it can prove
to be computationally expensive in some cases.
After performing the minimization on all SHP and obtaining an ˆλ estimate for each of
them, the quality of the estimates has to be validated against a measure equivalent to the
temporal coherence used for some PS­InSAR approaches. As an example, the Goodness
Of Fit (GOF) measure defined in [1] is:
γGOF =
2
N2 −N ℜ
( N
∑
n=1
N
∑
k=n+1
exp(iσnk) ∗exp(−i(λn −λk))
)
(2.14)
12 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:16==
3
PS­InSAR Processing Algorithm
In this chapter, a PS­InSAR algorithm inspired by the particular approach described in
[8] and [9] is developed and validated. The algorithm is introduced from scratch to the
reader, supposing they do not know the specific PS­InSAR approach, explaining each
step in detail.
After introducing the algorithm, its validation is carried out using controlled, synthetic data,
aiming to relate all possible output behaviours to the algorithm’s implementation.
3.1
Algorithm Development
Any InSAR processing algorithm can be divided into 2 main steps: generating a best
estimate of the wrapped interferometric phase ϕinterf and getting the LOS deformation by
unwrapping and scaling the interferometric phase estimates.
A PS­InSAR processing algorithm is not different to the rest, and consists of the same
steps, with an additional PS selection step preceding the estimation of the wrapped phase
since they are the only type of target this approach deals with.
An overview of the developed algorithm´s steps is shown in Figure 3.2 as a flow chart,
where straight edges, orange­filled blocks represent data sources, rounded edges non­
filled blocks represent the algorithm steps and oval grey­filled blocks represent the output
components.
The first step is to form the interferograms. They are produced by defining a data stack
with multiple SAR SLC acquisitions spanning a defined period, co­registering them to the
master acquisitions and applying corrections such as DEM and flattening corrections. The
criteria for choosing the master acquisition is flexible, being a common option to select
the first acquisition of the stack or the acquisition with the smallest spatial baseline (closer
to the master orbital tracks). Co­registration ensures all pixels from the SAR images are
as aligned as possible, aligning the SAR resolution cell.
After all the images in the data stack are co­registered to the master acquisition, inter­
ferograms can be formed by selecting acquisition pairs, forming the interferometric data
stack. In this approach, all acquisitions are paired with the first acquisition, integrating
pairs with large temporal baselines.
Once the interferometric data stack is formed, the next step concerns the selection of
PSs. As mentioned in section 2.2, a PS is characterised by a stable phase component
over time, which can be verified by multiple methods, each approach using its own.
The PS selection criteria used in this PS­InSAR algorithm is the Amplitude Dispersion
(AD) test. The AD test gives a measure of dispersion called dispersion index DA using
the magnitude time series of each pixel, as expressed in Equation 3.1. In the equation, σA
represents the standard deviation of a pixel’s magnitude time series while µA represents
its mean.
Targets exhibiting a low dispersion index are considered to have high backscatter stability
and by the definition of an ideal PS, a high probability of having a phase standard devia­
tion equal to their amplitude dispersion magnitude. ([9]).
Therefore, PS exhibiting an ideal PS­like behaviour can be selected by performing an AD
test on all pixels of the interferometric data stack, selecting those below a certain thresh­
old, defining when a PS candidate stops having a high probability of selecting targets with
a rather stable phase (low standard deviation).
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
13
==PAGE:17==
DA = σA
µA
(3.1)
The next step is to provide the best­wrapped phase estimates. In this approach, the
process to retrieve such estimates starts by forming a PS network, where PS act as the
nodes and, using a triangulation algorithm, connections between PS nodes are created,
acting as the arcs of the network. The Delaunay triangulation algorithm is used in this
implementation, using the (x,y) Cartesian coordinates of the interferometric image grid.
Creating a PS network intends to build a relation between the PS by working with the
wrapped phase gradients between PS nodes (arcs) instead of the phase time series of
each PS, referencing phase changes to neighbouring PS nodes.
The arcs’ associated phase gradient time series has therefore a length N (number of
interferogram pairs). Aside from the phase gradient vectors, a matrix containing the node
relationships and subtraction direction used to build each phase gradient is stored, as it
will be used in later steps.
The chosen approach assumes the underlying deformation to have linear and non­linear
deformation components. Therefore, there is a need to separate the phase gradient com­
ponents associated with the linear and the non­linear contributions.
The adopted method to separate the phase into linear and non­linear components is to es­
timate the physical magnitudes associated with each PS phase and detrend (remove the
linear trend) the phase gradients with the linear estimates, resulting in detrended phase
gradients.
As previously shown in Equation 2.3, the phase contributions of a PS are the topographic
error and the ground deformation velocity. An estimate for each of these parameters has
to be estimated to accurately detrend the phase time series.
The periodogram method is used to estimate the topographic error and the linear velocity.
It consists of creating a limited range of deformation velocity and topographic error values
by setting maximum, minimum and step parameters, generating a gradient phase time
series for all possible combinations of said values.
Aside from the arcs’ phase gradients, the periodogram method uses satellite, orbital pa­
rameters and the temporal and spatial baselines as input parameters, since they are nec­
essary for identifying the best fit for the linear parameters. They are also used to perform
scaling and unit change operations.
The generated phase gradient value that shows a higher coherence w.r.t the original
phase gradient time series is then selected, and their deformation velocity and topographic
error values are chosen as the best linear fits from the sampled values. Along with the
linear estimates of each phase gradient of each arc, the temporal coherence associated
with the fit is output as a quality measure.
After the estimates of all arcs have been computed, their phase gradients can be de­
trended by subtracting the phase components generated by the estimates.
It is worth mentioning that as a new addition to previously implemented versions of the
algorithm, multiprocessing capabilities using parallel processes estimating multiple arc
linear parameters are used for the periodogram step, since it has shown to highly benefit
its performance in time execution terms, reducing it approximately by a factor equal to the
number of processes simultaneously running.
At this point in the processing algorithm, the best estimates for the wrapped phase gradi­
ents’ linear parameters and the non­linear phase time series have been delivered, and it
is time to perform the so­called phase unwrapping.
The phase unwrapping step consists of delivering a final estimate of a node’s phase or
14 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:18==
deformation time series by integrating the small phase gradients spatially and temporally.
Many algorithms perform phase unwrapping, being one of the most important topics in
the InSAR processing field.
The algorithm used in this approach is composed of a Weighted Least Squares (WLS)
acting as the 2D spatial unwrapping for both the linear and non­linear components and a
1D temporal unwrapping for the non­linear components.
Before performing the unwrapping or any of the contributions, the weights for the spatial
unwrapping have to be defined. The standard option is to use the temporal coherence
of the linear fit estimates as the WLS’ weights for each of the arcs, which associates a
higher contribution to arcs whose fit has a high­quality measure than the ones that have
a low one.
An alternative to using the temporal coherence as weights is to use a modified version of
the temporal coherence by applying a Sigmoid function transformation. A Sigmoid func­
tion is defined as any S­shaped function, in this case, it is defined between 0 to 1 since it
has to act as a scaling function for the weights.
The objective of applying such a function is to increase the difference between well­ and
poorly­fitted arcs’ estimates, increasing and decreasing the weights values, and therefore
their importance in the unwrapping, respectively. The Sigmoid transformation has 2 pa­
rameters: the slope and the centre. The slope controls how steep the transition towards
the 0 and the 1 is, and the centre defines where the function outputs the input value without
transforming it (not modifying the weights). Equation 3.2 shows the equation that defines
the envisioned Sigmoid transformation, with a and b as the slope and centre parameters
respectively, and Figure 3.1 shows the sensitivity of the Sigmoid function transformation
for 3 realisations with different parameters.
fSigmoid(x) =
1
1 −exp(−a ∗(x + b))
(3.2)
(a) Slope parameter sensitivity
(b) Centre parameter sensitivity
Figure 3.1: Sigmoid transformation realisations for different slope (left) and centre (right)
parameters.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
15
==PAGE:19==
Although there is no specific order for the contributions to be unwrapped, the algorithm
starts unwrapping the linear contribution first. As mentioned earlier, the linear contribu­
tion undergoes a 2D spatial unwrapping using a WLS linear regression. Since the linear
estimates are for the parameters originating the ϕdeformation and ϕtopo, but not the phase
components themselves, the phase is not being unwrapped, but the already estimated
physical parameter estimates are.
The WLS formulation is shown in Equation 3.3. In this specific setup, X is the Arc­to­PS
mapping matrix introduced earlier defining the arcs’ definition, y are the linear estimates
(velocity or topographic error) associated to each arc and ˆβ are the linear estimates as­
sociated to each PS.
The 2 first equations show the LS problem formulation, while in the 3rd one, the W matrix
is introduced, transforming the LS method into its WLS version. The W matrix is the arcs’
temporal coherence (modified or not).
The PS linear estimates ˆβ can be estimated using the last equation.
X ˆβ = y
(3.3a)
X TX ˆβ = X Ty
(3.3b)
X TWX ˆβ = X TWy
(3.3c)
ˆβ = (X TWX)−1X TWy
(3.3d)
After the linear estimates are spatially unwrapped, they are re­scaled and referenced
to one of the PS nodes. It is really important to reference the deformation to a data
point with a known location, otherwise, the linear deformation estimates would not be
interpretable, as they would not have a reference to be deformed from. The reference PS
is normally chosen with previous knowledge of the deformation location, as a PS suffering
little deformation is the closest candidate to a reference point with no deformation, which
is desired.
The non­linear contributions are unwrapped using the detrended wrapped phase gradi­
ents time series introduced earlier. In this case, it can be said that a phase unwrapping
is being performed. The process to unwrap the non­linear contributions includes an ad­
ditional step before performing the WLS spatial unwrapping, as it is explained next.
The detrended gradient phase contains topographic and deformation non­linear contribu­
tions and the Atmospheric Phase Screen (APS) or atmospheric noise. The APS contri­
bution is spatially correlated but uncorrelated in time, thus needing to be filtered before
performing the spatial unwrapping.
APS can be mostly filtered by applying a Low Pass (LP) filter to the detrended phase spec­
trum, transforming the filtered spectrum back to the temporal domain. The LP filtered is a
triangular window whose length is proportional to a defined number of acquisitions. The
Temporal Filter’s Length (TFL) can be understood as how many different acquisitions are
integrated to estimate and remove the temporally uncorrelated APS noise.
The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm is used to transform the phase data to the
frequency domain and back to the time domain.
The filtered wrapped phase gradients are then temporally unwrapped, eliminating the 2π
moduli that kept them wrapped.The temporally unwrapped phase is then used as the input
for the WLS spatial unwrapping, using the same solution and weights previously defined.
The unwrapping returns a phase time series of non­linear components for each PS, which
can be easily scaled and transformed into equivalent non­linear deformation time series
16 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:20==
The last step (although not added in the flow chart) consists of optionally adding up all the
linear and non­linear unwrapped deformation time series. It is said to be optional since a
linear fit is sometimes enough information if the expected deformation is not characterised
by non­linearities.
If all the deformation contributions are added, it is recommended to visually inspect the
magnitude of the non­linear deformation contribution. For small TFL, the non­linearities
can be associated with a great magnitude to them w.r.t the linear deformation magnitude,
making the combined deformation time series look noisy or complex to interpret. For large
TFL values, the non­linearities tend to have a small magnitude, appearing to oscillate
around a probably more dominant linear deformation component.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
17
==PAGE:21==
Compute phase gradient
among nodes (Arcs)
Define Sigmoid
transformation and TFL
Compute PS-to-Arcs
map matrix
Periodogram estimation of
deformation rate (velocity), height
error and Temporal Coherence
Detrend Phase
FFT Detrended Phase
Linear Deformation Rate
2D Spatial Unwrapping
Height Error
2D Spatial Unwrapping
Apply Low-Pass Filter to
the Detrended Phase and
FFT back
Non-Linear Deformation
Spatial Unwrapping
Temporal Phase
unwrapping (Non-Linear
components)
Linear
Deformation TS
Height Error TS
Non-Linear
Deformation TS
PS selection
Create PS network (Delaunay
Triangulation)
Temporal and Spatial
Baselines
Satellite and Orbital
parameters
Sentinel-1 SLC products
Interferogram formation
Figure 3.2: PS­InSAR processing algorithm flow chart. The straight edges, orange­filled
blocks represent data sources, the rounded edges non­filled blocks represent algorithm
steps and the oval grey­filled blocks represent the output formation Time Series (TS)
components.
18 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:22==
3.1.1
Algorithm implementation
The code implementation of the PS InSAR processing algorithm described in this chapter
is an adapted version of DTU’s PhD. student Jakob Ahl’s PS­InSAR algorithm.
The original code is written in Matlab and contains most of the algorithm stages explained
in the chapter.
The version developed in this project is a Python­translated version from scratch of Jakob’s
implementation. Additional tools and functionalities have been added, such as multipro­
cessing capabilities for the periodogram section, the PS selection criteria and the analysis
of the ground motion estimates.
3.2
Validation
The validation of the developed PS InSAR processing algorithm is carried out by using
a semi­synthetic data stack, composed of a real backscatter magnitude stack and a syn­
thetic phase stack.
There are various reasons to combine a real and a synthetic component in the data stack
to perform the validation. A real magnitude stack allows to testing of a realistic PS se­
lection, since the AD test criteria depend only on the magnitude, providing a realistic PS
network. Furthermore, the real data stack used for the magnitude stack in the algorithm
validation is used (magnitude and phase) for further testing later in this project, serving
as an introduction to one of the main testing scenes.
The phase of a SAR stack is complicated to simulate, especially when dealing with time­
decorrelation phenomena, but it is necessary for the validation process as absolute ground­
truth is sparsed for ground motion measurements.
Although complex to simulate, the SAR phase equations are known and can be related to
synthetic deformation velocities, adding the benefit of introducing a well­known parameter
to be used as ground truth in the analysis.
3.2.1
Synthetic data stack
The SAR magnitude stack consists of a Sentinel­1 SAR data stack of Aarhus’ urban and
harbour areas. The data stack contains 118 acquisitions taken with a 6­day revisit time
during the period from 2017­11­04 to 2019­10­19, corresponding to a descending orbit
with track number 139. The location and frame of the acquisitions for the corresponding
Sentinel­1 track are shown in Figure 3.3.
The specific location has been selected for 2 main reasons. The scene shows an urban
area containing a real and dense distribution of PS, where the algorithm is supposed to
excel. Furthermore, Aarhus’ harbour area is known for undergoing a subsidence process,
having the possibility to further test the algorithm on a real phase stack upon validation
using the synthetic phase stack. Figure 3.4 shows the temporally averaged backscatter
magnitude of the SAR data stack over the validation area, along with an optical image
from Google Maps.
Spatial features such as the harbour decks, the city centre, parks and large roads can be
appreciated in both figures.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
19
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Frame and geometry of the orbital track # 139 used to form the interferometric
data stack for the PS­InSAR algorithm validation and the Aarhus testing scenario.
(a) Temporal averaged backscatter magnitude
(b) Google Maps optical image
Figure 3.4: Validation area containing Aarhus’ urban and harbour area
The phase component of the stack is simulated using Equation 3.4, where BT is the
temporal baseline [years], v is the underlying deformation velocity [mm/year] and σN is
a white Gaussian noise component. Equation 3.4 is a simplified version of Equation 2.1,
which only contains the ground motion ϕdeformation and noise component ϕN, not adding
the topographic error ϕtopo and APS ϕAPS components.
ϕ = 4 ∗π
λ
∗BT ∗vdeformation + σN
(3.4)
The Gaussian noise is given a relatively low amplitude, as PSs are often characterised by
a stable phase, being targets with a high SNR. The parameter to be synthetically simulated
is the deformation velocity vdeformation.
Figure 3.5 shows the simulated velocity used for the algorithm validation for the whole
SAR scene grid. The velocities are spatially correlated to simulate a smooth deformation
gradient throughout the scene, aiming to create gentle gradients between PS and simplify
its visual analysis and spatial integration.
20 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Simulated velocity over the scene used to generate the synthetic phase stack
for the algorithm validation.
The first step after creating the interferogram stack is the PS selection. Figure 3.6 shows
the selected PS for multiple AD thresholds used in the AD test. As expected, the number
of PS increases when relaxing (increasing) the amplitude dispersion threshold. The areas
containing clusters of man­made structures such as Aarhus’ city centre, buildings along
the sides of large roads and the harbour, increase their PS density faster, as it can be
observed for Figure 3.6b, Figure 3.6c and Figure 3.6d.
However, there is a trade­off between PS density and making and selection quality. When
increasing the AD test threshold the probability that guarantees the relation between the
standard deviation and the stability of the magnitude and phase components decreases,
no longer holding the assumptions to consider the pixels’ PSs.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
21
==PAGE:25==
(a) AD threshold of 0.25
(b) AD threshold of 0.35
(c) AD threshold of 0.40
(d) AD threshold of 0.45
Figure 3.6: PS coverage over the whole test scene for various Amplitude Dispersion
Threshold values, used for their selection. The legend in Figure 3.6a shows the refer­
ence area that will be used in the unwrapping step, chosen by knowing the synthetic
deformation velocity is close to 0 there.
Taking a closer look at a sub­area of the SAR scene, in the suburbs of Aarhus where more
green areas and railway tracks are present, helps observe the PS selection behaviour.
The selected sub­area and a close­up of the SAR scene and an optical equivalent are
shown in Figure 3.7. Figure 3.8 shows the PS selection in the sub­area for the same AD
thresholds used earlier, and the same behaviour is observed.
It is particularly clear how low­magnitude pixels, most likely residential buildings in green
areas, are not selected until the AD threshold is largely relaxed (or even not selected).
It is also curious to see how the bright building on the bottom­left part of the sub­area
is not selected even for large AD values, which helps emphasize that pixels with a high
backscatter magnitude are not necessarily stable targets (at least for the criteria followed
by the AD test).
22 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.7: Aarhus sub­area. From left to right, a transition from highlighting the sub­area
in the SAR scene, to showing the close­up of the mean SAR backscatter of the sub­area
and approximately the optical equivalent of the sub­area (image taken from Google Maps).
Figure 3.8: Selected PS on the sub­area for various AD threshold values.
A strict AD threshold of 0.25 is set to guarantee pixels representing phase­stable scatter­
ers are selected (at least from a magnitude point of view, since the phase is synthetic).
The PS network containing phase gradients between PSs from Figure 3.6a is generated
using the Delaunay triangulation algorithm, as shown in Figure 3.9.
The features observed when analyzing the PS selection are observed in the PS network.
The city centre is the most densely connected area while the west side is sparsely popu­
lated. Part of the harbour can be clearly distinguished by its elongated shape containing
PS along it.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.9: PS network obtained using a Delaunay triangulation.
The temporal coherence after performing the linear estimates using the periodogram
method looks rather high for all network arcs (Figure 3.10) since a low magnitude syn­
thetic noise has been simulated, indicating that the fit for the linear estimates is good.
Therefore, no Sigmoid transformation is applied to the temporal coherence, and its val­
ues are used directly as weights for the unwrapping algorithm.
Since the synthetic data simulates a linear deformation, only the linear deformation esti­
mates are validated, therefore not focusing on the TFL’s choice in this case.
Figure 3.10:
Temporal coherence histogram for the PS approach using a synthetic
dataset.
24 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:28==
The estimated deformation velocities are shown in Figure 3.11. At first glance, the esti­
mates seem to match the underlying synthetic deformation velocities shown in Figure 3.5.
To test the accuracy of the estimates more precisely the difference (error) between the
estimates and the ground truth is computed, as well as its distribution, as shown in Fig­
ure 3.12 and Figure 3.13.
Overall, the estimated velocities seem to have a low deviation w.r.t the ground truth values,
as shown by the error values. PSs with larger errors seem uniformly distributed through­
out the scene, without any error­prone cluster in sight. The magnitude of the largest errors
is also rather low, although an error larger than 0.5 mm/year is considerable and must not
be ignored.
Regardless of the presence of larger errors, the average error µPS is around 0.01mm/year,
which is an acceptable error magnitude.
The conclusion extracted from the validation setup is that the developed PS­InSAR algo­
rithm works well under the assumption that the data is PS­like stable, delivering accurate
estimates of the underlying deformation velocities in the phase data. Some deformation
estimates appear to deviate from their synthetic ground truth, although the error magni­
tude is not too large and does not follow any spatial pattern suggesting an imperfection in
the developed algorithm.
Therefore, the algorithm seems to prove its capabilities to perform InSAR processing and
analysis using PS.
Figure 3.11: PS deformation velocity estimates for the synthetic data stack over the
Aarhus SAR scene. The purple star symbol indicates the reference area where defor­
mations are referenced.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
25
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.12: Computed error for the PS deformation velocity estimates of the synthetic
data stack over Aarhus SAR scene. The purple star symbol indicates the reference area
where deformations are referenced.
Figure 3.13: Histogram of the computed error for the PS deformation velocity estimates
of the synthetic data stack.
26 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:30==
4
PSDS­InSAR Processing Algorithm
In this chapter, a hybrid PSDS­InSAR processing algorithm, able to estimate deformation
time series from both PS and DS using the same unwrapping algorithm, is developed
and validated. The focus of the chapter lies on developing the stages that adapt the
deformation­related phase information from DS into a PS­like format, so that both types
of targets can be merged in the same PS­InSAR processing approach, in this case, the
one explained in the previous chapter (chapter 3).
The chapter is divided into 2 main sections: the development of the steps needed to adapt
DS to a PS­like format and the validation of the hybrid PSDS processing chain using a
synthetic data stack, comparing its performance with the PS approach.
4.1
Algorithm Development
The process needed to adapt DSs’ phase information into a PS­like format can be divided
into 2 sequential stages: DS clustering and SHP phase compression.
The first stage consists of clustering DS that are statistically related, and the second stage
consists of merging their information to decrease the noise introduced by time decorrela­
tion phenomena and extract a phase time series with an improved Signal­to­Noise­Ratio
(SNR), from which an improved ground deformation estimate can be extracted.
The 2 main properties that define a DS from an algorithm point of view are exhibiting poor
robustness, caused by the presence of time decorrelation phenomena, and the high prob­
ability of having neighbouring DS targets defined by the same physical type of targets.
For example, crops and forests are likely to be formed by DS targets, as they are sur­
rounded by targets with a similar distribution of the same physical scatterer in the radar
resolution cell, and they suffer decorrelation phenomena (growth).
The first stage of the proposed solution is therefore to find clusters of DS that share statis­
tical properties, also named SHP (Statistically Homogeneous Pixels) in an image context.
Figure 4.1 shows the flow chart of the proposed DS clustering algorithm along the rest
of the steps in the hybrid processing chain. The DS clustering algorithm is formed by
the blocks between the PS selecting step and the first SPH filtering block (green­filled).
The steps of the algorithm are represented by unfilled round­edge blocks and blue­filled
diamond blocks, the latter indicating decision­making steps, where NO and YES (binary)
decisions are taken.
Notice that the DS clustering flow matches the characteristics of an iterative algorithm.
The first step is to identify the pixel candidates to be part of the iterative clustering, which
is carried out by masking out the pixels that are known to not be DSs. That includes pixels
associated with PSs and decorrelated areas that are known to not have a stable phase
at all, such as water bodies. Once these undesired pixels are masked out, the iterative
clustering algorithm can be performed.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
27
==PAGE:31==
YES
NO
Are there any pixels
drawn from the same distribution?
Create Mask with unselected
PS pixels
Center exploration window on
the first "masked" pixel
Perform statistical test
YES
NO
Is the master pixel
connected to the pixels drawn
from the same distribution?
(8 directions)
Mask pixel out and
move to the next
unmasked pixel
Form SHP with
connected pixels
NO
YES
SHP average AD
and length filtering
Center exploration window on
the next "masked" pixel
Sentinel-1 SLC products
Interferogram formation
PS selection
Are there more pixels
to be tested?
Form SHP with
master pixel
SHP Phase
Compression
SHP filtering by GOF
PS-InSAR algorithm
Figure 4.1: PSDS­InSAR processing algorithm flow chart. The straight­edge, orange­
filled blocks represent data sources, the rounded edges non­filled blocks represent algo­
rithm steps, the diamond blue­filled blocks represent decision­making blocks for the DS
clustering stage and green­ and red­filled blocks represent other steps of the DS filtering
and SHP phase compression stages, and the PS­InSAR algorithm respectively.
28 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:32==
The algorithm iterates over all the DS candidate pixels in the SAR scene, performing the
same clustering routine. For the following explanation, it is useful to bear in mind that we
are dealing with a SAR image in a matrix format, so the used terminology resembles the
one used in image processing.
The routine consists of centring an exploration window of a predefined size on each DS
candidate. A local window mask is created for the exploration window to mask out all pix­
els already contained in other SHP or contained in the masked­out­pixels mask mentioned
earlier, excluding them from the iteration.
The rest of the pixels inside the exploration window form the pool of possible statistically
related pixels w.r.t the centre (master) pixel in the window. The statistical relation between
the pixels and the master pixel is verified by performing a statistical test which verifies if
2 pixels’ time series have been drawn from the same statistical distribution.
The most common statistical tests for this purpose are the Kolmogorov­Smirnov (KS) and
Anderson Darling (AD) tests, which are not bound to any particular reference distribution.
The time series used as inputs for the test by all the candidates and master pixels are
formed by the backscatter magnitude time series, not involving any phase information at
this stage. Each statistical test outputs a p­value, which is a measure of the likeliness that
the 2­time series have been drawn from the same distribution.
A pre­chosen p­value threshold is used to decide the degree of likeliness for which the
tested time series are accepted to have been drawn from the same distribution, selecting
those with a higher p­value output than the threshold. Pixels with a lower p­value than the
threshold are dropped out from the analysis since they would reject the null hypothesis
of the 2­time series being drawn from the same distribution for the defined confidence
interval by the threshold.
The last step of the iterative process is to check the candidates’ connectivity: ensure
that the selected pixels are connected by neighbouring pixel candidates (any of their 8
surrounding pixels). Pixels that are not connected to the master pixel directly, or through
a chain of pixels connected with each other up to the master pixel, are also discarded.
The remaining connected pixels can be considered a DS cluster.If none of the statistically
related pixels are connected to the master pixel, an SHP for the master pixel alone is
added.
For each new SHP, all its pixels are added to the mask containing the masked­out pixels,
so they are removed in future exploration windows. This is done so that a pixel cannot
be part of 2 different SHPs. The clustering algorithm ends when all DS candidates have
been assigned an SHP.
4.1.1
Parameters
The DS clustering algorithm has 4 parameters which define the filter sizes, thresholds
and statistical methods to be performed during the iterative algorithm. The algorithm
performance and output change substantially depending on the parameter values. Their
definition, particular relevance and expected trade­offs are mentioned below.
• Exploration Window Radius: It defines the size of the exploration window centred
on the master pixel. The size remains constant throughout the algorithm. There is
a trade­off between setting a large size to capture SHP with enough pixels in it and
the execution time of the algorithm, as the number of iterations does not decrease
but the amount of pixels to be analyzed in each iteration does. The step in which
the pixels’ connectivity is computed is affected by large exploration windows.
• P­value threshold: It defines the minimum p­value for which the null­hypothesis of
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
29
==PAGE:33==
the statistical test is accepted or rejected. The algorithm is quite sensitive to this
parameter. The trade­off lies therefore in setting a strict enough threshold so that
we can rely that the selected pixels are really drawn from the same distribution (large
p­value) while being loose enough to avoid creating small SHP (<10 pixels).
• Test of choice: Name of the statistical test to be used on the algorithm. As the
literature suggests, 2 tests are suitable for the clustering algorithm: the 2­sample
Kolmogorov­Smirnov test and the 2­sample Anderson­Darling test. Aside from the
statistical test, we added the possibility of combining their output with a secondary
test: an amplitude dispersion or a backscatter magnitude test. The secondary test
checks if the selected DS have a rather AD or backscatter magnitude w.r.t. the mas­
ter pixel. The test was added as a measure to have a relaxed statistical threshold
while still relating physically related clusters.
• Secondary test threshold: Threshold for the secondary test (if used). The value
refers to the allowed deviation percentage of the test parameter w.r.t the master
pixel.
The second stage of the processing algorithm, called SHP Phase compression, has 2
main purposes: enhancing the phase information of SHP by exploiting the statistical re­
lation between their DSs, and adapting it to a PS­like format.
As explained in the theoretical background (subsection 2.3.2), the complete phase infor­
mation of a PS and a DS have different dimensions, since the properties of their coherence
matrix γ differ, requiring N and N∗(N−1)
2
interferometric pairs respectively.
However, it is possible to process PS and DS with the same PS­InSAR algorithm if the
DSs’ phase information dimension is compressed using a phase vector of size N. Such
compression can be performed by an iterative minimization algorithm over the Maximum
Likelihood Estimate of p(dΩ|θ), where Ωis the group of DS clustered in an SHP and θ is
the N­dimensional phase vector where the SHP’s phase information can be compressed
in.
For more information regarding the exact formulation of the minimized function, consult
subsection 2.3.2.
Before compressing the SHPs’ phase, the SHP candidates obtained in the DS clustering
stage are filtered by their size and the average AD of their DSs. The aim of applying such
a filter is to reject SHPs that contain few pixels (<10) and whose average AD is rather low
(<0.5), which are properties of low­quality PSs rather than DS targets. Furthermore, the
iterative minimization step is computationally demanding, benefiting from a reduction in
the SHP candidates’ pool. The filter parameters are not decisive and could vary depend­
ing on the scenario.
The phase compression algorithm is then applied to the remaining SHP. In this case, the
chosen algorithm is the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) algorithm, a numer­
ical optimization method for solving unconstrained nonlinear optimization problems.
Each compressed SHP phase vector is evaluated using a Goodness Of Fit (GOF), serving
as a quality measure of the minimization w.r.t the a priori phase knowledge contained in the
uncompressed coherence matrix of the SHP. The chosen GOF is defined in Equation 2.14
[1], and aims to be an equivalent of the temporal coherence for DS, acting as the AD test
performed for the PS selection.
A GOF threshold is applied to filter the compressed phase vectors and keep the SHPs
whose phase has been minimized well enough, discarding SHPs with a poorly minimized
phase. The remaining SHPs’ phases are stored using their compressed form and using
30 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:34==
the position of their master pixel as their equivalent PS coordinates, being in the same
format as the pre­selected PS.
After the second stage, the SHPs are expressed in a PS­like format and are ready to be
merged with the selected PS candidates and undergo the same PS InSAR processing
algorithm.
4.2
Validation
The validation section aims to test the added DS pre­processing stages and their be­
haviour when added to the PS­InSAR algorithm. The same synthetic data stack from
chapter 3 is used, allowing the comparison of the results against the known velocities and
the PS approach output. The only modification made to the synthetic data stack is the
phase noise magnitude for the SHP pixels, which is set to larger values than the phase
noise for PS.
4.2.1
DS clustering
The first step consists of creating a binary mask to remove the PS candidates and un­
desired areas (water) from the DS clustering algorithm. The mask consists of applying
a backscatter magnitude and AD filters, with variable threshold values depending on the
scenario. In this case, the mask was initially based on an AD filter, but some water pixels
were shown to have a higher­than­expected AD, even though their backscatter is highly
uncorrelated. Since water pixels have a low magnitude value, an additional backscatter
magnitude was added. By defining 2 thresholds, the water pixels were completely masked
out, although some areas of interest such as roads and parks were also discarded since
they were below both or one of the set thresholds.
To partially compensate for the masking effect, both the AD and magnitude images were
smoothed using a 3x3 2D averaging filter before applying the thresholds, aiming to smooth
out outliers values in water areas, so the thresholds could be lowered. The result is shown
in Figure 4.2, where ones or light pixels are the candidates to undergo the DS clustering
algorithm.
Some areas in the city are still masked out, but it is a consequence of working with a
single backscatter magnitude and having to mask out water bodies without using a geo­
referenced mask.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
31
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.2: PS and water mask used as an input for the DS clustering algorithm.
After discarding the undesired pixels from the analysis, the DS clustering is performed.
As above­mentioned, the output of the algorithm is sensitive to its input parameters, espe­
cially to the p­value threshold. Figure 4.3 shows the DS clusters for three different runs for
the same set of input parameters, but varying the p­value threshold, in the Aarhus scene
sub­area introduced in the chapter 3. The colour of each SHP has no physical meaning,
as it is purely used to differentiate neighbouring clusters from each other.
The SHPs for each realization have already been filtered by size and average AD, with
threshold values of >20 pixels and >0.5 AD respectively, to remove weak SHPs. It can be
clearly observed how as the p­value threshold increases, the amount of SHP decreases
since the statistical test becomes more strict. Although the number decreases, the loca­
tion of the clusters remains the same, reinforcing the trust in the clustering algorithm to
identify areas with a high DS density.
Furthermore, the DS and PS coverage (Figure 3.8) do not overlap, complementing com­
plement each other. SHPs are concentrated in the areas where not many PS were found,
which in the optical image of the sub­area appear to be greener areas. Such observation
highlights the importance of working towards a PSDS­InSAR approach to increase data
32 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:36==
density in sparsely populated PS areas.
By comparing the DS distribution over the sub­area to the PS distribution shown in Fig­
ure 3.8, especially for the highest p­value threshold (0.35), it is observed that DS and
PS coverage do not overlap and they complement each other. SHPs are concentrated
in the areas where not many PS were found, which in the optical image (Figure 3.7) of
the sub­area appear to be greener areas. Such observation highlights the importance of
working towards a PSDS­InSAR approach to increase data density in sparsely populated
PS areas.
Figure 4.3: DS clusters for 3 realisations of the DS clustering algorithm with a window
radius of 6 pixels, a KS statistical test and 3 different p­value thresholds: 0.05, 0.15 and
0.35. The colour of the clusters does not have a physical meaning, it is meant to differ­
entiate clusters from each other easily.
The output obtained when using other statistical test combinations had rather similar re­
sults to the observed for the KS test. To simplify the reading of the report, they are not
included, as they would not add any critical insights.
4.2.2
SHP phase compression
The rest of the validation is performed using the output of the DS clustering stage with the
following parameters, as they showed to work well for the validation area:
• Window Radius: 6 pixels
• Test: Kolmogorov­Smirnov (KS)
• P­value threshold: 0.35
• Secondary test threshold: Default of 0.05 [Not Used]
The selected SHP go through the phase compression algorithm explained earlier, and
the GOF is computed for each of the compressed phase vectors. The histogram of the
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
33
==PAGE:37==
SHPs’ GOF is shown in Figure 4.4. A GOF threshold is arbitrarily chosen depending
on its distribution, by visually inspecting the GOF histogram, aiming to drop the worst
compressed phases out. The threshold is shown as a red dashed line in the histogram
figure, having a value of 0.8.
Figure 4.5 shows the GOF values on their corresponding SHP location over the SAR
scene. No specific pattern on the GOF spatial distribution is observed, therefore not
observing a physical meaning relating to the SHPs GOF and their location.
Figure 4.4: Histogram of the SHPs’ GOF. A vertical dashed red line indicates where the
GOF threshold used for the current example is set (0.8), giving an overview of the volume
of rejected and accepted minimized SHPs.
34 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.5: Scatter plot using the GOF values on their SHP location over the SAR scene.
No spatial patterns relating to the GOF magnitudes and their location on the scene are
observed. The shown GOF correspond to all the SHPs previous to applying the GOF
filter.
4.2.3
Hybrid processing algorithm
The compressed phase vectors can be merged with the pre­selected PS, and processed
with the developed PS­InSAR algorithm. After creating the PS network and estimating
the best linear fit with the periodogram method, the histogram of the assigned temporal
coherence for all the arcs in the network is shown in Figure 4.6. The histogram for the
network arcs having at least an SHP as one of their nodes is also plotted, in an orange
tone. It can be appreciated how the distribution of the coherence values, is separated into
low and high values, corresponding to SHP and PS associated arcs.
The temporal coherence is used directly as the weights for the spatial unwrapping algo­
rithm.
The reference area for the unwrapping of the data has been chosen with a prior knowledge
of an area with little deformation, since the underlying deformation is synthetic and a close­
to­zero deformation location is known.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
35
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.6: Histogram of the temporal coherence for each arc in the PS network (blue
bars) and for the arcs containing at least an SHP as one of their nodes (orange bars).
The linear deformation velocity estimates for both the PS and SHP nodes in the network
are shown in Figure 4.7. The SHP nodes are rather recognizable in the image, as their
shape is heterogeneous since all pixels inside each SHP are plotted with their associated
SHP’s deformation velocity estimate.
The PS estimates look similar to the ground truth, and the estimates obtained from the PS
approach, although some areas seem to have deviated estimates. The estimates associ­
ated with SHPs have rather large and distinct magnitudes in comparison with neighbouring
estimates associated with PS and look like outliers for most of the areas throughout the
scene. Therefore, such estimates are expected to have a large error in comparison to the
PS nodes.
36 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.7: Linear deformation estimates for all the PS and SHP. The estimates associated
with SHP appear larger with a heterogeneous shape, showing their pixel distribution inside
each of them. A purple star indicates the reference area used during the unwrapping step.
4.2.4
Analysis of the Validation Estimates
The difference between the known synthetic formation velocities and their estimates,
called error throughout this analysis, is shown in Figure 4.8, where the error associated
with PS and SHP estimates are separated into 2 figures to ease their analysis.
The errors associated with PSs are not homogeneous throughout the scene, as observed
for the PS approach. The error is relatively low in the areas close to the city centre, where
the highest PS density is located, and for the area on the top­left corner of the image
(approximately), characterised by a light green colour (no deformation error).
Large deviation estimates can be spotted on the left part of the scene, where both nega­
tive and positive errors are found, and in small areas on the upper part of the scene and
the harbour area. The deviated estimates seem to follow a spatial correlation, since the
magnitude of the error is similar for neighbouring pixels, forming an error­prone cluster of
PS. Such behaviour is well­observed for all the areas containing a large error.
A >2 mm/year deviation would most likely be considered a large deviation since it repre­
sents a substantial magnitude w.r.t the true deformation of the pixels.
The error associated with SHP pixels, shown in Figure 4.8b, seems to follow an even more
spatially correlated pattern, as well as having larger discrepancies with a larger magnitude
than the ones associated with PS. The deviated estimates in the centre of the image have
a negative value, while in the rest of the areas, left and right of the scene, the error tends
to have a positive value. The magnitude of the errors seems to have a smooth transition
from one area to another in the scene. A priori, no explanation for this behaviour comes
to mind. Aside from the large errors, few SHPs show low error estimates, only in areas
containing few SHPs such as the harbour and the city centre. However, given the strong
errors’ spatial pattern, such areas do not seem related to each other.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
37
==PAGE:41==
(a) PS nodes
(b) SHP nodes
Figure 4.8: Error associated with both PS (top) and SHP (bottom) nodes. The purple star
symbol on each image represents the reference area taken for the spatial unwrapping.
38 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:42==
Observing a strong spatial pattern in the errors associated with SHPs suggests there
might be a correlation between the PS and SHP errors. Figure 4.9 shows that actually,
PSs exhibiting a large error are mostly located in areas of high SHP density, which could
be causing a larger error for the PS, since most of the arcs in the area will connect the PS
to SPH nodes.
Such an assumption can also be observed with the contrary effect. The PS located in the
city centre, where no SHPs are located have a little error, which might be due to being
interconnected in the network without sharing arcs with SHP nodes.
Areas with low SHP density but PS presence seem to output an in­between error mag­
nitude, suggesting that observed error might be due to both PS and SHP densities in a
given area.
Figure 4.9: Error associated with both PS and SHP pixels. The purple star symbol on the
image represents the reference area taken for the spatial unwrapping.
The distribution of the errors associated with PSs, SHPs and both of them together are
shown in Figure 4.10. As expected, the distribution has wider tails for the SHPs and
narrower for the PSs. The combined distribution resembles the PS distribution as a matter
of node numbers since the analysis is formed by around 14 times more PSs than SHPs.
The standard deviation for both PSs and SHPs is too large to be reliable in a real­case
scenario. Furthermore, there is a deviation in the mean of the SHP distribution, which
would be expected to be around 0 (equal amount of negative and positive errors), thought
to be caused by the slightly larger amount of negative than positive errors.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
39
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.10: Error histograms associated with PS, DS and both of them combined. The
errors are fitted to a normal distribution, whose fit is shown in the figure’s legend.
4.3
Analysis of the validation discrepancies
In an attempt to understand the origin of the discrepancies between the estimated and ex­
pected deformation velocities for the SHPs, which seems to be causing the errors for both
SHPs and PSs, previous steps are carefully revised. There are mainly 2 steps that are
thought to contain some clue related to the errors: SHP selection and linear fit estimates
of the compressed phase.
The SHP selection process is greatly determined by the filtering of 3 parameters: the
SPHs length, average AD and GOF. Scatter plots for all the SHPs comparing the men­
tioned parameters to their errors are shown in Figure 4.11.
The GOF would be expected to be inversely correlated to the error, having low errors for
large GOFs, but no pattern or correlation is observed in the scatter plots. Surprisingly
the scatter plot comparing the average AD to the GOF seems to be slightly correlated.
The majority of the SHPs have a low average AD, where the error takes a different mag­
nitude, but the error narrows down slightly for larger average AD, especially visible for
40 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:44==
average AD larger than 0.65. The density of SHPs having such a large average AD value
is not enough to confirm the correlation between the parameter and its associated error,
although it helps realize that the proposed GOF ([1]) does not work for the developed
algorithm.
The SHPs’ length does not show much of a relation, although slightly lower errors are
observed in large length values.
After observing the 3 scatter plots, the average AD seems a more accurate measure than
the GOF to select the SHPs. Nonetheless, the average AD cannot be the quality measure
of the compressed phase vectors, since it takes magnitude values instead.
(a) GOF against Errors
(b) Average AD against Errors
(c) Length against Errors
Figure 4.11: Scatter plots comparing the GOF (top­left), average AD (top­right) and length
(bottom) of each SHP to their associated error.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
41
==PAGE:45==
Regardless of the output of assessing the parameters to select SHPs, the core of the issue
must be either in the linear estimates of the compressed phase (periodogram stage) or in
the compressed phase formation itself.
A close inspection of the linear velocity and topographic error estimates for each of the
PSDS network arcs reveals an unexpected behaviour for the arcs containing SHPs as
one of their nodes. Figure 4.12 shows the histogram of both parameters for all arcs in the
network (blue bars) and the arcs related to SHPs (orange bars). Both histograms have a
large amount of SHP arcs on the bars associated with the maximum and minimum values
for which the periodogram performs the fits, a behaviour that does not happen for the rest
of the arcs.
Since the data stack is synthetic, it is known that such large linear velocities are not to
be expected between any nodes (especially having smooth deformation gradients, as
shown in Figure 3.5) and that topographic error estimates shall be 0m or close to it, since
the topographic component of the phase is not included in the simulated phase to simplify
the analysis. Therefore the resulting fits for the SHP arcs, which have a low temporal
coherence (Figure 4.6), are not a result of the periodogram estimation boundaries, but
the compressd phase gradients.
An educated guess would be that the poor fit is triggered by the apparent topographic
error fit since it is not expected and has a large value for the SHP arcs. The apparent
topographic error must therefore be triggered by the arcs’ phase gradients associated
with the SHPs.
(a) Linear velocity estimates
(b) Topographic error estimates
Figure 4.12: Scatter plots comparing the GOF (top­left), average AD (top­right) and length
(bottom) of each SHP to their associated error.
The effect of the large difference in the periodogram parameters values distribution for
arcs containing or not SHP as their nodes is visually accentuated when looking at their
representation in a network format, as shown in Figure 4.13. This visualization also rein­
forces the belief that the errors caused by SHPs affect PSs outside of the main PS cluster
in the city centre since they are largely connected to SHP nodes.
The errors’ spatial pattern observed in Figure 4.9 looks exactly as the arcs’ temporal co­
42 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:46==
herence in Figure 4.13a.
(a) Temporal Coherence
(b) Linear deformation velocity
(c) Topographic error
Figure 4.13: Scatter plots of the periodogram output parameters in a network­like for­
mat: temporal coherence (top­left), linear deformation velocity estimates (top­right) and
topographic error (bottom).
The arc phase gradients are defined using the compressed phase vector from the SHP.
Inspecting the compressed phase vectors is a tedious task since the only way to visu­
alize them is in a signal format, having their values wrapped by the 2π moduli from the
wrapped phase data. Before the following discussion, it is recommended to read subsec­
tion 2.3.2, where the terminology and equations of the SHP phase compression algorithm
are explained in detail.
An arbitrary SHP within the SHPs used in the processing algorithm (SHP number 678)
is chosen to be analysed. The phase vectors playing a role in the iterative minimization
algorithm (BFGS) used to compress the phase of said SHP are visualized in Figure 4.14.
The vectors are the phase of the first row of the SHP’s estimated coherence matrix ˆ
ΓΩ,
the initialization values for the compressed phase, and the values obtained in the last it­
eration.
The magnitude of the phase vector related to ˆ
ΓΩis low, as it seems to iterate around 0,
a behaviour shared among other SHPs’ ˆ
ΓΩ. If an SHP’s ˆ
ΓΩis understood as a type of
weighted coherence matrix for all the pixels in an SHP, it could make sense for the values
to tend to 0. However, it is hard to interpret the magnitude of such interferometric phase
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
43
==PAGE:47==
values.
The magnitude of the initialization values for the compressed phase look as expected,
having a wider range of phase values within the 2π moduli, as non­averaged DSs and
PSs.
This magnitude­related comment is intended to express that the compressed phase is
expected to emulate an individual scatterer phase component since it should be merged
with PSs later on. Figure 4.14b shows the phase component of the first row of the
ˆ
ΓDS
for each of the first 5 DSs of the selected SHP before combining them all into ˆ
ΓΩ. The
magnitude of the phase vectors is within a wider margin, as it would be for a PS.
The point of bringing the second figure into the discussion is to understand the process the
phase information is undergoing. From creating an estimated coherence matrix for each
DS in an SHP, whose phases are the interferometric phases between acquisitions, being
combined into ˆΓSHP where the phase component seems to acquire lower values, and
estimating the compressed phase, where phase values seem to increase their magnitude
again.
The final iteration of the compressed phase is complex to analyze but what catches the
eye is the large number of close­to ±π phase values along the time series. The phase
vector can have such values, but a wider range of values would perhaps be expected.
To sum up, the irregularities observed on the algorithm’s estimates seem to have origi­
nated in the SHP phase compression stage, since the output does not look as it would be
expected, although the specific origin of the issue is not entirely located.
Regardless of the origin of the issue in the algorithm, the analysis of the validation per­
formance indicates that the developed PSDS approach is not suitable to be applied in a
real case scenario, not because the SHPs’ associated estimates contain a large error,
but because such error affects the performance of PS associated estimates, having a
detrimental effect on the InSAR processing algorithm.
44 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:48==
(a) Phase vectors involved in the phase compression minimization algorithm.
(b) Phase components from the SHP’s estimated coherence matrix (Γ0:5,:.
Figure 4.14: Time Series of the phase components involved in the SHP number 678 com­
pression. The first figure shows the phase component of the SHP’s estimated coherence
matrix ( ˆ
ΓΩ0,: (red line), the initialization values for the compressed first using the method
suggested in [2] (blue line) and the final iteration for the compressed weights (black line).
The second figure shows the phase components of the first row of the first 5
ˆ
ΓDS that form
ˆ
ΓΩ0,:.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
45
==PAGE:49==
46 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:50==
5
Testing scenario 1: Aarhus harbour
subsidence
In this chapter, the developed InSAR algorithms are tested on a real scenario where a
subsidence process, sinking of the ground, has been documented.
The testing scenario takes place in the harbour area of Aarhus, Denmark. Several parts of
the harbour are experiencing larger deformations than their surroundings, in this specific
case, they undergo subsidence. The magnitude of the rate at which deformation occurs
(mean velocity) can be sensed by InSAR technology, as the subsidence process makes
the ground slowly move away from the radar signal, partially projecting the deformation
in the LOS direction. Following the convention of our InSAR implementation, subsidence
is associated with a negative deformation.
The data stack used in this section is the complete real version of the data stack used
for the algorithms’ development validation (subsection 3.2.1), this time containing the real
magnitude and phase components instead of a synthetic phase component. The inter­
ferometric data stack has been generated by the Interferometric Post Processing Chain
(IPP) software at DTU Space.
Although Sentinel­1 SLC files were used to build the data stack, the version used in this
project is an internal dataset from DTU Space used in previous projects. Therefore, the
student does not count with access to the .SAFE files where the data originates from, not
adding them in the Appendix. An overview of the SAR scene and the LOS deformation
direction is shown in Figure 3.3, as it was partially introduced earlier during the validation
of the developed PS­InSAR algorithm.
First, the output from both the PS and PSDS algorithms will be compared to each other,
aiming to observe their behaviour when dealing with a real phase data stack instead of
a synthetic one, and highlight the deformation patterns they reveal. Although no real
ground truth exists, previous InSAR studies have detected and quantified the magnitude
of the LOS deformation caused by the subsidence process that will be studied, providing a
robust baseline for the expected velocity estimates. Therefore, following the comparison,
the developed algorithms are intercompared with 2 available InSAR datasets containing
deformation estimates for the same area and period. Their performance will be compared
and discussed.
5.1
PS­ and PSDS­ InSAR analysis
Various algorithm parameters used in this scenario differ from the ones chosen during the
algorithms’ validation since working with a real phase data stack changes the output we
observe during the analysis. Next, the chosen algorithm parameters and the reason for
their modification are introduced in sequential order following the algorithm’s stages.
Figures explaining the changes correspond to the PSDS approach, although the changes
for the stages that both the PS and PSDS approach share are the same.
The PS selection and DS clustering stages do not undergo any parameter change w.r.t the
algorithms’ validation, since they only exploit the magnitude stack, which is kept the same
in this scenario. The first change arises in the SHP phase compression stage, where a
different phase stack (the real one) is used.
After minimizing the phase of all the selected SHP, the GOF’s histogram shows a different
distribution than the previously obtained for the synthetic phase stack, as shown in Fig­
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
47
==PAGE:51==
ure 5.1a. Given the observed GOF distribution, a GOF threshold of 0.7 is chosen, aiming
to take advantage of the a priori clearer well­compressed phase vectors.
Even though its histogram shape has changed, no pattern in the spatial distribution of the
GOF values over the SAR scene can be observed, as shown in Figure 5.1b. Such obser­
vation helps discard the supposition that high and low GOF values might be clustered in
different areas.
In the end, fewer SHPs are selected when using the real phase stack, as many GOFs
have low values.
48 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:52==
(a) GOF histogram
(b) GOF distribution over the SAR scene
Figure 5.1: The left plot shows the GOF histogram when minimizing the real phase of the
SHP. A vertical red dashed line indicates the chosen GOF threshold. The right plot shows
the spatial distribution of the GOF over the SAR scene.
After combining the PS and selected SHP, the algorithm’s network is built, and the peri­
odogram estimates are performed for all its arcs. Figure 5.2 shows the histogram of the
temporal coherence obtained after estimating the linear velocity and topographic error for
all the network’s arcs (blue bars), and for only arcs containing an SHP in at least 1 of their
nodes (orange bars).
As observed during the algorithms’ validation, the temporal coherence tends to be con­
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
49
==PAGE:53==
siderably lower for arcs containing SHP than for the vast majority of the arcs containing
PS as their nodes. In this case, the temporal coherence histogram has a different shape
than the one obtained by simulating the phase stack, caused by the wider range of quality
in the phase component of the PS nodes, whose noise magnitude can be higher than for
ideal PSs.
Such observation highlights a possible improvement in modelling the phase noise of PSs
using a synthetic stack approach w.r.t the one used in earlier chapters, so the temporal
coherence can match the histogram shape observed in Figure 5.2.
The visualization of the temporal coherence for PS arcs in a network plot format, as shown
in Figure 5.3, helps understand the quality of the periodogram fit based on the nodes
distribution. It is clearly observed how low temporal coherence is attributed to long arcs
interconnecting small PS clusters, while higher values are attributed to PS nodes forming
small clusters throughout the image.
Figure 5.2: Temporal coherence histogram for the PSDS algorithm using the real mag­
nitude and phase stacks. It includes the histogram for all arcs in the algorithms’ network
(blue bars) and the histogram for the arcs containing an SHP as at least 1 of their nodes
(orange bars).
50 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.3: Temporal coherence for all arcs containing PS nodes in a scatter­network
plots format.
Given the temporal coherence histogram from Figure 5.2, it was decided to apply a Sig­
moid function transformation to it before using it as weight. As shown in section 3.1,
applying a Sigmoid function increases the weight of arcs with high temporal coherence
and decreases it in the opposite case. Figure 5.4 shows an overview of how the distri­
bution for the spatial unwrapping weights is modified. The figure shows the distribution
of the original and modified temporal coherence (pink and green respectively) and the
Sigmoid transformation (blue), centred at a temporal coherence of 0.7 and having a slope
of 10.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
51
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.4: Temporal coherence and weights histograms overlapped. The Sigmoid func­
tion with parameters (10, 0.7) used to transform the temporal coherence values into the
weights for the WLS spatial unwrapping is also plotted.
The temporal LP filter length has been set to 25 acquisitions, equivalent to 150 days. This
length outputs sensitive non­linear deformation contributions for the 6­day revisit times of
the data stack, providing a good trade­off between the magnitude of both linear and non­
linear deformation magnitudes.
The deformation velocity estimates obtained by the PS and PSDS approaches are shown
in Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.8 respectively. The algorithm parameters choice is the same
in both approaches, except for the GOF threshold which is only used in the PSDS ap­
proach. Each one of the estimates figures contains 2 sub­figures, one for a deformation
model taking into account only linear deformation contributions, and one for a model tak­
ing both linear and non­linear deformation contributions into account. During the rest of
the chapter, the models are referred to as linear and non­linear models for ease of under­
standing.
The velocity estimates for the PS InSAR approach show an overall little deformation in
Aarhus, both for the linear and non­linear model outputs. A close inspection reveals large
negative velocity estimates (orange­red colour) in both the harbour and the railway’s area
closer to the city centre w.r.t the rest of the scene, indicating a large negative LOS defor­
mation, due to subsidence. The ground motion in the harbour happens in certain areas
such as the eastern side of the largest deck of the harbour (right side of the image), the tip
of the middle deck, and the cluster of buildings on the northern side of the harbour. A better
representation of the 3 mentioned areas is shown in Figure 5.6, where the named areas
A, B, and C respectively are highlighted over an optical image of the harbour. All over
the image, it can be observed that some pixels have larger deformation values than their
52 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:56==
neighbouring pixels, having little to no signs of deformation. Local deformation estimates
are harder to interpret as they are proper from individual radar cells. Such estimates vary
depending on the chosen algorithm parameters but are always present in every realiza­
tion. Although slightly different for some pixels, the linear and non­linear models output
the same information and deformation patterns.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
53
==PAGE:57==
(a) Linear model
(b) Non­Linear model
Figure 5.5: Deformation velocity estimates for the PS InSAR algorithm, both using a linear
and non­linear deformation model.
54 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.6: Areas in Aarhus´ harbour where subsidence is observed in the PS InSAR
output.
As an exercise to understand the sensitivity of the unwrapping algorithm to the spatial
unwrapping weights and justify the chosen parameters for the SIgmoid function, the output
of the PS algorithm without applying a Sigmoid function to exploit the temporal coherence
is shown in Figure 5.7.
The estimates indicate a large deformation throughout the scene, except for Aarhus city
centre. This is observed in both models, especially in the linear model outputs, and the
harbour and leftmost areas of the scene.
The observed deformation does not look at all like the expected deformation for the men­
tioned areas. Such an example highlights the importance of finding an optimal value for
the Sigmoid function so that the temporal coherence of each of the arcs can be exploited
to improve the 2D spatial unwrapping. In this case, the selected values that define the
applied Sigmoid function (10 and 0.7) worked the best.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
55
==PAGE:59==
(a) Linear model
(b) Non­Linear model
Figure 5.7: Deformation velocity estimates for the PS InSAR algorithm without applying a
Sigmoid function to transform the temporal coherence into the spatial unwrapping weights.
56 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:60==
The PSDS approach output clearly shows what had been observed earlier in its validation:
the SHP deformation estimates deviate from their expected values. Most of the velocity
estimates from the SHP are large in comparison with neighbouring PS estimates, hav­
ing such intense blue and red colours, indicating a strong LOS deformation towards and
away from the instrument respectively, since the scale of the velocity estimates has been
cropped at ±10mm/year Some of the SPH estimates seem to be correlated with their
surrounding estimates, but the rest of the random­looking SHP estimates make them not
be reliable to consider in a proper results interpretation. Regardless of the poor perfor­
mance of the SHP estimates, the PS estimates seem to match the deformation estimates
from the PS approach. Such an outcome can be attributed to the Sigmoid function ap­
plied to the temporal coherence to obtain the weights for the spatial unwrapping, as it
decreases the importance of the weights from arcs containing SHP as their nodes, avoid­
ing the detrimental effect they could have on PS nodes, as experienced in the algorithms’
validation.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
57
==PAGE:61==
(a) Linear model
(b) Non­Linear model
Figure 5.8: Deformation velocity estimates for the PSDS InSAR algorithm, both using a
linear and non­linear deformation model.
58 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:62==
After analyzing the performance of both approaches, it is decided to only compare the
PS approach results to the rest of the datasets. Such a decision is taken after the low
performance of the estimates derived by SHP. Nonetheless, it is worth mentioning that
the PSDS approach would not have changed the outcome of the comparison much in this
case, since few SHPs (if any) with a high enough GOF are located in the harbour areas
undergoing subsidence and the PS node estimates are similar in both cases.
5.2
InSAR datasets comparison
The 2 InSAR datasets used to assess the deformation rate estimates derived by the de­
veloped InSAR algorithm are generated by the following institutions:
• EGMS (European Ground Motion Service) was created in response to user needs to
have a platform where private companies, public institutions and individuals could
access ground motion information easily. It is envisioned to provide support for
monitoring the structural integrity of dams, bridges, etc.. and help decision­makers
decide where to build new infrastructures. More information can be found in: https:
//egms.land.copernicus.eu/.
• DTU Space (Danmarks Tekniske Universitetet) dataset is part of the results gener­
ated within the ESA InSARinSub project, aimed to develop new calibration methods
for ground motion measurements obtained from a satellite platform and combine it
with geological models to provide useful information to end­users. More information
can be found in: https://incubed.esa.int/portfolio/insarinsub/.
In the end, after reviewing the performance of both developed algorithms only the PS
results will be used in the assessment. The reason to leave the results from the PSDS
approach out of the assessment is the expected deviation of the SHP estimates and the
fact that not many DS are close to the area where the datasets will be compared, therefore
not adding value in the sense of having a higher scatterers density in the area of interest.
The results for the PS approach will include the mean velocity fit obtained by the linear
and non­linear deformation time series.
To compare the 3 datasets, the results from the PS approach have to be projected from a
matrix grid to a (Latitude, Longitude) grid, as the other two datasets are. The projection is
performed using the WGS84 referencing coordinates, with the help of the orbital parame­
ters from the Sentinel­1 acquisitions, which provides information for the correct projection
of each of the pixels. To verify that the estimates of the 3 datasets are projected on the
same area overlapping scatter plots of the data points of each dataset in Latitude ­ Longi­
tude coordinates are performed, as shown in Figure 5.9. The data points of the datasets
are indeed aligned, as the harbour area shape indicates. The data density of the datasets
is also obvious, being the EGMS dataset the most densely populated of the 3, with the
DTU and PS datasets having a similar data density.
Aside from ensuring that the projection for the 3 datasets is the same, it is also important to
use the same amount of acquisitions to perform the deformation estimates. The EGMS
and DTU Space datasets include more deformation samples from previous years w.r.t
the data stack used for the PS approach. Therefore, the deformation time series of said
datasets is cropped to match the same number of samples.
Figure 5.9 also shows important features for the velocity estimates’ comparison: the POI
(Points Of Interest) as red circles and the reference area as a red rectangle.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
59
==PAGE:63==
The estimates of the 3 InSAR datasets are referenced back to the area highlighted with
a red rectangle, which is the reference area used in the spatial unwrapping of the PS
algorithm, therefore not having any effect on the already­shown estimates, but the other
2 datasets.
The small red circles on the figure are the defined POI where the datasets will be com­
pared, as they are areas where the datasets suggested the presence of large deformation.
The POI’s label is based on the harbour sub­areas defined in Figure 5.6.
Each of the POI has a 50­meter radius where observed deformations for each dataset are
averaged to not introduce outlier estimates in the comparison.
A2
C1
B2
B1
A1
A3
Figure 5.9: Overlapped scatter plots of the data points of each of the 3 InSAR datasets.
The multiple Points Of Interest (POI) are highlighted by red circles for areas where large
deformation is expected. The red rectangle highlights the reference deformation area.
The deformation time series for each of the POI in the harbour sub­areas A, B and C are
shown in Figure 5.10, Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12 respectively. The legend in each figure
includes the number of data points that have been averaged to compute the deformation
time series, along with the mean velocity estimate.
Sub­area A contains 3 POI. The behaviour of the dataset appears to be the same for the 3
POI: DTU estimates tend to be the lowest, followed by the PS approach estimates which
are slightly higher, both the linear and non­linear contribution, and EGMS outputting the
largest deformation. The DTU and PS datasets agree especially for the POI A3.
In sub­area B, the POI B1 represents the area where the largest deformation is detected
by all datasets. The estimates’ behaviour is the same as observed in sub­area A, where
60 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:64==
the PS approach outputs an in­between value between DTU’s and EGMS’ estimates.
In sub­area C there is only 1 POI (C1), which is the POI for which the datasets seem
to agree the most. DTU and the PS linear model estimates are the same, while the
PS non­linear model and the EGMS output slightly larger deformations. In this case,
EGMS’ estimate is rather close to the other datasets, which might be given the amount of
averaged data points it is taking, adding up to 75.
As observed earlier in this section, the mean velocity estimates of the PS approach for
its linear and non­linear models are rather similar. In this case, it is visually clear how
the deformation’s linear contribution is the same in both models and how the non­linear
contribution oscillates around the linear velocity estimates. Such behaviour is due to the
chosen temporal filter length applied to the de­trended phase time series when estimating
the deformation’s non­linear contributions.
Overall, it is positive to observe the similarities between the InSAR estimates produced by
the developed PS approach and DTU’s dataset, as the latter has been revised and vali­
dated. The large estimates from EGMS are complex to compare with since the estimates
for other areas in the scene, such as the city centre seem more consistent with the rest of
the datasets. For all POI, EGMS averages more data points than the other datasets, so
outliers should not be playing a role in the comparison. No explanation has been found
to explain the disparity between the EGMS and the other datasets. Regarding the linear
and non­linear models for the PS approach, it is encouraging to see how the non­linear
and linear model estimates do not deviate from each other while capturing non­linearity
features, which adds information on how the deformation evolves. However, it is fair to
say that the estimates for the models vary greatly depending on the spatial unwrapping
weights and the temporal filter length, not having an optimal rule to choose their optimal
values. Therefore, the estimates could be deviated since a better model parameter choice
might exist for this scenario.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
61
==PAGE:65==
(a) POI A1
(b) POI A2
(c) POI A3
Figure 5.10: Deformation time series and mean velocity fit of the 3 InSAR datasets for the
POI in sub­area A.
62 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:66==
(a) POI B1
(b) POI B2
Figure 5.11: Deformation time series and mean velocity fit of the 3 InSAR datasets for the
POI in sub­area B.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
63
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.12: Deformation time series and mean velocity fit of the 3 InSAR datasets for the
POI in sub­area C.
64 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:68==
6
Testing scenario 2: Cadia Tailings dam
failure event
In this chapter, the developed PS­InSAR algorithm is tested on an additional scenario:
the Cadia tailings dam failure event. The objective is to further test the capabilities of the
developed algorithm as an InSAR monitoring solution for infrastructures located in terrain
undergoing ground motion over long periods.
Previous to testing the algorithm, the concept of a tailings dam is introduced, including the
need for their monitoring, the technology used for such a purpose and more. Furthermore,
the specific failure event (the Cadia tailings dam collapse) is documented and set up as
an introduction before analysing the derived PS­InSAR analysis.
6.1
Introduction to tailings dams
A tailings dam is a large embankment used to store byproducts of mining activities after
separating the ore. Tailings, the name such byproducts are given, can vary in texture
(liquid, slurry, solid..) and are often highly toxic, depending on the mining ore extracted
in each facility. They are regarded as one of the largest man­made structures in terms of
volume storage capabilities, although they vary in size. The largest tailings dams are 10
to 20 kilometres long and can attain heights over 80 meters.
They are designed for permanent storage, as the mining industry has not yet come up
with a solution for processing the large quantity of byproducts generated by their activities
but storing them. Therefore, tailings dams should be designed and built to last forever,
although in reality they often do not.
The engineering procedures to improve the design and construction of tailings dams have
not been developed for the last decades, and safety practices are not usually enforced.
Therefore, even though tailings dams are designed to last for a very long time, failures
occur every year, and their consequences are catastrophic.
When a failure event occurs, the toxic tailings stored in the embankment are likely to
flow out at a high speed, being in high danger to people working in the nearby area.
Furthermore, the toxic tailings will spread out making contact with nature (forests, rivers,
and human settlements) highly polluting the environment and natural resources over a
long distance.
Statistics reports issued by companies and institutions related to the mining industry high­
light the high failure rate of tailings dam structures. A report from the ICOLD (International
Commission on Large Dams) issued in 2011 shows how 2 to 5 major and 35 minor tailings
dam failures occur every year. The amount of tailings dams around the world is estimated
to be over 3500, although the exact quantity is unknown. Such a number, upon being an
accurate estimate, would set the failure rate over 2 orders of magnitude w.r.t to hydro­
logical retention dams. Moreover, it is suspected tailings dams’ failures are sometimes
unreported and poorly documented
6.1.1
Construction methods
Tailings dams’ capacity is expanded during their lifetime by building wall sections on top
of each other, increasing the height and sometimes the area of newly built levels. Under­
standing how tailings dams are built adds knowledge to the interpretation of deformation
phenomena in their structures. There are several methods most tailing dams are built
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
65
==PAGE:69==
with, being the most common the upstream, downstream and centreline methods. A vi­
sual overview of the 3 methods is found in Figure 6.1
The main difference between these building methods is the location of the 3 spatial points
that define the growth of the tailings dam: the starting wall, the toe and the crest. The
starting wall, as its name indicates, is the first layer of the tailings dam, built on stable
ground and serving as a foundation for the expansion of its contention walls. The toe
is a foundation located in the maximum perimeter of the tailings dam and is designed to
be expanded. The crest is the uppermost layer of the wall layers, the tip of the structure,
which is displaced w.r.t the other parts depending on the construction method that is used.
The upstream method consists of raising impoundments or new wall sections on top of a
solidified or stabilized tailings bed right next to the foundation wall, in this case, the toe.
It is only performed in facilities whose tailings have the properties to be used as beds for
the wall sections. The crest moves upstream as the embankment is expanded.
The downstream method consists of building the impoundments downstream, towards a
further away toe, which in this case does not correspond to the starter wall. The impound­
ments do not rely on tailings beds, since they are built on solid ground. The crest moves
downstream as the embankment is expanded. Although a much safer and stable option,
the downstream method is constrained by the amount of area and material available, as
it requires a large quantity of planning and resources.
The centreline method is a mix between the downstream and upstream methods, where
the tailings impoundments are located partially over a tailings bed and stable ground. The
crest is raised over the starter wall.
The words upstream and downstream are also used to name the sections of a tailings
dam closer and further away from the tailings respectively, and will be used throughout
this chapter when describing the sections of a tailings dam’s wall.
66 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.1: Visual overview of the upstream (left), downstream (right) and centreline (bot­
tom) tailings dam building methods. Each of them shows the position of the Starter wall,
the toe and the crest. The figures have been borrowed from https://www.goldfields.com/
construction-methods.php.
6.1.2
Monitoring techniques: State of the art
Given the long lifetime and potential negative consequences tailings dams have, their
monitoring is crucial. There exist several monitoring techniques that when combined,
provide an overview of the conditions and deformations the structure is undergoing.
On­site, real­time sensors are probably the most typical monitoring on any tailings dam
facility. Piezometers are used in embankments to monitor stress and stability on local
regions of the containment walls. Surface and groundwater sampling devices are used
to keep track of the humidity and water­related conditions of the structure, as it plays a
great role in the structure’s stability.
Covering such large structures with the above sensors requires a vast, tedious and ex­
pensive maintenance network.
Interferometric­type monitoring has been proven to be a good addition to the monitor­
ing network of tailings dam structures, being used in various failure event cases analy­
sis [10][11] [12]. Both ground­ and satellite­ based radars can provide InSAR displace­
ment trends in large portions of the structure, delivering the capability to monitor and
trigger awareness whenever a large section of the structure undergoes a deformation
rate change. Satellite­based InSAR provides larger coverage over mining sites at the ex­
pense of revisit time and spatial resolution (w.r.t ground­based InSAR instruments), being
useful in cases where deformation is slow and continuous. A disadvantage is that it is not
possible to retrieve the underlying cause of the deformation process, therefore it is best
used when paired with the rest of the introduced sensors. Not so well­established but
complementary monitoring techniques include ground­based Ground Penetrating Radars
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
67
==PAGE:71==
(GPR) and seismometers.
Although risk assessments are far from being automated, monitoring techniques deliver
valuable insights to specialists and decision­makers to maintain tailings dams.
6.1.3
Failure event: Cadia Tailings Dam
On Friday, March 9th 2018, the Cadia Gold Mine, operated by Newcrest Mining, in Or­
ange, New South Wales, Australia, suffered a partial failure on one of its embankment
walls after finding cracks earlier in the day during the mine’s daily operations.
The collapse occurred at the southernmost wall of the Northern Tailings storage facility,
on a section linking the two tailings storage areas in Cadia’s gold mine.
An overview of the location of the mining facilities and the tailings dam is shown in Fig­
ure 6.2, including a close­up of the collapsed wall after the failure.
Figure 6.3 shows a similar overview containing the approximate size of the collapsed sec­
tion, giving a perspective of the magnitude of the area to be monitored and the total size
of the tailings dam. Notice that the figure shows both the solid state of the tailings after
the failure event and the areas where initial cracks on the wall were observed earlier in
the failure event’s day (collapsed section).
Upon discovery of the cracks on the embankment´s wall, mining operations were sus­
pended and strict monitoring and risk assessment plans were deployed. Since most of
the tailings behind the collapsed section did not collapse, a large­scale outflow of tailings
into the lower facilities was avoided.
Seismic activity was registered a few days before the partial collapse, although no decla­
rations were made from the owning company with regards to their effect in the failure.
Cadia’s tailings dams are built using the upstream method, meaning that additional wall
sections are resting on a tailings foundation. The collapsed section of the tailings dam
occurred for the layers closer to the crest, resting over a thicker layer of tailings.
Figure 6.2: Series of pictures zooming in Cadia’s gold mine location. From left to right,
a picture of Australia where Cadia’s location is highlighted, Cadia gold mine facilities in­
cluding an open pit, the 2 tailings dams and several ponds, and a picture of the collapsed
section of the tailings dam wall after the failure.
68 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.3: Approximate dimensions of the wall section that collapsed and produced the
tailings dam failure
A previous article [11] that studied the Cadia tailings dam failure using InSAR and Finite
Elements (FE) analysis pointed out that InSAR measurements of the area previous to the
collapse matched on­site sparse measurements of local deformation. Although a clear
exponential deformation pattern, with an accelerating rate of change, was not observed,
large deformations on the tailings dam wall in the LOS direction were appreciated, espe­
cially for the upstream section where the collapse took place.
The article provides more information regarding the deformation patterns and tailings dam
conditions during the sensing period, which will be referred to throughout the InSAR anal­
ysis when the context needed is set up.
6.2
PS­InSAR analysis
An interferometric data stack of Sentinel­1 SAR SLC images for the period from 2016­01­
07 to 2018­02­25 is used to perform the PS­InSAR analysis on the tailings dam failure.
The acquisitions are mostly every 12 days, except for a few acquisitions spanning 6 days
between them, having a total number of 66 acquisitions pre­failure event.
The interferometric data stack has been generated by the Interferometric Post Processing
Chain (IPP) software at DTU Space.
The name of the .SAFE files containing the Sentinel­1 SLC products for this specific data
stack are listed in subsection A.1.1 All the acquisitions are delivered by the same descend­
ing orbital track (track 045), whose geometry w.r.t the scene is represented in Figure 6.4.
As can be observed the tailings dam lies between 2 acquisition frames.
The Line Of Sight (LOS) and descending orbit direction are represented by black arrows,
both in the overall frame of the scene (left) and zooming in on the Caia tailings dam, pro­
viding an overview of the sensitivity to the deformation directions w.r.t the infrastructure
of interest.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
69
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.4: Overview of the acquisition frames over the whole SAR scene for orbital track
045 (left), and representation of Line Of Sight geometry with a closeup of the scene in the
Cadia tailings dam.
Figure 6.5 shows the average SAR magnitude over time for the cropped region where the
analysis will be based. The physical features of Cadia’s gold mine are well­differentiated
in the figure. On average low magnitude, values represent the fluid accumulation inside
the open pit, a small pond, and the tailings dams, while large backscatter values highlight
the open pit rim and the facilities’ buildings. Although not obvious, a closer inspection of
the scene shows the surroundings of the mine’s facilities to be mostly crops, forests and
sloppy terrain like hills.
70 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:74==
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
# pixels X-axis
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
# pixels Y
-axis
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Mean backscatter amplitude
Figure 6.5: Cadia tailings dam SAR scene, represented by averaging the backscatter
magnitude for each pixel in the data stack.
The first step in the analysis is to visualize and understand the PS distribution of the scene.
Figure 6.6 shows the PS candidates based on amplitude dispersion threshold selection
for 4 different values. PSs with the lowest amplitude dispersion start appearing mostly
around the mine facilities, clustered around the open pit, buildings, earth piles and some
sections of the tailings dam wall rim. More PS start appearing in the same areas and their
surroundings when the AD threshold is increased, various of them clustered in small areas
(ex: smaller buildings, settlements, ...). For a 0.45 threshold PS are chosen all around
the scene, not following any particular feature, probably introducing many non­ideal PS
to the selection pool given the selection criteria (AD test).
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
71
==PAGE:75==
(a) Amp. Disp. threshold of 0.25
(b) Amp. Disp. threshold of 0.35
(c) Amp. Disp. threshold of 0.40
(d) Amp. Disp. threshold of 0.45
Figure 6.6: PS coverage over the whole test scene based on an AD test selection cri­
teria for various threshold values.Figure 6.6b shows the reference area for the algorithm
unwrapping step on a yellow rectangle.
A threshold of 0.35 is chosen to proceed with the analysis as it provides a suitable PS den­
sity on the tailings dam perimeter wall. The resulting PS network is shown in Figure 6.7,
which provides a good overview of the PS distribution centred in the mining facilities ex­
cept for some in its surroundings.
72 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:76==
Figure 6.7: PS network for the Cadia scene after selecting PS with an amplitude dispersion
lower than 0.35.
The phase gradient of the network arcs is then used to estimate the linear velocity, to­
pographic error and temporal coherence via the periodogram method. The temporal co­
herence distribution follows an expected shape for a PS approach, with the peak of the
distribution being around 0.92 having a wide left tail and a sharp ending right tail, as ob­
served in the testing scenario in Aarhus.
Based on the observed distribution, the temporal coherence is exploited by transforming
its values with a Sigmoid function and using the output as weights for the 2D spatial
phase unwrapping. The parameters defining the Sigmoid function are the same as for
the previous testing scenario: a slope of 10 and a centre of 0.7.
Figure 6.8 shows the histogram of the temporal coherence (pink bars), the histogram for
the weights (green bars) and the Sigmoid transformation function (blue line).
A spatial representation of the temporal coherence in a network format is shown in Fig­
ure 6.9 to better understand the strength of the PS network. The main observation is the
same as with the previous testing scenario, although it is better visualized in this case.
The temporal coherence between nodes forming PS clusters is very high, while PS lo­
cated in sparse areas get lower coherence values, although they can also have a high
temporal coherence value, as seen throughout the scene.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
73
==PAGE:77==
Figure 6.8: Temporal coherence and weights histograms overlapped (pink and green bars
respectively). The Sigmoid function with parameters (10, 0.7) is also plotted (blue line).
Figure 6.9: Scatter plot in a network format of the arcs’ temporal coherence.
The choice of the temporal LP filter length, which will be shortened to TFL (Temporal Filter
Length) throughout the chapter, differs from the previous testing scenario. The acquisi­
74 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:78==
tions are every 12 days instead of 6, increasing the amount of average period (in terms of
days) for the same number of acquisitions. A deformation leading to a structure collapse
would be expected to accelerate its deformation rate over time, implying the presence of
non­linear contributions in the deformation model. Therefore, multiple TFLs are used to
infer the non­linear deformation estimates. The values for the TFL are 2,5 and 10 acqui­
sitions. The aim is to observe which TFL works better for this specific scenario, capturing
the non­linear deformation contributions, averaging approximately 24, 60 and 120 days
respectively.
Therefore, the InSAR results analysis will count on 4 different models, 1 linear and 3 non­
linear models with a different TFL. To start with the analysis, Figure 6.10 shows the mean
velocity estimates of the linear model for the whole scene. The spatial pattern of the mean
velocity is similar for all the models, although the scale varies. The mining facilities show
different deformation trends: contrary to the LOS in the open pit area, toward the LOS
on the earth piles and the tailings dam wall, and little deformation on the surrounding PS
over the image.
A section of the scene is cropped to perform a more in­depth analysis of the deformation
on the tailings dam wall, becoming the focus of attention for the upcoming discussion.
The location of the sub­area in the SAR scene context is shown as a red rectangle.
Figure 6.10: Mean velocity estimates for the linear model over the Cadia tailings dam
scene. The red rectangle in the middle of the scene indicates the area where the in­depth
analysis over the tailings dam wall will be performed.
Figure 6.11 shows the mean velocity estimates for the 4 models in the tailings dam sub­
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
75
==PAGE:79==
area. The linear and non­linear models (TFL of 5 and 10 acquisitions) seem to output
the same mean deformation velocity pattern, where the upstream section of the tailings
dam is experiencing a larger deformation velocity decreasing for the PS located in the
downstream sections. The deformation velocities for the middle and downstream sec­
tions appear to be slightly larger for the wall section next to the collapse location w.r.t
the leftmost wall section, while the contrary is observed for the upstream section, which
is moving faster for the leftmost section of the wall. The deformation pattern resembles
both in spatial distribution and magnitude the InSAR results by previous studies intro­
duced earlier.
The non­linear model with TFL of 2 acquisitions shows rather different behaviour, indi­
cating large deformations only for the upstream sections of the wall, while downstream
sections for the whole perimeter have lower LOS deformation.
76 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:80==
(a) Linear model
(b) Non­linear model, TFL of 2 acquisitions
(c) Non­linear model, TFL of 5 acquisitions
(d) Non­linear model, TFL of 10 acquisitions
Figure 6.11: Estimated mean deformation velocity for the PS on the tailings dam wall
section for the whole pre­collapse date period (2016­01­07 to 2018­02­25). From left to
right (and top to bottom) the estimates from the Linear and Non­linear models for a TFL
of 2, 5 and 10 acquisitions respectively.
Although the deformation mean velocities suggest large deformations occurring on the
tailings dam wall, it is crucial to analyze the deformation time series as well. The defor­
mation evolution over time can help unearth the deformation trends for different periods,
especially for the non­linear models. Patterns in deformation time series can also be used
to hint at a possible acceleration of the deformation rate, which can be used as a trigger
for a possible failure event.
To observe the deformation time series on various areas of the tailings dam, a series of
Points Of Interest (POI) are defined around the wall perimeter, integrating PS that share
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
77
==PAGE:81==
a similar mean velocity value. The POIs are shown in Figure 6.12. The POIs intend to
be scattered along 4 transversal or orthogonal sections to the wall (leftmost, bottom­left
corner and bottom sections) while differentiating between the upstream and downstream
wall areas.
Figure 6.12: Location of POIs to perform a deformation time series analysis. The colours
represent 4 different transversal transects, while the solid or dashed properties of the
polygon indicate if the POIs cover the upstream or downstream section of the wall re­
spectively.
The deformation time series for the PS inside each POI and for each of the non­linear
models is shown in Figure 6.13. The behaviour of the non­linear model with the lowest TFL
(Figure 6.13a) does not seem to follow a linear or exponential deformation trend overall.
The leftmost POIs located in the upstream sections of the wall (black and brown solid
lines) indicate larger deformation towards the LOS direction during the period from 2016
to 2017, stabilizing and even reversing the deformation directions slightly for the rest of the
time series duration. A continuous or exponential deformation would be expected from a
section of the wall continuously undergoing large deformation, therefore not matching the
assumption over the deformation dynamics. The rest of the POIs indicate little deformation
and towards the satellite deformation for the whole time series duration. A behaviour
which is not expected. The observed behaviour of the deformation time series explains
78 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:82==
the difference observed between the mean velocity estimates observed earlier and the
rest of the models.
The deformation time series for the other 2 non­linear models with a higher TFL show a
similar trend w.r.t each other for all the POIs. As expected from the mean velocity es­
timates from Figure 6.11, the upstream sections (solid lines) experience a larger LOS
deformation, especially noticeable for the leftmost POIs.
The deformation pattern among the POIs’ deformation time series seems to match, expe­
riencing the same deformation rate changes (deformation velocity changes) for the same
periods.
The non­linear model with a TFL of 10 acquisitions looks like a smoothed version of the
non­linear model with the 5 acquisitions’ TFL. Regardless of the deformation rate changes
over time, more common during the period from 2016­09 to 2017­09, the deformation
trend seems to be rather linear, especially for the downstream section POIs (dashed
lines).
It is worth mentioning that said deformation rate changes deviating from a linear defor­
mation pattern could be caused by consolidation periods from newly upstream additions
to the tailings dam. As mentioned in the article studying the case [11], the upstream sec­
tions undergo a short construction and long consolidation period from the end of 2016
throughout the whole span the data stack covers (until early 2018).
Furthermore, the upstream section of the wall is resting on a tailings base, while the
downstream section is resting on an earth foundation. Such information indicates that
the upstream layers of the wall capture both deformations caused by the stability of the
structure and the tailings dynamics.
It is needed to say that the most upstream PS seen in the analysis are not part of the
newest wall additions, as observed in the average SAR magnitude from the sub­area of
the wall, where higher magnitude values than the ones proper to the tailings appear in the
upstream wall section without PS being detected. Therefore, the selected PS closer to
the upstream sections of the wall have a probability of being affected by tailings dynamics
if they are located on a tailings base.
In addition, one could discuss that the deformation time series might indicate a subtle
exponential deformation trend, which is the type of trend that would trigger the alarm when
monitoring any structures’ deformation since it implies an acceleration in the deformation
rate. Nonetheless, if the observed deformation is exponential in some areas, it looks like
the rate of deformation varies too slowly to be related to the collapse of the tailings dam,
as a sharp acceleration in the deformation rate would be expected close to the failure date
(last acquisitions of the used data stack). Therefore, hints of an exponential deformation
trend would indicate no imminent risk of failure by deformation rate criteria.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
79
==PAGE:83==
(a) Non­linear model, TFL of 2 acquisitions
(b) Non­linear model, TFL of 5 acquisitions
(c) Non­linear model, TFL of 10 acquisitions
Figure 6.13: Deformation time series for all POI and the non­linear models with a TFL of
2, 5 and 10 acquisitions respectively (top to bottom). The colours of the deformation time
series match the colours of the polygons used to show the POIs’ location in Figure 6.12.
80 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:84==
Humidity and groundwater flow inside the tailings dam walls play a role in the stability and
conditions of the structure, having dedicated monitoring instruments dedicated to sensing
these parameters. Precipitation is one of the phenomena that can cause a change in the
mentioned parameters.
The mean daily precipitation between acquisitions for the Cadia area is compared against
the deformation rate between acquisitions, as shown in Figure 6.14. For the sake of
clarity, the rate of deformation is computed for each POI, separating the upstream and
downstream areas.
Although not perfectly correlated, one can see an inverse relationship between the de­
formation rate changes and the mean daily precipitation. The mean velocity between
acquisitions seems to be centred slightly below 0, indicating an oscillating deformation
rate centred towards the LOS direction (negative deformation rates).
During or after a period where the mean precipitation decreases, the deformation rate
seems to increase towards the opposite direction to the LOS, having the contrary effect
for larger precipitation periods, when the deformation rate appears to take larger values
in the LOS direction.
Such behaviour, if truly correlated, would suggest an acceleration in the deformation rate
during or after periods of mean daily precipitation. Since both the upstream and down­
stream POIs’ deformation rates behave similarly, the changes might or not be related to
tailings dynamics but ground motion. It is complex to attribute the nature of the changes
to the tailings or the structure since a deeper knowledge of the deformation phenomena
occurring in the tailings dam is needed.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
81
==PAGE:85==
(a) Upstream POI
(b) Downstream POI
Figure 6.14: Both figures show the mean daily precipitation between data acquisitions
(orange bars) against the LOS deformation rate time series between acquisitions for the
upstream (top) and downstream (bottom) POI. The colour code for the deformation rate
time series is the same as the one described in the legend of Figure 6.13.
It is worth mentioning that the InSAR deformation estimates are 1­dimensional in the Line­
Of­Sight (LOS) of the SAR instrument, which is probably not the sole direction of the tail­
ings dam deformation, but only a projection of its true deformation that can be sensed.
The scientific article dealing with the same failure event [11] proposes a Finite Element
analysis of the tailings dam deformation, suggesting that the true deformation is expected
to be in the transversal or orthogonal direction to the dam’s wall.
Should the deformation be transversal to the wall perimeter, it would have a different pro­
jection w.r.t the LOS for the multiple sections along the tailings dam. Figure 6.15 provides
an overview of how the geometric relation between the approximate transversal deforma­
tion vector (black arrow) looks w.r.t the LOS deformation (red dashed arrow). For each
section in the tailings dam perimeter, the transversal vector to the wall changes its orien­
tation.
82 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:86==
The angle A indicates the relation between the longitudinal (90◦w.r.t the transversal vec­
tor) vector of the collapsed section of the wall and the LOS (dark red), changing along the
perimeter.
If the transversal to the wall deformation model is adopted
If the suggested deformation dimension pattern is adopted, it would partially explain why
the deformation in the leftmost POIs is larger than for the rightmost POI (closer to the
collapsed section): the LOS is more parallel with the transversal direction of the leftmost
POIs w.r.t the rest of POIs. This would mean that if such a deformation model was fol­
lowed, the deformation observed for the rightmost POIs in the LOS direction would only
be a fraction of the real deformation (focused on the transversal direction).
The observed non­linearities and deformation pattern would not change, since projecting
the LOS deformation into the transversal direction of each wall only affects the magnitude
of the deformation (in reality the deformation vector changes its 3D coordinates, but from
a remote sensing point of view, such information cannot be captured since measurements
are in 1D (LOS)).
As a complementary exercise, if the direction of the deformation is supposed to solely
be transversal, the deformation time series for the different POIs would look as shown in
Figure 6.16.
The equation followed to perform the projection is Equation 6.1, with θ = 35.5◦as the
incidence angle, equal for the 4 POI transversal partitions (different colours), and A =
[12, 22, 67, 92]◦from the rightmost to the leftmost sections of the wall (inspired by [11]).
δT =
δLOS
sin θ sin A
(6.1)
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
83
==PAGE:87==
Figure 6.15: Geometrical relationship between the dam walls’ orientation and the satellite
flight track. LOS and transversal to the wall direction vectors are indicated for approxi­
mately the 4 transversal sections of the dam under study. The angle A indicates the angle
between the longitudinal and the LOS vectors.
84 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:88==
(a) Non­linear model, TFL of 2 acquisitions
(b) Non­linear model, TFL of 5 acquisitions
(c) Non­linear model, TFL of 10 acquisitions
Figure 6.16: Deformation time series in the transversal deformation assumption for all
POI and non­linear models with a TFL of 2, 5 and 10 acquisitions respectively (top to
bottom). The colours of the deformation time series match the colours of the polygons
used to show the POIs’ location in Figure 6.12.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
85
==PAGE:89==
As mentioned, the deformation patterns do not change, but their magnitudes do. Although
the magnitudes are vaguely approximated, the deformation projection into the transversal
direction aims to reflect that even if the LOS deformation appears to have larger magni­
tudes in some areas, the underlying deformation along its real 3D direction can be larger
for areas that appear as lower.
Contrary to the results observed for the LOS deformation, the transversal deformation
appears to be larger for the rightmost POIs w.r.t the leftmost POIs.
To sum up, the mean velocity estimates for the various models (linear and non­linear)
show similar results for the section of the tailings dam wall where the failure took place
and the surrounding sections.
The mean velocity pattern suggests a larger deformation in the upstream wall sections
(which are closely related to tailings dam dynamics) w.r.t the downstream sections. The
performance of the most non­linear model (TFL of 2 acquisitions) showed estimates not
related to the expected behaviour, and could not be compared with the rest on a one­to­
one basis.
Upon inspecting the deformation time series for the multiple defined POIs, a mostly con­
tinuous deformation pattern is observed. The behaviour that would be expected from an
about­to­collapse scenario would be a non­linearity resembling an exponential accelera­
tion for the deformation velocity towards the failure date, which is not clearly observed for
all the POIs in a magnitude that could raise concerns (ex. larger than previously observed
non­linearities in the time series).
Regardless of observing a collapse­risk trend, the InSAR analysis has proven to agree
with previous studies of the same scenario, both in deformation patterns and magnitude,
outputting a good overview of the LOS deformations in the tailings dam facilities [11].
The coupling of a deeper knowledge of tailings dam mechanics and specific deformation
patterns would surely improve the interpretation of InSAR­derived deformation estimates
and assist the monitoring and risk assessment of said structures.
86 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:90==
7
Conclusions
The vast majority of the objectives have been achieved to the level it was intended, while
others posed unexpected complications that overcame time and scope constraints. More­
over, other areas of knowledge that were not thought to be studied ended up being com­
bined with the initial ideas, enriching the experience and content of the main topic of the
master thesis.
The initially proposed multi­temporal PS­InSAR algorithm has been developed, imple­
mented and validated from scratch using Python as a primary programming tool (chap­
ter 3). The algorithm has been validated using a synthetic interferometric data stack with
its phase component simulated by well­described equations, showing its capabilities to
deliver accurate deformation estimates with little to no deviation from the underlying sim­
ulated deformation pattern.
The performance obtained in the synthetic data validation setup indicates the algorithm
is competent enough to be used in a real scenario.
For testing purposes, two real scenarios where ground deformation affects critical infras­
tructures are proposed. The aim of introducing such scenarios is to assess the monitoring
capability of the developed algorithm when using a real interferometric data stack.
In both cases, Sentinel­1 SLC product data is used to build the interferometric stacks.
The first scenario concerning the subsidence phenomena (sinking of the ground) the port
of Aarhus, Denmark, is undergoing aims to test the algorithm’s ability to correctly estimate
local linear deformation rates.
Other InSAR results datasets of the same area, delivered by EGMS and DTU Space,
were available to compare the PS­InSAR approach estimates with, assessing its perfor­
mance based on the deviations w.r.t said datasets. The comparison of the Line­Of­Sight
(LOS) deformation time series is performed for certain Points Of Interest in the harbour
area where the subsidence is known to have a larger magnitude. The results showed an
agreement in the deformation rate with the dataset from DTU Space, slightly deviating
from the EGMS dataset, whose estimates seem to deviate from both the PS­InSAR and
the DTU Space estimates.
Although the deformation is known to be mostly linear, the capabilities of using non­linear
deformation components are tested, which had not been done in the validation section.
Said capabilities showed an approximately equal level of agreement with the mentioned
datasets w.r.t the linear deformation estimates, which is a positive observation towards
using the algorithm to retrieve non­linear deformation patterns accurately.
The second testing scenario consisted of studying the deformation pattern of a tailings
dam failure event in Cadia, Australia, on the 9th of Mach 2018, aiming to test the risk as­
sessment capabilities the developed algorithm can deliver for deformation patterns that
are expected to show an accelerated rate of deformation over time (non­linear deforma­
tion).
The LOS deformation estimates agreed with previous results obtained by an InSAR study
using a different algorithm [11], which further reinforced the performance of the devel­
oped algorithm. Furthermore, a deformation model for tailings dams suggested by the
mentioned article, involving the transformation of the LOS deformation measured by In­
SAR to an orthogonal deformation w.r.t the tailings dam walls, was tested. Adopting the
orthogonal deformation pattern was not envisioned at the beginning of the test, although
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
87
==PAGE:91==
it turned out to provide a large insight into how to combine InSAR measurements with
other areas of knowledge such as structure stability. The benefits such a combination
can provide when performing risk assessments and infrastructure monitoring were clear.
In the end, a rather linear deformation pattern was observed by the InSAR estimates in­
stead of the characteristic exponential deformation pattern expected from a failure event
where the deformation rate accelerates the closer it is to the failure date. Said exponential
pattern did not appear for other studies of the failure event based on InSAR measure­
ments, as it is not bound to be observed by the revisit time characteristics of the used
data stack or triggered by the underlying real causes that caused the failure event.
Aside from the PS approach, a hybrid PSDS­InSAR algorithm was also developed, aim­
ing to enhance the capabilities of an only­PS InSAR algorithm and solve the phase­linking
problem that arises when dealing with DS targets. The algorithm was based on the pre­
vious implementation of the same approach [1], [2] and [7].
The PSDS approach focused on developing the necessary stages to adapt DS targets
to a PS­like format, so they could be processed together, and validating them on a syn­
thetic and real data stack. The stages consisted of clustering Statistically Homogeneous
DS Pixels (SHP) and using a statistically averaged coherence matrix to compress SHPs’
phase information into a PS­like format, so they can be processed by the same PS­InSAR
algorithm afterwards.
The DS clustering stage showed promising results, forming SHPs with a physical meaning
in areas where they were expected to be formed. In this stage, the coverage enhance­
ment capabilities of a PSDS algorithm were proved, as DS clusters explored sparsely
PS­populated areas from which no deformation could even be extracted.
The SHP phase compression achieved the objective of reducing the dimensionality of the
phase information using the DS clusters averaged coherence matrix, allowing the pro­
cessing of SHP in a PS­like format.
However, the deformation estimates for the SHP showed large discrepancies between
their expected values, both for the validation using synthetic data and the first testing sce­
nario (Aarhus Harbour) using real data. The deviations did not affect the estimates of
PS targets when using a real data stack, as they did when validating the algorithm in the
synthetic data stack. Nonetheless, the overall performance of the algorithm proved to not
be mature enough to be trusted as a monitoring tool.
In the end, after investigating all the stages of the developed PSDS algorithm, the issue
seemed to originate in the SHP phase compression stage, where the output compressed
phases did not entirely look like a PS phase component, as it would be expected.
Thus, affecting the deformation estimates in the next stage of the hybrid processing chain.
Although one of the stages of the PSDS approach did not turn out to work properly, the
benefits and overall structure of said approach were clear when developing the algorithm,
turning out to be an enriching process. The approach is bound to have great potential if
it can be properly developed and successfully validated in the future.
88 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
[1]
Alessandro Ferretti et al. “A New Algorithm for Processing Interferometric Data­
Stacks: SqueeSAR”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
49.9 (2011), pp. 3460–3470. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2011.2124465.
[2]
Homa Ansari, Francesco De Zan, and Richard Bamler. “Efficient Phase Estima­
tion for Interferogram Stacks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing 56.7 (2018), pp. 4109–4125. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2018.2826045.
[3]
Dinh Ho Tong Minh and Yen­Nhi Ngo. “ComSAR: A new algorithm for processing
Big Data SAR Interferometry”. In: 2021 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium IGARSS. 2021, pp. 820–823. DOI: 10.1109/IGARSS47720.
2021.9553675.
[4]
Michele Crosetto et al. “Persistent Scatterer Interferometry: A review”. In: ISPRS
Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 115 (2016). Theme issue ’State­
of­the­art in photogrammetry, remote sensing and spatial information science’, pp. 78–
89. ISSN: 0924­2716. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2015.10.011. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924271615002415.
[5]
O. Mora et al. “A new algorithm for monitoring localized deformation phenomena
based on small baseline differential SAR interferograms”. In: 2 (2002), 1237–1239
vol.2. DOI: 10.1109/IGARSS.2002.1025900.
[6]
Markus Even and Karsten Schulz. “InSAR Deformation Analysis with Distributed
Scatterers: A Review Complemented by New Advances”. In: Remote Sensing 10.5
(2018). ISSN: 2072­4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs10050744. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/
2072-4292/10/5/744.
[7]
Andrea Monti Guarnieri and Stefano Tebaldini. “On the Exploitation of Target Statis­
tics for SAR Interferometry Applications”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 46.11 (2008), pp. 3436–3443. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2008.2001756.
[8]
A. Ferretti, C. Prati, and F. Rocca. “Nonlinear subsidence rate estimation using per­
manent scatterers in differential SAR interferometry”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geo­
science and Remote Sensing 38.5 (2000), pp. 2202–2212. DOI: 10.1109/36.868878.
[9]
A. Ferretti, C. Prati, and F. Rocca. “Permanent scatterers in SAR interferometry”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 39.1 (2001), pp. 8–20.
DOI: 10.1109/36.898661.
[10]
Fábio F. Gama et al. “Deformations Prior to the Brumadinho Dam Collapse Re­
vealed by Sentinel­1 InSAR Data Using SBAS and PSI Techniques”. In: Remote
Sensing 12.21 (2020). ISSN: 2072­4292. DOI: 10.3390/rs12213664. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/12/21/3664.
[11]
Maral Bayaraa, Brian Sheil, and Cristian Rossi. “InSAR and numerical modelling for
tailings dam monitoring – the Cadia failure case study”. In: Géotechnique 0.0 (0),
pp. 1–19. DOI: 10.1680/jgeot.21.00399. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1680/jgeot.21.
00399. URL: https://doi.org/10.1680/jgeot.21.00399.
[12]
H. Duan, Y. Li, and H. Jiang. “Retrospective monitoring of slope failure event of tail­
ings dam using InSAR time­series observations.” In: Natural Hazards 117.3 (2023),
pp. 2375–2391. DOI: 10.1007/s11069-023-05946-7. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11069-023-05946-7.
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
89
==PAGE:93==
90 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:94==
A
Appendix
A.1
Sentinel­1 SLC .SAFE files
A.1.1
Testing Site 2: Cadia Tailings Dam, Australia, Track 045, period
(2016/01/07 ­ 2018/02/25)
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160107T192307_20160107T192334_009392_00D995_F89E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160107T192332_20160107T192400_009392_00D995_D9F0.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160119T192307_20160119T192334_009567_00DE9E_6D59.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160119T192332_20160119T192400_009567_00DE9E_36B0.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160131T192307_20160131T192334_009742_00E3C1_A41B.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160131T192331_20160131T192359_009742_00E3C1_A8F2.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160212T192306_20160212T192333_009917_00E8D4_9C54.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160212T192331_20160212T192359_009917_00E8D4_36CD.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160224T192306_20160224T192333_010092_00EDF6_977A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160224T192331_20160224T192359_010092_00EDF6_FF44.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160307T192306_20160307T192333_010267_00F2E1_8070.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160307T192331_20160307T192359_010267_00F2E1_D671.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160319T192307_20160319T192334_010442_00F7D9_1020.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160319T192332_20160319T192400_010442_00F7D9_017C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160331T192307_20160331T192334_010617_00FCDB_047A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160331T192332_20160331T192359_010617_00FCDB_EDAB.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160412T192308_20160412T192335_010792_010219_1123.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160412T192332_20160412T192400_010792_010219_8EDF.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160424T192308_20160424T192335_010967_01076F_96C7.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160424T192333_20160424T192401_010967_01076F_A052.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160506T192309_20160506T192336_011142_010CEF_1C91.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160506T192333_20160506T192401_011142_010CEF_A8ED.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160518T192309_20160518T192336_011317_011297_BA08.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160518T192334_20160518T192402_011317_011297_E632.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160530T192310_20160530T192337_011492_01184F_784E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160530T192335_20160530T192403_011492_01184F_679F.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160611T192311_20160611T192338_011667_011DC5_94DA.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160611T192336_20160611T192403_011667_011DC5_E6C0.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160705T192312_20160705T192339_012017_0128E6_BFDC.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160705T192337_20160705T192404_012017_0128E6_C9FF.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160717T192313_20160717T192340_012192_012EA7_761B.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160717T192338_20160717T192405_012192_012EA7_08B7.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160729T192316_20160729T192344_012367_01345B_C200.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160810T192314_20160810T192341_012542_013A31_4968.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160810T192339_20160810T192407_012542_013A31_4334.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160822T192315_20160822T192343_012717_014003_2A25.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160822T192341_20160822T192407_012717_014003_4F61.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160903T192315_20160903T192343_012892_0145EA_E5C7.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160903T192341_20160903T192408_012892_0145EA_ACB8.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160915T192316_20160915T192343_013067_014B7C_5A77.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160915T192341_20160915T192408_013067_014B7C_7D29.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20160927T192330_20160927T192358_013242_015148_0154.SAFE
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
91
==PAGE:95==
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20161009T192336_20161009T192403_013417_0156C3_93AD.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20161021T192336_20161021T192403_013592_015C50_EE84.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20161102T192336_20161102T192403_013767_0161B5_6BC6.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20161114T192336_20161114T192403_013942_016736_A399.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20161126T192336_20161126T192403_014117_016C87_643F.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20161208T192324_20161208T192351_014292_017213_0047.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20161220T192324_20161220T192351_014467_01778A_D100.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170101T192322_20170101T192349_014642_017CF2_99B8.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170113T192322_20170113T192349_014817_018243_00EF.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170125T192322_20170125T192349_014992_0187B2_EDF1.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170206T192322_20170206T192349_015167_018D0E_18CB.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170218T192321_20170218T192348_015342_01928C_0C8E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170302T192321_20170302T192348_015517_0197DC_2DBC.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170314T192321_20170314T192348_015692_019D2A_9B7A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170326T192322_20170326T192349_015867_01A259_E8AE.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170407T192322_20170407T192349_016042_01A791_29F3.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170419T192323_20170419T192350_016217_01ACF4_854A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170501T192323_20170501T192350_016392_01B240_878C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170513T192324_20170513T192351_016567_01B78E_320F.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170525T192324_20170525T192351_016742_01BCEF_7AE1.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170606T192325_20170606T192352_016917_01C268_4752.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170618T192326_20170618T192353_017092_01C7C8_E0F5.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170630T192327_20170630T192354_017267_01CD10_0338.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170712T192327_20170712T192354_017442_01D25D_6956.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170724T192328_20170724T192355_017617_01D7B0_E120.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170805T192329_20170805T192356_017792_01DD0A_B9B9.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170817T192329_20170817T192356_017967_01E256_32F6.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170829T192330_20170829T192357_018142_01E7A0_B391.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170910T192330_20170910T192357_018317_01ED0F_9C35.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20170922T192331_20170922T192358_018492_01F26E_3B95.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20171004T192331_20171004T192358_018667_01F7C7_6CAB.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20171016T192331_20171016T192358_018842_01FD24_930E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20171028T192331_20171028T192358_019017_020271_A61F.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20171109T192331_20171109T192358_019192_0207D7_CAD3.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20171121T192331_20171121T192358_019367_020D5D_EA4D.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20171203T192330_20171203T192357_019542_0212D4_4C7B.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20171215T192330_20171215T192357_019717_021848_C297.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20171227T192329_20171227T192356_019892_021DB6_3A91.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180108T192329_20180108T192356_020067_022334_113A.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180120T192329_20180120T192355_020242_0228C3_4F0B.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180201T192328_20180201T192355_020417_022E56_4C98.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180213T192328_20180213T192355_020592_0233F4_8374.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180225T192328_20180225T192355_020767_023989_C8BE.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180309T192328_20180309T192355_020942_023F0C_55FB.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180321T192328_20180321T192355_021117_02449E_F94E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180402T192328_20180402T192355_021292_024A25_C11B.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180414T192329_20180414T192356_021467_024F96_8B81.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180426T192329_20180426T192356_021642_02550D_FC55.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180508T192330_20180508T192357_021817_025A9C_6754.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180520T192331_20180520T192358_021992_026030_2B68.SAFE
92 Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
==PAGE:96==
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180601T192331_20180601T192358_022167_0265C6_F11D.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180613T192332_20180613T192359_022342_026B36_AB9F.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180625T192333_20180625T192400_022517_02705F_3755.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180707T192333_20180707T192400_022692_027578_09C4.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180719T192334_20180719T192401_022867_027AD4_6958.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180731T192335_20180731T192402_023042_02805E_4C25.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180812T192336_20180812T192402_023217_0285F2_C16F.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180824T192336_20180824T192403_023392_028B94_D4F1.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180905T192337_20180905T192404_023567_02912C_0325.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180917T192337_20180917T192404_023742_0296C4_5271.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20180929T192337_20180929T192404_023917_029C73_6207.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20181011T192338_20181011T192405_024092_02A230_EA22.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20181023T192338_20181023T192405_024267_02A7E2_59BB.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20181104T192338_20181104T192405_024442_02ADCC_0998.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20181116T192337_20181116T192404_024617_02B431_493C.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20181128T192337_20181128T192404_024792_02BA9E_44E8.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20181210T192337_20181210T192403_024967_02C082_8A9E.SAFE
S1A_IW_SLC__1SDV_20181222T192336_20181222T192403_025142_02C6D5_ABA0.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SDV_20161015T192252_20161015T192322_002521_00441A_D9A5.SAFE
Implementation of a combined persistent­ and distributed­ scatterer InSAR algorithm, with application to
tailing dams monitoring
93
==PAGE:97==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, 105, Building 348
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.space.dtu.dk/
