==PAGE:1==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Enhancing Listener Experience in Open
Spaces with Multiple Sound Sources
Master's Thesis
Christian Svensson (s174843)
==PAGE:2==
Page intentionally left blank
==PAGE:3==
Enhancing Listener Experience in Open Spaces with Multiple Sound Sources
Master's Thesis
28 January 2024
By
Christian Svensson (s174843)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom-
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Kelian Pﬂeger, 2019
Published by:
DTU Health Tech, Technical University of Denmark, Ørsteds Plads, Building
345C, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Health Tech, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in
collaboration with the National Museeum of Denmark, fulﬁlling the requirements for acquiring
a Master of Science degree in Engineering Acoustics. The thesis was written from 28 August
2023 to 28 January 2024 under the supervision of Associate Professor Jeremy Marozeau from
the department of Health Technology, and Associate Professor Cheol-Ho Jeong from the de-
partment of Electrical and Photonics Engineering and is worth 30 ECTS credits.
This document comprises of two distinct sections: a research paper adhering to the conventions
of scientiﬁc publications and a comprehensive section summarizing the thesis’s background and
supplemental material.
As a lifelong music enthusiast with a passion for understanding the intricacies of sound, I em-
barked on this master’s thesis with a keen interest in enhancing the listener experience in open
spaces. My fascination with music dates back to childhood, where the melodies and rhythms
resonated deeply with me, shaping my understanding of sound and its profound impact on hu-
man perception through years of musical training. This passion has fueled my academic journey,
leading me to pursue a Master of Science degree in Engineering Acoustics.
Acknowledgements
This section is dedicated to the people who have contributed to this thesis with their knowledge
and support throughout the process.
I extend gratitude to my supervisors, Jeremy Marozeau and Cheol-Ho Jeong. Their support,
academic sparring, and insightful guidance signiﬁcantly shaped this master’s thesis. I am for-
tunate to have had mentors who not only encouraged intellectual exploration but also fostered
a collaborative and enriching environment.
An enormous thank you to my family who provided great moral support throughout my acad-
emic years. It suﬃces to say, that without your support, this thesis would not have happened.
Kongens Lyngby, 28 January 2024
Christian Svensson (s174843)
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
iv
Acknowledgements
iv
1    Paper
1
2    Introduction
9
3    Background
10
3.1    Theoretical Framework  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2    Literature Review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4    Methodology
15
4.1    Loudspeaker Evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2    Harmonic Mixing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3    Perceptual Listening Test  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4    Sound Field Recordings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5    COMSOL  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.6    Project Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5    Results
34
5.1    Parabolic Loudspeaker Frequency Response  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.2    Sound Field Coherence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3    Perceptual Listening Test  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.4    Modal Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6    Discussion
47
7    Conclusion
50
Bibliography
52
Appendix A - FP6020-II Data Sheet
56
Appendix B - Visitor Feedback Form
58
Appendix C - Listening Test Questionnaire
60
v
==PAGE:6==
List of abbreviations
BPM – Beats Per Minute
CB – Critical Band
CPSD – Cross Power Spectral Density
DAW – Digital Audio Workstation
DSP – Digital Signal Processing
FR – Frequency Response
HiFi – High-Fidelity
MDF – Medium Density Fiberboard
MUSHRA – Multi Stimulus test with Hidden Reference and Anchor
PSD – Power Spectral Density
RMS – Root Mean Square
SPL – Sound Pressure Level
VR – Virtual Reality
vi
==PAGE:7==
Localized sound zone with directive sound source and vi-
brotactile transducer in open spaces
Christian Svensson¹, Cheol-Ho Jeong² and Jeremy Marozeau¹
¹ Department of Health Technology, The Technical University of Denmark, Ørsteds Plads, Building 348,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Copenhagen Capital Region, Denmark
² Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, The Technical University of Denmark, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Copenhagen Capital Region, Denmark
28 January 2024
Creating localized sound zones is challenging, as audio systems oﬀering this, have not been able to
combine high quality sound, minimal visual disturbance, little equipment and low cost. This study fo-
cuses on improving the listener experience in open spaces with multiple sound sources, by creating
a personal sound zone utilizing both a directional loudspeaker and a vibrotactile transducer, and on
comparing the proposed solution with three other sound system designs. Consequently, a sound qual-
ity and a directivity assessment test was conducted. Data was collected with the use of questionnaires
during testing. Results showed that the proposed solution of combining sound systems, which was
named ‘Sound Shower’, was preferred when rating comfort level inside the listening area. Two of the
setups, the parabolic loudspeaker and the proposed solution, performed statistically better than the
other in a one-tailed t-test (lower) inside the listening area when assessing comfort level. The transducer
was found signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the other sound systems both inside and outside the listening
area, for both comfort level and perceived sound ratio.
1   introduction
In open spaces, such as exhibitions and fairs
where there often are a lot of diﬀerent sound
sources, it is important to control individual
sound zones to avoid a cacophony. While several
solutions exist in the market to create personal
sound zones and highly directive loudspeakers
[1], no existing systems oﬀer High-Fidelity (HiFi)
quality while also being highly directional and
easy to install. This paper proposes and evalu-
ates an innovative solution designed for broad-
band signals such as music. Existing solutions
for creating personal sound zones require either
an extensive amount of loudspeakers [2], rely-
ing on Digital Signal Processing (DSP) [3], or im-
plementing highly directional parametric loud-
speakers [4]. These solutions are limited by heavy
use of equipment, complex DSP, not being cost-
eﬀective, or less than optimal low frequency re-
production.
The proposed solution consists of a combina-
tion of a parabolic loudspeaker and a wooden
platform excited by a transducer, to create vibro-
tactile stimuli that cover the low-frequency range
missing in the parabolic loudspeaker. This setup
was named ‘Sound Shower’, with the visualiza-
tion of being immersed in a local sound experi-
ence, as when taking a shower. The amalgama-
tion of the aforementioned devices should lead to
an immersive listening experience. Such a com-
bination has not yet been studied to the authors’
knowledge. A setup consisting of a vibrotactile
ﬂoor combined with conventional loudspeakers
is the closest resembling system for multi-modal
reproduction of music [5]. A sound quality and
a directionality assessment test have been devel-
oped to investigate the eﬀect of the proposed so-
lution.
It was hypothesized:
1. A HiFi loudspeaker is expected to outperform
parabolic, parametric, and transducer systems
1
==PAGE:8==
in sound quality and frequency response due
to its design, emphasizing high-ﬁdelity audio
reproduction.
2. In a designated listening area with multiple
sound sources playing diﬀerent stimuli, a HiFi
system will oﬀer greater listening comfort
compared to a parabolic, a transducer, and a
combined sound system.
3. A HiFi system will be rated as hearing both
songs equally loud, indicating less directivity,
compared to a parabolic, a transducer, and a
combined sound system.
The expected outcome for hypotheses 1, is that
among the included sound systems, the HiFi
loudspeaker will be rated with a much better
overall sound quality compared to other sound
systems. In addition to that, it is also expected
that the combined sound system, consisting of a
parabolic loudspeaker and a transducer, will be
rated as having a better sound quality than each
component on their own.
For hypothesis 2, the expected comfort level
rating of the HiFi loudspeaker and the trans-
ducer, when hearing two diﬀerent songs simulta-
neously, will be rated more negatively compared
to the other sound systems.
The expected outcome for hypothesis 3 is
that for all the included sound systems, a tradi-
tional loudspeaker design will have a ratio rating,
where both songs are heard equally loud. Addi-
tionally, it is expected that the transducer will
have a signiﬁcantly higher ratio rating than the
parabolic speaker alone, and also when the par-
abolic speaker and the transducer are combined
- due to the parabolic speaker’s directivity and
because a cross-over ﬁlter is implemented.
2   methods
A questionnaire using psychoacoustic principles
for evaluation was used to assess both sound
quality and directionality of the sound systems.
A sound quality test was done ﬁrst to capture the
ﬁrst impression of the subject, to avoid a train-
ing eﬀect after long exposure to the audio sys-
tems, but also before possible listening fatigue
occurred.
After the ﬁrst test comes the directionality as-
sessment test. This test was done to investigate if
any of the systems would be capable of creating
localized sound zones irrespective of their sound
quality. Additionally, subjects would determine
the comfort level of listening to sound from mul-
tiple sound zones, to investigate any possible ef-
fect of tempo synchronization and musical key.
Information about tempo and key was kept hid-
den. All participants were encouraged to share
their experiences and comments after testing.
None of the subjects were trained listeners.
2.1   subjects
Twelve participants between the age of 23 and 29
participated in the study. Of the 12 participants,
10 were classiﬁed as having normal hearing by
their own judgment. One subject reported a bi-
lateral hearing loss for which they used hearing
aids, and the other subject reported frequent low
frequency noise occuring in quiet conditions. All
participants provided written consent before par-
ticipating in the study. The research protocol was
approved by the Science-Ethics Committee for
the Capital Region of Denmark under reference
number H-16036391.
2.2   test setup and stimuli
Figure 1 shows the test setup in the room used for
testing at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
Figure 1: Test setup showing three of the sound
systems. (1) HiFi loudspeakers, (2) parabolic
loudspeakers and (3) the platforms with an at-
tached transducer. Also seen in the ﬁgure are
HBK microphones. Only one was used for cali-
bration. The placement seen in the picture does
not represent the actual placement for the tests.
2
==PAGE:9==
A top view of the test setup is given in
Figure  2, to clarify the listening areas and
sound system placement. The diﬀerence in plat-
form shape was due to availability of resources.
Figure 2: Top view of the test setup portraying the
relative positions of sound systems and listening
areas. The marked listening areas refer to the po-
sition of the subject during the tests. The inside
listening area corresponds to the marking on top
of the circular platform.
The test setup included the following audio re-
production systems:
• SoundTube FP-6020 II loudspeaker (Dome);
• Rogers LS3 / 5A loudspeaker (HiFi);
• HSS H450 parametric loudspeaker (Paramet-
ric);
• Clark Synthesis TST329 Gold Transducer
(Shaker);
• A combination of the SoundTube FP-6020 II
loudspeaker and the Clark Synthesis TST329
Gold Transducer (DomeShaker).
A common naming convention used by the au-
thors is listed in parenthesis next to each element.
To ensure an equal listening level for all systems
an HBK 1/2″ Free Field microphone type 4291-
L-001 was calibrated using an HBK Sound Cal-
ibrator. The target SPL in the listening position
was 65 dB. The measurement microphone was
positioned inside the listening area, at the head
height of a 180 cm tall person, and the sound
systems were adjusted to match the target level,
using the recorded average RMS SPL of the stim-
uli. Filtering was only used for the DomeShaker
combination to create a cross-over ﬁlter.
Two songs from the danish band D-A-D were
used for the sound quality test:
1. D-A-D – Nineteenhundredandyesterday (141
BPM)
2. D-A-D – Nothing Ever Changes (138 BPM)
These songs were synchronized to a BPM of
139.5, so that each song was adjusted equally in
tempo. Additionally, the songs were ﬁne-tuned
using Flex Time in Logic Pro to account for the
slight diﬀerences in tempo between the musi-
cians. Two additional songs,
3. D-A-D - Reconstructdead (90 BPM)
4. D-A-D - Scare Yourself (123 BPM)
were used for the directionality assessment test
and were not subjected to temporal editing. All
stimuli were truncated to a length of 10 seconds.
2.3   procedure
Participants were placed on a platform, where
a random order had been generated to deter-
mine sound system presentation for each subject.
Stimuli playback was handled in Apple’s Digi-
tal Audio Workstation (DAW) Logic Pro. For the
sound quality test, the participants were only
presented the stimuli from the HiFi reference
loudspeaker. Furthermore, for the sound qual-
ity test, audio was only presented in the sound
zone where participants were placed. After pre-
senting the stimuli in the reference speaker, and
a one second pause, the same stimuli was pre-
sented in one of the four other sound system.
Figure 3: Questionnaire rating of the sound qual-
ity test.
The subjects were then given time to rate the
presented sound system compared to the ref-
erence, using the scale seen in Figure  3. This
process was then repeated for all four sound
systems to conclude the sound quality test.
Figure 4: Questionnaire rating of the bass/treble
ratio test.
3
==PAGE:10==
Following this, the bass/treble ratio assessment
was initiated as part of assessing the overall
sound quality. Here, the subjects were asked to
evaluate a single characteristic of the sound sys-
tems as seen in Figure 4. The stimuli presentation
process was identical to the sound quality test.
The second test, the directionality assessment
test, required the subjects to be both inside and
outside the listening area, in contrast to the
sound quality test. When outside of the listening
area, the subject was placed at an equal distance
from the two sound zones. In this test, there
was no reference speaker to compare against.
Instead, the stimuli consisted of both synchro-
nized and unsynchronized songs and two sound
zones were playing at the same time. Song 1 was
always referencing the song playing inside the
listening area that the subjects were positioned
in, whereas song 2 was always the other sound
zone. Throughout the test, the stimuli used for
song 1 and 2 switched back and forth between
the zones, without informing the participants.
Figure 5: Clippings of questionnaire rating scales
for the directionality assessment test.
After presenting the stimuli, the subjects were
asked to rate how much of either song was per-
ceivable to them, using the scale seen in Fig-
ure  5. Additionally, the subjects were asked to
rate how comfortable they found listening to two
songs simultaneously. The questionnaire ratings
were evaluated for four songs, two positions, and
four sound systems for a total of 32 repetitions.
All participants responded in writing on printed
questionnaires. The data was then transferred
manually to an Excel sheet for analysis in MAT-
LAB.
Presentation order was organized such that
the same loudspeaker order was never presented
across synchronized and unsynchronized songs
or across subjects. The authors took this ap-
proach to minimize possible bias that could oc-
cur. To center the reference mean at zero, 50 was
subtracted from all data points prior to statisti-
cal analysis. This means that for the sound qual-
ity test, any mean value below zero corresponds
to a worse performance compared to the refer-
ence loudspeaker. For the directionality test, the
zero mean represented a neutral rating. The rat-
ing scheme behind the bass/treble ratio test was
diﬀerent, such that any value that diﬀered from
zero was considered worse balanced than the ref-
erence.
3   results
Statistical analysis were conducted on data from
both tests in the software JMP Pro. For the sound
quality test, a one-tailed t-test (lower) was done
and for the bass/treble ratio test a two-tailed
t-test was done. For the directionality assess-
ment test, ANOVA tests were done for the com-
fort level and ratio ratings. The alpha (𝛼) level
was 𝛼= 0.01 for t-tests to compensate for the
amount of t-tests done. No signiﬁcant eﬀect size
was found for synchronization conditions and
the results are therefore not included.
3.1   sound quality and bass/treble
ratio
Figure 
6 
shows 
the 
mean 
rating 
re-
sult 
from 
the 
sound 
quality 
test.
Figure 6: Mean rating of the four diﬀerent sound
systems from the ﬁrst part of the sound quality
test. Values plotted represent mean ±se. Asterisks
(*) indicate signiﬁcance levels where, * = p<.05, **
= p<.01 and *** = p<.001.
4
==PAGE:11==
This shows that the parametric loudspeaker was
rated as the worst performing loudspeaker. The
Shaker and the Dome were rated more or less
equally, but still quite below the zero mean that
represents the reference loudspeaker. The high-
est mean at −8.1 was seen for the DomeShaker
system. Statistical analysis was carried out on the
mean rating data from the sound quality ques-
tionnaire. The DomeShaker did not present a sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence. The Dome, Shaker and Para-
metric sound systems showed signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ences t(11) = −5.71, p<.001, t(11) = −3.93, p=.001
and t(11)= −9.86, p<.001, respectively.
Figure  7 shows the mean rating result from
the bass/treble ratio test. As such, the results in
Figure 7 also showed a poor rating of the para-
metric loudspeaker. Like the parametric speaker,
the Dome was also rated as having too much
treble, or from another perspective, too little
bass. The Shaker and DomeShaker showed re-
sults close to being rated perfectly balanced.
Figure 7: Mean rating of the four diﬀerent sound
systems from the bass/treble ratio test. Values
plotted represent mean ±se. Asterisks (*) indicate
signiﬁcance levels where, * = p<.05, ** = p<.01 and
*** = p<.001.
The mean value of the Shaker was slightly better
in terms of equalization than the DomeShaker.
Statistical analysis was carried out on the mean
rating data from the bass/treble ratio question-
naire. The Shaker and DomeShaker systems did
not present a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. The Dome
and Parametric sound systems showed signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences t(11) = 6.93, p<.001 and t(11) =
6.18, p<.001 respectively.
3.2   comfort level and ratio
Figure 8 displays the mean comfort level rating
from the directionality assessment test, with a fo-
cus on the eﬀect of being inside or outside the
listening area. The overall conclusion of the com-
fort level ratings in Figure 8 was that the Dome
and the DomeShaker were rated higher than any
other sound system both inside and outside the
listening area. Regardless of whether the subjects
were positioned inside or outside the listening
area, the Shaker was rated almost equally bad.
In comparison, all of the other systems have a
large diﬀerence in mean comfort level rating, be-
tween being inside or outside the listening area.
As such, the results clearly showed the ability of
the Dome and the DomeShaker to create a more
comfortable listening environment irrespective
of the synchronized condition or of the subject.
Figure 8: Mean comfort level rating of the four
diﬀerent sound systems from the directionality
assessment, inside and outside the listening area.
Values plotted represent mean ±se.
The mean comfort level rating data was analyzed
using a standard least square regression model.
Four sound systems (4) and two listening envi-
ronments (2) were included as ﬁxed factors, while
the subjects and songs were included as a random
factor, and the mean rating was chosen as the
dependent variable. The analysis showed statisti-
cally signiﬁcant results for the sound system with
F(3) = 21.54, p<.001, the area with F(1) = 32.31, p<.
001, the sound system and area combined with
F(3) = 22.39, p<.001.
A post-hoc analysis was performed on the
sound system within each listening area. The
5
==PAGE:12==
analysis showed that inside the listening area,
the HiFi loudspeaker was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from the Dome, Shaker and DomeShaker with
t(55) = −3.32, p<.001, t(55) = 5.52, p<.001 and
t(55) = 4.70, p<.001. The Shaker was also signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent from the Dome and DomeShaker
with t(55) = −8.83, p<.001 and t(55) = 10.22, p<.
001. Outside the listening area, the DomeShaker
was found signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the Shaker
with t(55) = 2.41, p=.009. The analysis found no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between Dome and Dome-
Shaker inside the listening area, between Dome,
HiFi and DomeShaker outside the listening area
or between Shaker and HiFi outside the listening
area and Shaker inside the listening area.
Figure 9 portrays the mean ratio rating, from
the directionality assessment test, with the same
focus. The ‘ratio’ parameter described how much
either sound ﬁeld was heard, as indicated in Fig-
ure 5. When investigating the ratio rating of all
sound systems, the Shaker was found rated at
roughly equal ratios for song 1 and 2 inside the
listening area, whereas outside, the ratio was
skewed towards song 2.
Figure 9: Mean ratio rating of the four diﬀerent
sound systems from the directionality test, inside
and outside the listening area. Negative values
indicate song 1 to be louder and positive values
indicate the opposite. Values plotted represent
mean ±se.
Despite the rating of the Shaker, combining it
with the Dome and adding a low-pass ﬁlter to
the Shaker, did not seem to change the listening
experience, when comparing the performance of
the Dome and the DomeShaker. The perceived
ratio of song 1 and song 2 are very similar for
both the Dome and DomeShaker systems, show-
ing high directionality. The mean ratio rating
data was analyzed using a standard least square
regression model, with the same conditions as
for the mean comfort level rating analysis. The
analysis showed statistically signiﬁcant results
for the sound systems with F(3) = 40.94, p<.001,
the area with F(1) = 116.43, p<.001, the sound sys-
tems and area combined with F(3) = 21.67, p<.001.
A post-hoc analysis was performed on the sound
system within each listening area. The analysis
showed that inside the listening area, the HiFi
loudspeaker was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
Dome, Shaker and DomeShaker with t(59) = 3.08,
p=.002, t(59) = −8.61, p<.001 and t(59) = −3.24,
p=.001. The Shaker was also signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent from the Dome and DomeShaker with t(59) =
11.69, p<.001 and t(59) = −11.85, p<.001. Outside
the listening area, the Dome, HiFi loudspeaker
and DomeShaker was found signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ent from the Shaker with t(59) = 3.35, p<.001, t(59)
= −3.61, p<.001 and t(59) = −4.39, p<.001.
The analysis found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between Dome and DomeShaker inside the lis-
tening area, or between Dome, HiFi and Dome-
Shaker outside the listening area. No signiﬁcant
diﬀerence was found between the Shaker in-
side and outside the listening area. Between the
Shaker inside, and the Dome and HiFi outside
the listening area, there were no signiﬁcant dif-
ference.
4   discussion
A few subjects reported that feeling the vibra-
tions through the platform, as a low frequency
supplement, was not a pleasant way of listening
to music. This could explain why the mean rating
of the Shaker and the DomeShaker in Figure 6
were not rated higher or better than the reference
loudspeaker. The mean value of DomeShaker in
Figure 6 indicated a listening experience rated al-
most as good as the HiFi speaker, which is con-
trary to how some subjects felt about the vibro-
tactile element. Despite the mixed perception of
the vibrotactile element, the Shaker, along with
the DomeShaker, was not found to be signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent in the bass/treble ratio test in
6
==PAGE:13==
Figure 7. These ﬁndings mean that hypothesis 1
was rejected for the DomeShaker, but not for any
other sound system.
While the synchronization condition was not
found to induce a signiﬁcant diﬀerence on the
mean rating, and while it also was not included
in the results, some subjects reported that they
were not annoyed when exposed to the unsyn-
chronized stimuli outside the listening area, sim-
ply because the duration was too short. If they
had been subjected to the stimuli for longer, they
felt conﬁdent that they would be very uncomfort-
able. In stark contrast, some reported that the in-
tuition of wanting to follow a beat, made it con-
fusing to be outside the listening area being ex-
posed equally to both stimuli.
The results in Figure  8 and Figure  9 clearly
showed that the Shaker was not a comfortable
sound source, nor was it good at localizing sound.
The reason for this was most likely that the struc-
tures the transducers were attached to, were ma-
terials that had much higher density than loud-
speaker membranes, meaning the sound pro-
duced had a much longer decay [6]. This is
thought to have polluted the listening environ-
ment more than normal loudspeakers would
have. Another factor that might have contributed
to the rating of the Shaker, is the fact that the
platform the subject was standing on, has a mass
loading element to it, compared to the other plat-
form with no participant on it. The added mass
will to some degree attenuate high frequencies
for the platform the subject was on, while the un-
loaded platform will not have had the same atten-
uation. This is thought to skew the ratio towards
song 2. On top of this, a common feeling among
the test participants was that it was diﬃcult to lo-
cate the sound source, when only the Shaker was
playing, despite standing on top of one of the vi-
brating sources. It is worth considering that per-
haps the best ratio rating outside of the listening
area, is the one that rates equal loudness for both
sound zones, as long as the comfort level rating
is high.
The results showed that inside the designated
listening area, hypothesis 2 was rejected for the
Dome and the DomeShaker sound systems. The
Shaker failed to reject hypothesis 2. Furthermore,
the results also showed that hypothesis 3 was re-
jected for the Dome and DomeShaker systems in-
side the listening area. The Shaker also failed to
reject this hypothesis.
4.1   limitations
Most of the limitations listed below arised from
time and resource availability. One limitation is
the loudness perception of the individual sound
systems not having been implemented in the cal-
ibration procedure. One way to correct this could
be to code the experiment in e.g. MATLAB, and
include a loudness matching module, where the
subjects adjust the amplitude of the sound sys-
tems, so they are perceived equally loud, prior
to starting the test. Not only would this create a
more robust test design, it would also allow for
easy data management and lower the risk of user
error.
Not including proper assessment of the test
participants’ hearing status is a limitation of this
study. With the limited time available for this
study, it was decided to use a questionnaire as an
alternative to doing audiometry assessment. Fu-
ture work should assess the hearing status of par-
ticipants to better understand the results. Includ-
ing a larger sample size would also provide better
understanding of the proposed solution’s impact
and possibly reduce the variance seen in the data.
With two sound zones playing at the same time,
some degree of masking is speculated to appear.
Similarities were found by R. T. Verrillo and G.
A. Gescheider [7] in both the auditory and tactile
perception. It was also found that in tactile per-
ception, in the case of more than one stimuli be-
ing present, one could sometimes make the other
appear more intense. Whether or not these traits
are present when subjected to stimuli in both the
auditory and tactile realm remains to be studied.
While the presentation level was kept low (65 dB
SPL) to minimize the eﬀect of masking, it has not
been possible for the authors to determine the
amount of masking that might have occured dur-
ing testing.
5   conclusion
A novel approach to enhancing the listening ex-
perience in open spaces with multiple sources
has been proposed, combining a parabolic loud-
7
==PAGE:14==
speaker and a transducer on a wooden platform.
This method outperformed conventional loud-
speakers in terms of comfort and sound isolation,
oﬀering a focused and immersive auditory expe-
rience for listeners. To further validate the eﬀec-
tiveness of this method and identify areas for
improvement, the authors suggest reﬁning the
experimental test design. This could involve in-
corporating more comprehensive subjective and
objective measures, such as questionnaires and
acoustical analysis, to capture a broader range of
listener perceptions and the acoustical character-
istics of the listening environment.
Conducting additional controlled experiments
with varying sound source conﬁgurations and
listener positions could provide valuable insights
into the factors that inﬂuence the overall listen-
ing experience. Investigating the impact of this
method on hearing-impaired individuals holds
great promise for audio accessibility, potentially
bridging the gap between those with and without
hearing impairments.
5.1   acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Hearing Sys-
tems department at the Danish Technical Uni-
versity. A special thank you to Rikke Sørensen
for providing guidance on conducting hearing re-
search at DTU, and to the National Museum for
lending equipment for the study.
[1] M. Alunno and A. Yarce Botero, “Directional Land-
scapes: Using Parametric Loudspeakers for Sound
Reproduction in Art”, Journal of New Music Re-
search, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 201–211, Apr. 2017, doi:
10.1080/09298215.2016.1227340.
[2] J.-H. Chang and F. Jacobsen, “Sound Field Control
with a Circular Double-Layer Array of Loudspeak-
ers”, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of Amer-
ica, vol. 131, no. 6, pp. 4518–4525, Jun. 2012, doi:
10.1121/1.4714349.
[3] T. Betlehem, W. Zhang, M. A. Poletti, and T. D. Ab-
hayapala, “Personal Sound Zones: Delivering Inter-
face-Free Audio to Multiple Listeners”, IEEE Signal
Process. Mag., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 81–91, Mar. 2015,
doi: 10.1109/MSP.2014.2360707.
[4] J. J. Croft, “Theory, History, and the Advance-
ment of Parametric Loudspeakers”. Accessed: Oct.
31, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.yumpu.
com/en/document/read/30807469/theory-history-
and-the-advancement-of-parametric-loudspeakers
[5] S. Merchel and M. E. Altinsoy, “Psychophysical
Comparison of the Auditory and Tactile Percep-
tion: A Survey”, J Multimodal User Interfaces, vol.
14, no. 3, pp. 271–283, Sep. 2020, doi: 10.1007/
s12193-020-00333-z.
[6] U. G. Wegst, “Wood for Sound”, American Journal
of Botany, vol. 93, pp. 1439–1448, Oct. 2006, doi:
10.3732/ajb.93.10.1439.
[7] R. T. Verrillo and G. A. Gescheider, “Enhancement
and Summation in the Perception of Two Successive
Vibrotactile Stimuli”, Perception & Psychophysics,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 128–136, Mar. 1975, doi: 10.3758/
BF03204100.
8
==PAGE:15==
2   Introduction
Visitors in open spaces like malls, museums, conferences, and exhibitions, often en-
counter multiple simultaneous audio sources. If these sources are left uncontrolled, they
can result in a cacophony, reducing visitor satisfaction and impeding comprehension [8].
The National Museum of Denmark is planning an exciting exhibition in March 2024,
about the danish rock band D-A-D. Their goal is to have multiple sound sources play
diﬀerent music in the same open space, while visitors explore the band’s history through
their 40 years long career. The exhibition takes place in an old cinema room, at the
National Museum, which is being renovated for this purpose between November 2023
and March 2024.
This thesis aims to explore solutions that enhance the listener experience in such an
environment. Speciﬁcally, the possible solutions that allow sound to be localized mainly
by directional sound systems are explored. As such, for a design to address this need
eﬀectively, it is important to also consider ethical implications e.g. the Sound Pressure
Level (SPL) that visitors are exposed to. Nowadays, the average music listener, can
almost always isolate themselves in their own listening space, with the addition of noise-
cancelling features in headsets and in-ear devices. While this is a possible method for
avoiding a cacophony in open spaces, it also isolates visitors from each other, removing
the joy of sharing an experience with others. Hence, creating a localized sound zone
allows visitors to be engaged in the audio content while simultaneously being able to
communicate with others. All while the sound zone ensures not to disturb other envi-
ronments within the open space.
As a consequence of these considerations, the research in this project explores the
addition of vibrotactile sensations in combined loudspeaker setups for an enhanced lis-
tener experience in open space, when exposed to multiple sound sources. The listener
experience was shown to be enhanced by the addition of vibrotactile elements [9]–[12].
By leveraging the physical nature of sound propagation and psychoacoustic eﬀects of
vibrotactile stimuli, alongside common DJ principles such as harmonic mixing and beat-
matching, an innovative system to create a localized sound zone has been investigated.
2 Introduction
9
==PAGE:16==
3   Background
This study begins by reviewing the existing knowledge on sound localization, drawing
upon various relevant publications. Speciﬁcally, the study explores the roles of sound
beaming technology, tactile stimuli and musical harmony, which is why a few principles
are described before the literature review.
3.1   Theoretical Framework
3.1.1   Consonance and dissonance
The result of two pure tones interacting with each other can be described as either
consonant or dissonant. Consonance is when the notes are in harmony with each other
which is dependent on the frequency of the tones. In the opposite scenario, when the
interaction is dissonant, the outcome is a lack of harmony. Harmony can be described
as a combination of notes creating a pleasing eﬀect in the listener. A. Kameoka and
M. Kuriyagawa [13] found that the harmonic eﬀect can be described by a frequency
diﬀerence ratio between two pure tones. Generally, ratios of 1:1, 4:3, 3:2 and 2:1 are
perceived as consonant, and those with a musical background might already have ﬁg-
ured out, that these ratios correspond to the tonic, the fourth, the ﬁfth and the octave
in musical terms.
The reason why diﬀerent ratios result in diﬀerent harmonies, can be explained with
Critical Bands (CBs) as stated by R. Plomp and W. J. M. Levelt [14]. CBs allow
frequency discrimination but is limited by the width of the individual CB. Frequency
components that lie within the same CB, cannot be spectrally resolved and this results
in beating. This beating is what is considered as dissonant. A practical example of
beating is, when two keys on a piano, with a distance of a semi-tone inbetween, are
pressed simultaneously. Interestingly, McDermott et al [15] found cultural discrepancy
in the perception of dissonance, for societies living in isolation with no inﬂuence from
TV, radio and other electronic equipment.
3.1.2   Tactile stimuli
To hear sound, vibrations are a necessity, either through air molecules or through sur-
faces that the listener is in contact with, which provide important queues for musical
perception [12]. Unlike traditional loudspeakers, where a transducer is used to displace
a membrane to propagate sound, a transducer can also be used for sound conduction,
by simply vibrating a surface. Tactile stimuli can enhance the perception of sound,
which involves the perception of touch, pressure or vibration of the skin or other layers
below. This thesis focus speciﬁcally on including tactile stimuli through vibration as
this allows the perceived loudness to be enhanced, without increasing the actual SPL
of the sound source [16]. Specialized sensory receptors in the skin, e.g. Pacinian cor-
puscles, detect the mechanical vibrations and converts them to electrical signals to be
processed in the brain. These receptors are heavily concentrated in areas of the hands
and feet, and are able to detect vibrations between 20 - 1000 Hz, with a high sensitivity
around 200 Hz [17].
10
3 Background
==PAGE:17==
3.1.3   Sound Beaming
Sound beaming goes under several names such as ‘audio spotlight’ or ‘directional au-
dio’. The goal of this technology is to create localized sound zones, without having a
lot of spillover of sound to other areas. The largest challenge is to create directional
low-frequency audio, because of the physical nature of sound waves. The length of a
sound wave is inversely proportional to its frequency, as described in (1),
𝜆= 𝑐
𝑓
(1)
where λ describes the wavelength of a sound wave in meters, c is the speed of sound
in meters per second and f is the frequency of a sound wave in hertz. It is seen in (1),
that as the frequency becomes lower, the wavelength is increased. Ignoring the eﬀects
of temperature, humidity etc., with a speed of sound at 343 𝑚
𝑠, a 100 Hz sound wave
will have a wavelength of 3.43 meters. When the wavelength is much larger compared
to the source, the sound waves wrap around the source. This behaviour is described as
omni-directional when sound radiates equally in all directions. When the wavelength is
comparable to the size of the source, the sound propagation becomes more directional. 
High frequency wavelengths are often much smaller compared to the source, which re-
sults in high directionality. Loudspeaker directivity plays a critical role in the listening
experience in open spaces.
Sound beaming can be done in several ways, e.g. with parametric loudspeakers.
The principle behind the parametric loudspeaker is to modulate the source signal from
the human audible frequency range of 20 - 20000 Hz to somewhere between 30 - 70 kHz
using ultrasound as a carrier. The modulation to higher frequencies makes it not only
inaudible but also highly directive, as sound waves become more and more directive
as the frequency increases. As the ultrasound wave interacts with a target, the carrier
signal is demodulated due to non-linearities of the air [18]. This is a result of the air
molecules compressing and expanding at diﬀerent speeds during the interaction with
the ultrasound carrier leading to a diﬀerence in volume. The source signal is then only
audible in the very narrow path that the parametric speaker propagates or when the
sound is reﬂected from an interfering object e.g. a wall. By aiming the parametric
speaker directly at the intended listener, the listener will, in essence, become a loud-
speaker. This has several eﬀects:
1. Other people around the main listener will be able to hear the audio signal, de-
pending on the background noise level, and the amplitude of the audio signal.
2. The perceived sound for the targeted listener will happen due to bone conduction,
leading to an uncommon and very immersive listening experience.
Other types of sound beaming technologies are parabolic speakers, relying more on the
physical nature of sound propagation than Digital Signal Processing (DSP). Parabolic
speakers include a speaker playing into a parabolic dish, to control the dispersion of
sound. Another type is an array of speakers on a satellite dish shape mount, that will
result in a narrow sound ﬁeld, where the array of speakers is angled, so that they com-
bine all the sound waves into a highly directive wave [19].
3.1 Theoretical Framework
11
==PAGE:18==
3.1.4   Room acoustics
This section will not go into the details of room acoustics, as this thesis does not fo-
cus on implementing acoustic treatment of the exhibition room. However, it is still
important to mention that room acoustics play a crucial role in the listening experience
of open spaces [20]. As such, room acoustics can be evaluated not only for objective
parameters, but also subjective parameters, adding further complexity to the task of
achieving good room acoustics.
3.2   Literature Review
The literature shows three diﬀerent methods when it comes to localizing sound to an
area [21]. Parametric (ultrasound) speakers, parabolic speakers where sound is directed
with the use of physical restrictions and lastly audio setups relying heavily on DSP. As
an addition to these sound systems, it is of great interest for this project to investigate
if any possible ﬁndings for vibrotactile studies on music exist. Literature was found on
DTU FindIt and Google Scholar, using the following search terms:
Keywords: Sound localization, directional speaker, auditory-tactile perception,
ultrasonic speaker, vibrotactile, sound beaming, music in open spaces, harmonic
mixing music.
3.2.1   Parametric Loudspeaker
The ﬁrst mention of a working parametric loudspeaker array in air dates all the way
back to 1974 [22], [4], albeit the audible sound was not music but simple tones. Through
decades of research in improving the performance of ultrasound loudspeakers, the two
biggest factors that to this day are still limiting the usage, especially for music, are the
audible frequency range, or lack thereof, and the harmonic distortion.
The parametric speaker has so far not proved useful for reproducing music. This
has to do with the frequency bandwidth constraints of the parametric loudspeaker. 
While it is capable of reproducing frequencies in the high end range of human hearing,
the loudspeaker is not capable of reproducing frequencies below 400 Hz. This can be
acceptable for speech, but it is not an enjoyable listening experience when it comes to
music.
Shi, Mu & Gan (2013) [23] proposed a DSP technique to utilize psychoacoustics for
a better low end experience with parametric speakers. This is a welcome improvement,
however it does require a good amount of DSP. Additionally, Kamakura (1985) [24]
suggested the optimal carrier frequency to be around 30 kHz to optimize the sound
quality.
3.2.2   Parabolic Loudspeakers
Investigation of the commercial market shows that there are multiple companies pro-
ducing parabolic speakers such as SoundTube and Brown Innovations. Unlike tradi-
tional loudspeaker manufacturers, who generally provide a frequency response and other
technical information along with their loudspeakers, parabolic speaker manufacturers
generally do not provide such information. While researching, only the SoundTube
manufacturer provided such data on their website. This was the only chance to some-
what judge the quality of the speaker without listening to it.
12
3 Background
==PAGE:19==
Seemingly, each company has their own patented reﬂective dome to control the
sound propagation. Naturally, a dome that is bad at directing the sound into a beam,
must be very ﬂat considering the physical nature of sound propagation. The taller the
dome and thereby more ‘bell like’, the better the directivity. Brown Innovations [25]
oﬀer a parabolic loudspeaker for a single person listening experience, which is the most
directional dome available from this company. It measures 0.8 m in diameter and 0.4 m
in height. In contrast, SoundTube’s most directional parabolic loudspeaker, ‘FP-6020
II’ [26], measures 0.51 m in diameter and 0.22 m in height. The dimensions of the Brown
Innovations dome are almost twice as large as SoundTube’s most directional dome.
Overall, the biggest disadvantages of the parabolic speaker are the size of it, the
space it requires for mounting, and the visual impact [19]. It is, however, a very simple
design that does not require a lot of DSP. Neither of the companies speciﬁcally state
their prices on their website, making it diﬃcult to determine the cost of this solution.
As the author is located in a diﬀerent country, the distribution choices are limited. 
It was only possible to ﬁnd a national distributor [27] of the SoundTube loudspeaker,
that listed their reselling price of 5625 DKK at the time of writing.
3.2.3   Personal Sound Zones
A very eﬀective, but also very costly method of creating localized areas of sound, consist
of using loudspeaker arrays and microphones [3] to measure the sound ﬁeld and cancel
out sound outside of a designated area. This relies on the same principles that noise-
canceling headphones use, namely, inverting the phase of a measured signal and play it
back to eﬀectively attenuate the original signal. The reason this is expensive is that it
requires a high number of speakers and microphones to realize such a sound ﬁeld.
Another method is to create a double-sided loudspeaker array [2] as Chang & Ja-
cobsen (2012) did. This does not include a large number of microphones, but it does
require many loudspeakers. In the aforementioned study, 20 loudspeaker pairs were
used to create sound zones with large dynamic contrast. Not only is this an expensive
method, but it is also a physical and visual obstruction in e.g. a museum setting.
3.2.4   Vibrotactile Installations
For several decades, vibrotactile systems and devices have been studied for their eﬀect
on the auditory system. To the author’s knowledge, the direct eﬀect of a vibrotactile
platform on auditory perception and enhancement of the listening experience when
the stimuli is music, has not been studied. One study [28] created platforms with two
transducers attached to each, where the stimuli consisted of sine waves and ﬁltered pink
noise. Another study [29] focused on the presentation of musical notes to diﬀerent body
parts including the foot. Fascinatingly enough, one study [30] found that musicians
show better frequency discrimination compared to non-musicians.
3.2.5   Harmonic Mixing
One way to ensure a good listening experience when mixing two songs together is to take
care of the musical key of each song. The less notes each musical key have in common
the more the keys are going to be perceived as dissonant. A common notation for DJs,
and something that is also incorporated into diﬀerent DJ software such as Serato, is the
Camelot key notation [31]. This builds upon the circle of ﬁfths but making it easier at a
3.2 Literature Review
13
==PAGE:20==
glance to ﬁgure out what keys work together, without having to know the composition
of each key. Several techniques have been developed with the aim to improve harmonic
mixing, one being a dissonance suppresion technique [32], that identiﬁes and select parts
of a song, that will result in consonance in the ﬁnal mix. Another method is applying
psychoacoustic models to determine optimal harmonic alignment [33], to expand on
the traditional key analysis method implemented in DJ software. These techniques are
however limited by not being tested on long music excerpts, music with vocal content
or only being tested on complex tones.
In addition to harmonic mixing, it is very important to match the tempo of the
two songs being mixed together. Songs with a strong rhythmic feel, such as a section
with e.g. drums, can very easily create a chaotic sound environment when mixed with
another song of similar rhythmic feel, if the songs are not synchronized in tempo. If
the songs being mixed together has a weak rhythmic feel, e.g. long sustained notes of
strings or synthesizer sections without drums etc., then there is room for slightly more
tempo variation. D. Moelants [34] proposed a possible human preference for tempo
ranges between 120 - 130 Beats Per Minute (BPM). This could be used to determine
song selections.
There are two important factors to consider, before implementing digitally altered
music, one being that the artists might not wish for their music to be altered, as this
can take away the artistic expression that was originally intended. The second factor
is that listeners, who might be invested fans, might have a preconceived expectation of
the music they will be listening to. These considerations are however for the National
Museum to decide on, and will not necessarily limit the methodology for this thesis.
Summary of literature review
Sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.5 discusses various methods for creating localized areas of sound. 
Parametric loudspeakers, parabolic speakers, personal sound zones, and vibrotactile
installations are all explored. Parametric loudspeakers are limited by their frequency
bandwidth for music reproduction, while parabolic speakers are large and visually in-
trusive. Personal sound zones, formed by large loudspeaker arrays, are very eﬀective
but also very costly, and vibrotactile installations require further research to determine
their impact on auditory perception and enhancement of the listening experience. 
Harmonic mixing techniques focus on aligning key and tempo, while also considering
ethical implications of altering the music on both artists and visitors.
14
3 Background
==PAGE:21==
4   Methodology
With the knowledge gained from the literature review, a strategic approach to the
methodology was taken. As the aim was to enhance the listener experience for a speciﬁc
exhibition at the National Museum, a test environment was set up at Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark (DTU), to simulate part of the actual room. Furthermore, technical
measurements such as the directivity of the parabolic speaker were measured to validate
the results shown in the oﬃcial data sheet in Appendix A. The sound ﬁelds of the dif-
ferent listening positions were recorded and analysed, to evaluate the directivity of the
sound system, as an addition to the perceptual listening test. Moreover, modal analysis
was done of the platform, to investigate the behaviour of the vibrotactile system and
determine any possible optimization.
As the preparation of the exhibition room at the National Museeum of Denmark
was not going to be started until November, the author had very little time, if any, to
do room acoustic measurements and analysis as initially planned. As a result, no room
acoustic methodologies were implemented in this thesis.
4.1   Loudspeaker Evaluation
Once existing solutions had been identiﬁed, it was necessary to contact local distributors
to ﬁgure out if borrowing equipment would be possible. KinoVox, a local distributor of
loudspeakers such as the FP-6020 II, agreed to let the author borrow two speakers for 14
days. This timeframe did result in quick decision making when it came to planning the
future tasks. The borrowed speakers were a large model, FP-6030 II and a small model,
FP-6020 II. The author’s wish was to borrow two FP-6020 models as their directivity is
better than the larger model, meaning the sound ﬁeld is more contained. As only this
one model was of interest for further use, only the FP-6020 model was measured in the
anechoic chamber. Later on, the National Museum of Denmark provided two FP-6020
models, which allowed the author to do additional testing.
Initially the setup was placed in a listening room at the DTU. This room is dedi-
cated to and designed for loudspeaker listening, as a means to determine the quality of
the speaker. The room was mostly empty, except for a few chairs and a table, leaving
the room in its intended acoustical state for listening to music. The following equipment
list shows the diﬀerent hardware used for the evaluation process:
• RME FireFace UCX sound card;
• Macbook Pro laptop;
• Samson ampliﬁer;
• the t.amp ampliﬁer (stylized in lower case letters);
• Two SoundTube FP-6020 II parabolic loudspeakers;
• Two Clark Synthesis TST329 Gold transducers;
• Two HSS Ultrasound speakers;
• Two Rogers HiFi loudspeakers.
To simplify the audio playback process and give a better overview of all the music
tracks to be played in each sound zone, a Digital Audio Workstation (DAW) was used
to handle this. As the author has a background in music production and mixing and
4.1 Loudspeaker Evaluation
15
==PAGE:22==
mastering, the DAW used for this task was Apple’s Logic Pro. Additionally, the equal-
ization for each speaker was done internally in the same DAW for ease of use.
The setup consisted of two sound zones, each a meter in diameter, placed roughly
three meters apart while still maintaining distance to the surrounding walls. Each sound
zone had an elevated platform made out of wood, which was vibrating in sync with
the music by using a Clark Synthesis TST329 Gold Transducer. Utilizing vibration of
the platform allows for tactile sound control of the low frequency spectrum. This is
important seeing as low frequencies are omni-directional, and this makes it diﬃcult to
control the sound ﬁeld. However, since the tactile sound is felt and experienced through
touch and vibration, this means that the low frequency content of the music will not
pollute the listening environment, to the same extent as a conventional loudspeaker.
Parabolic loudspeakers were installed above each platform in each sound zone. 
The parabolic speaker has higher directivity than regular loudspeakers, which helps
encapsulate the listener in a controlled sound zone. In order to minimize the extent
of which these two systems interfere with each other, a high pass and a low pass ﬁlter
were implemented in each sound zone. The high-pass ﬁlter with a cutoﬀ frequency at
200 Hz ensures that only frequencies below 200 Hz were attenuated for the parabolic
loudspeaker. The transducer attached to the platform, was low-pass ﬁltered with a
cutoﬀ frequency at 180 Hz, which therefore only attenuated frequencies above 180 Hz. 
This leads to a narrow crossover region at roughly 190 Hz. The cutoﬀ frequencies were
chosen by adjusting the frequency with a digital slider, while listening to the combined
setup and is therefore initially based on a perceptual experience, where a good balance
between the two loudspeakers were found.
After assessing the performance of the combination of a parabolic loudspeaker and
transducer, two parametric loudspeakers were set up in the listening room, to evaluate
if the addition of these speakers would improve or worsen the sound quality in com-
bination with the aforementioned setup. Two HiFi loudspeakers were also set up, to
serve as a reference point for the experienced sound quality of the experimental setup.
The ultrasound speakers were set at head height of the listener, when the listener was
standing on the platform. Several scenarios were tried to ﬁnd the most optimal imple-
mentation of the ultrasound speakers.
1. Replacing the parabolic loudspeaker with the parametric loudspeaker. It was of
interest to see if the parametric loudspeaker was capable of handling the same
frequency range as the parabolic loudspeaker when playing music.
2. Using two sound systems at the same time, to investigate if the parabolic and
parametric loudspeakers in combination would improve the Frequency Response
(FR) for mid and high frequencies.
3. Using all three sound systems at the same time, but applying a bandpass ﬁlter to
the parametric speakers. This creates a narrow frequency range that would act as
a supplement to the parabolic speaker, as it was found through listening that the
parabolic speaker was lacking in the mid range.
The conclusion after testing these diﬀerent scenarios, was that the parametric loud-
speaker did not add any positive eﬀects to the setup apart from its highly directive
characteristics. The perceived sound quality was not improved in any case. The ﬁnd-
ings served as a useful guideline for later tests and overall approach. During testing of
the diﬀerent setups, the author and one of the author’s supervisors, Jeremy Marozeau,
16
4 Methodology
==PAGE:23==
agreed on naming the combination of the parabolic loudspeaker and transducer as
‘Sound Shower’. Attaching the transducer to a platform and just including it in gen-
eral, has a positive implication on visitor well-being, considering ethical sound design
principles. This method immerses people in the music to a greater extent, and it can
help hearing-impaired people experience the music. It also allows the overall SPL to
be lower, further improving the ethical design.
4.1.1   Anechoic Measurements
In order to properly evaluate the directivity of the speaker, on and oﬀ axis measure-
ments are a great way to determine the coverage area. These measurements will also
provide data that can be compared with the data sheet of the SoundTube FP-6020
loudspeaker. In Figure 10 the microphone positions are portrayed with relative heights
and angles to the loudspeaker.
Figure 10:  Measurement setup in an anechoic chamber at DTU, where colors indicate
the angle and the marker shape indicates the vertical distance from the loudspeaker. 
The sketch only portrays the recording positions (indicated by markers) relative to the
speaker, not the exact room size.
4.1 Loudspeaker Evaluation
17
==PAGE:24==
To keep the recording process simple and not overly complex, three diﬀerent heights
were chosen to assess performance. It is important to keep in mind that the ﬁndings
from the anechoic measurements will only characterize the performance of the speaker
in idealized conditions. In a real world scenario such as the exhibition at the National
Museum, there will be a high degree of reﬂections, and therefore the loudspeaker per-
formance will be diﬀerent.
For an optimal listening experience according to the manufacturer [35], the speaker
should be positioned between 45 and 60 cm above the listeners’ head, which gives a
total range of 15 cm. In Denmark, the average population height is 181.4 cm [36],
and centering the optimal listening range around this number indicates that it will ﬁt
heights in the range of [173.9 ; 188.9] cm. This clearly shows that it will be impossible
to ﬁnd a perfect ﬁt for all visitors at the National Museum for the ﬁnal setup. Another
interesting aspect is that adjusting the speaker height for taller people, will unavoidably
create a greater spread of sound compared to adjusting the height for shorter people. 
Considering the height diﬀerence between a child and an adult, it is easy to conclude
(simply because of the physical aspect of the setup), that a more inclusive choice will
be to adjust for taller people, even if the sound quality is worsened for shorter people
and directivity is aﬀected.
It is also of interest to measure the FR further from the source to see the behaviour
of the sound ﬁeld outside of the listening area, as the main goal of this thesis is to
enhance the listener experience in open space when there are multiple sources present.
For these reasons the FR was recorded at a distance to the loudspeaker of 58 cm, 92
cm and 158 cm and at a 0°, 30° and 60° angle to the loudspeaker to investigate how
the FR and thereby also the directivity changes for listeners of diﬀerent heights.
Figure 11:  Top view of the microphone positions shown in Figure 10, where colors
indicate the angle and the marker shape indicates the distance from the loudspeaker as
seen in Figure 10.
18
4 Methodology
==PAGE:25==
As seen in Figure 11 the measurements were repeated at a rotation of 90 degrees, re-
sulting in measurement points along the horizontal and vertical axis relative to the face
plane of the loudspeaker. This was done to keep a similar measurement approach as
shown in the data sheet for the SoundTube FP-6020 loudspeaker.
In general, when measuring directivity of a loudspeaker, it is common to place the
loudspeaker on an automated rotational device, such that the loudspeaker is rotated
a ﬁxed number of degrees depending on the required resolution of the measurements.
Not only does this save time as it removes the need for physically changing the setup
in between each measurement, but it also reduces the measurement error by having a
calibrated system take care of the rotation. As this type of equipment is not available for
this project, it must be noticed that the given microphone positions are close approxi-
mations, and that this is a limitation of the test setup. Additionally, the manufacturer
of the FP-6020 II loudspeaker was contacted, to hear more about the measurement
process behind the data shown in their data sheet. Unfortunately the manufacturer did
not wish to provide any insight into this.
4.1.2   Measurement Setup
To measure the loudspeaker’s performance in the small anechoic chamber at DTU, the
following hardware and software was used:
• A PC with Microsoft Windows 10 OS installed;
• MATLAB version 2019b;
• A Dynavox CS-PA1 MKII ampliﬁer;
• A Mini DSP UMIK-1 omni-directional measurement microphone;
• A SoundTube FP-6020 II Focus Point Speaker.
The audio source fed to the speaker was white noise as this is a common way to measure
the performance in the full frequency range, due to the characteristics of white noise. 
This type of noise is also known as broadband noise and it has the same amount of
Power Spectral Density (PSD) for all frequencies. As such, this characteristic means
that the output of the speaker will portray the characteristics of the speaker and not
be colored by the input.
As the main goal of this measurement was to measure the directivity, the FR was
measured from 150 Hz to 10000 Hz, due to high frequencies naturally being more di-
rectional than low frequencies. Also, as the age group of the target audience at the
National Museum exhibition is above 40 years, some degree of hearing impairment is
likely, simply due to the hearing loss that naturally occurs with aging [37]. As a result,
the high frequencies will usually be attenuated to a noticeable degree. For some, the
upper limit of audible frequencies can be decreased as well.
4.2   Harmonic Mixing
Harmonic mixing, in the world of DJ’ing, often includes a transition from one song
to the next, where the spectral content is mixed over a certain period of time during
the transition. However, after receiving advice from several professional DJ’s, it was
decided not to have the songs overlap with a transition. This is often problematic with
rock music and does not sound good according to the DJ’s the author communicated
with. This problematic view is elaborated on by A. Carrol (2013) [38]. Instead, the
4.2 Harmonic Mixing
19
==PAGE:26==
music will play out in each sound zone, with necessary pauses, taking into account the
diﬀerent lengths of each song.
Initially, the entire discography of D-A-D was considered, in order to give as much
freedom as possible to choose a combination of songs. During the process of analyzing
songs and selecting them based on the musical tempo and key, several softwares were
used. In the beginning of the project, before having a digital copy of the music catalog,
‘DJ.Studio’ was used since this software featured online analysis through a streaming
service such as YouTube. This also meant that in the beginning of the process, the
actual selection of songs were limited to the availability on YouTube. This limitation
mostly aﬀected the music released in the 1980′s. This experience served as building
blocks for outlining the possible combinations, that would later be used as an argument
when discussing with the National Museum about choosing a selection of songs to be
used for the exhibition. This would prove useful, as the author approached the song
selection theoretically, to enhance listener experience, whereas the National Museum
had an interest in telling a story with their song choice.
4.2.1   Song Selection
Once musical key and BPM were calculated for all songs, the process of creating song
combinations started. As there were going to be four diﬀerent sound zones in the open
space at the National Museum, the method for combining songs were as follows:
1. For all decades (80′s, 90′s, 00′s and 10′s), songs with tempi as similar as possible
(± 3 BPM) were selected.
2. If more than one song was found in each decade to match the same tempo from
the other decades, the selection was narrowed further by matching the key of the
songs.
3. The process was repeated four times to have a total of ﬁve diﬀerent songs for each
of the four sound zones.
This section shows the resulting song combinations following the wishes of the National
Museum either fully or partially. Figure 12 shows the songs that the National Museum
chose for the exhibition. A big variation in tempi are seen, with the slowest tempo being
90 BPM and the fastest 164 BPM. It is not of big concern that the mean BPM diﬀers
between groups, but it is problematic when there is a large BPM diﬀerence between
individual sound zones for the same group, as seen in Figure 12. Such large tempo
diﬀerences will result in a chaotic listening environment since all of the sound zones will
be out of sync with each other. It will not be possible to synchronize the songs, due to
the large tempo diﬀerences, without ruining the sound of the music.
20
4 Methodology
==PAGE:27==
Figure 12:  Song selection based primarily on the songs that the National Museum wish
to include. Each group consists of four sound zones (1-4) that have individual stimuli,
and, from left to right, the songs played simultaneously across zones are shown (grouped
by color).
In Figure 13, a much more uniform distribution of tempi was chosen for each group,
simply by choosing the songs based on their tempo. This led to a minimal need for
tempo adjustment for the individual songs, to be able to synchronize all the songs
across the sound zones. During the process of matching songs based on their tempo,
the choices were limited to such an extent, that choosing based on key as well was
not possible. If necessary, the key of other songs can be transposed a few semitones
to achieve a larger discography. The song choice shown in Figure 13 was a result of
analyzing feedback from the National Museum and understanding their need for certain
songs to be part of the exhibition, while still optimizing for the best sound design.
4.2 Harmonic Mixing
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 13: Song selection based on tempo matching between all sound zones. Each
group consist of four sound zones (1-4) that have individual stimuli, and, from left to
right, the songs played simultaneously across zones shown (grouped by color).
With a selection of songs that are similar in tempo, the Logic Pro DAW was used
to digitally synchronize the tempo across the sound zones for each consecutive song
playing. This is elaborated on in Section 4.3.4. The alignment of tempi will create a
more comfortable listening environment, which is an important aspect of the ethical
implications of sound designs.
4.3   Perceptual Listening Test
This section will add additional methodology on top of the already explained methods
in the paper in Section 1.
4.3.1   Equipment
• An RME FireFace UCX sound card;
• A Samson Servo 300 Ampliﬁer;
• A ‘The t.amp’ E4-130 Ampliﬁer;
• A MacBook Pro 16-inch 2019 laptop;
• An HBK Nexus Microphone Pre-Amp;
• An HBK ½” Free-Field Microphone Type 4192-L-001;
• An HBK Sound Calibrator Type 4230.
In addition to that, there is a total of ﬁve diﬀerent audio systems available:
• SoundTube FP-6020 II loudspeaker (Dome);
• Rogers LS3 / 5A loudspeaker (HiFi);
22
4 Methodology
==PAGE:29==
• HSS H450 parametric loudspeaker (Parametric);
• Clark Synthesis TST329 Gold Transducer (Shaker);
• A combination of the SoundTube FP-6020 II loudspeaker and the Clark Synthesis
TST329 Gold Transducer (DomeShaker).
For the sound quality test, the Rogers LS3 / 5A loudspeaker is used as a reference
point before each loudspeaker presentation, to compare the performance of each system
to the HiFi loudspeaker. This means that rating is only done for four audio setups in
this test. For the directionality test, the ultrasound loudspeaker is not included as it
is expected from the sound quality test, to have a very poor outcome. Therefore, it
disqualiﬁes as a potential solution for the ﬁnal setup. This means that there are also
only four audio setups being rated in this test.
4.3.2   Presentation Order
The order of loudspeaker presentation will be organized in a similar manner to block
randomization, so that each subject will be listening to the loudspeaker systems in
diﬀerent order.
4.3 Perceptual Listening Test
23
==PAGE:30==
TP
Start with
Sound system order - song 1
Sound system order - song 2
1
Song 1
A
B
C
D
D
A
B
C
2
Song 2
C
A
B
D
B
C
D
A
3
Song 1
B
A
D
C
C
D
A
B
4
Song 2
D
B
C
A
A
D
C
B
5
Song 1
C
B
A
D
A
D
B
C
6
Song 2
D
C
A
B
B
A
C
D
7
Song 1
A
C
B
D
D
B
A
C
8
Song 2
B
D
C
A
C
A
D
B
9
Song 1
A
D
B
C
C
B
D
A
10
Song 2
C
B
D
A
A
C
D
B
11
Song 1
D
A
C
B
B
D
A
C
12
Song 2
B
D
A
C
C
A
B
D
TP
Start with
Sound system order - synced music
Sound system order - unsynced music
1
S
Song 1
A
B
C
D
D
A
B
C
2
U
Song 2
C
A
B
D
B
C
D
A
3
S
Song 2
B
A
D
C
C
D
A
B
4
U
Song 1
D
B
C
A
A
D
C
B
5
S
Song 1
C
B
A
D
A
D
B
C
6
U
Song 2
D
C
A
B
B
A
C
D
7
S
Song 2
A
C
B
D
D
B
A
C
8
U
Song 1
B
D
C
A
C
A
D
B
9
S
Song 1
A
D
B
C
C
B
D
A
10
U
Song 2
C
B
D
A
A
C
D
B
11
S
Song 2
D
A
C
B
B
D
A
C
12
U
Song 1
B
D
A
C
C
A
B
D
Table 1: Randomized presentation order for the sound quality test (top) and direction-
ality test (bottom) based on a sample size of 12 subjects. The directionality test has a
second start condition, synchronized (S) or unsynchronized (U). Sound systems: (Top)
A: Dome, B: Shaker, C: Ultrasound and D: DomeShaker. (Bottom) A: Dome, B: Shaker,
C: HiFi and D: DomeShaker.
For each test participant, the test will alternate between starting with song 1 or 2 for
the sound quality test, and for the directionality test between the synced or unsynced
version and between song 1 and 2, as seen in the column named ‘Start with’ in the
ﬁgure above.
4.3.3   Test Setup
The SoundTube FP-6020 II loudspeaker was hung above the listening position, whereas
the Rogers LS3 / 5A loudspeaker and the HSS H450 loudspeaker was positioned at the
head height of the subject, such that they pointed directly towards the head of the test
participant. This will vary from subject to subject and was corrected for each trial. 
The Clark Synthesis TST329 Gold Transducer was mounted on a wooden platform that
the participant was standing on. An equal listening level was ensured by ﬁrst calibrat-
24
4 Methodology
==PAGE:31==
ing a measurement microphone, and then calibrating the loudspeakers by adjusting the
output level to match an average Root Mean Square (RMS) SPL of the stimuli to be
used. The target SPL was 65 dB. This method of calibrating the loudspeakers was not
capable of compensating for the diﬀerence in perceived loudness as a result of using
vibrotactile systems and ultrasound loudspeakers. Microphone calibration was carried
out with a HBK Sound Calibrator, which was calibrated at 1001.2 Hz at 93.91 dB SPL,
and a calibration script in Matlab. Pre-amp gain was set to 1 V/Pa to ensure a high
enough gain as the target level was 65 dB. As this test served as a validation of the
proposed solution, to determine its use in the exhibition, the loudness level was chosen
as a safe level [39] with the visitors in mind. A major component of ensuring visitor well-
being is to not expose visitors to high SPL levels for prolonged duration. The average
visitor is expected to spend around 45 minutes in the exhibition room, which does not
exceed the maximum recommended duration at that level.
To calibrate the ultrasound speaker, a hard wall was set up right behind the mi-
crophone in the listening position, to get as close to the source of demodulation as
possible. This setup was inspired by a common technique used in the ﬁeld of acoustics
when measuring the SPL of an outdoor environment with a noise source. When mea-
suring in front of a hard surface, the acoustic sound pressure is doubled due to the
reﬂection of the hard surface resulting in a 6 dB increase in the SPL [40]. Sometimes
this is the only way to eﬀectively measure and the average RMS SPL level was found by
subtracting 6 dB from the measured value. However, this is only an approximation, as
mentioned above, as this method is not capable of quantifying the loudness perception
of the sound conduction.
When the subject was listening to the Dome or Shaker by themselves, the ﬁltering
for each speaker was removed for a fair representation. When the DomeShaker was
playing, ﬁltering was added. Listening positions for the subjects were marked with tape.
4.3.4   Stimuli
The audio material used for the tests was the same between all systems for a fair
comparison. According to the Multi Stimulus test with Hidden Reference and Anchor
(MUSHRA) method, which is a suitable method for evaluating intermediate audio qual-
ity with accurate and reliable results, the stimulus length should be 10 seconds and,
at most, 12 seconds [41]. This is chosen to not fatigue the test subjects. Furthermore,
when the goal is to judge audio quality, the best practice is, according to MUSHRA,
to not include assessment of other attributes simultaneously, to avoid confusion. The
MUSHRA method has a comprehensive list of requirements and far from all will be
implemented for this test, nor are they suitable.
For the sound quality test, the stimuli will be synchronized by ﬁrst choosing two
songs that are very close in BPM or the same. Two songs from the band D-A-D will
be used:
1. D-A-D – Nineteenhundredandyesterday (141 BPM)
2. D-A-D – Nothing Ever Changes (138 BPM)
The songs were synchronized to a BPM of 139.5, so that each song is adjusted equally
in tempo. Furthermore, since the musicians aren’t playing strictly on beat, this means
that even at the same tempo, the two songs will drift relative to each other. To account
for this, Flex Time in Logic Pro will be utilized to stretch and compress audio regions
4.3 Perceptual Listening Test
25
==PAGE:32==
in time (e.g. compress a chorus that is playing slightly slower than the set BPM). The
changes are minor and are only meant to be used as a ﬁne tuning, which is why they
are applied over larger regions of the audio ﬁle. Two additional songs will be used for
the directionality test:
3. D-A-D - Reconstructdead (90 BPM)
4. D-A-D - Scare Yourself (123 BPM)
The two songs are part of the unsynchronized test and will therefore not be temporally
edited.
4.3.5   Windowing
To avoid introducing audible artifacts when playing back stimuli, all of the songs for the
test have been windowed to recreate a fade-in and fade-out. This process was applied
before RMS averaging the stimuli as elaborated in Section 4.3.6.
Figure 14:  The eﬀect of windowing a discrete-time signal. In the world of music pro-
duction, this is referred to as fade-in (top chart) and fade-out (bottom chart).
The windowing was applied to the ﬁrst and last 10 ms of the audio samples. Know-
ing the sample frequency, 𝑓𝑠= 44100 Hz, the amount of samples a window of length
𝑡= 0.01𝑠 corresponds to, can be calculated as:
26
4 Methodology
==PAGE:33==
samples = 𝑡⋅𝑓𝑠= 441
In the top chart of Figure 14, the two audio signals have an equal amplitude after 441
samples, which is seen for the fade in. Naturally, the opposite can be seen for the fade-
out, as the two signals in the bottom chart of Figure 14, have equal amplitude in the
beginning, but one signal is attenuated to zero after 441 samples.
4.3.6   RMS Averaging
To ensure that all of the stimuli played at the same level on each calibrated loudspeaker,
the average RMS was normalized to match the stimuli with the lowest average RMS. 
For a discrete set of values x, the RMS is the square root of the mean value of the
squared values of x:
𝑥RMS = √( 1
𝑁) ∑
𝑁
𝑛=1
[𝑥𝑛]2
(2)
With the use of logarithmic rules, a scaling factor can be created to achieve a certain
RMS value for a set of values, x:
𝑦= 𝑥⋅10
𝑑
20
(3)
where d is the diﬀerence between the current RMS value of the signal and the new
RMS value. Table 2 shows the average RMS before and after normalization for the
stimuli. The signals were normalized to song 2, which had the lowest RMS out of all
stimuli. As one of the songs still had a few peak levels with too large an amplitude
that created slight distortion, the RMS was scaled down a bit more, resulting in the
SPL seen in Table 2.
Song 1
Song 2
Song 3
Song 4
RMS SPL
86.05
83.26
83.90
85.54
RMS SPL (normalized)
83.01
83.01
83.01
83.01
Table 2: Average RMS SPL of the diﬀerent stimuli before normalization.
4.3.7   Subjects
Due to time constraints, it was not possible to perform an assessment of the subjects
to determine normal hearing. As an alternative, the subjects were asked to evaluate if
they believe to have normal hearing. Seeing as the target audience of the exhibition
is an older age group (40+), not having normal hearing subjects can be considered
acceptable to include in this test. Basic information questions used in assessing nor-
mal hearing were asked to help determine if a subject experienced any problems with
their hearing. The participants were asked about their height prior to the experiment,
to keep track of the distance from the subject’s head to the dome, according to the
recommended listening distance for the parabolic speaker. As an optional choice, the
4.3 Perceptual Listening Test
27
==PAGE:34==
subjects were asked to indicate their weight range, as this can impact the performance
of the platform. The weight range included in the questionnaire consisted of increments
of 5 kg, starting from 50 to 110 kg. If the subject laid outside of the given options,
there was an empty box to ﬁll with a custom weight.
To get an idea about the subject’s hearing, a few questions from a basic information
survey from DTU’s own database NOAH were used. To evaluate the test participant’s
background and interest in music, a few questions relating to this were asked prior to
the experiment. The questions were in part inspired by a questionnaire on musicality
from the University of Zurich, found in Appendix C.
4.4   Sound Field Recordings
The goal is to measure the two sound zones, when music is not synchronized, and ana-
lyze the data to investigate how well the sound shower setup is at localising the sound
to the designated listening area. The unsynchronized music was chosen as stimuli, as
these two songs did not share the same musical key, and therefore it was expected to
be easier to detect diﬀerences in the frequency domain.
Three diﬀerent sound ﬁelds were measured - two diﬀerent platforms playing diﬀer-
ent music, and the third being in between the two platforms, to record the sound ﬁeld
outside of the listening area. All of the measurements were done after calibrating the
setup for the perceptual listening test elaborated on in Section 4.3.3.
Equipment used for the measurements:
• HBK Nexus Microphone Pre-amp;
• Three HBK 1/2″ Free-Field Microphones Type 4291;
• An HBK Sound Calibrator Type 4230;
• RME FireFace UCX Sound Card;
• 2018 Macbook Pro 16″ Laptop;
• Samson amp;
• the t.amp (stylized in lower case letters);
• Two SoundTube FP-6020 II Parabolic Loudspeakers;
• Two Clark Synthesis TST329 Gold Transducers.
The multichannel stimuli playback and recording were all done in Logic Pro for ease of
use as the author has prior experience with sound engineering. The stimuli for the two
sound zones were song 3 and song 4 for the unsynchronized measurement, as described
in Section 4.3.4. Measurements were then done for three diﬀerent audio setups:
• Dome only;
• Shaker only;
• DomeShaker.
The recorded ﬁles were bounced in place in Logic Pro, i.e. silence was added before
the tracks, in order to time align the individual recordings. This was done in order
to more easily compare and process the recordings in MATLAB. When the recordings
were exported from Logic Pro, no additional processing such as e.g. normalization was
applied.
28
4 Methodology
==PAGE:35==
MATLAB processing
To compare the recordings with the original audio ﬁles, MATLAB’s coherence function
‘mscohere’ was used. This function estimates the magnitude-squared coherence func-
tion on the basis of PSD and Cross Power Spectral Density (CPSD). The function will
output values between 0 and 1, indicating how similar the signals are at each frequency.
The expected outcome of measuring the sound ﬁelds is that measurements done close
to source 1 will have a much higher correlation with source 1, than measurements done
close to source 2, because of the high directivity of the dome speaker. It is also expected
that synchronizing the music will increase the similarity in the time-domain between
measurements.
4.5   COMSOL
4.5.1   3D CAD Modelling
To conceptualize the intended physical solution for the National Museum, a 3D drawing
was made using the online service ‘OnShape’. The reason for choosing this software
was mainly due to it being free and web based, removing the necessity of installing
software. It also makes it easy to access from any device.
Figure 15: 3D models of the concept design (left) for the exhibition at the National
Museum of Denmark, and the simple design (right) for testing purposes at DTU.
Figure 15 shows the two models that were drawn in OnShape. The concept design
on the left features a rail, that is intended to provide additional vibration for the arms
and hands to increase the tactile feedback. It also serves as a mild safeguard for people
to safely get on and oﬀ the platform. Additionally it also hides cables and the trans-
ducer placed underneath the platform by having a round structure serving as the ‘feet’
of the platform. In contrast, the simple design seen on the right features only a plate
to vibrate with four square feet for support. This was a minimalistic design made for
testing purposes at DTU. The platforms serve as one half of the complete solution, as
the intent is to have a parabolic speaker above the platform.
After showcasing the simple design to the stakeholders at the National Museum of
Denmark, it was agreed to make the platform as small as possible, as they have very
4.5 COMSOL
29
==PAGE:36==
limited space due to safety regulations. The platform used for testing measures 0.9 m
in diameter and ﬁts one person. It is possible to reduce the diameter further by up to
15 cm before it becomes too narrow for adults. However, reducing the physical size of
the platform will inevitably change the eﬀect of the vibrations due to a decrease in mass
and size. For this reason, any new designs should be thoroughly tested to determine
any improvements.
4.5.2   COMSOL
There are many diﬀerent types of wood and many of which have diﬀerent propagating
properties. With this in mind, it was of interest to analyse the wooden platform of
the Sound Shower in COMSOL, a software designed to simulate real-world physics, to
determine which type of wood would be better for transmitting the vibrations from the
transducer. While analyzing this in COMSOL, it was also of interest to investigate the
propagation of sound through air for diﬀerent types of wood. Analysis in COMSOL
focus on an acoustical analysis and a mechanical analysis in order to couple the two do-
mains. This way, it is possible to analyze how the mechanical structure deforms under
load, how the vibrations propagate through the structure and how the sound radiates
into free space. For this, the simple platform design seen in Figure 15 was modeled
in the software, as this is a much less complex structure to analyze. It is possible to
import CAD models into COMSOL, but the imported structure from Section 4.5.1
ended up with incorrect boundaries and domains, leading to the author remodelling the
structure with COMSOL’s own tools. Only the simple design was built in COMSOL,
as the author had no prior experience with the software.
When the author built the simple design of the platform for the perceptual listening
test, the material available at DTU consisted of Medium Density Fiberboard (MDF)
plates and hard wood laths. As the wood type is known only for the plate, the laths
providing the support for the platform will be assigned a pre-deﬁned type in COMSOL.
It was only possible to ﬁnd the acoustic properties of MDF from one online source [42]. 
The material characteristics are necessary to determine how sound propagates in the
plate. For this purpose, the following properties were used:
Density, 𝜌MDF
= 750 kg
𝑚3
Young's modulus, 𝐸MDF = 4 GPa
Poisson's ratio, 𝜈MDF
= 0.25
(4)
With these material properties the speed of sound in the material can be calculated as:
Speed of sound, 𝑐MDF = √𝐸MDF
𝜌MDF
= 2309.4 𝑚
𝑠
(5)
U. G. Wegst [6] has shown that in general, the properties of wood used for musical
instruments, speciﬁcally Young’s modulus and thereby also the speed of sound, are
much higher than the properties of MDF. It is also stated by U. G. Wegst, that the
sound radiation of materials with lower density will have a shorter decay compared to
those with higher density, such as bars used for xylophones.
30
4 Methodology
==PAGE:37==
The sound radiation property, R, describes how much sound is radiated from the
material. A higher coeﬃcient means more sound is radiated and vice versa for a lower
one. R can be calculated as the ratio of the speed of sound, c and the density, 𝜌.
𝑅platform = 𝑐MDF
𝜌MDF
= 2309.4 𝑚
𝑠
750 kg
𝑚3
= 3.08 𝑚4
𝑠⋅kg
(6)
Comparing the R value from (6) to the R values of diﬀerent types of wood analyzed by
U. G. Wegst, which range from 4 to 16 𝑚4
𝑠⋅kg, the MDF plate is expected to be a better
choice than other types of wood. This was convenient as the aim of the platform is to
transfer as much energy as possible to the listener through vibrations, and as little as
possible through the air. The expectation was investigated in COMSOL to see if it held
true. Additionally, a diﬀerent material was investigated as well to compare against. The
material, American Red Oak (ARO), was pre-deﬁned in COMSOL, with the following
properties
𝜌ARO = 630 kg
𝑚3 ,  𝐸ARO = 12.4 GPa,  𝜈ARO = 0.3
(7)
These parameters lead to a speed of sound and sound radiation coeﬃcient in ARO
material of
𝑐ARO = 4.435 𝑚
𝑠,  𝑅ARO = 7.04 𝑚4
𝑠⋅kg
(8)
With the results of (6) and (8), the American Red Oak material is expected to radiate
more sound than the MDF plate.
Figure 16 depicts the geometric build in COMSOL. The simple structure was placed
in a box with width 1.5 m, depth 1.5 m and height 2 m, resembling the air around the
platform when a person is standing on the platform.
4.5 COMSOL
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 16: COMSOL geometry of the simple structure seen in Figure 15, with an en-
closing space representing air.
A pressure acoustics module and a solid mechanics module was used in COMSOL to
simulate the two realms in the frequency domain. A multiphysics module was used to
couple the acoustic and solid mechanics together. All boundaries (except for the bottom
part of the box) represent air, and were set to perfectly matched boundaries, meaning
that the boundaries of the box would not reﬂect sound waves in the simulation. This
allows analysis of the pressure acoustics in the near vicinity of the listening position. 
The bottom boundary of the box was instead deﬁned as a hard surface boundary, to
act like a hard ﬂoor that will reﬂect sound. The air was added as a material to the
space with the acoustic properties:
𝜌air = 1.2 kg
𝑚3 , 𝑐air = 343 𝑚
𝑠
(9)
In COMSOL, ‘studies’ are used to analyze certain behavior of the domains. First, an
eigenfrequency study was done for the solid mechanics domain, to ﬁnd resonance fre-
quencies of the platform below 200 Hz. To calculate and compare the eigenfrequencies
with the ones from COMSOL, it is necessary to determine the ﬂexural rigidity, D, which
for a round plate that is simply supported [43], can be described as:
𝐷=
𝐸ℎ3
12(1 −𝜈2)   (Pa ⋅𝑚3)
(10)
With ℎ= 0.009 𝑚 being the plate thickness and the values from (4), the ﬂexural rigidity
can be calculated as:
𝐷MDF =
𝐸MDFℎ3
MDF
12(1 −𝜈2
MDF) = 259.2  Pa ⋅𝑚3
(11)
32
4 Methodology
==PAGE:39==
The fundamental frequency can be calculated using the following formula:
𝑓= 10.21
𝑅2 ⋅2𝜋
√( 𝐷
𝜌ℎ)   (Hz)
(12)
Inserting the radius of the plate, 𝑅= 0.475 𝑚 along with the other values from (4),
and (11), in (12) results in the eigenfrequency:
𝑓= 44.63 Hz
(13)
This eigenfrequency is for a circular plate with simple support. Albeit, the frequency
will most likely be diﬀerent when the plate is supported with four blocks as shown in
Figure 16. These frequencies will be identiﬁed with an eigenfrequency study in COM-
SOL.
With no further knowledge of the structure, the analysis in COMSOL does not include
damping of the system, as this is outside of the scope of the thesis, even though it would
give a more realistic result.
4.6   Project Management
Project management played an important role in the development and implementation
of the proposed sound system solution for the National Museum. A comprehensive
approach was employed with regular meetings, eﬀective communication, and a pivotal
demo presentation. Engaging in regular meetings with various departments at the mu-
seum, including the Audio/Visual group, architects, and project writers, proved instru-
mental in fostering collaboration and ensuring alignment among project stakeholders. 
These meetings served as a platform for discussing project progress, addressing concerns,
and identifying potential roadblocks. The meetings facilitated the exchange of ideas
and expertise, leading to a more holistic understanding of the project’s requirements
and objectives. Eﬀective communication, both oral and written, was a cornerstone of
the project management strategy. Clear and concise communication protocols were
established to ensure consistent information sharing across all departments. With a
proactive approach, regular status updates and progress reports were implemented to
maintain transparency and keep all stakeholders informed of project developments.
A critical pivot point in the project was marked by a comprehensive demo presenta-
tion of the intended sound system solution. This demonstration allowed the museum’s
representatives to experience the system’s capabilities ﬁrsthand, particularly its ability
to eﬀectively control and distribute sound within the museum’s complex acoustic envi-
ronment.
In conclusion, the project management methodology brought into play for this
project emphasized collaboration, communication, and demonstration. These elements
were instrumental in navigating the project’s complexities. The museum’s satisfaction
with the outcome demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of this approach in addressing the
speciﬁc needs of a large-scale project within a complex institutional setting.
4.6 Project Management
33
==PAGE:40==
5   Results
5.1   Parabolic Loudspeaker Frequency Response
Figure 17 depicts the on-axis and oﬀ-axis responses, measured within the suggested
listening distance. A clear distinction between the on-axis and 60° oﬀ-axis measurement
was seen. Depending on the observed frequency range, the attenuation varied between
8-10 dB and 12-15 dB. A 10 dB increase or decrease results in twice as large or as small
perceived loudness, respectively.
Figure 17:  On-axis and oﬀ-axis frequency response of the FP-6020 dome speaker mea-
sured in an anechoic chamber in building 354 at DTU. The x-axis is limited from 150
Hz to 10000 Hz.
The 0° FR shown in Figure 17 was found to have an amplitude range of 25 dB between
minimum and maximum values, compared to the FR shown in the data sheet in Ap-
pendix A, in the same frequency range. However, the 0° FR in Figure 17 was far from
being a ﬂat response. The extreme peaks and troughs for all three curves, resembled the
pattern observed from comb ﬁltering. The diﬀerence between the 0° and 30° response
was much smaller than the diﬀerence between the 30° and 60° response.
In Figure 18, the on-axis response for diﬀerent distances outside the recommended
listening range was investigated. At 92 cm away from the FP-6020 loudspeaker, the
response illustrated by the blue curve with cross markers was attenuated approximately
5-6 dB across the entire frequency range, with a few exceptions. Two large dips were
34
5 Results
==PAGE:41==
seen in the FR at around 2600 Hz and 5500 Hz. These dips were found to be even more
frequent in the response at 153 cm from the loudspeaker.
Figure 18:  On-axis frequency response of the FP-6020 dome speaker measured in an
anechoic chamber in building 354 at DTU.
Figure 19 shows the results of measuring the eﬀect of an oﬀset on the frequency re-
sponse. For a further explanation on the oﬀset, see Figure 11 in Section 4.1.1. Below
700 Hz no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found. Above 700 Hz, large diﬀerences between
the oﬀset and non-oﬀset measurements were found for both 30° and 60° angled mea-
surements.
5.1 Parabolic Loudspeaker Frequency Response
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 19:  On-axis frequency response of the FP-6020 dome speaker measured in an
anechoic chamber in building 354 at DTU.
5.2   Sound Field Coherence
The frequency response of the stimuli and all recordings are presented in Figure 20,
and afterwards, the results of the Magnitude-Squared Coherence analysis are shown in
Figure 21, Figure 22 and Figure 23. The FRs serve as a supplement to the coherence
results, as they provide insight into the mixing of the stimuli, and into the diﬀerences
between the three measurement positions and also the performance of the loudspeaker
setups. As a reminder for the reader, the loudspeaker combination DomeShaker has
added cross-over ﬁltering, so that the shaker and dome complement each other.
36
5 Results
==PAGE:43==
Figure 20: Frequency responses of the stimuli and sound ﬁeld recordings. ‘Reconstruct-
dead’ was played in the primary sound zone, while ‘Scare Yourself’ was played in the
secondary zone. Microphone 1 was placed in the primary sound zone, microphone 2
was placed in between both zones and microphone 3 was placed in the secondary sound
zone.
The two stimuli in Figure 20 had rather similar low and high frequency responses,
with mostly the midrange (500 - 2000 Hz) varying between the two songs. Overall, the
songs had a minor roll-oﬀ from 100 Hz and upwards until 10000 Hz of about 30 dB/
Decade. After 10000 Hz, there was a roll-oﬀ of roughly 40 dB/Octave. This together
with the characteristics of the individual loudspeakers, and to an extent the room they
were placed within, dictated the FR seen for the measurements. The dome had a slightly
smaller response in the bass region (below 250 Hz) compared to the other speakers. In
contrast, the dome had a slightly larger response than the shaker after 6000 Hz.
The coherence results in Figure 21, Figure 22 and Figure 23 showed good spec-
tral discrimination for the dome and the domeshaker setup in each sound zone. 
Contrary to this, the shaker was seen to have poor spectral discrimination in either
sound zone. Mic 1 and mic 3 in Figure 21 showed great spectral separation for
both sound zones, while they were still diﬀerent from mic 2. The mean coherence
for mic 1, 2 and 3 in the primary sound zone were 0.52, 0.18 and 0.05 respectively.
5.2 Sound Field Coherence
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 21: Magnitude-Squared Coherence results of the primary sound zone (top), and
the secondary sound zone (bottom), when only the dome is playing in each. Microphone
1 was placed in the primary sound zone, microphone 2 was placed in between both
zones and microphone 3 was placed in the secondary sound zone.
In the secondary sound zone, the mean coherence was 0.05, 0.26 and 0.56 for mic 1, 2
and 3 respectively. At around 140 Hz mic 1 had a poor coherence value of less than 0.1
for the primary sound zone, and in turn showed a value of 0.5 at the same frequency in
the secondary zone. For all microphones, a very low coherence value was seen below 70
Hz. Similarly for the secondary zone, very low values were seen, but only below 60 Hz.
Figure 22 shows worse frequency discrimination than Figure 21. The coherence
curves were seen to be very similar for both sound zones with minor diﬀerences. Mean
coherence for mic 1, 2 and 3 for the primary sound zone was 0.26, 0.18 and 0.13.
38
5 Results
==PAGE:45==
Figure 22: Magnitude-Squared Coherence results of the primary sound zone (top), and
the secondary sound zone (bottom), when only the shaker is playing in each. Micro-
phone 1 was placed in the primary sound zone, microphone 2 was placed in between
both zones and microphone 3 was placed in the secondary sound zone.
The secondary sound zone showed mean coherence results of 0.16, 0.26 and 0.29 for
mic 1, 2 and 3 correspondingly. No large diﬀerence was found between the two sound
zones across microphone recordings. Similar to Figure 21, the curves in Figure 22 only
showed very little coherence below 70 and 60 Hz for the two sound sources. In addition,
the peak and trough that was seen at 140 Hz in Figure 21, showed up multiple times
and at diﬀerent frequencies for the shaker measurements.
Figure 23 shows coherence values similar to both the results shown in Figure 21
and Figure 22. As an example, the 140 Hz peak and trough that was seen in Figure 21
was visible in the coherence plot for the DomeShaker. The same high-pass behaviour
as for the other setups was seen at 60 and 70 Hz for the two sound zones.
5.2 Sound Field Coherence
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 23: Magnitude-Squared Coherence results of the primary sound zone (top), and
the secondary sound zone (bottom), when the dome and shaker are playing in each. 
Microphone 1 was placed in the primary sound zone, microphone 2 was placed in be-
tween both zones and microphone 3 was placed in the secondary sound zone.
The mean coherence was 0.48 for mic 1, 0.19 for mic 2 and 0.06 for mic 3 in the primary
sound zone. In the secondary sound zone, the mean coherence was 0.05, 0.24 and 0.52
for mic 1, 2 and 3, respectively.
5.3   Perceptual Listening Test
As the thesis is split into two parts, the most prominent results are presented in Section
1. This section will therefore only provide supplemental results that were not included
in the paper. Figure 24 shows the distribution of subjects for some of the metrics in-
cluded in the assessment questionnaire. The height of the test participants showed less
variance compared to the weight, with the mean height measured at 177 cm and the
mean weight measured at 71 kg. Eighty percent of the subjects were classiﬁed as nor-
mal hearing, and 20 percent had a hearing impairment. Out of the 12 subjects, two
thirds have at one point had normal or extensive musical training for at least a year,
whereas the other third has had no musical training at all. The same distribution was
found for the amount of participants who either studied or worked within a relevant
ﬁeld of acoustics. Eleven out of twelve participants owned a HiFi device in the form of
headphones or loudspeakers.
40
5 Results
==PAGE:47==
Figure 24: Background information of 12 test participants included in the listening test,
showing the distribution of subjects for several parameters.
With the information found from the perceptual listening test, the author found it in-
teresting to investigate if any eﬀect from musical training could be seen. In Figure 25,
the results showed similar outcome to the one outlined in Section 1, with only a slight
diﬀerence between the Dome and Shaker, for subjects with no musical training.
Figure 25: Mean ratings of each sound system for subjects with musical and no musical
training. (Left) graph shows data from the sound quality test and (right) shows data
from the bass/treble ratio test. Values plotted represent mean ±se.
Similar to the analysis in Section 1, statistical analysis was performed of data from both
tests in Figure 25. For the sound quality test, a one-tailed t-test (lower) was done and
5.3 Perceptual Listening Test
41
==PAGE:48==
for the bass/treble ratio test a two-tailed t-test was done. For both tests, the alpha (𝛼)
level was 𝛼= 0.05. No signiﬁcant eﬀect was found for musical training.
5.4   Modal Analysis
This section will ﬁrst look at the eigenfrequency study of the plate and the platform,
where the material of the plate is chosen to be MDF. Then the frequency domain study
will be introduced for the platform surrounded by air. This will then be repeated for
a new material applied to the plate.
For Figure 26 and Figure 27, the colormap indicating the amplitude of the defor-
mation had no important meaning, other than simply showing the areas where high
stress occured. Furthermore, the colormap also scaled itself according to the amplitude
for each study, meaning the colormap is not comparable between each analysis. In Fig-
ure 26 the results of a modal analysis are shown. The analytical value of the ﬁrst mode
of the plate, was found to match the result from (13) within a few Hz. Four modes in
total were found below 200 Hz, as this was the cut-oﬀ frequency for the ﬁlter applied to
the transducer. The resonance frequencies of the system were 49.8 Hz, 103.6 Hz, 169.9
Hz and 193.7 Hz.
Figure 26: Eigenfrequency analysis showing the ﬁrst 4 modes for the MDF plate with
constrained edges. Top left image shows the ﬁrst mode found at 49.8 Hz, top right
image shows the second mode at 103.6 Hz, bottom left image shows a third mode at
169.9 Hz and lastly the bottom right image shows an eigenmode at 193.7 Hz.
42
5 Results
==PAGE:49==
The natural vibration frequencies of the platform are shown in Figure 27. With a slight
shift towards lower frequencies compared to the results in Figure 26, the system was
found to be particularly sensitive to vibration at 42.3 Hz, 97.3 Hz, 157.4 Hz and 179.1
Hz.
Figure 27: Eigenfrequency analysis of the platform used in the listening test. Top left
image shows the ﬁrst mode found at 42.3 Hz, top right image shows the second mode
at 97.3 Hz, bottom left image shows a third mode at 157.4 Hz and lastly the bottom
right image shows an eigenmode at 179.1 Hz.
Figure 28 illustrates the resulting SPL in the surrounding air ﬁeld as an eﬀect of the
vibration of the platform. A large diﬀerence in SPL, of more than 20 dB, was found
between the platform and the air for all resonance frequencies. The highest SPL of
approximately 115 dB in the surrounding air space was found at 42.3 Hz, and the lowest
SPL of roughly 85 dB at 179.1 Hz.
5.4 Modal Analysis
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 28: Sound propagation analysis for an acoustically and mechanically coupled
system in COMSOL. The sound pressure level in the air in the near vicinity of the
platform was investigated for the four resonance frequencies found in Figure 27. Top
left image at 42.3 Hz, top right image at 97.3 Hz, bottom left at 157.4 Hz and lastly
the bottom right image at 179.1 Hz.
Vibrations were seen to travel through the legs of the platform and emit a high SPL as
well, as seen in Figure 28.
A large shift in frequency was found when the material of the plate was changed to
American Red Oak, as seen in Figure 29. The ﬁrst eigenfrequency was found at 97.3
Hz. No additional modes were found below 200 Hz.
44
5 Results
==PAGE:51==
Figure 29: The ﬁrst eigenmode of a round plate with identical dimensions as in Fig-
ure 26, but with a built-in material in COMSOL applied to it. The material chosen
was ‘American red oak’. The eigenmode was found at 97.3 Hz.
The diﬀerence found for the platform in Figure 30 was similiar to the one found for
Figure 29, naturally. Additionally, the same downwards resonance frequency shift found
between Figure 26 and Figure 27, was found between Figure 29 and Figure 30. Inter-
estingly enough, two natural frequencies at 82.8 Hz and 188.9 Hz were found below 200
Hz for the platform in Figure 30, where only one was found for the plate in Figure 29.
Figure 30: Eigenfrequency analysis of the platform with identical dimensions as Fig-
ure 26, but with a built-in material in COMSOL applied to it. The material chosen
was American Red Oak. Left image shows the ﬁrst eigenmode at 82.8 Hz and right
image shows the second mode at 188.9 Hz.
At the resonance frequencies of the platform with the American Red Oak material,
Figure 31 shows lower sound levels in the air compared to the results in Figure 28.
5.4 Modal Analysis
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 31: Sound propagation analysis for an acoustically and mechanically coupled
system in COMSOL. The sound pressure level in the air in the near vicinity of the
platform was investigated for the two resonance frequencies found in Figure 29, 82.8 Hz
and 188.9 Hz respectively.
A sound pressure level diﬀerence of approximately 15 dB was found between the two
frequencies in Figure 31. The SPL at 82.8 Hz in Figure 31 was slightly lower than the
lowest level found in Figure 28.
46
5 Results
==PAGE:53==
6   Discussion
Good directionality at the cost of sound quality
 With the results shown in
Figure 18 and Figure 17, the frequency response of the parabolic loudspeaker was in
general, far from ﬂat. Since the loudspeaker propagates sound upwards and into the
plastic dome, which directs sound downwards toward the listener, it seems likely that
phase cancellation was the cause of the poor response. However, while the loudspeaker
might not provide HiFi quality, the oﬀ-axis measurements revealed good directionality.
The directionality was of course not comparable to parametric loudspeakers, but bet-
ter than conventional loudspeakers. A possible solution to improve the sound quality
might be to equalize the stimuli to counteract the phase cancellation. The parabolic
loudspeaker was found to be a viable option for implementing sound-beaming technol-
ogy at the National Museum.
Great sound ﬁeld separation in unsynchronized conditions for the proposed
solution
 Overall, the coherence results showed good sound zone separation for the
Dome and the DomeShaker setups. The Shaker showed non-optimal coherence results,
most likely due to its inherent function of simply vibrating objects, without a focus on
directing sound. The platform did not have any padding underneath the supporting
feet, which could have resulted in unwanted vibrational noise. The very low coherence
scores below 70 Hz for the various sound systems, were a result of two things. The
Dome on its own is not meant for reproducing low-frequency content below 150 Hz. 
For the two other systems, the Shaker and the DomeShaker, the low coherence score is
a result of the measurement technique. The vibrotactile element of the platform meant
that the bass was perceived to a greater extent when standing on the platform, but
not when listening to the sound propagated through the air. In the same way, the
microphone was only able to measure the low-frequency content propagated in the air,
as it was not in contact with the platform. This means that the results are limited in
the sense that they can not account for the sound conduction induced by the platform. 
Considering the test paradigm was done in unsynchronized condition, meaning a more
diﬃcult listening environment, the outcome showed great promise. The coherence re-
sults in Figure 21 and Figure 23 successfully demonstrate the separation of two closely
placed sound zones with the Dome and DomeShaker combination.
Signiﬁcant diﬀerence in comfort level between proposed solution and a con-
ventional loudspeaker
 As it was found in the paper in Section 1, a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence was found inside the listening area, between the proposed solution and a
conventional HiFi loudspeaker when the subjects rated comfort level. Furthermore, no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found between the DomeShaker and the HiFi loudspeaker in
the sound quality test and the bass/treble ratio test. Figure 24 showed that most of the
participants were accustomed to listening to a High Fidelity (HiFi) audio device, which
is thought to have created a good foundation for the subjects’ ability to evaluate sound
quality critically. While individual preferences for music taste can vary a lot, it is diﬃ-
cult to say how much it aﬀected the outcome of the listening test. It was also found that
musical training had no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the results, yet it is nonetheless interesting
6 Discussion
47
==PAGE:54==
to see, that the mean of the DomeShaker in the right image of Figure 25 indicated a
perfectly balanced system, when rated by subjects with a musical background.
Considerations of acoustic material properties and unexpected observa-
tions
 It was expected of the MDF material to decrease overall SPL compared to
the ARO material that had a higher sound radiation, as described in Section 4.5. 
Surprisingly, the surrounding sound pressure level was found to be slightly lower for the
ARO material than the MDF, at their respective resonance frequencies. Also, the ARO
material had fewer modes under 200 Hz, that is the region the transducer will be used
in, which meant less resonance and possibly a better frequency response. One possible
reason for these ﬁndings, was not including damping of the system in the modeling. 
As the author had no prior experience with COMSOL, the modal analysis were natu-
rally limited by this. As a result, a more comprehensive study could be carried out to
properly assess the material eﬀect on the platform.
Limitations of the study
 Only being able to study the listener experience with two
designated sound zones, left some uncertainty as to how it would work in the exhibition
room at the National Museum, where four sound zones would be implemented. This was
mainly due to the fact that the exhibition room was under construction during the time
frame of this research. This naturally led to not being able to assess the acoustics of
the room and plan strategic placement of sound absorbers. Furthermore, the acoustics
of the room, could change drastically once the exhibition opens and visitors enter the
room. This is another concern that was not possible to investigate in this thesis, due to
the aforementioned reason. A very limited budget meant that equipment and resources
were scarce. While this did limit the available solutions, it also ensured some creative
and critical design choices were made to enhance the listener experience.
The inherent nature of a listener’s experience is subjective. This, along with other
variables such as musical background, cultural background and possibly many others, all
shape a person’s response. All of this makes it diﬃcult to create a universal framework
to accurately convey the performance of a sound system. To this extent, the results of
the listening test are also limited by only having 12 test participants.
While research has shown beneﬁts of vibrotactile stimuli for various implementa-
tions, it is diﬃcult to predict whether the eﬀect of the sound conduction will be positive
or negative, for an audience who might not be familiar with the technology, and who
might have diﬀerent expectations for an exhibition on a rock band. The proposed solu-
tion was not tested with any form of background noise, which will inherently be present
when 40 - 50 visitors are in the exhibition room. To involve more subjects and keep
the test duration short, the stimuli was never presented for more than 10 seconds at a
time. At the exhibition, visitors will be subjected to sound zones for at least 15 minutes
at a time. The eﬀect of this can be a very fatiguing listening experience for some, even
if the sound environment has been optimized for a pleasant experience.
Future work
 As the eﬀect of vibrotactile installations on the music experience is
still a rather unexplored area, it is paramount that studies exploring the combination
of directional loudspeakers and vibrotactile stimuli are carried out to further enhance
the listening experience in open space with multiple sources. The focus of such a study
48
6 Discussion
==PAGE:55==
could be the ethical implications of the sound conduction, to be more inclusive towards
hearing impaired people in settings like exhibitions and other open spaces.
It is possible to extend the vibrotactile stimuli for other uses than reproduction of
music. The platform on its own could be included in future consumer products aiming
to provide a more immersive experience in Virtual Reality (VR) through the use of
vibrotactile sound.
6 Discussion
49
==PAGE:56==
7   Conclusion
Assessing the outcomes of this research project against the initial project plan and
learning objectives provides valuable insights into the eﬀectiveness of the strategies and
methodologies applied.
1. Be able to explain sound propagation and identify challenges in open
spaces. Section 3.1.3 explains the basic principle of sound propagation in rela-
tion to wavelength and frequency. Simultaneously, Section 3.1.3 also identiﬁes
loudspeaker directivity as one of the biggest challenges in open spaces. In Sec-
tion 3.1.4, room acoustics are identiﬁed to be another challenge in open spaces. 
Other factors such as cost and visual impact are recognized as obstacles in the
literature review in Section 3.2.
2. Demonstrate the use of sound beaming and ultrasound modulation
techniques. The loudspeaker evaluation in Section 4.1 and the perceptual listen-
ing test in the paper in Section 1, demonstrated in-depth use of both loudspeaker
technologies. In the end, the parabolic loudspeaker, representing sound-beaming
technology, was chosen over the parametric loudspeaker, for its improved sound
quality.
3. Select and position sound absorbents eﬀectively to contain audio in
designated areas. As the National Museum were not able to give access to the
exhibition room before late December, the author decided that investigating the
room acoustics and placing sound absorbers strategically was not feasible. This
was simply due to time constraints. Furthermore, sickness among the construc-
tion workers resulted in the preparation of the exhibition room being delayed
even further.
4. Describe the principles of bone conduction and propose its applica-
tions in open spaces. In Section 3.1.2 the principles behind sound and bone
conduction are introduced, while also mentioning some of the ways they can be
used in open spaces.
5. Implement beat matching, make tonal adjustments, and utilize auto-
remixing for seamless transitions. The harmonic mixing was implemented
and demonstrated in Section 4.2 and further elaborated on in Section 4.2.1. 
The methods were also included in the perceptual listening test to investigate
the eﬀect of beat matching and tonality. Section 1 concludes on the ﬁndings.
6. Conduct and interpret results from sound quality tests, identifying ar-
eas of overlap or poor clarity. The paper in Section 1 introduces a perceptual
listening test, that conducts and interprets results from sound quality tests and
directionality tests. Additionally, the pros and cons of the proposed solution are
discussed.
7. Design visitor feedback forms. A visitor feedback form is found in Appendix
B. It includes parameters to analyze a subjective perception of the listening ex-
50
7 Conclusion
==PAGE:57==
perience in the exhibition room. It also includes the option for visitors to include
additional comments.
8. Collaborate in teams and present joint solutions to sound management
problems. Section 4.6 elaborates on the process of working with several teams
at the National Museum, and underlines the importance of eﬀective communica-
tion and brainstorming, to tackle complex problems. In Section 4.5.1 a concrete
example of how a demo showcase led to structural changes is given.
9. Propose audio solutions that address the needs of an exhibition for the
National Museum of Copenhagen. This thesis, and Section 1 in particular,
shows the individual processes of investigating, creating, hypothesizing, testing
and analysing a solution tailored to the needs of the exhibition at the National
Museum of Copenhagen.
10. Discuss the ethical implications of diﬀerent sound designs on visitor
well-being. Section 4.3.3 considers the implication of prolonged exposure to high
sound pressure levels and incorporates safe measures in the test design as well. 
The implementation of vibrotactile stimuli, further ensures safe listening levels
for the visitors, by allowing lower SPLs, as elaborated in Section 3.1.2.
11. Analyze feedback for the diﬀerent stakeholders and make iterative im-
provements to sound solutions. Throughout the project, the diﬀerent audio
solutions that were explored were discussed with the stakeholders at the National
Museum, in order to incorporate their feedback into the design. An example of
this is given in Section 4.2 when selecting the music for the exhibition.
7 Conclusion
51
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Alunno and A. Yarce Botero, “Directional Landscapes: Using Parametric
Loudspeakers for Sound Reproduction in Art”, Journal of New Music Research,
vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 201–211, Apr. 2017, doi: 10.1080/09298215.2016.1227340.
[2]
J.-H. Chang and F. Jacobsen, “Sound Field Control with a Circular Double-Layer
Array of Loudspeakers”, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 
131, no. 6, pp. 4518–4525, Jun. 2012, doi: 10.1121/1.4714349.
[3]
T. Betlehem, W. Zhang, M. A. Poletti, and T. D. Abhayapala, “Personal
Sound Zones: Delivering Interface-Free Audio to Multiple Listeners”, IEEE Sig-
nal Process. Mag., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 81–91, Mar. 2015, doi: 10.1109/MSP.
2014.2360707.
[4]
J. J. Croft, “Theory, History, and the Advancement of Parametric Loudspeak-
ers”. Accessed: Oct. 31, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.yumpu.com/
en/document/read/30807469/theory-history-and-the-advancement-of-parametric-
loudspeakers
[5]
S. Merchel and M. E. Altinsoy, “Psychophysical Comparison of the Auditory and
Tactile Perception: A Survey”, J Multimodal User Interfaces, vol. 14, no. 3, pp.
271–283, Sep. 2020, doi: 10.1007/s12193-020-00333-z.
[6]
U. G. Wegst, “Wood for Sound”, American Journal of Botany, vol. 93, pp. 1439–
1448, Oct. 2006, doi: 10.3732/ajb.93.10.1439.
[7]
R. T. Verrillo and G. A. Gescheider, “Enhancement and Summation in the Per-
ception of Two Successive Vibrotactile Stimuli”, Perception & Psychophysics, vol. 
18, no. 2, pp. 128–136, Mar. 1975, doi: 10.3758/BF03204100.
[8]
C. Marquis-Favre, E. Premat, and D. Aubrée, “Noise and Its Eﬀects – A Review
on Qualitative Aspects of Sound. Part II: Noise and Annoyance”, Acta Acustica
united with Acustica, vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 626–642, Jul. 2005.
[9]
“Marozeau: An Artistic Audiotactile Installation for... - Google Scholar”. 
Accessed: Jan. 27, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://scholar.google.com/
scholar_lookup?title=An%20artistic%20audiotactile%20installation%20for%20
augmented%20music&author=J.%20Marozeau&author=R.%20Bresin&author=
K.%20Falkenberg&publication_year=2023&journal=&volume=&pages=419-425
[10] S. C. Aker, H. Innes-Brown, K. F. Faulkner, M. Vatti, and J. Marozeau, “Eﬀect
of Audio-Tactile Congruence on Vibrotactile Music Enhancement”, The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 3396–3409, Dec. 2022,
doi: 10.1121/10.0016444.
[11] “Merchel: Auditory-tactile Experience of Music - Google Scholar”. 
Ac-
cessed: Jan. 
27, 2024. 
[Online]. 
Available: https://scholar.google.com/
scholar_lookup?title=Auditory-tactile%20experience%20of%20music&author=S.
%20Merchel&author=M.%20E.%20Altinsoy&author=S.%20Papetti&author=C.
%20Saitis&publication_year=2018&book=Musical%20Haptics
52
7 Bibliography
==PAGE:59==
[12] S. Merchel and M. E. Altinsoy, “The Inﬂuence of Vibrations on Musical Experi-
ence”, J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 220–234, Apr. 2014, doi: 10.17743/
jaes.2014.0016.
[13] A. Kameoka and M. Kuriyagawa, “Consonance Theory Part II: Consonance of
Complex Tones and Its Calculation Method”, The Journal of the Acoustical Soci-
ety of America, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 1460–1469, Jul. 2005, doi: 10.1121/1.1911624.
[14] R. Plomp and W. J. M. Levelt, “Tonal Consonance and Critical Bandwidth”,
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 548–560,
Oct. 1965, doi: 10.1121/1.1909741.
[15] J. H. McDermott, A. F. Schultz, E. A. Undurraga, and R. A. Godoy, “Indif-
ference to Dissonance in Native Amazonians Reveals Cultural Variation in Music
Perception”, Nature, vol. 535, no. 7613, pp. 547–550, Jul. 2016, doi: 10.1038/
nature18635.
[16] H. Gillmeister and M. Eimer, “Tactile Enhancement of Auditory Detection
and Perceived Loudness”, Brain Research, vol. 1160, pp. 58–68, Jul. 2007, doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2007.03.041.
[17] S. Chen, Z. Yang, Q. Huang, K. Li, and S. Ge, “Vibrotactile Sensation: A Sys-
tematic Review of the Artiﬁcial Pacinian Corpuscle”, J Bionic Eng, vol. 20, no. 
4, pp. 1401–1416, Jul. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s42235-023-00348-8.
[18] F. J. Pompei, “Sound From Ultrasound: The Parametric Array as an Audible
Sound Source”, 1973.
[19] J. Kuutti, J. Leiwo, and R. E. Sepponen, “Local Control of Audio Environment:
A Review of Methods and Applications”, Technologies, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 31–53,
Mar. 2014, doi: 10.3390/technologies2010031.
[20] N. Kaplanis, S. Bech, S. H. Jensen, and p. u. family=Waterschoot given=Toon,
“Perception of Reverberation in Small Rooms: A Literature Study”, presented at
the Audio Engineering Society Conference: 55th International Conference: Spatial
Audio, Audio Engineering Society, Aug. 2014. Accessed: Jan. 26, 2024. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=17348
[21] M. Alunno and A. Yarce Botero, “Directional Landscapes: Using Parametric
Loudspeakers for Sound Reproduction in Art”, Journal of New Music Research,
vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 201–211, Apr. 2017, doi: 10.1080/09298215.2016.1227340.
[22] “PARAMETRIC ARRAY IN AIR - DTU Findit”. Accessed: Oct. 29, 2023. [On-
line]. Available: https://ﬁndit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5925eec15010df73d023ab7c
[23] C. Shi, H. Mu, and W.-S. Gan, “A Psychoacoustical Preprocessing Technique
for Virtual Bass Enhancement of the Parametric Loudspeaker”, in 2013 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, May 2013, pp.
31–35. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2013.6637603.
[24] T. Kamakura, M. Yoneyama, and K. Ikegaya, “Studies for the Realization of
Parametric Loud-Speaker”, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of Japan, vol. 
41, no. 6, pp. 378–385, 1985, doi: 10.20697/jasj.41.6_378.
7 Bibliography
53
==PAGE:60==
[25] “Brown Innovations Single Localizer Sound Dome (For One Listener)”. Accessed:
Dec. 30, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.browninnovations.com/sound-
dome/single-localizer-sound-dome
[26] “FP6020-II”. Accessed: Dec. 30, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://soundtube-
int.mseaudio.com/fp6020-ii.html
[27] “CCPro Soundtube FP 6020 speaker”. 
Accessed: Dec. 
30, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://ccproshop.dk/stereo-tv-hjttaler/soundtube-fp-6020-
speaker?link_rewrite=soundtube-fp-6020-speaker
[28] E. Frid and H. Lindetorp, “HAPTIC MUSIC - EXPLORING WHOLE-BODY
VIBRATIONS AND TACTILE SOUND FOR A MULTISENSORY MUSIC IN-
STALLATION”.
[29] C. Hopkins, S. Maté-Cid, R. Fulford, G. Seiﬀert, and J. Ginsborg, “Vibrotactile
Presentation of Musical Notes to the Glabrous Skin for Adults with Normal Hear-
ing or a Hearing Impairment: Thresholds, Dynamic Range and High-Frequency
Perception”, PLoS ONE, vol. 11, no. 5, p. e155807, May 2016, doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0155807.
[30] A. Sharp, M. S. Houde, M. Maheu, I. Ibrahim, and F. Champoux, “Improved
Tactile Frequency Discrimination in Musicians”, Exp Brain Res, vol. 237, no. 6,
pp. 1575–1580, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.1007/s00221-019-05532-z.
[31] “Circle of Fifths with Camelot Wheel - Google-søgning”. Accessed: Sep. 12, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.google.com/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=
circle+of+ﬁfths+with+camelot+wheel&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8#vhid=8NaRDO
8GkPcfKM&vssid=l
[32] V. Maﬀei, “Techniques for Automatic Dissonance Suppression in Harmonic Mix-
ing”, 2016, Accessed: Jan. 27, 2024. [Online].  Available: https://www.politesi.
polimi.it/bitstream/10589/119363/3/2016_04_Maﬀei.pdf
[33] R. Gebhardt, M. Davies, and B. Seeber, “Psychoacoustic Approaches for Har-
monic Music Mixing”, Applied Sciences, vol. 6, no. 5, p. 123, May 2016, doi:
10.3390/app6050123.
[34] D. Moelants, “Preferred Tempo Reconsidered”, 2002.
[35] “SOUNDTUBE FP6030 INSTALL INSTRUCTIONS Pdf Download”. Ac-
cessed: Oct. 03, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.manualslib.com/manual/
1059143/Soundtube-Fp6030.html
[36] NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC), “A Century of Trends in Adult Hu-
man Height”, eLife, vol. 5, p. e13410, Jul. 2016, doi: 10.7554/eLife.13410.
[37] X. Liu and D. Yan, “Ageing and Hearing Loss”, The Journal of Pathology, vol. 
211, no. 2, pp. 188–197, Jan. 2007, doi: 10.1002/path.2102.
[38] A. Carroll, “Beat-Mixing Rock Music”, Ejournalist, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 102–115,
2013, Accessed: Jan. 26, 2024. [Online].  Available: http://ejournalist.com.au/
public_html/ejournalist_v13n1.php
54
7 Bibliography
==PAGE:61==
[39] “WHO Global Standard for Safe Listening Venues and Events”. Accessed: Jan. 
26, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/publications-detail-redirect/
9789240043114
[40] R. V. Waterhouse, “Interference Patterns in Reverberant Sound Fields”, The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 247–258, Mar. 
1955, doi: 10.1121/1.1907509.
[41] “ITU-R Recommendation BS.1534-3. Method for the Subjective Assessment of
Intermediate Quality Level of Audio Systems.”. Accessed: Nov. 19, 2023. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.itu.int/dms_pubrec/itu-r/rec/bs/R-REC-BS.1534-
3-201510-I!!PDF-E.pdf
[42] “Medium Density Fiberboard (MDF) :: MakeItFrom.Com”. Accessed: Dec. 
30, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.makeitfrom.com/material-properties/
Medium-Density-Fiberboard-MDF
[43] A. W. Leissa and Y. Narita, “Natural Frequencies of Simply Supported Circular
Plates”, Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 221–229, May 1980,
doi: 10.1016/0022-460X(80)90598-2.
7 Bibliography
55
==PAGE:62==
Appendix A - FP6020-II Data Sheet
56
1 - FP6020-II Data Sheet
==PAGE:63==
1 - FP6020-II Data Sheet
57
==PAGE:64==
Appendix B - Visitor Feedback Form
Event: D-A-D Exhibition
Date:
Location: National Museum of Denmark
—
Figure 34: Sound zones in the exhibition room
Feedback:
1. How would you rate your overall listening experience at the exhibition?
• [ ] Excellent [ ] Very good [ ] Good [ ] Fair [ ] Poor
2. How would you rate the sound quality in zone 1?
• [ ] Excellent [ ] Very good [ ] Good [ ] Fair [ ] Poor
3. How would you rate the sound quality in zone 2?
• [ ] Excellent [ ] Very good [ ] Good [ ] Fair [ ] Poor
4. How would you rate the sound quality in zone 3?
• [ ] Excellent [ ] Very good [ ] Good [ ] Fair [ ] Poor
5. How would you rate the sound quality in zone 4?
• [ ] Excellent [ ] Very good [ ] Good [ ] Fair [ ] Poor
58
2 - Visitor Feedback Form
==PAGE:65==
6. Were there any technical issues or challenges you faced during your visit? Please
provide details.
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
Suggestions:
1. Do you have any suggestions for improving the overall listening experience?
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
—
Thank you for taking the time to provide your valuable feedback. Your input is
essential for enhancing future events and experiences.
2 - Visitor Feedback Form
59
==PAGE:66==
Appendix C - Listening Test Questionnaire
60
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:67==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
61
==PAGE:68==
62
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:69==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
63
==PAGE:70==
64
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:71==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
65
==PAGE:72==
66
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:73==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
67
==PAGE:74==
68
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:75==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
69
==PAGE:76==
70
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:77==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
71
==PAGE:78==
72
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:79==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
73
==PAGE:80==
74
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:81==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
75
==PAGE:82==
76
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:83==
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
77
==PAGE:84==
78
3 - Listening Test Questionnaire
==PAGE:85==
DTU Health Tech
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
