==PAGE:1==
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
Flexible Master Thesis
DTU Compute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
Flexible Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Søren Johansen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, , Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den­
mark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over three months at DTU Compute, at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Flexible Master in Machine
Learning.
Søren Johansen ­ s141410
Signature
Date
ii
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:5==
0.1
Abstract
This project is to investigate how well different deep learning network architectures learn
dynamic systems. The approach is called physics informed neural network that are neural
networks that are trained to not only fit data, but also respect given physical laws described
by differential equations (ODE/PDE). Current research shows that there can be difficulties
in learning more ’complicated’ ODE/PDEs. In the thesis I will compare different neural
networks MLP and ResNet with the number of layers, number neurons in each layer and
activation function according to the total loss function.
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Søren Johansen, Flexible Master DTU Compute, DTU
iv
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
0.1
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scientific Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Statement of Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Code repository . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Neural Networks architectures
7
2.1
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Activation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Automatic Differentiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Physics Informed Neural Networks
15
3.1
Formulation of Physics Informed Neural Networks principle . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Applications of Physics informed Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Inductive Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Implementation
23
4.1
The Grad Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Jacobian Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Overview of Physics Informed Neural Network Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5
Experiments and Results
31
5.1
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
45
A.1 Selected dynamic systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
A.2 Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
A.3 Example forward and reverse mode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.4 Number of Parameters in MLP and ResNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.5 MSEloss for various sampling sizes for ResNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The topic of my thesis for the Flexible Master degree is ’Physics Informed Neural Net­
works’. I see this as a continuation of my project on Ordinary Differential Equations Neural
Networks during the Deep Learning course (02514) in the autumn of 2022. Mathemat­
ical models are an integrated tool in natural sciences and engineering that allows us to
deepen our understanding of nature or improve the design of engineered systems and
understand natural phenomena and progress scientific discovery.
1.1
Scientific Evolution
Microsoft Research characterised the historical evolution of scientific discovery through
four paradigms see figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: The evolution of scientific discovery
With origins dating back thousands of years, the first paradigm was purely empirical and
based on direct observation of natural phenomena. While many regularities were appar­
ent in these observations, there was no systematic way to capture or express them. The
second paradigm was characterised by theoretical models of nature, such as Newton’s
laws of motion in the seventeenth century, or Maxwell’s equations of electrodynamics in
the nineteenth century. Derived by induction from empirical observation, such equations
allowed generalization to a much broader range of situations than those observed directly.
While these equations could be solved analytically for simple scenarios, it was not until
the development of digital computers in the twentieth century that they could be solved
in more general cases, leading to a third paradigm based on numerical computation. By
the dawn of the twenty­first century computation was again transforming science, this
time through the ability to collect, store and process large volumes of data, leading to
the fourth paradigm of data­intensive scientific discovery. Today the power of AI methods
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
1
==PAGE:10==
has increased since the early 2010’s because of the availability of large datasets, and
aided by fast and massively parallel computing (GPUs and super computers HPC) and
coupled with new algorithms. Machine learning and AI forms an increasingly important
component of the fourth paradigm, allowing the modelling and analysis of large volumes
of experimental scientific data. These four paradigms are complementary and coexist.
The scientific process we all learned in high school will remain the same: conduct back­
ground research, identify a hypothesis, test it through experimentation, analyze the col­
lected data, and reach a conclusion. AI has the potential to revolutionize how each of
these components looks in the future.
Before I continue I need to define a few terms. Dynamic systems are systems that evolve
over time according to a set of rules. They can be found in various fields such as physics,
engineering, biology, economics, and more. These systems are characterized by how
their state changes over time, often in response to inputs and parameters.
Differen­
tial equations are used to create models of dynamic systems. They express the laws
governing the system’s behavior (like Newton’s laws for mechanical systems, or popula­
tion growth rates in biology). There are ordinary differential equations (ODEs) for single­
variable functions and partial differential equations (PDEs) for multivariable functions. In
a general form I can formulate a ODE/PDE equation with the following:
F(u(t, x)) = 0
x ∈Ω⊂Rd,
t ∈[0, T]
(1.1)
­where F is a differential operator representing the PDE and u(t, x) is the state variable,
t and x is time/position. T is the time horizon and is Ωis the spatial domain. Because F
is differential operator one must also specify boundary condition and/or initial conditions
to ensure existence and uniqueness of a solution to Eq 1.1
My first idea of topic for my thesis was to focus on dynamic systems for weather and
climate predictions.
The last 2 years there has been many announcements on new
data­driven weather forecasting models from Nvidia, Deepmind and Huawei. The cur­
rent climate change have also accelerated research and the 2023 NeurIPS workshop on
’Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning: Blending New and Existing Knowledge
Systems’ had over 30 poster sessions on AI and climate change. In the summer of 2023
Prof. Peter Ditlevsen publish a paper in Nature Communications where he (and his sister)
made an warning(prediction) of a forthcoming collapse of the Atlantic meridional overturn­
ing circulation (AMOC) 1 i.e. the salinity of the Atlantic ocean see [1]. The main result of
the article predicting a much earlier collaps of the balance made headlines in international
news see Financial Times ’Global warming threatens collapse of Atlantic currents this cen­
tury, new study finds’ and in research communities. While AMOC was already known to
be at its slowest in 1600 years, the latest research show a much closer time estimate of
a collapse between 2025 and 2095, with a central estimate of 2057. If proven correct,
this scenario could see temperatures drop by 5 to 10 degrees in Europe, with devastating
consequences for life as we know it. In the article the dynamic system is modelled as
stochastic differential equation but originally it is a dynamic system ­ modelled as coupled
ordinary differential equations see [2].
Unfortunately the amount of GPUs required to train these models are above the capacity
of a student. Weather forecasting models was traditionally modelled as Partial Differential
equation systems and solved with numerical methods e.g. finite elements method see [3].
1Also known as the Thermohaline Circulation (THC)
2
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:11==
In the summer of 2023 the MIT Technology wrote an article ’Weather forecasting is having
an AI moment’ see [4] about the focus on the new AI weather forecasting models and the
battle between Nvidia, Deepmind and Huawei (West versus China) to launch the fastest
and most accurate data­driven forecasting model.
Because of the climate change the need for accurate and timely weather forecast have
never been more important. Besides weather forecasts these new deep learning data­
driven models be used to predict severe weather conditions i.e. cyclone tracking, flooding
and predict extreme heat and cold temperatures. Improving the accuracy of weather fore­
casts and provide early warning can thereby reduce loss of property and safe lives. Mod­
ern weather forecasting systems have huge impact in is used in industries like agriculture,
logistics and energy productions.
Large­scale models like weather forecasting and infectious diseases prediction are typ­
ically solved numerically with finite element methods. The problem with these classical
methods is that for finite element it requires a mesh and it converts the PDE to an alge­
braic system (introduce an error) that is solved by a linear solver. If the initial conditions
change or you need to re­run the model with new data then you need to re­run the finite
element model from scratch. One of the interesting applications of a pre­trained deep
learning model is that you can use it for making predictions on new data (inference). The
model object is fairly light­weight and can in many cases easily be implemented on a
mobile device.
An example is the new weather forecasting model FourCastNet developed by Nvidia.
The model is a pure data­driven modellen. This forecasting model is developed as a pure
data­driven deep learning model and trained on a data set with 20 variables (channels)
1.2 at a resolution of 0.25 degrees that approximately 30 km * 30 km and a global grid
size of 721*1440 pixels see figure for from year 1979 to 2015 and with 4 observations a
day.
Figure 1.2: FourCastNet Variables
The deep learning architecture used is the adaptive Fourier Neural Operator network
(AFNO) and a vision transformer architecture see figure 1.3 ­the model use the GELU
activation and the depth is 8 layers.
The model took 16 hours to train on a cluster of 64 Nvidia A100 GPUs and according to
Nvidia FourCastNet it is about 45.000 times faster than a traditional Numerical Weather
prediction model.
In December 2023 Deepmind published a new version of the GraphCast weather fore­
casting model that predicts hundreds of weather variables for the next 10 days at 0.25
degrees resolution globally in under 1 minute. According to Deepmind GraphCast signif­
icantly outperforms the most accurate deterministic systems on 90% of 1.380 verification
targets and its forecasts support better severe event prediction see [5].
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: FourCastNet Architecture
A dynamic system in itself can be a real­world system, like the weather, a swinging pen­
dulum, or an economy. These are physical, biological, or conceptual systems that change
over time. When we talk about dynamic systems in the context of analysis, study, or en­
gineering, we often represent these real­world systems as mathematical models. These
models are constructed using mathematics to describe and predict the behavior of the
system over time.
One way to categorize mathematical models is by the modeling technique used to derive
the model see [6]:
1. First principles models derived using fundamental physical laws – typically formu­
lated with ODE and PDE’s.
2. Data­driven models based on experimental data. The techniques have typically
been statistics, but a more modern approach is machine learning (including Deep
learning)
This thesis I will present the framework physics informed neural networks that is setup to
integrate first principles (1) with the data driven approach (2) .
Until now the chosen way of mathematical modeling has been to formulate the natural
phenomena as an ODE or a PDE that satisfies known physical laws. For many Ordinary/
partial differential equations, it is not possible to derive a analytical solution and thereby
you need to use numerical approximation methods.
The discovery of governing equations is important as it enables us to understand the
underlying physical laws of the dynamic system. By identifying the mathematical models
that describe the behavior of a system, it is possible to make accurate predictions and
gain insights into how the systems will behave under different conditions. This knowledge
can be applied to optimize performance of engineering systems, improve the precision of
weather forecast, and understand climate change, among other applications.
Discovering governing equations can be difficult for a number of reasons:
• Real­world systems are complex and involve many interdependent variables, mak­
ing it difficult to identify the relevant variables and their relationships.
• Many systems are nonlinear and involve interactions between variables that are
hard to model using linear equations.
4
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:13==
• The available data may be noisy or incomplete, making it challenging to extract
meaningful patterns and relationships.
Despite these challenges, Deep learning have made it possible to identify the governing
equations and identify complex, nonlinear models from data. These approaches may lead
to new discoveries and identify new insights into the behavior of dynamic systems.
The physics informed neural networks approach is an example of including physics knowl­
edge into the design of the loss function. Physics informed neural networks have shown
efficiency and accuracy in learning simple differential equations. Using fully connected
neural networks, physics informed neural networks directly approximate the solution of
the differential equations with space coordinates and time stamps as inputs. These net­
works are trained by minimizing both the loss on measurements and the residual function
error through the partial differential equation. More specifically, based on definition 1.1 a
fully connected neural network is employed to model solution ˜u(u, t|θpinn) where θpinn is
the weights/bias of the physics informed neural network and be optimized by minimizing
the loss function:
Lpinn = L(u) + λfLF (u)
­with L(u) = ||˜u −y||Γ is the error between the ˜u(x, t|θpinn) and the set of boundary
conditions and measured data on the set of points Γ where the boundary conditions and
data are defined. The loss LF = ||F(˜u(x, t|θpinn))||Γ is the mean­square error of the
residual function to enforce the predictions generated by PINN satisfying the differential
equation.
1.2
Literature Overview
To write this thesis I have used a couple of survey articles ’Constructing Neural Networks­
Based Models for Simulating Dynamical Systems’ by Christian M. Legaard see [6]. The
author defined a taxonomy for Deep learning architectures for dynamical systems ’Direct
Solutions’ and ’Time stepper’ solutions. The article was an overview of his Phd thesis ’The
Next Paradigm for Modeling and Simulation?’. The survey ’Physics­Guided Deep Learn­
ing for Dynamical Systems : A Survey’ by R. Wang see [7] covered topics about why deep
learning for dynamical systems is important and formulate the 4 main learning problems of
physics guided Deep learning ’solving differential equations’,’forecasting’,’learning resid­
ual’ and ’equation discovery’. The article ’Physics­informed machine learning’ by George
E. Karniadakis see [8] have interesting topics on ’how to embed physics in ML’ and ’induc­
tive’ and ’observational’ bias. The article ’DeepXDE: A Deep Learning library for Solving
Differential Equations’ by L. Lu see [9] is an introduction to the python package ’Deep­
XDE’. The article also contains an algorithm for solving physics informed neural networks.
The scientist M. Raissi et al. was the first scientist to define the Physics informed neu­
ral networks framework in the article ’Physics­informed neural networks: A deep learning
framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential
equations’ ­ see [10] furthermore they also categorized the two goals as data­driven solu­
tion and data discovery of partial differential equations. In the article ’An Experts Guide to
Training Physics ­informed Neural Networks’ by the research team of S. Wang, H. Wang
and S. Sankaran and P. Perdikaris see [11] find that physics informed neural network,
that their practical effectiveness can be hampered by training pathologies The research
team identify several ways to adjust the neural network architecture with ’Fourier Feature
Network’, ’Random Weight Factorization’ and ’Exact boundary conditions’. For the train­
ing algorithm they introduce ’loss balancing’, ’Causal Training’ and ’Curriculum Training’.
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
5
==PAGE:14==
The Fourier Feature Network is a feature engineering with ’random Fourier embeddings’.
The entire setup is quite advanced and is not that transparent.
Another Neural Network architecture that I found relevant is the the DeepONets that use
an result regarding neural networks that they can generically approximate any continu­
ous function. Deep Operator Networks (DeepONet) are a type of neural network archi­
tecture designed to learn and represent operators mapping from one function space to
another. This means they can take a function as input and provide a function as output.
A DeepONet consists of two main parts: a branch network and a trunk network. The
branch network learns representations of the input function at specific points, while the
trunk network learns representations of the coordinates where the output function will be
evaluated. The outputs of these networks are then combined to produce the final out­
put function. More recently the team of L. Lu, P. Jin and G. E. Karniadakis published in
their article ’DeepOnet: Learning nonlinear operators for identifying differential equations
based on the universal approximation theorem of operators’ see [9]. In their article ’Learn­
ing the solution operator of parametric partial differential equations with physics­informed
DeepONets.’ see [12] they present astonishing performance on a set of selected PDEs
such Burges equation, reaction­diffusion and advection equation.
1.3
Statement of Work
Here is the list of topics I completed in this project:
1. Developed MLP and ResNet neural network architectures that is a function of the
number of neurons, number of layers, number of ResNet blocks and activation func­
tions.
2. Developed modular functions to compute initial loss, boundary loss and residual
loss that easily can be adapted to solve other dynamic systems.
3. Developed code that can sample data for the initial condition, boundary condition
and the residual equation that can be extended to other dynamic systems.
4. Developed pytorch code for the Heat and Burges equation.
5. Performed experiments in order to find the neural networks that minimize MSEloss.
6. Analyzed the impact of size of the sampling for the residual equation and the ini­
tial/boundary conditions.
7. Identified which variables have the most impact on the MSEloss.
1.4
Code repository
Here is the Github repository for the code I have made.
6
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:15==
2
Neural Networks architectures
In this chapter I will give an introduction to the neural network architectures I use for the
experiments, the activation functions together with their properties (pro’s/cons’s) and their
first and second derivative. The chapter ends with a presentation of automatic differenti­
ation and the important forward and reverse mode.
2.1
Neural Networks
In this section I will present the two neural networks architectures that I use for experi­
ments: Multilayer perceptron (MLP) and the Residual Neural network.
2.1.1
Multilayer Perceptron
The most used neural network architecture used in the study of physics informed neural
networks is the multilayer perceptron (MLP) or feedforward deep network. A multilayer
perceptron is a mathematical function mapping some set of input values to output values.
The function is formed by composing many simpler functions. In the MLP network the
first layer is the Input Layer which receives the input signal to be processed. After that,
the MLPs contain one or more hidden layers. The role of the hidden layers is to transform
the inputs into something that the output layer can use. Each hidden layer consists of
neurons that apply a transformation and a non­linear activation function to the data. The
Output Layer is the final hidden layer’s output and is passed to the output layer which is
designed to format the output to be suitable for the problem at hand (e.g., classification
or regression), see figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Multilayer perceptron
I have implemented an MLP function construct_network in Pytorch that is a function of
the number of layers, the number of neurons in each layer, and the chosen activation
function (Relu, Tanh, Gelu, softplus, swish and sinusoidal). As an example the call:
construct_network(2, 1, 50, 2, tanh)
­gives the network in figure 2.2.
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: Construct_network(2,1,50,2,tanh) example of MLP.
2.1.2
Residual Neural Networks
Kaiming He [13] from Microsoft Research defined the Residual Neural Network(ResNet)
architecture that won the ILSVRC1 computer vision competition in 2015 and used con­
volutions transformations in the sequence. I have made a scalar implementation of the
ResNet neural network. When training a neural network the objective is to make it model
a target function h(x). The key building block of ResNet is to add the input to the output;
this is called a skip connection. The network is then forced to model f(x) = h(x) −x
instead of h(x) see figure 2.3.
h(x)
Residual Neural Network Architecture
h(x)
+
f(x)=h(x)-x
ℎ! = ℎ" + 𝑓(ℎ",𝜃")
ℎ# = ℎ! + 𝑓(ℎ!,𝜃!)
ℎ$%" = ℎ$ + 𝑓(ℎ$,𝜃$)
.
.
.
.
Figure 2.3: Residual Network Definition.
In Pytorch I have implemented a scalar ResNet neural network function SimpleResNet
that is dependent on the number of outputs from the ResNet, The number of ResNet
blocks, and the number of neurons in each block. The function
SimpleResNetScalar(num_classes = 2, features = 50, num_blocks = 3)
­gives the following ResNet see figure 2.4.
Each linear transformation is followed by a Silu (swish) activation function.
1ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition challenge
8
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Scalar Residual Network.
2.2
Activation Functions
An important factor in physics informed neural network is the selection of the activation
function. Obviously if you are studying an n’te order PDE than you need to select a
activation function that has derivative of that order e.g. the heat equation is an PDE of
second order and require activation function has derivative of second order. The activation
functions I have used in my experiments is ’tanh’, ’softplus’, ’GELU’ , ’Relu’ and ’SiLU’
(swish) see table 2.1. The Hyperbolic tangent function ’tanh’, squashes input to range
between ­1 and 1. The softplus activation function is a smooth approximation to the ReLU
function.The Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU), is also a smooth version of ReLU. The
Rectified Linear Unit (Relu), outputs the input if positive, otherwise 0. The softplus and
the GELU functions provide smooth, non­linear alternatives to ReLU and are used in
deep learning, their mathematical formulations and characteristics differ. The Softplus
function is a direct smooth approximation of ReLU, while GELU incorporates aspects of
the Gaussian distribution, leading to different behaviors in neural network models.Unlike
traditional activation functions like ReLU, the SiLU function is non­monotonic. This means
that it doesn’t consistently increase or decrease but has a region where it decreases
before increasing again.The SiLU function is smooth and differentiable everywhere, which
can help with gradient­based optimization methods in deep learning. The term x · σ(x)
implies that the function has a self­gating property, where σ(x) acts as a gate that controls
the flow of information (the value of x) through the network. This allows the function to
regulate the flow of gradients during backpropagation, potentially leading to better training
performance. Finally I added the sinusoidal (sin) function to my list of activation functions
I whish to test. This is an experiment and the reason is that the PDE/ODE had wave like
patterns that I thought I can capture with the sin activation function. Interesting to see that
there is an peer reviewed article about the topic [14].
In table 2.2 i have summarized pro’s and con’s of the activation functions.
The ”dead neurons” problem, is often associated with the ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit)
activation function and refers to a situation where certain neurons effectively become in­
active and stop contributing to the learning process. This phenomenon occurs due to
the nature of the ReLU function, which outputs zero for any negative input. The vanish­
ing gradient problem is encountered in training deep neural networks, particularly those
using activation functions like the sigmoid or tanh. It refers to the situation where the gra­
dients of the network’s loss with respect to the parameters (weights) become very small,
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
9
==PAGE:18==
Activation Function
Formula
Tanh
tanh(x)= ex−e−x
ex+e−x
Softplus
softplus(x) = 1
β log(1 + exp(βx))
GELU
GELU(x) = x * Φ(x)
ReLU
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
Swish
Swish(x) = x * sigmoid(x)
Sin
sin(x)
Table 2.1: Activation Functions
Function
Pros
Cons
Tanh
­ Zero­centered, aiding in conver­
gence.
­ Smooth gradient, facilitating faster
optimization.
­ Suffers from the vanishing gradi­
ent problem for large inputs.
­ Computationally more expensive
than simpler functions like ReLU.
Softplus
­ Smooth approximation of ReLU,
beneficial for gradient­based opti­
mization.
­ No dead neurons issue, unlike
ReLU.
­ Computationally intensive.
­ Can suffer from vanishing gradi­
ents for large negative inputs.
GELU
­ Non­monotonic, aiding in learning
complex patterns.
­ Smooth gradient, reducing dying
neurons issue.
­ Computationally more complex
than ReLU.
­ Often requires approximations due
to its complexity.
ReLU
­ Simple and computationally effi­
cient.
­ Promotes sparsity in activations,
beneficial for deep networks.
­ Can suffer from the dying ReLU
problem.
­ Outputs are not zero­centered,
which can be a drawback in some
scenarios.
Swish (SiLU)
­ Smooth, continuous, and non­
monotonic, beneficial for complex
patterns.
­ Balances properties of ReLU and
sigmoid, aiding in learning.
­ Can be adaptive if parameter β is
trainable.
­ More computationally expensive
than ReLU.
­ Performance gains not consistent
across all types of neural networks.
Sin
­ Periodic and smooth, can model
complex, cyclical patterns.
­ Infinite range, avoiding saturation
issues.
­ Not commonly used, limited empir­
ical evidence in deep learning.
­ Can lead to unstable gradients due
to its periodic nature.
Table 2.2: Pros and Cons of Different Activation Functions
effectively vanishing as they propagate back through the layers during training. This prob­
lem is more pronounced in networks with many layers. During my training of the Physics
Informed Neural Networks I have seen this in some training situations. In the textbook
by Goodfellow, Bengio and Courville [15] they defines this as ’Plateaus, Saddle Points
and other flat regions’ see page 278. See plot 2.5 for an example of a training plateau;
the example is the Heat equation trained with a neural network with the swish activation
function.
10
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.5: Plot of loss boundary for neural network with swish activation.
I have performed experiments in Weights and Bias and it logs the process time which is
defined as the time inside the running process. In figure 2.6 I have plottet the average
process time for the Heat equation for each activation function. This is aligned with the
claim that some of the activation functions are more computational intensive than others.
Figure 2.6: Average process time across activation functions
For each of the chosen activation I have computed their first and second derivatives see
figure 2.3.
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
11
==PAGE:20==
Function
First Derivative
Second Derivative
Tanh
1 −tanh2(x)
2(tanh2(x) −1) tanh(x)
Softplus
exp(βx)
exp(βx)+1
β
4 cosh2(βx
2 )
GELU
Φ(x) + xϕ(x)
ϕ(x) + xϕ′′(x) + ϕ(x)
ReLU
{
1,
if x > 0
0,
otherwise
0
Swish (SiLU)
σ(x) + xσ′(x)
2σ′(x) + xσ′′(x)
Sin
cos(x)
−sin(x)
Table 2.3: Activation Functions and Their Derivatives
­Note that Φ is the cummulative normal distribution and ϕ it the normal density.
Figure 2.7: Plot of activation functions, first derivative and second derivatives
2.3
Automatic Differentiation
Automatic differentiation is a fundamental part of the modern deep learning frameworks
that began with release of Tensorflow in late 2015. The framework I use is Pytorch and
the code I have developed is in a modular structure. In Physics informed neural networks
it is required to compute derivatives of the network outputs with respect to the network
inputs e.g. time and the state variable x. There are four possible methods for computing
the derivatives: (1) Hand­coded analytical derivative (cumbersome and complex; (2) nu­
merical approximation (finite difference, Runge­kutta); (3) Symbolic differentiation (used
in programs such as Mathematica and Maple) 2 And (4) automatic differentiation (AD). In
deep learning the derivatives are evaluated using backpropagation.
Automatic differentiation (AD) is a computational technique used to calculate the deriva­
tives of functions. It’s especially useful in optimization, machine learning, and numeri­
cal simulations where understanding how changes in input affect the output can be crit­
ical. Unlike symbolic differentiation, which works with mathematical expressions to find
2My first scientific calculator Hewlet Packard HP28S from the late 80’s had symbolic differentiation.
12
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:21==
derivatives, and numerical differentiation, which approximates derivatives using finite dif­
ferences, AD computes derivatives accurately and efficiently by systematically applying
the chain rule.
The components of automatic differentiation are:
• Function Decomposition: AD breaks down a complex function into simpler elemen­
tary functions (like addition, multiplication, sine, cosine, exponentials, etc.) whose
derivatives are known.
• Computational Graph: It represents the function as a graph where nodes correspond
to elementary operations or inputs, and edges represent the dependencies between
these operations.
• Forward Mode: In forward mode, AD traverses the computational graph from the
inputs to the output, calculating the derivative of each sub­function with respect to
its inputs as it goes.
• Reverse Mode: In reverse mode, or backpropagation , AD traverses the graph from
the outputs back to the inputs. It calculates the derivative of the output with respect
to each sub­function.
In the forward mode the function is computed from the inside out. In the reverse mode
the function is computed from the outside to the inside. To show the forward and reverse
mode I use the function f(x1, x2) = exp(x1) + x1x2 −cos(x2). In appendix A.3 i have
made a detailed example. The computation graph of f(x1, x2) is visualized in figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Plot of computation graph
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
13
==PAGE:22==
Suppose that y = f(x) where x ∈Rn and y ∈Rm. The forward mode AD, can compute
the Jacobian of f in time O(n). The reverse mode AD, can compute the Jacobian of f in
time O(m).
Forward accumulation is more efficient than reverse accumulation for functions f : Rn →
Rm with n << m as only n sweeps are necessary, compared to m sweeps for reverse
accumulation.
Reverse accumulation is more efficient than forward accumulation for functions f : Rn →
Rm with n >> m as only m sweeps are necessary, compared to n sweeps for forward
accumulation. In the next chapter I will present the Pytorch functions jvp and vjp that
compute the forward mode and the reverse mode.
The key advantages of automatic differentiation are:
• Accuracy: AD provides exact derivatives up to machine precision, unlike numerical
differentiation which suffers from round­off and truncation errors.
• Efficiency: For many problems, AD can compute derivatives with a similar number
of operations as the original function, making it faster than symbolic differentiation
for complex expressions.
• Versatility: It can be applied to any function that can be computed on a computer,
regardless of its complexity.
14
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:23==
3
Physics Informed Neural Networks
Throughout this thesis, I will consider dynamic systems of the form:
dx(t)
dt
= f(x(t), t, β)
(3.1)
x(t0) = x0
(3.2)
where x is the state of the system and f is vector field that possibly depends on the state
x, time t a set of parameters β. The above dynamic system is also called a initial value
problem (IVP). Partial differential equations have an initial condition and also includes an
boundary condition.
Dynamic systems are formulated as differential equations or partial differential equations
and arise naturally in many applications. Dynamical systems provide a mathematical
framework to describe the world around us. Formally, dynamical systems concern the
analysis, prediction, and understanding of the behavior of systems of differential equations
that describe the evolution of the state of a system. This formulation is general enough
to encompass a range of phenomena, including those observed in classical mechanical
systems, electrical circuits, turbulent fluids, climate science, ecology and epidemiology
etc. Consider the following examples.
The heat equation is a partial differential equation that describes how the distribution of
heat (or temperature) evolves over time in a given region, under the influence of thermal
diffusion. The heat equation is usually written as:
∂u
∂t = α∇2u
­where u(t, x) is the temperature at position x and time t. As mentioned above the heat
equation is subject to a initial condition (IC) :
IC : u(0, x) = u0(x)
and boundary condition (BC) :
BC : u(t, a) = α(t)
u(t, b) = β(t)
For the heat equation ∂u
∂t = α∇2u with initial condition u(0, x) = sin(π · x) and boundary
condition u(t, 0) = u(t, 1) = 0, there exist a analytical solution u(x, t) = e−απ2t sin(πx)
which is plotted in figure 3.1.
The Burgers’ equation is a fundamental partial differential equation from fluid mechanics.
The equation is significant in the study of fluid dynamics, nonlinear wave equations, and
shock waves. The Burgers’ equation is expressed as:
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x = ν ∂2u
∂x2
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.1: Analytical solution to heat equation with α = 0.01
Where u = u(x, t) is the velocity field as a function of space x and time t. ν is the viscosity
coefficient. Burges is typically formulated with an initial condition and boundary condition
as above. For the equation:
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x = 0.01
π
∂2u
∂x2
x ∈[−1, 1],
t ∈[0, 1]
­with initial condition u(0, x) = −sin(πx) and boundary condition u(t, −1) = u(t, 1) = 0
there exist an analytical solution which is plottet in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Analytical solution to Burges equation
The Heat equation and Burges equation is examples of a partial differential equations
,whereas the Harmonic damped oscillator is example of and ordinary differential equation.
See appendix for a detailed description of the above equations.
In many cases it is impossible to find an exact analytical solution to the dynamical system,
and instead numerical methods are used to approximate the solution. Numerical solvers
are algorithms that approximate a continuous IVP, as the Harmonic damped oscillator.
into a discrete time dynamical system.
The two most common numerical solvers to the initial value problem are the Euler method
and the Runge­kutta method. The basic idea is to take small steps in the independent
variable and estimate the dependent variable based on the current slope (given by the
16
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:25==
differential equation). In the case of Partial Differential equation the numerical method is
finite element methods and finite difference methods.
3.1
Formulation of Physics Informed Neural Networks
principle
The article by Raissi see [10] was the first scientist to define Physics Informed Neural Net­
works. He states that there is two main types of problems regarding solving an PDE/ODE
and that is: data­driven solution and data­driven discovery. The first problem is that of
inference, forecasting and simulation or data­driven solutions See A, B, C in figure 3.4
of ODE/PDE’s which states: Given a fixed model parameters λ what can be said about
the unknown hidden (latent) state u(t, x) of the system. The second problem is that of
learning, or data discovery see D. in figure 3.4 of a PDE stating: what are the parameters
λ that best describe the observed data.
Many of the problems with a ODE/PDE constraint fit the following equation:
F(u(t, x)) = 0,
x ∈Ω⊂Rd,
t ∈[0, T]
(3.3)
Where F is a differential operator representing the ODE, u(t, x) is the state variable(latent
variable) ­ the parameter of interest t and x is the position/time, T is the time horizon, and
Ωis the spatial domain. Since F is a differential operator, in general one must specify the
boundary and/or the initial conditions to ensure existence/uniqueness of a solution to Eq
3.3. In the context of a ODE it could be a second order equation like the damped harmonic
oscillator. If it is a PDE it could be an parabolic like the heat equation, hyperbolic or elliptic
differential operator .
One possible data­driven approach is to incorporate domain information by applying Eq
1 as ”hard constraint” when training a NN on the data. This can be formulated as the
following constrained optimization problem.
minθL(u)
s.t.
F(u) = 0.
(3.4)
Where L(u) is the data­fit term (including initial/boundary conditions), and where F is a
constraint on the residual of the PDE system under consideration (ie. the physics knowl­
edge in the equation itself). As mentioned before, for many practical use cases, it is not
possible to derive closed­form solutions, and it often quite difficult to solve problems of
the form of Eq 3.4, with F(u) as a hard constraint.
Another data­driven approach is to impose the constraint as a ”soft constraint” on the
output of the NN model:
minθL(u) + λF F(u)
(3.5)
L(u) = Lu0 + Lub
(3.6)
The above equation is the Lagrange function of the hard constraint problem in Eq. 3.4.
Here, Lu0 and Lub measure the misfit of the neural network prediction and the initial/bound­
ary conditions (which are pre­specified/given as input to the problem), and θ denotes the
Neural network parameter (weights and bias); which take (t, x) and possible other quanti­
ties, as inputs and then outputs u(t, x). Furthermore λF is a regularization parameter that
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
17
==PAGE:26==
controls the emphasis on the PDE based residual. The goal is then to use ML methods to
train the neural network model to minimize the loss in Eq 3.5 and the method is illustrated
in figure 3.3. In particular the neural network is trained to minimize this modified loss
Figure 3.3: Physics informed Neural Network Heat Equation
function, where the modification is to penalize the violations of F(u) for some λF ≥0.
However, this approach does not guarantee that the neural network will obey the gov­
erning equations in the constraint Eq 3.3. In scientific machine learning problems, these
sorts of constraints on the system matter; as they correspond to physical mechanisms of
the system.
Note that this approach of incorporating physics­based regularization, where the regular­
ization constraint λf, corresponds to a differential operator, is very different than incorpo­
rating much simpler norm­based regularization (such as L1 or L2 regularizations), as is
common in ML more generally. Here, the regularization operator, LF = λfF(u) is non­
trivally structured ­ it involves a differential operator that does not correspond to a nice
convex set as a norm ball.
Moreover LF corresponds to an actual physical quantity, and the there is often an impor­
tant distinction between satisfying the constraint versus satisfying the constraint approxi­
mately.
As an example; the loss function of the heat equation is defined as :
Loss(˜u) = MSELoss(∂˜u
∂t −α∇2˜u) + MSEloss(˜u −uinitial) + MSELoss(˜u −uboundary)
The state variable u is modeled with a neural network and the initial/boundary conditions
are in my case simulated. The implementation of the residual, initial and boundary con­
dition is done in the next chapter. To help understand the concept I have developed a
simple algorithm to show the steps needed to solve a physics informed neural network
see alogrithm 1.
3.2
Applications of Physics informed Neural Networks
In this section I will give more examples of the core applications of the Physics informed
Neural Networks approach: simulation, forecasting, discover equations and estimate pa­
18
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:27==
Algorithm 1 Physics Informed Neural Network
Step 1 Identify what order the PDE/ODE have.
Step 2 Check that your activation function have derivatives of order needed.
Step 3 Construct a neural network
˜
u(x; θ) with parameters θ.
Step 4 Specify the two training sets Nf and Nu for the equation and boundary/initial
conditions.
Step 5 Use MSE loss for both the PDE equation and the initial/boundary condition
residuals.
Step 6 Train the neural network to find the best parameters θ∗by minimizing the loss
function L(θ; T)
rameters.
Figure 3.4: Use cases of Physics Informed Neural Networks.
3.2.1
Simulation
Simulation is an important method of analyzing, optimizing, and designing real­world pro­
cesses, which are easily verified, communicated, and understood see A. in figure 3.4.
Simulation serves as the surrogate model1 and digital twin and provides valuable insights
into complex physical systems. Simulation can be used to perform what­if analysis and
thereby be used to make decision regarding the outcome of dynamic system (climate
model, Epidemiology). In chapter 2 I presented the gradient function jvp that is a function
map a nudge on the input variable x and gives the change in output variable y. In chapter
5 I show how a MLP neural network with 50 neurons per layers and 8 layers and with
GELU activation function can learn the Heat equation. With the jvp I can now ask what
happens if I perturbate x with 1% ? In figure 3.5 the impact on the predicted solution will
change with 1% at time t = 0.5. The green arrow is the delta_y (see chapter 4.2) i.e. the
impact of 1% of x in the target u(0.5, x).
3.2.2
Forecasting
When F in Eq 3.3 is unknown or numerically solving Eq 3.3 requires too much compu­
tation, deep learning models can directly approximate high­dimensional spatiotemporal
1A surrogate model are analytically tractable models to approximate properties of complex systems
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.5: Perturbate x with 1%
dynamics by directly forecasting the future states and bypassing numerical integration.
These models are trained to make forward predictions given the historic frames as input
with one or more steps of supervision and can roll out up to hundreds of steps during
inference.
If we assume the first dimension is t in Eq 3.3 then the problem of dynamics forecasting
can be be defined as learning a mapping that maps a sequence of historic states to future
states of the dynamical system.
f(u(t −k + 1, x), . . . , u(t, x)) = u(t + 1, x), . . . , u(t + q, x)
­where k is the input length and q is the output length. The function f is usually approx­
imated with a data­driven og physics informed neural network and neural network are
optimized by minimizing the loss function L. The FourcastNet is an autoregressive so it
feed its own predictions back as input.
The dynamic systems I study is not directly a useful for forecasting. FourCastNet can
be used to predict different weather conditions like flooding, extreme precipitation, and
hurricane path prediction see 3.6.
3.2.3
Discover Equations
When F is unknown and it is necessary to determine the precise governing equations to
practical problems, numerous efforts have been made to discover the exact mathematical
formulation of F. The most common approach is to select from a wide range of possi­
ble candidate functions and choose the model that minimizes fitting errors on observed
data. The goal of discovering governing equations is to find an approximate function
˜F = Φ(u(x), x)θ ≈F , where Φ(u(x), x) = [ϕ1(u(x), x), ϕ2(u, x), . . . , ϕp(u, x)] is a library
of candidate functions, such as polynomials and trigonometric function, and θ ∈R2 is a
sparse vector indicating which candidate functions are active in the dynamics. This prob­
20
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.6: FourCastNet forecasting huricane trajectory
lem can be formulated as an optimization problem, where the goal is the minimize loss
function over a set of observed data y of u:
L(θ) =
n
∑
i=1
||Φ(yi, x)θ||2
This is an application of the machine learning method ridge regression,the lasso and elas­
ticNet and the method Sindy (Sparse Identification of Nonlinear Dynamical systems) see
the article [16].
3.2.4
Estimating parameters
Estimating parameters in a dynamic system using a Physics­Informed Neural Network
(PINN) involves extending the traditional training of a neural network to include not only
the network’s weights and biases but also the parameters governing the dynamics of the
system under study. Typically, a dynamic system is defined theoretically using physics
equations. In an experimental setting, after defining the system, you would design an
experiment and collect observational data. The goal is to use this data to train the PINN,
adjusting both its internal parameters and the parameters of the dynamic system to see if
the observed data can verify the theoretical model. For the heat equation with the initial
condition and boundary condition as as stated above we can extend the neural network
with an extra learnable parameter ν and see if are able estimate the parameter α. In this
case we can sample data from the analytical solution u(x, t) = e−απ2t sin(πx) (ground
truth). The neural network have 50 neurons per layer and 6 layers in total, and with GELU
activation function. With 3.000 epochs it gives the estimation in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Heat Equation
Equation
Ground Truth α
Estimate λ
% error
∂u
∂t = λ∇2u
0.01
0.009626
3.74172%
­Note % Error = (Estimate−Ground_Truth)
Ground_Truth
∗100 .
To estimate the parameters in the Burges equation I used a neural network with 50 neu­
rons per layer, with 8 layers and with activation function tanh. With 6.000 epochs it gives
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
21
==PAGE:30==
a fairly good estimation see table 3.2. See Github folder ’DataDrivenDiscovery’ for more
details.
Table 3.2: Burgers’ Equation
Equation
Ground Truth
Estimate
% Error
∂u
∂t + λ1u∂u
∂x −λ2 ∂2u
∂x2
λ1
λ2
λ1
λ2
Error 1
Error 2
Value
1
0.01
π
9.359 × 10−1
2.945 × 10−3
6.4092%
7.4830%
This approach is particularly powerful in situations where the underlying physics of a sys­
tem is well­understood, but the exact parameters are not. By informing the neural network
with the physics of the system, the network can learn not just to fit the data but also to
align to the underlying physical laws.
3.3
Inductive Bias
Inductive bias in the context of Physics­Informed Neural Networks refers to the set of prior
assumptions that guides the learning process towards the solution of the dynamic system.
For Physics informed neural networks the inductive bias is often related to the integration
of physical laws into the loss function i.e. the ODE/PDE residual and the initial/boundary
condition as in defined above.
Inductive bias requires knowledge and skills about how to build deep learning models
and the dynamic system that we are trying to learn. Inductive bias is both how to select a
neural network architecture including the relevant activation functions, the training setup
and of course the ODE/PDE of the dynamic system and the physics constraint i.e. initial
condition and boundary condition.
Because we include the physical laws they guide the neural network, helping it to learn the
patterns that are aligned with the physics. Note that for the experiments I will complete; I
simulate the data and do not use observational data. Including observational data, could
easily be added to the Pytorch code.
The context I study is the case where you need to find a solution for a dynamic system
only with the mathematical specification at hand.
22
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:31==
4
Implementation
In this chapter I will give an overview of automatic differentiation(AD) that is the most
important function in modern deep learning. Pytorch have additional Jacobian functions
that is based on the Taylor expansion that I will use to do perturbation of the trained
models. In the last section of this chapter I will persent the code I have used to simulate
training data and the training code for the physics informed neural network of the Heat
equation. The code can easily be adapted to other physics equations.
4.1
The Grad Function
In Pytorch the grad function calculates the first derivative of a function. The derivative of
the activation function torch.Tanh is done with the following code snippet see listing:
# Create a tensor and tell PyTorch that we want to compute
# gradients with respect to it
x = torch.tensor([1.0], requires_grad=True)
# Apply the Tanh function
y = torch.tanh(x)
# Compute the gradients
y.backward()
# Print the gradient of Tanh at the point x
x.grad
Listing 4.1: Syntax for computing the first derivatives in Pytorch
And the plot of the first derivative is in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Plot of activation function Tanh and first derivative
Pytorch also have a function to calculate the hessian:
def tanh_function(x):
return torch.tanh(x)
# Define the point at which to compute the second derivative
x_point = torch.tensor([1.0], requires_grad=True)
# Compute the second derivative (Hessian) at x = 1.0
second_derivative_point = hessian(tanh_function , x_point)
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
23
==PAGE:32==
# Extract the value from the resulting tensor
second_derivative_value = second_derivative_point[0][0].item()
Listing 4.2: Syntax for computing the Hessian
Note that the Hessian is a matrix and in the example from above the Tanh function is only
dependent on one variable x and that is exactly at [0][0] in the Hessian matrix.
4.2
Jacobian Functions
There is a couple of other interesting functions that I am going to use. The first­order
Taylor expansion of a function f(x) around a point a is given by:
f(x) ≈f(a) + f′(a)(x −a)
Now if nudge the input x by vector v we get:
f(x + v) ≈f(x) + ∂f(x)v + O(||v||2)
Note that ∆y = ∂f(x)∆x
The Pytorch function jacobian­vector products jvp is the function that performs the map­
ping:
(x, v) 7→(f(x), ∂f(x)v)
Forward mode: Jacobian­vector products (JVPs), build Jacobian one column at a time
and v is a tangent vector. The function performs the dot product between a vector v and
the Jacobian. As an example; let g(x) = 2x2 + 3x −2, then f′(x) = 4x + 3. Given a point
x = 2 and set ∆x = 0.1 then f′(2) = 11, and ∆y = 11 · 0.1 = 1.1. In Pytorch code:
And lets say that we have a point x = 2 and that we nudge it by v = 0.1 then we get:
def g(x):
return 2*x**2+3*x-2
x=torch.tensor(2.)
delta_x = torch.tensor(.1)
y, delta_y = torch.autograd.functional.jvp(g, (x,), (delta_x ,))
print(y.item())
print(delta_y.item())
Listing 4.3: Use of jvp on g(x)
And get y = 12 and delta_y = 1.1. We can test if this correct by:
eps = 1e-4
v=delta_x
delta_y_approx = (g(x + eps * v) - g(x)) / eps
print(delta_y_approx)
Listing 4.4: Delta y approximation
And gives delta_y_approx = 1.1063.
24
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:33==
Imagine we have trained a deep learning model to predict the global temperatures and
one of the features is CO2. Then we can use the trained model to answer a question as:
what is the global temperature change caused by a small change in of CO2 level by 2%.
The last Pytorch function is the vjp vector­Jacobian products funtion. Reverse mode:
vector­Jacobian products (VJPs), build Jacobian one row at a time.
This function maps:
(x, w) 7→(f(x), wT ∂f(x))
Where w ∈RM and has the same dimensions as the output function f. At a given input
point x ∈Rn, if we have a vector w ∈RM that represents a scalar­valued linear function
on perturbations ∆y of the output, then what is a vector representing the corresponding
linear function on perturbations ∆x to the input? What is λ ∈Rn such that:
⟨w, ∆y⟩= ⟨w, ∂f(x)∆x⟩= ⟨λ, ∆x⟩
­for any ∆x and ∆y = ∂f(x)∆x and ⟨·, ·⟩is the inner product. From above at point x = 2
and with ∆x = 0.1 we got a change in y of 1.1. Let’s assume that the change was not 1.1
but half 0.5∆y = .55 ? What is the change to λ to the input x needed to get ∆y = 0.55?
w=torch.tensor(.5)
y, lmbda =torch.autograd.functional.vjp(g,(w,),(delta_y ,))
print(y)
print(lmbda)
Listing 4.5: Lambda calculation
This gives λ = 5.5 which is correct.
4.3
Overview of Physics Informed Neural Network Code
To give an overview of the code I have developed I will follow the structure outline in figure
4.2. I will start by presenting how I generate the training data and thereafter I present the
training loop. I will use the heat equation to explain the code. The heat equation that I will
study (and perform experiments on) is the following:
∂u
∂t = 0.01∇2u
And with boundary condition:
u(t, 0) = u(t, 1) = 0
And initial condition:
u(0, x) = sin(πx)
­see appendix for a detailed explanation of the heat equation. This heat equation have
an analytical solution:
u(t, x) = exp(−0.01π2t) · sin(πx)
I will use this solution to measure performance of the trained neural network.
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.2: Overview of Physics Neural Network training loop
4.3.1
Generation of training data
Before I present the training loop I will give an overview of how I have generated the train­
ing data. The generation of the training data is done in three steps (1) Generate data
for initial condition (2) Generate data for Boundary condition and (3) Generate interior
data for the physics equation. I split the sampling between the residual function f and
the initial condition/boundary condition. These two hyperparameters Nf and Nu are de­
fined as the number of observations to sample of the residual equation and of the initial
condition/boundary condition; the approach is the same as [10].
To generate data for the physics equation I sample (t, x) in the interior of [0, 1]∗[0, 1] by use
of the Latin hypercube sampling. In statistical sampling, a square grid containing sample
positions is a Latin square if and only if there is only one sample in each row and each
column. A Latin hypercube is the generalization of this concept to an arbitrary number
of dimensions, whereby each sample is the only one in each axis­aligned hyperplane
containing it. By using the Latin hypercube sampling I force the learning algorithm to
explore the entire domain. Finally u is set to zero see (a) figure 4.3 (black stars) and the
code is:
# Interior conditions
x_int=lhs(2,N_f) # Latin hypercube sampling
x_int=torch.tensor(x_int)
u_int = torch.zeros(N_f, 1)
Listing 4.6: Sampling of interior data
To generate data for the initial condition I sample #Nu of (t, x) and set t = 0 given a matrix
of size (Nu,2) and then sample the initial condition u(0, x) = sin(πx) see the black stars
in (b) figure 4.3 and the code is :
# Initial conditions
x_ini = torch.rand(N_u, 2)
x_ini[..., 0] = 0
# t = 0
u_ini = torch.sin(np.pi * x_ini[..., 1]).reshape(N_u, 1)
Listing 4.7: Sampling of initial condition data
26
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:35==
(a) Sampling of interior
(b) Sampling of initial condition
(c) Sampling of boundary Condition
Figure 4.3: Sampling overview
To generate data for the boundary condition I sample Nu of (t, x) and randomly sample
either 0 or 1 for x and u is set to zero see (c) figure 4.3 (black stars) and the code is:
# Boundary conditions
x_bc = torch.rand(N_u, 2)
# t, 0 to 1
x_bc[..., 1] = torch.tensor([0, 1])[torch.randint(0, 2, (N_u,))]
# 0 or 1
u_bc = torch.zeros(N_u, 1)
Listing 4.8: Sampling of boundary condition data
4.3.2
Training code
In this chapter I will present the code that I have used to perform the experiments that I
will present in chapter 5. I chosen a modular approach to the Pytorch implementation e.g.
defined three loss functions; one for the physics equation, one for the initial condition and
one for the boundary condition. In each of the loss functions a call to the model is done
to predict the new u with.
The code for the training loop is:
# Training loop
for epoch in range(n_epochs):
optimizer.zero_grad()
# Loss initial condition
loss_initial = initial_loss(x_ini_inp , u_ini_inp)
# loss boundary condition
loss_boundary = boundary_loss(x_bc_inp , u_bc_inp)
# Loss physics equation
loss_physics = heat(x_inp)
# Total loss
total_loss = loss_physics + lambda_b*(loss_initial + loss_boundary)
loss_history.append(total_loss.item())
# Backpropagation
total_loss.backward()
# Optimize
optimizer.step()
if epoch % 100 == 0:
print(f'Epoch {epoch}, Loss: {total_loss.item()}')
Listing 4.9: Training loop
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
27
==PAGE:36==
Before I present the loss functions the neural network is defined as
def construct_network(input_dim , output_dim , hidden_dim , hidden_layers ,
activation):
# Activation function mapping
activations = {
'swish': nn.SiLU,
'tanh': nn.Tanh,
'relu': nn.ReLU,
'gelu': nn.GELU,
'softplus': nn.Softplus ,
'sin': SinusActivation
}
# Check if activation is valid
if activation not in activations:
raise ValueError(f"Invalid activation function. Expected one of: {list
(activations.keys())}")
ActivationFunc = activations[activation]
# Construct the layers
layers = [nn.Linear(input_dim , hidden_dim), ActivationFunc()]
for _ in range(hidden_layers):
layers.extend([nn.Linear(hidden_dim , hidden_dim), ActivationFunc()])
layers.append(nn.Linear(hidden_dim , output_dim))
layers.append(ActivationFunc())
# Activation function for the output
layer
# Create the network
net = nn.Sequential(*layers).double().to(device)
xavier_init(net)
return net
Listing 4.10: Feedforward Network
The initialization of the model and the optimizer is done with:
# Initialize the model
#model = PINN()
model=construct_network(input_dim , output_dim , hidden_dim , hidden_layers ,
activation)
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=learningRate , weight_decay
=wd)
Listing 4.11: Initialization of model and optimizer
The Initial condition loss is calculated with the sampled input xinit as defined above (see
figure 4.3 (b) and listing ’Sampling of initial condition data’) and the loss is calculated as
the mean square error between the predicted u_ini_pred and the simulated uinit.
def initial_loss(xinit,uinit):
# Predictions for initial
u_ini_pred = model(xinit.double().to(device))
# return initial loss
return torch.mean((u_ini_pred - uinit.double().to(device)) ** 2)
Listing 4.12: Initial Condition and loss computation
28
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:37==
Boundary condition loss is calculated with the sampled input xbc as defined above (see
figure 4.3 (c) and in code listing ’Sampling of boundary condition data’). The mean square
error is calculated between the predicted u_bc_pred and the sampled ubc.
def boundary_loss(xbc,ubc):
# Predictions for boundary conditions
u_bc_pred = model(xbc.double().to(device))
# return loss for boundary conditions
return torch.mean((u_bc_pred - ubc.double().to(device)) ** 2)
Listing 4.13: Boundary Condition and loss computation
The loss of the heat equation is calculated with the sampled input data x_data (see figure
?? and code listing ’Sampling of interior data’ )and output the prediction u. The derivative
of the prediction u(t, x) with respect to t, and x is calculated. The second derivative with
respect to x is calculated and finally the mean square error is calculated according to the
heat equation. Note that I set the flag ’require_grad_’ to True because we need to take
the derivative of (t, x) and the flag ’create_graph’ is set to True construct the computation
graph of the derivatives, allowing to compute higher order derivatives.
def Heat(x_data):
# Calculate prediction of u dependent on x, t
x_physics = x_data.requires_grad_(True)
u = model(x_physics.double().to(device))
# Calculate the grad of u with respect to x
grad_u = torch.autograd.grad(u, x_physics , grad_outputs=torch.ones_like(u),
create_graph=True)[0]
u_t = grad_u[:, 0] # The first derivative of u with respect to t
u_x = grad_u[:, 1] # The first derivative of u with respect to x
# Compute the second derivative of u with respect to x
u_xx = torch.autograd.grad(u_x, x_physics , grad_outputs=torch.ones_like(u_x)
, create_graph=True)[0][:, 1]
alpha_tensor = torch.tensor(alpha)
pde_residual = u_t - alpha_tensor * u_xx
return torch.mean(pde_residual ** 2)
Listing 4.14: Heat equation
4.3.3
Evaluation of deep learning model performance
To evaluate the models ability to learn the dynamics I have used the fact the for the Heat
equation there is an analytical solution u(t, x) = exp(−t) sin(πx) and calculate the MSE
loss between the analytical solution and the predicted ˜u(t, x). I random sample (t, x) in
the domain and calculate MSE Loss see the code below.
x_sample=torch.rand(5000,2)
#x_int[..., 1] = 2 * (x_int[..., 1] - 0.5)
# shift x to [-1, 1]
x_test = x_sample[:, 1]
# Extracts the first column x
t_test = x_sample[:, 0]
# Extracts the second column t
# Analytical solution
U=np.exp(-alpha * np.pi**2 * t_test) * np.sin(np.pi * x_test)
# Predicting on the grid
with torch.no_grad():
u_pred_grid = model(x_sample.double().to(device))
# MSE loss
mse_loss= F.mse_loss(U,u_pred_grid[:,0].cpu())
print('MSE loss',mse_loss.item())
Listing 4.15: Model evaluation
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
29
==PAGE:38==
Note that this method is different then our classical approach with splitting the data in train
and validation and then use the test as a out­of­sample data set. It might be possible to
make a train, validation training process for the data in the domain that the dynamical
system is defined on. But the way that the PDE/ODE is defined with initial/boundary
condition defines the domain where the model exist ­ outside the domain it does not. The
conclusion is that using the model to predict something outside the domain on test data
set does not make sense.
To evaluate the Burges equation I have used the dataset ’Burges_shock’ from the article
by M. Raissi [10].
The code presented in this chapter is placed in my github repository Here is the here. I
will perform experiments on both equations and present the experiment design and result
in the next chapter.
30
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:39==
5
Experiments and Results
5.1
Experiments
I have compared the model performance on MSE loss for the Heat equation and the
Burges equation with respect to :
• MLP neural network as a function of number of neurons per layer, number of layers
for each activation functions GELU, tanh, swish, softplus and sin
• ResNet as a function of the number of blocks and activation functions (the above
list)
• For the Heat equation the model performance is compared to the analytical solution
• For the Burges equation the model performance is compared to the solution pro­
vided in the article [10]
• I have used the Adam optimizer for all experiments with weight decay and learn­
ingRate
All experiments have been trained in Collab with the use of the GPU T4. The open source
software package Weights and Biases was used to record all hyperparameters, training
measures initial loss, boundary loss and residual loss and final performance measure
MSEloss.
For both the Heat equation and the Burges equation I trained the two neural networks
MLP and ResNet with each activation function for different sizes of the number of neurons
(hidden_dim) 10, 20, 40 and 50 and the number of layers equal to 2,4,6 and 8. All other
hyperparameters is fixed to the values in table 5.1. The experiment is equivalent to the
one in the article [10], but extended with a comparison of the five activation functions.
The training strategy is to train the models on 3.000 epochs and then see which activation
gives the best MSEloss. For both equation I got 4 different sizes of neurons per layer and
4 different length of layers. This gives a total of 5*4*4=80 observations per equation ­ as
base case.
Table 5.1: Hyperparameters
Parameter
Value
alpha
0.01
lambda_f
1
resblocks
0
learningRate
0.0001
wd
1e­4
N_f
3000
N_u
100
n_epochs
3000
network
MLP
5.2
Results
Heat Equation
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
31
==PAGE:40==
As mentioned above I trained both the MLP and the ResNet across neurons, the number of layers
and the number of ResNet blocks and recorded MSEloss and found the configuration that gives
the minimal MSEloss. The findings is in table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Best performing configuration for the Heat equation for MLP and ResNet
Network
Activation
Neurons
Layers
resblocks
MSEloss
MLP
GELU
50
8
6.0 × 10−6
ResNet
Swish
40
8
2.371 × 10−6
From table 5.2, one see that that it is the ResNet that is the best neural network according to
MSELoss. In order to compare them correct I have counted all the parameters in each model
configuration see table A.22 and table A.21. The MLP model have in total 20.601 parameters
and the ResNet model have 26.401 parameters. It is best practice to choose the model with
less complexity and also given that the difference is 3.629 × 10−6. I select the MLP model. An
interesting observation is that for the ResNet model it is not the largest network (50, 8) that has
the lowest MSE Loss but the (40, 8). If I focus on the MLP model I have plotted the average Total
loss (boundary loss + initial loss + residual loss) see figure 5.1
(a) Plot of LossTotal across Activation Functions
(b) MSELoss across activation functions
Figure 5.1: Plot of total loss across activation functions for MLP network
By visual inspection of 5.1a and 5.1b we see that the softplus (blue line) does not perform well.
Regarding the other activation functions it is difficult to see which is the best. The minimum MSE
loss is achieved for the network with activation function GELU. In addition the worst performing
neural network is for the softplus function see table A.2. The MSE loss for the best performing
activation function GELU across neurons and layers is in table 5.3. See appendix A.2 for the
results of the experiments of the other activation functions.
Table 5.3: MSE Loss for GELU Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Layers
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
2.249e­03
1.700e­03
8.06e­04
5.2e­05
20
3.88e­04
3.34e­04
5.8e­05
6.4e­05
40
3.61e­04
1.22e­04
6.3e­05
4.3e­05
50
3.09e­04
1.20e­04
6.3e­05
6.0e­06
32
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:41==
From table 5.3 we see that the performance improve with the number of neurons and the num­
ber layers. I have also analyzed the impact of sample sizes of Nf(sampling related to residual
equation) and Nu (sampling related to the initial/boundary condition) see table 5.4
Table 5.4: MSE loss for various Nu and Nf Values. MLP network 40 neurons, 6 layers
and tanh activation function.
Nu\Nf
1000
2000
3000
4000
20
8.20e­05
8.50e­05
8.50e­05
8.30e­05
50
2.15e­04
2.09e­04
2.05e­04
2.07e­04
100
2.06e­04
2.04e­04
2.65e­04
2.03e­04
200
2.76e­04
2.80e­04
2.78e­04
2.78e­04
From the above table 5.4 I see the association that the MSE loss is increasing when I increase
the sample size of Nu. I would have expected the opposite that the MSELoss would decrease as
Nu and Nf increase. The values for Nu and Nf of the ResNet is in table A.23 and for Nu = 100
gives the lowest MSEloss for all values of Nf.
In Weights and Biases there is an function called ’Variable importance’ that shows the numerical
variables impact on MSEloss. In Weights and Biases there is 212 observations from training. In
figure 5.2 I see the impact on MSEloss on MLP and ResNet.
(a) Variable Importance for Heat equation. MLP network.
(b) Variable Importance for Heat equation. ResNet network.
Figure 5.2: Variable Importance for MLP and ResNet for the Heat equation
For the MLP netwok 5.2a I see that the three most important variables is the number of neurons,
the number of layers and the weight decay and have negative correlation. The last two important
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
33
==PAGE:42==
variables Nf and Nu has both positive correlation. For the ResNet 5.2b I see that the three top
important variable is the number of neurons, the number of ResNet blocks and weight decay all
with negative correlation. Again the last two Nf and Nu have positive correlation.
In figure 5.3 I have plotted the three loss terms boundary, initial and residual for the two models
’worst’ and ’best’ i.e. for the activation function softplus and GELU.
(a) Loss terms of activation function softplus
(b) Loss terms of activation function GELU
Figure 5.3: Loss terms for worst and best case
From figure 5.3a the patterns of the loss terms does not look well for the residual loss (green) and
the initial loss (red). It looks like that the three loss terms is in three different scales and that the
optimization algorithm cannot converge. For the activation function GELU I observe a much better
pattern of convergence see figure 5.3b. The loss term for boundary have a plateau that could be
a case of a vanshing gradient (or constant gradient) ­ see also figure 2.5. Regarding the plot at
right of figure 5.3b if I zoom in on the residual loss I get the plot in figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Plot of residual loss for MLP with GELU activation function
From the plot I can see that the gradient of the residual was first zero, then positive, then zero, and
then negative again with some bumps. In figure 5.3b when I look at both the boundary loss(blue
line) and the residual loss (green line) are both increasing in the start of the training process on
the behalf of the rapid convergence of the initial loss.
34
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:43==
To get an understanding of how well the model predicts the temperature I have plotted the different
time cross sections in figure 5.5 and see the how well the model fits.
Figure 5.5: Plot of best prediction model at time steps
if I train the network for 6.000 epochs MSE loss 3.47464e­06, which is a marginal improvement.
Burges Equation
I have used the same hyperparameter configuration as in table 5.1 except that I trained the neural
networks with 6.000 epochs instead of 3.000 epochs. I have trained both MLP and ResNet across
neurons, the number of layers and the number of ResNet blocks and recorded all variables and
MSEloss and found the configuration that gives the minimal MSEloss. The findings is in table 5.5.
Table 5.5: Best and worst performing configuration for the Burges equation
Network
Activation
Neurons
Layers
resblocks
MSEloss
MLP
sin
40
6
0.003469
ResNet
sin
20
8
0.0004104
From table 5.5, I see that the ResNet is the best performing model according to MSELoss. Com­
pared to the results for the heat equation there is a significant difference in MSEloss between the
two networks for the Burges equation. The MLP model have in total 10.001 parameters and the
ResNet model have 6.801 parameters see table A.22 and table A.21. In this case the ResNet is
the network with the lowest MSE loss and with the lowest number of parameters.
An interesting observation is that for the ResNet model it is not the largest network (50, 8) that has
the lowest MSE Loss but the (40, 6).
I have also analyzed the impact of sample sizes of Nf (sampling related to residual equation) and
Nu (sampling related to the initial/boundary condition) see table 5.6
Table 5.6: MSELoss for Various Nu and Nf Values. MLP with 40 neurons and 6 layer and
tanh activation function
Nu\Nf
1000
2000
3000
4000
20
5.104e­02
3.386e­02
4.274e­02
6.273e­02
50
1.189e­02
1.890e­02
1.281e­02
6.08e­04
100
1.416e­02
6.478e­03
4.193e­02
3.66e­04
200
6.322e­02
3.065e­02
1.179e­02
2.273e­02
Regarding table 5.6 we see that the association between Nf and Nu is different from the heat
equation. If one take a row Nu then the minimal MSEloss is achieved at different size of Nf
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
35
==PAGE:44==
across Nu. This result might be because of the ResNet structure i.e. the skip­connection feature.
The values of Nu and Nf for the ResNet is in table A.24 there is no clear pattern. In Weights and
Biases there is a function called ’Variable importance’ that shows the numerical variables impact
on MSEloss. In Weights and Biases there is 212 observations from training. In figure 5.6 I see the
impact on MSEloss on MLP and ResNet.
(a) Variable Importance for Burges equation. MLP network.
(b) Variable Importance for Burges equation. ResNet network.
Figure 5.6: Variable Importance for MLP and ResNet for the Burges Equation
The most important variables for the MLP network is Nf which also makes sense; I also see that
there is a positive correlation. The next three variables is the number neurons (hidden_dim), the
number of layers and weight decay and have all negative correlation. Note that for the MLP there
is 114 observations. For the ResNet we see again that Nf is the most important variable. Note
that Nu also have positive correlation. Interesting to see that weight decay and the number of
ResNet blocks both have negative correlation ­ as expected. The number of observations for the
ResNet is 98. As for the Heat equation to identify the best performing activation function I have
plotted the average Total loss (=boundary loss + initial loss + residual loss) see figure 5.7a.
36
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:45==
(a) Plot of Loss total Burges across activation functions
(b) MSELoss across activation functions
Figure 5.7: Plot of total loss across activation functions for ResNet network
By visual inspection of figure 5.7 we see again that the softplus does not perform well and it is
difficult to see which of the other functions that is the best according to MSEloss see figure 5.7b.
The minimum MSE loss is achieved for the ResNet with 40 neurons and 8 resblocks with the
sinusoidal activation function see table 5.7.
Table 5.7: MSE Loss for Sin Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
8.0488e­02
3.7447e­02
5.802e­03
1.52e­03
20
6.3446e­02
8.31e­04
8.98e­04
4.10e­04
40
7.95e­04
5.52e­04
4.659e­03
8.50e­04
50
9.187e­03
1.605e­03
1.5849e­02
2.0733e­02
In addition the worst performing neural network is the one with softplus activation function see
table A.15. See appendix A.2.2 for the results of the experiments of the other activation functions.
In figure 5.8 I have plotted the three loss terms boundary, initial and Residual for the two models
’worst’ softplus and ’best’ sin .
Regarding the plot in figure 5.8b and if I zoom in on the residual loss I get the plot in figure 5.9.
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Loss terms of activation function softplus
(b) Loss terms of activation function sin
Figure 5.8: Loss terms for worst and best case
Figure 5.9: Plot of residual loss for ResNet with sin activation function
From the plot I can see that the gradient of the residual was first negative, then zero, then positive,
then zero and then negative again. In figure 5.8b when I look at both the boundary loss(blue line)
and the initial loss (red line) are both decreasing in the start of the training process on the behalf
of the increasing residual loss.
To get an understanding of how well the model predicts the temperature I have plotted the different
time cross sections in figure 5.10 and see the how well the model fits.
38
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.10: Plot of best prediction model at time steps for the Burges equation
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
For the Heat equation I see that the ResNet has the lowest MSELoss, but is also the most complex
network. I always take the machine learning model with the lowest complexity (parameters) and
I choose the MLP neural network with 50 neurons, 8 layers and with GELU activation function
and it made an impressive prediction of the analytical solution see figure 5.5. As expected when
I increase the number of neurons and the number of layers then MSELoss decrease. This fact
was also confirmed by the variable importance analysis in figure 5.2. The analysis regarding the
sample size of Nf and Nu was opposite than what I would have expected. The rational is that
the MSELoss decrease as Nf and Nu increase (negative correlation). This needs more research.
One reason could be that the Heat equation is simple and that the Nf is high enough to learn the
pattern. The result is confirmed by the variable importance analysis. The plot of the three loss
terms figure 5.3 also showed some interesting patterns that needs more research.
For the Burges equation the best neural network is the ResNet with 20 neurons and 8 resblocks
and with sin activation function. This network was also the network with the lowest number of
parameters. The analysis regarding the sample size of Nf and Nu see table 5.6 was more incon­
clusive and needs more research. If I exclude the columns Nf = 1000 and Nf = 2000; than I do
see the rational pattern ­ that the MSEloss decrease as Nf and Nu increase. From the variable
importance plot 5.6 I see that the variable Nf is the most important variable for both the MLP and
the ResNet network and it has positive correlation. For the MLP network I also conclude the ob­
vious dependency of negative correlation between the MSEloss and the number of neurons, the
number of layers and the weight decay. My sinusoidal activation function performed very well for
the Burges equation see plot 5.10.
The activation function softplus is the poorest performing activation function across both equations
but also across the two networks ­ not surprisingly because it is an approximation of the ReLU.
One of my main tasks is to find the hyperparameter that have the largest impact on MSEloss. For
these experiments it can be more or less impossible to find the needle in the haystack manually.
Instead I should have used hyperparameter optimization to make a more effectively search of the
hyperparameter space. The variable importance function is a good starting point to understand
which variable has an impact on the MSELoss.
The other topic that needs further research is how we evaluate the physics informed neural net­
works. The approach I use and other research papers is to select cases where we have an ana­
lytical solution. Unfortunately that has very limited use; because in most dynamic systems there
is no analytical solution available that we can evaluate the prediction on. Also have in mind that
an dynamic system is defined within a domain and outside it may not exist at all. Given that I only
had the analytical solution to evaluate model performance, it is difficult to understand the degree
of overfitting for the two equations. A next step would be to develop a cross validation step for
Physics informed neural networks. This also points to the question on how we can use physics
informed neural networks. I think the most obvious use case is when we already have formulated
a dynamical system and we need to estimate the parameters in the model on data.
With the benefit of hindsight I should have selected a different neural network than the ResNet. In
the literature there is a few interesting articles on Physics informed neural networks with variational
autoencoders and recurrent neural networks. This would have been interesting if it is possible to
develop a physics informed neural network with LSTM or a transformer network that is autore­
gressive to do forecasting with.
One topic that could be interesting to explore further is how one can train physics informed neu­
ral networks on a broader set of initial/boundary conditions. This type of research have been
completed on the interesting neural network architecture DeepOnets [12]. Aligned with this type
of research it could be interesting to explore how transfer learning works within the context of
physics informed neural networks. Both the Heat equation and the Burges equation is connected
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
41
==PAGE:50==
via a transformation. The open question is; can I train a neural network for the simple heat equa­
tion and then transfer learn to the Burges equation? This would be an interesting next step for this
project !
In some of the articles I have read they have a very optimistic view on Physics Informed Neural
Networks and praise the approach to the sky.
Even In the excellent article by R. Wang [7] they write: Despite the tremendous progress of DL for
science, e.g., atmospheric science [127], computational biology [1], material science [22], quan­
tum chemistry [141], it remains a grand challenge to incorporate physical principles in a systematic
manner to the design, training, and inference of such models. DL models are essentially statistical
models that learn patterns from the data they are trained on. Without explicit constraints, DL mod­
els, when trained solely on data, are prone to make scientifically implausible predictions, violating
the governing laws of physical systems.
And further: To build trustworthy predictive models for
science and engineering, we need to leverage known physical principles to guide Deep learning
models to learn the correct underlying dynamics instead of simply fitting the observed data.
They seem to forget that when we define the extended loss with the residual equation it can be
violated during the training process. So the title physics informed neural network is correct as a
way to guide the neural networks to learn the governing equations as close as possible,
But in all areas of deep learning there is hype and you just need to learn to live with it.
The end.
Søren Johansen
42
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
P. Ditlevsen and S Ditlevsen. “Warning of a forthcoming collapse of the Atlantic
meridional overturning circulation”. in: Nat Commun 14 (2023). URL: https://static-
curis.ku.dk/portal/files/362388477/s41467_023_39810_w.pdf.
[2]
Hans Kaper and Hans Engler. Mathematics and Climate. Philadelphia, PA: Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2013. DOI: 10.1137/1.9781611972610. URL:
https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611972610.
[3]
Eugenia Kalnay. “Atmospheric Modeling, Data Assimilation and Predictability”. in:
129 (november 2002). DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511802270.
[4]
Melissa Heikkilä. “Weather forecasting is having an AI moment”. in: MIT Technology
Review (july 2023). URL: https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/07/11/1076067/
weather-forecasting-is-having-an-ai-moment/.
[5]
Remi Lam andothers. “Learning skillful medium­range global weather forecasting”.
in: Science 382.6677 (2023), pages 1416–1421. DOI: 10.1126/science.adi2336.
eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.adi2336. URL: https:
//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.adi2336.
[6]
Christian Legaard andothers. “Constructing Neural Network Based Models for Sim­
ulating Dynamical Systems”. in: ACM Comput. Surv. 55.11 (february 2023). ISSN:
0360­0300. DOI: 10.1145/3567591. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3567591.
[7]
Rui Wang and Rose Yu. “Physics­Guided Deep Learning for Dynamical Systems:
A Survey”. in: (2023). arXiv: 2107.01272 [cs.LG].
[8]
George Em Karniadakis andothers. “Physics­informed machine learning”. in: Na­
ture Reviews Physics 3 (2021), pages 422–440.
[9]
Lu Lu andothers. “Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the uni­
versal approximation theorem of operators”. in: Nature Machine Intelligence 3.3
(march 2021), pages 218–229. ISSN: 2522­5839. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-021-00302-
5. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42256-021-00302-5.
[10]
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris and G.E. Karniadakis. “Physics­informed neural networks:
A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving non­
linear partial differential equations”. in: Journal of Computational Physics 378 (2019),
pages 686–707. ISSN: 0021­9991. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999118307125.
[11]
Sifan Wang andothers. “An Expert’s Guide to Training Physics­informed Neural
Networks”. in: (2023). arXiv: 2308.08468 [cs.LG].
[12]
Sifan Wang, Hanwen Wang and Paris Perdikaris. “Learning the solution operator
of parametric partial differential equations with physics­informed DeepONets”. in:
Science Advances 7.40 (2021), eabi8605. DOI: 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abi8605. eprint:
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.abi8605. URL: https://www.science.
org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.abi8605.
[13]
Kaiming He andothers. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition”. in: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1512.03385 (2015).
[14]
Giambattista Parascandolo, Heikki Huttunen and Tuomas Virtanen. “Taming the
waves: sine as activation function in deep neural networks”. in: (2017). URL: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=Sks3zF9eg.
[15]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
43
==PAGE:52==
[16]
Steven L. Brunton, Joshua L. Proctor and J. Nathan Kutz. “Discovering governing
equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems”. in:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113.15 (march 2016), pages 3932–
3937. ISSN: 1091­6490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1517384113. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.1517384113.
[17]
Atilim Baydin andothers. “Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a survey”.
in: Journal of Machine Learning Research (2018). arXiv: 1502.05767 [cs.SC].
44
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:53==
A
Appendix
A.1
Selected dynamic systems
A.1.1
Heat Equation
The heat equation is a partial differential equation that describes how the distribution of heat (or
temperature) evolves over time in a given region, under the influence of thermal diffusion.
The heat equation is usually written as:
∂u
∂t = α∇2u
Where:
• u = u(x, t) is the temperature at position x and time t.
•
∂u
∂t is the partial derivative of u with respect to time, representing how temperature changes
over time.
• α is the thermal diffusivity of the material, a constant that measures the rate of heat transfer.
• ∇2u is the Laplacian of u, representing the spatial part of the equation. It involves the second
spatial derivatives of u, reflecting how the temperature changes in space.
Physical Interpretation: The heat equation is a model of heat transfer in a medium. It states that the
rate of change of temperature in a small region is proportional to the curvature of the temperature
graph. This means that if a region is hotter than its surroundings, it will cool down, and if it is
cooler, it will warm up.
Solutions: Solving the heat equation involves finding a function u(x, t) that satisfies the equation
for given boundary and initial conditions. Solutions to the heat equation are often obtained us­
ing methods like separation of variables, Fourier series, or numerical methods in more complex
scenarios.
Applications: The heat equation is crucial in many fields, such as physics, engineering, and envi­
ronmental science. It’s used to model various phenomena like the cooling or heating of objects,
the spread of heat in environments, and even in financial mathematics for option pricing in the
Black­Scholes model.
The heat equation thus provides a fundamental framework for understanding and predicting the
behavior of systems in which heat transfer and diffusion are key processes.
The heat equation is a partial differential equation that describes how the distribution of heat (or
temperature) evolves over time in a given region, under the influence of thermal diffusion.
The Burgers’ equation is a fundamental partial differential equation from fluid mechanics. It is
named after Johannes Martinus Burgers, a Dutch physicist. The equation is significant in the
study of fluid dynamics, nonlinear wave equations, and shock waves.
The Burgers’ equation is expressed as:
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x = ν ∂2u
∂x2
Where: u = u(x, t) is the velocity field as a function of space x and time t. ν is the viscosity
coefficient.
The equation contains two main parts:
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
45
==PAGE:54==
• The nonlinear convective term: u ∂u
∂x. This term represents the advection or transport of the
velocity field u.
• The viscous term: ν ∂2u
∂x2 . This term accounts for the diffusion or smoothing effect due to
viscosity.
The Burgers’ equation is a simplified model that captures essential features of more complex fluid
flow equations, like the Navier­Stokes equations. It is used to study various phenomena such as
turbulence, shock waves, and pattern formation. In the limit of zero viscosity (ν = 0), it reduces
to a simpler form known as the inviscid Burgers’ equation, which is a prototype for studying shock
wave formation and propagation in fluids.
A.2
Results
A.2.1
Heat Equation
MLP network
Table A.1: MSE Loss for Tanh Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Layers for the heat equation
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
4.6971e­02
1.0010e­03
1.1720e­03
8.41e­04
20
1.4120e­03
5.84e­04
2.51e­04
6.67e­04
40
3.13e­04
3.87e­04
2.65e­04
1.98e­04
50
1.6160e­03
2.65e­04
6.1e­05
5.4e­05
Table A.2: MSE Loss for Softplus Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions
and Layers for the heat equation
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
0.176641
0.181794
0.195227
0.196202
20
0.005076
0.003919
0.001322
0.184620
40
0.004032
0.004025
0.186216
0.002169
50
0.189738
0.192115
0.192332
0.458709
Table A.3: MSE Loss for Swish Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Layers for the heat equation
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
2.590e­03
1.265e­03
8.29e­04
1.86e­04
20
2.71e­04
3.00e­04
3.1e­05
5.6e­05
40
2.31e­04
9.1e­05
2.79e­04
2.0e­05
50
2.03e­04
1.78e­04
6.3e­05
2.0e­05
46
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:55==
Table A.4: MSE Loss for Sin Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Layers for the heat equation
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
1.25912e­01
1.82e­04
2.032e­03
2.49e­04
20
9.93e­04
2.31e­04
1.59e­04
1.61e­04
40
3.50e­04
1.75e­04
9.7e­05
1.24e­04
50
5.17e­04
1.82e­04
1.21e­04
1.34e­04
Table A.5: MSE Loss for Softplus Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions
and Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
1.89685e­01
1.86584e­01
1.79392e­01
3.8550e­02
20
1.79521e­01
1.01938e­01
1.82189e­01
3.1510e­03
40
1.82335e­01
1.88965e­01
3.4110e­03
4.55436e­01
50
5.0390e­03
1.8710e­03
3.9220e­03
4.6670e­03
Table A.6: MSE Loss for Tanh Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
1.6334e­02
8.13e­04
5.99e­04
1.372e­03
20
8.65e­04
1.39e­04
9.2e­05
6.4e­05
40
2.63e­04
3.6e­05
3.2e­05
3.4e­05
50
1.48e­04
3.7e­05
4.4e­05
2.4e­05
Table A.7: MSE Loss for GELU Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
7.14e­04
4.26e­04
8.6e­05
5.6e­05
20
2.93e­04
2.69e­04
7.0e­05
2.0e­05
40
1.35e­04
4.7e­05
1.4e­05
4.0e­06
50
1.09e­04
2.8e­05
1.9e­05
2.3e­05
Table A.8: MSE Loss for Swish Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
1.77926e­01
1.091e­03
2.33e­04
1.02e­04
20
6.19e­04
5.1e­05
2.4e­05
1.8e­05
40
1.06e­04
1.5e­05
2.0e­05
2.371e­06
50
1.01e­04
1.7e­05
2.0e­06
9.0e­06
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
47
==PAGE:56==
Table A.9: MSE Loss for Sin Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
2.1068e­02
1.52e­04
9.1e­05
2.26e­04
20
1.84e­04
5.6e­05
1.25e­04
2.6e­05
40
1.70e­04
4.6e­05
1.6e­05
1.0e­05
50
1.93e­04
6.3e­05
1.7e­05
1.0e­05
A.2.2
Burges Equation
MLP network
Table A.10: MSE Loss for Sin Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Layers
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
1.22707e­01
8.6335e­02
7.3808e­02
1.2897e­02
20
1.07722e­01
8.1672e­02
1.8997e­02
6.668e­03
40
8.1608e­02
4.8967e­02
3.469e­03
6.884e­03
50
8.5991e­02
1.4784e­02
4.074e­03
4.928e­03
Table A.11: MSE Loss for GELU Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions
and Layers for the burges equation
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
1.88228e­01
1.78497e­01
1.60572e­01
1.67727e­01
20
1.78489e­01
1.81477e­01
2.02817e­01
2.04837e­01
40
1.68064e­01
1.67770e­01
1.99502e­01
2.06944e­01
50
1.65219e­01
1.89148e­01
2.00643e­01
2.08706e­01
Table A.12: MSE Loss for Softplus Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions
and Layers for the Burges equation
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
3.51670e­01
3.40394e­01
2.50108e­01
2.63273e­01
20
2.56497e­01
2.59027e­01
3.42697e­01
3.06132e­01
40
3.48172e­01
2.52152e­01
2.65221e­01
2.76564e­01
50
2.58873e­01
2.60499e­01
2.62113e­01
2.76889e­01
48
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:57==
Table A.13: MSE Loss for Swish Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions
and Layers for the Burges equation
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
1.46247e­01
1.44904e­01
1.38982e­01
1.32137e­01
20
1.59737e­01
1.35900e­01
1.49080e­01
1.59018e­01
40
1.40379e­01
1.34593e­01
1.52098e­01
1.60717e­01
50
1.37464e­01
1.34266e­01
1.52989e­01
1.60932e­01
Table A.14: MSE Loss for Tanh Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Layers
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
1.11476e­01
7.9444e­02
4.4168e­02
9.668e­03
20
8.5867e­02
6.3301e­02
9.896e­03
7.301e­03
40
6.7702e­02
2.1085e­02
1.1885e­02
2.2216e­02
50
7.0712e­02
2.8969e­02
8.832e­03
7.916e­03
ResNet
Table A.15: MSE Loss for Softplus Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions
and Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
3.48305e­01
2.43493e­01
2.45032e­01
3.22447e­01
20
3.41519e­01
3.15605e­01
2.43862e­01
2.66227e­01
40
2.50995e­01
2.76763e­01
2.65769e­01
2.77467e­01
50
2.49210e­01
2.37134e­01
2.55765e­01
2.75119e­01
Table A.16: MSE Loss for Tanh Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions and
Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
6.6739e­02
2.0436e­02
6.456e­03
6.581e­03
20
2.7657e­02
1.2985e­02
4.418e­03
4.095e­03
40
3.786e­03
5.585e­03
5.293e­03
5.2324e­02
50
1.929e­03
5.907e­03
1.843e­03
4.4415e­02
Table A.17: MSE Loss for GELU Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions
and Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
1.77906e­01
1.95111e­01
1.96818e­01
1.95759e­01
20
1.85553e­01
2.02718e­01
2.05706e­01
2.05674e­01
40
1.99096e­01
2.07759e­01
2.07593e­01
2.05322e­01
50
2.01716e­01
1.99481e­01
2.08356e­01
2.06736e­01
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
49
==PAGE:58==
Table A.18: MSE Loss for Swish Activation Function with Different Hidden Dimensions
and Numbers of Resblocks
hidden_dim
2 Resblocks
4 Resblocks
6 Resblocks
8 Resblocks
10
1.52594e­01
1.29880e­01
1.28450e­01
1.43319e­01
20
1.40452e­01
1.47680e­01
1.53142e­01
1.42573e­01
40
1.47827e­01
1.39695e­01
1.56289e­01
1.59404e­01
50
1.24474e­01
1.54586e­01
1.51994e­01
1.58572e­01
A.3
Example forward and reverse mode
To show the forward and reverse mode I use the function f(x1, x2) = exp(x1) + x1x2 −cos(x2) is
evaluated at (x1, x2) = (2, 5) and setting ˙x = 1 to compute ∂y
∂x1 . The example follows the algorithm
in [17].
The forward evaluation is on the left and the forward derivation operation is on right see table A.19.
Forward computation
Forward derivative
v1
= x1
= 2
˙v−1
= x1
= 1
v0
= x2
= 5
˙v0
= ˙x2
= 0
v1
= exp(v−1)
= exp(2)
˙v1
= exp(v−1)
= exp(2)
v2
= v−1 · v0
= 2 · 5
˙v2
= ˙v−1·v0+ ˙v0·v−1
= 5
v3
= cos(v0)
= cos(5)
˙v3
= ˙v0(−sin(5))
= 0
v4
= v1 + v2
= 10 + exp(2)
˙v4
= ˙v1 + ˙v2
= exp(2) + 5
v5
= v4 −v3
= 10 + exp(2) −cos(5)
˙v5
= ˙v4 −v3
= exp(2) + 5
y
= v5
= 17.1054
˙y
= ˙v5
= 12.3891
Table A.19: Forward mode example
The reverse mode calculation are evaluated in reverse see figure 2.8. Both
∂y
∂x2 and
∂y
∂x2 is com­
puted in the same reverse pass with start ¯v5 = ¯y = ∂y
∂y = 1 see table A.20.
Reverse derivative trace
¯x1
= ¯v−1
= 12.3891
¯x2
= ¯v0
= 1.0412
¯v−1
= ¯v−1 + ¯v1 ∂v2
∂v−1
= ¯v−1 + exp(v0)
= 12.3891
¯v0
= ¯v0 + ¯v2 ∂v2
∂v0
= ¯v0 + ¯v2 + ·v−1
= 1.0412
¯v−1
= ¯v2 ∂v2
∂v−1
= ¯v2 · v0
= exp(2) + 5
¯v0
= ¯v3 ∂v3
∂v0
= ¯v3(−sin(v0))
= 0.9589
¯v2
= ¯v4 ∂v4
∂v2
= ¯v4 · 1
= 1
¯v1
= ¯v4 ∂v4
∂v1
= ¯v4 · 1
= 1
¯v3
= ¯v5 ∂v5
∂v3
= ¯v5 · (−1)
= −1
¯v4
= ¯v5 ∂v5
∂v4
= ¯v5 · 1
= 1
¯v5
= ¯y
= 1
Table A.20: Reverse mode example
In Pytorch this is done with the following script.
50
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:59==
import torch
# Create tensors for x1 and x2 and enable gradient tracking
x1 = torch.tensor([2.0], requires_grad=True)
x2 = torch.tensor([5.0], requires_grad=True)
# Forward Mode:
# Defining the function: f(x1, x2) = exp(x1) + x1 * x2 - cos(x2)
# This is the forward pass, where we compute the output of the function
# as well as set up the computational graph for backpropagation.
u1=torch.exp(x1)
u2=x1*x2
u3=torch.cos(x2)
f = u1 + u2 -u3
# Print the operations
print("Forward graph:")
du1_dx1=grad(u1,x1,retain_graph=True)[0]
print("u1.grad:", du1_dx)
du2_dx1=grad(u2,x1,retain_graph=True)[0]
print("u2.grad:",du2_dx )
du3_dx1=grad(u3,x1,allow_unused=True,retain_graph=True)[0]
du3_dx1 = du3_dx1 if du3_dx1 is not None else torch.tensor([0.0])
print("u3.grad:",du3_dx1 )
print('df_dx1',du1_dx1.item()+du2_dx1.item()+du3_dx1.item())
print('')
print('Reverse mode')
# Reverse Mode (Automatic Differentiation/Backpropagation):
# When we call backward(), PyTorch traverses the computational graph
# in reverse , computing gradients of f with respect to x1 and x2.
f.backward(retain_graph=True)
# The gradients are computed and stored in x1.grad and x2.grad.
# These gradients represent df/dx1 and df/dx2.
grad_x1 = x1.grad
grad_x2 = x2.grad
print("Reverse mode - Gradient with respect to x1:", grad_x1.item())
print("Reverse mode - Gradient with respect to x2:", grad_x2.item())
Listing A.1: Syntax for computing the forward and reverse mode derivatives in Pytorch
A.4
Number of Parameters in MLP and ResNet
Table A.21: Number of Parameters in ResNet
hidden_dim
2 resblocks
4 resblocks
6 resblocks
8 resblocks
10
418
921
1.361
1.801
20
1.761
3.441
5.121
6.801
40
6.721
13.281
19.841
26.401
50
10.401
20.601
30.801
41.001
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
51
==PAGE:60==
Table A.22: Number of Parameters in MLP
hidden_dim
2 layers
4 layers
6 layers
8 layers
10
261
481
701
921
20
921
1.761
2.601
3.441
40
3.441
6.721
10.001
13.281
50
5.301
10.401
15.501
20.601
A.5
MSEloss for various sampling sizes for ResNet
Table A.23: MSELoss for Various Nu and Nf Values. Heat Equation. ResNet with Tanh
activation function.
Nu\Nf
1000
2000
3000
4000
20
1.580e­04
1.580e­04
1.560e­04
1.570e­04
50
6.200e­04
6.160e­04
6.120e­04
6.150e­04
100
9.200e­05
8.800e­05
8.600e­05
8.600e­05
200
3.200e­04
3.290e­04
3.260e­04
3.250e­04
Table A.24: MSEloss for Various Nu and Nf Values. Burges equation. ResNet with Tanh
activation function.
Nu\Nf
1000
2000
3000
4000
20
1.4956e­02
4.9484e­02
1.0053e­01
3.7270e­02
50
2.1466e­02
6.0700e­03
8.5140e­03
4.0190e­03
100
2.3468e­02
6.0960e­03
2.0220e­03
7.4750e­03
200
7.6410e­03
5.4750e­03
4.1230e­03
5.3040e­03
52
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
==PAGE:61==
Physics informed neural networks for
dynamical systems
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
