==PAGE:1==
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor
Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
Master’s Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
Master’s Thesis
January 28, 2024
By
Stephanie Bjarta Hansen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Stephanie Bjarta Hansen, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn­
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://sustain.dtu.dk/en
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Indoor Climate, Depart­
ment of Indoor Environment and Energy, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Architectural Engineering.
The thesis was prepared during the period from August 28th, 2023, to January 28th, 2024,
and is credited 30 ETCS points.
Stephanie Bjarta Hansen ­ s173811
Signature
Date
ii
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
28 / 01 / 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The quality of indoor environment (IEQ) plays a significant role on occupant health and
productivity in office buildings. Traditionally, general assessments of the indoor climate
have overlooked these impacts and emphasized on the building’s performance in terms
of energy efficiency. This study addressed a critical gap in building design by focusing on
the indoor climate’s impact on health and particularly productivity.
The study aimed to explore the implications of indoor climate renovations in office build­
ings. By integrating findings from diverse research papers, relationships between the
indoor climate, short­term sick leave, productivity, and economy were established. A
Python­based simulation tool with a graphical user interface (GUI) was developed, allow­
ing users to input buildings details and renovation measures for calculating productivity
and the economic impact.
Whole­year indoor climate simulations with the tool revealed potential productivity in­
creases of 0.2% to 1.5% across various scenarios in a case study, translating to benefit­
to­cost ratios of 20 to 49. The findings suggest significant economic potential in investing
in indoor climate renovations for office buildings.
While uncertainties exist due to various assumptions and simplifications, the outcomes
align with existing literature. Consequently, the tool serves as a decision support system,
enabling stakeholders to make informed decisions regarding indoor climate renovations
and addressing a critical gap in contemporary building design practices.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
iii
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
Kvaliteten af det indendørs miljø (IEQ) spiller en betydelig rolle for menneskets sundhed
og produktivitet i kontorbygninger. Traditionelt set har generelle vurderinger af indeklima
overset disse påvirkninger og i stedet fokuseret på bygningens præstation med henblik
på energieffektivitet. Dette studie adresserede et kritisk behov i bygningsdesign ved at
fokusere på indeklimaets indflydelse på sundhed og særligt produktivitet.
Studiet havde til formål at udforske konsekvenserne af indeklimarenoveringer i kontor­
bygninger. Ved at integrere resultater fra diverse forskningsartikler blev der etableret
sammenhænge mellem indeklima, kortvarigt sygefravær, produktivitet og økonomi. Et
Python­baseret simuleringsværktøj med en grafisk brugergrænseflade (GUI) blev udviklet,
som tillod brugere at indtaste bygnings­ og renoveringsdetaljer for at kunne estimere pro­
duktivitet og økonomisk påvirkning.
Simuleringer med værktøjet viste potentielle produktivitetsstigninger på 0,2% til 1,5% i
forskellige scenarier i en case study, hvilket svarer til ’benefit­to­cost’ forhold på 20 til 49.
Resultaterne indikerer et betydeligt økonomisk potentiale ved at investere i indeklimaren­
overinger i kontorbygninger.
Selvom der er usikkerheder forbundet med resultaterne grundet diverse antagelser og
forenklinger, stemmer resultaterne overens med eksisterende litteratur. Som følge heraf
fungerer værktøjet som en beslutningsstøtte, der giver interessenter mulighed for at træffe
informerede beslutninger om indeklimarenoveringer og adresserer et kritisk behov i den
moderne bygningsdesignpraksis.
iv
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This thesis was conducted under the guidance of Professor Jørn Toftum, who serves
as the head of the Section for Indoor Environment in the Environmental and Resource
Engineering Department, and Professor Pawel Wargocki, also in the Department of En­
vironmental and Resource Engineering.
I express my gratitude to my project supervisors for their valuable support and assistance
during the course of this project. Their collective expertise in the field of indoor climate
has not only significantly contributed to this project but has also proven highly valuable to
my educational development.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
v
==PAGE:8==
Acronyms and Abbreviations
Acronym / abbreviation
Explanation
ACH
Air Change per Hour
BRI
Building Related Illness
BRS
Building­Related Syndrome
CAV
Constant Air Volume
CEN
European Committee for Standardization
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
DS
Danish Standards
GUI
Graphical User Interface
HVAC
Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning
IAQ
Indoor Air Quality
IEQ
Indoor Environmental Quality
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
ISO
International Organization of Standardization
No.
Number
NPV
Net Present Value
Occ.
Occupant
ROI
Return of Investment
SEC
Specific Energy Consumption
Sim.
Simulation
UML
Uniform Modeling Language
VAV
Variable Air Volume
VR
Ventilation Rate
vi
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Acronyms and Abbreviations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
2
2.1
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Background
5
3.1
Indoor environmental quality in office buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
The effect of IEQ­parameters on productivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
The effect of indoor climate parameters on occupant health and well­being
14
3.4
Cost implications of poor indoor climate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5
Typical annual costs in office buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.6
Life­cycle cost analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Methods
21
4.1
Introduction to the tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Tool structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Calculation methods and input variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Occupancy and equipment schedules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.5
Quantitative relationships between IEQ­parameters and productivity . . . . 28
4.6
Estimated economic benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5
Results and Validation
36
5.1
Model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.2
Temperature and air quality assessment performed by the tool
. . . . . . . 36
5.3
Comparison of simulations with IDA ICE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6
Discussion
50
7
Conclusion
54
References
55
A Literature Review ­ Screening
61
B Calculation of weighted average
73
B.1 Temperature and productivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
B.2 Short­term sick leave and productivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
C Hourly wage in Denmark
77
D Energy sources and costs
78
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
vii
==PAGE:10==
E
Simulation Results and Comparisons
79
E.1 Annual operative temperature distributions for varying ventilation types . . . 79
E.2 Comparison of annual distributions of operative temperatures and CO2­
concentrations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
E.3 Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions . . . . . . . . . . 82
E.4 Comparison of annual CO2­concentration distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
viii
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The quality of indoor environment (IEQ) in office buildings plays a significant role in shap­
ing the well­being and productivity of occupants. As people spend a substantial portion of
their lives indoors, the quality of indoor environment becomes a critical factor influencing
overall health, comfort, and productivity. This realization has caused a growing emphasis
on understanding and improving the indoor climate in office settings.
In the context of building design and management, the focus has historically been di­
rected towards the building’s performance and energy efficiency. While these aspects
are crucial, the sometimes overlooked dimensions of occupant health and particularly
productivity have gathered increased attention in recent years. Several studies have suc­
cessfully managed to identify relationships between indoor climate, health and produc­
tivity. Moreover, certain investigations have quantified the socioeconomic consequences
derived from the productivity level of occupants.
Recognizing the impact of the indoor climate on occupants, this study aimed to explore
the various implications of indoor climate renovations in office buildings. Beyond the im­
mediate benefits of improved comfort and well­being, a nuanced investigation into the
socioeconomic consequences formed the foundation of this research. The central ques­
tion guiding this study was:
How does the indoor climate in office buildings impact occupants in terms of health and
productivity, and how can these impacts be quantified to reveal their socioeconomic con­
sequences?
The overall objective of this study was to quantify the complex relationship between indoor
climate, occupant health, productivity, and economy, with focus on office buildings. The
research aimed to offer a thorough understanding of the consequences of indoor climate
renovations on these factors.
The subsequent sections of this study explore existing research and establish the foun­
dation for understanding the interconnected dynamics of indoor climate, health, and pro­
ductivity through a literature review. The Methodology section outlines the systematic
approach employed to quantify these relationships, detailing the creation and validation
of a Python­based simulation tool. Results present the findings derived from the tool’s ap­
plication, highlighting the impacts of indoor climate renovations in office buildings. Finally,
Discussion and Conclusion sections synthesize the gained insights and offer suggestions
for further development and practical implementation of the tool.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature Review
The literature review was conducted to explore the broader academic context and gain
insights into current trends and potential gaps. This systematic process involved defining
the research scope, framing a targeted question, and utilizing diverse search engines with
specific keywords. Evaluating sources through title and abstract screening was essential
for ensuring a comprehensive and well structured review.
2.1
Approach
The literature review systematically followed the steps outlined in Figure 2.1 to establish
a foundation for the study.
Defining the research scope and objectives involved formulating a focused research ques­
tion. This led to the following inquiry:
How does the indoor climate in office buildings impact occupants in terms of health and
productivity, and how can these impacts be quantified to reveal their socioeconomic con­
sequences?
Figure 2.1: Steps of the literature review.
In addition to the research question, inclusion/exclusion criteria for articles identified through
the literature survey were established. This literature review included global studies, and
2
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:13==
diverse building types, including offices and schools. This broad scope of building types
was adopted to gain insights into the potential similarities and distinctions in the effects of
indoor climate on occupants.
The search strategy involved a comprehensive exploration of various search engines,
including GoogleScholar, Scopus, Web of Science, and DTU Findit. Initially, a random
search was conducted to assess search terms based on the quality and relevance of the
records that appeared. This exploratory phase allowed for an initial investigation of the
study objective.
Following the random search, the study objective was systematically examined using
Boolean operators such as ”AND,” ”OR,” and ”NOT.” The research question was decon­
structed into key concepts, and specific keywords like Indoor climate, Offices, Health,
Productivity, Performance, Economic, and others were employed. This structured ap­
proach refined search terms and ensured a focused exploration of relevant literature.
Source screening involved an initial assessment by reading through titles and abstracts,
leading to identification of 141 potentially relevant studies. These studies underwent a
more thorough evaluation, considering parameters like abstract, conclusion, and method­
ology. Ultimately, 60 studies were selected due to their incorporation of quantification
methods for both productivity, health and economic consequences arising from poor in­
door climates.
The organization of identified and screened records was managed using the reference
manager software Mendeley. All references were categorized as either ”Not Relevant,”
”Relevant,” or ”Very Relevant,” with the latter corresponding to articles included in the
screening process, as shown in Figure 2.2.
Categorizing articles was conducted based on subjective criteria. For an article to be la­
beled as ”Very Relevant”, it needed to incorporate quantification methods for either health,
productivity, or economic consequences arising from poor indoor climates. Articles with­
out quantification methods for these aspects were classified as ”Relevant”, while those
with no mention of health, productivity, or economic consequences were labeled as ”Not
Relevant”.
This subjective categorization served the purpose of providing a quick and effective way
to assess the relevance of each article without examining the full content. Additionally,
it directed attention toward articles considered most relevant, contributing to a focused
approach in exploring the literature review.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Flowchart of literature search and screening process.
In addition to organizing records in Mendeley, the references were structured in an Excel
spreadsheet. This facilitated a quick overview of crucial details from each record, including
study type, indoor climate parameters, economic quantification methods, etc. The excel
spreadsheet is presented in Appendix A.
This thorough process ensured a comprehensive review of the literature within indoor
climate, health, productivity, and socioeconomic consequences. The selected studies
formed the foundation for subsequent stages in the research, providing valuable insights
into the complexities of these interconnected aspects.
4
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:15==
3
Background
The Background chapter uncovers relationships between indoor climate, occupant health,
productivity, and economy derived from the literature review. The subsequent sections
provide the foundation connecting theory to practical insights, revealing existing knowl­
edge and leading the way for specific contributions to this study.
3.1
Indoor environmental quality in office buildings
Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) parameters are typically classified into four main do­
mains: visual comfort, acoustic comfort, thermal comfort, and Indoor Air Quality (IAQ).
Figure 3.1 provides an overview of the various parameters within each domain.
Figure 3.1: Indoor Environmental Quality domains and parameters.
While all parameters influence the indoor environment, this study specifically examined
the impact of two key domains: thermal comfort and IAQ, with a focus on temperature,
ventilation, and CO2­concentration.
Traditionally, achieving good indoor climate has typically included well­insulated buildings
and advanced climate control systems, aimed at conserving energy and reduce opera­
tional costs. However, the situation has evolved with the integration of productivity as
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
5
==PAGE:16==
a nuanced layer in indoor climate assessments (Kallio et al. 2020). This development
indicates a shift from conventional considerations, highlighting the evolving complexities
of improving indoor climates, where productivity has become a crucial aspect in recent
years.
Establishing standardized assessment methods for the indoor climate is crucial in ensur­
ing the well­being, comfort, and productivity of occupants within indoor spaces. Globally,
various indoor climate measures have been implemented, such as ASHRAE, WELL, and
ISO Standards. Common for all of these measures is that they focus on creating indoor
environments that are not only healthy but also comfortable and conducive to productivity.
The utilization of standards and categorizations act as a strategic framework, providing
guidance throughout the life­cycle of a building — from design and construction to ongo­
ing operation (WBDG 2016). This ensures compliance with established benchmarks for
human health, overall well­being, and sustainable practices.
The selection of indoor climate assessment measures is influenced by various factors,
such as location and regional regulations, project type and intended use, occupant needs
and preferences, etc. In Denmark, the assessment of the indoor climate frequently in­
volves the application of DS Standards, a collection of national Danish standards. These
standards are crucial in promoting consistency, quality, and safety across diverse sectors
of the Danish economy. While compliance with DS Standards is often voluntary, certain
industries or specific products and services are required to adhere to the standards (DS
2024).
A summary of recommended design values in relation to operative temperature and air
quality according to Standard DS/CEN/TR 16798­2:2019 is presented in Table 3.1 and
3.2, respectively (DS 2019a).
Table 3.1: Recommended design values of the indoor operative temperature in winter and
summer for buildings with mechanical cooling systems (DS 2019a).
Type of building
Category
Operative Temperature [°C]
Minimum for
heating (winter season),
approx. 1.0 clo
Maximum for
cooling (summer season),
approx. 0.5 clo
Landscaped office
(open plan office)
Sedentary, approx. 1.2 met
I
21.0
25.5
II
20.0
26.0
III
19.0
27.0
Table 3.2: Non­adapted persons. Recommended ventilation rates and corresponding
CO2­levels above outdoors for non­residential buildings (DS 2019a).
Type of building
Category
Minimum ventilation rate, qp
CO2­level above outdoors
For occupancy only [L/s­pers]
[ppm]
Landscaped office
(open plan office)
I
10.0
550
II
7.0
800
III
4.0
1,350
IV
2.5
1,350
The categories presented in Table 3.1 and 3.2 represent various levels of expectation to
the indoor climate. Table 3.3 provides an explanation of what the categories entail, based
6
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:17==
on the definition in (DS 2019a).
Table 3.3: Categories of Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ).
Category
Level of expectation
Explanation
IEQI
High
Should be selected for occupants with
special needs (children, elderly, persons
with disabilities).
IEQII
Medium
The normal level used for design and
operation.
IEQIII
Moderate
Will still provide an acceptable
environment. Some risk of reduced
performance of the occupants.
IEQIV
Low
Should only be used for a short time of
the year or in spaces with very short
time of occupancy.
While it is evident that various globally adopted assessment measures ensure optimal
conditions, challenges occur when exploring the productivity related to indoor climate.
Although various tools assess indoor climate thoroughly, there is a limited scope for eval­
uating productivity alongside indoor climate. This gap calls for a closer examination of the
complex relationship between indoor climate, energy efficiency, and well­being, allowing
for exploration of how organizational productivity emerges through thoughtful design and
mindful management of the built environment.
3.2
The effect of IEQ­parameters on productivity
Adverse health effects or general discomfort due to unsatisfactory indoor climate can
have a significant effect on both individual well­being and organizational productivity. Un­
derstanding the connections among various building and operational variables and their
impact on costs emerges as a critical area of study (Wargocki et al. 2006).
Productivity, not to be confused with performance, can be described as an index ratio of
output relative to input. This concept involves an interaction of factors, including environ­
mental conditions, organizational decisions, and individual capabilities (Pritchard 1990).
Productivity can be improved by reducing input (costs) and/or improving output. The abil­
ity of individuals to increase work output in terms of quantity and/or quality is central to
productivity (Leaman and Bordass 2006).
In contrast, cognitive performance measures the effectiveness of production, including
what is produced and how well it meets expectations. It is usually evaluated in terms
of time, quality, efficiency, and satisfaction, representing the degree to which something
fulfills its intended purpose or outcome (ourlinQ 2023).
For clarity within this study, the term ’productivity’ has been used consistently.
Environmental conditions that reduce individual productivity, increase absenteeism, or
reduce turnover have proven costlier for organizations than the capital and operating costs
of better indoor environments (Woods 1989).
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
7
==PAGE:18==
Consequently, a poor indoor environment not only decreases organizational productiv­
ity by reducing revenue but also increases costs. Understanding these links between
building and operational variables and costs, including building design and operational
choices, is crucial. While productivity is a significant factor influencing a company’s prof­
itability, market situations also play a crucial role, as illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Factors affecting the profitability of a company (Wargocki et al. 2006).
Poor indoor climate can lead to substantial reduction in work productivity, with some cases
that may result in a 100% loss of productivity during employee absence (Wargocki et
al. 2006). The evaluation of indoor climate effects on employee productivity requires
a comprehensive approach. Measures include various aspects such as absence from
work, health costs, observed downtime, self­assessments of productivity, individual per­
formance metrics, component skills and task measures, and more.
Over the years, numerous studies have been conducted to examine the impact of various
indoor climate parameters on productivity and performance. While drawing direct conclu­
sions for specific indoor climate parameters has proven to be difficult, clear associations
have been identified between air quality and productivity as well as between operative
temperature and productivity.
3.2.1
Operative temperature and effects on productivity
Thermal environment plays a significant role in productivity through several mechanisms.
Thermal discomfort, represented by too low or high operative temperature, can distract at­
tention, generate complaints, and escalate maintenance costs. Warm conditions caused
by high operative temperature have been found to aggravate Building­Related Symptoms
(BRS) and have a negative effect on mental work, while cold conditions caused by low
operative temperature have been associated with negative effects on manual work (Wyon
and Wargocki 2006).
Studies have explored the relationship between temperature and productivity, providing
insights into the ideal temperature range for optimal productivity.
Niemelä et al. (2002) investigated the effect of temperature on labor productivity in telecom­
8
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:19==
munication offices. The study was conducted as a case study in two call centres and
consisted of an observational approach and an intervention approach. In the case of the
call centre with the intervention approach, the productivity level was measured before and
after the intervention by monitoring the number of telephone calls divided by the active
work time. The findings on the two call centre cases indicated that productivity may fall
by 5­7 % at elevated indoor temperatures above 25°C.
Lan et al. (2011) investigated the effects of warm discomfort on health and productivity
in an office in an attempt to unfold the physiological mechanisms involved. 12 subjects
performed neuro­behavioral tests and tasks typical for office work while feeling thermally
neutral (at 22°C) and warm (at 30°C). The experiment’s findings revealed that productiv­
ity declined by up to 25 %, depending on the nature of the task, when the participants
felt warm. The tasks indicating the largest decrease were text typing with feedback and
grammatical reasoning.
An experiment carried out by Ryd and Wyon (1970) showed that productivity significantly
declined at an air temperature of 27°C as opposed to 20°C in classrooms. Two further
experiments were carried out by Holmberg and Wyon (1967) where they exposed two
classes of nine­ and 11 year old’s to temperatures of 20°C, 27°C, and 30°C. In both groups,
reading speed and comprehension declined significantly, up to 30 % at 30°C compared
to 20°C. The effect of 27°C also showed significant decrement of productivity.
Limited information exists regarding the extent to which productivity is influenced by slightly
low temperatures or due to sensations of cold.
Low temperatures causing cold discomfort have been associated with the productivity of
manual tasks, particularly concerning the dexterity of the hands (Seppänen et al. 2005).
Manual dexterity tests reveal that productivity is contingent on the temperature of the
fingers and hands, influenced by the overall thermal balance of the body. In colder con­
ditions, blood flow to the hands is constrained, resulting in a decline in hand temperature
and finger dexterity before the body’s core temperature decreases. The dexterity of the
hands experiences deterioration even at indoor air temperatures ranging from 20°C to
22°C (Seppänen et al. 2005).
The significance of hands and finger dexterity is evident in manual labor, but it might also
be important in modern office work, where a significant part of the work revolves around
computer tasks. Nevertheless, quantitative evidence linking decrements in finger dexter­
ity to reduced office work is limited.
The findings from the studies mentioned above are depicted in Figure 3.3, illustrating the
decline in work productivity relative to temperature across these experiments. All data was
normalized using the highest productivity value from each experiment as a reference. The
lines in the figure represent the trend in productivity decrement observed in the respective
studies.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
9
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.3: Summary of the studies and the observed effect of temperature on productivity.
A consistent pattern appeared across all the studies featured in Figure 3.3: there is a
general indication of decreasing productivity with rising temperatures. This suggests that
the optimal temperature range for productivity lies somewhere below 24°C.
Seppänen et al. (2006a) undertook a comprehensive literature review with the objective
of quantifying the impact of temperature on office work. By extracting the data from 24
studies, they calculated the percentage of productivity change per degree change in tem­
perature and conducted a thorough statistical analysis of measured work productivity in
correlation with temperature. The outcomes reveal productivity improvement with tem­
peratures close to 21­22 °C, followed by a decline as temperatures exceed 23­24 °C. The
findings of the study are depicted in Figure 3.4.
The interpretation of the graph suggests that the temperature range for optimal produc­
tivity should be approximately between 21°C to 24°C. This finding aligns closely with an
earlier conclusion, which identified the non­effect temperature range as 21­25°C (Seppä­
nen et al. 2003), most likely due to the use of similar set of results. However, this analysis
by Seppänen et al. (2006a) offers a more refined estimation of how performance varies
within the 21­24°C range.
It is essential to acknowledge the considerable uncertainty linked to the quantitative cor­
relation depicted in Figure 3.4, due to various assumptions and subjectively assigned
weights to the relationships. Nevertheless, given that this relationship currently represents
the only mostly referred quantitative approach available for describing the links between
temperature and productivity, it formed the basis for this study.
10
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.4: Productivity as a function of temperature (Seppänen et al. 2006a).
3.2.2
Air quality and effects on productivity
Ventilation and CO2­concentration play a vital role in air quality and has a notable influ­
ence on productivity, although the exact mechanisms are not fully understood. Higher
ventilation rates are linked to lower indoor pollutant levels, which among others decrease
BRS and have a positive impact on overall productivity. Various studies, ranging from
controlled experiments in labs to real­world observations, have measured how ventilation
rates affect work activities, such as text typing, the productivity of call centre operators,
and the occurrence of short­term sick leave.
Wargocki et al. (1999) conducted an experiment to study the perceived air quality, BRS,
and productivity in an existing office where the air pollution level could be modified by in­
troducing a pollution source. Five groups of six subjects performed simulated office work.
Results of the experiment showed that the subjects performed text typing and calculation
tasks significantly slower when the pollution source was present, typing 6.5% less text
compared to when the pollution source was absent.
Wargocki et al. (2004) performed a 2X2 replicated field intervention experiment in a call­
centre providing a telephone directory service, where the outdoor supply rate was ad­
justed and the supply air filters were either new or had been in place for six months.
Replacing a used filter with a clean filter demonstrated a 10 % productivity improvement,
as evidenced by reduced talk­time, at high ventilation rates but had no significant effect
at low rates. Increasing the outdoor supply rate from 2.5 to 25 L/s per person reduced
talk­time by 6 % with a new filter in place but increased talk­time by 8 % with a used filter
in place.
A study conducted by Ben­David et al. (2017) investigated the effects of eight ventilation
strategies on various aspects, including occupant productivity, energy consumption, and
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
11
==PAGE:22==
the transport of outdoor pollutants to indoor spaces. These impacts were assessed in
comparison to a baseline scenario with a constant mechanical ventilation rate of 9.4 L/s­
person, using two representative office settings.
Energy modelling, empirical correlations, and air quality modelling were used to quantify
outcomes of the productivity. The calculations showed that increasing the annual average
ventilation rate by 5­10 % would increase productivity by 0.5 %. A sensitivity analysis
identified infiltration and outdoor climate as the largest outcome drivers.
The findings from Wargocki et al. (2004) and Ben­David et al. (2017) are depicted in Fig­
ure 3.5, illustrating the decline in productivity relative to CO2­concentration across these
experiments; one study shows the opposite trend because the supplied air by ventilation
was polluted by a dirty filter. All data were normalized using the highest productivity value
from each experiment as a reference.
Figure 3.5: Summary of the studies and the observed effect of CO2­concentration on
productivity.
Given the direct correlation between CO2 and ventilation in occupied environments where
CO2­production is similar, it is evident that increasing the ventilation rate consistently leads
to decrease in CO2­levels, thereby exerting a positive influence on occupant productivity,
as supported by numerous studies.
The work of Wargocki et al. (2000) established a positive correlation between increased
ventilation rates and productivity by synthesizing findings from three independent studies
involving a total of 90 subjects. The combined analysis indicated that increasing the ven­
tilation rate from 2.5 L/s­person to 10 and 30 L/s­person resulted in improved productivity
of text typing, addition, and proofreading. Notably, a significant relation was identified for
text typing, revealing an approximate 1% increase in productivity for each doubling of the
outdoor air supply rate. Additionally, the research demonstrated a clear linear relation­
ship between increased ventilation rate and heightened productivity across various office
tasks, although with varying degrees of significance.
An experiment conducted by Park and Yoon (2011) involved exposing six groups of four
subjects each to varying ventilation rates of 5, 10, and 20 L/s­person. During an 8­hour
period, participants performed tasks on three separate occasions for each ventilation rate.
The results of the experiment revealed an improvement in productivity corresponding to
12
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:23==
increased ventilation rates, particularly notable in tasks evaluating ability to add, text­type,
and memorize.
The findings from Wargocki et al. (2000) and Park and Yoon (2011) are depicted in Fig­
ure 3.6, illustrating the decline in productivity relative to the ventilation rate across these
experiments. All data was normalized using the highest productivity value from each ex­
periment as a reference.
Figure 3.6: Summary of the studies and the observed effect of ventilation rate on produc­
tivity.
The data depicted in Figures 3.5 and 3.6 indicate measured, normalized productivity levels
corresponding to the measured CO2­concentration and ventilation rate, respectively. The
lines in the figures represent the trend in productivity decrement observed in the respective
studies.
From both figures there is a general indication of decreasing productivity as CO2­levels
rise or ventilation rates fall. The study performed Wargocki et al. (2000) is the only excep­
tion to this trend, indicating an increase in productivity as ventilation rates fall, indicating,
as mentioned above, that when the air supplied by the ventilation system is of poor quality,
ventilation ­ even if increased ­ will have no effect or even a negative effect.
Seppänen et al. (2006b) established a quantitative correlation between productivity and
ventilation across a wide range of ventilation rates. This study identified seven relevant
research publications through computerized searches and through reviews of conference
proceedings. Although the quantified relationship has a high level on uncertainty, it has
served as a reference for numerous studies on productivity and ventilation over the years.
The derived equation from the relationship by Seppänen et al. (2006b) is used to evaluate
the ratio of productivity under any two ventilation rates. As the ventilation rate increases
from V0 to V1, the productivity ratio at V1(P(V1)) to that at V0(P(V0)) is expressed as:
P(V1)
P(V2) = exp
[
0.1 ·
∫V1
V0
ˆλ(v)dv
]
(3.1)
where:
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
13
==PAGE:24==
ˆλ(v) is the fitted fractional change in performance per 10 L/s­person at ventilation, v.
Based on the findings from Seppänen et al. (2006b), Equation 3.1 enables the calculation
of productivity at all ventilation rates relative to the productivity at the reference ventilation
rate of 10 L/s­person. This relationship is depicted in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Relative performance in relation to reference value 10 L/s­person.
Interpreting the graph in Figure 3.7 reveals a positive correlation between increased venti­
lation rates and improved productivity. Notably, the productivity increase per unit increase
in ventilation is more pronounced at rates below 20 L/s­person, as illustrated in 3.7, be­
coming less significant with higher ventilation rates.
While this quantified relationship by Seppänen et al. (2006b) between ventilation rates and
productivity involves a high level of uncertainty, it currently represents the mostly referred
approach available and therefore formed the basis for this study.
3.3
The effect of indoor climate parameters on occupant health
and well­being
Poor air quality can lead to Building­Related Illness (BRI) or Building­Related Symptoms
(BRS). BRI encompasses airborne infectious diseases, hypersensitivity diseases, and
toxic reactions. Despite clear links in BRI, identifying causative agents can be uncertain.
Poor air quality can lead to various unpleasant symptoms, either categorized as Building­
Related Illness (BRI), or Building­Related Symptoms (BRS).
BRI includes airborne infectious diseases, hypersensitivity diseases, and toxic reactions.
Despite clear links in BRI, identifying causative agents can be uncertain.
BRS describes adverse health symptoms indoors, particularly in offices, that lessen while
14
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:25==
away from the building (Apte 2000). Symptoms include upper and lower respiratory is­
sues, neuro­physiological effects, and skin irritation.
While specific agents for BRS may be challenging to define, addressing key indoor cli­
mate factors, particularly by improving ventilation, has shown promise in symptom relief
(Seppänen and Fisk 2004b).
3.3.1
Airborne transmitted diseases
Humidifier fever, associated with microbes from polluted humidifiers, manifests as com­
mon cold symptoms like fever, respiratory issues, and fatigue. Prevalent in contaminated
workplaces, symptoms typically peak early in the week and then declines gradually. Win­
ter months have shown the highest prevalence due to increased fresh air drawn into hu­
midifiers during summer, reaching up to 90% Edwards et al. (1977).
Additionally, there are strong links between allergy and asthma symptoms and building
characteristics like indoor allergen concentrations, moisture, and mold.
Mold issues,
present in both households and offices, can lead to a 100% increase in lower respira­
tory symptoms indicative of asthma Fisk (2002). Mold exposure can also trigger allergic
reactions, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and other health problems, especially impacting
the immunocompromised luce (2024).
Building­Related Symptoms
BRS serve as key indicators when studying human responses within health­related inves­
tigations of buildings. Air quality conditions associated with the heightened prevalence of
BRS include increased air temperature, elevated concentrations of dust in both room air
and on surfaces, and heightened airborne levels of certain groups of volatile organic com­
pounds (Jones and Molina 2017).
According to the data representative of U.S. office buildings, 23% of office workers (equiv­
alent to 15 million individuals) reported experiencing two or more common building­related
symptoms. Notably, these symptoms demonstrated improvement when individuals were
away from their workplace (Apte 2000).
Jaakkola et al. (1989) investigated the relationship between symptoms, complaints, and
indoor air factors in an office building. Their findings identified temperature as the key
indoor air parameter influencing BRS and the perception of dryness. The study revealed
a direct correlation between the prevalence of BRS, the sensation of dryness, and an
increase in room temperature above 22°C. The experiment’s conclusions imply that in­
dividual control over room temperature can improve thermal comfort and alleviate SBS
symptoms in office workers.
Correlations between the prevalence of BRS and the ventilation rate in office buildings
have also been identified. A cross sectional population based study was carried out in
399 workers from 14 mechanically ventilated office buildings in the Helsinki metropolitan
area by Jaakkola and Miettinen (1995). The results from the study suggested that outdoor
ventilation rates below the optimal (15 to 25 l/s per person) increase the risk of BRS with
the sources of pollutants present in mechanically ventilated office buildings.
BRS can also be directly linked to reduced productivity. In an experiment conducted by
Fang et al. (2002), 30 subjects were exposed to various temperatures, relative humidity
levels, and ventilation rates for 280 minutes while engaging in simulated office work. The
outcomes of the experiment revealed a significant increase in the intensity of BRS, such
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
15
==PAGE:26==
as fatigue, headaches, and difficulty in clear thinking, when subjects were subjected to
increased levels of temperature and humidity, thus indicating a negative impact on pro­
ductivity.
3.3.2
Short­term sick leave
Studies have established a direct link between illness related to indoor climate diseases
and short­term sick leave.
In the United States, four prevalent respiratory illnesses (common cold, influenza, pneu­
monia, and bronchitis) contribute to a significant annual loss of productivity, with approx­
imately 176 million workdays lost and an additional 121 million days of restricted activity,
as estimated by Fisk (2000).
In recent years, the global workforce has experienced a notable decline in productivity due
to the impact of COVID­19. Although it may no longer be a pandemic, Berdan et al. (2023)
estimated that the disease may have decreased the availability of the US workforce by
up to 2.6 percent in 2022. Additionally, each case of COVID­19 was projected to result in
a loss of 1.0 to 1.5 days of productive work, depending on the scenario.
With the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation reporting between 315 million to 690
million COVID­19 cases in the United States in 2022, the corresponding working days lost
ranged from 315 million to 1.05 billion. This is equivalent to approximately 1.3 million to
4.3 million workers leaving the workforce for the entire year, doubling the average number
of sick days taken by US workers in the decade before the pandemic.
While it is evident that COVID­19 has contributed to a significant annual loss of produc­
tivity, the future trajectory of productivity loss is uncertain. The prediction depends on
various factors, including the arrival of new variants and the implementation of public
health measures.
Despite its significant influence on the workforce, this study did not account for the re­
cent impact of COVID­19, due to the limitation in quantification methods specific to indoor
climate related sick leave.
From the existing literature studying the effects of environmental factors on short­term sick
leave, the strongest correlations have appeared within air quality, while no relationships
between temperature and short­term sick leave have been published. For this reason,
this study emphasized on the connections between air quality and short­term sick leave.
A study conducted by Milton (2000) found that office workers exposed to a lower ventila­
tion rate of 12 L/s­person experienced a 50% higher prevalence of short­term sick leave
compared to those in environments with a ventilation rate of 24 L/s­person. This con­
clusion is drawn from a comprehensive analysis of short­term sick leave data in 1994,
involving 3,720 hourly employees across 40 buildings with 115 independently ventilated
work areas.
To further understand this relationship, a baseline short­term sick leave was set at 2%
using the data presented by Milton (2000). This baseline was established for an office
building with a ventilation rate of 12 L/s­person, representing a 50% higher sick leave
prevalence compared to the rate of 24 L/s­person. This baseline served as a reference
for calculating the annual average sick leave rate in scenarios with ventilation rates higher
or lower than the established baseline. The detailed calculation procedure is outlined in
Section 4.5.3, providing the framework for evaluating the dynamics between ventilation
rates and the prevalence of short­term sick leave.
16
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:27==
3.4
Cost implications of poor indoor climate
While the primary origins of asthma and allergies may not be directly linked to buildings,
the occurrence and intensity of symptoms often correlate with building­related factors.
This connection has significant economic implications, with estimated costs reaching $15
billion annually in the United States alone (Fisk 2000). Consequently, the potential annual
savings and productivity gains from reduced respiratory diseases in the United States
were estimated to be around $6 to $14 billion (Fisk 2000).
The expenses associated with occupant health issues are evident but vary across sectors
and countries. In Denmark, the annual cost of employee sickness was approximated at
DKK 46 billion (Erhverv 2023), translating to an average of around nine sick days per
employee each year. Nevertheless, as reported by Statistikbanken (2022), the annual
average sick days per employee have increased over the past decade from eight sick
days in 2013 to nearly 11 sick days in 2022.
Examining the potential cost implications of poor indoor climate reveals increased medi­
cal care costs, productivity losses due to heightened sick leave, decreased productivity,
elevated turnover of employees, and increased building maintenance expenses due to a
higher number of complaints about the air quality (Seppänen and Fisk 2004a). This col­
lective understanding highlights the diverse economic challenges associated with poor
indoor climate.
3.4.1
Employee turnover
A reduced job turnover could substantially reduce costs to employers (Seppänen and Fisk
2004a). In a 1999/2000 bench­marking study on health, productivity, and management
programs involving 43 employees, the median estimate of associated costs amounted to
$9,992 per employee annually (Goetzel et al. 2001). These costs were distributed among
group health (47 %), turnover (37 %), unscheduled absence (8 %), non­occupational
disability (5 %), and workers’ compensation programs (3 %).
Improving indoor climate to lower job turnover rates would not only improve workplace
conditions but also represent an opportunity for employers to mitigate costs and maintain
a more stable and productive workforce.
3.4.2
Maintenance costs due to complaints
Reduced responsiveness of facility management to complaints related to indoor climate
is perceived as an economic advantage, given that facility management must address
numerous complaints (Seppänen and Fisk 2004a). Data from 575 buildings in the USA,
as reported by Federspiel (2001), indicated that 18.4% of complaints were classified as
indoor environmental complaints, with 77% of them revolving around conditions perceived
as too hot or too cold. Federspiel (2001) estimated potential savings in maintenance costs
to be 0.0377/m2 per year solely due to a reduction in hot and cold complaints.
3.5
Typical annual costs in office buildings
The costs in an office building typically include the investment cost and the operating and
maintenance costs. These costs vary for different types of buildings, their location and
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
17
==PAGE:28==
many other factors.
3.5.1
Operating and maintenance costs
The operational cost of an office building is influenced by factors such as the age and size
of the building, the quality of the premises, and most importantly, the building’s location –
whether it resides in a desirable downtown area or a less central location.
The total annual operating cost per square meter of office space, whether leased (and
potentially included in the rent) or owned, includes several key components (Wargocki
et al. 2006):
1. Consumption: This includes heating, cooling, and electricity. The extent of their
use is mainly influenced by the building’s location, size, and age, ambient climatic
conditions and the required indoor thermal climate and air quality.
2. Cleaning costs: Cleaning of the premises is a significant aspect of the office space.
A reduced level of cleaning standards will likely result in reduced well­being and
could potentially contribute to reduced office work.
3. Maintenance: Both running and preventive maintenance of building and its installa­
tions are essential to maintain an acceptable level of thermal climate and IAQ.
Energy costs depend on the price of energy and its use. It is essential to note that each
type of energy comes with its own price and follows different trends or changes in its cost.
Thus, when calculating energy expenditure, it is crucial to consider this diversity in the
real rate of interest for different energy sources. Furthermore, decisions not dictated by
market mechanisms can impact prices; for instance, electrical energy might be valued
more highly than fossil fuels per kilowatt­hour (kWh) (Wargocki et al. 2006).
Maintenance costs vary in magnitude and occur over different years. Unplanned repair
costs may arise, but ideally, they may never occur. Periodically, refurbishment costs may
appear, resembling investment costs but accounting for time and potential interruption
costs due to system changes (Wargocki et al. 2006).
3.6
Life­cycle cost analysis
The life­cycle cost analysis of building services should encompass all relevant expenses
anticipated over the building’s lifespan. These typically include costs associated with de­
sign, construction, installation, commissioning, facilities management, post­occupancy
evaluation, operation, and potential activities such as re­use, recycle, demolition, or re­
furbishment. Collectively, these are known as whole­life costs (Wargocki et al. 2006).
This study focused specifically on indoor climate conditions and the investments influenc­
ing it. In the economic calculation method presented here, the overall costs and benefits
of building services include investment costs (first costs), operational costs (energy and
maintenance), and the impacts of the indoor climate on the work performed in the building
(productivity and short­term sick leave). Economic analysis requires the inclusion of all
these elements in the calculations, as a minimum.
To be able to compare investment cost and annual cost, three main economic methods
for life­cycle cost calculations are available (Wargocki et al. 2006):
1. Annuity cost model
18
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:29==
2. Net present value cost model
3. Internal rate of return method
The common goals of these three life­cycle analysis methods are to evaluate the eco­
nomic feasibility of an investment, consider the time value of money, and incorporate
both initial and ongoing costs. Their differences lie in their time focus, sensitivity to in­
terest rates, decision criteria, and how they handle cash flows. The Annuity Cost Model
focuses on equal annual cash flows, the Net Present Value (NPV) Cost Model evaluates
the present value of cash flows, and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) Method identifies
the discount rate at which the project breaks even. Each method has unique strengths
and considerations for different types of projects.
In this study, the annuity cost model was employed. By evenly spreading the initial invest­
ment across the entire lifespan of the investment, the annuity of the investment becomes
comparable to the yearly operational costs and variations in productivity.
The process for calculating annual costs is illustrated in Figure 3.8. The calculations
include the following cost items (Wargocki et al. 2006):
1. Incremental investment cost (compared to the basic case)
2. Change in operating and maintenance cost (including energy cost)
3. Productivity loss due to indoor environment
Figure 3.8: Annuity cost model. Investment cost is converted to annual cost.
The procedure for converting an initial investment cost into an annual cost is detailed in
Section 4.6.
When estimating the investment cost, it is crucial to include all relevant expenses asso­
ciated with the improvement of the indoor climate in the calculations. These expenses
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
19
==PAGE:30==
encompass, among others, design, construction and installation, electrical works, piping,
mechanical works, and more.
The effect of the total cost is calculated as the sum of (Wargocki et al. 2006):
• Investment cost (could be annual) relative to the basic alternative
• Change in operation and maintenance cost relative to the basic alternative
• Change in productivity loss relative to the basic alternative
The economy of the investment in indoor climate improvements relies on several key
factors, including the value of the work (encompassing gross salary, overhead costs, and
profit), floor area per employee, interest rate, the lifespan of the investment, and the net
cost of the investment, which accounts for changes in operation and maintenance costs
(Wargocki et al. 2006).
Existing literature provides compelling evidence of economic gains associated with im­
proved quality of indoor environment. While precise quantification of these gains remains
challenging, the projections from various studies consistently demonstrate substantial po­
tential benefits. For instance, in the U.S., Fisk (1997) estimated economic gains ranging
from $10 billion to $20 billion due to a reduction in BRS, and $12 billion to $125 billion
resulting from direct improvements in worker performance unrelated to health.
Calculations conducted by Fisk (1997) suggest that the prospective financial benefits of
improving indoor climate outweighs the costs by a factor ranging from 18 to 47. While
these benefit­to­cost ratios serve as a useful estimate, it is essential to recognize that
numerous factors ­ such as occupancy and equipment schedules, energy unit costs and
sources, investment lifespan ­ significantly influence the resulting calculated financial ben­
efits.
20
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:31==
4
Methods
The approaches outlined in this chapter are derived from the foundational theory pre­
sented in Chapter 3. Within the subsequent sections, the methodologies employed to
measure the dynamic interactions among indoor climate, occupant health, productivity,
and economic consequences within office environments, are presented.
4.1
Introduction to the tool
This study introduces a tool with a single goal: to quantify the socioeconomic conse­
quences of indoor climate renovations in office spaces. Addressing a notable gap in
available measures, this tool offers organizations a data­driven approach to understand
the direct benefits of such renovations.
The tool is designed to quantify the monetary potential of indoor climate renovations. By
incorporating a range of input parameters, it calculates the increase in productivity of the
occupants as well as the economic benefits resulting from improved indoor climate. Thus,
the tool provides a financial rationale for decision­makers, connecting indoor climate, pro­
ductivity gains, and economic advantages.
The tool is operational as a Python­based software with Tkinter serving as its graphical
user interface (GUI). Tkinter is a standard GUI library which comes with Python and was
selected for its adaptability in lightweight desktop applications and efficient prototyping.
The purpose of implementing a GUI was to provide a better user experience and make
the tool more accessible.
Specifically programmed for whole­year indoor climate simulations in any office building,
the software relies on a set of input parameters related to the building envelope, ventila­
tion principles, occupant activity, etc. A detailed explanation of these input parameters is
provided in the subsequent sections.
4.2
Tool structure
As the software is programmed to perform indoor climate simulations, it utilizes scientifi­
cally recognized calculation methods, international standards, and peer­reviewed models
for various aspects such as infiltration, natural ventilation, mechanical ventilation, and
energy performance. These measures were implemented to promote accuracy and reli­
ability in the tool’s simulations. However, it is important to acknowledge that the tool was
specifically designed for relatively simple geometries, and multiple assumptions were in­
tegrated into its programming.
The tool begins with a baseline level, representing a building’s state before renovation.
The calculation flow initiates with the definition of an existing building, including location,
geometry, air leakage, heat transfer properties, windows, ventilation, heating/cooling set­
point temperatures, and user behavior.
By evaluating the current energy usage and indoor environment, the tool estimates the
impact of renovation measures like mechanical ventilation, cooling, or changes to the
building envelope. Simulating the thermal indoor environment in hourly time steps, the tool
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
21
==PAGE:32==
then calculates air quality at smaller time intervals (default set at 5 minutes). To account
for short­term window opening events, natural ventilation calculations are performed with
a higher temporal resolution, as hourly time steps alone are insufficient for predicting the
dilution of indoor air.
Output variables, including indoor CO2­ concentration, indoor temperature, air humidity,
and ventilation rate, are initially established for a reference case. The calculation is then
repeated for the renovated building, facilitating the assessment of indoor climate. This
aligns with the recommended assessment approach in DS/EN 16798­1 (DS 2019b).
To quantify the monetary value of indoor climate renovations, the tool incorporates rela­
tionships between indoor climate and occupant productivity, along with other office­related
parameters such as annual average salary and working hours. The subsequent sections
elaborate on these relationships.
Figure 4.1 presents a Uniform Modeling Language (UML) diagram that offers an overview
of the different Python classes associated with the software and illustrates their interac­
tions.
Figure 4.1: UML diagram illustrating the various classes in the software.
As illustrated in Figure 4.1, a number of classes interact to perform the indoor climate
simulations and associated productivity and economic calculations.
The ”ISO13790” class plays a significant role, relying on several other classes to compute
22
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:33==
heating and cooling requirements, operative temperatures, solar gains, internal gains, and
more. The ventilation design depends on values determined for category requirements,
infiltration, and natural ventilation, as depicted in Figure 4.1.
Meanwhile, the ”Schedules” class is implemented to define holidays, weekends, and gen­
eral occupant schedules. These predefined schedules influence internal gains and overall
energy usage, as they determine when the equipment and the heating, ventilation, and
air conditioning (HVAC) system should operate.
Within the ”Statistics” class, various methods facilitate statistical calculations that are cen­
tral for the output of indoor climate simulations. Once the software completes the whole­
year simulations, the output data is extracted to a text document through the implemen­
tation of the ”File Write” class.
From the simulation outputs, an overall change in productivity is calculated, reflecting
the productivity levels before and after renovation. Additionally, based on the computed
productivity level and indoor climate levels, the cost­benefit before and after renovation is
determined.
4.3
Calculation methods and input variables
4.3.1
Energy simulation
The tool applies the simple hourly method outlined in ISO 13790 (DS 2008) to calculate
indoor temperatures and heating and cooling loads. This method relies on several key
input parameters, including hourly external air temperature, hourly incident solar radiation,
solar height and azimuth, and the day of the week. Optionally, additional factors such as
local or meteorological wind speed, wind direction, albedo, and relative humidity can be
incorporated.
The tool treats the building as a single zone by default and therefore, it follows ISO 13790
guidelines in accordance with specific conditions. These conditions specify that tempera­
ture set­points for heating and cooling should not vary by more than 4°C between spaces.
Additionally, all spaces should be serviced by the same heating and cooling system, and at
least 80 % of the floor area should be serviced by the same ventilation system (if present).
Furthermore, ventilation levels should not vary by more than a factor of four within 80 %
of occupied spaces (DS 2008).
The hourly calculations involve a two­step simulation process. Initially, the tool simulates
building conditions without any heating or cooling. Subsequently, the simulation is re­
peated, introducing a fixed cooling or heating effect equivalent to 10W/m2. In this second
step, the tool applies linear interpolation or extrapolation to compute the necessary en­
ergy for heating or cooling. This energy calculation is performed to maintain a specified
set­point within the designated calculation time step, following the procedures specified
in DS (2008).
For convenience, the tool assumes an even distribution of the total translucent surface
among all four building facades, with facades oriented toward each cardinal direction.
Solar heat gain is evenly distributed across all facades, ensuring the solar load in a zone
remains independent of orientation. The calculation of solar load takes into account the
transmittance of glass and, if applicable, solar shading.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
23
==PAGE:34==
4.3.2
Internal loads
The tool incorporates a representation of internal loads, including contributions from both
occupants and equipment. These internal loads significantly influence the heat, moisture,
and pollutant levels within the building.
To simplify the calculation methods, input parameters for an average office employee were
derived from reference values outlined in DS/EN ISO 8996 (DS 2004).
The occupant was assumed to have a surface area of 1.70m2, representing the average
30­year­old man or woman. Additionally, the tool considers an activity level of 1.2 met for
all occupants, corresponding to sedentary office work. Furthermore, each occupant were
modelled with an average moisture generation level of 50 g/h (Zemitis et al. 2016).
The indoor CO2­concentration and air humidity were determined using mass balances,
accounting for emission rates and air exchange rates within a fully mixed air zone.
In an office setting, internal loads from equipment typically include electrical devices such
as laptops, monitors, printers, as well as lighting systems and other office appliances.
The tool relies on reference heat generation values from common office equipment, as
detailed in Table 4.1. Notably, the table provides a simplified representation, focusing
on essential equipment at a typical workstation. Consequently, the tool does not include
potential sources of common heat gains such as printers, ceiling lamps, etc.
Table 4.1: Internal heat gains from office equipment (Toftum 2021).
Equipment
Internal heat gain [W]
Computer monitor
21
Laptop
36
Desk lamp
20
While the number of monitors per employee often vary between 1­2 based on the com­
pany, an average of 1.5 monitors per employee was considered. Additionally, one laptop
and one desk lamp were assumed, resulting in a total internal heat gain from equipment
per workstation per occupant of 87.5 W.
4.3.3
Ventilation
Mechanical ventilation
The tool incorporates methods for simulating the impact of mechanical ventilation, en­
abling its integration with or without cooling, as either constant air volume (CAV) or CO2­
controlled variable air volume (VAV).
The ventilation system was assumed inactive outside of office hours.
The VAV system operates on proportional control, adjusting outdoor air intake flow (Vot)
in proportion to the CO2­range (Murphy and Bradley 2005). This ensures synchronized
changes between outdoor airflow and CO2 concentration. To achieve stability, the con­
troller gradually adjusts Vot until the indoor CO2­concentration reaches a steady state.
This adjustment follows a specific relationship, expressed by Equation 4.1 (Murphy and
Bradley 2005):
24
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:35==
Vot = Cs−actual −Cs−min
Cs−design −Cs−min
· (Vot−design −Vot−min) + Vot−min
(4.1)
where:
Vot is the outdoor air intake flow [m3/s]
cs−actual is the indoor CO2­concentration [ppm]
cs−min is the minimum CO2­concentration [ppm]
cs−design is the design CO2­concentration [ppm]
Vot−design is the design outdoor air intake flow [m3/s]
Vot−min is the minimum outdoor air intake flow [m3/s]
The tool incorporates input parameters describing the design of minimum and maximum
ventilation rates. These parameters are based on indoor environmental categories out­
lined in DS/EN 16798­1 (DS 2019b). The control scheme ensures ventilation at a mini­
mum rate required relative to the building floor area. Table 4.2 provides design ventilation
airflow rates for each indoor environment category.
Table 4.2: Design ventilation rates for sedentary, adults, non­adapted persons for diluting
emissions (bio­effluents) from people for different categories.
Category
Airflow per non­adapted
person [L/s­person]
I
10
II
7
III
5
IV
2.5
The indoor environmental category serves as an input parameter, expressing the build­
ing’s design in terms of ventilation capacity and temperature set­points. This variable can
also establish a performance goal for the building, achievable through renovations, allow­
ing estimation of the intervention’s impact. Table 3.3 in Section 3.1 offers an explanation
of each category level in terms of building design.
If mechanical ventilation with CAV is chosen, the constant ventilation rate is set to the total
design ventilation airflow rate, assuming full mixing of indoor air.
In instances where cooling is integrated into the ventilation system, the calculation of sup­
ply air temperature and humidity ratio adheres a model for a chilled­water coil developed
by Elmahdy and Mitalas (1977). The post­coil air temperature (ta) and humidity ratio (Wa),
dependent on the supply water temperature (tw), are approximated by the following equa­
tions:
ta = −0.057867 · t2
w + 1.773 · tw + 1.1816
(4.2)
Wa = 3.2434 · 10−5 · t2
w −1.7972 · 10−5 · tw + 6.223 · 10−3
(4.3)
where:
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
25
==PAGE:36==
ta is the air temperature after the cooling coil [°C]
Wa is the humidity ratio after the cooling coil [kg/kg dry air]
tw is the supply water temperature [°C]
Infiltration
The estimation of outdoor air infiltration through the building envelope applies the Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory (LBL) infiltration model, as proposed by Sherman and Grimsrud
(1980). This model evaluates the collective impact of wind pressure and stack effect,
incorporating factors such as a generalized shielding factor, the terrain class surrounding
the area, the building’s leakage area, and the wind speeds specified in the weather file.
Window opening
The tool incorporates a feature for systematic hourly window opening, with the schedule
derived from assumptions outlined by Toftum et al. (2021). This schedule, originally de­
signed to imitate window opening behavior in Danish schools, was assumed applicable
to office environments.
The duration of window opening varies dynamically throughout the year.
In January,
February, November, and December, windows were assumed to be open for five min­
utes per hour during the use time; in March, September, and October, for 10 minutes per
hour during the use time; in April, for 15 minutes per hour during the use time; and in June
and August, for 20 minutes per hour during the use time. Windows are closed outside of
work hours, as well as during holidays and weekends.
The tool applies manual control for window openings; nevertheless, this window configu­
ration and control setting can also replicate the effects of automatic window opening.
The effectiveness of window opening depends on whether the space allows for cross­flow
ventilation or single­sided ventilation. Single­sided ventilation, where air flows in and out of
the same window opening, is less efficient than cross­flow ventilation (Toftum et al. 2021).
However, single­sided ventilation may be more prevalent in cellular office configurations,
while cross­flow ventilation is common in open­plan offices.
To streamline input parameters, various assumptions and simplifications have been made.
The total window area of the building was assumed to be evenly distributed along all
four external walls, and the wind direction was assumed to be constantly at 45 degrees
to the windows, eliminating the need for building orientation and wind direction input.
Additionally, the windows were assumed to be of equal size and placed at the same height.
A default window opening area of 70% was assumed, although it could be adjusted based
on the specific scenario.
To assess single­sided ventilation through window opening (qv,singlesided), a straightforward
empirical model, accounting for the combined influences of wind and buoyancy effects,
was proposed by De Gids and Phaff (1982):
qv,singlesided = Aopening · veq
(4.4)
where:
qv,singlesided is the ventilation airflow rate for single sided ventilation [m3/s]
Aopening is the effective opening area
veq is determined by:
26
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:37==
vwq =
√
C1 · v2
wind + C2 · H0 · ∆T + C3
(4.5)
where:
veq is the equivalent air velocity through the opening [m/s]
H0 is the opening height [m]
C1, C2, andC3 are empirical constants derived by De Gids and Phaff (1982).
For simulating the ventilation airflow rate with wind­driven cross­ventilation, Equation 4.6
derived by Karava et al. (2011) was applied:
qv,cross−ventilated =
1
√
2 · CD · A · Uref ·
√
Cpw −Cpl
(4.6)
where:
qv,cross−ventilated is the ventilation airflow rate for cross­ventilation [m3/s]
CD is the discharge coefficient for the window openings [­]
A is the effective window opening area [m2]
Uref is the wind speed at building height [m · s−1]
CpwandCpl are pressure coefficients on the windward and leeward sides of the building
[­]. The pressure coefficients were assumed constant at Cpw = −0.15andCpw = 0.7
The combined effect of infiltration and window opening was estimated through quadratic
addition, as detailed in Awbi (2002).
4.4
Occupancy and equipment schedules
Occupancy and equipment schedules are crucial elements in building design and energy
management, impacting energy efficiency, comfort and productivity, resources, costs, and
various other aspects.
In this study, occupancy and equipment schedules follow the guidelines of ASHRAE
(2019) for a typical office. The schedule outlined in Table 4.3 describe the office oc­
cupancy.
Table 4.3: Occupancy and equipment schedule (ASHRAE)
Time during day
Occupancy,
weekdays [%]
Occupancy,
weekends and holidays [%]
00:00­08:00
0
0
08:00­09:00
20
0
08:00­12:00
95
0
12:00­13:00
50
0
13:00­17:00
95
0
17:00­18:00
30
0
18:00­24:00
0
0
The occupant schedule takes into account national Danish holidays, including five weeks
of vacation per year. To simplify the model and avoid the complexity of individual sched­
ules, an assumption was made that during these five weeks, all employees were on va­
cation simultaneously. This includes a winter break in week seven, an autumn break in
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
27
==PAGE:38==
week 42, and a summer holiday aligned with the standard Danish industrial holiday in
weeks 29, 30, and 31 for the year 2019.
4.5
Quantitative relationships between IEQ­parameters and pro­
ductivity
4.5.1
Temperature and productivity
In simulating the effect of temperature on work productivity, reference was made to the
insights provided by Seppänen et al. (2006a).
Table 4.4 explains the estimated decline in productivity relative to different temperature
intervals. These intervals were categorized as either Category I, II, or III, in accordance
with the guidelines in DS (2019a), as described in Section 3.1. The corresponding pro­
ductivity levels were computed using an equation derived from Seppänen et al. (2006a),
which estimates productivity based on temperature:
PT = 0.1647524 · T −0.0058274 · T 2 + 0.0000623 · T 3 −0.4685328
(4.7)
where:
PT is productivity relative to maximum value [%]
T is temperature [°C]
Within the temperature intervals outlined in Table 4.4, a noticeable impact on productivity
was observed, with higher temperatures generally affecting productivity more than cooler
ones, as estimated by Equation 4.7. To account for this influence, productivity levels
were calculated using a weighted average approach. Additionally, the derived produc­
tivity levels were scaled to ensure that temperatures falling within IEQ­Category I would
correspond to 100% productivity. Adopting 100 % as baseline for IEQ­Category I was
chosen to streamline the comparison of productivity levels between temperature and air
quality.
Detailed calculations of the weighing and scaling approach are available in Appendix B.
Table 4.4: Calculated relative productivity related to corresponding temperatures.
Category
Temperature [°C]
Relative productivity (PT) [%]
I
21.0­25.5
100.0
II
20.0­26.0
99.3
III
19.0­27.0
98.3
N/A
18.0­28.0
97.3
While the tool does not incorporate a Category IV for temperature, the range of 18 ­ 28°C
was chosen to include hours outside of category. This selection is specific to this study,
where the HVAC system’s heating and cooling set­points were set at 18 °C and 28 °C
outside of occupied hours, respectively. As temperatures were not assumed to extend
significantly beyond this range, the interval was employed to represent the remaining
hours outside of category.
28
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:39==
4.5.2
Air quality and productivity
In simulating the impact of air quality on work productivity, reference was made to the
insights provided by Seppänen et al. (2006b).
The estimated decline in productivity relative to different ventilation rates and CO2 con­
centrations is presented in Table 4.5. Similar to the case for temperature, air quality pa­
rameters were categorized as Category I, II, III, or IV, following the guidelines outlined in
DS (2019a), as described in 3.1). The corresponding productivity levels were computed
using a variation of Equation 3.1 derived by Seppänen et al. (2006b). This equation es­
timates productivity based on the ventilation rate, with 10 L/s­person as the reference
ventilation rate Fisk et al. (2011):
PV R = exp
(−76.38 · x−1 −0.78 · x · ln(x) + 3.87 · x −y0
1000
)
(4.8)
where: PVR is the relative work productivity as affected by the ventilation rate (VR)
x is the ventilation rate in L/s­person
y0 is calculated as follows:
y0 = −76.38 · X−1
R −0.78 · XR · ln(XR) + 3.87 · XR
(4.9)
where:
XR is a reference value of the ventilation rate set equal to 10 L/s­person.
Table 4.5: Calculated relative productivity related to corresponding ventilation rates.
Category
CO2­concentration
above outdoors for
non­adapted persons [PPM]
Airflow per non­
adapted person
[L/s­person]
Relative productivity
(PVR) [%]
I
≤550
10.0
100.00
II
550 ­ 800
7.0
99.2
III
800 ­ 1350
4.0
97.9
IV
≥1350
2.5
96.5
4.5.3
Air quality and short­term sick leave
Drawing on insights from Milton (2000), the impact of air quality on short­term sick leave
was quantified.
By extrapolating data from Milton (2000), it could be estimated that doubling the aver­
age ventilation rate to 24 L/s per person would reduce sick leave in an office from 2%
(equivalent to 5 days per year) to 1.45% (translating to 3.8 days per year).
The relationship between ventilation rates and short­term sick leave is illustrated in Figure
4.2. The graph presents a logarithmic trend of the function:
Psick−leave = 0.0276 · e−0.027·V R
(4.10)
where:
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
29
==PAGE:40==
Psick−leave is the productivity loss from short­term sick leave [%]
VR is the ventilation rate [L/s­person]
The rationale behind opting for a logarithmic function is due to the diminishing marginal
returns observed in the data. At lower ventilation rates, small increases result in more
significant reductions in sick leave compared to higher ventilation rates.
Notably, the trend is derived from two data points which introduces a high level of uncer­
tainly to the relationship.
Figure 4.2: Relative short­term sick leave prevalence in relation ventilation rate.
The short­term sick leave at the ventilation rates associated with each of the four cate­
gories was calculated based on the derived function. Additionally, the derived productivity
levels were scaled to ensure that ventilation rates falling within IEQ­Category I would cor­
respond to 100 % attendance. This assumption was made to streamline the comparison
of productivity levels between temperature and air quality.
Detailed calculations of the scaling approach are available in Appendix B.2.
and is presented in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6: Calculated short term sick leave prevalence corresponding to ventilation rates.
Category
Airflow per
non­adapted person
[L/s­person]
Relative productivity
(Psick−leave) [%]
I
10.0
100.00
II
7.0
99.83
III
4.0
99.62
IV
2.5
99.52
30
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:41==
4.5.4
Aggregated effects on productivity
When quantifying the combined reduction in productivity, whether in terms of work pro­
ductivity or short­term sick leave, the current state is compared to an optimal scenario
where no work hours are lost due to indoor environmental factors (Wargocki et al. 2006).
The annual decline in productivity due to the indoor environment includes the reduction
in effective work hours caused by the impact of temperature on productivity, as well as
the influence of air quality on both productivity and sick leave. However, calculating the
total productivity loss requires consideration of the dependencies between temperature
and air quality effects. To address this, Wargocki et al. (2006) suggested a methodology
proposing that the effect of ventilation on productivity can be computed directly or via
perceived air quality. Notably, sick leave is independent of the effect on productivity, with
the effects being additive. Furthermore, it was proposed that the effect of temperature
is independent of ventilation. Consequently, as the combined impact of ventilation and
temperature remains unknown, Wargocki et al. (2006) suggested the following:
”The magnitude of the combined effect is at least the effect of the greater of the single
parameters and not more than the sum of the independent parameters.”
Thus, when calculating the cumulative impacts on productivity, an interval is established
where the minimum productivity loss is the greater of either:
Pmin = Ploss,sickleave + Ploss,V R
(4.11)
or:
Pmin = Ploss,sickleave + Ploss,Toperative
(4.12)
where:
Ploss,sickleave is the productivity loss due to short­term sick leave [%]
Ploss,CO2 is the productivity loss due to the air quality, in this case quantified by the venti­
lation rate [%]
Ploss,Toperative is the productivity loss due to the operative temperature [%].
Thus, the maximum productivity loss can be calculated as:
Pmax = Ploss,sickleave + Ploss,V R + Ploss,Toperative
(4.13)
4.6
Estimated economic benefits
To quantify the economic advantages of improving indoor conditions, the monetary value
of lost productivity was determined by subtracting the annual hours lost due to reduced
productivity and increased absenteeism resulting from poor indoor climate. This calcula­
tion considered the average annual salary to estimate the financial impact of these lost
hours.
4.6.1
Annual salary
The annual salary was calculated using an hourly wage of DKK 293 Statistikbanken
(2019), representing the average earnings of all employees in the Danish job market for
the year 2022, excluding teenagers and students.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
31
==PAGE:42==
In the tool, the user has the flexibility to adjust the default hourly wage to a region­specific
average if preferred. The average hourly wages for different regions are provided in Ap­
pendix C.
4.6.2
Annual energy consumption
The tool evaluates the expenses associated with implementing a mechanical ventilation
system, utilizing cost data derived from LCCbyg for renovation measures. In addition to
initial installation costs, the tool factors in operational and maintenance expenses. Op­
erational costs were projected based on the annual air volume delivered by the ven­
tilation system, multiplied by the specified electricity consumption for air transportation
(SEL­værdi in Danish) outlined in the Danish Building Regulations (Bygningsreglementet
(2018)). This value must not surpass 1,800 J/m3 for CAV systems and 2,100 J/m3 for
VAV systems.
Thus, the annual ventilation energy was estimated by the following equations in case of
CAV and VAV, respectively:
Annual ventilation energyCAV [kWh] = Total air volume [m3] · 1, 800 J/m3
3600 s · 3.6 · 106J/kWh
(4.14)
Annual ventilation energyVAV [kWh] = Total air volume [m3] · 2, 100 J/m3
3600 s · 3.6 · 106J/kWh
(4.15)
4.6.3
Investment costs
Annual maintenance costs were set at 4% of the initial investment cost, in accordance
with values described in LCCbyg.
The estimated energy costs were calculated at 0.52 DKK/kWh for heating, assuming dis­
trict heating, and 1.77 DKK/kWh for electricity, according to LCCbyg. However, users
have the flexibility to adjust the default source of energy, as seen in Figure 4.3, and its
associated cost. Details regarding the energy costs can be found in Appendix D.
Figure 4.3:
Different options for
heating sources with the GUI.
In this study, the annuity cost method was employed
for a life­cycle analysis of the building services.
All costs and benefits, including investment cost,
operational cost, and productivity, were standard­
ized to the same unit: DKK/person/year. The in­
vestment costs included the procurement and in­
stallation of an HVAC system, along with the ex­
penses associated with operating the system at a
specific airflow rate. The first costs for procuring
and installing the HVAC system were estimated at
956DKK/m2 based on LCCbyg.
To convert the investment cost into an annual cost,
the following equation was applied (Wargocki et al.
(2006))
32
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:43==
Ca = B · a = B ·
r
100 ·
(
1 +
r
100
)n
(
1 +
r
100
)n −1
(4.16)
where:
Ca is the annual cost of the investment
B is the present value of the investment [DKK/m2]
a is the annuity factor for the n years [­]
r is the annual interest rate [%]
n is the calculation period corresponding to the life time of the investment [years].
An interest rate of 5% was applied when calculating the annual investment cost, based
on examples provided by Wargocki et al. (2006). Additionally, the investment horizon was
set to the typical lifespan of an HVAC system, which was presumed 25 years according
to LCCbyg. After this period, the HVAC system would require replacement, leading to a
re­evaluation of the life­cycle analysis for the next period.
The effect of the total cost was calculated as the sum of the annual investment cost relative
to the basic alternative, the change in operation and maintenance cost relative to the basic
alternative, and the change in productivity relative to the basic alternative.
To account for varying first costs based on the temperature and ventilation set­points, the
difference in energy costs per m2 were calculated with IDA ICE.
IDA ICE, recognized as Indoor Climate and Energy software, is a detailed and dynamic
multi­zone simulation tool designed for the whole­year assessments of indoor climate and
building energy consumption (EQUA (2023)). Its physical models incorporate the latest
research, ensuring robust and reliable results that align well with measured data. IDA
ICE’s versatile features, including compliance with various standards and integration of
local climate data, make it an optimal choice for validating the Python­based tool.
The IDA ICE model was adapted to mirror the specifications of the office building modelled
with the tool. The dimensions of the geometry measured 52.4 m x 17.5m and included a
single floor with a height of 2.8m for simplicity. Windows, each measuring 1.5m x 1.0m,
were evenly distributed around the building’s four facades with a total area corresponding
to approximately 12% of the floor area. The occupant density of the office building was
assumed 15.3, representing a typical occupant density in open­plan offices (DS 2019a).
Figure 4.4 provides a visual representation of the reference model in IDA ICE while Figure
4.5 shows how dimensions of the building could easily be changed with the GUI.
Figure 4.4: Geometry in IDA ICE representing an office building. The geometry mirror the
office specifications utilized in the tool.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
33
==PAGE:44==
The thermal properties of the building envelope were replicated to match those in the tool,
as detailed in Table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Thermal properties of the simulated office building.
Element
Thermal transmittance
(U) [W/m2 · K]
Solar heat gain
coefficient (g) [­]
External walls
0.26
­
Floor
0.20
­
Roof
0.22
­
Window, pane
0.80
0.4
Window, frame
0.80
­
The schedules for the occupancy and equipment were implemented in IDA ICE based on
the specifications outlined in Table 4.3.
HVAC system
To simulate the varying first costs based on temperature and ventilation set­points, the
model assumed the building was ventilated using a VAV system. VAV systems are com­
monly seen in modern office buildings due to their energy efficiency and airflow control,
contributing to improved comfort and energy savings.
In the IDA ICE modeling of the VAV system, airflow rates followed the specifications out­
lined in Table 3.2, with system regulation based on the CO2 levels as per Table 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Input text boxes for the
building dimensions.
The building was modelled with an ideal heater, de­
liberately overdimensioned at 1000 W/m2 in IDA
ICE to prevent capacity constraints due to the tool’s
unlimited heating capacity.
For cooling, an ideal cooler with a cooling coil was
implemented. The cooling capacity was set to 10
W/m2 and the water supply temperature was set to
12 °C.
During occupancy hours, the building was heated
and cooled according to temperature set­points
listed in Table 3.1. During unoccupied periods, the
heating set­point adjusted to 18 °C, and the cooling
set­point to 28 °C. This modification of set­points
ensured a gradual adjustment, prompting energy
conservation, as extreme temperature changes of­
ten result in higher energy consumption as the sys­
tem works to return the space to the desired com­
fort level. Additionally, maintaining a mild temper­
ature during non­occupancy hours contributes to
improved occupant comfort upon return (Grundfos
(2023)).
34
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:45==
Location
The simulated office building was located in Copenhagen, Denmark, with an assumed
ambient CO2­concentration of 400 ppm. The wind profile ”Suburban ASHRAE” was se­
lected for the IDA ICE model to match the shield level and terrain class of the model in
the tool.
Estimated variation in energy costs
The energy cost estimations were derived from the whole­year indoor climate and energy
simulation in IDA ICE for the office building. The calculated differences in energy costs,
shown in Table 4.8, were based on targeted IEQ­category.
Table 4.8: Estimated costs associated with varying IEQ­targets.
IEQ­Category
Ventilation rate
CO2­concentration
above outdoors
Temperature
Annual investment cost
[L/s­person]
[PPM]
[°C]
[DKK/m2]
IEQI
10.0
<550
21.0­25­5
39.17
IEQII
7.0
550 ­ 800
20.0­26.0
35.88
IEQIII
4.0
800 ­ 1350
19.0­27.0
32.52
IEQIV
2.5
>1350
18.0­28.0
It should be noted that the estimated energy cost variations, influenced by temperature
and ventilation set­points, depend on factors such as the building’s thermal properties,
occupant density, occupancy and equipment schedules, among others. While these pro­
jections may not serve as standardized approximations, they provide a foundational basis
for estimating the economic benefits associated with improved productivity for a specific
case study, presented in the following chapter.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
35
==PAGE:46==
5
Results and Validation
This chapter presents the outcomes of an evaluation of the Python­based tool. The initial
assessment involved 12 different scenarios in office settings for which indoor environment
and energy simulations were conducted to examine the tool’s predictions of CO2­levels
and operative temperatures. The subsequent sections explore analyses and comparisons
with the recognized and validated but proprietary software IDA ICE. This feeds in to a
specific case study that demonstrates the quantified benefits of improved indoor climate
on productivity, sick leave reduction, and cost­effectiveness.
5.1
Model setup
A validation of the tool was performed with IDA ICE. This validation aimed at investigating
the precision of the tool by comparing its prediction with IDA ICE simulation results.
The model in IDA ICE followed the specifications outlined in Section 4.6.3. However, initial
simulations were conducted for simplified geometries as well as varying occupant densi­
ties and ventilation systems before introducing a specific case study. These preliminary
simulations were conducted to compare the tool’s outcomes against those generated by
IDA ICE across diverse scenarios.
The simulated geometries measured 12.5m x 8.0m and represented simple, open­plan
offices, featuring either a single floor or four floors at a height of 2.8m. Each facade had
a centrally positioned window of 3.36 m2 placed at the same height. Figure 5.1 provides
a visual representation of the two geometries modeled in IDA ICE.
The building simulations incorporated both mechanical and natural ventilation. Mechan­
ical ventilation options included a CAV or VAV system, while natural ventilation options
included single­sided or cross­flow ventilation.
The CAV system applied fixed temperature set­points, while the VAV system was reg­
ulated by office CO2­concentration. For the cases of VAV, ventilation occurred with a
minimum background rate at CO2­concentrations below 950 ppm and a maximum rate at
concentrations exceeding 1350 ppm, maintaining an airflow rate of 7 L/s­person.
For simulations including natural ventilation, the window opening schedule followed the
specifications outlined in Section 4.3.3.
The ventilation system was inactive outside of occupied hours.
5.2
Temperature and air quality assessment performed by the
tool
Simulations with the tool were conducted initially and involved testing across 12 different
scenarios to assess its ability in predicting the real world impacts of indoor climate ren­
ovations in offices. For these scenarios, the ventilation type and occupant density were
systematically changed to ensure the tool’s adaptability to diverse conditions.
An overview of the 12 different scenarios is presented in Table 5.1.
36
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.1: Geometries in IDA ICE representing simple, open­plan office spaces with
configurations of one floor and four floors. The geometries mirror the office specifications
utilized in the tool.
Table 5.1: Overview of the 12 scenarios including parameters tested with the tool.
Simulation no.
Ventilation type
Occupant density
No. of floors
Mechanical
Natural
[m2/occ]
1
CAV
­
7
1
2
CAV
­
14
1
3
CAV
­
14
4
4
VAV
­
7
1
5
VAV
­
14
1
6
VAV
­
14
4
7
VAV
Single­sided
7
1
8
VAV
Single­sided
14
1
9
VAV
Single­sided
14
4
10
VAV
Cross­flow
7
1
11
VAV
Cross­flow
14
1
12
VAV
Cross­flow
14
4
In Table 5.1, CAV and VAV refer to mechanical ventilation, while single­sided and cross­
flow refer to natural ventilation. The selected minimum occupant density of 7 m2/occ
aligns with the specifications of Arbejdstilsynet (2024). In contrast, the selected maximum
occupant density of 14 m2/occ corresponds to a standard landscaped office, as described
in DS/CEN/TR 16798­2:2019 (DS (2019a)). The number of floors was intentionally set at
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
37
==PAGE:48==
either one or four to assess its potential impact on indoor climate conditions.
All cases were simulated against the same ”pre­intervention” condition as reference point.
The indoor climate conditions corresponding to this reference are detailed in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Annual distributions of operative temperature and CO2­concentration
before intervention.
Operative Temperature [%]
CO2­Concentration [%]
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
N/A
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
IEQIV
Pre­intervention
22.7
14.9
33.2
29.2
16.4
44.4
34.7
4.5
With energy simulations performed with the tool, variations in CO2­levels and indoor tem­
peratures were examined across the diverse scenarios. Table 5.3 offers an overview of
the distributions of operative temperature and CO2­concentration within the 12 cases.
Table 5.3: Annual distributions of operative temperatures and CO2­concentrations
simulated with the tool.
Operative Temperature
CO2­concentration
Sim. no.
Variables
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
N/A
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
IEQIV
CAV
1
7 m2/occ.
1 floor
30.4
18.9
48.1
2.6
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
2
14 m2/occ.
1 floor
33.6
9.4
54.5
2.5
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3
14 m2/occ.
4 floors
37.8
4.0
55.8
2.4
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
VAV
4
7 m2/occ.
1 floor
30.4
18.9
48.1
2.6
59.9
40.1
0.0
0.0
5
14 m2/occ.
1 floor
33.6
9.4
54.5
2.5
90.0
10.0
0.0
0.0
6
14 m2/occ.
4 floors
37.8
4.0
55.8
2.4
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Single­sided
7
7 m2/occ.
1 floor
22.7
14.9
33.2
29.2
16.4
44.4
34.7
4.5
8
14 m2/occ.
1 floor
30.3
13.3
47.1
9.3
99.7
0.3
0.0
0.0
9
14 m2/occ.
4 floors
36.5
8.8
50.0
4.7
85.0
14.0
1.0
0.0
Cross­flow
10
7 m2/occ.
1 floor
32.0
17.6
28.8
21.6
89.1
9.5
1.2
0.2
11
14 m2/occ.
1 floor
30.2
13.4
47.3
9.1
99.7
0.3
0.0
0.0
12
14 m2/occ.
4 floors
37.8
8.6
49.5
4.1
97.6
2.2
0.2
0.0
The findings outlined in Table 5.3 reveal that the specific type of ventilation considerably in­
fluences the operative temperature and air quality, as indicated by the CO2­concentration,
within the office, as expected. The findings indicate that incorporating natural ventilation,
particularly single­sided, results in the lowest quality of indoor climate conditions com­
pared to relying solely on mechanical ventilation. This demonstrates the challenges in
effectively regulating the indoor climate through natural ventilation. However, employing
an alternative window opening schedule could have simulated different outcomes.
The overall results suggest an improved indoor climate associated with lower occupant
38
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:49==
density. Increasing the number of floors while maintaining an occupant density of 14
m2/occ resulted in further improvements of the operative temperature, assuming Cate­
gory I represents the most desirable temperature range. However, increasing the number
of floors sightly reduced the air quality for scenarios including natural ventilation.
The most favorable indoor climate outcomes within each ventilation type are highlighted
in blue in Table 5.3.
To emphasize the effects on operative temperature, Figure 5.2 illustrated a comparison
between these four highlighted scenarios and the pre­intervention scenario.
Figure 5.2: Annual operative temperature distributions for simulation no. 3, 6, 9, and 12,
representing different ventilation systems for a 4­story building with an occupant density
of 14 m2/occ.
Although the differences in operative temperature among the ventilation types were minor,
a considerable improvement in indoor climate was revealed when compared to the pre­
intervention scenario, as illustrated in Figure 5.2. This improvement is indicated by the
increased duration within IEQ­Category I and the decreased duration outside of category,
when compared to the pre­intervention scenario.
While the outcomes of the 12 simulations detailed in Table 5.3 indicated variations in op­
erative temperatures based on occupant density and the number of floors, they did not
specify whether these differences were caused by higher or lower temperatures. To high­
light the attributes, Figures 5.3 and 5.4 provide detailed presentations of the temperature
variations between these parameters, for a CAV system and a VAV system with cross­flow
ventilation, respectively.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.3: Annual operative temperature distributions with CAV as selected ventilation
system, plotted by weekly average.
Figure 5.4: Annual operative temperature distributions with VAV and cross­flow as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by weekly average.
Examining Figure 5.3 reveals a subtle reduction in operative temperatures when the oc­
cupancy density was lowered from 7 m2/occ to 14 m2/occ. Furthermore, keeping the
occupancy density constant at 14 m2/occ while increasing the number of floors from one
to four resulted in a decline in operative temperatures throughout the year, most signifi­
cantly during the summer.
A similar trend was observed in Figure 5.4 for ventilation with a VAV system and natural
cross­flow. However, the temperature variations, particularly between 7 m2/occ and 14
m2/occ, were greater compared to the CAV case, and temperatures reached nearly 30°C
in the summer, in contrast to 26°C with CAV. This highlights the challenges associated
40
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:51==
with natural ventilation in maintaining temperature control.
The graphs in 5.3 and 5.4 contribute to the clarification of the temperature categorization
detailed in Table 5.3. The longer duration of hours within IEQ­Category I for an occu­
pant density of 14 m2/occ and four floors can be attributed to cooler temperatures in the
summer, as seen in the graphs. Moreover, the considerable number of hours with cold
temperatures during the winter contributed to the significant duration in IEQ­Category III,
accounting for approximately 50­55%, as observed in Table 5.3.
It is worth noting that the simulations considered operative temperatures during unoccu­
pied hours as well as occupied hours, which likely accounts for this distribution, as the
heating set­point was fixed at 18°C during night, weekends, and holidays.
5.3
Comparison of simulations with IDA ICE
The same set of 12 scenarios initially simulated with the tool were replicated by IDA ICE
for a side­by­side evaluation.
Results of the operative temperature and CO2­concentration distributions simulated with
IDA ICE were compared with those detailed in Table 5.3. A summary of selected results
from the validation with IDA ICE is provided in Table 5.4, while the complete set of results
is available in Appendix E.2.
Table 5.4: Comparison of annual distributions of operative temperatures and CO2­concentrations between
the tool and IDA ICE.
Operative temperature
[%]
CO2­concentration
[%]
No.
Software
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
N/A
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
IEQIV
Tool
37.8
4.0
55.8
2.4
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
33.1
13.2
26.3
27.4
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
CAV
3
∆
­4.7
9.2
­29.5
25.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Tool
39.9
7.0
51.4
1.7
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
38.0
19.5
28.9
13.6
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
VAV
6
∆
­1.9
12.5
­22.5
11.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Tool
36.5
8.8
50.0
4.7
85.0
14.0
1.0
0.0
IDA ICE
36.5
19.4
28.9
15.2
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
VAV, single­sided
9
∆
0.0
10.6
­21.1
9.5
15.0
14.0
1.0
0.0
Tool
37.8
8.6
49.5
4.1
97.6
2.2
0.2
0.0
IDA ICE
31.6
12.6
25.6
30.3
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
VAV, cross­flow
12
∆
­6.2
4.0
­23.9
27.2
2.4
2.2
0.2
0.0
The highlighted rows in Table 5.4 show the variations in the percentage of simulated hours
within the IEQ categories. The outcomes from IDA ICE simulations indicated a decrease
in operative temperature hours within categories I and III, accompanied by an increase
in hours within category II and outside of category, compared to the results obtained with
the tool.
Additionally, the simulations demonstrated an increased number of hours with CO2 con­
centrations in category I compared to the tool.
The factors contributing to the variations in results between the tool and IDA ICE, as seen
in Table 5.4, remain uncertain. A possible explanation could be that the temperature
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
41
==PAGE:52==
intervals defining each category are closely situated, making the data sensitive to minor
variations that can result in it falling into either category.
To gain insights into the relation between the tool’s simulated outcomes and those simu­
lated by IDA ICE, the annual operative temperature and CO2­concentration distributions
were plotted for comparative analysis.
A closer examination of the annual operative temperature distributions is presented in
Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.5: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with CAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Figure 5.6 presents a comparison of the simulated operative temperatures for Case 3
which includes the scenario of an occupant density of 14m2/occ and four floors.
Based on the graph depicted in Figure 5.5 it becomes evident that the tool generally
simulated more extreme temperatures in comparison to IDA ICE, particularly during the
summer. During this period, temperatures sometimes reached nearly 4°C lower with the
tool than with IDA ICE. During colder months, the tool and IDA ICE calculated operative
temperatures closer to each other, with variations typically within 0.5°C.
When examining the outcomes across all scenarios, a greater consistency in results for
single­floor scenarios were observed in comparison to those with four floors.
This is
demonstrated by Figure 5.6, presenting a comparison of the simulated operative tem­
peratures for Case 1 which includes the scenario of an occupant density of 7m2/occ and
a single floor. Results for the remaining cases are available in Appendix E.4.
42
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.6: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with CAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
While the graph depicted in Figure 5.6 generally followed the same trend as the one
in Figure 5.5, this case presents a closer consistency between simulated outputs with
the tool and IDA ICE. The most extreme variations occurred during the summer, where
temperatures simulated with the tool sometimes reached 2C higher compared to IDA ICE.
Over the course of the year, the simulated minimum, maximum, and average operative
temperatures for scenario 1 and 3 were calculated as in Table 5.5. A comparison of the
operative temperatures for the same two scenarios is illustrated in a box plot in Figure
5.7.
Table 5.5: Comparison of minimum, maximum, and average annual operative tempera­
tures between the tool and IDA ICE.
Ventilation type
Sim. no.
Software
Minimum
[°C]
Maximum
[°C]
Average
[°C]
Tool
17.30
28.88
20.36
IDA ICE
17.46
27.35
19.51
CAV
1
∆
0.16
­1.53
­0.85
Tool
17.34
27.00
19.44
IDA ICE
16.67
25.36
19.61
CAV
3
∆
­0.67
­1.64
0.18
Upon reviewing Figure 5.7, it is apparent that a noticeable difference exists in temperature
variability between the simulations conducted with the tool and those with IDA ICE. Specif­
ically, for the case of scenario 1, the interquartile range (IQR) for the tool extended from
approximately 17.9°C to 22.5°C, indicating a broader range in comparison to IDA ICE,
which maintained a more confined span ranging from approximately 18.0°C to 20.8°C.
For the case of scenario 3, the observed IQR for the tool extended from approximately
17.8°C to 20.3°C while the IQR for IDA ICE ranged from approximately 18.0°to 21.3°C.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
43
==PAGE:54==
Furthermore, an examination of the maximum and minimum values depicted in the graph
highlights the heightened simulated temperature variability associated with the tool, par­
ticularly for the case of scenario 1, contrasting with the milder trends observed with IDA
ICE. Consequently, the distribution spread of data in Figure 5.7 aligns with the observed
patterns illustrated in Figures 5.6 and 5.5 as well as in Table 5.5.
Figure 5.7: Comparison of annual operative temperature with CAV as selected ventilation
system.
Similar comparisons between the tool and IDA ICE were performed for the annual CO2­
concentration distributions. Figure 5.8 presents the annual simulated results for CO2­
levels for Case 1, while results for the remaining cases are available in Appendix X.
Figure 5.8: Comparison of annual CO2­concentration distribution with CAV as selected
ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
The tool and IDA ICE simulated similar annual CO2­concentrations, as depicted in Figure
44
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:55==
5.8. While IDA ICE tended to simulate slightly higher CO2­levels compared to the tool,
the graph indicates that these variations were no larger than approximately 30 ppm. The
considerably low simulated CO2­levels for both methods suggest a well ventilated office
space.
The simulated average CO2­concentration was 430 ppm and 424 ppm for the tool and
IDA ICE, respectively. Moreover, the minimum and maximum CO2­concentrations were
400 ppm and 499 ppm with the tool, and 400 and 524 ppm with IDA ICE.
A comparison of the CO2­levels is illustrated in a box plot in Figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9: Comparison of annual CO2­concentration with CAV as selected ventilation
system.
Examining the outcomes depicted in Figure 5.9 reveals nuanced differences in the simu­
lated CO2­levels. IDA ICE simulations indicated a broader range between maximum and
minimum values, while maintaining a more confined span within the IQR in comparison to
the tool’s simulations. However, the difference in measured CO2­concentrations between
the two methods is negligible. Consequently, the spread of data observed in Figure 5.9
correspond with the trends presented in Figure 5.8.
The overall analysis of the simulated operative temperatures and CO2­concentrations be­
tween the tool and IDA ICE indicated that the whole­year simulations generally followed
the same trends and produced comparable results, despite slight variations. This coher­
ence contributed to the tool’s overall credibility in performing indoor climate simulations,
creating a solid foundation for estimating the associated productivity levels and econom­
ical impacts.
5.4
Case study
This section presents a case study that illustrates the impact of improved indoor climate
on the productivity and reduction of short­term sick leave. Furthermore, it examines how
these benefits can be integrated into a cost analysis.
The presented case shows the estimated influence of increased ventilation on productivity,
investment costs, and operational expenses within a typical office building with a standard
floor plan.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
45
==PAGE:56==
Built upon a case presented by Wargocki et al. (2006), the office building reflects a con­
temporary five­story structure with a gross floor area of 4,580 m2. Occupied by 300 em­
ployees, the occupancy density is 15.3 m2/person. The building’s facades feature evenly
distributed windows on all four sides, collectively making up for approximately 12% of the
gross floor area.
The study explored four different scenarios. In the first scenario, the building represented
a pre­renovation condition, aligning with IEQ­condition IV, corresponding to a low level of
indoor climate, as per Table 3.3. Ventilation was achieved with a VAV system regulated
by CO2­levels, maintaining an airflow rate of 2.5 L/s per person, in accordance with IEQ­
category IV specifications outlined in Table 3.2. Additionally, the building was heated at
18°C and cooled at 28°, consistent with the temperature requirements of IEQ­category
IV, as detailed in Table 3.1.
The second scenario was designed to meet IEQ­category III standards, with heating and
cooling set­points adjusted to 19°and 27°C, respectively, while maintaining an airflow rate
of 4 L/s per person with the ventilation system.
The third scenario represented IEQ­category II standards with adjusted heating and cool­
ing set­points to 20°C and 26°C, respectively, and an airflow rate of 7 L/s per person.
The fourth and final scenario included heating and cooling set­points at 21°C and 25.5°C,
respectively, and an airflow rate of 10 L/s per person, corresponding to IEQ­category I
specifications.
For this case study, the assigned value for annual work was estimated at DKK 563,700
per employee, corresponding to an hourly rate of DKK 293, based on the assumption of
1,924 working hours annually. Notably, the tool does not account for average annual sick
days due to other factors than the ventilation rate.
The estimated energy costs for this study were set at 0.52 DKK/kWh for heating and 1.77
DKK/kWh for electricity, as detailed in Section 4.6
The life­cycle cost analysis of the building services involved in the renovations employed
the annuity cost method, as outlined in Section 4.6.
To convert the initial cost of installing and operating a ventilation system into an annual
cost, Equation 4.16 was employed. The investment cost was assumed to be 956DKK/m2
with a 5% interest rate, and the ventilation system’s lifetime was set at 25 years, in ac­
cordance with LCCbyg. Additionally, annual maintenance costs for the ventilation system
were assumed to be 4% of the investment cost, following LCCbyg guidelines.
The annual energy consumption per person was calculated in the tool by Equation 4.15.
All four scenarios were simulated with the tool, and the resulting distributions of operative
temperature and CO2­concentration are presented in Table 5.6. Figure 5.10 illustrates
how the indoor climate results are presented in the GUI.
46
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:57==
Table 5.6: Calculated operative temperature and CO2­concentration distribution in the
office building for the four scenarios.
Operative Temperature [%]
CO2­Concentration [%]
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
N/A
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
IEQIV
Scenario 1
25.1
8.2
12.1
55.6
69.5
30.4
0.1
0.0
Scenario 2
28.3
6.4
18.0
47.3
93.8
6.2
0.0
0.0
Scenario 3
31.6
10.7
54.9
2.8
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Scenario 4
37.9
47.9
14.3
0.0
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
The results presented in Table 5.6 indicate an improvement in the temperature and CO2­
levels following the renovation initiatives targeting IEQ­categories III, II, and I for the office
building. This improvement is notable in both the recorded operative temperatures and the
calculated CO2 concentrations, each demonstrating improvements with each renovation
scenario. Only the impact on CO2 concentrations observed between scenarios 3 and 4
is not noticeable, as all recorded hours fell within IEQ­category I.
Results of the estimated costs of the building services are listed in comparison to the
estimated benefits of improved productivity in Table 5.7. Figure 5.11 illustrates how the
results of the life­cycle analysis are presented in the GUI.
Figure 5.10: Overview with the GUI of the
calculated operative temperatures and CO2­
levels going from scenario 1 to 2
The first costs of the HVAC system, in­
cluding operational expenses, were esti­
mated at 1,501, 1,531, 1,583, and 1,633
DKK/person for scenarios 1, 2, 3, and 4,
respectively. Transitioning from scenario
1 to 2, 3 or 4 would result in a corre­
sponding increase in energy consumption
by 5.6, 17.0, or 27.9 kWh/person, trans­
lating to 9.9, 30.1, or 49.3 DKK/person,
respectively. The associated productivity
improvements were 0.2­0.4%, 0.7­1.0%,
or 1.2­1.5%, equivalent to approximately
850­2,000, 4,000­5,400, or 6,800­8,200
DKK/person, as detailed in Table 5.7.
When considering investment costs, the
case study revealed benefit­to­cost ratios
of approximately 20­48 when renovating
from IEQ­category IV towards III conditions, 35­47 when renovating towards category
II conditions, and 37­44 when renovating towards category I conditions.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
47
==PAGE:58==
Table 5.7: Annual increase of energy use, first cost, and benefits of increased productivity
in the simulated office building across four scenarios.
Renovation
case*
Annual
increase of
energy
consumption
Annual
increase of
the first
cost
Annual
increase of
maintenance
Annual
increase in
productivity
Benefit
to cost
ratio
[DKK/occ.]
[DKK/occ.]
[DKK/occ.]
[%]
[DKK/occ.]
[­]
Cat IV to III
Min
9.9
30.7
1.3
0.2
846
20.2
Max
0.4
2,030
48.5
Cat IV to II
Min
30.1
82.0
3.3
0.7
4,004
34.7
Max
1.0
5,414
46.9
Cat IV to I
Min
49.3
132.1
5.3
1.2
6,824
36.6
Max
1.5
8,234
44.1
Cat III to II
­
20.2
51.2
2.0
0.6
3,158
43.0
Cat III to I
­
39.3
101.3
4.1
1.1
5,978
41.3
Cat II to I
­
19.2
50.1
2.0
0.5
2,820
39.6
* Cat IV refers to scenario 1, cat III refers to scenario 2, cat II refers to scenario 3, and cat I refers to
scenario 4.
Table 5.7 highlights the evident financial benefits derived from all renovation scenarios ­
renovating from scenario 4 to 3, 2 and 1, from scenario 3 to 2 and 1, and from scenario 2 to
1. The calculated benefit­to­cost ratios ranged from 20.2 to 48.5 across the various sce­
narios, underscoring the substantial influence of indoor climate on occupant productivity
and associated economical consequences.
Figure 5.11: Overview with the GUI of estimated annual costs and profits when renovating
from scenario 1 to 2.
Figure 5.12 underscores the estimated costs and profits outlined in Table 5.7 for the first
three renovation cases. The graph demonstrates a trend in increased annual profits with
increased annual investment costs. The graph nearly presents a linear trend, as expected,
as the calculated benefit­to­cost ratios were similar across the three cases, particularly for
the maximum achievable profit.
48
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.12: Annual economical impact from improved productivity due to renovation ef­
forts.
The benefit­to­cost ratios generally align with the range examined by Fisk (1997), indicat­
ing benefits outweighing costs by a factor between 18 to 47.
The sensitivity of the calculated ratios within this study should however be acknowledged
due to the various number of assumptions involved with programming of the tool and esti­
mating costs. Nevertheless, the findings from this study consistently revealed substantial
financial gains across all scenarios.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
49
==PAGE:60==
6
Discussion
This chapter explores and analyses the findings of this study along with the applied method­
ologies and associated assumptions and simplifications.
This study integrated methodologies from diverse research papers to explore the general
relationships among indoor climate, short­term sick leave, productivity, and the economy.
By applying quantified relationships between indoor climate parameters and productivity,
a Python­based tool was developed to calculate the aggregated productivity levels and
associated economic consequences.
While several studies within the past decades have examined the relationships between
indoor climate on productivity and socioeconomic outcomes, a notable gap exists in the
absence of a software to practically determine these relationships. The introduction of
the tool serves to address this gap by providing a practical method for stakeholders to
translate research findings into actionable insights.
This tool separates itself through its functionality, allowing users to input details about the
building and renovation measures into the tool and thereby enabling the calculation of
productivity and the derived economic impact.
Moreover, the tool’s user­friendly design ensures accessibility to a broader audience, as
the implementation of the GUI facilitates the calculations of the socioeconomic benefits
associated with indoor climate renovations.
Based on the findings of this study, there is a significant economic potential in investing
in indoor climate renovations in office buildings. This was highlighted by the calculated
benefit­to­cost ratios, which ranged between 20.2 to 48.5. The obtained outcomes took
offset in a case study that investigated four scenarios for which a 4,580 m2 office building
was tailored to IEQ­categories IV, III, II, and I.
Although the findings from the life­cycle cost analysis consistently revealed substantial
financial gains, it should be noted that the outcomes contain a high level of uncertainty
due to various assumptions and applied methodologies.
The life­cycle analysis involved the annuity cost method, which evenly spread the invest­
ment costs of the HVAC system across the lifespan of the investment. Cost data was
derived from LCCbyg when estimating investment costs for the HVAC system, includ­
ing maintenance and lifespan of the system. The estimated investment cost was 956
DKK/m2, including installation, and the system applied a lifespan of 25 years. Moreover,
LCCbyg estimated an additional 4% in maintenance cost of the investment cost. The
implementation of estimates from LCCbyg provided a sound foundation for cost calcu­
lations within this study, although precise knowledge of the specific HVAC system for a
given office building would always be preferred.
The analysis assumed a 5 % interest rate, which is commonly used in practice, as com­
mercial or building­related investments often range from around 3 % to 7 %. However,
actual rates may vary based on the economic conditions, regional interest rates, and the
specific terms negotiated with lenders. In practice, it would be advisable to consult finan­
cial experts for precise, location­specific rates.
The estimations of investment costs also included the costs associated with varying set­
points according to the IEQ categories. Since there was no standardized model avail­
able to estimate these costs, this study used IDA ICE to replicate an office building of
50
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:61==
same properties as the one in the tool. This allowed for close approximations of the cost
variations associated with targeted IEQ­category, although there is a level of uncertainty
associated with the costs. Moreover, the derived costs from the IDA ICE simulations are
not directly applicable to other building renovation scenarios, as the costs are influenced
by various factors such as thermal properties, occupancy and equipment schedules, etc.
The annuity cost method applied the investment cost of the HVAC system as well as the
interest rate and the lifespan. The interest rate and the lifespan were used to calculate
the annuity factor which was used to determine the annual cost of the investment. Even
minor changes in the lifespan or the interest rate for the HVAC system would result in
considerable changes in the final benefit­to­cost ratios, which emphasizes the sensitivity
of the input data.
In addition to the assumed costs, the estimated productivity levels introduces significant
uncertainty, impacting the cost analysis.
It was observed that productivity gains from increased ventilation hardly impacted the
renovation scenarios, as simulated CO2­levels mostly met IEQ­category I standards, ex­
cept for the worst case scenario. The tool’s limitation lies in categorizing productivity
levels, which obstructs a nuanced reflection of CO2 variations on productivity. Future in­
vestigations would benefit from exploring methods to improve the accuracy of estimated
productivity levels.
Besides limitations due to the categorization of indoor climate parameters, uncertainties
also appeared with the quantification methods linking these parameters to productivity
and short­term sick leave.
The quantitative association between temperature and productivity drew upon findings
from the study conducted by Seppänen et al. (2006a), while the quantitative link between
air quality and productivity relied on insights from Seppänen et al. (2006b). Employing
studies by the same authors aimed to establish a shared theoretical foundation, providing
consistency in methodologies for drawing conclusions. However, uncertainties persist in
both approaches.
The sample sizes in the two studies performed by Seppänen et. al. were 24 and seven
when quantifying the impacts of temperature and air quality, respectively.
The sam­
ple sizes within both studies included varying approaches, design settings, and sam­
ple groups, which introduced uncertainties in deriving a common quantified relationships.
Consequently, the sample sizes might have limited the generalization of the ability to de­
tect common effects, whereas larger sample sizes could increase the reliability of the
drawn conclusions.
Furthermore, the examination of temperature and air quality effects involved different spe­
cific tasks within the two studies, raising uncertainty about their applicability to real office
environments.
Additionally, there was considerable variation in productivity measure­
ments across the reviewed studies. Although the combined weights took into considera­
tion the relevance of different productivity measurements, the assignment of weights was
done with a degree of approximation and subjectivity.
The overall productivity level was derived from a synthesis of the studies conducted by
Seppänen et. al, alongside an estimation of productivity related to short­term sick leave
as indicated by Milton 2000. Given the unknown combined effect of temperature and air
quality, this study adopted the approach proposed by Wargocki et al. (2006), stating that
the combined impact on productivity is at least the greater of the single parameters and
not more than the sum of the individual parameters. While this method introduces a level
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
51
==PAGE:62==
of uncertainty, it was considered the most reasonable approach based on the relevant
literature to estimate the combined effects.
Simulations of the indoor climate included several simplifications and assumptions, which
contributed a level of uncertainty to the outputs.
The modeled occupancy and equipment schedules were derived from standard ASHRAE
office schedules, which, while effective for estimating office occupancy and equipment op­
eration, would benefit from increased accuracy if based on actual schedules. It is worth
noting that ASHRAE, being a global organization with its origins in the United States, may
not perfectly align with the working patterns of Danish offices. For instance, in Denmark,
it is common for employees to begin work at 08:00 or even earlier, and leave the office by
16:00. This contrasts with many other countries where starting work at a later hour and
leaving the office around 17:00 or 18:00 is typical. This global standardization of working
hours is reflected in the occupancy and equipment schedules utilized in this study.
Additionally, the schedule assumed 95% occupancy from 09:00 to 17:00, excluding lunch.
In many cases, this may overestimate the actual number of occupants, especially con­
sidering the increasing trend of employees having the option to work remotely. The likely
overestimation in number of occupants could potentially have contributed to increased
heat gains and CO2­levels in the office which would reflect on the calculated operative
temperatures and CO2­concentrations.
Initial simulations with the tool across the 12 scenarios outlined in Table 5.1 indicated an
improved indoor climate with lower occupant density. This observation aligned with the
expected outcome, as reduced occupant density translates to fewer people emitting heat
and indoor pollutants, resulting in a more stable thermal environment and lower contam­
inant levels for improved comfort and air quality. Additionally, increasing the number of
floors while maintaining the low occupant density further improved the indoor climate, pri­
marily attributed to cooler temperatures in the summer, as depicted in Figure 5.3. This
enhancement could be due to potential improvements in insulation within a multi­floor
configuration, reducing heat transfer between floors. Improved ventilation also plays a
role in sustaining cooler temperatures by minimizing external heat gain.
Additionally, the initial simulations of the indoor climate using the tool revealed that ven­
tilation solutions including natural ventilation led to less favorable conditions compared
to mechanical ventilation alone. Unlike mechanical systems, which offer reliable control
over air distribution, natural ventilation relies on external forces, offering energy efficiency
but demonstrating potential inconsistencies in maintaining air quality. This observation
was confirmed by simulation results that incorporated single­sided and cross­flow venti­
lation in the office building, as presented in Table 5.3. The tool, following a predefined
window opening schedule, assumed longer window opening durations in summer than
winter. This schedule might not accurately reflect the building’s ventilation needs, poten­
tially compromising occupant comfort and indoor climate. To improve the indoor climate
in office buildings with operable windows, optimizing the tool could involve refining win­
dow opening schedules, perhaps by introducing temperature or CO2­controlled opening
schedules.
While this study focused on ventilation type, occupant density, and number of floors as
adjustable parameters influencing the indoor climate, it is essential to acknowledge the
presence of various other factors that can significantly impact the indoor climate. Param­
eters such as solar shading, thermal envelope adjustments, building height, and window
size remain unexplored in this study but hold potential for future investigations.
The tool’s ability to perform whole­year indoor climate simulations was validated with IDA
52
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:63==
ICE. The validation process with revealed results that, while not identical, demonstrated
similarities with the tool. The simulated temperatures and CO2­levels showed consistent
trends and patterns between the tool and IDA ICE. Nevertheless, deviations in patterns
were observed, particularly for the scenarios that implemented multiple floors. These de­
viations were further investigated by analyzing minimum, maximum, and average values
by the introduction of box­plots. The box­plots indicated a general wider span in operative
temperatures simulated with the tool compared to IDA ICE, as shown by minimum and
maximum values, whereas a wider span in CO2­levels was observed in IDA ICE com­
pared to the tool.
Several factors contribute to these deviations. Firstly, variations in the underlying algo­
rithms of the tool and IDA ICE may lead to slight differences. The use of different numerical
methods or approximations can introduce differences in the simulation results. Addition­
ally, the sensitivity to input parameters in simulation processes means that even subtle
variations in data or model settings can contribute to deviating outcomes. Variations in
numerical precision and convergence criteria also play a role in influencing simulation ac­
curacy. Despite efforts to align settings, nuanced differences in how each tool handles
numerical operations may contribute to these observed deviations. To gain a comprehen­
sive understanding of these deviations, it would be beneficial to compare the outcomes of
the tool and IDA ICE to other similar software such as EnergyPlus, DesignBuilder, or TRN­
SYS. This comparison would reveal the extent of the variations among different software
and thus allow for a more informed decision on the tool’s capabilities.
It should be emphasized that the observed differences, although present, are relatively
minor. The tool’s capability to assess the indoor climate through whole­year simulations
remains reliable, as the observed deviations are assumed within an acceptable range.
Despite the challenges in quantifying productivity levels and financial benefits from indoor
climate, the outcomes of this study are consistent with the findings in the existing liter­
ature. The results underscore the potential economic gains associated with investing in
indoor climate renovations, as demonstrated through the life­cycle analysis of different
building scenarios. The study’s alignment with established literature improves the cred­
ibility of the observed trends and highlights the significance of prioritizing indoor climate
considerations in building design and renovation decisions.
The tool developed within this study was presented as a step toward informed decision­
making in building management. It has the potential to become a common practice, offer­
ing insights into the economic implications of prioritizing indoor climate in office buildings.
As a direct link between research and practical application, the tool presented in this study
holds the potential to guide stakeholders toward more informed decision­making regard­
ing indoor climate renovations in office buildings.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
53
==PAGE:64==
7
Conclusion
This study addressed a critical gap in the current landscape of building design which tend
to overlook the aspects of occupant health and productivity. To address this gap, the study
was guided by defining the links between indoor climate, occupant health and productivity,
and the associated socioeconomic consequences.
The study applied methodologies from various research papers to determine common
quantified relationships between the indoor climate and occupant productivity. These re­
lationships were integrated into a Python­based tool, which was developed to perform
whole­year energy and indoor climate simulations.
Simulations with the tool indicated improved productivity levels associated with improved
indoor climate. The highest calculated productivity increase with the tool was 1.5 % in a
case study that simulated the effects of renovating from an IEQ­category IV scenario to an
IEQ­category I scenario. The increase in productivity was mainly attributed to the oper­
ative temperature variations, as the effects from improved air quality were not as clearly
noticeable due to the way they were categorized. For the same reason, the estimated
productivity increase from reduced short­term sick leave was modest, as sick leave was
derived from the air quality.
A life­cycle cost analysis was integrated to the tool which applied the investment costs
associated with a given indoor climate renovation and estimated the economical benefits
due to improved performance. For the case study, the tool calculated benefit­to­cost ratios
ranging between 20 to 49. The lowest calculated ratio of 20 was for the case of renovating
from an IEQ­IV scenario to an IEQ­III scenario, which caused a minimum increase in
performance of 0.2%. This underscores the significant impact even minor improvements
in performance can have on the annual economic gains.
It should be acknowledged that there is a high level of uncertainty involved with applica­
tion of the tool. Developing the tool included numerous assumptions and simplifications
associated with the integration of methodologies derived from multiple research papers,
building codes, and standards.
The calculated performance levels with the tool are somewhat conservative due to way
they were scaled and the way indoor climate parameters were categorized. The tool es­
timated 100% performance and attendance when simulated operative temperatures or
CO2­levels fell within IEQ­category I. However, this categorization does not reflect on
actual conditions and holds potential for further development.
Despite the uncertainties in the outcomes obtained with the tool, the results align with
existing literature, underscoring the potential economic gains linked to investments in in­
door climate renovations. This offers potential stakeholders a support guide to conduct
informed decisions in regards to building design and indoor climate renovations.
54
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:65==
References
1. Apte, M G (2000). “Associations Between Indoor CO2 Concentrations and Sick
Building Syndrome Symptoms in U.S. Office Buildings: An Analysis of the 1994­
1996 BASE Study Data”. In: Indoor Air 10.4. Cited by: 255; All Open Access, Bronze
Open Access, Green Open Access, pp. 246–257. DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0668.2000.
010004246 . x. URL: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 -
0034543094&doi=10.1034%2fj.1600-0668.2000.010004246.x&partnerID=40&md5=
836f006ab88c995309f6e049409a8485.
2. Arbejdstilsynet (2024). Hvor Meget Plads Skal Der Være Pr. Ansat i et Arbejdsrum.
URL: https://at.dk/spoergsmaal-svar/k/kontor-plads-pr-ansat/.
3. ASHRAE (2019). ASHRAE Standards and Guidelines. URL: https://www.ashrae.
org/conferences.
4. Awbi, H B (2002). Ventilation of buildings. Routledge.
5. Ben­David, T, A Rackes, and M S Waring (2017). “Alternative Ventilation Strategies
in U.S. Offices: Saving Energy While Enhancing Work Performance, Reducing Ab­
senteeism, and Considering Outdoor Pollutant Exposure Tradeoffs”. eng. In: Build­
ing and Environment 116, pp. 140–157. ISSN: 1873684x, 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.
buildenv.2017.02.004. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/595bb3a25010df72ed6a70a1.
6. Berdan, C et al. (Jan. 2023). “One billion days lost: How COVID­19 is hurting the US
workforce”. eng. In: McKinsey’s Healthcare Systems and Services Practice, p. 63.
7. Bygningsreglementet (2018). 11 ­ Energiforbrug og klimapåvirkning. URL: https :
//bygningsreglementet.dk/Tekniske- bestemmelser/11/BRV/Funktionsafprovning/
Specifikt-elforbrug.
8. De Gids, W and H Phaff (1982). “Ventilation rates and energy consumption due to
open windows: a brief overview of research in the Netherlands”. In: Air infiltration
review 4.1, pp. 4–5.
9. DS (2004). DS/EN ISO 8996:2004 ­ Ergonomi – Termisk miljø – Bestemmelse af
varmeproduktion ved stofskifte. URL: https://webshop.ds.dk/standard/48864/ds-en-
iso-8996-2004.
10. —
(2008). DS/EN ISO 13790:2008 ­ Bygningers energieffektivitet – Beregning af
energiforbrug til rumopvarmning og ­køling. URL: https://webshop.ds.dk/standard/
M204448/ds-en-iso-13790-2008.
11. —
(2019a). DS/CEN/EN 16798­2:2019 ­ Bygningers energieffektivitet – Ventila­
tion i bygninger – Del 2. URL: https://webshop.ds.dk/standard/M313129/ds-cen-tr-
16798-2-2019.
12. —
(2019b). DS/EN 16798­1:2019 ­ Bygningers energieffektivitet – Ventilation i
bygninger – Del 1. URL: https://webshop.ds.dk/standard/M297459/ds-en-16798-1-
2019.
13. —
(2024). Harmoniserede Standarder. URL: https://www.ds.dk/da/om-standarder/
ce-maerkning/harmoniserede-standarder.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
55
==PAGE:66==
14. Edwards, J H et al. (1977). “Humidifier Fewer”. In: Thorax 32.6, pp. 653–633. URL:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC470808/.
15. Elmahdy, A H and G P Mitalas (1977). “Simple Model for Cooling and Dehumidifying
Coils for Use in Calculating Energy Requirements for Buildings”. In: ASHRAE 83.2,
pp. 103–117. ISSN: 00012505. URL: https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?
eid=2-s2.0-0017703932&origin=inward&txGid=5b65918752fc055574b79c6046f65a3c.
16. EQUA (2023). IDA ICE. URL: https://www.equa.se/en/ida-ice.
17. Erhverv, Dansk (2023). “Analyse: 340.000 danskere tager hvert år mindst en sygedag
fra arbejde, selv om de ikke er syge”. In: Dansk Erhverv. URL: https : / / www .
danskerhverv . dk / presse - og - nyheder / nyheder / 2023 / september / analyse - 340 . 000 -
danskere-tager-hvert-ar-mindst-en-sygedag-fra-arbejde-selv-om-de-ikke-er-syge/.
18. Fang, L et al. (2002). “Sick Building Syndrome symptoms and performance in a field
laboratory study at different levels of temperature and humidity”. eng. In: Proceed­
ings of Indoor Air 2002. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/537f0cde7401dbcc12005edc.
19. Federspiel, C C (2001). “Predicting the Frequency and Cost of Hot and Cold Com­
plaints in Buildings”. eng. In: Ashrae Transactions 107, p. 63. ISSN: 00012505.
20. Fisk, W J (1997). “Estimates of improved productivity and health from better indoor
environments”. eng. In: Indoor Air 7.3, pp. 158–172. ISSN: 16000668, 09056947.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.1997.t01-1-00002.x. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
543e33cdacc4e2154d0089e3.
21. —
(2000). “Health and Productivity Gains from Better Indoor Environments and
their Relationship with Building Energy Efficiency”. eng. In: Annual Review of En­
ergy and the Environment 25.1, pp. 537–566. ISSN: 23282126, 10563466. DOI:
10 . 1146 / annurev . energy . 25 . 1 . 537. URL: https : / / findit . dtu . dk / en / catalog /
54469733aa6842c10423cead.
22. —
(May 2002). “How IEQ affects health, productivity”. In: Ashrae Journal ­ ASHRAE
J 44. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/252855393_How_IEQ_affects_
health_productivity.
23. Fisk, W J, D Black, and G Brunner (2011). “Benefits and costs of improved IEQ in
U.S. offices”. In: Indoor Air 21.5, pp. 357–367. ISSN: 16000668­09056947. DOI:
10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0668 . 2011 . 00719 . x. URL: https : / / findit . dtu . dk / en / catalog /
5441f25dacc4e2154d3bdd0e.
24. Goetzel, R et al. (2001). “Health and Productivity Management: Establishing Key
Performance Measures, Benchmarks, and Best Practices”. In: Journal of Occupa­
tional and Environmental Medicine 43, pp. 10–17. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:1152059.
25. Grundfos (2023). Night Setback. URL: https://www.grundfos.com/solutions/learn/
research-and-insights/night-setback.
26. Holmberg, I and D P Wyon (1967). The Dependence of Performance in School on
Classroom Temperature. Educ. psychol. Interactions. Department of Educational
and Psychological Research, School of Education. URL: https://books.google.dk/
books?id=SlnPNwAACAAJ.
56
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:67==
27. Jaakkola, J J K, O P Heinonen, and O Seppänen (1989). “Sick Building Syndrome,
Sensation of Dryness and Thermal Comfort in Relation to Room Temperature in
an Office Building: Need for Individual Control of Temperature”. In: Environment
International 15.1. Indoor Air Quality, pp. 163–168. ISSN: 0160­4120. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0160-4120(89)90022-6. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0160412089900226.
28. Jaakkola, J J K and P Miettinen (1995). “Ventilation Rate in Office Buildings and Sick
Building Syndrome”. In: Occupational and Environmental Medicine 52.11, pp. 709–
715. ISSN: 14707926­13510711. DOI: 10.1136/oem.52.11.709. URL: https://findit.
dtu.dk/en/catalog/53292bb2c18e77205d619119.
29. Jones, B. and C. Molina (2017). “Indoor Air Quality”. In: Encyclopedia of Sustainable
Technologies. Ed. by M A Abraham. Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 197–207. ISBN: 978­0­
12­804792­7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-409548-9.10198-8. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780124095489101988.
30. Kallio, J et al. (2020). “Assessment of Perceived Indoor Environmental Quality,
Stress and Productivity based on Environmental Sensor Data and Personality Cat­
egorization”. In: Building and Environment 175, p. 106787. ISSN: 0360­1323. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.106787. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0360132320301451.
31. Karava, P, T Strathopoulos, and A K Athienitis (2011). “Airflow assessment in cross­
ventilated buildings with operable façade elements”. In: Building and Environment
46.1, pp. 266–279. ISSN: 03601323. DOI: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2010.07.022. URL:
https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2- s2.0- 77956229936&origin=
inward&txGid=c74d7edfc199f8a3b30d914633ae3dea.
32. Lan, L et al. (2011). “Effects of Thermal Discomfort in an Office on Perceived Air
Quality, SBS Symptoms, Physiological Responses and Human Performance”. eng.
In: Indoor Air 21.5, pp. 376–390. ISSN: 16000668, 09056947. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-
0668.2011.00714.x. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/537f0fea74bed2fd21005c36.
33. Leaman, A and B Bordass (2006). Productivity in Buildings: the Killer Variables.
Taylor and Francis Group. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net / profile / Derek -
Clements- Croome/publication/320567205_Creating_the_Productive_Workplace/
links/59ee65540f7e9b369575a18b/Creating-the-Productive-Workplace.pdf.
34. luce (2024). “Molds In Workplaces: The Health Risks and Disadvantages”. In: luce.
URL: https://www.luce.sg/blog/molds-in-workplaces.
35. Milton, D K (2000). “Risk of Sick Leave Associated with Outdoor Air Supply Rate, Hu­
midification, and Occupant Complaints : Sick Leave and Building Ventilation”. In: In­
door Air 10.4, pp. 212–221. ISSN: 16000668­09056947. DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0668.
2000.010004212.x. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/54469a92aa6842c1042553ab.
36. Murphy, J and B Bradley (2005). “CO2­Based Demand­Controlled Ventilation with
ASHRAE Standard 62.1­2004”. In: Trane 34.5. URL: https : / / www . trane . com /
content / dam / Trane / Commercial / global / products - systems / education - training /
engineers-newsletters/standards-codes/admapn017en_1005.pdf.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
57
==PAGE:68==
37. Niemelä, R et al. (2002). “The effect of air temperature on labour productivity in call
centres—a case study”. In: Energy and Buildings 34.8. REHVA Scientific, pp. 759–
764. ISSN: 0378­7788. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7788(02)00094-4. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778802000944.
38. ourlinQ (2023). Productivity vs Performance, Differences, and Measuring. URL: https:
//ourlinq.com/blog/productivity-vs-performance/.
39. Park, J S and C H Yoon (2011). “The Effects of Outdoor Air Supply Rate on Work
Performance During 8­h Work Period”. eng. In: Indoor Air 21.4, pp. 284–290. ISSN:
09056947, 16000668. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.2010.00700.x. URL: https://findit.
dtu.dk/en/catalog/5441dd73acc4e2154d34c99d.
40. Pritchard, R D (Nov. 1990). “Measuring and Improving Organizational Productivity:
A Practical Guide”. In: URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:106559504.
41. Ryd, H and D P Wyon (1970). Methods of Evaluating Human Stress due to Climate.
eng. Vol. 1970:D06, 42 s. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/58945a6f8040e5ab45000e00.
42. Seppänen, O and W J Fisk (June 2004a). “A Model to Estimate the Cost Effective­
ness of the Indoor Environment Improvements in Office Work”. In: ASHRAE Trans­
actions 111.2. ISSN: 0001­2505. URL: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/875736.
43. —
(2004b). “Summary of Human Responses to Ventilation”. In: Indoor Air, Sup­
plement 14.SUPPL. 7. Cited by: 185; All Open Access, Bronze Open Access, Green
Open Access, pp. 102–118. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.2004.00279.x. URL: https://
www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-20844434666&doi=10.1111%2fj.1600-
0668.2004.00279.x&partnerID=40&md5=68feab51f70987187893c7873b76fa04.
44. Seppänen, O, W J Fisk, and D Faulkner (June 2003). “Cost Benefit Analysis of the
Night­Time Ventilative Cooling in Office Building”. In: URL: https://www.osti.gov/
biblio/813396.
45. —
(2005). “Control of Temperature for Health and Productivity in Offices”. In:
Ashrae Transactions 111, pp. 680–686. ISSN: 00012505. URL: https://findit.dtu.
dk/en/catalog/543f58d7acc4e2154d5b65d0.
46. Seppänen, O, W J Fisk, and Q H Lei (2006a). “Effect of Temperature on Task Per­
formance in Office Environment”. In: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. URL:
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45g4n3rv#authors.
47. —
(2006b). “Ventilation and Performance in Office Work”. In: Indoor Air 16.1,
pp. 28–36. ISSN: 16000668­09056947. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.2005.00394.x.
URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/543f8995acc4e2154d6a00ac.
48. Sherman, M and D Grimsrud (Oct. 1980). “Measurement of infiltration using fan
pressurization and weather data”. In: NASA STI/Recon Technical Report N. URL:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/246790995_Measurement_of_infiltration_
using_fan_pressurization_and_weather_data.
49. Statistikbanken (2019). LONS30: Løn Efter Område, Sektor, Aflønningsform, Løn­
modtagergruppe, Lønkomponenter og Køn. URL: https://www.statistikbanken.dk/
statbank5a/selectvarval/define.asp?PLanguage=0&subword=tabsel&MainTable=
LONS30&PXSId=192718&tablestyle=&ST=SD&buttons=0.
50. —
(2022). Fravær efter sektor, fraværsårsag, tid, køn og fraværsindikator. URL:
https://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/selectvarval/saveselections.asp.
58
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:69==
51. Toftum, J (Aug. 2021). Load Calculations ­ Lecture Note, 11221 Ventilation and Cli­
matic Systems.
52. Toftum, J et al. (2021). “Development of a tool to predict the socio­economic con­
sequences of better air quality and temperature control in classrooms”. In: Energy
and Buildings 250, p. 111274. ISSN: 0378­7788. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enbuild.2021.111274. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0378778821005582.
53. Wargocki, P, D P Wyon, and P O Fanger (2000). “Productivity is Affected by the Air
Quality in Offices”. eng. In: Proceedings of Healthy Buildings 2000, pp. 635–640.
URL: https://www.aivc.org/resource/productivity-affected-air-quality-offices.
54. —
(2004). “The Performance and Subjective Responses of Call­Center Opera­
tors with New and Used Supply Air Filters at Two Outdoor Air Supply Rates”. eng. In:
Indoor Air 14.Suppl. 8, pp. 7–16. ISSN: 16005554, 09085920, 16000668, 09056947.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.2004.00304.x. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
537f0d257401dbcc120097dd.
55. Wargocki, P et al. (1999). “Perceived Air Quality, Sick Building Syndrome (SBS)
Symptoms and Productivity in an Office with Two Different Pollution Loads”. eng. In:
Indoor Air 9.3, pp. 165–179. ISSN: 16000668, 09056947. DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.
1999.t01-1-00003.x. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/537f103574bed2fd21009df9.
56. Wargocki, P et al. (Jan. 2006). REHVA Guidebook No. 6 ­ Indoor Climate and
Productivity in Offices ­ How to Integrate Productivity in Life­Cycle Cost Analysis
of Building Services. ISBN: 978­2­9600468­5­4. URL: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/344374247_REHVA_Guidebook_No_6_-_Indoor_Climate_and_
Productivity_in_Offices_-_How_to_Integrate_Productivity_in_Life-Cycle_Cost_
Analysis_of_Building_Services.
57. WBDG (2016). Codes and Standards Development. URL: https://www.wbdg.org/
resources/codes-and-standards-development.
58. Woods, J E (Oct. 1989). “Cost Avoidance and Productivity in Owning and Operating
Buildings”. In: Occupational medicine (Philadelphia, Pa.) 4, pp. 753–770. URL: https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/20641795_Cost_avoidance_and_productivity_
in_owning_and_operating_buildings.
59. Wyon, D P and P Wargocki (2006). Room Temperatures on Office Work. 2. Tay­
lor and Francis Group, pp. 181–192. URL: https : / / findit . dtu . dk / en / catalog /
537f0d227401dbcc12009591.
60. Zemitis, J, A Borodinecs, and M Frolova (2016). “Measurements of moisture pro­
duction caused by various sources”. In: Energy and Buildings 127, pp. 884–891.
ISSN: 0378­7788. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . enbuild . 2016 . 06 . 045. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778816305345.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
59
==PAGE:70==
60
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:71==
A
Literature Review ­ Screening
Figure A.1: Literature review ­ screening process.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.2: Literature review ­ screening process.
62
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.3: Literature review ­ screening process.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
63
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.4: Literature review ­ screening process.
64
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.5: Literature review ­ screening process.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
65
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.6: Literature review ­ screening process.
66
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.7: Literature review ­ screening process.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
67
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.8: Literature review ­ screening process.
68
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.9: Literature review ­ screening process.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
69
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.10: Literature review ­ screening process.
70
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.11: Literature review ­ screening process.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
71
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.12: Literature review ­ screening process.
72
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:83==
B
Calculation of weighted average
B.1
Temperature and productivity
To determine the weighted average productivity level for each operative temperature in­
terval, two averages within each interval were calculated: the average value of increasing
productivity values and the average value of decreasing productivity values.
The highest productivity level, identified at 21.8°C, served as the reference for calculating
average values for the two intervals within IEQ­Category I. Average productivity values
within the remaining categories were calculated according to the temperature intervals
presented in Table B.1.
Table B.1: Calculated average productivity levels within each IEQ­Category for operative
temperature.
Temperature
Average, Pmean,1, Pmean,2
Maximum
Minimum
Difference, ∆1, ∆2
[°C]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
IEQI
21.0 ­ 21.8
99.89
99.91
99.83
0.08
21.8 ­ 25.5
99.09
99.91
97.64
2.27
IEQII
20.0 ­ 21.0
99.63
99.81
99.40
0.41
25.5 ­ 26.0
97.30
97.53
97.07
0.46
IEQIII
19.0 ­ 20.0
98.96
99.33
98.54
0.79
26.0 ­ 27.0
96.38
96.95
95.79
1.16
N/A
<19.0
97.86
98.43
97.23
1.20
>27.0
95.01
95.65
94.35
1.30
Initially, normalized weights were assigned to each category with the following method:
NWn =
∆2
∆1 · Pmean,2
∆2
∆1 · Pmean,2 + Pmean,1
(B.1)
where:
NWn is the normalized weight for the given category, n [­]
∆1 is the difference in values for the increasing productivity interval [%]
∆2 is the difference in values for the decreasing productivity interval [%]
Pmean,1 is the average value for the increasing productivity interval [%]
Pmean,2 is the average value for the decreasing productivity interval [%]
The normalized weights for each category were calculated as:
NW1 =
2.27
0.08 · 99.09
2.27
0.08 · 99.09 + 99.91 = 0.966
(B.2)
NW2 =
0.46
0.41 · 97.30
0.46
0.41 · 97.30 + 99.63 = 0.523
(B.3)
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
73
==PAGE:84==
NW3 =
1.16
0.79 · 96.38
1.16
0.79 · 96.38 + 98.96 = 0.588
(B.4)
NW4 =
1.30
1.20 · 95.01
1.30
1.20 · 95.01 + 97.86 = 0.513
(B.5)
From the normalized weights, the weighted average was determined for each category
with the following method:
WAn = NWn · Pmean,2 + (1 −NWn) · Pmean,1
(B.6)
where:
WAn is the weighted average for the given category, n [%]
The weighted average for each category was calculated as:
WA1 = 0.966 · 99.09% + (1 −0.966) · 99.89% = 99.12%
(B.7)
WA2 = 0.523 · 97.30% + (1 −0.523) · 99.63% = 98.41%
(B.8)
WA3 = 0.588 · 96.38% + (1 −0.588) · 98.96% = 97.44%
(B.9)
WA4 = 0.513 · 95.01% + (1 −0.513) · 97.86% = 96.40%
(B.10)
Since the aggregated productivity level was assumed to be the combined effect from short­
term sick leave and the greater effect from either operative temperature or ventilation, as
per Section 4.5.4, it is crucial for the estimated productivity levels to be comparable. In
this context, it means that effects from operative temperature and ventilation should have
the same baseline, assuming 100 % productivity when the temperature or ventilation falls
within Category I.
To ensure this alignment between operative temperature and ventilation, the weighted
average for the categories was scaled accordingly, following the method:
SAn =
WAn
WAmax
· 100%
(B.11)
where:
SAn is the scaled average for the given category, n [%]
WAn is the weighted average for the given category, n [%]
WAmax is the highest value of the calculated weighted averages, in this case WA1 [%]
The scaled average productivity values for each category were calculated as:
SA1 = 99.12%
99.12% · 100% = 100.00%
(B.12)
74
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:85==
SA2 = 98.41%
99.12% · 100% = 99.28%
(B.13)
SA3 = 97.44%
99.12% · 100% = 98.31%
(B.14)
SA4 = 96.40%
99.12% · 100% = 97.26%
(B.15)
B.2
Short­term sick leave and productivity
The derived productivity loss from short­term sick leave due to varying ventilation rates
were calculated using Equation 4.10. The values were translated to an attendance rate,
simply referred to as ”Productivity”, as seen in Table B.2.
Table B.2: Calculated productivity levels within each IEQ­Category for short­term sick
leave.
Ventilation Rate
[L/s­person]
Productivity loss
[%]
Productivity
[%]
IEQI
10.0
2.11
97.89
IEQII
7.0
2.28
97.72
IEQIII
4.0
2.48
97.52
IEQIV
2.5
2.58
97.42
To ensure alignment between productivity loss from short­term sick leave and productivity
loss from operative temperature and IAQ, the values were scaled, following the method:
SPn =
Pn
Pmax
· 100%
(B.16)
where:
SPn is the scaled productivity for the given category, n [%]
Pn is the productivity at the given category, n [%]
Pmax is the highest value of the calculated productivity levels, in this case the value for
Category IEQI.
The scaled productivity values for each category were calculated as:
SP1 = 97.89%
97.89% · 100% = 100.00%
(B.17)
SP2 = 97.72%
97.89% · 100% = 99.83%
(B.18)
SP3 = 97.52%
97.89% · 100% = 99.62%
(B.19)
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
75
==PAGE:86==
SP4 = 97.52%
97.89% · 100% = 99.52%
(B.20)
76
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:87==
C
Hourly wage in Denmark
The average hourly wage per employee in the year 2022, teenagers and students ex­
cluded, are presented in Table C.1 (Statistikbanken (2019)).
Table C.1: Hourly wages per employee in Denmark divided by region in 2022.
Region
Hourly, average wage per employee
[DKK/h]
All of Denmark
292.97
Capital
320.25
Zealand
273.06
South of Denmark
276.45
Central Jutland
280.15
North of Jutland
268.32
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
77
==PAGE:88==
D
Energy sources and costs
The costs associated with the various energy units presented in Table D.1 are national
average values employed from LCCbyg.
Table D.1: Annual costs of various energy units.
Energy
Annual cost
[DKK/kWh/year]
Heating, district
0.52
Heating, oil boiler
1.11
Heating, natural gas
0.65
Heating, pillars
0.40
Electricity
1.77
78
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:89==
E
Simulation Results and Comparisons
E.1
Annual operative temperature distributions for varying ven­
tilation types
Figure E.1: Annual operative temperature distribution with VAV as selected ventilation
system.
Figure E.2: Annual operative temperature distribution with natural, single­sided ventilation
as selected method.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
79
==PAGE:90==
Figure E.3: Annual operative temperature distribution with natural, cross­flow ventilation
as selected method.
80
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:91==
E.2
Comparison of annual distributions of operative tempera­
tures and CO2­concentrations
Table E.1:
Comparison of annual distributions of operative temperatures and CO2­
concentrations between the tool and IDA ICE.
Operative Temperature [%]
CO2­concentration [%]
Sim. No.
Software
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
N/A
IEQI
IEQII
IEQIII
IEQIV
CAV
1
Tool
30.4
18.9
48.1
2.6
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
18.0
9.5
25.6
46.9
94.8
5.2
0.0
0.0
2
Tool
33.6
9.4
54.5
2.5
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
16.6
8.3
17.8
57.3
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3
Tool
37.8
4.0
55.8
2.4
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
17.5
7.3
19.9
55.3
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
VAV
4
Tool
30.4
18.9
48.1
2.6
59.9
40.1
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
15.9
10.3
25.0
48.8
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5
Tool
37.8
4.0
55.8
2.4
90.0
10.0
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
11.5
11.3
26.9
50.3
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6
Tool
37.8
4.0
55.8
2.4
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
10.8
13.4
28.3
47.5
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Single­sided
7
Tool
22.7
14.9
33.2
29.2
16.4
44.4
34.7
4.5
IDA ICE
24.2
6.1
8.5
61.2
83.5
13.1
3.4
0.0
8
Tool
30.3
13.3
47.1
9.3
99.7
0.3
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
20.4
5.5
8.5
65.6
99.9
0.1
0.0
0.0
9
Tool
36.5
8.8
50.0
4.7
85.0
14.0
1.0
0.0
IDA ICE
21.2
6.4
8.1
64.3
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Cross­flow
10
Tool
32.0
17.6
28.8
21.6
89.1
9.5
1.2
0.2
IDA ICE
14.1
8.3
6.5
71.1
98.0
2.0
0.0
0.0
11
Tool
30.3
13.4
47.2
9.1
99.7
0.3
0.0
0.0
IDA ICE
10.5
8.8
6.7
74.0
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
12
Tool
37.8
8.6
49.6
4.0
97.6
2.2
0.2
0.0
IDA ICE
7.9
9.4
7.8
74.9
100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
81
==PAGE:92==
E.3
Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions
Figure E.4: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with CAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Figure E.5: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with CAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
82
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:93==
Figure E.6: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with VAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Figure E.7: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with VAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
83
==PAGE:94==
Figure E.8: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with VAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Figure E.9: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with Single­Sided
ventilation as selected method, plotted by hourly average.
84
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:95==
Figure E.10: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with Single­Sided
ventilation as selected method, plotted by hourly average.
Figure E.11: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with Single­Sided
ventilation as selected method, plotted by hourly average.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
85
==PAGE:96==
Figure E.12: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with Cross­Flow
ventilation as selected method, plotted by hourly average.
Figure E.13: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with Cross­Flow
ventilation as selected method, plotted by hourly average..
86
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:97==
Figure E.14: Comparison of annual operative temperature distributions with Cross­Flow
ventilation as selected method, plotted by hourly average.
E.4
Comparison of annual CO2­concentration distributions
Figure E.15: Comparison of annual CO2 −concentration distributions with CAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
87
==PAGE:98==
Figure E.16: Comparison of annual CO2 −concentration distributions with CAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Figure E.17: Comparison of annual CO2 −concentration distributions with VAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
88
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:99==
Figure E.18: Comparison of annual CO2 −concentration distributions with VAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Figure E.19: Comparison of annual CO2 −concentration distributions with VAV as se­
lected ventilation system, plotted by hourly average.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
89
==PAGE:100==
Figure E.20: Comparison of annual CO2 −concentration distributions with VAV system
and single­sided ventilation, plotted by hourly average.
Figure E.21: Comparison of annual CO2 −concentration distributions with VAV system
and single­sided ventilation, plotted by hourly average.
90
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
==PAGE:101==
Figure E.22: Comparison of annual CO2 −concentration distributions with VAV system
and single­sided ventilation, plotted by hourly average.
Socioeconomic Consequences of Indoor Climate Renovations in Office Buildings
91
==PAGE:102==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://sustain.dtu.dk/en
