==PAGE:1==
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and
video of PV solar panels
Master Thesis
Josep Blazquez Folch, 2024
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Photovoltaic (PV) module diagnosis has become increasingly important due to the growth
of solar cells plants worldwide. This thesis presents a methodology for developing detec-
tion neural networks for localizing and classifying artifacts on polycrystalline PV mod-
ules in real-world conditions, using bounding boxes.
These PV modules images are
captured by a drone mounted with an Electroluminescence camera flying over a full PV
plant. The dataset used contains 36062 PV modules, and only 2.8% defective cells. This
highly imbalanced dataset represents real-world conditions. Because of the challenge
of the solar cell diagnosis task, we used Conformal Risk Control, and data augmenta-
tion across datasets to improve the robustness of the presented neural network. The
proposed method is a Faster R-CNN able to detect 60.80% of the defects on testing con-
ditions. Additionally, several topics are discussed in this work, including the use of an
active learning loop, multimodality, datasets used by prior works, conformal prediction for
object detection, and standardization of artifacts in PV modules.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Outline of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
PV module technology, failures and measurement methods . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Detection methods based on Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Regularization techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4
Handling imbalanced datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.5
Conformal Prediction and Conformal Risk Control for object detection
. . . 18
2.6
Active Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.7
Multimodality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
Related Work
23
3.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Methodology
29
4.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Data imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
Network architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.5
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.6
Hyperparameter tuning and regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.7
Conformal Risk Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Results and discussions
39
5.1
Data Imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Architecture selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.4
Hyperparameter tuning and regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.5
Testing the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Conclusions
51
7
Future Work
53
Bibliography
55
A Code
59
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
With the increasing number of photovoltaic (PV) plants worldwide, it has become crucial
to prevent power losses caused by defects and failures in solar panels. Timely detection
and repair of artifacts is critical to maintaining the optimal performance of solar panels.
This thesis aims to develop an automated diagnostic system for the detection of arti-
facts on panels using electroluminescence (EL) images acquired by drones mounted with
cameras. This automated diagnostic system uses Computer Vision methods based on
detection using bounding boxes.
1.1
Project goals
The goals of the project are:
• Perform localization of the defect on the PV modules. We develop detection meth-
ods based on deep learning using bounding boxes.
• Achieve better and more robust results than the prior art. Novel methods are re-
searched and used to develop more accurate and robust detection models.
• Deliver reliable and complete predictions. The predictions include the Safety and
Power loss categories listed in the “Review of Failures of Photovoltaic Modules” [1].
Also, Conformal Risk Control is performed to deliver predictions with a guaranteed
confidence level.
1.2
Contributions
The contributions of the project are:
• Research and implementation of methods for mitigating extreme class imbalances.
– Methods for handling data imbalance.
– Data augmentation methods.
– Synthetic data augmentation approach. Performed using Cut, Paste and Learn
[2] across different datasets. So, inserting defects from external datasets in
non-defective PV modules from our dataset.
• Research and implementation of methods for delivering more reliable and accurate
predictions.
– Predictions including the standardized Safety and Power loss categories listed
in the “Review of Failures of Photovoltaic Modules” [1].
– Regularization techniques.
– Conformal Risk Control.
• Research, implementation, and fine-tuning of detection neural networks.
• Discussion of various topics.
– Conformal Prediction.
– An active learning loop.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
1
==PAGE:8==
– Multimodality.
• Release of a scalable and modular code to replicate the experiments performed in
this project.
1.3
Outline of the project
The thesis project begins by researching photovoltaic (PV) module technology, failures,
and measurement methods. This allows us to understand the requirements and con-
text of the PV module diagnosis task. Later, research on state-of-the-art computer vision
detection methods is continued in the same Section 2.
In Section 3, the Related Work on the automated diagnostic systems for solar panels is
examined and discussed. Also, datasets of electroluminescence (EL) imaging publically
available are included, discussed, and summarized.
Based on the research and discussions from previous sections, in Section 4, the Method-
ology for the development of an appropriate detection method for delivering state-of-the-
art performance according to detection metrics is explained. Also, the experiments per-
formed on the thesis are presented.
The Results and Discussions of these experiments are available in Section 5.
Finally, the Conclusions and Future Work are in Sections 6 and 7 respectively.
2
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory
Understanding the complex challenge of detecting defects and failures in solar cells re-
quires researching the solar cell’s technology, the measurement methods for forecasting
its performance, and detection techniques for localizing the defects on the photovoltaic
(PV) modules. In this section, these concepts are explained.
2.1
PV module technology, failures and measurement
methods
Today’s statistics show degradation rates of the rated power for crystalline silicon PV
modules of 0.8% each year [1]. This is due to all the defects that appear on the solar cells
during their lifespan. These defects and failures can appear in multiple ways on the PV
module, and each one can be detected using a measurement method that is presented
below.
2.1.1
PV module technology
In PV module, a cell is the smallest semiconductor unit, having a voltage associated with
a single junction. This foundational building block serves as the elemental component in
the creation of solar modules. A string of cells contains a group of cells interconnected
in series. To prevent potential issues affecting cells or strings, two or more strings of
cells are sometimes connected in parallel with a bypass diode, creating an electrically
independent module. Modules are electrically independent, isolating from any cells or
string failure outside their reach. The connection of cells in series to form a string is done
by a cell interconnect ribbon. At a cell level, gridlines or fingers create an array of lines
to collect the current generated by an individual cell. The current from the gridlines are
collected in the busbars. These busbars are overlapped by the cell interconnect ribbon.
These elements can be found in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Elements of a PV module [3].
In the context of detecting PV module failures, it is critical to differentiate between the
two cell crystal technologies, the monocrystalline (or mono) and the multicrystalline (or
polycrystalline, poly, or multi) cells. Monocrystalline cells are made from a single crystal,
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
3
==PAGE:10==
which has a uniform black appearance, while polycrystalline cells are made from multiple
crystal structures, forming a less uniform appearance. The difference between the two
cell crystal technologies can be observed in Figure 2.2.
(a) Monocrystalline cell.
(b) Multicrystalline cell.
Figure 2.2: Mono and multi PV modules captured using Electroluminescence imaging
technology.
2.1.2
PV failures and defects
PV module flaws can be divided into failures and defects, according to Köntges et al.
definition [1].
On the one hand, a PV module failure degrades the module power or creates a safety
issue. So, cosmetic issues are not considered a PV module failure.
On the other hand, a defect is everything in a PV module that is not as it is expected to
be. It may imply a PV module failure or not, and does not necessarily result in a safety or
power loss for the PV module.
These defects or failures can be categorized depending on the power loss they cause and
their safety-related issues. In the task of detection of defects and failures, it is essential
to use a standardized way to deliver the failures power loss and safety issues prediction.
The categories defined by Köntges et al. [1] are a great standard, so all the researchers in
the field can speak in the same terms. Otherwise, each automated diagnosis system uses
different categories of failures, different names, or different criteria on the failure definition
for delivering the forecast of the defects detected in PV modules. The safety-related
failures categories are available in Table 2.1 and the definition of power loss categories
in Table 2.2.
Safety category
Description
A
Failure has no effect on safety.
B(f,e,m)
Failure may cause fire (f), failure may cause electrical shock (e),
failure may cause physical danger (m), if a follow-up failure and/or
a second failure occurs.
C(f,e,m)
Failure causes direct safety problem (definition of f,e,m see B).
Table 2.1: List of safety categories [1].
4
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:11==
Power loss category
Description
A
Power loss below detection limit <3%.
B
Exponential-shaped power loss degradation over time.
C
Linear-shaped power loss degradation over time.
D
Power loss degradation saturates over time.
E
Degradation in steps over time.
F
Miscellaneous degradation types over time.
Table 2.2: Definition of power loss categories [1].
2.1.3
Photovoltaic modules’ measurement methods
The detection of these failures and defects requires the use of measurement tools and
methods for acquiring data on the PV modules. There are three main PV measurement
methods.
• I-V characteristics as a diagnostic tool.
• Image-based methods.
– Thermography imaging.
– Electroluminescence imaging.
– UV fluorescence imaging.
• Visual inspection.
I-V characteristics as a diagnostic tool
Measurements of module I-V characteristics determine short-circuit current, open-circuit
voltage, and other parameters. These characteristics allow us to acquire large information
on the state of the PV module in real-time, giving a lot of insight that other methods are
not capable of. The failures/defects types detected by this diagnostic tool are very broad.
Thermography imaging
The thermography imaging technique most commonly used is thermography under steady-
state conditions, as it allows the analysis of PV modules in the field under working con-
ditions, while performed on a sunny cloudless day. There are two more thermography
imaging methods named pulse thermography and lock-in thermography, but both tech-
niques need to be done under lab conditions.
Thermography or infrared (TIR) imaging is a non-destructive measurement technique that
provides fast, and real-time images of PV modules. It is a contactless method and re-
quires the use of an appropriate IR camera that measures the temperature distribution of
the solar cell. The measurements can be performed for individual PV modules and for
large-scale systems. The large-scale measurement of cells allows us to defect anomaly
patterns like one module, row, sub-string, or cell warmer than others.
Electroluminescence imaging
Electroluminescence (EL) imaging methods have become increasingly popular.
This
method is usually performed in a dark environment by silicon-charged coupled device
(CCD) cameras, which radiate around 1150 nm. EL images are commonly captured in-
doors or outdoors during nighttime to avoid saturation due to the sunlight. This saturation
happens because the crystalline silicon luminescence signal is several orders of magni-
tude lower than sunlight. However, recent EL measurement methods allow capturing EL
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
5
==PAGE:12==
images during daylight by applying an electrical bias to the PV modules, causing them to
emit light that can be captured by InGaAs sensors. Moreover, methods like the drone-
based system able to acquire EL images released by Alves dos Reis Benatto et al. [4]
have sufficient diagnostic information to identify faults associated with power loss during
daylight.
Using EL imaging, it is especially possible to detect cell cracks in photovoltaic modules.
Other defects/failures can be detected too, as listed in Table 2.3.
Failure/Defect Type
Safety
Power loss
Crack A
B
C
Crack B
B(f)
C
Crack C
B(f)
C
Cross crack line/cross crack
B(f)
A
Finger failure A
A
A
Finger failure B, finger interruptions along cell cracks
B(f)
C
Finger failure C, gridfinger interruptions
B(f)
C
Humidity corrosion
A
F
Shunt fault
B(f)
A
Disconnected cell interconnect
B(f)
A
Table 2.3: Defects and failures measurable by EL imaging [1].
The main types of detectable cracks on EL images. The electrically connected cracks,
that do not influence the current flow over the crack are named Cracks A. Then, the cracks
that influence the current flow are named Cracks B. Finally, cracks that completely isolate
part of the cell are named Cracks C. Also, Finger failures (FF) are measurable with EL
images. FF are interruptions along the grid lines, also known as the “fingers”, of the cell.
Finger failures of type B are finger interruptions along cell cracks [1].
UV fluorescence imaging
Ultraviolet (UV) fluorescence imaging is a less common but easier-to-use method. The
PV modules must be sited outdoors for at least one and a half years for the method to
be effective. It is performed on cameras that work at 315 nm UV light and allows the
measurement of the discoloration, cracks, and degradation of PV modules.
Visual Inspection
Visual inspection includes the human experts’ inspection and the use of visible-light cam-
eras. It gives a lot of insight into failures and defects in a PV module. Nevertheless, not
all defects are visibly inspectable, but for the ones that are, it is essential to rely on the
assessment of an expert to confirm the defect or failure detected by the system.
A summary of failure and defect types, the measurement methods that can capture them,
and if they are visible inspectable is available in Table 2.4.
6
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:13==
Failure/Defect Type
Measurement methods
Visibly Inspectable
Cracks
I-V, TIR, EL, UV
Yes
Finger failure
EL, UV
No
Delamination
I-V, TIR
Yes
Diodes associated failures
I-V
No
Corrosion
I-V, EL
Yes
Cell interconnect
I-V, TIR, EL, UV
No
Patterns in arrays of cells Y/N
TIR, EL
Some
Table 2.4: Defects and failures and measurement methods summary.
PV module defects have to be checked by a human expert to determine if they require to
be replaced because are a safety thread or their power efficiency has been reduced. Tak-
ing this into account, we find that adding this human expertise to the automatic detection
method is essential, as the human is already part of the assessment and replacement of
the PV modules. In Section 2.6, we explain our theoretical approach to this challenge.
Our summary of the measurement methods is as follows:
• TIR is especially useful when detecting patterns in the array of PV modules.
• Most of the UV fluorescence measurable defects are also measurable by EL imaging
methods.
• Visual inspection by an expert is useful to validate the detected defects and failures
by the automated diagnosis systems.
Also, studies by solar cell enterprises report some interesting insights:
• 0.44% of the modules were returned after an average deployment of 5 years, with
the majority (66%) of these returned because of problems with interconnections in
the laminate [1].
• The vast majority of the returns were associated with failures that can usually be
identified visually, though there could be bias in this data since modules with no
visual defects would be harder to identify by the customer [1].
2.2
Detection methods based on Deep Learning
An automated diagnosis tool for PV modules can be built using the measurements ex-
plained before. If we only count on the I-V characteristics of the module, a Machine
Learning approach would be suitable for the diagnosis. If we use imaging techniques,
image processing methods would be required. The first image processing methods used
handcrafted techniques. Later on, Machine Learning algorithms became a standard for
any image classification problem. Nowadays, Deep Learning methods are the state-of-
the-art for these tasks. Following, we explain the Theory behind these algorithms and
how they can be used for performing an automated diagnosis of the PV module.
Deep Learning to diagnose PV module tasks has been approached in different ways, as
explained in Section 3. Now, we focus on the methods we use for performing bounding
box detection of PV module defects and failures.
There are two types of detection neural networks.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
7
==PAGE:14==
On one hand, single-stage detectors take an input image, create a feature map, and com-
pute the bounding box coordinates and class probabilities for each box as a regression
and classification problem. Single-stage detectors are fast and have a simple architec-
ture, because the input image is passed only once through the model.
On the other hand, there are two-stage detectors. These methods are based on region
proposal networks (RPN). Two-stage detectors create anchor box candidates and then,
the model classifies these proposals into the corresponding classes and modifies the
proposed anchor box coordinates. Two-stage detectors have a more complex architecture
and are slower than single-stage detectors, but can reach higher accuracy rates [5].
2.2.1
Backbones
Doing detections on raw images is a thoughtful task, so pre-processed inputs are required
to improve the results. The pre-processing step used to be performed using image pro-
cessing handcrafted methods. Nowadays, neural networks allow having feature maps
and detection models can infer great detections from these features maps. The neu-
ral networks (NN) to create these feature maps from raw images are called backbones.
These backbones, when connected to a deep learning detection model, allow us to train
models end-to-end.
To build up backbones, we take classification models, and we cut the fully-connected
layers and the softmax classifier to end up with an output of feature maps with high-level
features.
A popular backbone is the ResNet modified version named ResNet-50-FPN [6]. The
ResNet-50 Feature Pyramid Network is a deep learning model that creates feature maps
at different resolutions. The combination of upsampling and adding up the outputs of
the ResNet at different layers generates multiple feature maps at different resolutions.
ResNet-50 FPN architecture is shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: ResNet-50 Feature Pyramid Network [7].
2.2.2
SSD
Single Shot MultiBox Detector (SSD) [8] is a single-stage detection neural network, similar
to You Only Look Once (YOLO) [9] detector. The main characteristic of SSD is that the
model creates different feature maps at different resolutions, and then, a Detection Head
is used to create a set of detections at each resolution, as shown in Figure 2.4. For each
feature map, the SSD creates a set of default boxes over different aspect ratios, scales,
and locations. The whole process can be summarized in three stages: Feature Extraction,
Detection Heads, and Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS).
8
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: SSD block diagram [10].
The Feature Extraction is the pass of the input image through the model backbone. Then,
SSD creates a set of anchor boxes for its feature maps of different sizes. These bounding
box candidates are encoded as:
S × S × B × (4 + C)
(2.1)
where S is the size of the feature map (also called grid), e.g., 38x38, 19x19, 10x10. B
is the number of bounding boxes per grid, C is the number of classes and 4 is for the
bounding box coordinates. C encodes the class probability (or confidence score for each
detection). At each cell of every feature map, the model creates B predefined anchor
boxes with a default aspect ratio and size. The Detection Head regressor predicts offsets
that modify the initial predefined anchor box candidates.
The model generates 7308 detections per class, so the model needs to select the best
anchor boxes. The Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) does that. For each anchor box,
it computes the Interaction over Union (IoU) with the other anchor boxes of the same
class and if there is a match, defined as an IoU over 0.5, the anchor box with the higher
confidence is selected. The Interaction over Union is computed as:
IoU = Area of Interaction of the boxes
Area of Union of the boxes
(2.2)
For training, there is a matching strategy to choose which prediction corresponds to each
ground truth box. For every ground truth box, the mode selects all the predictions with an
IoU over the threshold of 0.5 as a match.
2.2.3
R-CNN, Fast R-CNN and Faster R-CNN
Region Based Convolutional Neural Network (R-CNN), Faster R-CNN, and Faster R-CNN
are three region-based methods, also named two-stage detectors. First was R-CNN, then
an enhanced version named Fast R-CNN was released and finally, the Faster R-CNN was
published. Unlike SSD, region-based methods perform a preliminary region of interest
proposal, instead of directly forecasting the final bounding box regions.
R-CNN [11] performs a selective search [12] to extract all the Regions of Interest (ROI).
The Selective search algorithm is based on grouping super-pixels. These regions are
warped and passed through a CNN that classifies each region into a class. It is a very
slow algorithm because it requires passing every single proposal into a CNN to get a clas-
sification and for each pass to do the backpropagation to train that same neural network.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
9
==PAGE:16==
Moreover, the selective search cannot be trained as part of an end-to-end network, which
is a problem if we want to optimize the performance of the Region Proposal algorithm.
Fast R-CNN adds a bounding box offset regressor and it is faster than R-CNN. The region
proposal algorithm is the selective search. However, the first step is passing the whole
image through a Convolution neural network to create a feature map. Then, for each ROI
(proposed by the selective search) a projection of the proposal to the feature map is done.
After that, the ROI projected on the feature map is fed into a Region of Interest pooling
layer and two Fully-Connected layers that create a fixed-length ROI feature vector. The
ROI feature vector is the input for the Softmax classifier and the Bounding Box offsets
regressor to predict the final bounding boxes.
Faster R-CNN [13] presents a state-of-the-art detection network that can be trained end-
to-end with its Region Proposal algorithm. Faster R-CNN does not include the selective
search, because it is a non-trainable method and it is a time computational bottleneck.
The Faster R-CNN backbone generates a feature map that the Region Proposal Network
uses to create the anchor boxes. For every pixel in the feature map, the RPN creates
9 anchor boxes with different sizes and an objectiveness score for each of them. The
objectiveness is the probability of the foreground class (object detected). Similar to the
SSD model, Faster R-CNN does not generate the bounding box coordinates, it just adapts
the anchor box proposal coordinates with 4 offsets. A positive anchor is the one with an
IoU over 0.7 with any ground truth box.
To train altogether the RPN and the Fast R-CNN in Figure 2.5, the Faster R-CNN uses
a 4-Step Alternating Training [13]. This Alternating Training includes the training of the
RPN and the Fast R-CNN independently, and the training of the RPN and the Fast R-CNN
freezing some layers.
Figure 2.5: Faster R-CNN blocks diagram [13].
10
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:17==
2.2.4
RetinaNet
Two-stage detectors, like Faster R-CNN, have a state-of-the-art performance but are
slower than one-stage detectors, such as SSD. One-stage detectors have a simpler ar-
chitecture and are faster. The big imbalance between positive (foreground) and negative
(background) classes has proved to be the main cause of the inferior performance of the
one-stage methods. RetinaNet [14] presents the Focal Loss, a loss that focuses on the
hard sample in the dataset and prevents the large number of easy examples from having
a big impact on the training loss, and therefore, on the model training.
If we define the ground truth as y ∈±1 and the model probability output as p ∈[0, 1], we
can compute the standard cross-entropy loss defined as:
CE(p, y) =

−log(p)
if y = 1
−log(1 −p)
otherwise,

(2.3)
Standard cross-entropy loss works great on problems where the classes are balanced.
However, in the detection task, the imbalance between the background class and the rest
of the foreground classes makes the loss very big. Particularly, for those background
examples that are computed as the correct class with a probability around 0.8 or 0.9.
These easy-to-detect objects have a great impact, especially when we have a lot of them,
as the accumulated sum of those losses is not of marginal importance, as seen in Figure
2.6.
The Focal Loss solves this problem by weighing down the easy examples. Using the
same nomenclature as the paper that proposes it:
pt =

p
if y = 1
1 −p
otherwise,

(2.4)
The Focal Loss is:
FL(pt) = −(1 −pt)γlog(pt)
(2.5)
where γ is the weighting down factor of the well-classified examples in Figure 2.6. The
Focal Loss uses a γ = 2 and the Cross-entropy loss a γ = 0. Multiple well-classified
examples can drain the Cross-entropy, while the Focal Loss is way more resistant to
these easy background examples.
Figure 2.6: Cross entropy Loss and Focal Loss [14].
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
11
==PAGE:18==
The RetinaNet architecture is a ResNet with a FPN backbone. The feature maps gener-
ated by the backbone are used as input for the subnetworks in Figure 2.7, the classifier
of the anchor boxes and the regressor for bounding boxes. The anchors are assigned to
ground-truth object boxes using an IoU threshold of 0.5. Similar to the other models, the
detector generates 9 anchor boxes for every pixel on the feature map and the regressor
computes the offsets of these boxes.
Figure 2.7: RetinaNet blocks diagram [14].
2.2.5
FCOS
Fully Convolutional One-Stage (FCOS) [15] detector is a single-shot object detection
model that introduces a unique approach to object detection by utilizing a fully convo-
lutional network. The model generates a set of bounding boxes directly at each spatial
location on the feature map without relying on predefined anchor boxes. FCOS is an-
chor box free, as well as proposal free detector. FCOS model uses a ResNet-50-FPN
backbone, and the architecture is displayed in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: FCOS block diagram [15].
2.2.6
Evaluating a detector
The evaluation metrics for validating the performance of a detector are explained below.
Confusion Matrix
To compute a confusion matrix for the detection problem, we follow these steps.
1. When multiple predictions are overlapping with an IoU equal to or bigger than the
IoU threshold we defined, we keep the one with the highest score for each label.
2. Only predictions with a score equal to or bigger than the score threshold we defined
are considered. Anything that is below this value is discarded.
12
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:19==
3. For each ground-truth box, we compute the IoU with every detected box. A match
is found if both boxes have an IoU greater or equal to the IoU threshold.
4. The list of matches is pruned to remove duplicates (ground-truth boxes that match
with more than one detection box or vice versa). If there are duplicates, the best
match (greater IoU) is always selected.
5. Ground-truth objects that were not detected or predictions that were not matched
with any ground-truth object are counted in the corresponding cell of the confusion
matrix. An example of a confusion matrix is in Table 2.5.
Detections ⇒
Ground truth ⇓
Class 1
Class 2
Class i
Background
Class 1
Class 2
Class i
Background
Table 2.5: Confusion Matrix.
In the Confusion Matrix in Table 2.5, the green cells indicate that the detection was matched
with a ground truth box with the same class. The yellow cells indicate that the detection
was matched with a ground truth box, but the class was incorrect. The orange cells are
the detections that did not match any ground truth box, so the detection had a class, but
the ground truth was just background. The red cells indicate those ground truth boxes that
were not detected by the neural network. The black cell is a non-case scenario because
there are no background bounding boxes in the dataset, and the anchor boxes that have
the class background are ignored when evaluating the model performance.
We defined what we consider a True positive (TP), True negative (TN), False positive
(FP), and False negative (FN) as:
• True positive (TP): We count all the elements in the green cells of the confusion
matrix. We consider as True all the classes except the Background.
• True negatives (TN): These are background elements detected as background, so
the black cell in the confusion matrix. As said before, TN are non-case scenario,
because there are no background bounding boxes in the dataset and the anchor
boxes that have the class background are ignored when evaluating the model per-
formance. We consider TN = 0 from now on.
• False negatives (FN): Ground truth elements not detected. They are in the red cells
in the matrix.
• False Positives (FP): Detections with a positive wrong label or not matched with any
ground truth box. They are the yellow and orange cells.
The first metric we can use is the accuracy. It allows us to see how many elements were
classified right among all the detections and ground truth elements.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN

TN=0
(2.6)
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
13
==PAGE:20==
We evaluate the performance of the detector on the object’s level (so, defects and fail-
ures). There is the possibility to train the detector on a cell level, considering that TN are
the cell images without defects that are classified correctly by not detecting any defect
box. Detection problems can be heavily unbalanced on data classes, so the accuracy
metric alone may not be an enough good indicator of the model performance.
The precision is how many correct detections from all the detections were made. A high
precision indicates that the model is very reliable when it detects an element.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(2.7)
The recall computes the number of correct detections among all the ground-truth ele-
ments. A high recall indicates that the model is showing a high number of detections from
the ground truth.
Sensitivity = Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(2.8)
The Precision and Recall metrics can be combined to explain how our model performs
overall, on what is named the Fscore:
Fscore = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(2.9)
The Fscore is the metric commonly used to evaluate the overall performance of a model.
However, for the PV module diagnosis task, the Precision-Recall tradeoff is beneficial to
be studied because it can be hard to have excellent performance on both metrics.
Mean Average Precision
The mAP (mean Average Precision) is a metric used to evaluate the performance of mod-
els in the COCO dataset [16].
To measure it, we collect all the predictions made for all the classes in every image. Then,
we rank all the images in descending order according to the Precision of the model in
each one of them. With this list, we create the Precision-Recall curve, where each image
is represented on the curve by one point according to the Precision and Recall computed.
Figure 2.9: Precision-Recall curve example [17].
14
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:21==
The Average Precision is the area under the Precision-Recall curve. However, the mAP
is defined as:
mAP =
1
101
X
r∈{0.0,...,1.0}
piter(r)
(2.10)
where:
piter(r) = max
˜r≥r p(˜r)
(2.11)
piter is the interpolated precision. For measuring mAP, 101 values of interpolated precision
are selected, and then the mean is computed.
2.3
Regularization techniques
Regularization techniques are used to prevent deep learning models from overfitting.
Overfitting happens when the algorithm performs great on the training set, but does not
generalize its learning to the validation or test sets. To overcome this problem, several
regulation techniques allow us to improve the performance and robustness of our models,
while allowing it to generalize its learning onto data not seen during the training.
2.3.1
Dropout
Dropout, at each training iteration, randomly removes some nodes in the network along
with all of their incoming and outgoing connections [18]. This removal of nodes changes
every forward pass. Dropout reduces co-adaptation between neurons, making the nodes
more robust.
However, while using dropout, we require more iterations to get to the
model’s convergence.
2.3.2
Batch normalization
Batch normalization allows us to make the models faster on training and more stable
through normalization of the inputs by re-centering and re-scaling them according to the
mean and variance of the dataset. Essentially, batch normalization prevents the internal
covariate shift, and addresses the problem by normalizing the inputs [19].
2.3.3
L2-regularization (Weight decay)
L2-regularization adds a complexity term in the loss function that penalizes large weights
in the model during the training process
Lnew = L + λ
2 W 2
(2.12)
where the hyperparameter λ requires to be optimized because if it is too small, this cancels
the complexity term. While if λ is too large, the model becomes too simple, causing un-
derfitting. The optimal value of lambda produces a model that generalizes well to training,
validation, and test data.
2.3.4
Label smoothing
Label smoothing is a technique to prevent the model from becoming overly confident in
its predictions by introducing noise for the labels. The solution proposed by Szegedy et
al. [20] changes the target probabilities, such that instead of having hard labels like 1 for
the correct class and 0 for the other classes, the labels are smoothed (soft) labels.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
15
==PAGE:22==
p′(y|xi) = (1 −ε)p(y|xi) + ε 1
K
(2.13)
where ε is the smoothness factor hyperparameter and K the number of classes.
One approach to determine the amount of per-class smoothness is the one introduced
by Maher et at. [21], where a teacher network trained with hard one-hot labels is used to
determine the amount of per-class smoothness factor applied to each instance.
2.3.5
Data augmentation
Data augmentation is used to generate new, artificial training examples. Data augmen-
tation techniques can especially be useful when the training dataset is small or very im-
balanced, to prevent the model from seeing the same training images repeatedly. In
the case of imbalanced datasets, data augmentation methods can be combined with the
oversampling approach mentioned in Section 2.4.2.
• Geometric transformations such as horizontal and vertical flipping, rotation, crop-
ping, translation, or affine transformations.
• Adjusting the jitter brightness, contrast or color hue of the image.
• Adding noise (e.g. Gaussian noise) to the image.
• Kernel filters (e.g. blurring or sharping).
• Random erasing, which cuts out a random rectangular part of the image and re-
places it with either random noise or a constant value [22].
• Mixing images. An approach to this method is the one proposed by Dwibedi et al.
[2] and explained in more detail in Section 2.3.5.
One important aspect to consider when choosing transformations is the preservation of
realism of the transformation. This means that we want to preserve a realistic object under
the label after the transformation. For example, if we want to detect dogs and cats, it is
generally safe to do horizontal flipping, but not if we want to detect hand-written digits [23].
Cut, Paste and Learn
Cut, Paste and Learn is a data augmentation method based on mixing images for de-
tection problems. The approach is to copy objects we want to detect from images, to be
pasted over random background pixels for other images. These extracted objects require
a blending step that ‘smoothens’ out the boundary artifacts between the pasted object
and the background (e.g. Gaussian Blurring or Poisson blending).
To make the training algorithm further ignore the effects of blending, the authors synthe-
size the exact same scene with the same object placement and only vary the type of
blending used [2].
Cut, Paste and Learn across datasets for solar cell panels diagnosis
A different approach to Cut, Paste and Learn is to copy objects from an external dataset
and paste them in over random background pixels samples of the images used from
training the neural network.
For the PV module diagnosis task, the training using dataset augmentation policies can
be seen as an increase of the image domain capability of the neural network (NN) over
multicrystalline cell space. A NN trained without data augmentation methods would re-
quire a lot of data diversity to generalize its learning. In the solar cell artifact detection
task, there is a shortage of data diversity as explained in Section 3.2. So, it is mandatory
16
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:23==
to use data augmentation, especially on the minority classes when there is an oversam-
pling strategy. However, data augmentation only creates variations over the training set,
and when the training set is scarce it may not be enough.
The mix of multiple datasets can be beneficial for this task, but it requires having access
to curated and cleaned datasets. The revision of the quality of external datasets and the
possible required re-labeling and cleaning of samples is time-consuming. This leads to
a novel way of selecting samples from external datasets: Just selecting instances and
pasting them over random background pixel images from our dataset.
This data augmentation policy allows the neural network to be trained across datasets
and avoids some of the problems related to the mix of datasets. Especially, when the mix
is done on an image level and not on an object level.
We understand the neural network diagnosis training as an effort to generalize the concept
of a mutlicrystalline cell and the different types of defects and failures that can appear on
them. To reach a NN generalization, the model needs to be trained on the full spectrum of
all the possible multicrystalline cells. A neural network trained without data augmentation
only would perform great on cells and defects very similar to the ones seen during training.
Once data augmentation policies are applied, the model regularizes its performance. But
unless the original dataset is big and contains a lot of diversity, the use of external datasets
is required to reach generalization. For this purpose, we proposed to use ’Cut, Paste and
Learn across datasets’ for the solar cell panels diagnosis task. In Figure 2.10 there is a
diagram displaying how data augmentation across the dataset enlarges the spectrum of
all the possible multicrystalline cells’ image space.
Figure 2.10: Data augmentation and data augmentation across the dataset relation as a
diagram.
2.4
Handling imbalanced datasets
An imbalanced dataset has a very different density of samples between classes. If no
action is taken, the imbalance is the cause of the model’s overfitting on the majority class
and performing badly on the minority class. Methods to mitigate data imbalance are pre-
sented below.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
17
==PAGE:24==
2.4.1
Class weighting
Class weighting assigns different weights to different classes in the loss function, to give
more importance to the minority classes.
2.4.2
Resampling
When getting samples from the dataset to train the model, an ’epoch’ is the whole forward
pass of the training set through the model. Resampling techniques modify the way we take
samples from the training set, sampling them differently. So, not necessarily the whole
training set needs to be passed through the network and examples in the set may be
sampled multiple times. This resampling implies the oversampling of the minority classes
or the undersampling of the majority classes.
Oversampling
Oversampling is creating more samples for the minority class. This creation of samples
implies the duplication of existing samples for the less represented class on the dataset
or the synthetic generation of data for the minority class.
To prevent the model from seeing the same images multiple times during training, it is
recommended to use Data Augmentation techniques.
Undersampling
Undersampling is reducing the samples for the majority classes, either by random selec-
tion or using clustering techniques.
2.5
Conformal Prediction and Conformal Risk Control for
object detection
2.5.1
Conformal Prediction
The Conformal Prediction (CP) framework allows for uncertainty quantification of a model.
CP is a general framework for constructing prediction intervals, where a user-chosen error
rate (or significance level) α allows for obtaining a set that would contain the true class
with probability almost exactly 1 −α, called marginal coverage [24][25].
There have been proposed many methods for conformal prediction framework for the
image classification task, such as adaptive classification with cross-validation+ calibra-
tion [26]. Regarding object detection, there have been attempts to adapt the conformal
prediction framework to this task.
2.5.2
Conformal Prediction for object detection
Conformal Prediction for object detection methods design scores based on the bounding
box coordinates prediction [27]. Such scores lead to margins that scale multiplicatively
with the size of the predicted object [28], which ensure coverage of a substantial portion
of the ground truth but lead to bounding boxes way bigger than the ground truth boxes,
but do not improve the localization recall of objects in the images nor the precision.
18
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:25==
(a) Example of Object Detection with Proba-
bilistic Guarantees [28].
(b) Example of Confident Object Detection
via Conformal Prediction [27].
Figure 2.11: Examples of Conformal Prediction for object detection.
2.5.3
Conformal Risk Control
For our deep learning problem, the natural notion of error is not pixel miscoverage. Con-
formal Risk Control (CRC) extends conformal prediction to situations where other metrics,
such as the false negative rate (FNR), are more appropriate [25].
Theorem 1 (Conformal Risk Control). Suppose (X1,Y1),...,(Xn,Yn),(Xtest),(Ytest) are an
i.i.d. sample from some distribution. Further, suppose l is a monotone function of λ, i.e.
one satisfying
l(Cλ1(x), y) ≥l(Cλ2(x), y)
(2.14)
for all (x,y) and λ1 ≤λ2. Then, the conformal risk control guarantee is satisfied
E

l(Cbλ(Xtest), Ytest)

≤α
(2.15)
where λ is picked as
bλ =

λ : bR ≤α −B −α
n

(2.16)
where bR(λ) = (l(Cλ(X1), Y1)+...+l(Cλ(Xn), Yn))/n is the empirical risk on the calibration
data.
To measure the quality of the output of Cλ, we consider a loss function l(Cλ(x), y) ∈
(−∞, B] for some B < ∞.
To that end, we post-process the model’s raw outputs into the set of predictions with
sufficiently high scores. Those scores are the confidence score or class probabilities of
the detection neural networks. As the threshold λ grows, we include more detections in
Cλ (so it becomes more conservative in that we are less likely to omit true examples).
Conformal risk control is used to find a value bλ that controls the fraction of missed ground
truth boxes. bλ is chosen so that we guarantee to fall below a user-chosen error rate α.
For example, if B = 1, α = 0.1, and we have n = 1000 calibration points, then we select
bλ to be the value where empirical risk hits level bR = 0.0991 instead of 0.1.
The negative of the Recall, False Negative Rate (FNR), or Miss Rate, can be defined as
FNR = 1 −Recall
(2.17)
where FNR can be used as the bR(λ) function.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
19
==PAGE:26==
This approach is used by Anastasios et al. [29]. They define the bR function as
R = E

1 −
1
O(X)
min(O(X), b
O(X))
X
j=1
1

C(j) = argmax
k
bf(j)
k (X), j ∈eJλ(X)


(2.18)
where bO(X) gives the number of predicted objects, O(X) the number of objects in image
Xi, and eJλ(X) is set to ignore objects with top scores lower than the threshold.
2.6
Active Learning
Active Learning allows us to keep training the algorithm once the neural network is al-
ready in the production or operation phase. Once the model is trained and calibrated,
the predictions from the model and Conformal Risk Control (CRC) can be classified by
a threshold depending on the score outputted by the model into high-confidence predic-
tions and low-confidence predictions. In the Active Learning loop, those low-confidence
predictions are selected to be human-labeled and introduced in the pool of labeled data
to retrain the model. The proposed Active Learning framework based on CRC in Figure
2.12 is inspired by the active learning framework by Thomsen et al. [24] based on CP.
Figure 2.12: Illustration of the proposed active learning framework based on Conformal
Risk Control. The dashed arrows indicate steps that are not directly considered in this
work.
The selection of new samples to be introduced to the labeled data pool can include a small
amount of data that was previously deemed high-confidence to ensure that the updated
model is still confident in these samples, which can work as a quality assurance step.
Additionally, methods such as the one proposed by Matiz et al. [30] would be useful to
select data based on the informativeness, diversity, and information density of the sample.
Also, this selection of new samples to be used on the model retraining should preserve the
20
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:27==
initial distribution of samples for each class. However, the number of samples selected
would be determined by the time resources of human experts labeling this new data.
To select samples that are deemed as low-confidence and high-confident predictions, we
define the following method.
From the CRC method, we use the FNR as the risk function to obtain the calibrated thresh-
old λ1. Then, using the Precision as the risk function, we can calibrate a threshold λ2.
Using this method, we obtain a threshold λ1 calibrated according to a desired Recall, and
a λ2 for a defined Precision. Both thresholds define the intervals in Figure 2.13, which
cluster the samples as discarded, low-confident samples for retraining the model, and
high-confident samples.
Figure 2.13: Method for selected low-confident samples for the Active Learning loop using
the CRC framework.
2.7
Multimodality
Multimodality is a new trend in artificial intelligence. It allows merging data from different
sources (e.g. images, I-V characteristics) with an integration strategy (early, late, and joint
integration) and making predictions using the different data domains. In the PV module
failure diagnosis context, using multimodality would surpass the state-of-the-art models,
as it would allow mixing measurements from the imaging techniques, with the I-v charac-
teristics of the solar cells. It would not only improve the forecasting of defects but increase
the number of detectable defects that an unimodal algorithm can detect. As seen in Table
2.4, it would be very beneficial to mix I-V data with imaging one because some failures
are only measurable by I-V methods.
However, multimodality has not been feasible for the PV module diagnosis yet. Develop-
ing a multimodal algorithm requires having simultaneous data from the same solar cell,
and nowadays, there are only single-domain datasets and each one is labeled differently.
Nevertheless, once datasets are available, multimodality will boost the performance in the
field.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
21
==PAGE:28==
22
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:29==
3
Related Work
Diagnosis of PV module methods based on EL imaging techniques can be approached in
different ways, mostly depending on the dataset used. Classification of the solar cell is a
common approach. Recent work is more focused on localizing those defects on the cell’s
image. This localization can be approached in the different ways shown in Figure 3.1.
Semantic segmentation labels all the pixels on the image into a class. However, for our
task, it is useful to have instances for each defect, and semantic segmentation by itself
does perform that. Classification + Localization only detects a single object on the image
and localizes it using a bounding box. There can be multiple defects in the PV Modules,
which makes this approach unsuitable. Then, the two most useful localization methods for
our problem are object detection and instance segmentation. Both allow us to detect and
classify multiple instances (so, defects). Object detection delivers its predictions using
bounding box coordinates, while instance segmentation labels all the pixels from that
instance.
Figure 3.1: Learning-based detection and segmentation tasks [31].
Our research of the prior art was not limited to those papers that only performed object
detection. To understand the limitations, scope, and possibilities within the PV diagno-
sis methods with EL images, we included all those papers that perform automatic solar
cell defect diagnosis. Also, we included Related Work that uses monocrystalline and
multicrystalline (or polycrystalline) cells, even though this project is focused on Multi PV
Modules. Using a dataset that mixes both cell crystal technologies may not be appropriate
because they are not from the same image domain, as seen in Figure 2.2.
In our methodology, we decided to experiment with object detection because the use of
bounding boxes allows us to take images from external datasets. As we have seen in
our Dataset research in Section 3.2, for the dataset that uses masks as its labels, those
masks are labeled differently from dataset to dataset. Some datasets label the masks
with a high pixel accuracy, however, other datasets use masks that are wider than the
defect that is underneath.
The use of bounding boxes allows us to avoid a re-labeling of external datasets. Addi-
tionally, the training of bounding box detection systems is computationally cheaper than
instance segmentation models.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
23
==PAGE:30==
3.1
Background
Demirci et al. [32] used multiple Convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures to
generate multiple feature maps. Then, the minimum Redundancy - Maximum Relevance
(mRMR) is used to identify those feature maps with the best representation capabilities.
The final classification task into defective and non-defective is handled by Support vector
machine (SVM), achieving a F-score of 91.55%. Nowadays, the methods released ex-
plore end-to-end training of deep learning models. Also, they perform a multiclass clas-
sification of 3 possible defect probabilities for each module in the dataset [33], which is
not ideal as it may be more appropriate to approach this dataset as a regression problem
than a multiclass classification one.
Su et al. [34] extended the Faster R-CNN model by incorporating a complementary atten-
tion network for the detection of multiple defects using bounding boxes. This approach
achieves an outstanding F-score of 98.47%. The paper stands out for its comprehensive-
ness, encompassing multiple experiments with different backbone implementations and
yielding impressive results.
Pratt et al. [35] released the first work to apply semantic segmentation to the PV module
defect detection challenge. However, it faces challenges stemming from a limited dataset,
comprising only 30 test images. The U-Net architecture struggles with the detection of
smaller defects and exhibits superior performance on Mono cells compared to Multi cells.
This brings to light the importance of domain-specific considerations when addressing
defects in different cell types within the same dataset. Mono and Multi cells are not from
the same image domain.
Hussain et al. [36] used CNN for classifying PV modules into defective and non-defective,
with a specific focus on data augmentation techniques. Their utilization of Filter-Induced
Augmentations (FIA) aims to overcome the issue of cell data scarcity. However, via visual
inspection, it is evident that the samples generated are out of the PV images domain.
Fioresi et al. [37] trained a Deeplabv3 model with a ResNet-50 backbone for performing
semantic segmentation. They released their large dataset for public use to overcome the
common low-data problem. The dataset contains 10 types of defects, and to overcome
class imbalance, they merge these defects into four categories and perform undersam-
pling for images with no defects. Additionally, Griddler-Pro was used to generate realistic
simulated images. Their contribution archives a weighted F-score of 95% and an un-
weighted F-score of 69%.
Otamendi et al. [38] performed binary segmentation of defects. Their method is a weakly
supervised deep auto-encoder with unsupervised clustering techniques. However, this
approach simplifies the defect detection problem, treating it as a binary task - when not
all defects cause the same performance loss - and reports only an accuracy of 94.32%,
which may not adequately reflect model performance given the class imbalance.
Xie et al. [39] use CNN model to classify the PV polycrystalline modules into defective
and non-defective. In this work, they had a labeled monocrystalline dataset and an unla-
beled polycrystalline. So, they perform a domain adaptation using attention-based trans-
fer learning and a class-aware domain discriminator. This work continues to approach
defect detection as a binary classification problem. This raises concerns about the limited
consideration of varying defect impacts on the performance of PV modules.
Thomsen et al. [24] introduced a unique approach by involving humans in an active train-
ing loop for low-confidence predictions. Additionally, it leverages conformal prediction to
24
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:31==
provide reliability of their predictions. The CNN model, which classifies polycrystalline
modules into four different classes, attains an F-score of 62.77%. While this work rep-
resents a notable contribution, it seems to fall short in performance compared to some
previous works in the field.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
25
==PAGE:32==
Reference
Year
ML/DL-based
method
and/or
type of learning
Classification,
de-
tection,
segmenta-
tion
Type of PV module
faults/defects
Dataset available
Metrics
[24]
2023
CNN, Conformal pre-
diction, Active learning
Classification
of
PV
modules
Cracks and Finger fail-
ure
No
Standard F1 = 44.39%
Conformal
Prediction
F1 = 62.77%
[39]
2023
CNN,
adversarial
learning
Binary classification
-
Yes
F1 = 87.34%
[38]
2023
Deep
auto-encoder
with
unsupervised
clustering techniques
Segmentation
Binary
Yes
Accuracy = 94.32%
[37]
2022
Deeplabv3 model with
a
ResNet-50
back-
bone
Semantic
segmenta-
tion
8 types of defects
Yes
Weighted F1 = 95%
Unweighted F1 = 69%
[36]
2022
CNN
Binary classification
-
No
F1= 97%
[35]
2021
U-Net
Segmentation
Cracks,
inactive
ar-
eas, and gridlines
Yes
Recall on inactive =
84%
Recall on crack = 69%
Recall on gridline de-
fects = 53%
[34]
2021
Complementary atten-
tion network in Faster
R-CNN
Detection
Crack, finger interrup-
tion, and black core
defects
No
F1 = 98.47%
mAP = 87.38%
[32]
2021
CNN,
minimum
Re-
dundancy
Maximum
Relevance and SVM
Classification
3 degrees of degrada-
tion
Yes
F1 = 91.55%
Table 3.1: Related Work summary.
26
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:33==
3.2
Datasets
There are a lot of datasets available online for performing PV module diagnosis. How-
ever, some of them lack quality or contain bias within it. A lot of Recent Work in Table 3.1
uses datasets that have as many cells as defects in them. In the production or operational
phase, these models would fall in performance, as defect detection is a problem with ex-
tremely unbalanced data. Most of the cells are non-defective in the real world, so models
only trained and evaluated with defective cells would be useless in a real scenario. This
lack of data diversity across datasets makes it impossible to compare the results of the
different previous works. Especially for those works that do not use non-defective cells
for the detection of defects tasks, as the models produced from this training are highly
biased on a dataset that does not represent real-world conditions.
The dataset used by Thomsen et al. [24] is a very unbalanced one, it contains 36062 cells
and only contains 1233 defects. Those are real-world conditions. This is the main reason
why the results provided by the research seem to fall in performance in comparison with
other datasets. But this dataset is hard to train models on because it recreates operation
phase conditions, so the results provided from their research are results that we know
would be similar in the real world. We can not confirm this statement for other previous
work that uses datasets that are almost non-defect-free.
Other publicly available datasets are summarized in Table 3.2.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
27
==PAGE:34==
Reference
Panel
Type
Type
of
de-
fects
Shape of im-
ages
Nb of
cells
Nb of
defects
Papers using
this dataset
Availability
[24]
Poly
3
types
of
cracks
and
finger failure
∼300x300px
36062
1233
[24] [40]
No
[33]
Poly and Mono
3
possible
defect probabil-
ities
300x300px
2624 total
1074 Mono
1550 Poly
1116
[35]
[32]
[39]
[41] [38] [42]
Yes
[43]
Poly and Mono
16 types of de-
fects
512x512px
553
938
[41] [43]
Yes
[37]
Poly and Mono
10 types of de-
fects
∼300x300px,
∼400x400px,
∼600x600px,
>1000x1000px
16941
43463
[37]
Yes
[44]
Poly
8 types of de-
fects
1024x1024px
36543
37380
[44]
Upon request
Table 3.2: Datasets of PV Modules defects with EL imaging summary.
28
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:35==
4
Methodology
The methodology we followed to obtain a neural network able to localize defects and
failures is explained in this section.
4.1
Dataset
The dataset used consists of Electroluminescence (EL) images collected from different
solar farms in the United Kingdom. The images were taken with a silicon-based detector
camera (Nikon D750), which was modified by removing the near-infrared filter and adding
a daylight filter [40]. The EL images were captured during daylight by applying an electrical
bias to the photovoltaic (PV) modules, causing them to emit light that can be captured
by camera sensors. The imaging method was developed by Alves dos Reis Benatto et
al. [4], and the PV modules captured have sufficient diagnostic information to identify
faults associated with power loss during daylight. A perspective correction algorithm was
applied to the panel images because the camera might not have always been placed
perfectly perpendicular to the panels. This ensures that the borders between cells are
aligned horizontally and vertically. Then a local brightness normalization was applied
to correct the brightness gradient present across the images. Finally, the panels were
separated into individual cells of approximately 300×300 pixels [45]. This was the same
dataset as the one used by Thomsen et al. [24]. Because not all images are the same
size, we resize all the images to 300×300 pixels to input them into our models.
The PV modules in the dataset only contain multicrystalline (or polycrystalline) cells, so
we developed models aimed at making a diagnosis on these types of PV modules. Also,
as mentioned in Section 3, it is not appropriate to train a single detection or classifier
model straightforward on a dataset that mixes multicrystalline and monocrystalline cells
because these are not from the same domain and these cells do not have the same
physical appearance.
In the original dataset, four different types of defects are considered: cracks of modes A,
B, and C, as well as finger failures. Nevertheless, we decided to unite Crack A and B
into a single class called Crack A/B. We saw little to no difference between images with
a Crack A and images with a Crack B. In Figure 4.1, an example of each defective type
is displayed with its annotations. Additionally, we added a new class called Finger failure
B. This type of Finger failure (FF) happens when it appears along cell cracks. There are
no examples of this type of defect in our dataset, so we can not train the neural network
on this type of failure. So, when in the operational phase, we find a Crack that overlaps a
FF, we determine that it is a FF of type B.
We rank the defect types in order from highest to lowest priority, according to the safety
and power loss category explained in Section 2.1, and where the definition of each defect
type is detailed. In Table 4.1 the defect’s priority rank is shown.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
29
==PAGE:36==
Failure/Defect Type
Safety
Power loss
Labeled in the dataset
Crack C
B(f)
C
Yes
Crack A/B
B, B(f)
C
Yes
Finger failure
A
A
Yes
Finger failure B
B(f)
C
No
Table 4.1: Defects and failures in our dataset.
For localizing the defects and failures on the image cells, we decided to use bounding box
detection instead of mask segmentation. The use of bounding boxes allows us to have a
more consistent dataset because we plan to use images from external datasets too. In the
datasets that use masks as their labels, those masks are labeled differently from dataset
to dataset. Some datasets label the masks with a high pixel accuracy, however, other
datasets use masks that are wider than the defect that is underneath. Using bounding
boxes allows us to generalize the concept of localization without worrying about the style
used for labeling the masks in each dataset. The reason for using external datasets is
because of the lack of enough PV modules defects diversity in the dataset we are using,
as seen in Table 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Example of different types of defective cells.
The dataset is randomly split into three sets before any experiments are conducted: a
training set (75%), a validation set (15%), and a testing set (10%). Throughout all the
following sections, the model is trained on the training set and evaluated on the validation
30
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:37==
set. The testing set is reserved for evaluation only at the conclusion when the final model
has been chosen.
Additionally, for the Conformal Risk Control, the validation set is utilized for model calibra-
tion. Despite this is not the standard methodology for calibrating a model, the decision
was made because of the lack of data available. The image splits can be found in Table
4.2, where the counts are performed at the cell level, as each cell possesses a unique
class even in the presence of multiple defects. The number of defects displayed at each
split is displayed in Table 4.2 inside a parenthesis.
Split/Class
No defect
Crack A/B
Crack C
Finger failure
Total
Training (75%)
26336
274 (337)
98 (102)
391 (487)
27099
Validation (15%)
5184
48 (66)
18 (21)
79 (95)
5329
Testing (10%)
3534
42 (53)
11 (12)
47 (60)
3634
Total
35054
364 (456)
127 (135)
517 (642)
36062
Table 4.2: Distribution of cell classes after splitting the data into training, validation, and
testing sets. The number inside the parenthesis corresponds to the count of defect, as
each cell can contain multiple defects.
4.2
Training
For training, we used the sets as shown in Table 4.2 and explained in the previous Section.
During the training of the models, we started by evaluating the model’s performance every
epoch. Conventionally, one epoch is completed once the whole training set has been seen
by the model. However, as we perform oversampling of the least frequent classes and
undersampling of the non-defective cells, not all images are shown at the same frequency.
Also, we were performing the evaluation every epoch, and due to the large amount of non-
defective cells in the dataset, showing the whole training set every epoch was causing the
model to overfit in too few epochs. Because of that, we decided to define the epoch as a
fixed number of iterations of the training data, instead of the training data as a whole. As
we used a batch size of 4, and a fixed number of 1000 iterations per epoch, we performed
an evaluation every 4000 training samples.
Training the detection neural networks from scratch requires a large dataset that we do
not have, so we used the fine-tuning strategy. We transfer the learning from a model
trained with one dataset for one task to another model for a different task. We took pre-
trained backbones on the COCO dataset [16]. We only trained the detection heads of the
detections and the backbone layers that extract mid-level and high-level features, leaving
the first layers of the backbones frozen.
Unless stated otherwise, the models are trained using Adam optimizer [46], with an initial
learning rate of η = 0.0001 for Faster R-CNN and RetinaNet models, and η = 0.001
for FCOS and SSD models. A learning rate scheduler is used to exponentially decay
the learning rate by using a factor of γ = 0.99 after every epoch. A batch size of 4,
a weight decay of λ = 10−5, and 3 trainable backbone layers to extract mid-level and
high-level features were used as default. These default parameters were taken from
recommendations when using detection neural networks and miscellaneous experiments
to check the maximum GPU memory for choosing the batch size, or the convergence
of the neural networks at different learning rates. All the neural networks selected used
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
31
==PAGE:38==
ResNet-50-FPN backbone.
4.3
Data imbalance
The data distribution of the original dataset we used is presented in Table 4.2. The im-
balance between the non-defective cells and the defective classes makes it necessary to
apply a method to handle the data imbalance.
We start with training a Faster R-CNN with and without the techniques for handling data
imbalance. We implemented a sampling strategy to balance the probability of showing
cells of each class during training.
We assign a probability of sampling each image during training. We call this probability
the class weight, which we compute as:
Class weight =
1
Class count
(4.1)
where this class weight is assigned to each cell based on its class. This ensures that
classes with a higher representation have a smaller weight, and the classes with low
representation are more likely to be selected during the training.
The main problem of this approach is that the random weighted sampling of images from
the training set does not ensure that all training images are shown during the training. But
statistically, at some point in the training process, all the images are passed through the
model. And certainly, all the classes are guaranteed to be equally represented during the
model’s training.
Since the model sees around the same amount of images from each class due to the
weighted sampling mechanism, the classes are weighted equally in the loss function.
4.4
Network architectures
To select a network architecture, we perform several epochs with the four detection mod-
els explained in Section 2.2. The settings used for these trainings are the ones specified
previously. These detection models are available at torchvision library [47] and are Faster
R-CNN, FCOS, SSD, and RetinaNet with the ResNet-50-FPN backbone.
We select the two architectures with the best performance to continue with the experi-
ments because these experiments are time and energy demanding.
4.5
Data augmentation
Data augmentation is important for reducing overfitting. As we are applying a strong
oversampling on the training set, we must perform a good selection of data augmentation
methods. The data augmentation methods selected have two aims:
• Create realistic variations of our dataset to reduce overfitting.
• Improve the robustness of the neural network by selecting samples from an external
dataset.
The use of external datasets is difficult due to some constraints. Firstly, because not all
datasets, even for the same task, are labeled following the same criteria. Previously, we
discussed the use of bounding boxes instead of segmentation masks to reduce the effect
of the different labeling criteria across different datasets. We decided to apply a novel
32
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:39==
data augmentation technique for the defect detection task on PV modules. It is explained
in Section 4.5.1.
The following proposed transformations are the methods used for data augmentation:
• Horizontal and vertical flipping.
• Random brightness and contrast adjustment, also known as color jittering. The
amount of jittering is chosen uniformly on the interval [−0.25, 0.25] for both brightness
and contrast.
• Random gamma adjustments. The gamma value is chosen from a log-uniform distri-
bution on the interval [2/3, 3/2]. Then, we explored the use of the [4/5, 5/4] interval.
The gamma transformation raises every pixel value to a power γ, where γ is taken
between the given interval.
• Random Gaussian blurring. The image is blurred using a Gaussian kernel with a
standard deviation chosen uniformly on the interval [0.01, 1].
• Randomly adding Gaussian noise. The noise has a mean value of 0 and a standard
deviation chosen uniformly on the interval [0, 0.1].
• Randomly equalizing the histogram of the images.
• Randomly increasing the sharpness of the image.
Examples of the data augmentation methods are shown in Figure 4.2.
(a) B/C adjustment.
(b) Gamma adjustment.
(c) Blurring.
(d) Gaussian noise.
(e) Equalizing.
(f) Sharpness.
Figure 4.2: Examples of the data augmentation methods proposed.
Cropping, rotations between (0°,90°), random erasing [22], and shearing were not used
as data augmentation techniques because they produce non-realistic images. The same
applies to zoom in and zoom out. Also, these types of data augmentation methods are
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
33
==PAGE:40==
not recommended when they require upsampling or padding techniques that can bias
the training. Even though it may have a positive impact on the training, the resulting
model in the operational phase will never see PV modules similar to the result of these
transformations, as these modifications move the cells’ busbars from the usual locations,
or entirely crop the busbars out. Additionally, 90° rotations were not used because all the
PV modules in our dataset have the busbars vertically aligned.
To assess the impact that each transformation has on the model performance, they are
each tried individually. Since Flip is considered a base level of augmentation, each of the
other transformations is used in combination with random flipping.
Every transformation is applied with a probability 0.5. This almost ensures that some
transformation is applied to all the images, preventing the model from seeing the exact
same image twice. In this specific task, where we are applying heavy overfitting, data
augmentation is important to reduce the overfitting on the minority class of the training
set.
4.5.1
Cut, Paste and Learn
Cut, Paste and Learn [2] data augmentation is performed on instances of the same dataset.
Nevertheless, as we are already displaying a lot of objects of our dataset due to the over-
sampling of images that contain defects instances, we decided to perform Cut, Paste, and
Learn on defects instances of another dataset.
For performing this method, we have to carefully select a dataset that contains crack
defects, which is the type of defect we fall short in quantity, and the PV Modules are
Polycrystalline. We selected the dataset released by Fioresi et al. [37], named ’UCF’.
We filtered out the Monocrystalline cells and those cells that did not contain any Resistive
crack, which we refer to as Crack A/B, nor isolated crack, which is equivalent to our Crack
C. Examples of images of Resistive crack and isolated crack from the ’UCF’ dataset are
displayed in Figure 4.3. Also, we only included samples that contained a segmentation
mask. Then, we rotate all the images 90° because Fioresi et al. [37] dataset has the
busbars aligned horizontally, and in our dataset, the busbars are aligned vertically.
Although, we only included resistive cracks and isolated cracks from ’UCF’, we also
thought about including interconnect failures because they are important, we don’t have
them in our dataset. Specially, because Interconnect Bright Spot defects can become fire
when there are a lot of them in cells. Also, we noticed that ’UCF’ dataset used Griddler-Pro
for generating the type of defect named Interconnect Disconnected PV.
We use the segmentation masks of those instances to cut the defects, and we randomly
paste them in images of our dataset that do not contain any defect to avoid possible
overlapping with other defects. We randomly paste these instances in the images of our
dataset within the borders of the image. We apply a gaussian blur to the image border to
‘smoothen’ out the boundary artifacts between the pasted object and the background. Our
methodology is visible in Figure 4.4. We take a mask from Fioresi dataset, we randomly
displace it within the image borders. We displace the image from the ’UCF’ dataset the
same amount of pixels as the mask. Finally, we blend the instance segment to a non-
defective cell image in our dataset to obtain the final image we are showing to the neural
network. Some examples of our Cut, Paste and Learn implementation are in Figure 4.5.
34
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:41==
(a) Crack Resistive in ’UCF’ dataset, equiva-
lent to Crack A/B.
(b) Crack Isolated in ’UCF’ dataset, equivalent
to Crack C.
Figure 4.3: Examples of samples from the ’UCF’ dataset by by Fioresi et al. [37].
Figure 4.4: Our approach to Cut, Paste and Learn.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.5: Examples of our approach to Cut, Paste and Learn.
We perform Cut, Paste and Learn to 12.5%, 6.25%, and 3.125% of non-defective cells to
see how advantageous this Data augmentation method can be at different proportions.
4.6
Hyperparameter tuning and regularization
After a network architecture and the data augmentation methods are selected, different
hyperparameters are explored and regularization is added as a means to avoid overfitting
and improve the performance.
We took pre-trained neural networks to fine-tune them for our specific task. The backbone
used to create the feature maps that are later fed into the detection head can be fully
trained or only partly, depending on how many layers from the backbone we decide to
freeze. The first layers extract low-level and generic features, while the last one can
extract mid-level and high-level features specific to our task, so it is important to re-train
them while using the pre-trained weights as an initialization. We tried training 2, 3, and 4
backbones layers.
Label smoothing is first tried as a regularization technique to avoid the model becoming
overly confident in its predictions. For the label smoothing parameter ε, the values ε ∈
{0, 0.05, 0.10} are tried.
After this, weight decay is also tried to further regularize the model, using the values
λ ∈

0, 10−5, 10−4, 10−3, 10−2	
for the weight decay parameter.
Finally, different sets of learning rate η and learning rate decay factor γ (decays the
learning rate by γ every epoch) are tried.
For learning rate we tried the values η ∈
36
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:43==
{0.00003, 0.0001, 0.0003}, and for learning rate decay factor we used the values γ ∈{0.995, 0.99}.
4.7
Conformal Risk Control
Once a model is settled on and hyperparameters have been found, the model’s outputs
are adapted to conformal risk control. We use the False Negative Rate as the bR(λ) func-
tion. We try different bλ and its associated empirical risk hits levels bR. False Negative Rate
is the negative of the Recall, so, we are presenting the results using the Recall because it
is more intuitive. We study the Precision-Recall tradeoff, and we see the relation between
the detections included as model’s outputs and different bλ and IoU thresholds.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
37
==PAGE:44==
38
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:45==
5
Results and discussions
This section reports the results of the experiments that have been done as described in
the previous section. We start by testing the method for handling the data imbalance in
the dataset. Then, the architectures were trained and we chose two of them. After, the
data augmentation methods are tried. Finally, the hyperparameters and regularization
techniques are tuned. Last, a final model is trained on the training set and the validation
set is used as the calibration set. The results are displayed on the testing set.
For all the training loss figures, we applied an exponentially weighted average over itera-
tions, so we inspect the convergence of the neural networks more easily.
5.1
Data Imbalance
From using the random weighted sampling, we can see that the classes distribution goes
from very unbalanced to well-balanced in Figure 5.1.
The random weighted sampling allows us to oversample the minority classes (Crack A/B,
Crack C, and Finger Failures), and undersample the majority class (Non-defective cells).
(a) Distributions of samples from the original
dataset.
(b) Distributions of samples after random
weighted sampling.
Figure 5.1: Classes distribution before and after handling data imbalance.
Performing this heavy oversampling requires displaying the same samples from the mi-
nority classes multiple times. That is the reason why using data augmentation is critical in
this problem. Also, we are aware that we are displaying much fewer non-defective cells
during training than the ones that during the operation phase will be seen for the model.
Nevertheless, not handling data imbalance makes the training of the neural network in-
effective, as can be seen in Figure 5.2, where we had to display the y-axis in log-scale
because the loss of Faster R-CNN without data imbalance handling methods was not
converging, and it was orders of magnitudes larger than the loss when data imbalance
handling methods were used.
Training the neural network training on the sample distribution of Figure 5.1b is not the
real-world conditions. Operation phase conditions are displayed in Figure 5.1a. How-
ever, the model is validated and tested on sets that have the real class proportions, so
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
39
==PAGE:46==
the results reported are results that we know for sure would be similar in a real-world
environment.
From Section 3.2, we learned that many previous works report excellent results on the
PV module diagnosis task because they use datasets where each solar cell contains at
least a defect or failure. Training on these types of datasets boosts the performance of
the reported metrics, but the final models are not useful for the detection of defects and
failures in a scenario where the defective cells are a small proportion of the total number
of cells.
Figure 5.2: Training loss of Faster R-CNN with data imbalance handling and without data
imbalance handling.
5.2
Architecture selection
We performed 12 epochs of training for each of our different neural networks. The metrics
of the training and validation set are in Figures 5.3.
On the training set, we can observe the convergence of the different neural networks. In
Figure 5.3a, while Faster R-CNN, RetinaNet, and SDD can reduce the training loss when
more iterations have passed, FCOS is unable to reduce the training loss function. For
FCOS we tried different orders of magnitude learning rates around η = 0.001, and none
of them were able to reduce the loss function. Also, we can deduce that SDD is more
unstable than Faster R-CNN and RetinaNet, because due to some training batch samples,
the loss was increased drastically around the 11k iteration. These results are similar to
the ones we observe in Figure 5.3b. On the validation set, FCOS is still performing badly,
and SDD is struggling to converge and being very inconsistent.
For evaluating the recall, we only included detections with a minimum confidence score
or class probabilities of 0.5. In Figure 5.3c, Faster R-CNN can memorize almost all the
defects and failures on the training set, reaching a Recall of 99.78%. RetinaNet also has
great performance on the training set. However, SSD instability is displayed here, where
after 9 epochs, due to training batch samples that increased the loss a lot, the metrics of
SDD fall to 0. In Figure 5.3d, Faster R-CNN can achieve a maximum Recall of 51.65%
while the other detections fall behind, RetinaNet being the following one with a Recall
26.92% on an uncompleted training, as this model seems to require more epochs than
Faster R-CNN to achieve similar results.
40
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:47==
In Figures 5.3e and 5.3f, the results are consistent with what we have been discussing
in the previous paragraphs. In the following experiments, we decided to proceed with
RetinaNet and Faster R-CNN, as these models converge faster and reach better results
than SDD and FCOS.
(a) Training loss functions.
(b) Validation loss functions.
(c) Training recall with min. score of 0.5 and
IoU=0.5.
(d) Validation recall with min. score of 0.5 and
IoU=0.5.
(e) Training loss functions.
(f) Validation loss functions.
Figure 5.3: Metrics of the architecture selection experiments.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
41
==PAGE:48==
5.3
Data augmentation
All the proposed data augmentation methods are tested. Each approach is used along
with random flipping horizontally and vertically, as this is seen as a basic form of improve-
ment. Additionally, the models are trained without any transformations to compare the
results of data argumentation to a baseline. Finally, we tried all the data augmentation
policies altogether and then just a selection of methods, applying randomly one at a time.
The results are visualized in Table 5.1 for RetinaNet and Table 5.2 for Faster R-CNN. For
the metrics, we used a minimum IoU between the forecasted detection and the ground
truth label of 0.5. For F1, we selected detection with a minimum confidence score of 0.7
(noted as F1@0.7). For Precision, we selected detection with a min. score of 0.9, and for
Recall, we used 0.5.
Using no augmentation in comparison to just Flipping results in lower metrics except for F1
and Precision of Faster R-CNN. However, the Recall improves drastically. This confirms
that flipping is an effective way of augmenting the data.
We noticed that Gamma1, transforming the pixel value to a power γ, where γ is taken from
the interval [2/3, 3/2], performed worse than other augmentation techniques for RetinaNet.
That is why we tied a Gamma2 and changed the interval to [4/5, 5/4], leading to better
results on RetinaNet.
Also, we saw how adding random noise to the image leads to poor results on RetinaNet.
Additionally, we were not sure if adding Gaussian random noise to the PV module images
created realistic enough cells. An example of this data augmentation method is displayed
in Figure 4.2d.
Then we applied all the data augmentation methods at the same time, with a probability of
50% to apply each one. Using all the methods leads to images that are over-transformed,
as multiple data augmentation policies can be applied simultaneously with a probability of
50%. This causes the model to not see many images from the dataset, just transformed
images that are not necessarily realistic. Using this approach, Faster R-CNN reached
the worst F1, and the best Recall at the same this. This is because the low Precision
drags down the F1. On RetinaNet, neither the F1 nor the Recall are high using all data
augmentation techniques at once.
Finally, we selected the data augmentation methods with the best performance on the
Recall, F1, and took into account that the transformations need to be realistic. For this
purpose, we selected the horizontal and vertical Flip, B/C, Gamma2, Blur, Equalize, and
Sharpness. Instead of applying all the transformations at the same time with 50% proba-
bility each, we decided to select one random transformation for image, and apply it with
a 50% rate. This resulted in the best F1 for Faster R-CNN and decent Recall. For Reti-
naNet, this selection resulted in the second-best F1 and the second-best Recall. Also, we
saw how the Recall for RetinaNet is way lower than the Recall on Faster R-CNN, but the
precision is way higher. However, we are more interested in the Recall, as it is harder to
localize all the defects on the images than localizing just a few ones and be sure that they
are correct. Also, a high recall helps us to speed up the active learning loop re-labeling,
because a human expert can easily determine if a localized defect is correct or incorrect.
And localizing this defect by a human expert is more time-consuming than just discarding
incorrect predictions
For Faster R-CNN, we selected some metrics displayed in Figures 5.4 where we can
see how these data augmentation policies work as regularization techniques. So, the
42
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:49==
transformations are preventing overfitting in the neural network. This is especially obvious
when we compare the metrics of the model when ’None’ transformations were applied
and the rest of the transformations. Also, we saw that by using data augmentation, the
performance on the training set is reduced and increased on the validation set, which was
one of our goals.
Augmentations
F1@0.7
Prec.@0.9
Recall@0.5
None
0.174
0.264
0.208
Flip
0.242
0.600
0.269
Flip+B/C
0.193
0.500
0.263
Flip+Gamma1
0.061
0.600
0.071
Flip+Gamma2
0.214
0.500
0.291
Flip+Blur
0.252
0.551
0.340
Flip+Noise
0.113
0.187
0.252
Flip+Equalize
0.210
0.666
0.324
Flip+Sharpness
0.191
0.500
0.291
All positive
0.124
0.571
0.236
Selected augm.
0.244
0.466
0.324
Table 5.1: Validation metrics from various data augmentation policies on RetinaNet.
Augmentations
F1@0.7
Prec.@0.9
Recall@0.5
None
0.236
0.333
0.236
Flip
0.171
0.206
0.412
Flip+B/C
0.223
0.214
0.478
Flip+Gamma1
0.233
0.212
0.439
Flip+Gamma2
0.186
0.164
0.439
Flip+Blur
0.247
0.290
0.423
Flip+Noise
0.205
0.204
0.439
Flip+Equalize
0.234
0.275
0.384
Flip+Sharpness
0.209
0.228
0.456
All positive
0.113
0.123
0.533
Selected augm.
0.247
0.252
0.472
Table 5.2: Validation metrics from various data augmentation policies on Faster R-CNN.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
43
==PAGE:50==
(a) Training Recall with min. score of 0.5 and
IoU=0.5.
(b) Validation Recall with min. score of 0.5 and
IoU=0.5.
(c) Training F1 with min.
score of 0.9 and
IoU=0.5.
(d) Validation F1 with min.
score of 0.9 and
IoU=0.5.
Figure 5.4: Faster R-CNN metrics of the data augmentation experiments.
5.3.1
Cut, Paste and Learn
We performed Cut, Paste and Learn to 12.5%, 6.25%, and 3.125% of non-defective cells.
In Table 5.3, we could see how increasing the percentage of Cut, Paste and Learn samples
from the ’UCF’ dataset, the Recall of the model decreased. However, using Cut, Paste and
Learn to just 3.125% of samples improved the F1 without decreasing the Recall too much
in comparison to the model that was only trained with the selected data augmentation
policies from the previous section. Using this proportion of samples where we apply Cut,
Paste and Learn (3.125%) and combining it with the selected data augmentation methods
improved the Cut, Paste and Learn models’ performance.
This proves that using defects and failures from external datasets can improve the per-
formance of a detection neural network. This result is not obvious, because we are eval-
uating the model on a validation set that does not contain any example of defects and
failures from the external dataset.
Additionally, the usage of an external dataset improves the robustness of the model. This
happens because the neural network has been trained with more data diversity and the
scarcity of our dataset ’Cracks’ defects has been compensated by pasting defects cut
44
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:51==
from ’UCF’ dataset.
Nonetheless, we are interested in having the maximum possible Recall because our
dataset is heavily unbalanced. And, the F1 gives a large weight to the precision, which is
detrimental to the localization task. By examining the Recall, we decided to not include
this data augmentation policy in the final model training. Because it reduced the Recall
significantly.
Augmentations
F1@0.7
Prec.@0.9
Recall@0.5
Selected augm.
0.125
0.162
0.576
Cut, Paste and Learn (3.125%)
0.189
0.268
0.434
Cut, Paste and Learn (6.25%)
0.218
0.387
0.368
Cut, Paste and Learn (12.5%)
0.196
0.245
0.340
Cut, Paste and Learn (3.125%) + Selected augm.
0.192
0.279
0.439
Table 5.3: Validation metrics from Cut, Paste and Learn on Faster R-CNN.
5.4
Hyperparameter tuning and regularization
To avoid overfitting and improve the performance of the model, we experimented with the
use of different hyperparameters for our neural network. We proceeded with the experi-
ments with Faster R-CNN, as it performed better than the other detection neural networks.
5.4.1
Trainable backbone layers
Faster R-CNN has 5 trainable backbone layers. Because we are not interested in training
all 5 of them because the first ones only extract low-level features, we tried training 2, 3,
and 4 backbones layers and leaving the rest frozen.
In Table 5.4, we can see that training 3 backbone layers and freezing the first 2 layers is
the optimum for training Faster R-CNN on this task. This is in agreement with what we
said previously, as the first input layers of a backbone just extract low-level features, and
re-training them does not necessarily lead to better results.
Trainable backbone layers
Recall@0.5
F1@0.7
2
0.532
0.165
3
0.576
0.235
4
0.560
0.160
Table 5.4: Validation metrics for trainable backbone layers on Faster R-CNN.
5.4.2
Weight decay
Weight decay (or L2-regularization) adds a complexity term in the loss function that penal-
izes large weights in the model during the training process. In Table 5.5 we can see how
a too large bλ makes the model too simple to provide useful predictions, as its recall is at
the minimum. An optimized bλ = 10−5 penalizes the models’ complexity without penalizing
the Recall and F1 metrics on the validation set.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
45
==PAGE:52==
Weight decay
Recall@0.5
F1@0.7
λ = 0
0.565
0.170
λ = 10−5
0.593
0.180
λ = 10−4
0.532
0.188
λ = 10−3
0.478
0.173
λ = 10−2
0.087
0.044
Table 5.5: Validation metrics for weight decay experiments on Faster R-CNN.
5.4.3
Learning rate and decay factor
For learning rate, we tried the values η ∈{0.00003, 0.0001, 0.0003}, and for learning rate
decay factor, we used the values γ ∈{0.995, 0.99}. We took the at the epoch where the
models’ performance was at its maximum according to the Recall and F1 metrics. As in
Figures 5.4, the models reached their peaks in these metrics between the epoch 8 and
10. For all the learning rates and learning rate decay factors we tried, they all reached
their Recall and F1 peaks also between epochs 8 and 10.
By observing the results in the Table 5.6, we can see how the best Recall is reached by
using η = 0.00003 and γ = 0.995. However, this setup also has the second-worst F1. We
determined that the best learning rate and learning rate decay factor are η = 0.0003 and
γ = 0.995. Using these hyperparameters, the Recall and the F1 are both in the top-3 of
validation metrics on this setup.
Hyperparameters
Recall@0.5
F1@0.7
η = 0.00003, γ = 0.995
0.642
0.067
η = 0.00003, γ = 0.99
0.598
0.179
η = 0.0001, γ = 0.995
0.582
0.101
η = 0.0001, γ = 0.99
0.582
0.065
η = 0.0003, γ = 0.995
0.620
0.151
η = 0.0003, γ = 0.99
0.604
0.185
Table 5.6: Validation metrics for learning rate and decay factor experiments on Faster
R-CNN.
5.4.4
Label smoothing
In Table 5.7, we can see that is beneficial to use some degree of label smoothing to
prevent the model from becoming overly confident in its predictions by introducing noise
for the labels. The Recall using ε = 0.05 is higher than using other values for ε.
46
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:53==
Label smoothing
Recall@0.5
F1@0.7
ε = 0
0.582
0.230
ε = 0.05
0.620
0.232
ε = 0.10
0.549
0.279
Table 5.7: Validation metrics for label smoothing experiments on Faster R-CNN.
5.5
Testing the model
For the final training, we took the hyperparameters and data augmentation policies that
we discussed in the previous sections. In summary:
• Detection neural network: Faster R-CNN with ResNet-50-FPN backbone.
• Number of epochs = 10. Number of iterations per epoch = 1000.
• Batch size = 4.
• Random weighted sampling mechanism.
• Data augmentation policies: Flip, B/C, Gamma2, Blur, Equalize, Sharpness.
• Trainable backbone layers = 3.
• Weight decay λ = 10−5.
• Learning rate η = 0.0003 and decay factor γ = 0.995.
• Label smoothing ε = 0.05.
The results on the training dataset are in the Confusion Matrix 5.8 and on the validation set
(without calibration) are in the Confusion Matrix 5.9. These results are using a minimum
confidence score of 0.5 and IoU=0.5 between the detections and ground truth.
Detections ⇒
Ground truth ⇓
Crack A/B
Crack C
Finger Failure
Background
Crack A/B
182
12
0
143
Crack C
0
96
0
6
Finger Failure
1
3
312
171
Background
3053
738
2131
0
Table 5.8: Training Confusion Matrix.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
47
==PAGE:54==
Detections ⇒
Ground truth ⇓
Crack A/B
Crack C
Finger Failure
Background
Crack A/B
26
4
0
36
Crack C
1
17
1
2
Finger Failure
0
0
53
42
Background
552
157
430
0
Table 5.9: Validation Confusion Matrix.
Then, we proceed with the Risk Control study. Varying the bλ threshold to low-confident
predictions. The higher the bλ threshold, the more conservative the model is. In Figure
5.5, there is the Precision, Recall, and F1 of the calibration set as a function of bλ threshold.
The calibration set is the same as the validation set. We want at least a Recall of 0.5, so
the bλ threshold has to be 0.54.
Figure 5.5: Precision, Recall, and F1 of the calibration set as a function of λ.
Next, we computed the same metrics, using a fixed bλ = 0.54, and this time varying the
minimum IoU between predictions and ground truth. Using a smaller IoU allows us to
consider a match even if the overlap between the predictions and the ground truth bound-
ing box is small. In Figure 5.6, we can see how the maximum Recall is achieved when
the IoU is the smallest. We are interested in localizing the artifacts, but not necessarily
in achieving a perfect bounding box match with the ground truth. We fixed the minimum
IoU at 0.2.
48
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.6: Precision, Recall, and F1 of the calibration set as a function of the IoU between
predictions and ground truth.
Finally, using the calibrated model, with minimum IoU = 0.2 and bλ threshold = 0.54, we
made the predictions on the testing set. In Table 5.10 the Testing Confusion matrix is
displayed. We achieved a Precision = 0.1186, F1 = 0.1984, and a Recall = 0.6080.
Detections ⇒
Ground truth ⇓
Crack A/B
Crack C
Finger Failure
Background
Crack A/B
22
4
1
26
Crack C
1
9
1
1
Finger Failure
0
0
45
15
Background
248
77
233
0
Table 5.10: Test Confusion matrix with the calibrated model, min. confidence score = 0.54
and IoU = 0.2.
Some visual examples of our model predictions on the testing set are in Figure 5.7.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.7: In the left images with the ground truth label, and the right the Faster R-CNN
predictions.
50
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusions
This work presents a diagnosis detection neural network for detecting and localizing, us-
ing bounding boxes, artifacts on polycrystalline PV modules EL images. The model found
is a Faster R-CNN, it is able to localize types of cracks and finger failures within so-
lar cells. We experimented with different hyperparameters that reduced the overfitting
and improved the performance on the validation set. Weight decay and label smoothing
proved to be useful regularization methods. Additionally, several data augmentation poli-
cies are tried and discussed based on the results they produced and the realism of the
transformed images by these methods. The usage of external datasets was explored in
this work. Cutting and pasting defects from other datasets in training images proved to
be a promising method, but did not help to improve the models’ performance. Finally,
we used a calibration strategy based on Conformal Risk Control (CRC). This calibration
strategy allowed us to study the Precision-Recall tradeoff and filter out the low-confident
predictions according to a given minimum Recall, that fixed the CRC bλ parameter.
Finally, we achieved a model in the polycrystalline target domain that reached a Recall of
0.608, a F1 of 0.198, and a Precision of 0.118.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
51
==PAGE:58==
52
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:59==
7
Future Work
There have been some aspects commented on this project but not addressed that we
consider important to be dealt with in the future.
The use of semantic segmentation or instance segmentation would be very valuable to
be explored in future work. There are interesting tradeoffs to be researched between
segmentation methods and object detection neural networks.
As part of future work, the exploration of data augmentation across datasets would be an
interesting topic. We proved that using Cut, Paste and Learn [2] across datasets improved
the detection performance. Our adaptation of Cut, Paste and Lean method copied artifacts
from Florei Fioresi et al. [37] dataset and pasted them over random background pixels of
non-defective cells from our dataset. This created some solar cells that were not enough
realistic. To improve this, the creation of the photovoltaic module characteristics for each
cell would be very valuable. For example, instead of random pasting of a defect, pasting
them replicating the same characteristic as the photovoltaic module it was copied from.
This would prevent the model from pasting a crack that may have appeared between two
busbars to be pasted over one busbar. Also, the parametrization of the type of Cracks
taken from the external dataset and where they can be pasted on would be interesting to
be worked on to find the scope of this approach.
Future work could also include the implementation of per-class smoothness introduced
by Maher et at. [21], where a teacher network trained with hard one-hot labels is used to
determine the amount of per-class smoothness factor applied to each instance.
Also, further improvements may be obtained by investigating the use of other detection
neueral networks, like YOLOv7 [48], or the use of transformers or attention modules [49].
One of the main limitations of the performance of our model is its dataset. All the future
work oriented towards adding more diversity or samples to it would result in an improve-
ment in the model performance. We think that in most solar cell diagnosis works, its
performance bottleneck is due to the dataset used. Also, the inclusion of different types
of artifacts is interesting. Specially, the interconnect defects. Interconnects in the lam-
inate defects are the cause of 66% of these returned PV modules to the manufacturer
according to reports [1].
Future developments of the active learning loop have to be addressed to in the future too.
Finally, we believe that the use of multimodality in solar cell diagnosis would boost the
performance in the field. However, multimodality has not been feasible for the PV module
diagnosis yet. Developing a multimodal algorithm requires having simultaneous data from
the same solar cell, and nowadays, there are only single-domain datasets and each one is
labeled differently. This multimodality could include different imaging methods like RBG,
EL, and TIR measurements, or I-V characteristics of the module.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
53
==PAGE:60==
54
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Marc Köntges et al. “Review of Failures of Photovoltaic Modules”. In: 2014. URL:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:69660097.
[2]
Debidatta Dwibedi, Ishan Misra, and Martial Hebert. “Cut, Paste and Learn: Surpris-
ingly Easy Synthesis for Instance Detection”. In: arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1708.01642
(Aug. 2017), arXiv:1708.01642. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1708.01642. arXiv: 1708.01642
[cs.CV].
[3]
PVeducation. Solar Cells, Modules, and Arrays. 2024. URL: https://pveducation.
com/solar-concepts/solar-cells-modules-arrays/ (visited on 01/02/2024).
[4]
Gisele Alves dos Reis Benatto et al. “Drone-Based Daylight Electroluminescence
Imaging of PV Modules”. In: IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics 10.3 (2020), pp. 872–
877. DOI: 10.1109/JPHOTOV.2020.2978068.
[5]
Petru Soviany and Radu Tudor Ionescu. “Optimizing the Trade-off between Single-
Stage and Two-Stage Object Detectors using Image Difficulty Prediction”. In: CoRR
abs/1803.08707 (2018). arXiv: 1803.08707. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08707.
[6]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. Feature Pyramid Networks for Object Detection. 2017. arXiv:
1612.03144 [cs.CV].
[7]
Inwoong Lee et al. “An Efficient Human Instance-Guided Framework for Video Ac-
tion Recognition”. In: Sensors 21.24 (2021). ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.3390/s21248309.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/24/8309.
[8]
Wei Liu et al. “SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector”. In: CoRR abs/1512.02325
(2015). arXiv: 1512.02325. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.02325.
[9]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection”.
In: CoRR abs/1506.02640 (2015). arXiv: 1506.02640. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1506.02640.
[10]
Charles Melby-Thompson. MLT init Session 4, SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector.
Machine Learning Tokyo. 2021. URL: https://youtu.be/F-irLP2k3Dk.
[11]
Ross B. Girshick et al. “Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and
semantic segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1311.2524 (2013). arXiv: 1311.2524. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2524.
[12]
Jasper Uijlings et al. “Selective Search for Object Recognition”. In: International
Journal of Computer Vision 104 (Sept. 2013), pp. 154–171. DOI: 10.1007/s11263-
013-0620-5.
[13]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Re-
gion Proposal Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1506.01497 (2015). arXiv: 1506 . 01497.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497.
[14]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection”. In: CoRR abs/1708.02002
(2017). arXiv: 1708.02002. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02002.
[15]
Zhi Tian et al. “FCOS: Fully Convolutional One-Stage Object Detection”. In: CoRR
abs/1904.01355 (2019). arXiv: 1904.01355. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.01355.
[16]
Tsung-Yi Lin et al. “Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context”. In: CoRR abs/1405.0312
(2014). arXiv: 1405.0312. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.
[17]
Rafael Padilla, Sergio L. Netto, and Eduardo A. B. da Silva. “A Survey on Perfor-
mance Metrics for Object-Detection Algorithms”. In: 2020 International Conference
on Systems, Signals and Image Processing (IWSSIP) (2020), pp. 237–242. URL:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:220734135.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
55
==PAGE:62==
[18]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from
Overfitting”. In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15.1 (Jan. 2014), pp. 1929–1958. ISSN: 1532-
4435.
[19]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Net-
work Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift”. In: CoRR abs/1502.03167 (2015).
arXiv: 1502.03167. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167.
[20]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer Vision”.
In: CoRR abs/1512.00567 (2015). arXiv: 1512.00567. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1512.00567.
[21]
Mohamed Maher and Meelis Kull. “Instance-based Label Smoothing For Better Cal-
ibrated Classification Networks”. In: CoRR abs/2110.05355 (2021). arXiv: 2110 .
05355. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05355.
[22]
Zhun Zhong et al. “Random Erasing Data Augmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1708.04896
(2017). arXiv: 1708.04896. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.04896.
[23]
Connor Shorten and Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar. “A survey on Image Data Augmentation
for Deep Learning”. In: Journal of Big Data 6.1 (July 6, 2019), p. 60. ISSN: 2196-
1115. DOI: 10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-
0197-0.
[24]
Vitus Thomsen et al. “Improving Deep Learning-Based Defect Classification in Solar
Cells using Conformal Prediction”. In: Jan. 2023.
[25]
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. “A Gentle Introduction to Confor-
mal Prediction and Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification”. In: CoRR abs/2107.07511
(2021). arXiv: 2107.07511. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07511.
[26]
Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel J. Candès. Classification with Valid
and Adaptive Coverage. 2020. arXiv: 2006.02544 [stat.ME].
[27]
Léo Andéol et al. Confident Object Detection via Conformal Prediction and Con-
formal Risk Control: an Application to Railway Signaling. 2023. arXiv: 2304.06052
[cs.LG].
[28]
Florence de Grancey et al. “Object Detection with Probabilistic Guarantees: A Con-
formal Prediction Approach”. In: Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security. SAFE-
COMP 2022 Workshops. Ed. by Mario Trapp et al. Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2022, pp. 316–329.
[29]
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos et al. “Learn then Test: Calibrating Predictive Algo-
rithms to Achieve Risk Control”. In: CoRR abs/2110.01052 (2021). arXiv: 2110 .
01052. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.01052.
[30]
Sergio Matiz and Kenneth E. Barner. “Inductive conformal predictor for convolu-
tional neural networks: Applications to active learning for image classification”. In:
Pattern Recognition 90 (2019), pp. 172–182. ISSN: 0031-3203. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.patcog.2019.01.035. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S003132031930055X.
[31]
Ruohan Gao Fei-Fei Li Yunzhu Li. CS231n: Deep Learning for Computer Vision.
https://cs231n.github.io/. Accessed: 2023–12-02. 2023.
[32]
Mustafa Yusuf Demirci, Nurettin Beşli, and Abdülkadir Gümüşçü. “Efficient deep
feature extraction and classification for identifying defective photovoltaic module
cells in Electroluminescence images”. In: Expert Systems with Applications 175
(2021), p. 114810. ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.
114810. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417421002517.
[33]
C. Buerhop et al. “A Benchmark for Visual Identification of Defective Solar Cells in
Electroluminescence Imagery”. In: Sept. 2018. DOI: 10.4229/35thEUPVSEC20182018-
5CV.3.15.
56
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:63==
[34]
Binyi Su et al. “Deep Learning-Based Solar-Cell Manufacturing Defect Detection
With Complementary Attention Network”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor-
matics 17.6 (2021), pp. 4084–4095. DOI: 10.1109/TII.2020.3008021.
[35]
Lawrence Pratt, Devashen Govender, and Richard Klein. “Defect detection and
quantification in electroluminescence images of solar PV modules using U-net se-
mantic segmentation”. In: Renewable Energy 178 (2021), pp. 1211–1222. ISSN:
0960-1481. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . renene . 2021 . 06 . 086. URL: https :
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148121009526.
[36]
Muhammad Hussain, Hussain Al-Aqrabi, and Richard Hill. “PV-CrackNet Architec-
ture for Filter Induced Augmentation and Micro-Cracks Detection within a Photo-
voltaic Manufacturing Facility”. In: Energies 15.22 (2022). ISSN: 1996-1073. DOI:
10.3390/en15228667. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/22/8667.
[37]
Joseph Fioresi et al. “Automated Defect Detection and Localization in Photovoltaic
Cells Using Semantic Segmentation of Electroluminescence Images”. In: IEEE Jour-
nal of Photovoltaics 12.1 (2022), pp. 53–61. DOI: 10.1109/JPHOTOV.2021.3131059.
[38]
Urtzi Otamendi et al. “A Scalable Framework for Annotating Photovoltaic Cell De-
fects in Electroluminescence Images”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informat-
ics 19.9 (2023), pp. 9361–9369. DOI: 10.1109/TII.2022.3228680.
[39]
Xiangying Xie et al. “Effective transfer learning of defect detection for photovoltaic
module cells in electroluminescence images”. In: Solar Energy 250 (2023), pp. 312–
323. ISSN: 0038-092X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2022.10.055. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0038092X22007940.
[40]
Claire Mantel et al. “Machine learning prediction of defect types for electrolumines-
cence images of photovoltaic panels”. In: Optical Engineering + Applications. 2019.
URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:202768838.
[41]
Abdelilah Et-taleby et al. “A combined convolutional neural network model and sup-
port vector machine technique for fault detection and classification based on elec-
troluminescence images of photovoltaic modules”. In: Sustainable Energy, Grids
and Networks 32 (2022), p. 100946. ISSN: 2352-4677. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.segan.2022.100946. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2352467722001916.
[42]
M. Waqar Akram et al. “CNN based automatic detection of photovoltaic cell defects
in electroluminescence images”. In: Energy 189 (2019), p. 116319. ISSN: 0360-
5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116319. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544219320146.
[43]
Lawrence Pratt, Jana Mattheus, and Richard Klein. “A benchmark dataset for de-
fect detection and classification in electroluminescence images of PV modules us-
ing semantic segmentation”. In: Systems and Soft Computing 5 (2023), p. 200048.
ISSN: 2772-9419. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sasc.2023.200048. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2772941923000017.
[44]
Binyi Su, Zhong Zhou, and Haiyong Chen. “PVEL-AD: A Large-Scale Open-World
Dataset for Photovoltaic Cell Anomaly Detection”. In: IEEE Transactions on Indus-
trial Informatics 19.1 (2023), pp. 404–413. DOI: 10.1109/TII.2022.3162846.
[45]
Claire Mantel et al. “Method for Estimation and Correction of Perspective Distor-
tion of Electroluminescence Images of Photovoltaic Panels”. In: IEEE Journal of
Photovoltaics 10.6 (2020), pp. 1797–1802. DOI: 10.1109/JPHOTOV.2020.3019949.
[46]
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization”. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations (Dec. 2014).
[47]
TorchVision maintainers and contributors. TorchVision: PyTorch’s Computer Vision
library. Nov. 2016. URL: https://github.com/pytorch/vision.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
57
==PAGE:64==
[48]
Chien-Yao Wang, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao. YOLOv7: Train-
able bag-of-freebies sets new state-of-the-art for real-time object detectors. 2022.
arXiv: 2207.02696 [cs.CV].
[49]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. In: CoRR abs/1706.03762 (2017).
arXiv: 1706.03762. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
58
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
==PAGE:65==
A
Code
The functions, classes, and scripts created for performing the experiments of this project
are available at this link and also in the following webpage:
https://github.com/josepbf/EL_detection_code
The code contains these different scripts:
• EL_dataset.py: classes and functions to load the dataset, sampling mechanism and
data augmentation techniques, including Cut, Paste and Learn with Fioresi et al. [37]
dataset.
• EL_metrics.py: class and functions to upload the training and validation metrics to
Weights & Biases.
• EL_models.py: class and functions to load the detection neural networks.
• EL_optim.py: class and functions to load different optimizers.
• EL_train.py: main script to initialize the training setup. Include the use of a parser
to define training parameters via shell to run experiments.
• EL_train_utils.py: main function to train the detection neural network.
• EL_utils.py: utility function used across all the scripts.
• EL_validation.py: classes and functions to evaluate the models performance on all
the metrics mentioned in Section 2.2.6.
• jobscript.sh: example of a shell script used to train a detection neural network.
Detection of artifacts in infrared images and video of PV solar panels
59
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
