==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Sub-Gene Level Re-Analysis
of Proteomics Data
Author:
Mikkel Swartz (s174586)
Date:
January 28th 2024
Supervisor:
Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup (krivi@dtu.dk)
==PAGE:2==
1
ABSTRACT
1
Abstract
In this project, 19 different published data sets have been re-analyzed for sub-gene level changes with differential
gene abundance analysis and differential splicing analysis. The project aimed to show that alternative splicing
has a great impact on sub-gene level changes and inspire others to look for alternative splicing.
Despite limited mentions of isoforms or alternative splicing in proteomics papers [1], this project found,
that close to two-thirds of the sub-gene level changes were affected by alternative splicing. This was observed
across 74 comparisons in 19 different proteomics data sets. For approximately half of the sub-gene level
changes, the change was solely due to differential splicing, which is groundbreaking for proteomics data. It
was found that due to the differences among the genes that were observed in the conducted analyses, both
differential gene abundance and splicing analyses will be needed to obtaining comprehensive insights of the
data.
Comparisons between isoform and peptide level data, while showing small overlap, suggest that the two
analyses capture distinct patterns, meaning that analysis at both isoform and peptide level data are justified
when analyzing proteomics data.
Another significant finding was the impact of total abundance bias correction, a crucial, but currently
absent, step in proteomic data analysis workflows. Without correction, differential gene abundance and
splicing analyses resulted in high false positive and false negative rates. This emphasizes the necessity of
total abundance bias correction, especially in the splicing analysis where the median false positive rate across
comparisons was 45%.
Validation of the methods used in this project showed that the differentially splicing analysis required
at least four replicates of samples for the method to be trustworthy. It is therefore a suggestion from this
project, to produce data sets with higher replicates for enhanced understanding, despite associated time and
cost implications.
The results from the gene set enrichment analysis demonstrated differences in which pathways that were
significant in splicing and abundance data. In several comparisons, no pathways were observed to be significant
in the splicing data, especially using the functional class score method. For some comparisons many pathways
were observed in both gene abundance and isoform data, and most of them showed a noticeable overlap of
their pathways.
i
==PAGE:3==
2
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
2
Acknowledgments
This project is the master’s thesis project for the finalization of my MSc Bioinformatics & System Biology at
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project was made in the Department of Healthtech and
accounts for 30 ECTS points.
I would like to give a huge thanks to my supervisor, Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup, who introduced me to the
field of proteomics and guided me throughout this project. It has been a pleasure to write my thesis with
Kristoffer as supervisor and wishes him the best for his future research.
A thank should also be given to Bernat Godayol Farran (s212717), who has conducted a similar project at
peptide level data, instead of isoform, in parallel to this project. Some tasks have been made in collaboration
and results have been shared between us.
I would also like to thank Simone Tiberi and the rest of the people behind the IsoBayes paper. Their work
was part of the reason for the initiation of this project.
The Healthtech department should be thanked for making it possible for master students, to have a
physical place to write their projects together with other fellow students. This makes a project period like
this more enjoyable. On that note, I would like to thank Melissa Ensmenger, Caroline Uldahl Martensen,
Christian Peder Jacobsen and Søren Vestergren Sandgaard for sharing the time in the student room, "Jungle
of Confusion", at the department.
This project would not have been possible to complete without the help and support from my family, and
especially Marie Fobian Jensen who both have bought a house with me and said "yes" to my proposal for
marriage during this thesis. All along she has let me use the hours needed, while she has taken care of the
household and everything else around me.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Abstract
i
2
Acknowledgments
ii
3
Introduction
1
3.1
Workflow for Analysis of MS-Based Proteomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
3.1.1
False Discovery Rate in Peptide Association . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3.2
Total Abundance Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.3
Analysis of Proteomics Data with limma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.3.1
Comparison of Results from limma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3.2
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
Evolution in Gene Expression Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4.1
The Concept of Alternative Splicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4.2
Isoforms and Their Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
Difference between Peptide and Isoform data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.6
Difference between Splicing of Isoforms and Gene Abundance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.7
Why this Project?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Methods
9
4.1
Programming Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Project Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3
Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.3.1
Data Used in This Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.4
Correction for Total Abundance Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.5
Method Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.5.1
Statistical Uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.5.2
Peptide-Association-Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.6
Data Normalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.7
Differential Gene Abundance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.8
Differential Splicing of Isoforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.9
Comparisons of topSplice and topTable Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.10 Significant Genes Across Comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.10.1 Publication Count for Each Gene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.11 Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Results
15
5.1
Total Abundance Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Validation of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.1
Statistical Uncertainty for Differential Gene Abundance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.2
Statistical Uncertainty for Differential Splicing Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.3
Influence of Peptide-Association-Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3
Influence of Normalization Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.4
Differential Splicing vs. Differential Abundance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.5
Isoform vs. Peptide Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.6
Significant Genes Across Data Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.7
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Discussion
26
7
Conclusion
29
8
Future Perspectives
29
References
30
A Appendix
35
==PAGE:5==
3
INTRODUCTION
3
Introduction
One of the cornerstones of our bodies, animals, plants, and life in general, is proteins. They are essential
in most of the biological processes within any given cell. It is therefore crucial to understand proteins, to
understand all aspects of the entire body, down to every single cell in it.
Proteomics is the field of protein structures, interactions, functions, and their part of cellular activities.
Proteomics has officially existed since 1995 when Mark Wilkins defined the concept of the proteome. Since
then, researchers have gained valuable information and a better understanding of how humans and other
organisms work in terms of protein structures and their functions. In this project, data of protein abundances
was analyzed. The data used in this projects is based on detecting the proteins with mass spectrometry
(MS) techniques [2, 3]. Proteomics data categorizes information about the proteins, often broken down into
peptides, present in a sample and their respective abundances. This type of data represents the proteins that
are actually present in a given sample and the quantities in which they exist [2].
3.1
Workflow for Analysis of MS-Based Proteomics
In MS-based proteomic workflows, two different methods can be used, namely top-down and bottom-up
proteomics. Both methods begin with the extraction of the proteins, but the main difference between the
two methods is the step right after protein extraction. In bottom-up proteomics the proteins are digested
into peptides, typically by the serine protease called trypsin [2, 4]. In top-down proteomics, the proteins are
not cleaved to peptides but are analyzed in their intact protein form. This gives the possibility to study the
proteins at their full complexity, however with many complications and limitations, such as low signal-to-noise
ratio for large proteins, low abundance of many proteins, and low solubility compared to peptides [4]. For
this project, the focus has been on data from bottom-up proteomics, which is the most utilized of the two
methods [2, 4].
The first step in bottom-up proteomics is the sample preparation, which is the most critical step. During the
sample preparation, the samples must be treated in exactly the same way to make accurate and reproducible
results. It is important to exclude potential non-biological factors, which include differences in solvents and
sample storage, that can affect the proteins in terms of their interactions or expression. Two identical samples
that have been handled differently can yield different results in the downstream analysis [2, 5].
After the proteins are soluted, they are cleaved into peptides using trypsin, which cleaves the proteins
C-terminally to lysine or arginine, leaving a positively charged amino acid in the C-terminal of every peptide.
The peptides can then be analyzed using MS, where the liquid containing the peptides is converted into
gaseous ions. The MS accelerates the ions using an electric field, and thereby separates them based on their
different mass-to-charge ratios (m/z). The mass separation results in ions reaching the detector at different
times, and record the abundance of ions at various m/z values. The detector registers the number of ions
at different m/z values, providing a mass spectrum. The m/z values are then used to identify and quantify
peptides in the sample, and the abundance of each peptide is determined by counting the number of ions with
a specific m/z value from the MS-spectra [5].
The analysis of the MS-spectra is a challenging task that is often carried out with the MaxQuant software [6].
MaxQuant is using a range of algorithms specifically designed for for high-resolution, quantitative MS-data,
including correlation analysis and graph theory. MaxQuant is able to quantify several hundreds of thousands
1 of 35
==PAGE:6==
3.1
Workflow for Analysis of MS-Based Proteomics
3
INTRODUCTION
peptides per experiment with high accuracy, making it a very robust tool. For identification of peptides,
MaxQuant compares the observed MS spectra against a sequence database containing true protein sequences,
and annotates the peptide sequence with the highest probability [6].
3.1.1
False Discovery Rate in Peptide Association
The method for peptide identification is not perfect. To quantify that only up to a specific amount of peptide
associations are wrongly associated, the likelihood of false identifications is assessed by what is called False
Discovery Rate (FDR). As described previously, the MS spectra are annotated to peptide sequences from a
database. This database contains peptide sequences from forward reads, and the annotations makes up the
forward list. All spectra are then annotated again to a reverse read database. The reverse database is simply
the forward database with the single change that all sequences are reversed. Since the reads are reversed, it is
expected that these annotations are incorrect. These annotations make up the reverse list [6].
The Posterior Error Probability (PEP) is calculated for each peptide in each of the lists with annotations
to get the probability of any given peak in the MS spectra to be associated to the correct peptide. The two
probability densities can be described in Equation 3.1.
p(s, L|X = true ∨false)
and
p(s, L|X = false)
(3.1)
To the left, the probability for a peptide in the forward list are found. The probability for a peptide in the
reverse list can be found to the right. Here, the probability score, s, for a peptide of length L is given the
correctness of the annotation X. The correctness of annotation can either be true or false for peptides in the
forward list whereas the correctness of annotations can only be false for the reverse list.
For each individual peptide, the PEP is defined as in Equation 3.2.
p(X = false|s, L) = p(s, L|X = False)p(X = false)
p(s, L
(3.2)
here p(X = false|s, L) is the posterior probability of the sequence being false given the observed score s
and peptide length L and p(X = false) is the priori probability of the sequence being false. Since all the
associations in the reverse list are false associations, the PEP for the reverse list will in general be lower than
from the forward list. Since the PEP is defined as a function of peptide length, the PEP distribution will
differ depending on the different peptide lengths. For short peptides, the PEP densities will overlap more
than for longer peptides.
In summary, the two lists of peptide identifications, the forward list derived from an actual database and the
reverse list from a reversed database, are sorted based on their PEP. The PEP is calculated for each peptide,
representing the probability of correct identification. By controlling the FDR at 1%, peptides are accepted
one by one from the top of the sorted list until 1% of peptides from the reverse list are included. This rigorous
filtering ensures that only a minimal percentage, specifically 1%, of the accepted peptide associations are
expected to be false positive. [6]
2 of 35
==PAGE:7==
3.2
Total Abundance Bias
3
INTRODUCTION
3.2
Total Abundance Bias
While MaxQuant takes care of normalizing the data using median centering of the peptide ratios [6], there is
a hypothesis that the total abundance of peptides in the sample can influence the result of the downstream
analysis. Here, this is called the total abundance bias. It has not been possible to find any external sources
or literature describing this matter, but the supervisor of this project Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup, KVS, has
observed a possible influence of total abundance bias in several data sets [7].
The reasoning for concern is that despite careful sample preparation and normalization of the data, the
total abundance of all peptides varies between samples. The total abundance bias is therefore a technical
artifact of the sample preparation and the experimental run. A given gene, isoform, or peptide can have
a difference in its abundance between samples. If that difference is evened out after correction for total
abundance bias, the initial discovery of a differential abundance can be marked as a false positive. By adding
the total abundance as a co-factor to the linear model produced by limma (see Section 3.3), it is expected
that the data is corrected for the total abundance bias.
3.3
Analysis of Proteomics Data with limma
A popular tool for high-throughput analysis of proteimics data is the R-based tool called limma (linear models
for microarray data). The tool was originally developed for microarray data when it was released in 2003, but
has been extended to handle RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) data as well. Even though the intention of limma
is to be used for gene expression analysis, the linear models of limma can for example be used to analyze
single-cell gene expression data, DNA methylation arrays or, as in this case, quantitative proteomics data of
peptide abundances [8]. For this project, five functions from limma have been used, namely lmFit, eBayes,
topTable, diffSplice and topSplice.
The function lmFit is used for fitting a linear model for each gene in the data, based on either the least squares
method (default) or the robust regression method, creating a MArrayLM-object. The MArrayLM-object from
lmFit, is utilized by the function eBayes to compute either moderated t-statistics, moderated F-statistics and
log-odds of differential abundance of peptides in the data using empirical Bayes statistical test. eBayes is
both fast and numerically stable, which makes it suitable for reproducible high-throughput analyses. The
function utilizes a Bayesian hierarchical model to find gene-wise variances in the data, but instead of using
prior knowledge as a usual Bayesian procedure, it estimates the information directly from an overall pattern
of the observed data. The results from the statistical tests can then be explored with the function topTable,
which displays the top results as well as calculating the adjusted p-values using Benjamini Hochberg method
as default [8, 9].
The functions diffSplice and topSplice can in combination be used for differential splicing analysis using linear
models. The method is intended for exon-level expression data, and it utilizes a linear fitted model from
lmFit, and diffSplice test for differential exon usage for each gene and each column in the MArrayLM-object
from lmFit.
diffSplice compares log-fold changes between exons within the same gene. Two tests are employed: A
F-test is used to identify differences in log-fold changes among the exons, and a t-test is conducted to compare
each individual exon to the average of all others within the same gene. Originally designed for exon microarray
data, this function can also be applied to exon-level RNA-Seq counts using voom (another limma function,
3 of 35
==PAGE:8==
3.3
Analysis of Proteomics Data with limma
3
INTRODUCTION
which is not employed in this project). To compare the log-fold changes between exons and genes, diffSplice
needs to be provided with a list of which exons belongs to which genes. In this project, peptide-level data
have been used instead of entire exons. This is different than what the use of diffSplice was originally designed
for, and a list of the relations between peptide and genes was used instead of a list of relations between exon
and genes.
The results from diffSplice can be displayed by the topSplice-function, which works similarly to topTable.
The results are displayed by top-ranking the results either based on simes-, f-, or F-statistic tests.
To test for differential splicing, the tools from limma is considerably faster than other alternative tools. Since
this project analyzes across many different data sets and thereby on a large amount of data, limma was a
logical tool to choose [8]. Another reason for using limma in the analysis is that limma can be utilized to
perform both differential gene abundance analysis and differential splicing analysis. Since the two analyses
use functions within the same package, the results from the two analyses are easier to compare due to shared
underlying features.
3.3.1
Comparison of Results from limma
During this project, results from several differential gene abundance analyses and differential splicing analyses
were compared. The list of significant genes from the analyses were compered using two measures, the overlap
coefficient and the Fisher’s exact test. These two measures made it possible to compare analyses of abundance
to abundance, splicing to splicing, and abundance to splicing.
The overlap coefficient, also called the Szymkiewicz-Simpson coefficient, was used to determine the similarity
of which significant genes that were observed in two analyses. The overlap coefficient is defined as the size of
the intersection of the gene list, divided by the size of the shortest gene list as seen in Equation 3.3, which
makes it robust when the length of lists to compare have varying sizes. The equation for the calculation of
the overlap coefficient can be seen in Equation 3.3.
O(A, B) =
|A ∩B|
min(|A|, |B|)
(3.3)
Here, O(A, B) is the overlap coefficient, and A and B are the list of gene IDs for significant genes in the two
data sets. The overlap coefficient can have a range from 0 to 1, where 1 means that the gene IDs in two lists
are completely identical, and 0 means that not a single gene is significant in both data sets.
The Fisher’s exact test was employed to determine the exact p-value, assessing the association between the
two gene ID lists from the data sets based on their sizes. The genes were grouped in a 2x2 matrix as seen
below.
"
A
B
C
D
#
A is the number of significant genes that were significant in both analysis 1 and 2, B is the number of genes
that were significant in analysis 1 but not in analysis 2, C is the number of genes that were significant in
analysis 2 but not in analysis 1, and finally, D was the number of genes that were not significant in either
analyses 1 or 2 [10, 11].
4 of 35
==PAGE:9==
3.3
Analysis of Proteomics Data with limma
3
INTRODUCTION
The p-value in Fisher’s test is calculated as in Equation 3.4.
p =
 a+b
a
 c+d
c

  n
a+c

= (a + b)! (c + d)! (a + c)! (b + d)!
a! b! c! d! n!
(3.4)
where p is the p-value and n is the sample size (n = a + b + c + d) [12].
If the p-value is below the significance level, 0.05, the null hypothesis can be rejected. The null hypothesis
for Fisher’s test is that "There is no association between the number of genes significant in analysis 1 and the
number of genes significant in analysis 2".
If the p-value for a majority of the tested comparisons is below 0.05, it indicates that the results of the
analyses are associated. However, it cannot be concluded solely from the Fisher’s test whether the results of
the two analyses are the same or different. The test reveals association, but the nature of that association
(similarity or difference) requires additional considerations or analyses, for example in the form of an overlap
coefficient.
3.3.2
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
One thing is to investigate isolated genes and proteins, another is to investigate entire pathways. Using Gene
Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), it is possible to extract important biological insights. Normally, GSEA
utilizes some sort of gene expression data, where the data is sorted in a ranked list based on their differential
expression, if they are over- or under-expressed and to which degree. Using these ranked lists together with
information on which genes are involved in which pathways, the GSEA generates an output that displays
which pathways that either up- or down-regulated in the samples.
Using GSEA, it can be discovered which changes with biological effects happen in the samples. In
a differential abundance analysis, a single gene, A, could show a 30-fold difference between two samples.
If all other genes that shares pathways with gene A do not have significant changes in abundance, the
30-fold difference in gene A might be biologically irrelevant. With GSEA it is possible to link all the small
changes for genes in a specific pathway and by that find a true biological change with effect for the samples [13].
In this project GSEA was used differently than usually. Instead of using a measure for gene expression, the
p-values from topTable and topSplice (see Section 3.3) were used for ranking. This is done by taking the
−log10 to the p-value, and thereby ensuring only positive numbers are present and the low p-values get the
highest ranking.
Two GSEA methods were used in this project, namely an Over-Representation Analysis (ORA) and a
Functional Class Score analysis (FCS). Both are a part of the fgsea R-package as the functions fora and
fgseaMultilevel for ORA and FCS respectively [14].
An ORA is a relatively simple approach that uses an overview of pathways with the genes related to the
pathways, and two lists of genes. Of the two lists of genes, one contains a full list of all genes observed in the
sample, and the other contains only the genes of interest. For this project, the list of genes of interest, is genes
that have been observed to be significantly differentially abundant or spliced. The ORA uses hypergeometric
tests to calculate for a gene set or pathway to be over-represented in the list of genes of interest. This is done
by evaluating if the genes in a pathway are represented more than expected in the list of interests than in the
full list of genes [14, 15].
5 of 35
==PAGE:10==
3.4
Evolution in Gene Expression Theories
3
INTRODUCTION
The FCS employs a multilevel splitting Monte Carlo approach to estimate extremely low p-values for individual
gene sets. This analysis utilizes a ranked gene list and a set of potential pathways. The key step involves
calculating an enrichment score for each pathway, quantifying how genes within the pathway are over-
represented at the top or bottom of the ranked gene list. The enrichment score is computed by reversing
the ranked list and accumulating a running sum, where each gene’s contribution depends on its membership
in the functional class. Consequently, each pathway is assigned a functional class score that indicates its
enrichment based on the ranked list. This facilitates the identification of biologically significant pathways
associated with the observed gene abundance or splicing patterns [14].
3.4
Evolution in Gene Expression Theories
In 1941, George Beadle and Edward Tatum published their ground-breaking thoughts of how the relationship
between genes and enzymes works and their impact on how organism works. This lead to Beadle in 1945
proposing a hypothesis known as the one gene, one enzyme-hypothesis. This hypothesis provided a framework
for connecting genetic information to the biochemical functions carried out by enzymes. The hypothesis was
later reformulated to one gene, one protein [16, 17].
In 1957 the English molecular biologist Francis Crick gave a lecture at University College London that changed
the basic understanding of how protein synthesis works. In that lecture, he outlined what later has been
known as the Central Dogma [18]. A renewed model of the Central Dogma was later presented in the scientific
journal Nature with the title Central Dogma of Molecular Biology in 1970, which further shaped the narrative
of protein synthesis [18, 19]. Crick proposed that information can be transferred from DNA to DNA, from
DNA to RNA, and from RNA to protein. Moreover, it was proposed that it might be possible, under special
circumstances, that information could be transferred from RNA to RNA, from RNA to DNA, and from DNA
to protein [19].
In recent times, it has been proven that one gene, one protein hypothesis is far from right in most cases.
Large-scale cDNA cloning and sequences have revealed that 90% of genes expressed in mammalians are
alternatively spliced [20, 21]. Other sources states that up to 95% of multi-exon genes undergo alternative
splicing as described in later sections [22–24].
3.4.1
The Concept of Alternative Splicing
During transcription, the DNA is translated into pre-mRNA which contains both introns (non-coding sections)
and exons (coding sections). Following the one gene, one protein hypothesis, the introns are removed and all
the exons are used to produce the final mRNA that is later translated to the final protein. However, this is
not always the case. When alternative splicing occurs, some exons are left out and the order of exons can be
rearranged, thereby giving the possibility for several different mRNAs to be constructed [25, 26]. The different
mRNA sequences result in different proteins, that share similar functions since some exons correspond to a
specific functional domain of the protein. Proteins produced from the same gene due to different splicing
events are called isoforms [20, 26].
The control and regulation of alternative splicing is a complex matter. Short sequences called exonic splicing
enhancers (ESEs) promote splicing, while exonic splicing silencers (ESSs) inhibits it.
Intronic splicing
enhancers (ISEs) and intronic splicing silencers (ISSs) located in introns also play a role. Splicing factors
6 of 35
==PAGE:11==
3.5
Difference between Peptide and Isoform data
3
INTRODUCTION
like serine-arginine-rich (SR) proteins and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) interact with
these elements. Kinases and phosphatases can modify the activity of splicing factors through phosphorylation.
Epigenetic factors such as DNA methylation and histone modifications, as well as RNA secondary structure,
also influence alternative splicing.
Additionally, competition between splicing sites and cellular signals
contributes to the regulation of this process, allowing cells to generate diverse protein isoforms for various
functions [20, 27].
3.4.2
Isoforms and Their Importance
Isoforms are, as described in the previous section, variants of the same protein derived from the same gene
through alternative splicing. Since the functional parts of a protein typically are encoded in a few specific
exons, the inclusion and exclusion of an exon often results in significant functional changes of a protein. In
some cases, two or more isoforms of the same gene have directly opposite effects [28].
For the gene casp-2, two isoforms are possible; a long (casp-2L) and a short one (casp-2S). casp-2L promotes
apoptosis (cell death) whereas casp-2S inhibits apoptosis. The underlying specific mechanisms of either of the
isoforms are not yet fully understood, but the bottom line is that the presence or absence of the two isoforms
is a matter of life or death for the cell [29].
A less drastic functional change, is within the insulin receptor. Here, the function of the insulin receptor is
influenced by which of its two isoforms that is produced, the IR-A and IR-B. The IR-B includes exon 11,
whereas IR-A does not. This leads to IR-A having a higher affinity for insulin. The inclusion of exon 11
is tissue-related. In adults, IR-A is found everywhere in the body, while in fetal and cancer tissues, it is
more uncommon. Having more IR-A than IR-B is connected to insulin resistance in people with myotonic
dystrophy (genetic disorder that causes progressive muscle weakness and difficulty relaxing muscles after
contraction) and possibly people with type 2 diabetes [30].
3.5
Difference between Peptide and Isoform data
As described in Section 3.1, proteins are in bottom-up proteomics digested into peptides. Therefore, it is the
peptide identifications and their abundances that are returned from most MS-based proteomics workflows.
Since it is know that the one gene, one protein hypothesis is false (see Section 3.4), it is easy to understand
why the estimation of protein abundances is difficult and generates a lot of noise, since several peptides maps
to multiple protein isoforms. When a lot of peptides are shared between genes, the association between
peptide abundance and peptide labeling can be erroneous, (see Section 3.1.1) and isoform abundances are,
because of this, challenging to estimate [31].
A novel statistical method called IsoBayes, proposed in a not yet published paper by Bollon J, et al. [31],
deals with the challenge of the inference of abundances at isoform level. It uses a Bayesian probabilistic
framework, which, according to their own tests, results in high specificity and sensitivity. IsoBayes relies
upon peptide abundance data and works with inputs from several proteomics tools, including MaxQuant.
Moreover, it can include mRNA abundances, which gives the possibility to reach even higher accuracy [31]. If
this tool can live up to its own promises, it can be groundbreaking for isoform analysis within the proteomics
field, since these types of analyses previously have been found to be a challenging matter [32, 33].
7 of 35
==PAGE:12==
3.6
Difference between Splicing of Isoforms and Gene Abundance
3
INTRODUCTION
3.6
Difference between Splicing of Isoforms and Gene Abundance
Detecting whether isoforms are differentially spliced within two samples is interesting to investigate, likewise
is the difference in gene abundance between two samples. In this project gene abundance is defined as the
summarized peptide abundance for all peptides mapped to a given gene. The gene abundance includes the
abundance of all isoforms within the gene, which thereby distinguishes it from protein abundance which is
typically defined for the total abundance of a protein molecule within a cell or sample, and thereby potentially
differentiating between different isoforms[34, 35]. Gene abundance is not to be mixed up with gene expression.
Gene expression reflects the level of which a gene is transcribed, and thereby the level of mRNA in a sample.
A typical way of doing gene expression level analysis is therefore by RNA-Seq [28, 36].
Differential splicing is defined as a gene that is alternatively spliced under two different conditions, resulting
in different isoforms having different abundances between conditions. Two conditions could be if a given
substance, for example a signal molecule or a drug, is present or not in the environment, or if a gene is
transcribed in two different tissues. For the splicing data used in this project, the abundance for each isoform
is the estimate of isoform abundance estimated by IsoBayes.
3.7
Why this Project?
As described previously, several studies have shown that up to 95% of multi-exon genes undergoes alternative
splicing [22–24], and the estimated number of protein-coding genes have decreased from 100.000 estimated
genes in the 1990’ies, to an estimate of 20.000 genes today [37, 38]. Despite the discovery of the concept
and proof of alternative splicing of proteins, the understanding of the one gene, one protein hypothesis and
the learnings from the central dogma seem to still be the rule of thumb. This is postulated since only 2% of
articles within the proteomics field in the first nine months of 2023 mentions alternative splicing, isoforms or
protein variants [1].
In this project, it is hypothesized that despite the relevance of protein isoforms, they are understudied and
overlooked in the field of proteomics. The aim of this project is to show that multiple data sets of proteomics
data contain undescribed events of alternative splicing at sub-gene level. Moreover, the aim is to formulate
and validate a methodology and pipeline based on limma to detect alternative splicing at sub-gene level. The
ultimate goal of this project is to convince researchers to analyze their data with alternative splicing in mind
and unlock the undiscovered potential of the data they already have at their hands.
8 of 35
==PAGE:13==
4
METHODS
4
Methods
4.1
Programming Environment
This project has been written entirely in R (version 4.3.1) [39] using RStudio (version 2023.03.1.446) [40].
The default environment had imported the following packages in the stated order:
Attached packages
Additionally used packages
without being attached
Package
Version
Citation
Package
Version
Citation
tidyverse
2.0.0
[41]
biomaRt
2.56.1
[42, 43]
plyr
1.1.4
[44]
NormalyzerDE
1.18.1
[45]
limma
2.56.2
[46]
gridExtra
2.3
[47]
fgsea
1.26.0
[14]
msigdbr
7.5.1
[48]
Table 1: Used R-packages with versions stated
The usage of packages will be described throughout the report when relevant.
4.2
Project Workflow
The workflow for the project is depicted in Figure 1. The project started with data acquisition and annotation,
followed by initial analyses with differential gene abundance analysis and differential splicing analysis to
confirm that signal could be observed in the data.
Data acquisition 
and annotation
Initial main analyses 
(confirm signal)
Method validation
Additional 
investigations
Method validation
Compare main 
analyses
Additional analyses
Figure 1: Overall workflow for the project.
The methods were validated to confirm the amount of captured noise. Additional investigations in the form of
normalization checks and total abundance bias correction were carried out. Selected changes from additional
investigations were implemented and methods were validated again. The differential gene abundance analyses
and differential splicing analyses on different data sets were compared and lastly, additional analyses with
significant genes across comparisons and gene set enrichment analysis were conducted.
4.3
Data Acquisition
Initially, 78 data sets from the Proteomics Identification Database (PRIDE) [49] were provided. The 78 studies
and their data sets were individually examined and validated for several different parameters to determine if a
given data set was suited for being used in this project. The task of validating the 78 data sets was divided
with a fellow student, Bernat Godayol Farran, BGF, and our results were shared. A study was considered
suited for use in this project if the data samples were annotatable in terms of whether each sample was
9 of 35
==PAGE:14==
4.3
Data Acquisition
4
METHODS
annotated to a specific biological aspect or condition. Furthermore, the data should be conditional in terms of
whether it was possible to deduce the biological conditions.
Five studies were excluded since they were considered a special case study. This could, for example, be if
the study did not have a biological aim. The studies were excluded even though they fulfilled the criteria of
being annotatable and conditional.
The following parameters were validated for each data sets;
• organism used in the study (Homo sapiens, human, or Mus musculus, mouse)
• the year of publication
• the model of mass spectrometer used in the study
• MaxQuant were used for analyzing MS data
• either 1 or 5 were used as FDR as a cutoff for gene and peptide
• the number of replicates within each sample group
Due to validation purposes of the used methods, it was decided to exclude studies with only two replicates.
For the data sets that passed the filtering, it was specified which samples in the data sets that should be
grouped as replicates, and hereafter which sample groups that should be compared in the following analysis.
The data sets provided by KVS were stored in two lists of data frames with one data frame for each study. Of
the two lists of data frames, one contained splicing data and the other contained abundance data. Each data
frame had the same structure with columns being samples and rows being gene- or isoform names depending
on type of data set type and each cell contained the measured abundance. The isoform data set provided by
KVS was created with IsoBayes [31]. Raw peptide abundance data from PRIDE, filtered by FDR, was used
as input for IsoBayes , which was run in FDR mode. Both the isoform and the gene abundance data were
log-transformed by KVS. In addition to both data sets, a list of which gene that codes for which isoforms was
provided by KVS. The list was originally from GENCODE [50].
Another list was created containing the information for which sample groups within each study that should
be compared. This list was used to name the comparisons and for use in parallel workflows.
4.3.1
Data Used in This Project
The inspection of all studies described in Section 4.3 resulted in 34 of the 78 studies being annotatable,
conditional, not being a special case study and with at least 3 replicates. The 34 studies had 145 different
comparisons in total, with a median of 3 comparisons per study. However, as it will be presented in Section 5.2,
all studies with less than 4 replicates per sample were removed from the final analysis. This resulted in 19
studies with 74 comparisons being kept, still with a median of 3 comparisons per study. The minimum and
maximum number of comparisons per study were 1 and 17, respectively.
For studies with a minimum of 4 replicates, the median total number of genes was 4,402. The minimum
number of genes was 2,057, and 7,015 was the maximum number of genes in a study. Homo sapiens were the
organism in 13 studies and Mus musculus was the organism in six studies. The publication year extends from
2019 to 2022, with 1, 10, 3, and 5 studies from each year, respectively. Nine different mass spectrometers were
used for the studies with Q Exactive HF being most frequent and was used in seven different studies. An
FDR level of 1 for gene and peptide was used in 16 of the studies, and an FDR level of 5 in the last three
studies. The number of sample replicates within each group was 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, and 24 for 11, 3, 1, 2, 1, and 1
studies respectively. A complete list of all studies used in this project can be found in Appendix A.
10 of 35
==PAGE:15==
4.4
Correction for Total Abundance Bias
4
METHODS
4.4
Correction for Total Abundance Bias
The issue of total abundance bias, as described in Section 3.2, was tackled by adding the total abundance
of each sample as a co-factor to the design matrix described in Section 4.7. This was done for both the
differential abundance and differential isoform analyses. Since the total abundance for each sample was added
to the design matrix, it was taken into account by lmFit when making the linear model. When adding the
total abundance co-factor, topTable was specified to use coef = 2 to utilize the grouping of the sample as a
comparison parameter from the linear model and not the total abundance.
4.5
Method Validation
To validate if the observed signal was trustworthy, it was needed to validate the methods in terms of the
two main aspects of concern, namely the statistical uncertainty and the peptide-association-error. For both
validations, a scrambling approach was used.
4.5.1
Statistical Uncertainty
Both topTable and diffSplice rely on a linear fitted model constructed with limma’s lmFit function, as described
in Section 4.7 and Section 4.8. lmFit is in both analyses provided with a design-matrix describing which
group each sample has been annotated to during the annotation described in Section 4.3.
A scrambling method was used to simulate the statistical uncertainty by simulating the analysis with 100
iterations of the workflow presented in Section 4.7 and Section 4.8. In each iteration, the design-matrix was
randomly scrambled using the base-function sample. Through 100 iterations, results of the analyses with
random sampling of the groups were produced. The results from the simulations were used to calculate the
background noise, the fold-change, and the modified z-score for both gene abundance and splicing data. The
following explanation is carried out for the differential gene abundance analysis, but the same applies for the
differential splicing analysis.
The background noise is defined as the median number of observed genes in the simulated analysis. For each
comparison, the background noise is calculated by taking the median of the number of significant differentially
abundant genes across the 100 scrambled iterations.
The fold-change, FC, is a measure of the quantitative difference between the results from the differential gene
abundance and the background noise in each comparison. The FC was calculated by dividing the number of
significantly differentially abundant genes for each comparison with the background noise for the comparison
as seen in Equation 4.1.
FCcomp = OBScomp
BGcomp
(4.1)
Here, OBS is the number of observed genes that are significantly differentially abundant and BG is the
observed background noise in the abundance data. With a significance level of 0.05, it can be expected to see
the observed values from analyses to be 20-fold higher than the background noise, since the theoretical FC
without taking statistical uncertainty into account is 1/0.05 = 20.
To determine if the observed results could be classified as an outlier compared to the background noise, the
11 of 35
==PAGE:16==
4.6
Data Normalization
4
METHODS
modified Z-score, originally described by Iglewicz and Hoaglin in 1993 [51, 52], was used, since the data is not
normal distributed. The modified Z-score is defined as
mZOBS.comp = 0.6745 · (xOBS.comp −MndBG.comp)
MADcomp
(4.2)
Here, mZOBS.comp is the modified Z-score for the comparison, xOBS.comp is the observed result for a comparison,
and MndBG.comp is the median of the background noise for the comparison. MADcomp is the median of the
absolute deviation about the median for the comparison defined as
MADcomp = Mnd(|xOBS.comp −MndBG.comp|)
(4.3)
Iglewicz and Hoaglin suggest that a data point should be categorized as an outlier if the absolute modified
Z-scores is above 3.5, |mZOBS.comp| > 3.5, which is equivalent to a standard deviation of 3.5 [52].
4.5.2
Peptide-Association-Error
As described in Section 3.1.1, 1% of all annotations in the raw data will be false negative, why it is needed to
validate the analyses in Section 4.7 and Section 4.8. Since the peptide-association-error is at peptide-level and
not at isoform-level, KVS made the simulation for the peptide-association-error and provided the simulated
data for comparison to the original observed results. KVS simulated the effect of peptide-association-error by
adding an additional 1% association-error. The simulation was done by taking a subset of 1% of the peptide
data and scrambling the association between peptide and abundance measure. Here, 20 iteration were carried
out, producing 20 simulated data sets. The 20 simulated data sets were run through IsoBayes to produce
isoform-level data. Thereafter, the simulated isoform-level data was run through the workflow presented in
Section 4.8. The results were compared to the original observed values with the FC and modified Z-score as
described in Section 4.5.1.
4.6
Data Normalization
It was tested if the normalization of the data provided by KVS was sufficient and appropriate, or if it was
possible to obtain a smaller variance within the samples. The R-package NormalyzerDE [53] was used, which
helped to produce several normalization’s with different normalization methods. In this case, the data provided
by KVS was log-transformed and normalized by median normalization.
Five data sets were randomly selected (PXD008726, PXD011962, PXD017976, PXD028034, and PXD033053)
and the normalyzer function from NormalyzerDE was run with noLogTransform set to TRUE since the data
was already log-transformed, otherwise standard settings was used.
Cyclic Loess normalization was implemented in both the differential splicing analysis and the differential
abundance analysis. Just prior to fitting the linear model using lmFit, the samples were normalized using
performCyclicLoessNormalization from NormalyzerDE with noLogTransform set to TRUE and remaining as
standard settings. The impact of Cyclic Loess normalization was analyzed with the workflow described in
Section 4.9.
12 of 35
==PAGE:17==
4.7
Differential Gene Abundance
4
METHODS
4.7
Differential Gene Abundance
For the differential gene abundance analysis, the gene abundance data set was used. In a parallel workflow,
each comparison was tested. A list with two data frames, called limma_input, was created for the specific
comparison. The first data frame contained the abundance measures for the samples that were within the
specific comparison. It was decided only to include rows with at least four non-missing values. The second
data frame contained all the sample names for the comparison and which samples that belonged to which
group. A design matrix was constructed based on the grouping of the samples, meaning that the abundance
for the two groups would be tested directly against each other.
limma ’s lmFit was used to make a linear model based on the abundance measures and the design matrix
using default parameters. The linear model from lmFit was hereafter run through limma ’s eBayes function
to compute moderated t-statistics, moderated F-statistics and log-odds for differential expression. The new
linear model from eBayes was then used as input for limma’s topTable. In order to get the output for all rows,
number was set to infinity, otherwise, default parameters were used.
4.8
Differential Splicing of Isoforms
A differential splicing analysis was carried out in roughly the same way as the differential abundance analysis.
The first part of the parallel workflow described in Section 4.7 was used, but this time with the splicing data,
instead of the gene abundance data.
The linear model created with lmFit was, instead of being parsed to eBayes, parsed directly to limma’s
diffSplice function. diffSplice was carried out with default parameters and given the linear model from lmFit
as input. Furthermore, diffSplice was provided with the reference list for the gene IDs and isoform IDs sorted
to match the isoform IDs from the abundance data frame in limma_input. The results from diffSplice were
further displayed with the topSplice function from limma. The number of output rows were set to infinity to
ensure that all rows were saved, and not just the top results, and the test method was set to F-test.
4.9
Comparisons of topSplice and topTable Results
In order to compare results created by topTable and topSplice the following workflow was created. For a direct
quantitative comparison, a data frame was construed to list the number of observed significant genes for each
comparison in each analysis. The data frame was visualized in numerous ways using a combination of box
plots and violin plots as well as scatter plots and tables.
For all analyses, a significance level of 0.05 was used to determine if a gene was significantly differenially
abundant or spliced. To compare results from two analyses the overlap coefficient as well as Fisher’s exact
test were computed for all comparisons. This was accomplished in order to measure if the significant genes in
two analyses were the same genes, and if the number of genes observed in two analyses were associated.
4.10
Significant Genes Across Comparisons
To get the number of significant genes across comparisons, the results from topSplice and topTable were used
to get a list of all significant genes. For all genes, the number of comparisons each gene was significantly
differentially abundant or spliced in was counted.
13 of 35
==PAGE:18==
4.11
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
4
METHODS
4.10.1
Publication Count for Each Gene
To find the publication count for each gene, the gene names were needed instead of the Ensemble IDs from
the raw data. For this, the R-package biomaRt was used [42, 43]. The Ensemble database was used by
connecting via useMart("ensembl") and the data sets for human and mouse (hsapiens_gene_ensembl and
mmusculus_gene_ensembl) were specified by using the UseDataset function. The getBM function was used
to download the gene name based on the gene IDs. The gene names were in form of the HUGO Gene
Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) [54] approved gene symbols. biomaRt was not able to find gene names for
21 out of our 6967 genes. Two gene IDs (ENSG00000015479.20 and ENSG00000280987.4) were mapped to
the gene name MATR3. Both IDs were kept in the data. The 21 gene IDs with no gene names were left out.
To estimate how many publications a given gene was mentioned in, the function entrez_search from the R-
package rentrez was used to search in PubMed [55] for a given query [56]. entrez_search was specified to search
in PubMed with the db option, and the term option was given a query of the <gene_name>[Title/Abstract].
In this way, it was recorded if the gene name was mentioned in either the title or the abstract of a publication.
Due to the low robustness of the method, a lot of gene names were identical to other abbreviations, such as
SET, MET, CA2, and Sars. All publication counts higher than the count for TP53 were therefore replaced by
NA. 37 publication counts were changed by this. TP35 was chosen since it is generally known to be the most
cited gene [57].
4.11
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
The GSEA with both FCS and ORA was performed on both the gene abundance and isoform data sets.
Possible pathways were loaded using the function msigdbr from the R-package with the same name [48].
Pathways were loaded for both Homo sapiens and Mus musculus.
For the GSEA itself, the R-package fgsea was used [14]. The functions fgseaMultilevel and fora were used
for the FCS and ORA and the analyses were performed for each of the comparisons in the data sets. For
fgseaMultilevel, a list of gene names and corresponding ratings were given as input along with the pathways
and the scoreType options were set to positive. The gene ratings were calculated by the −log10(p-value),
where the p-values were extracted from either topSplice or topTable depending on the analysis.
The function fora was given a list of the significant gene IDs from either topSplice or topTable, as well as
the entire list of genes present in the data and the list of pathways from msigdr. The remaining settings were
set as default. A filter was set to only include comparisons where at least 50 genes were observed to be either
significantly differentially spliced or differentially abundant.
The method described in Section 4.10 were likewise done for pathways, counting the number of comparisons
each pathway was significant in.
14 of 35
==PAGE:19==
5
RESULTS
5
Results
5.1
Total Abundance Bias
As described in Section 3.2, it was expected that inconsistencies in sample preparation would result in
differences in total abundance within comparisons, which would influence which genes were found to be
significantly differentially abundant or spliced. As illustrated in Figure 2a and Figure 2b this hypothesis was
validated. In the most extreme case, the study with ID PXD021639, the minimum total abundance divided
by the maximum total abundance for samples within the study was 0.19, indicating a five-fold difference
between the minimum and maximum total abundance. In contrast, the median ratio between the minimum
and maximum total abundance was 0.88 across all studies.
For the differential abundance analysis, Figure 2a, a median of 64 genes was exclusively identified when the
model without total abundance as a co-factor was employed across comparisons (left side), while only a
median of 16 genes was exclusively identified with total abundance as a co-factor (right side). This means that
fewer genes were found to be significantly differentially abundant when correction for the total abundance bias
was made. When comparing the genes found to be significantly differentially abundant in the two models, a
median of 59 genes was found across all comparisons. This is illustrated in the middle of Figure 2a.
Median: 64
Median: 59
Median: 16
Median FP: 21.6 %        Median FN: 11.2 %
0
10
100
1000
Only without abundance
correction (false positive)
Both with and without
(true)
Only with abundance
correction (false negative)
Number of genes
(a) Gene abundance data.
Median: 85.5
Median: 67.5
Median: 35.5
Median FP: 45 %        Median FN: 28.3 %
0
10
100
1000
Only without abundance
correction (false positive)
Both with and without
(true)
Only with abundance
correction (false negative)
Number of genes
(b) Splicing data.
Figure 2: Number of genes with sub-gene level changes in gene abundance and splicing data. The categories
show the number of genes observed solely in data without total abundance bias correction (left), the number of
genes observed both with and without total abundance bias correction (middle), and the number of genes solely
observed with total abundance bias correction (right). Only studies with at least four replicates were used.
In the context of the differential splicing analysis, Figure 2b, a similar pattern emerged. Across all compar-
isons, a median of 67.5 genes was observed with both models (middle), a median of 85.5 genes was observed
exclusively in the data without total abundance bias correction (left side), and a median of 35.5 was exclusively
observed in the model with total abundance as a co-factor (right side). Correcting for total abundance bias
lead to the removal of approximately half of the observed values.
15 of 35
==PAGE:20==
5.2
Validation of Methods
5
RESULTS
Based on Section 3.2, the genes that were found solely by the model that did not correct for total abundance,
can be classified as false positives. Likewise, the observed values only found with total abundance bias
correction can be classified as false negatives. With this, the false positive and false negative rates were
calculated for each comparison. The false negative rate for abundance data was 11.2%, and 28.3% for splicing
data for analyses that did not correct for total abundance bias. In terms of false positives in the differential
gene abundance analysis, 21.6% of the observed values without total abundance bias correction were false
positives. The false positive rate for differential splicing analysis was 45%.
With this knowledge, it was evident that correction for total abundance bias is important and has a significant
impact on the results for both gene abundance data and splicing data, however with more influence for splicing
data. Thus, it is necessary to correct for total abundance bias. Without total abundance bias correction,
about half of the observed results were false positives in the differential splicing analysis, and a big number of
false negatives were undiscovered as well.
It was investigated if the genes that were found to be significant only in the model that did not correct for
the total abundance bias tended to be either up- or down-regulated. Here, no clear pattern emerged, but a
slight tendency for more up-regulated genes was seen.
5.2
Validation of Methods
5.2.1
Statistical Uncertainty for Differential Gene Abundance Analysis
Since this project proposed new methods, it was crucial to make a validation of the methods to be certain
that they are trustworthy. As described in Section 4.5, two major concerns of the methods were identified,
namely the statistical uncertainty for the grouping of samples and the influence of peptide-association-error.
In the validation of the statistical uncertainty for the differential gene abundance analysis, the number of
significant differentially abundant genes was zero for all comparisons, meaning that when the samples were
scrambled, all the observed signal was lost. The background noise in the data was then zero, and the FC
of the observedvalues/backgroundnoise was equal to the observed values. This confirms that limma works
excellently on gene abundance data and none of the signals that were found can be explained by statistical
uncertainty.
5.2.2
Statistical Uncertainty for Differential Splicing Analysis
Grouping the comparisons by the number of sample replicates, disparities in group sizes were seen. The
groups of comparisons with 5, 6, 11, and 24 replicates only had 3, 4, 1, and 3 comparisons, respectively. Given
the inherent challenges associated with low sample sizes, the comparisons with 6+ replicates were merged to
one group.
From the statistical validation comparisons containing three replicates had a median FC of 1.8, which was
much lower than the theoretically expected FC of 20 (Figure 3a). Additionally, the median modified Z-score
was 1.02, indicating that the observed values were only 1.02 standard deviations from the scrambled data,
and thus, could not be deemed as outliers (Figure 3b). In contrast, comparisons with 4 and 6+ replicates
16 of 35
==PAGE:21==
5.2
Validation of Methods
5
RESULTS
displayed more robust statistics, with median FCs of 7.55 and 29.33, and median modified Z-scores of 7.57
and 12.91, respectively.
Median:
 1.8
Median:
 7.55
Median:
 0.73
Median:
 29.33
0
10
100
3 replicates
(n=71)
4 replicates
(n=44)
5 replicates
(n=3)
6+ replicates
(n=27)
FC = observed value/background
(a) Fold-change.
Median:
 1.02
Median:
 7.57
Median:
 0.34
Median:
 12.91
0
10
100
3 replicates
(n=71)
4 replicates
(n=44)
5 replicates
(n=3)
6+ replicates
(n=27)
Modified Z−score
(b) Modified Z-score.
Figure 3: Fold-change (FC) and modified Z-score in groups of studies based on replicate sizes for splicing data.
The 3 replicate group only show a median FC of 1.8 and with a median modified Z-score of 1.02. Whereas the
4 replicate group has a FC of 7.55 and modified Z-score of 7.57, and the 6+ replicate group has a FC of 29.33
and a median modified Z-score of 12.91. The dashed line represents where the filter were set for further
analysis. The data was corrected for total abundance bias.
Based on these results, it was decided to exclude the group with three replicates from the analysis. A median
of FC of 1.8 corresponded to that approximately 55% of the observed signal, could be explained by statistical
noise, at worst case. Ignoring the group of comparisons with three replicates, the median FC across all
other comparisons was found to be 9.57 and the median modified Z-score to be 8.16. The comparisons with
four or more replicates could clearly be considered an outlier from the background noise, and the FC of
9.57 corresponded to that up to 10.5% of the signal could be explained by statistical noise. It was thereby
concluded that for splicing data, four replicates per sample should be considered the minimum number of
replicates to reach an acceptable level of statistical noise.
The correlation between the number of observed values and the FC was also investigated. As seen in Figure 4,
there was a clear correlation between the number of observed values and FCs. The more observed values in a
comparison, the higher FC was seen as well. This correlation was seen across all replicate groups.
These results showed that the more observed values present in a comparison, the more trustworthy is the
result. The statistical noise at 10.5% was negatively influenced by samples with a low number of observed
values, and should therefore be treated with a higher level of skepticism than samples with a high number of
observed values.
17 of 35
==PAGE:22==
5.3
Influence of Normalization Method
5
RESULTS
FC = 20
FC = 20
3 replicates
4+ replicates
0
10
100
1000
0
10
100
1000
0
10
100
Observed value
FC = (observed value/background)
Number of replicates per sample
3
4
5
6
8
11
24
Figure 4: Fold-change (FC) over the observed number of genes in differential splicing analysis. A clear
correlation between the number of observed values and the FC across all replicate groups is seen. The dashed
line show a FC of 20 for reference. The data was corrected for total abundance bias.
5.2.3
Influence of Peptide-Association-Error
The validation of the peptide-association-error showed that the effect of the peptide-association-error, or False
Discovery Rate, at 1% (% FDR) did not have a significant effect. Looking at the comparisons in groups of
their number of replicates, the median modified Z-scores were in the range of 0.09 to 0.99, and the observed
values could therefore not be considered outliers. Median FCs were in the range of 0.97 to 1.24, but the three
major groups showed FCs of 0.97, 1.01, and 0.98 for groups with 3, 4, and 8 replicates, respectively.
After discarding the group with three replicates, due to the statistical validation, the remaining comparisons
demonstrated a median FC of 1.0 and a modified Z-score of 0.36. It was therefore estimated that less than
1%, or close to none, of the signal could be explained by the peptide-association-error, showing that 1% FDR
does not significantly influence the method.
5.3
Influence of Normalization Method
The correction for total abundance bias showed significant changes in the results, and it was therefore natural
to explore if other factors could impact the results of the analysis, hereof different normalization methods.
Several different normalization methods were used on a subset of the data using NormalyzerDE as described
in Section 4.6. From this, it was concluded that Cyclic Loess normalization could have an impact, which is
why it was further investigated.
A comparison of the differential gene abundance analysis for the initial data, and data that had been Cyclic
Loess normalized, showed few significant changes. The Fisher’s test revealed that the null hypothesis could be
rejected for 58 of the 74 comparisons and the median overlap coefficient was 0.94. In the differential splicing
analysis the null hypothesis from the Fisher’s test could be rejected for 71 comparisons, and the median over-
lap coefficient was 0.78 between the initial and Cyclic Loess normalized data in the differential splicing analysis.
18 of 35
==PAGE:23==
5.4
Differential Splicing vs. Differential Abundance
5
RESULTS
The results from the Fisher’s test indicated, that the gene abundance data was more influenced by the
normalization than the splicing data. However, the overlap coefficient showed that the overlap between the
genes that was observed, was much higher in the gene abundance data.
Overall, there was a tendency for Cyclic Loess normalization to have high influence in specific data sets
in the gene abundance data, but overall a low influence. In contract, the splicing data was in general more
affected by the normalization across all datasets. This pattern is depicted in Figure 5, where it is clear that
there was a strong correlation between the initial and Cyclic Loess normalized abundance data. There was
also a correlation in the initial and Cyclic Loess normalized splicing data, however the correlation was less
clear and contained more noise. Based on the this, it was concluded that the initial normalization of the data
was sufficient.
Median of cyclic loess genes: 58
Median of initial genes: 68.5
0
10
100
1000
0
10
100
1000
N initial genes
N cyclic loess genes
(a) Differential gene abundance analysis.
Median of cyclic loess genes: 107.5
Median of initial genes: 115
0
10
100
1000
0
10
100
1000
N initial genes
N cyclic loess genes
(b) Differential splicing analysis.
Figure 5: Correlation between the number of observed significant genes in the initial data and the Cyclic
Loess normalized data. Only studies with at least four replicates were included and the data was corrected for
total abundance bias.
5.4
Differential Splicing vs. Differential Abundance
It has been shown that both the differential gene abundance analysis and the differential splicing analysis
were trustworthy and background noise not was a strong concern. It was therefore natural to investigate the
differences of what could be learned from the two analyses.
A comparison of the results from the differential gene abundance analysis and the differential splicing
analysis showed clearly that they yielded different results in terms of which genes were significantly differentially
abundant and significantly differentially spliced.
As depicted in Figure 6a, the median number of significantly differentially spliced genes was 91.5, which was
more than double of the median of 44 for those genes that were significantly differentially abundant. The
median of genes that are both significantly differentially spliced and abundant was 10.5.
All the genes identified as significantly differentially abundant represent a bit more than one-third of
the sub-gene level changes observed in the data. This can be seen in figure Figure 6a when combining the
group of only abundant (right) and the spliced and abundant (middle). The differentially abundant genes are
exactly the genes that most researchers would find, since they typically do not make use of differential splicing
analysis. Most researchers would therefore overlook and miss more than half of the information available in
their data.
When encompassing all genes that are differentially spliced, they account for more than 64% of the
sub-gene level changes. The genes that are solely differentially spliced accounts for 56.07% of the sub-gene
level changes as seen in Figure 6b. This was calculated by the median of fractions within each comparison.
19 of 35
==PAGE:24==
5.4
Differential Splicing vs. Differential Abundance
5
RESULTS
Median: 91.5
Median: 10.5
Median: 44
0
10
100
1000
Only spliced Spliced and abundant Only abundant
Number of genes
(a) Number of significant genes that are only spliced,
both spliced and abundant, or only abundant.
56.07%
8.13%
35.79%
0
25
50
75
100
Percent of sub−gene level changes
Spliced
Spliced and abundant
Abundant
(b) Overview of what affects sub-gene level changes.
Median of spliced genes: 115
Median of abundant genes: 68.5
0
10
100
1000
0
10
100
1000
N abundant genes
N spliced genes
(c) Correlation between the number of significant
differentially abundant genes and the differentially
spliced genes. The blue line is a linear fitted model of
the data points.
0
5
10
15
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Overlap coefficient
N comparisons
(d) Overlap coefficients for the lists of significant genes
in both analyses.
Figure 6: Comparison of the results for differential gene abundance and differential splicing analysis. Only
studies with at least four replicates were included and the data was corrected for total abundance bias.
The distinct distribution patterns among the three groups showed interesting results. While the distributions
for the spliced and abundant and abundant groups appeared relatively uniform on a log10 scale, the distribution
for the spliced group was skewed negatively as depicted by the violin plots in Figure 6a. This indicated a
prevalence of genes exhibiting significant differential splicing compared to differential abundance. For 43
of the 74 comparisons, more genes were observed to be significantly differentially spliced than differentially
abundant.
This can also be seen in Figure 6c, with the correlation between the number of significantly differentially
abundant genes and the significantly differentially spliced genes. It was clear that for most for comparisons,
more differentially spliced than differentially abundant genes were observed as indicated by the number of
data points above the black reference line. However, in the comparisons where more difference in abundance
than splicing was observed, the difference in observed values was numerically larger.
The rather low similarity in significant genes was likewise seen by the overlap coefficient, as depicted in
Figure 6d. The comparison with the highest similarity for significant genes in both analyses was from study
PXD025933 with an overlap coefficient of 0.76. Several comparisons yielded an overlap coefficient of 0, meaning
that no genes were found to be both significantly differentially spliced and abundant. The median overlap
coefficient across all comparisons was 0.29. Considering all genes in the splicing and abundance datasets, the me-
dian similarity was 0.82, with minimum and maximum values of 0.77 and 0.87, respectively, across comparisons.
A validation was performed to asses to which extend the results differed numerically. A Fisher’s test showed
that for 53 of the 74 comparisons, the p-values were below 0.05. Consequently, the null hypothesis could be
rejected, indicating that for 53 of the 74 comparisons, the number of significant genes from the two analyses
20 of 35
==PAGE:25==
5.5
Isoform vs. Peptide Data
5
RESULTS
were significantly associated. However, for the remaining 21 comparisons, it cannot be concluded that the two
analyses yield associated results, in terms of the number of genes that are significantly differential spliced or
differentially expressed. For 19 of the 21 comparisons with a p-value above 0.05, zero genes were found to
be significant in both analyses. For 14 of those comparisons, zero genes were found to be significant in the
differential abundance analysis, whereas at least one was found to be differentially spliced.
5.5
Isoform vs. Peptide Data
The tool IsoBayes, see description in Section 3.5, transforms data from peptide level data to isoform level
data. It was wanted to investigate if this new tool would make it possible to find sub-gene level changes
that could not be found directly from the peptide data. To do this, a comparison of the differential splicing
analyses performed on peptide and isoform data was carried out. The differential splicing analysis at peptide
level data was performed by BGF who shared his results.
In contrast to the similarities observed in the differential gene abundance and differential splicing analysis,
Section 5.4, the similarities seen in the differential splicing analysis of the isoform and peptide data appear
considerably smaller. As illustrated in Figure 7a, the median for how many genes that were found to be
significantly differentially spliced in both data sets was 5. Notably, the isoform data exhibited more than
double the number of differentially spliced genes compared to the peptide dataset, with medians of 108.5 and
49.5, respectively.
Median: 108.5
Median: 5
Median: 49.5
0
10
100
1000
Only isoform data
Both data sets
Only peptide data
Number of genes
(a) Number of significantly differentially spliced genes
only in isoform data, both in isoform & peptide data,
and only in peptide data.
0
5
10
15
0.0
0.2
0.4
Overlap coefficient
N comparisons
(b) Overlap coefficients for significant genes in analyses.
0
10
20
30
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
Overlap coefficient
N comparisons
(c) Overlap coefficients for all genes in the two data sets.
Figure 7: Comparison of the results for differential differential splicing analysis using isoform and peptide data.
Only studies with at least four replicates were included and the data was corrected for total abundance bias.
With the low number of genes found to be significant in both data sets, the overlap coefficients of which
specific genes that were found were correspondingly low. This is depicted in Figure 7b. The median overlap
coefficient across all comparisons was 0.09. The highest coefficient reached 0.55, the 3rd quantile was 0.22, the
1st quantile was 0.2, and several comparisons did not show any overlap.
21 of 35
==PAGE:26==
5.6
Significant Genes Across Data Sets
5
RESULTS
In Figure 7c, it was seen that 14 comparisons had overlap coefficients in the range of 0.65 to 0.75. These
14 comparisons were all Mus musculus samples, whereas the remaining comparisons with overlap coefficients
above 0.8 were all Homo sapiens samples. This could indicate that mice have a higher number of genes
where only a single isoform is detected, since these genes are removed by IsoBayes. It could also be that the
peptide-gene-association in mice is not that well known compared to humans, and thereby the lower overlap
of all genes could be due to database related issues.
Fisher’s test results revealed that in 32 out of the 74 comparisons, the null hypothesis could be rejected.
This suggests that the number of observed significant genes in the two data sets are associated. In contrast, for
the remaining 42 comparisons, the null hypothesis could not be rejected, implying differences in the number
of observed genes from peptide and isoform data.
The comparison of results from the differential splicing analyses using peptide and isoform data clearly
showed that it was different genes that were significantly differentially spliced in the data sets. There was
observed more sub-gene level changes in isoform data than in peptide data, and a very small number of genes
was observed to be significant in both data sets. The isoform analysis can therefore not stand by itself and
analyses at peptide level are still justified.
5.6
Significant Genes Across Data Sets
In the previous analyses in Section 5.4, it was shown that many genes were observed to be significantly
differentially abundant and significantly differentially spliced. However, the results only showed the number
of genes observed in each comparison, and did not include if there was a pattern of which genes that were
observed across comparisons. It was therefore decided to pivot the data, and look at it from the perspective
of the genes and not from comparisons.
Here, it was found that a lot of the genes that were significant in the differential splicing and differential
abundance analysis were significant in a larger proportion of the comparisons, see Figure 8. In total, 6,967
unique significant genes were observed in the differential splicing and differential abundance analysis across
comparisons. Out of the total 6,967 different genes, 155 genes were differentially spliced in at least 10
comparisons and differentially abundant in less than 10. For genes that were differentially spliced in less than
10 comparisons and differentially abundant in at least 10 comparisons, 412 genes were observed.
The differences in group sizes followed the general trend for the data, as depicted in Figure 8 where the blue line,
generally shows that the genes were more likely to be differentially abundant than differentially spliced across
comparisons. This could indicate that the genes were more prone to regulation in abundance across many dif-
ferent conditions, whereas genes only change splicing patterns due to fewer, more specific changes in conditions.
Until this point, it has not been addressed which specific genes that were observed in the analyses. It was
desired to know if the genes that were observed many times in the analyses were well-known genes, which
would be genes that had been described in other papers. The number of publications for each observed gene
was estimated by a text-mining approach. From that investigation, the maximum number of publications
for a single gene was seen for TP53 which had 22,512 publications. However, this was due to the method
described in Section 4.10.1, where the publication count for TP53 was used as a delimiter, removing all genes
that had a higher publication count than TP53. That method was applied during the analysis of publication
count in this project, and the median number of publications for all the remaining genes was 62, while 45
genes were found to have zero publications.
22 of 35
==PAGE:27==
5.6
Significant Genes Across Data Sets
5
RESULTS
VIM
RHOA
XIAP
UBC
SQSTM1
HMGB1
SF1
MIF
0
10
20
30
0
5
10
15
20
Number of comparisons the gene 
is differentially abundant in
Number of comparisons the gene 
is differentially spliced in
Organism
Homo sapiens
Mus musculus
Figure 8: Number of comparisons that each gene was significantly differentially spliced and significantly
differentially abundant in. The labeled genes were manually selected from genes that were either differentially
spliced or differentially abundant in at least 10 comparisons and had a publication count in the top 5%. Only
studies with at least four replicates were included and the data was corrected for total abundance bias.
In Figure 8, eight genes are labeled. They were manually chosen from a list of 35 genes that were either
differentially spliced or differentially abundant in at least 10 comparisons and at the same time had a
publication count in the top 5%. The biological function and importance of the genes will be described in the
following paragraphs. The number of observed publications and the number of comparisons that each of the
genes were found to be significantly differentially abundant and spliced in, can be found in Table 2.
Table 2: Overview of publication counts and the number of comparisons that each gene was observed to be
significantly differentially abundant and spliced in.
Gene name
Publication count
N. abundant
N. spliced
High spliced and low abundant
VIM
5,358
18
5
RHOA
12,016
15
4
UBC
1,920
10
0
Low spliced and high abundant
HMGB1
9,174
3
11
SF1
2,322
0
10
MIF
9,174
3
11
High spliced and high abundant
SQSTM1
3,228
19
19
XIAP
4,195
14
14
23 of 35
==PAGE:28==
5.7
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
5
RESULTS
Three genes that were all differentially spliced in many different comparisons, but not differentially abundant to
the same extent, were selected for further inspection. The first gene that is highlighted is VIM. This encodes for
the protein vimentin, which is a type III intermediate filament protein used to build the cytoskeleton together
with actin and microtubules. Moreover, vimentim is part of the cholesterol transport and is involved in cell
attachments and signaling [58]. Related to VIM is the secound gene, RHOA, or ras homolog family member
A. It is a part of the Rho family which is essential for the reorganization of the actin in the cytoskeleton and
thereby important for the regulation of several cellular processes such as cell shape, ability to cell attachment,
and cell motility [59]. Last of the three is the gene UBC, which encodes for the protein ubiquitin C, a
polyubiquitin precursor. It is a part of several processors in the cell, including RNA binding and protease
binding. Furthermore, the gene is associated with DNA repair, regulation of the cell cycle, endocytosis and
protein degradation [60].
On the other end of the spectrum, three genes that are differentially abundant in several comparisons, but
not very differentially spliced are found. The gene HMGB1, also known by High Mobility Group Box 1,
regulates transcription through its abilities as a DNA-binding protein where it helps with DNA organization
[61]. The next gene, SF1, is in the context of this project an interesting one. SF1, or Splicing Factor 1, is a
pre-mRNA splicing factor. It is a very specific protein that recognizes intron branch points in the sequences
in the 3’ splice site which makes SF1 a key element in alternative splicing [62]. Important for the human
immune system is MIF, or Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor. It is a part of cell-mediated immu-
nity, inflammation, and immunoregulation, which is done by being a part of the regulation of macrophages [63].
For the genes that are both differentially spliced and differentially abundant in many comparisons, two have
been selected. The first is the gene SQSTM1, also known as Sequestosome 1, which encodes a multi functional
protein. It is part of the regulation of activation of the nuclear factor kappa-B pathways which by itself plays
an important role in inflammatory responses [64, 65]. The second gene in question is XIAP, which has the
full name X-Linked Inhibitor Of Apoptosis. As the name implies, it is involved in the regulation of apoptosis,
where it functions as an inhibitor and prevents premature cell death. This gene and protein is therefore of
great interest within cancer therapy [66].
It is clear that the genes found in this analysis were not only random genes observed due to random noise in
the data. Many of the observed genes, both in terms of differential abundance and splicing, were observed in
a large range of comparisons. Moreover, it has been shown that several well-known genes with important
biological functions and potential drug targets were observed in many different comparisons. This further
implies the importance of utilizing both differential gene abundance analysis and differential splicing analysis
when working with proteomics data.
5.7
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
As described in Section 4.11, it is important to see the broader perspective to find the biological impact of all
the genes. This was done by performing a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). While the preceding sections
delved into the complexity of single genes, GSEA gives a holistic view by examining the collective behavior
of functionally related gene sets. The GSEA was carried out for comparisons where at least 50 genes were
observed to be either significantly differentially abundant or differentially spliced, resulting in 57 comparisons.
24 of 35
==PAGE:29==
5.7
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
5
RESULTS
From the GSEA using functional class score (FCS), Figure 9a, it was seen that the number of significant
pathways was generally higher for the abundance data than for the splicing data. In numerous comparisons,
it was seen that the number of significant pathways was zero or close to zero for the splicing data.
Looking at the over-representation analysis (ORA) in Figure 9b, a similar, but yet different pattern was
seen. While there was still a tendency for more significant pathways in the abundance data compared to the
splicing data for each comparison, the difference was smaller than observed in the FCS. Fewer comparisons
with no significant pathways were seen in the splicing data. For the comparisons that had at least one
significant pathway in both splicing and gene abundance data, the correlation between the number of pathways
in the two analyses was more evident. For the ORA, a higher number of pathways in splicing data was
generally seen when compared to the FCS.
0
10
100
0
10
100
1000
Pathways in abundance data
Pathways in splicing data 
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Overlap coefficient
(a) Functional class score (FCS).
0
10
100
0
10
100
1000
Pathways in abundance data
Pathways in splicing data
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
Overlap coefficient
(b) Over-representation analysis (ORA).
Figure 9:
Gene set enrichment analysis with FCS and ORA showing the number of significant pathways
found in abundance and splicing data for each comparison. Only studies with at least four replicates were
included and the data was corrected for total abundance bias.
In both Figure 9a and 9b, it was seen that the overlap coefficients for the observed pathways were not
necessarily high for the comparisons where many significant pathways were observed in both abundance and
splicing data. In general, the GSEA implies that not only do differences in gene abundances impact the
functional and over-represented pathways in the sample, but splicing events have an impact as well, however
not to the same extent. The analysis thereby reflects that alternative splicing is important to investigate to
get the full picture of functional biological changes under two different conditions.
Solely based on these results, the FCS indicated that changes in the abundance had more influence on how
many pathways of biological interest that were seen compared to changes in splicing between conditions.
Likewise, the ORA indicated that most pathways were more influenced by the abundance than the splicing.
25 of 35
==PAGE:30==
6
DISCUSSION
6
Discussion
This project has uncovered several crucial aspects of sub-gene level proteomics analysis, where some could
even be categorized as groundbreaking in the proteomics field.
The result with the highest impact on the proteomics field was the correction for total abundance bias. Since
it has not been possible to find a single paper that describes correction for total abundance bias, it can be
postulated that total abundance bias is not part of the common proteomic data analysis workflow. Total
abundance bias correction was especially important when doing differential splicing analysis. Here it showed
that nearly half of the observed values would be false negatives if no correction was made. With these
two-digit false positive and false negative rates, total abundance bias was found to be crucial and should
be implemented when analyzing proteomic data. The method for total abundance correction have not been
validated in this project, meaning that the results still should be viewed with a bit of skepticism until further
validation is carried out.
Despite that only 2% of proteomics papers mention either isoforms, alternative splicing, or protein variants
[1], it was shown that 56% of sub-gene level changes across 74 different comparisons in 19 studies, were solely
due to differences in splicing between conditions. This is approximately the double of sub-gene level changes
solely due to differences in abundance. These results prove that most alternative splicing of proteins happens
without the gene being changed in overall abundance. The analysis means, that the 98% of papers which
do not consider alternative splicing, potentially are leaving a huge part of the information available unused,
which is a waste of potential knowledge and insight.
The key finding from Figure 6 and the Fisher’s test was that the sub-gene level changes observed in the
two analyses are different but still related. Neither of the two analyses can therefore stand on its own and it is
therefore strongly recommended to perform both differential gene abundance analysis and differential splicing
analysis to find all sub-gene level changes in a data set. Similar results were seen in an RNA-Seq study by
Dam et al. [28]. Here they showed that 48.1% of the observed biological signal in 100 representative RNA-Seq
data sets was partly from differential splicing. These results align with what was found in this project, where
a median 64.2% of sub-gene level changes were affected by differential splicing.
Bold statements, as "differential splicing accounts for up to two-thirds sub-gene level changes", require validation
and high trust in the methods behind the statement. This project opted for a validation approach as strict as
possible showing the worst case scenarios for observing noise. The validation states that using at least four
replicates, up to 10.5% of the observed values could be explained by statistical noise.
Because a scrambling method is used as validation, there is a chance in getting the initial grouping
annotated in Section 4.3 at 4.1% when using four replicates, since 1/4! = 1/24 = 4.1% [67]. The noise
explaining up to 10.5% of the observed values are in reality lower, but the 4.1% uncertainty does not make
the noise level at 10.5% a big overestimate. In comparisons with exactly three replicates, it is stated that up
to 55% of the signal could be explained by noise. For three replicates there is a chance of getting the initial
grouping by 1/3! = 1/6 = 16.7%. This is not taken into account when calculating the estimated noise based
on the fold change, why the actual noise might be lower.
It is therefore recommended to use at least four replicates of each sample when doing differential splicing
analysis on isoform level data. Since many of the data sets that have already been experimentally produced
do not live up to this measure, caution must taken for the methods used in this project, as they do not
26 of 35
==PAGE:31==
6
DISCUSSION
apply to all data sets researchers already have available. To make the method broader in use, two options
seem to be available. One is to produce data sets with a higher number of replicates for the future, and
another is to develop new statistical methods that can handle noise levels in samples with a low number of
replicates. However, it must be addressed that additional replicates in research will result in additional time
and expenses, likewise will the development of new analytical methods. These improvements are required if the
field of research wants to fully understand the biology, why it should be considered spending the extra resources.
When comparing splicing events observed in isoform and peptide data, it was observed that the number of
genes that were observed to be spliced in both data sets was surprisingly small. The reason for seeing different
results from the two data sets could either be that both analyses are unreliable and just capture noise, or that
the analyses capture different results and it therefore makes sense to perform both analyses.
In this project, it was validated that only a small amount of the observed signal in the differential splicing
analysis could be explained by noise for isoform level data. BGF has performed a similar validation for the
peptide data, and even though his validation showed that noise is a bigger issue, there is no reason to believe
that the differences in results during comparison are due to noise. It can therefore be argued, that the two
analyses capture different patterns and that both analyses are relevant to perform.
It can be argued that the results found in the isoforms data would be closer to the actual biological splicing
events in the organism, since the isoform level data is a direct representation of the isoforms in the organism
compared to the peptide level data. Though, this is under the assumption that IsoBayes infers isoforms
correctly and the estimation of the isoform abundance is close to the truth. Though it can not be denied that
there might be other factors contributing to the reason for getting different results in peptide and isoform
data.
A reason to look at peptide level data specifically, is that smaller changes properly can be detected easier
in peptide data compared to isoform data. Small differences between the peptide abundances can be evened
out in the isoform data, meaning that some information might be lost. This could be if a single peptide from
a gene shows very large abundance changes, but the peptide is not used in many isoforms within the gene, it
might be classified as differentially spliced in the peptide data, but not in the isoform data.
This project has not compared the results from the differential gene abundance analysis to the combined
result of differential splicing in isoform and peptide data. It can be argued that the ratio between the number
of observed genes affected by differences in gene abundance and differences in splicing might be favored
towards showing even more differential splicing in the data, if the splicing data from isoform and peptide level
data was combined.
It has been shown that the genes which were observed were relatively well-known in terms of their number of
publications. This project used a text-mining-based method, which showed some pitfalls and was therefore
not very robust. The method looked for a specific query (a gene name) mentioned in titles and abstracts in
all PubMed articles. The method did not distinguish between gene names, common words, or abbreviations.
This led to a lot of false positive hits. From the gene names that were filtered out because they had more
hits than TP53, the following examples can be mentioned in the order of their registered publication counts
starting from the top: "SET", "CA2", "SARS", "PIGS", "CAT", "MAX", "APP". Words like "set", and "app"
(application), and the animals "pigs" and "cat" are properly mostly used as common words, while abbreviations
like "CA2" (calcium 2+ ion), "SARS" (Severe acute respiratory syndrome), "max" (maximum) most often are
observed by their abbreviation and not a gene name. Besides genes that had a higher publication count than
27 of 35
==PAGE:32==
6
DISCUSSION
TP53, some examples of outliers with fewer publications than TP53 were "por" (Spanish word) and "oat".
By these examples, it is clear that the method is far from perfect, and the specific publication counts
mentioned in Table 2 should not be seen as 100% trustworthy, more like a loose guideline for the popularity
of the genes.
The GSEA reveals that the significance of pathways in splicing data did not necessarily correlate with the
significance in abundance data, and vice versa. Numerous pathways were influenced by either splicing or
abundance, and some were influenced by both.
Despite observing more spliced genes than abundant genes in each comparison (see Figure 6c), there
were fewer significant pathways in the GSEA results for splicing data compared to abundance data (see
Section 5.7). Several factors could contribute to this observation. Firstly, the methods for differential splicing
analysis may introduce excessive noise, impacting the statistical power needed for pathways to be deemed
significant. Another explanation could be that the databases used for gene sets were primarily constructed
based on expression level experiments. Pathway databases often miss information on isoform-based molecular
interactions and the significance of different isoforms from a single gene. If a gene displays different splicing
patterns without variations in expression or abundance, it might not be considered essential for the pathway
according to the database. The same pattern of having substantial more significant pathways affected by
differences in gene expression than splicing patters were also shown by Dam et al. (2023) [28].
Future development and enhancement of existing databases are crucial for comprehending the biological
importance of isoform changes in pathways. However, achieving a level of coverage similar to that for gene
set changes due to gene abundance requires substantial experimental efforts, as explained by Sulakhe et al.
(2019) [68].
From the FCS and the ORA, different results were observed. With FCS more pathways were observed in gene
abundance than in splicing data, while a more evenly distributed number of pathways in the two datasets
was observed with the ORA, however still with a higher number of pathways in gene abundance data. These
differences could be explained by several different factors. Firstly, the two methods use different scoring
methodologies. While the FCS evaluates the distribution of genes within a pathway across an entire ranked
list, the ORA evaluates the probability of a pathway being significant based on the given significant genes in
comparison to all genes in the samples, as described in Section 3.3.2.
The sensitivity of the two methods is different as well. FCS is more sensitive to less noticeable changes
which allows it to capture nuanced pathway activity, even for changes across the ranked list. Since ORA
only considers if the genes are observed to be significantly differentially abundant or spliced, it is better at
capturing when genes change from being significant to not, or vice versa. Since ORA does not consider all
genes, it is less robust if there are many false positives, as found by Khatri et al. (2012) [69].
The overlap coefficients displayed in Figure 9 suggest that some pathways were regulated both by differen-
tial abundance of the genes and by differential splicing. For some comparisons, the overlap of pathways was
close to none, even for comparisons were many pathways were significant in both abundance and splicing
data. This implies that some pathways could be solely regulated by either alternative splicing or changes in
abundance, which was also discussed by Peng et al. (2022) [70].
The results presented in this project were based on comparisons across many different data sets. Some data
sets only contributed with a single comparison, whereas other data sets contributed with up to 17 comparisons.
28 of 35
==PAGE:33==
8
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Due to the nature of the experimental sampling, two comparisons within the same data set must be more
similar to each other than comparisons across different data set. Therefore, there will undeniably be some
data set specific tendencies in the overall results, contributed by data sets with many comparisons. This is
however not something that has been corrected for in this project.
Since some results were quite study specific, and therefore data set specific, some patterns which seem to
be general, could be data set specific patterns. It can therefore not be guaranteed that the results found in
this project, would be observed for any given data set. However, it can be expected that similar results would
be observed across a range of data sets.
7
Conclusion
This project has proved that a change from a gene-centric approach to an isoform-centric approach is needed.
It has been shown that it is possible to gain significantly more information from high-replicate data that
is already available. When isoforms are not taken into account in proteomics analysis, it is comparable to
walking in the park with blinders. The blinders will keep the eyes on the road, but not make it possible
to see what is hiding behind the trees and bushes. In this project is was found that 44% of sub-gene level
changes can be related to differential gene abundance, while 56% of sub-gene level changes were solely due to
differential splicing. The genes that were only influenced by differential splicing, were the genes that most
scientist would not discover with the current gene-centric approach.
Furthermore, it was shown that when the blinders were removed, and differentially splicing analysis was
performed, it was crucial to correct for total abundance bias. Otherwise, a false positive rate of 45% was
observed.
While most sub-gene level changes were affect by differential splicing, a low number of significant pathways
was observed, especially when using Functional Class Score. However, it is expected that the low number of
observed pathways mainly was due to pathway databases being constructed by expression level data.
It is hoped that this project will encourage others to do proteomics analysis with an isoform-centric point
of view instead and the former and outdated gene-centric view.
8
Future Perspectives
The method for total abundance bias correction has not being validated to full extent in this project. It will
therefore be necessary to do a thorough investigation of the changes which is seen when the total abundance
is added as a co-factor. If the genes observed are not associated with the total abundance, the drop of overall
observed values could simply be a drop in statistical power. On the other hand, if there is a strong association
between the observed genes and the co-factor, the addition of the total abundance as co-factor would just
increase the statistical power of the test [71].
It would be interesting to investigate the differences between isoform and peptide level data. Specifically,
it would be interesting to look at genes significant in either of the data sets and look for their p-values in
the analysis where they were not significant. These differences could properly be more data set specific,
but general patterns might be revealed. A hypothesis could be that genes would be harder to classify as
significantly spliced in isoform data than in peptide data, if the genes have isoforms that consist of many
peptides or a large amount of the peptides are shared between isoforms.
29 of 35
==PAGE:34==
8
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
It has been shown that the more observed values in a given sample, the more trustworthy are the results.
Future perspectives could be to develop methods that are less noise sensitive, and therefore would be more
trustworthy with lower numbers of observed values. A problem regarding the number of replicates for each
sample has been identified in the method validation. The method requires at least four replicates per sample.
More replicates imply higher experimental costs, why it would be advantageous to work on analytical methods
that are robust with a small number of replicates.
A comparison between RNA-Seq data and proteomics data in terms of detecting alternative splicing would
be interesting. It could be investigated if the same genes could be observed to be differentially spliced in
RNA-Seq data and proteomics data created from the same source. This project has shown that the differential
splicing results from proteomics data can be trusted. If it can be proven that the same results can be obtained
by RNA-Seq data, the two methods could in combination lead to novel findings.
GSEA was not originally designed for proteomics data. It would therefore be interesting to look more into
Protein Set Enrichment Analysis (PSEA) which has proven to be more advantageous for analyzing proteomic
data compared to the traditional GSEA. PSEA considers protein differential expression scores, accommodating
the high variability in proteomic data sets by ranking proteins based on abundance changes between conditions.
This method enhances the identification of enriched pathways, making it a more suitable and effective approach
for robust protein abundance measurements in proteomics studies [72].
30 of 35
==PAGE:35==
REFERENCES
References
1.
Han, C. From a survey of 100 proteomics articles (from 2023/01/01 to 2023/09/30), it was found that
2% of the 100 articles mention protein isoform/variant/splicing Personal communication.
2.
Al-Amrani, S., Al-Jabri, Z., Al-Zaabi, A., Alshekaili, J. & Al-Khabori, M. Proteomics: Concepts and
applications in human medicine. World Journal of Biological Chemistry 12, 57. issn: 1949-8454 (5 Sept.
2021).
3.
Graves, P. R. & Haystead, T. A. J. Molecular Biologist’s Guide to Proteomics. Microbiology and Molecular
Biology Reviews 66, 39. issn: 1092-2172 (1 Mar. 2002).
4.
Miller, R. M. & Smith, L. M. Overview and considerations in bottom-up proteomics. Analyst 148,
475–486. issn: 13645528 (3 Nov. 2022).
5.
Sinha, A. & Mann, M. A beginner’s guide to mass spectrometry—based proteomics. Biochemist 42,
64–69. issn: 17401194 (5 Oct. 2020).
6.
Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass
accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature Biotechnology 2008 26:12 26, 1367–1372.
issn: 1546-1696 (12 Nov. 2008).
7.
Vitting-Seerup, K. Impact of correction for total abundance have been seen in several data sets Personal
communication.
8.
Ritchie, M. E. et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray
studies. Nucleic Acids Research 43, e47–e47. issn: 0305-1048 (7 Apr. 2015).
9.
Phipson, B., Lee, S., Majewski, I. J., Alexander, W. S. & Smyth, G. K. Robust hyperparameter estimation
protects against hypervariable genes and improves power to detect differential expression. The annals of
applied statistics 10, 946. issn: 19417330 (2 June 2016).
10.
Mccrum-Gardner, E. Which is the correct statistical test to use? British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery 46, 38–41 (2008).
11.
Fisher’s exact test in R: independence test for a small sample - Stats and R https://statsandr.com/
blog/fisher-s-exact-test-in-r-independence-test-for-a-small-sample/.
12.
Hoffman, J. I. Biostatistics for Medical and Biomedical Practitioners chap. Chapter 13 - Hypergeometric
Distribution. isbn: 9780128023877 (2015).
13.
Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 102, 15545–15550. issn: 00278424 (43 Oct. 2005).
14.
Korotkevich, G., Sukhov, V. & Sergushichev, A. Fast gene set enrichment analysis. bioRxiv (2019).
15.
Leong, H. S. & Kipling, D. Text-based over-representation analysis of microarray gene lists with annotation
bias. Nucleic Acids Research 37, e79. issn: 03051048 (11 2009).
16.
Beadle, G. W. & Tatum, E. L. Genetic Control of Biochemical Reactions in Neurospora. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 27, 499. issn: 0027-8424 (11 Nov.
1941).
17.
Horowitz, N. H. One-gene-one-enzyme: Remembering biochemical genetics. Protein Science 4, 1017–1019
(1995).
31 of 35
==PAGE:36==
REFERENCES
18.
Cobb, M. 60 years ago, Francis Crick changed the logic of biology. PLoS Biology 15. issn: 15457885 (9
Sept. 2017).
19.
Crick, F. Central Dogma of Molecular Biology. Nature 1970 227:5258 227, 561–563. issn: 1476-4687
(5258 1970).
20.
Krebs, J. E., Goldstein, E. S. & Kilpatrick, S. T. Lewin’s GENES XII 503–541 (Jones and Bartlett
Learning, LLC, 2017).
21.
Carlyle, B. C. et al. Isoform level interpretation of high-throughput proteomic data enabled by deep
integration with RNA-seq. Journal of proteome research 17, 3431. issn: 15353907 (10 Oct. 2018).
22.
Jiang, W. & Chen, L. Alternative splicing: Human disease and quantitative analysis from high-throughput
sequencing. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 19, 183. issn: 20010370 (Jan. 2021).
23.
Chen, F. C. Are all of the human exons alternatively spliced? Briefings in Bioinformatics 15, 542–551.
issn: 1467-5463 (4 July 2014).
24.
Sinitcyn, P. et al. Global detection of human variants and isoforms by deep proteome sequencing. Nature
Biotechnology 2023 41:12 41, 1776–1786. issn: 1546-1696 (12 Mar. 2023).
25.
Sadava, D. E., Hillis, D. M., Heller, H. C. & Berenbaum, M. LIFE The science of biology 346–347 (2013).
26.
Krebs, J. E., Goldstein, E. S. & Kilpatrick, S. T. Lewin’s GENES XII 78–83 (Jones and Bartlett Learning,
LLC, 2017).
27.
Yabas, M., Elliott, H. & Hoyne, G. F. The Role of Alternative Splicing in the Control of Immune
Homeostasis and Cellular Differentiation. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 17. issn: 14220067
(1 Jan. 2016).
28.
Dam, S. H., Olsen, L. R. & Vitting-Seerup, K. Expression and splicing mediate distinct biological signals.
BMC Biology 21, 1–10. issn: 17417007 (1 Dec. 2023).
29.
Han, C. et al. Caspase-2 Short Isoform Interacts with Membrane-Associated Cytoskeleton Proteins to
Inhibit Apoptosis. PLoS ONE 8. issn: 19326203 (7 July 2013).
30.
Belfiore, A., Frasca, F., Pandini, G., Sciacca, L. & Vigneri, R. Insulin Receptor Isoforms and Insulin
Receptor/Insulin-Like Growth Factor Receptor Hybrids in Physiology and Disease. Endocrine Reviews
30, 586–623. issn: 0163-769X (6 Oct. 2009).
31.
Bollon, J. et al. IsoBayes: a Bayesian approach for single-isoform proteomics inference
32.
Sidoli, S., Kulej, K. & Garcia, B. A. Why proteomics is not the new genomics and the future of mass
spectrometry in cell biology. Journal of Cell Biology 216, 21–24. issn: 0021-9525 (1 Jan. 2017).
33.
Dupree, E. J. et al. A Critical Review of Bottom-Up Proteomics: The Good, the Bad, and the Future of
This Field. Proteomes 2020, Vol. 8, Page 14 8, 14. issn: 2227-7382 (3 July 2020).
34.
Vogel, C. & Marcotte, E. M. Insights into the regulation of protein abundance from proteomic and
transcriptomic analyses. Nature reviews. Genetics 13, 227. issn: 14710056 (4 Apr. 2012).
35.
Mehdi, A. M., Patrick, R., Bailey, T. L. & Boden, M. Predicting the Dynamics of Protein Abundance.
Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP 13, 1330. issn: 15359484 (5 2014).
36.
Corchete, L. A. et al. Systematic comparison and assessment of RNA-seq procedures for gene expression
quantitative analysis. Scientific Reports 2020 10:1 10, 1–15. issn: 2045-2322 (1 Nov. 2020).
32 of 35
==PAGE:37==
REFERENCES
37.
Willyard, C. Expanded human gene tally reignites debate. Nature 558, 354–355. issn: 14764687 (7710
June 2018).
38.
Deveson, I. W. et al. Universal Alternative Splicing of Noncoding Exons. Cell Systems 6, 245–255.e5.
issn: 24054720 (2 Feb. 2018).
39.
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing R Foundation for Statistical
Computing (Vienna, Austria, 2023).
40.
Posit team. RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R Posit Software, PBC (Boston, MA,
2023).
41.
Wickham, H. et al. Welcome to the tidyverse. Journal of Open Source Software 4, 1686 (2019).
42.
Durinck, S. et al. BioMart and Bioconductor: a powerful link between biological databases and microarray
data analysis. Bioinformatics 21, 3439–3440. issn: 1367-4803 (June 2005).
43.
Durinck, S., Spellman, P., Birney, E. & Huber, W. Mapping identifiers for the integration of genomic
datasets with the R/Bioconductor package biomaRt. Nature 4, 1184–1191 (July 2009).
44.
Wickham, H. The Split-Apply-Combine Strategy for Data Analysis. Journal of Statistical Software 40,
1–29 (2011).
45.
Willforss, J., Chawade, A. & Levander, F. NormalyzerDE: Online Tool for Improved Normalization
of Omics Expression Data and High-Sensitivity Differential Expression Analysis. Journal of Proteome
Research (2018).
46.
Ritchie, M. E. et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray
studies. Nucleic Acids Research 43, e47 (2015).
47.
Auguie, B. gridExtra: Miscellaneous Functions for "Grid" Graphics (2017).
48.
Dolgalev, I. msigdbr: MSigDB Gene Sets for Multiple Organisms in a Tidy Data Format (2022).
49.
Perez-Riverol, Y. et al. The PRIDE database resources in 2022: a hub for mass spectrometry-based
proteomics evidences. Nucleic Acids Research 50, D543–D552. issn: 0305-1048 (D1 Jan. 2022).
50.
Frankish, A. et al. GENCODE 2021. Nucleic Acids Research 49, D916–D923. issn: 0305-1048 (D1 Jan.
2021).
51.
Abhaya, Gupta, M. & Patra, B. K. Accelerating LOF Outlier Detection Approach. Lecture Notes in
Electrical Engineering 888, 191–203. issn: 18761119 (2022).
52.
Iglewicz, B. & Hoaglin, D. C. How to Detect and Handle Outliers isbn: 0-87389-247-X (American Society
for Quality Control, Statistics Division, 1993).
53.
Willforss, J., Chawade, A. & Levander, F. NormalyzerDE: Online Tool for Improved Normalization
of Omics Expression Data and High-Sensitivity Differential Expression Analysis. Journal of Proteome
Research 18, 732–740. issn: 15353907 (2 Feb. 2019).
54.
Seal, R. L. et al. Genenames.org: the HGNC resources in 2023. Nucleic Acids Research 51, D1003–D1009.
issn: 0305-1048 (D1 Jan. 2023).
55.
PubMed - National Library of Medicine https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
56.
Winter, D. J. rentrez: an R package for the NCBI eUtils API. The R Journal 9, 520–526 (2 2017).
57.
Dolgin, E. The greatest hits of the human genome: A tour through the most studied genes in biology
reveals some surprises. Nature 551, 427–431. issn: 14764687 (7681 Nov. 2017).
33 of 35
==PAGE:38==
REFERENCES
58.
VIM Gene - GeneCards | VIME Protein | VIME Antibody https://www.genecards.org/cgi-
bin/carddisp.pl?gene=VIM&keywords=VM.
59.
RHOA Gene - GeneCards | RHOA Protein | RHOA Antibody https://www.genecards.org/cgi-
bin/carddisp.pl?gene=RHOA&keywords=RHOA.
60.
UBC Gene - GeneCards | UBC Protein | UBC Antibody https://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/
carddisp.pl?gene=UBC&keywords=ubc.
61.
HMGB1 Gene - GeneCards | HMGB1 Protein | HMGB1 Antibody https://www.genecards.org/cgi-
bin/carddisp.pl?gene=HMGB1&keywords=HMGB1.
62.
SF1 Gene - GeneCards | SF01 Protein | SF01 Antibody https://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/
carddisp.pl?gene=SF1&keywords=SF1.
63.
MIF Gene - GeneCards | MIF Protein | MIF Antibody https://www.genecards.org/cgi- bin/
carddisp.pl?gene=MIF&keywords=MIF.
64.
SQSTM1 Gene - GeneCards | SQSTM Protein | SQSTM Antibody https://www.genecards.org/cgi-
bin/carddisp.pl?gene=SQSTM1&keywords=SQSTM1.
65.
Liu, T., Zhang, L., Joo, D. & Sun, S. C. NF-Kappa B signaling in inflammation. Signal Transduction
and Targeted Therapy 2017 2:1 2, 1–9. issn: 2059-3635 (1 July 2017).
66.
XIAP Gene - GeneCards | XIAP Protein | XIAP Antibody https://www.genecards.org/cgi-
bin/carddisp.pl?gene=XIAP&keywords=XIAP.
67.
Counting permutations https://www.statlect.com/glossary/factorial.
68.
Sulakhe, D. et al. Exploring the functional impact of alternative splicing on human protein isoforms
using available annotation sources. Briefings in Bioinformatics 20, 1754. issn: 14774054 (5 Sept. 2019).
69.
Khatri, P., Sirota, M. & Butte, A. J. Ten Years of Pathway Analysis: Current Approaches and Outstanding
Challenges. PLOS Computational Biology 8, e1002375. issn: 1553-7358 (2 2012).
70.
Peng, Q. et al. Impacts and mechanisms of alternative mRNA splicing in cancer metabolism, immune
response, and therapeutics. Molecular Therapy 30, 1018–1035. issn: 1525-0016 (3 Mar. 2022).
71.
Konstantopoulos, S. The Impact of Covariates on Statistical Power in Cluster Randomized Designs:
Which Level Matters More? Multivariate Behavioral Research 47, 392–420. issn: 00273171 (3 June 2012).
72.
Zhao, K. & Rhee, S. Y. Interpreting omics data with pathway enrichment analysis. Trends in Genetics
39, 308–319. issn: 0168-9525 (4 Apr. 2023).
34 of 35
==PAGE:39==
A
APPENDIX
A
Appendix
List of all studies used in the project. Study IDs are the PX identifiers for the data sets in PRIDE. All 37
studies that were classified as annotateable and conditional. After filtering and method validation studies
with at least four replicates were used for the analyses.
Study ID
Organism
Year
Instrument
FDR gene
FDR peptide
Max replicates
PXD008726
Mus musculus
2018
Q Exactive
1
1
3
PXD011962
Homo sapiens
2018
Orbitrap Fusion
1
1
3
PXD012121
Mus musculus
2019
LTQ Orbitrap Elite
1
1
3
PXD014247
Homo sapiens
2019
Q Exactive Plus
5
5
3
PXD016875
Homo sapiens
2019
Orbitrap Fusion
1
1
3
PXD017611
Homo sapiens
2020
Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
1
1
3
PXD018819
Mus musculus
2021
LTQ Orbitrap Velos
1
1
3
PXD019267
Homo sapiens
2020
Q Exactive Plus
1
1
3
PXD021742
Homo sapiens
2020
Orbitrap Fusion
1
1
3
PXD023256
Mus musculus
2020
LTQ Orbitrap Velos
1
1
3
PXD025503
Mus musculus
2021
Q Exactive Plus
5
5
3
PXD025933
Homo sapiens
2022
Q Exactive Plus
1
1
3
PXD028034
Homo sapiens
2022
Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
1
1
3
PXD028300
Mus musculus
2022
Q Exactive HF-X
1
1
3
PXD032958
Homo sapiens
2022
Q Exactive HF-X
1
1
3
PXD011630
Homo sapiens
2020
Q Exactive HF-X
1
1
4
PXD013737
Homo sapiens
2019
Q Exactive
1
1
4
PXD017976
Homo sapiens
2020
Q Exactive
1
1
4
PXD019362
Mus musculus
2020
Q Exactive HF
1
1
4
PXD020019
Homo sapiens
2020
Q Exactive HF
5
5
4
PXD021915
Homo sapiens
2020
Orbitrap Fusion
1
1
4
PXD023559
Homo sapiens
2021
Q Exactive HF
1
1
4
PXD025184
Homo sapiens
2022
Orbitrap Fusion
1
1
4
PXD025626
Homo sapiens
2021
Q Exactive H
5
5
4
PXD028992
Homo sapiens
2022
Orbitrap Fusion
1
1
4
PXD031455
Homo sapiens
2022
Orbitrap Eclipse
1
1
4
PXD019451
Mus musculus
2020
Orbitrap Exploris 479
1
1
5
PXD021437
Mus musculus
2020
Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
1
1
5
PXD022752
Homo sapiens
2020
Q Exactive HF
5
5
5
PXD018170
Mus musculus
2020
Q Exactive HF
1
1
6
PXD028797
Homo sapiens
2022
Q Exactive HF
1
1
8
PXD033053
Mus musculus
2022
tims TOF Pro
1
1
8
PXD021630
Homo sapiens
2021
Q Exactive HF
1
1
11
PXD021639
Mus musculus
2020
Q Exactive
1
1
24
35 of 35
