==PAGE:1==
Smart Grids Empowered
Decentralized Power Distribution Using Blockchain
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Cybersecurity Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Smart Grids Empowered
Decentralized Power Distribution Using Blockchain
Master’s Thesis
January, 2024
By
Anton Østergaard Schmidt
Gustav Emil Nobert
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Cybersecurity Engineering, Richard Petersens
Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cybersecurity Engi­
neering, DTU Compute, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. This thesis amount to 30 ECTS.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Anton Østergaard Schmidt ­ s163053
Signature
Date
Gustav Emil Nobert ­ s185031
Signature
Date
Smart Grids Empowered
ii
25/01/2024
25/01/2024
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
We want to express our gratitude towards Dr. Weizhi Meng and Wei­Yang Chiu who
helped guide us through this thesis.
Moreover, we want to thank the following, who participated in interviews or provided valu­
able assistance in our information search: DTU Compute, DTU Energy, Energinet, The
Energy Project
Lastly we would like to thank our families, and our girlfriends. All of whom have heard us
dabble away for the last 5 months, without fully understanding what we talked about.
Smart Grids Empowered
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Smart Grid has become increasingly important in transitioning towards a carbon­
neutral future. The ability for prosumers to contribute to the overall energy production
is a crucial step in decreasing the reliance on centralized fossil fuel­based power plants.
Despite the research that has been conducted on blockchain­based peer­to­peer energy
trade, there is still a significant gap in the availability of public decentralized platforms that
are both scalable and capable of providing high levels of user privacy.
To address this gap, this thesis focuses on the integration of layer­2 blockchain tech­
nologies to create a more secure and scalable energy ecosystem. In addition, the thesis
utilizes state­of­the­art Group Signatures to enhance the privacy of prosumers. The Proof­
of­Concept developed in this thesis demonstrates the potential of blockchain to transform
the energy market into a decentralized, transparent, and privacy­conscious environment.
Future research directions include addressing transaction costs and achieving full anonymity
using advanced techniques like zero­knowledge rollups for large­scale implementations.
Through this work, the thesis aims to contribute to the development of a more sustainable
and equitable energy system for the future.
Smart Grids Empowered
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation & contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Blockchain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Blockchain Scalability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Layer­2 Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Cryptology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Smart Grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6
The Danish energy grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Related work
15
3.1
Blockchain­based solutions for Smart Grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Research in Blockchain Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Research in Blockchain Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
System Design
18
4.1
A blockchain­empowered community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Layer­2 design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Use Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Implementation
32
5.1
Smart contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Client
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
Group signature service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4
Layer­2 implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6
Testing
43
6.1
Unit testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
Integration testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.3
Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.4
Continuous integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7
Evaluation
47
7.1
TPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7.2
Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
8
Discussion
50
8.1
Key benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8.2
Feature comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8.3
Limitations & challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Smart Grids Empowered
v
==PAGE:7==
9
Conclusion
54
9.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Bibliography
55
A Unit Tests
58
A.1 SmartMeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.2 DSO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
B Integration tests
62
B.1 Adding an offer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
B.2 Buying an offer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
B.3 Testing state updates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
C Continuous integration
74
C.1 GitHub Actions pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
D Performance test
75
E
Costs test
76
Smart Grids Empowered
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Acronyms
TPS Transactions Per Second
IoT Internet­of­Things
PoW Proof­of­Work
PoS Proof­of­Stake
P2P Peer­to­Peer
DSO Distributed system operator
TSO Transmission system operator
ETH Ether ­ cryptocurrency for Ethereum
EVM Ethereum Virtual Machine
BTC BitCoin
ZKP Zero­knowledge proof
DER Distributed Energy Resource
EV Electric Vehicle
DoS Denial­of­Service
DAG Directed acyclic graph
ECDSA Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm
RSA Rivest–Shamir–Adleman asymmetric encryption
Smart Grids Empowered
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Denmark aims for a 70 percent reduction in fossil fuel emissions by 2030. The country is
intensifying its focus on transitioning to green energy production as part of this goal. The
transition to smart grids has enabled more people to participate in sustainable energy
production. The Smart Grid consists of prosumers, people contributing by producing and
selling surplus energy back to the grid. Prosumers can be any size, ranging from a small
house with solar panels to a farmer with private windmills. This new role in the energy
market introduces an excellent opportunity to incentivize the transition of adopting and
owning greener energy sources for the average citizen.
Three key principles can summarize our future energy requirements: decarbonization,
decentralization, and digitization. Decarbonization is simple, we need greener energy
sources to limit our emissions of climate­altering gases. Decentralization involves the uti­
lization of DERs (Distributed Energy Resources), leading to a shift in our energy economy
from a centralized structure characterized by a few large power plants to a widespread
network of smaller energy producers. Digitization demands the involvement of modern
technologies and devices that can provide data and track energy consumption and pro­
duction on a large scale. Innovative storage solutions, including EVs and cutting­edge
battery technologies, play a pivotal role in addressing the volatile nature of renewable en­
ergy sources. These technologies ensure a consistent and reliable power supply, even
during reduced renewable energy generation periods.
In pursuing a sustainable and decentralized future, emerging technologies offer unprece­
dented opportunities and present complex challenges. The need for a robust digital infras­
tructure becomes paramount to capitalize on these opportunities and address the com­
plexity of decentralized energy systems. Blockchain technology, with its inherent char­
acteristics of transparency, immutability, and decentralized consensus, stands out as a
powerful tool for the foundation of our future energy ecosystem. By leveraging blockchain,
we can add trust, streamline transactions, and enhance the security of critical energy data,
thereby contributing significantly to realizing our sustainable energy goals.
Introducing new technologies into any system inevitably brings new challenges and risks.
Integrating many new energy providers introduces novel challenges, particularly concern­
ing anonymity and scalability issues. As we strive to benefit from new technology, it be­
comes essential to address these challenges proactively. Balancing innovation with the
protection of citizens’ data is not only crucial for enabling trust but is also essential for
ensuring the security and scalability required to drive progress towards a greener future.
1.1
Motivation & contribution
Our motivation for this project is to change the energy trade and encourage the transition
into renewable energy sources. Furthermore, we wanted to bring the trade closer to the
citizens and to limit the role of energy retailers, which can ultimately reduce electricity
prices.
Our research has found several exciting solutions for peer­to­peer (P2P) energy trading.
However, a gap exists in public decentralized platforms, which are scalable and provide
high anonymity to their users.
Our contribution, therefore, strives to create a Proof­of­Concept that focuses on combining
Smart Grids Empowered
1
==PAGE:10==
enhanced privacy while maintaining performance that would work to support the Danish
energy infrastructure and demand.
Summarized, we can list our goals and contributions to this thesis:
• Create a Proof­of­Concept decentralized energy trading platform
• Focus on keeping users anonymous in their trading
• Utilize Layer­2 solutions to provide a scalable infrastructure that can handle the
many transactions needed in a nationwide solution
Concepts not explored in this thesis include market strategies, how different market mod­
els can benefit users and the econometrics herein. Secondly, grid management and se­
curing the network’s stability are considered outside this thesis’s scope and are not cov­
ered. Lastly, we do not investigate the requirements for a blockchain­based community
to participate in the wholesale energy market.
Smart Grids Empowered
2
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical Background
In this section, we will provide an overview of different theoretical aspects that are relevant
to our project. To start, we will briefly go through relevant parts of blockchain theory.
We will then dive deeper into its scalability issues and related solutions. Lastly, we will
investigate relevant privacy and data security research that can be applied to our system.
2.1
Blockchain
Blockchain technology was introduced in 2008 when Nakamoto published the whitepaper
for Bitcoin [1]. At its essence, blockchain functions as a distributed digital ledger com­
prised of interconnected blocks that contain data, thus forming a chain structure akin to a
linked list. This ledger is decentralized and shared among all participants, constituting a
peer­to­peer (P2P) network.
Transactions between peers are bundled together and recorded in blocks. Besides the
transaction data, the blocks include metadata used to verify the block’s validity. One of
the most fundamental is the hash value representing the block’s data. Blocks use a hash
function to digest their content into a single fixed­length string. This string works as proof
of the integrity of the block’s data since a single changed byte would produce a completely
different hash function output.
Figure 2.1: Hash linking in blockchain
Additionally, a block includes a reference to the hash value of the preceding block, creating
a hash chain. This structure ensures that any alteration to a single value at any point of
the chain would break it, a phenomenon known as the avalanche effect. Furthermore,
every participant in the network maintains a complete copy of the ledger. This adds an
extra layer of security, as an adversary would not only need to forge all data and hash
values on their own node but would also have to replicate this across the majority of the
network, which is highly impractical. This data structure of blockchain is highly tamper­
resistant and allows non­trusting peers to engage in a secure and transparent transaction
network.
2.1.1
Consensus mechanisms
In a network full of non­trusting peers, blockchain employs diverse methods to verify and
agree on the validity of a new block. This concept is known as a consensus mechanism.
The consensus mechanism is usually performed by some validators in the network. De­
pending on the consensus mechanism, they can be picked at random or pre­selected.
Each mechanism comes with its own set of advantages and disadvantages.
Smart Grids Empowered
3
==PAGE:12==
Proof­of­Work
Proof­of­work (PoW) was the first consensus mechanism used in blockchain. The valida­
tors in PoW, also known as miners, are randomly picked. The miners are then presented
with a hashing puzzle, where the first one to solve it gets the right to ”mine” the block
and earns a reward. When the block is mined, it is validated, and it will be added to the
blockchain. The hashing puzzle resolves around finding the correct nonce that produces
a hash with a particular prefix. There is only one correct answer for this puzzle, and the
miners repeatedly increment a number to find the correct answer. The more computing
power a miner has, the bigger his chance to solve the puzzle as the first. This proof works
great as a validity check; it is hard to solve but very easy to verify. When a miner claims
they have found the solution, it is broadcast to the other validators. They can immediately
check whether the solution is correct, allowing quick validation.
The consensus mechanism is also great for reducing illicit behavior by miners. When min­
ers use computational resources, they consume a lot of power, which costs them money.
Therefore, the PoW requires miners to ”invest” in the possibility of getting a reward. If a
miner were to cheat, e.g., changing the data of some transaction, his chances of success
are very low, and the whole scam would cost him money.
PoW’s biggest disadvantage is that it is heavy in energy usage. The proof wastes a lot
of computing power by solving a puzzle without intrinsic utility or real­world application
beyond securing the blockchain network. Numbers suggest that the annual energy con­
sumption of BitCoin, which employs PoW, ranges from 91­150 TWh, which is 3­4 times
the annual consumption of Denmark [2, 3].
Figure 2.2: Selection in PoW and PoS is influenced by computational power or stake [4]
Proof­of­Stake
Proof­of­Stake (PoS) is a consensus mechanism that deviates from PoW. Instead of solv­
ing arbitrary hashing puzzles, the consensus in PoS is reached with staking. In staking,
the likelihood of being chosen as the validator is based on how much cryptocurrency the
validator is willing to ”stake” as collateral. The collateral is only withdrawn from the valida­
tor if they try to cheat. PoS aims to address some of the energy inefficiencies associated
with PoW. Validators are incentivized to act honestly, as they risk losing their staked funds
Smart Grids Empowered
4
==PAGE:13==
if they attempt malicious activities. Due to higher efficiency, PoS is significantly faster than
PoW.
2.1.2
Ethereum
Ethereum, launched in 2015 by Vitalik Buterin, is an implementation of blockchain that
extends beyond transactions of cryptocurrency [5]. Unlike Bitcoin, which primarily serves
as a digital currency, Ethereum is a versatile blockchain that enables developers to create
and deploy programmable smart contracts and applications on its network. Ether (ETH)
is the native cryptocurrency of the Ethereum platform, used to compensate active nodes
for executing smart contracts and facilitating transactions.
2.1.3
Smart Contracts
Ethereum’s innovation lies in its ability to execute smart contracts ­ self­executing pro­
grams published on the blockchain. Smart contracts enable custom logic implementation,
facilitating trustless and automated transactions. By allowing developers to deploy decen­
tralized applications (dApps) and smart contracts, Ethereum has become a foundation for
blockchain­based solutions in supply­chain management, e­voting, energy trading, and
more. This programmability has enabled developers to create more complex applications
without a centralized infrastructure.
2.1.4
Gas
Running smart contracts requires computational resources from the blockchain nodes.
To ensure that the programs are executed fairly, a unit called gas measures the compu­
tational resources required to run each transaction [6]. Gas usage is measured on every
transaction, and the total amount of gas a transaction uses determines the fee that the
user must pay in ETH, the cryptocurrency for Ethereum. Gas is typically measured in
gwei, a unit that measures 10−9 amount of ETH.
2.1.5
Solidity
The programming language used to develop smart contracts on Ethereum is Solidity. The
Turing­complete programming language was created by Buterin and is an object­oriented,
high­level language influenced by C++ and JavaScript. It follows the principle of deter­
minism, ensuring a singular outcome for a given input. To persist determinism, Solidity
intentionally omits certain functionalities that might introduce randomization or hardware­
dependent outputs. For instance, while obvious features like creating a random number
have been excluded, less apparent ones, like rounding a number, are absent due to their
potential hardware dependencies, which could lead to non­deterministic outcomes. Main­
taining determinism is crucial since validating a transaction by a network of computing
nodes demands identical results to reach a consensus [7].
2.1.6
The Ethereum Virtual Machine ­ EVM
The EVM is a deterministic single­threaded state machine [8]. When a state change is
triggered in a smart contract, it is triggered in multiple different instances of that smart
contract. All replications of the smart contract have to reach a consensus on what state
the machine was in, what transaction was triggered, and what the resulting state is. The
state transition function is formulated as Y (S, T) = S′, where the function takes an old
state S and a set of transaction T to compute the new state S′. If the machine were not
deterministic, all instances of the contracts would necessarily not compute the same state.
Being single­threaded, costs are low. Moreover, since the EVM cannot access an external
database, reading and writing from storage using multiple threads would introduce many
race conditions.
Smart Grids Empowered
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Blockchain Scalability
One critical aspect of blockchain is its ability to scale. The most common way to measure
scalability is to count how many transactions are handled per second (TPS). The two most
popular blockchains, BitCoin and Ethereum, only operate with a TPS of around 4 and 14,
respectively. This is very low compared to traditional payment services such as VISA,
which handles 1,800 TPS on average. As current research shows, the low TPS is the
main inhibitor for blockchain’s broader adoption in the general industry [9, 10, 11, 12].
2.2.1
Blockchain Trilemma
The scalability issue in blockchain is often referred to as the Blockchain Trilemma. The
term was introduced by Ethereum founder Vitalik Buterin, and it is used to describe the
issue as an analogy depicting a triangle. The triangle has decentralization, security, and
scalability in each corner. The trilemma states that using a blockchain system, you can
only stand on one of the edges, i.e., claiming two of the attributes excludes the last one.
Side
Give up
Examples
Scalability / Security
Decentralization
Hyperledger, Consortium chains
Scalability / Decentralization
Security
Email, SMTP
Security / Decentralization
Scalability
BitCoin, Ethereum
Figure 2.3: The Blockchain Trilemma
Solutions to scalability issues can be addressed in two different categories, namely layer­
1 and layer­2 solutions. Layer­1 solutions, also known as on­chain solutions, focus on
changing the data structure of the blockchain itself. This could include changes to the
size of a block, fragmentation of data (sharding), or a completely new data structure,
such as a DAG (Directed acyclic graph) instead of the linked list.
Layer­2 solutions are implemented off­chain and do not affect the underlying data struc­
ture of the blockchain. The solutions are implemented as a layer on top of the original
data structure and are not bounded by the performance of the blockchain. The computa­
tional freedom can be utilized for more efficient computations, including state channels,
sidechains, and rollups.
2.3
Layer­2 Solutions
Layer­2 solutions have been shown to be the most promising scalability solution, which
we will cover in section 3.3. Therefore, in this thesis, we will only cover and focus on
layer­2 solutions, omitting a detailed look into layer­1 scalability.
Smart Grids Empowered
6
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.4: A payment channel for BitCoin
2.3.1
State Channels
One of the first layer­2 protocols developed was state channels, also known as payment
channels. The channels establish a direct link between two parties, allowing them to con­
duct transactions off­chain while using the layer­1 blockchain to verify the initial and final
transaction between them. The core concept involves opening a channel by agreeing on
an initial transaction state and pooling funds into a shared wallet or smart contract. No­
tably, the public blockchain only records the opening and closing transactions, preserving
the confidentiality of the transactions within the channel. When transactions happen be­
tween the two parties, they form their own private ledger of transactions.
State channels also allow for micro­transactions since it does not impose transaction fees.
The consensus between the two parties is achieved through the verification process mul­
tisig (multi­signature). The multisig protocol requires multiple entities to sign before pro­
cessing the transaction. Privacy is another feature of state channels. All transactions
between the two parties, except the first and final, are only accessible on the channel’s
private ledger.
Furthermore, the integrity of transactions within state channels is protected against po­
tential cheating scenarios. The logic implemented in the state channel smart contract
allows both parties to withdraw their funds from the current state independently at any
time. Additionally, a time lock mechanism is implemented to release funds in situations
of inactivity or intentional halting by either party.
2.3.2
Sidechains
Sidechains is a layer­2 solution that creates parallel chains linked to a main blockchain
to improve scalability. The sidechains are separate blockchains with their own set of
validators. Transactions or cryptocurrency can be moved from the main chain into one of
the sidechains.
Participants use a locking mechanism called the two­way peg when moving assets be­
tween the main and sidechain. The two­way peg locks an amount on the main chain and
provides proof of the locking to the side chain, after which the amount can be used in the
sidechain.
Sidechains does face challenges, such as the risk of centralization among validators.
This can happen if a minority of validators are validating the majority of the network. This
Smart Grids Empowered
7
==PAGE:16==
introduces the possibility of fraudulent transfers and security vulnerabilities if a majority of
sidechain validators choose to conspire against the state of the chain, which can lead to
the stealing of funds.
Plasma is another variant of a sidechain­based layer­2 solution. It introduces a layered
hierarchical structure of sidechains, which includes the following concepts.
• Child chains: layered side chains that handle many transactions off­chain.
• Root chains: Each child chain is anchored to a root chain that points back to the
main blockchain.
• Batch processing: Each child chain transaction is aggregated and periodically sent
to the main blockchain as a commitment.
• Exit mechanisms: Plasma introduces exit challenges to mitigate some of the issues
with simple sidechains, thereby upholding system integrity. These challenges allow
participants to dispute potentially fraudulent exits.
In general, sidechains and plasma work as a way to enhance scalability due to their off­
chain transactions, which are enabled by having multiple chains linked to the main chain.
2.3.3
Rollups
Rollups are another layer­2 scaling solution. Within the rollups, transaction data is pro­
cessed off­chain, consolidated, and bundled together before being submitted to the main
chain. This process is called ”rolling up” and involves presenting only the crucial informa­
tion about individual transactions to the main chain.
There exist two kinds of rollups.
• Optimistic rollups
• Zero­knowledge rollups
Optimistic rollups assume the validity of every proposed transaction to be correct. The
strategy has a ”challenge period” where participants can challenge potential fraudulent
transactions. Participants will submit a ”fraud­proof” to challenge the transaction. Dis­
putes are resolved by declaring a rollup valid or invalid.
Zero­knowledge rollups (ZK­rollups) use cryptographic proofs to verify the correctness
of the off­chain computations. We will elaborate on zero­knowledge proofs later, but in
general, they are proofs of correctness without revealing any sensitive information [13]. A
ZK­rollup produces proof verifying that the state is valid without revealing each transaction
that leads to the state, producing a checkpoint. These checkpoints can then be used
later if disputes arise over the state of the chain. By using the main chain to save these
checkpoints, the rollups can rely on the security guarantees provided by the main chain,
so they can instead focus on providing low costs and high scalability. Furthermore, rollups
also increase privacy, as it becomes possible to hide the content of individual transactions
and only share the results of the transactions.
Optimistic and ZK­rollups improve scalability and privacy by processing transactions off­
chain and submitting condensed information to the main chain. Rollups also reduce the
transaction fees since multiple transactions are batched into one transaction on the main
chain.
Smart Grids Empowered
8
==PAGE:17==
2.3.4
Polygon
Polygon is a blockchain network and layer­2 solution that combines Proof­of­Stake (PoS),
Plasma, and Rollups to create a fast and highly efficient solution compatible with Ethereum.
The solution is built on top of Ethereum but uses its own native token, MATIC, to han­
dle transactions. The network’s primary goal is to provide faster and more cost­effective
transactions while maintaining high levels of security and decentralization.
Polygon offers two networks:
• Polygon PoS network
• Polygon zkEVM network
The PoS network consists of two layers that exist on top of the underlying Ethereum:
a consensus layer called Heimdall and an execution layer called Bor. The Bor layer is
the first layer that the user interacts with. It functions as a sidechain and allows for fast
block production. These blocks are then aggregated down to the Heimdall verification
layer. Here, blocks are validated using PoS, where a Merkle tree of the incoming blocks
is created. The root of the Merkle tree is then published to the underlying Ethereum chain
to function as the final proof.
The zkEVM is Polygon’s implementation of a zero­knowledge­based network. They utilize
ZK­rollups to verify transactions, also enabling fast and low­cost transactions. In addition
to the PoS network, the zkEVM can verify transactions without revealing sensitive infor­
mation.
In conclusion, Polygon offers a highly scalable and cost­efficient layer­2 solution that
seamlessly integrates with Ethereum. Using this solution could be a massive benefit for
any decentralized application in terms of scalability.
2.4
Cryptology
In this section, we will introduce some of the cryptographic schemes the project relies on.
2.4.1
Digital signatures
The authentication of Ethereum and most other blockchains is built upon digital signa­
tures. Digital signatures are a subsection of asymmetric cryptography that is used in
authentication. In Ethereum, users have a public key, also known as a Wallet. The Wal­
let has an address that is derived from the private key. The private key is used to sign
transactions to prove you are the correct sender. The private key can also prove that you
own a Wallet.
Ethereum uses elliptic curve cryptography, namely the ECDSA scheme. The ECDSA
uses shorter keys than RSA but offers the same level of security, which is great in the
context of blockchain, where block sizes are a limiting factor for scalability. For example,
a 256­bit ECDSA signature offers the same level as a 3072­bit RSA signature [14]. Below,
we outline how the ECDSA signature works.
Key generation
To generate our key pair, we define an elliptic curve E over a finite field Fp.
E : y2 ≡x3 + ax + b
(mod p)
Where parameters a and b are generated randomly, and p is a prime. Next, a point on
the curve G(x0, y0) is selected as the base point, and a large prime n, which is the order
of the subgroup (number of elements in the subgroup) generated by G. We then select
Smart Grids Empowered
9
==PAGE:18==
a private key d as a random integer such that 1 < d < n, which is kept safe. We now
generate our public key Q.
Q = d × G
We have now defined the public key as (E, G, n, Q), and the private key as d.
Signing and verification
In the following, we will provide a simple example of how the signing and verification
process works. In a real­world implementation, the primes used would be much larger.
We define our public key as:
(E, G, n, Q) = (y2 = x3 + 7
mod 17, (15, 1), 19, (90, 6))
with the corresponding private key d = 6.
When signing, we choose a random integer k such that 1 < k < n. With k = 10 we can
compute r
k × G = (x1, y1) ⇔10 × (15, 1) = (150, 10) ⇒
r = x1
(mod n) = 150
(mod 19) = 17
We can then calculate the hash of our message to sign; for the simplicity of our example,
we imagine our hash function to return the value h = 123. In the following notations
denoted as, e.g., x−1, we are referring to the modular multiplicative inverse. We can now
compute our signature s.
s = k−1(h + dr)
(mod n) ⇔
s = 10−1(123 + 6 · 17)
(mod 19) = 13
Our signature for our message consits of {s, r} which was computed to {13, 17}. Having
access to the public key, we can verify the authenticity of the signature. We start by
calculating the modular multiplicative inverse of the signature w and intermediate values
u1 and u2.
w = s−1
(mod n) = 13−1
(mod 19) = 3
u1 = hw
(mod n) = 123 · 3
(mod 19) = 8
u2 = rw
(mod n) = 17 · 3
(mod 19) = 13
We can then calculate the point X = (x, y).
X = u1 × G + u2 × Q = 8 × (15, 1) + 13 × (90, 6) = (1290, 86)
And then verify our signature
r ≡x
(mod n) ⇔
17 ≡1290
(mod 19) ⇔
17 = 17
Our signature is verified in the example of the ECDSA scheme.
Smart Grids Empowered
10
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.5: Group signature scheme
2.4.2
Group signatures
The first group signature scheme was developed in [15]. These schemes were designed
to enable individuals to create a collective where members could authenticate themselves
while retaining anonymity. A signature can be validated to prove it was produced by a
group member, but not distinguish which one. Yet, a designated group manager has the
possibility to identify the signer. To verify a signature, the verifier needs to know the mes­
sage used to produce the signature and the group key.
The cryptographic properties of a group signature scheme include, among others:
• Unforageable ­ only members of the group can create signatures
• Traceability ­ given a valid signature, the group manager can identify who produced
it
• Unlinkability ­ no two messages produced by the same signer can be linked to­
gether
• No framing ­ even if all group members and the manager collude, they cannot forge
a signature for a non­colluding group member.
The base operations supported by a group signature scheme are the following.
• keyGen(n) ⇒{gpk, msk, GSKn}
Performed by the group manager to generate the group public key gpk, the manager
secret key msk and the n members’ secret keys GSKn = {gsk0, gsk1, .., gskn}.
• sign(message, gsk, gpk) ⇒signature
Is performed by a member to sign a message
• verify(message, signature, gpk) ⇒boolean
Can be performed by everyone possessing the group public key to verify a signature.
• open(signature, gpk, msk) ⇒signer
Is performed by the group manager to reveal the signer.
Additionally, some schemes are more flexible and support more functionality, e.g., dynam­
ically adding users after the group has been formed. In this project, we use an implemen­
tation of [16] provided by IBM, which has been extended with an add­user functionality.
Smart Grids Empowered
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4.3
Cryptographic hash functions
A cryptographic hash function transforms a variable length input to a fixed length output
[17]. The output has nothing in common with the input, and similar inputs do not produce
outputs with similar properties. More formally, the properties of a cryptographic hash
function are described as follows:
• Pre­image resistance Given a hash value h, finding any value m such as hash(m) =
h should be infeasible.
• Second pre­image resistance Given an input m1 it should be infeasible to find a
different input m2 such that hash(m1) = hash(m2).
• Collision resistance It should be infeasible to find two different messages m1 and
m2 such that hash(m1) = hash(m2). This property differs from the above where the
adversary is already in possession of m1
Cryptographic hash functions are often used for storing secrets such as passwords. By
hashing a secret and then storing it, a server can validate that a user owns a secret without
storing what the secret is.
2.4.4
Zero­knowledge proofs
In a zero­knowledge proof (ZKP), a prover proves to a verifier that they know a secret
without revealing it. Zero­knowledge proofs are often used in setups where sharing con­
fidential data is not possible or the prover does not trust the verifier with the information.
Graph 3­coloring
An example of a ZKP can be constructed on the Graph 3­coloring problem. A 3­colored
graph G is a graph with n colored vertices [v1..vn] and its corresponding edges eij describ­
ing an edge, if it exists, between vertex vi and vj. A 3­colored graph is only a 3­colored
graph if and only if there exists no edge connecting two vertices with the same color. If
a 3­coloring is provided, permuting the order of the three colors (R, G, B) still results in a
valid 3­coloring, meaning that changing all red vertices to blue and all blue vertices to red
still provides a valid 3­coloring.
Figure 2.6: A 3­colored graph
In a ZKP, a prover P wants to prove to a verifier V that P has the solution to a 3­colored
graph. P does not want to reveal its secret, which is the full coloring of the graph. There­
fore, P commits the color of all vertices in one envelope for each vertex and sends it to V .
V now wants to challenge P’s claim that it has a 3­colored graph and chooses a random
edge eij. P now needs to open the two envelopes of vi and vj. If the colors are different,
the verification passes.
A single verification probably does not convince V , therefore the process is repeated; P
permutes the existing colors and sends the proof again. The process is repeated until V
Smart Grids Empowered
12
==PAGE:21==
is confident that P does, in fact, have a 3­colored graph. The probability of V catching a
fraudulent proof in this ZKP is
1
|E|, where E is the edges existing in a graph. This means
that the success of cheating is (|E|−1
|E| )n, which tends towards 0 with increasing the number
of verification rounds n.
2.5
Smart Grids
Smart grids have emerged as an alternative solution to the centralized grid [18]. A smart
grid consists of many smaller energy producers to supply energy in a bi­directional flow.
The smart grid uses Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) to generate electricity and
store it in a network of interconnected devices. With this network of DERs, the smart grid
can enable much more flexible energy demand management strategies.
Figure 2.7: Overview of the smart grid [19]
The core of smart grids is enabling anyone to contribute to energy production regardless
of scale. This is usually a benefit for green energy production since a larger number of
citizens producing energy, also called prosumers, own small­scale green energy produc­
tion.
With the advent of electric vehicles (EVs), excess energy production can be stored and
Smart Grids Empowered
13
==PAGE:22==
later used as an on­demand energy resource when stationary. The smart grid enables
P2P energy trading. In P2P trading, energy retailers can be left out, reducing energy
tariffs and costs.
2.6
The Danish energy grid
This section will delve into the existing state of the Danish energy grid, describing relevant
actors, as outlined in [20]. A foundational understanding of the current electrical grid is
crucial for the development of a novel solution for energy trading.
Prosumer
The prosumers are the participants of the grid who produce and consume electricity. En­
ergy consumed from the grid is bought from the retailer. In the current market, prosumers
can sell excess energy to the retailer.
Retailer
The retailer’s main job is to buy and sell energy to end users. It acts as the point of
contact between citizens and the electrical grid. However, the retailer does not provide
any infrastructure necessary for the electricity to flow to the consumer. Instead, they pay
the DSO a fee for delivering the power to the consumer. The retailer buys electricity
from a free energy market, e.g., Nordpool, and sells it back to the consumer with added
fees to make a profit. Retailers usually also charge their customers a monthly fee for a
subscription.
DSO ­ Distributed System Operator
The DSO is responsible for cables and infrastructure in a community. It facilitates the
energy distribution from high voltage to lower voltages that run into people’s homes and
transfers the power prosumers produce to the grid. The DSO is concerned with the stabil­
ity and state of the grid but is not involved in pricing. They monitor the energy production
of the community to avoid overloads and crashes. The DSO charges the retailer for using
its infrastructure.
TSO ­ Transmission System Operator
The TSO operates on a national level and is responsible for balancing the grid. Balancing
the grid includes forecasting nationwide energy production and adjusting the supply by
importing and exporting energy to the international energy markets.
Smart Grids Empowered
14
==PAGE:23==
3
Related work
Before designing the infrastructure of our solution, we will cover related work in the area
of P2P energy trading in smart grids. Additionally, we will examine current research in
blockchain privacy and scalability.
3.1
Blockchain­based solutions for Smart Grids
The first paper to gain traction on blockchain­based smart grids was [21]. The paper
proposed a consortium blockchain model that utilizes electric vehicles as batteries for a
localized P2P energy trading network. They convey a system to maximize energy by dis­
tributing over low ranges and incentives to users using their own tokens (energy coins)
while maintaining users’ privacy. Their work laid the foundation for the first real­world
smart grid implementation, the ”Brooklyn Microgrid” [22]. The Brooklyn Microgrid is a
P2P grid operating without a trusted third party. It is a real­world implementation of a grid
in Brooklyn, focused on sharing the produced power between the participants to maximize
earnings on power.
Another early impactful study on blockchain­based energy trading was formulated in [23].
They propose a unified P2P energy trading framework, using three entities: energy nodes
as the buyers and sellers, energy aggregators to manage trading events, and smart me­
ters to record traded energy amounts. They also contribute with a credit­based payment
scheme and a pricing strategy.
[24] formulates a design that addresses a DSO’s requirements for a blockchain­powered
community to participate in the wholesale market. They investigate the requirements
for a smart meter and how the consensus protocol should be designed. Inspired by the
French and Belgian energy infrastructure, they created a community scheme where wallet
addresses are identifiable by community members. They use this property to ensure
everyone acts in good faith.
An exciting pilot project was The Energy Collective [25]. The project ran from 2017­2021.
It implemented a P2P energy trading system in a smaller community in Denmark. Con­
straints around the project made them drop their Ethereum­based solution, as they were
forced to use the Raiden Network, which did not allow them to build a decentralized mar­
ket mechanism. However, the authors gained great insights into market strategies and
operational concerns.
In the study detailed in [26], the authors successfully deploy a distributed P2P energy
trading platform utilizing Ethereum. Their implementation leverages the cryptographic ad­
vantages of blockchain to establish a tamper­resistant ledger for recording energy trades.
While achieving interesting results, the authors draw conclusions that pose issues to a
widespread implementation of the system. One major limitation is the current low TPS
of Ethereum, which has proven inadequate for large­scale implementation, highlighting a
scalability challenge inherent in the Ethereum network. Additionally, the authors note that
using ETH for trading is risky since the highly volatile currency is susceptible to specula­
tion. Furthermore, the system lacks a mechanism to ensure that exclusively green energy
is sold on the market. Finally, the authors point out a security concern related to the public
visibility of trading addresses. Addresses that trade a lot can be seen as wealthy accounts,
which can then be traced back to the actual owners, who can be targeted in the real world.
Smart Grids Empowered
15
==PAGE:24==
The review conducted in [27] also mentions scalability, speed, and security as the main
challenges blockchain­based energy trade platforms face. They mention that blockchain
technology has passed the Proof­of­Concept stage but needs development in perfor­
mance and operations.
3.2
Research in Blockchain Privacy
In [28], the authors address problems where adversaries link public crypto­wallets to real­
life identities. Malicious actors can data mine a public blockchain’s transaction history to
gain information to identify users. The authors propose a new scheme where they utilize
ephemeral addresses. The users’ wallet addresses change frequently after reaching a
threshold energy usage, hindering adversaries in linking users to transactions.
Privacy has been an issue that has plagued cryptocurrencies for a while. Governmental
institutions have shown it is possible to deanonymize wallet addresses, and that infor­
mation has been used to convict accused citizens in trials [29]. That has prompted the
emergence of privacy­based cryptocurrencies, which aim to provide full privacy for the
user at all times. One of the most prominent ones is Monero, which uses many cryp­
tographic techniques, including ring signatures, ring CT (ring confidential transfers), and
shadow addresses. Shadow addresses [30] are used to hide the receiver and sender from
eavesdroppers. RingCT [31] is used to hide transaction amounts together with Pedersen
Commitments [32], and lastly, ring signatures, similar to group signatures, obfuscate the
sender [33].
The authors of [34] propose PPChain to enhance users’ privacy in a permissioned blockchain
using group signatures. In PPChain, each transaction is signed using group signatures
to build an anonymous system where a trusted third party can identify malicious actors
without allowing other actors the ability to deanonymize users or link transactions with
each other. [35] also utilizes group signatures to obtain anonymity in logging energy con­
sumption and production in a permissioned blockchain.
In the domain of zero­knowledge proofs, a trading scheme is proposed in [36]. They
propose to use zero­knowledge proofs to calculate the aggregated energy usage while
keeping each log hidden. Another cryptographic technique is explored in [37]. Their
model uses attribute­based encryption to encrypt information of different sensitivity in their
blocks. They use this to create a consortium blockchain with arbitration nodes that ensure
data is only accessible to the actors with the right attributes.
[38] proposes a system called PETra, which uses garlic routing when broadcasting trans­
actions and mixers to anonymize receivers and senders in transactions. They propose
ring signatures to sign transactions and zero­knowledge proofs to obfuscate the contents
of a transaction.
3.3
Research in Blockchain Scalability
Scalability has been a challenge for blockchain technology since its beginning. In [12], the
authors address that blockchain has not disrupted as many industries as once expected
due to scalability issues. The authors mention that one of the key factors is the low trans­
action throughput on public blockchains like BitCoin and Ethereum. It is also noticed that
the low performance especially affects businesses where real­time responses are crucial.
This includes industries that rely on IoT devices, often limited by storage and computing
power, but need fast and reliable responses. While the low TPS is heavily linked to the
Smart Grids Empowered
16
==PAGE:25==
consensus mechanism, other factors can affect the scalability. In their review, the authors
identify how researchers address scalability, which boils down to on­chain and off­chain
solutions, also known as layer­1 and layer­2 solutions.
In their thorough review, the authors of [11] investigate the state­of­the­art layer­2 scala­
bility solutions. The authors state that the current layer­1 solutions have not been showing
scalable improvements in TPS, which is why they focus more in­depth on layer­2 solu­
tions. The paper compares layer­2 solutions such as channels, sidechains, and rollups
in scalability, security, decentralization, privacy, fees, and micro­payments. The authors
conclude that the implementation of layer­2 solutions resulted in performance enhance­
ments, ranging from a minimum of 2 times to a maximum of 9 times in TPS. Another inter­
esting fact from their study was that the performance tests were made on Ethereum 1.0
using the slower PoW consensus mechanism. Since then, Ethereum 2.0 has launched,
which utilizes the faster PoS consensus mechanism. The authors state that the layer­1
and layer­2 performance multiply, meaning that a faster consensus mechanism will ulti­
mately enhance layer­2 performance even further.
Smart Grids Empowered
17
==PAGE:26==
4
System Design
The following section will delve deeper into the system’s overall design. We will outline
the requirements for a distributed energy trading platform targeted at the Danish infras­
tructure. The section will also explain how we use these requirements to design the ar­
chitecture for our solution.
4.1
A blockchain­empowered community
Having previously discussed the workings of the current Danish energy system, we will
now explore the concept of a blockchain­based solution. Implementing a blockchain­
based energy trading platform allows one to simplify, redefine, or eliminate specific roles
within the energy grid.
As described earlier, a smart grid consists of many smaller energy providers, known as
prosumers. The primary focus of our system is to facilitate P2P energy trading among
these prosumers. We will leverage smart contracts deployed on a blockchain to establish
a reliable means of communication and trading. These smart contracts will define the
logic behind trading, ensuring a trustless experience for participating prosumers.
By employing this approach, we can eliminate the retailer’s role in the energy grid. As
previously noted, retailers profit from tariffs imposed on energy consumption, and by re­
moving this intermediary, energy prices may decrease. Additionally, the retailer is not
responsible for the underlying infrastructure, so the system’s functionality is not compro­
mised by excluding this actor.
However, some form of regulation is necessary. A pure P2P energy trading system may
pose challenges related to the authenticity of energy production. This could involve ma­
licious prosumers tampering with smart meters or engaging in illegal energy production.
Therefore, we need some level of governance.
The DSO serves as our governing entity, providing oversight of smart meters and their
owners. This governance is advantageous, as it enhances the assurance that smart me­
ters are non­tamperable and activity can be traced back to a citizen. The TSO is vital to
the energy infrastructure. However, since our system is more focused on the end users,
the TSO will not have an active role in our system.
Figure 4.1 shows a high­level overview of how our blockchain solution will look. We will
in the following define the active roles for our system.
Prosumer
A blockchain­based solution empowers prosumers to engage in P2P trading without the
involvement of a retailer. Prosumers can access a market where energy is traded, en­
abling them to buy and sell energy. In our system, the prosumer takes on the central role
as the primary user.
Smart meter
Smart meters are important components in a blockchain­based smart grid. They allow
for data flow automation, logging the energy production and consumption for prosumers.
Smart meters are connected to the blockchain and offer real­time monitoring and trans­
mission of consumption data, allowing accurate and up­to­date information on energy
usage.
Smart Grids Empowered
18
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.1: Blockchain enabled smart grid. Original figure from [35]
DSO
In our solution, the DSO functions as the governing body, requiring a reliable source of
information. The recommendations presented in [24] emphasize the importance of guar­
antees concerning the accuracy of chain data and the legitimacy of smart meter­generated
data. The DSO takes on a central role within our solution, overseeing grid access man­
agement and the energy transfer process. In case of disputes, the DSO needs the ability
to identify each user’s data on the blockchain.
Market
A blockchain­based market for trading energy can be implemented in different ways. The
most commonly found is monthly billing, where users are billed by the DSO based on their
monthly usage. We have chosen to expand this model by directly allowing prosumers to
trade excess stored energy. By utilizing the Smart Grid’s storage capacities, prosumers
can store excess energy produced in electric vehicles (EVs) and batteries.
Figure 4.2: Selling of stored energy
4.2
Requirements
Having described the high­level energy infrastructure, we will examine which require­
ments are relevant in designing a distributed energy trading platform.
4.2.1
Functional requirements
There are several frameworks to outline the functionality of a system. We opted to con­
ceptualize our system using user stories due to its simplicity and role­based perspective
Smart Grids Empowered
19
==PAGE:28==
on functionality.
User Story
Description
US1
As a prosumer, I want to sell energy back to the grid
US2
As a prosumer, I want to buy energy from the grid
US3
As a prosumer, I want to specify what price I want
to sell/buy my power for
US4
As a DSO, I want to issue and verify contracts
between two parties
US5
As a DSO, I want to be able to disclose people’s
identity when misbehaves happens in a contract
US6
As a DSO, I want to make sure that only
registered energy can go to the market
US7
As a non­involved third party I want to track
energy consumption/production and contracts agreed
on the network
Table 4.1: User stories describing the system’s functionality
The most crucial functionality revolves around buying and selling energy, with prosumers
having the freedom to engage in transactions when they deem the prices favorable. As
the governing body, the DSO should be capable of issuing and verifying energy trade
contracts between two parties. Additionally, the DSO needs to identify prosumers in case
of disputes and ensure the authenticity of energy production. Another critical feature is
enabling the interested public to track energy production transparently.
4.2.2
Non­functional requirements
Several essential requirements must be met to ensure viability in conceptualizing a po­
tential nationwide IT energy trading platform. In developing secure software, adherence
to the principles of the CIA triad (confidentiality, integrity, and availability) is a key consid­
eration [39].
Confidentiality
When engaging in trade of any kind, sensitive data needs confidentiality. Personal in­
formation, such as names, addresses, or bank accounts, can cause harm if malicious
actors exploit it. Using blockchain, we can identify users with their Wallets and omit sen­
sitive information. However, all transactions in a public blockchain are publicly verifiable,
so we must carefully consider what information we will publish. The system must allow
anonymous trading to keep the users’ privacy as high as possible.
Integrity
Data integrity is essential for the system’s viability. The accuracy and trustworthiness of
reported energy usage and deals being made are the highest priority when designing a
backbone for the energy infrastructure. Another benefit of using blockchain for this system
is data replication between nodes. All nodes participating in the system have a copy of the
entire transaction history. This functions as both a backup and a quick way to see if data
has been tampered with. Using hashing and consensus mechanisms, tampering with
data is impractical on blockchains. Another way that our system can uphold integrity is to
use Trusted Computing [40]. With Trusted Computing, we can benefit from TPMs (Trusted
Platform Modules), hardware modules integrated into devices to store cryptographic keys
securely. This can be utilized for the system operator to only allow registered smart meters
to emit data on the blockchain.
Smart Grids Empowered
20
==PAGE:29==
Availability
Availability within the CIA triad emphasizes the system’s ability to remain accessible and
fully functional, enabling users to conduct energy transactions reliably. Downtime or un­
availability could have significant consequences in the dynamic energy trading landscape.
A decentralized system benefits the availability since there is no single point of failure.
Most or all nodes would have to fail simultaneously for the system to be offline.
Scalability
Another crucial factor for the success of the system is its scalability. Scalability is piv­
otal in ensuring the system can efficiently handle a growing volume of transactions and
participants. Furthermore, the platform must have the capacity to expand its features to
accommodate the total number of Danish households’ capabilities without compromising
performance. Data from [41] indicates that there are 3.3 million homes in Denmark, all of
which emit a data log every 15th minute. Blockchain is notorious for having a low TPS
when utilizing BitCoin or Ethereum on layer­1 only. Therefore, we will need to use layer­2
techniques to improve our transaction throughput.
4.3
Architecture
Having outlined the requirements for our solution, we will examine further how we will
design these into the architecture of our system in the following section. A critical aspect
of this section is the integration of smart grid and blockchain technology.
4.3.1
Choice of Blockchain
When designing a system built with blockchain, one of the most defining choices is choos­
ing a private or a public blockchain infrastructure. Both have pros and cons, highlighted
in Table 4.2. In our system, we weigh certain properties high: scalability, privacy, and
decentralization. The first two properties are easily obtainable in private blockchains. Hy­
perledger and other consortium chains are not bound by low TPS and verification times.
Additionally, private blockchains have inherently good privacy since non­verified users
cannot participate in or view the history of the blockchain.
Contrary to this, public blockchains suffer from low scalability and privacy, where one
could argue that utilizing a private blockchain would be the obvious choice. However,
we think that public blockchains offer something that private blockchains do not: decen­
tralization. Decentralization brings the ownership of the system and all its data closer to
the citizen. Decentralization also facilitates a more trustless system, where verification
of transactions is not limited to a central consensus, such as in private blockchains. The
decentralization also enables a more tamper­resistant and publicly verifiable system. The
benefits of decentralization are inherently absent in private blockchains, so we will focus
on making a public blockchain scalable while keeping our users anonymous.
We have chosen to utilize the Ethereum blockchain. One of the main reasons for choosing
Ethereum is its ability to customize business logic using smart contracts. Another impor­
tant aspect is the wide community in which Ethereum development has evolved, which
gives many benefits regarding documentation and learning resources. Furthermore, we
will benefit from the data integrity and high availability that the blockchain offers. Our chal­
lenge lies in making our solution both scalable and making sure privacy is maintained.
4.3.2
System Overview
When designing our system, we wanted to keep as much of the business logic on­chain as
possible to get the most out of blockchain’s inherent security and transparency. Therefore,
most of our crucial business logic and verification mechanisms have been deployed on
Smart Grids Empowered
21
==PAGE:30==
Type of blockchain
Pros
Cons
Private
Scalability
Controlled Governance
Enhanced Privacy
Lower Energy Consumption
Centralization Concerns
Reduced Trustlessness
Limited Innovation
Public
Decentralization
Censorship Resistance
Immutable and Tamper­Resistant
Publicly verifiable
Scalability Challenges
Energy Consumption (PoW)
Slower Transaction Speeds
Limited Privacy
Table 4.2: Private and public blockchains
the blockchain as smart contracts. We will start by defining these key components in our
system and briefly describe their role and function.
Smart Meter
The smart meter contract is the interface between the physical smart meters and the
blockchain. The contract manages multiple smart meters and emits events regarding
production and consumption to the blockchain in an interval defined by the DSO. The
smart meter also tracks if there is a surplus in energy production for the household. If so,
the smart meter will save the surplus energy in a stored state, which can later be sold on
the market. Our design assumes that the physical smart meters use a designated wallet
to interact with the blockchain. This is done to enforce Trusted Computing.
DSO
The DSO manages access to the smart grid. Its primary objective is to facilitate the regis­
tration of smart meters, ensuring that only trustworthy devices are authorized to emit data
onto the blockchain. The registration process forms a critical layer of security, preventing
unauthorized or compromised smart meters from interacting with the blockchain, thereby
upholding the integrity and reliability of the entire smart grid system.
The Market
The market is the backbone of our system. It is here prosumers can sell and buy their
stored energy. The market keeps track of all energy offers, when they are being sold,
how much they cost, and how much energy they contain. Furthermore, the market is
responsible for enforcing rules regarding selling and buying. This includes interacting
with other smart contracts to determine the state of a transaction. The market component
acts as an intermediary, engaging with the smart meter and DSO smart contracts. It
ensures that only registered users are authorized to sell energy and verifies their stored
energy quantities before transactions. This process upholds the security and reliability of
the energy trading system on the blockchain.
Furthermore, it is responsible for emitting new supply contracts when a deal is approved.
A supply contract represents a formal agreement between a buyer and a seller within the
system, serving as evidence that the seller commits to deliver a specified quantity of en­
ergy in exchange for money. The supply contracts are securely stored on the blockchain,
forming immutable and tamper­proof evidence.
Client
The client is the prosumer’s access to the system. The client application is a Web3 appli­
cation that can interact with Ethereum. The integration is crucial for users’ digital signa­
tures when creating transactions on the blockchain. Furthermore, the client acts as the
user interface, showing relevant data for the user to buy and sell energy. It plays an im­
portant role in ensuring a user­friendly experience while enabling essential cryptographic
Smart Grids Empowered
22
==PAGE:31==
functionalities for secure transactions on the blockchain.
Group Signature Service
We decided to add a group signature service to our system for improved privacy. The
group signature service is managed by the DSO, and prosumers can be added as mem­
bers of the group. This benefits both the prosumer and the DSO. The prosumer benefits
from the added anonymity the group signature adds. Instead of having a wallet address
publicly stored in an offer or a supply contract, the system uses group signatures to limit
information that can lead to targeting individuals. It also benefits the DSO, as it can verify
the identity of the buyer and seller. Furthermore, the group signatures add another level
of authorization, as the DSO can restrict who is allowed to sell energy in a limited geo­
graphical area, e.g., a local community. The signatures also help distinguish fraudulent
supply contracts since everyone can verify them.
The overview of our system can be seen in Figure 4.3. The figure shows how the dif­
ferent components and roles interact with each other. The components shown in the
yellow­headed square are smart contracts deployed on the blockchain. The figure also
shows how they emit data to the blockchain whenever a smart meter log or a supply con­
tract is created. The remaining components of Client and Group Signature Service are
off­chain hosted services. The figure also includes a physical smart meter outside of the
blockchain environment. This illustrates how a smart meter in a household will interact
with the blockchain and transmit its real­time usage to the on­chain smart contracts.
Figure 4.3: System overview
The relationships shown in the figure illustrate how different components communicate.
The prosumer and DSO will interact with the Group Signature Service to sign, validate,
and disclose signatures.
4.4
Layer­2 design
In order to improve scalability and reduce costs, we are utilizing Polygon, a layer­2 solu­
tion. This solution enhances Ethereum’s capabilities by providing a framework for building
Smart Grids Empowered
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.4: Layered architecture
efficient and scalable applications. In this design, Polygon serves as a scaling layer at­
tached to the Ethereum mainnet. By offloading transactions to Polygon, we can achieve
higher TPS and lower transaction costs.
The smart contracts will be deployed on Polygon but remain fully interoperable with Ethereum,
allowing seamless interaction between the two networks. This allows prosumers to benefit
from the perks of Polygon without having to adapt or change how they use our application.
Furthermore, Polygon benefits from the security of the underlying Ethereum infrastructure,
where the blockchain ensures the integrity and trustworthiness of our application.
4.5
Security
Having designed a solution for our energy trading platform, we will analyze which threats
our system faces and how we have tried to mitigate these in our design choices.
4.5.1
Threat assessment
In every IT project, it is crucial to identify threats that can cause harm to your system and
users. We elected to use a comprehensive model that fits well into the design process.
STRIDE
STRIDE is a model developed by Microsoft to identify security threats when developing
software systems [42]. By adopting this model, we can identify and mitigate the security
risks inherent in our solution. STRIDE offers a systematic approach that aligns with our
goal to develop a robust and secure system, ensuring that potential threats are thoroughly
assessed.
Spoofing
Spoofing occurs when an adversary impersonates another system user. This is done
to gain information or access to our system acting as an authenticated user. Spoofing
attacks in our system can lead to the following vulnerabilities.
• An adversary could try to act on behalf of another user, e.g., adding an offer much
cheaper than the market rate or selling energy that was not meant to be sold.
• An adversary could also perform a replay attack where an earlier placed offer is sent
to the market at a later time.
• Social engineering attacks
Smart Grids Empowered
24
==PAGE:33==
For the first threat, we have different security means in place. When new users are added
to our system, they are registered with our DSO. Their unique wallet address and smart
meter address are stored in a hash map. This benefits our system in two ways: we
can ensure that only registered and non­tampered devices can use our market, and the
registered device can only be used by one person. Since we are using blockchain, all
transactions are digitally signed, and in order to spoof the user, one would have to get
hold of their private key. Social engineering attacks are more tricky to prevent since we
cannot control whom our users give their private keys, but educating and warning users
about sharing their keys should be highly important.
For the second threat, a replay attack could be made if an adversary replays an earlier
offer from another user. To mitigate this risk, we have added a nonce and a timestamp to
all offers being added. The used nonces are kept on the market smart contract to prevent
it from being used again. The nonce is stored with a timestamp. When the timestamp
expires, the nonce can be reused, and an offer can be replayed. However, we have
implemented a lifespan on an offer so that the replayed offer would be rejected. Even
if the timestamp were forged, the group signature of the offer would be invalid since a
signature includes both the expiration time and the nonce.
Tampering
Tampering of data in our system would potentially be very harmful. Changes to price or
energy amount data would lead to disputes between parties. If an adversary could tamper
data on an approved contract, trust in our system would be extremely low. By choosing
blockchain as our underlying data structure, we mitigate this threat since data published
to the blockchain are hard to alter due to its inherent security.
However, some attacks can alter data on the blockchain. The 51% attack is an attack in
PoW­based blockchain, where adversaries control more than half of the computing power
in the network. This enables them to manipulate transaction history, double­spend coins,
and potentially undermine the integrity of the entire blockchain. Depending on which
blockchain network this attack is made on, it is impractical, especially on the Ethereum
mainnet, which has upwards of a million validators.
The long­range attack is an attack in PoS­based blockchains [43]. The attack involves
creating an alternative blockchain from an earlier point in time when an attacker had a
significant stake (coins). This attacker’s chain could then be presented as an alternative
valid chain, challenging the true history of the blockchain. Again, this attack is impractical
since Ethereum has made countermeasures against it. Ethereum uses a concept called
Checkpointing, where the blockchain periodically takes snapshots of the state. These
checkpoints make it more challenging for an attacker to replace the entire history of the
blockchain. Additionally, a Slashing mechanism is implemented where malicious behavior
is hardly penalized on the stakes, which again makes it very impractical and non­feasible
to make the attack.
Repudiation
Repudiation is the threat of an adversary deleting their traces in the system. Similar to
the assessment of tampering, using blockchain mitigates the risk. The only way to erase
something stored on the blockchain is to alter its entire history with attacks such as the
51%­ or long­range attack.
Information Disclosure
The access to or leaking of sensitive data poses a threat to our system. As mentioned
in section 4.2.2, our system does not contain sensitive information regarding a person,
Smart Grids Empowered
25
==PAGE:34==
such as names, addresses, or similar. However, we should be careful what information
is easily available. Since all data on the blockchain is public, adversaries have easy ac­
cess to whatever is published. As mentioned in [26], Ethereum wallets can be used to
target individual owners. A wallet that sells a lot of energy could indicate that the owner
is wealthy. This information could be used to target the individual owning the wallet.
Additional vulnerabilities may occur if the owner uses his wallet in other distributed appli­
cations. Information that seems harmless in one application could potentially be harmful
when used in another context. Therefore, we want to limit the use and exposure of our
user’s wallet addresses. We are therefore designing our agreed contracts to only hold the
following information.
• Group signature of the buyer
• Group signature of the seller
• The amount of energy and price
• The nonce and a timestamp
By using group signatures instead of wallet addresses, we make it harder for adversaries
to identify spending and earning patterns that can be used for malicious behavior.
Denial­of­service
The availability of the system is crucial for its success. A DoS or DDoS attack would po­
tentially flood our system with incoming requests, blocking the usage of the system for
all users. There are multiple repercussions for this attack, such as IP filtering, rate limit­
ing, load balancing, and the use of CDNs. Even though these security implementations
would be valuable, we have not used them since we benefit from using blockchain. Since
all transactions on Ethereum cost gas, this form of attack would be very expensive and
probably not practical for an adversary.
Elevation
Elevation of privilege poses a threat to any system where unauthorized users perform
authorized tasks. In our system, we have put a lot of our authorized actions on smart
contracts that are operated by an admin. The smart contracts are programmed to do
different authorization checks so that users cannot add or buy offers on behalf of others.
The only way to alter this is to get access to the admin’s private key.
4.5.2
Assumptions
Having discussed security concerns using the comprehensive STRIDE model, we can
now make some assumptions regarding our system.
Secure smart meters
Our thesis assumes that physical smart meters and their hardware are secure systems.
We have not considered attacks that can be launched on the hardware, such as side­
channel, fault­injection, or cold boot attacks. Furthermore, we consider the security of the
devices to be out of scope for this thesis. This includes access to a smart meter’s wallet,
which should be provided straight into its hardware coming from its producer.
4.6
Use Cases
Having defined the overall architecture of our trading platform, we will examine how our
components interact in our most important protocols in the following section. In the follow­
ing figures, a blue participant indicates an off­chain service, whereas a yellow indicates
on­chain components.
Smart Grids Empowered
26
==PAGE:35==
4.6.1
Smart meter logging
Figure 4.5 depicts the logging of data. Every 15th minute, the smart meter logs its produc­
tion and consumption data. When the smart contract receives the data, it emits an event,
publishing the data to the blockchain. After every log, the battery charge is updated.
Figure 4.5: Smart meter logging
4.6.2
Registration of new users
When onboarding a prosumer into the system, several steps are undertaken. The regis­
tration starts with the DSO creating an onboarding request. The client then generates a
OTS (one­time­secret) that the prosumer will store. The client will then create an entry on
the smart meter contract with the address of the prosumer and his smart meter. When a
smart meter is registered, it is registered together with the hash of the OTS and the mar­
ket to which it belongs. The prosumer later uses the OTS hash to claim ownership of the
smart meter. The address of the smart meter is then utilized to register the smart meter
along with the prosumer’s public wallet address, which is securely stored within the DSO
smart contract. The smart meter has a registered market address to restrict stored energy
management, ensuring that only the market and the smart meter possess the authority to
modify this value.
Smart Grids Empowered
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.6: Registration of new users
4.6.3
Add offer
One of the most fundamental features of our system is that prosumers can sell surplus
energy. The way prosumers sell their energy is through offers.
Figure 4.7: Offer model
An offer contains an amount of stored energy (kWh) to be sold and the price it is offered to
(€). Furthermore, the offer contains the signature of the seller. The signature is present in­
stead of the seller’s wallet address to enhance privacy. Additionally, a nonce is introduced
as a preventive measure against replay attacks.
Smart Grids Empowered
28
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.8: Add offer
When the prosumer initiates the addition of an offer, they start by signing using the group
signature service. The prosumer generates a nonce and signs it together with the offer.
The signed offer is sent to the market, which validates the offer. The validation starts
by checking if the nonce and expiration time are valid. Then, the market smart contract
checks with the DSO to determine if the smart meter is registered. After that, it performs
several validation steps on the smart meter contract, which we will cover in the following
subsection. If the validation is accepted, the offer is added to the marketplace.
4.6.4
Battery subtraction and smart meter validation
The battery subtraction method on the smart meter also works as a validation mecha­
nism. The method is called from the market smart contract when an offer is created. The
validation is crucial to determine if a prosumer’s smart meter has enough energy stored
to make the offer.
The validation starts by verifying if the entity calling the method is the market smart con­
tract. The market smart contract is the only entity allowed to subtract energy from a
smart meter. When proposing an offer, the prosumer must also provide a one­time­secret
(OTS). The OTS is used to prove ownership of the smart meter in question. The OTS pro­
vided is hashed and checked against the stored hash on the smart contract. If the check
is valid, the smart meter proceeds and sets a new OTS hash provided by the prosumer.
Lastly, it verifies that the stored battery charge of the smart meter is adequate and sub­
tracts the charge. Ultimately, the smart meter returns a boolean to indicate whether the
validation succeeded.
Smart Grids Empowered
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.9: Smart meter offer validation
4.6.5
Buy offer
When a prosumer initiates the procurement of an offer, they start by signing the offer.
When the offer is signed, the prosumer interacts with the market and tries to purchase
the offer. The market validates that the offer has not expired and that the buyer is not
the seller/owner of the offer. If the validity check succeeds, the market moves the offer to
pending supply contracts. The procurement process can be seen in Figure 4.10.
4.6.6
Validating supply contracts
The DSO will routinely validate pending supply contracts. The smart contract does not
have the functionality to verify signatures which are handled off­chain. Figure 4.11 depicts
how the DSO validates the signatures of the pending supply contracts and informs the
market which offers are valid. If an offer contains invalid signatures, the smart meter
charge is refunded. If the contract is approved, the market emits a new supply contract
event.
Smart Grids Empowered
30
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.10: Buy offer
Figure 4.11: Validating pending supply contracts
Smart Grids Empowered
31
==PAGE:40==
5
Implementation
Having defined our system design, we will describe the implementation of our system in
this section. Our implementation consists of the following parts.
• A client application written in React TypeScript
• Smart contracts for Ethereum written in Solidity
• A group signatures service written in Python and Flask
All code is available at https://github.com/antonoeschmidt/SmartGridEmpowered
5.1
Smart contracts
Our system consists of three smart contracts representing the DSO, the market, and the
smart meter. Figure 5.1 shows a class diagram of the smart contracts. The purple boxes
represent structs, the green events, and the yellow boxes are the smart contracts.
Figure 5.1: Class diagram of the smart contracts
5.1.1
Smart meter
The smart meter contract serves as the interface for smart meters to engage with the
blockchain. The smart contract has two important data structures, a struct and a hashmap.
The struct SmartMeterInstance represents a smart meter. It includes essential informa­
tion such as the current battery charge, the connected market address, and when the last
data was sent. Furthermore, the struct includes the hash of the OTS that the prosumer
provides for claiming ownership of the smart meter.
1
contract SmartMeter {
2
struct SmartMeterInstance {
Smart Grids Empowered
32
==PAGE:41==
3
bytes32 otsHash;
4
uint batteryCharge;
5
uint lastDataSent;
6
address marketAddress;
7
}
8
mapping(address => SmartMeterInstance) public smartMeters;
Listing 5.1: Smart meter instances
The hashmap smartMeters is a mapping with an address as its key and the struct SmartMeterInstance
as the pairing value. The address is the Wallet address for the physical smart meter.
The main functionality of the smart contract is to emit events based on the latest energy
usage and update the current stored energy data. The battery charge, reflecting the net
change between production and consumption, provides a straightforward method for the
market to validate the claimed battery power in an offer
When the smart meter logs data, it creates an event. The event consists of two unsigned
integer: the consumption and production energy data. The creation of a log is facilitated
by the createLog function, simultaneously updating the battery with the current charge.
The function is protected with a require­function. The require keyword in Solidity is
an assertion that must pass for the function to execute. If the assertion in the require­
function fails, the transaction is reverted. However, the caller still pays gas fees to increase
the cost of a DoS­attack. The require­function in createLog checks that the smart meter
has not logged recently. This check is added to prevent spamming that could overload
the network. The transmissionInterval is set by the DSO. The logging of energy data
from the smart meter contract can be seen below.
1
event Log(uint256 consumption , uint256 production);
2
3
function createLog(
4
uint256 consumption , uint256 production
5
) public {
6
require(
7
block.timestamp - smartMeters[msg.sender].lastDataSent >
8
transmissionInterval ,
9
"Logs cant appear more frequently than the transmission interval"
10
);
11
int netDifference = int(production) - int(consumption);
12
13
if (netDifference > 0) {
14
smartMeters[msg.sender].batteryCharge += uint(netDifference);
15
} else {
16
if (uint(netDifference) > smartMeters[msg.sender].batteryCharge) {
17
smartMeters[msg.sender].batteryCharge = 0;
18
} else {
19
smartMeters[msg.sender].batteryCharge -= uint(netDifference);
20
}
21
}
22
emit Log(consumption , production);
23
smartMeters[msg.sender].lastDataSent = block.timestamp;
24
}
Listing 5.2: Create log function
When a prosumer adds an offer, the market smart contract executes two functions on
the smart meter contract. The first checkHashAndSetHash is executed when a prosumer
creates an offer. By using the keccak256, Solidity’s implementation of SHA­3, the smart
Smart Grids Empowered
33
==PAGE:42==
contract validates that the prosumer provides the correct OTS and sets the new hash pro­
vided. The hash allows a prosumer to claim ownership of a smart meter. It also provides
a stateless solution and allows the prosumer to claim ownership with other addresses
without explicitly transferring ownership.
1
function checkHashAndSetHash(
2
bytes memory ots,
3
bytes32 nextOtsHash ,
4
address smartMeterAddress
5
) public returns (bool) {
6
if (keccak256(ots) == smartMeters[smartMeterAddress].otsHash) {
7
smartMeters[smartMeterAddress].otsHash = nextOtsHash;
8
return true;
9
}
10
return false;
11
}
Listing 5.3: Validation of OTS
The second function subtractBatteryCharge verifies that a prosumer has the amount of
energy claimed in the offer. It includes several checks. The first is restricting the function
to only being called from the correct market. Security measures are implemented in the
smart meter contract by employing msg.sender. This keyword in Solidity refers to the
Wallet address of the sender of a transaction. Therefore, this value is non­tamperable
since it is bound to the private key of the sending wallet. This check only allows the
market to subtract energy.
1
2
function subtractBatteryCharge(
3
uint amount ,
4
bytes memory ots,
5
bytes32 nextOtsHash ,
6
address smartMeterAddress
7
) public returns (bool) {
8
require(
9
msg.sender == smartMeters[smartMeterAddress].marketAddress ,
10
"Only registered market can substract energy"
11
);
12
require(
13
checkHashAndSetHash(ots, nextOtsHash , smartMeterAddress),
14
"The blinding factor was not correct"
15
);
16
if (smartMeters[smartMeterAddress].batteryCharge < amount) {
17
return false;
18
}
19
smartMeters[smartMeterAddress].batteryCharge -= amount;
20
return true;
21
}
Listing 5.4: Subtract battery charge
5.1.2
Market
The market is the central smart contract for our system. It consists of several important
data structures. The market uses a struct offer and a hashmap offers to keep track of
active offers.
1
contract Market {
2
struct Offer {
3
string id;
4
uint price;
Smart Grids Empowered
34
==PAGE:43==
5
uint amount;
6
uint expiration;
7
address owner;
8
address smartMeterAddress;
9
bool active;
10
string sellerSignature;
11
uint nonce;
12
}
13
mapping(string => Offer) public offers;
Listing 5.5: Market Smart Contract
The contract includes similar mappings for pendingSupplyContracts. The market inter­
acts with other deployed smart contracts. To implement this, we need to create interfaces
for the DSO and SmartMeter smart contracts.
1
interface IDSO {
2
function registerKey(
3
address smartMeterPubKey , address smartMeterAddress) external;
4
5
function isRegisteredKey(address smartMeterPubKey , address
smartMeterAddress
6
) external view returns (bool);
7
8
function removeRegisteredKey(address smartMeterPubKey) external;
9
}
10
11
interface ISmartMeter {
12
function returnReservedBatteryCharge(
13
uint amount ,address smartMeterInstance
14
) external returns (bool);
15
16
function subtractBatteryCharge(
17
uint amount , bytes memory ots, bytes32 nextOtsHash ,address
smartMeterInstance
18
) external returns (bool);
19
20
function getBatteryCharge() external view returns (uint);
21
}
Listing 5.6: Interfaces
These interfaces allows for communication between smart contract deployed on the blockchain.
Furthermore, the market has self­enforcing safety guarantees implemented when inter­
acting with a prosumer. One is the nonceGuard, which checks if the nonce has been used
recently. If the nonce has not been used, the nonce is added to the list of recently used
nonces. The market registers each used nonce with an expiration time of two weeks.
After the expiration time, a nonce can be reused.
1
mapping(uint => uint) private usedNonces;
2
modifier nonceGuard(uint nonce) {
3
uint timestamp = usedNonces[nonce];
4
// nonce was used within the last two weeks.
5
if (timestamp + maxOfferLivespan * 2 > block.timestamp * 1000) {
6
revert("Nonce was used recently");
7
}
8
_;
9
}
Listing 5.7: Nonce guard
Smart Grids Empowered
35
==PAGE:44==
Add offer
The addOffer is protected by the nonceGuard and other security features. The function
checks if the caller of the contract, msg.sender, is the actual owner of the smart meter.
The function also adds a maximum lifespan to an offer to limit ”dead” offers with an unre­
alistically long time frame to be stored on the contract. Furthermore, the lifespan works to
mitigate replay attacks. When a nonce becomes available again, an adversary could try
to replay the offer. However, the offer’s expiration would not be correct, and it would be
rejected. Moreover, if the adversary somehow forges the expiration date within the valid
lifespan, the signature would be invalid, and the offer would be rejected. The function adds
the offer to the hashmap and records the id of the offer in a separate list. This approach
is necessary as Solidity hashmaps cannot be iterated through, making it challenging to
keep track of the existing items in a mapping.
1
function addOffer(string memory id, uint amount , uint price,
2
uint expiration , address smartMeterAddress ,
3
string memory sellerSignature , uint nonce
4
) public nonceGuard(nonce) returns (bool) {
5
require(
6
DSO.isRegisteredKey(msg.sender , smartMeterAddress),
7
"Smart Meter not registered by DSO"
8
);
9
10
uint maxOfferExpiration = block.timestamp * 1000 + maxOfferLivespan;
11
require(
12
block.timestamp * 1000 + maxOfferLivespan > expiration &&
13
expiration > block.timestamp * 1000,
14
"Offer lifespan not correct");
15
ISmartMeter smartMeter = ISmartMeter(smartMeterAddress);
16
require(
17
smartMeter.subtractBatteryCharge(amount),
18
"Not enough stored energy"
19
);
20
21
usedNonces[nonce] = block.timestamp * 1000;
22
offers[id] = Offer({
23
id: id,
24
amount: amount ,
25
price: price,
26
expiration: expiration ,
27
owner: msg.sender ,
28
active: true,
29
sellerSignature: sellerSignature ,
30
nonce: nonce
31
});
32
offerIds.push(id);
33
return true;
34
}
Listing 5.8: Add offer
Remove offer
If a prosumer wants to rescind an offer, it calls the removeOffer. The function removes the
offer, and the market returns the reserved battery charge to the associated smart meter.
1
function removeOffer(
2
string memory id,
3
address smartMeterAddress
4
) public returns (bool) {
5
Offer memory offer = offers[id];
6
require(msg.sender == offer.owner, "Only owner can remove offer");
Smart Grids Empowered
36
==PAGE:45==
7
ISmartMeter smartMeter = ISmartMeter(smartMeterAddress);
8
smartMeter.returnReservedBatteryCharge(offer.amount);
9
delete offers[id];
10
return true;
11
}
Listing 5.9: Remove offer
Buy offer
The buyOffer function facilitates the procurement of offers. Before calling the function,
the buyer signs the offer, including the seller’s signature. This prevents the signature
from being replayed on a similar offer. The function ultimately moves the specified offer
to pending supply contracts, awaiting DSO validation.
The function has several require assertions. It starts by checking whether an offer with
the proposed id exists. It then checks if the offer has expired, and lastly, it validates that
the buyer is not the same person as the seller. If these checks pass, the market deletes
the offer from the offer hashmap and adds it to pendingSupplyContracts. Lastly, it
removes the id from the list of offer ids.
1
function buyOffer(string memory id, string memory buyerSignature) public {
2
Offer memory offer = offers[id];
3
4
require(
5
keccak256(bytes(offer.id)) == keccak256(bytes(id)),
6
"No offer found"
7
);
8
require(offer.expiration > block.timestamp , "Cannot buy expired offer"
);
9
require(msg.sender != offer.owner, "Owner cannot buy own offer");
10
11
delete offers[id];
12
pendingSupplyContracts.push(
13
PendingSupplyContract({
14
buyerSignature: buyerSignature ,
15
sellerSignature: offer.sellerSignature ,
16
amount: offer.amount ,
17
price: offer.price,
18
timestamp: block.timestamp ,
19
nonce: offer.nonce,
20
smartMeterAddress: offer.smartMeterAddress
21
})
22
);
23
24
for (uint i = 0; i < offerIds.length; i++) {
25
if (keccak256(bytes(offerIds[i])) == keccak256(bytes(id))) {
26
offerIds[i] = offerIds[offerIds.length - 1];
27
offerIds.pop();
28
}
29
}
30
}
Listing 5.10: Buy offer
Validating pending supply contracts
Periodically, the DSO initiates the validation of pending supply contracts. This process
involves retrieving the pending supply contracts from the contract and verifying the asso­
ciated signatures. Following verification, the DSO generates an array of booleans. The
indices of this array correspond to the indices of the pending supply contracts and signify
whether each offer is approved. In case of approval, an event representing a valid supply
Smart Grids Empowered
37
==PAGE:46==
contract is emitted. However, if the buyer or the seller presents malformed signatures,
the seller’s battery charge is returned. This ensures a mechanism for rectification in case
of signature­related irregularities during the offer validation process.
1
event SupplyContract(
2
string buyerSignature ,
3
string sellerSignature ,
4
uint amount ,
5
uint timestamp ,
6
uint price
7
);
8
function validatePendingSupplyContracts(
9
bool[] memory offerIndicies
10
) public {
11
require(msg.sender == owner, "sender is not owner");
12
for (uint i = 0; i < offerIndicies.length; i++) {
13
PendingSupplyContract memory offer = pendingSupplyContracts[
14
i
15
];
16
if (offerIndicies[i] == true) {
17
emit SupplyContract(
18
offer.buyerSignature ,
19
offer.sellerSignature ,
20
offer.amount ,
21
offer.timestamp ,
22
offer.price
23
);
24
} else {
25
smartMeter.returnReservedBatteryCharge(
26
offer.amount ,
27
offer.smartMeterAddress
28
);
29
}
30
}
31
for (uint i = 0; i < offerIndicies.length; i++) {
32
if (offerIndicies.length < pendingSupplyContracts.length - i) {
33
pendingSupplyContracts[i] = pendingSupplyContracts[
34
pendingSupplyContracts.length - 1 - i
35
];
36
}
37
pendingSupplyContracts.pop();
38
}
39
}
Listing 5.11: Verify pending supply contracts
5.1.3
DSO
The DSO’s only responsibility is registering smart meters with the corresponding prosumer
and confirming their registration. The contract has a hashmap containing addresses of
the prosumers as keys and their smart meter contract address as the value.
1
contract DSO {
2
address owner;
3
mapping(address => address) registeredAddresses;
4
5
constructor() {
6
owner = msg.sender;
7
}
8
9
modifier isOwner() {
10
require(msg.sender == owner, "Only owner can change the key map");
Smart Grids Empowered
38
==PAGE:47==
11
_;
12
}
13
14
function registerKey(address prosumerAddress , address smartMeterAddress)
public isOwner {
15
registeredAddresses[prosumerAddress] = smartMeterAddress;
16
}
17
18
function isRegisteredKey(address prosumerAddress , address
smartMeterAddress) public view returns (bool) {
19
return registeredAddresses[prosumerAddress] == smartMeterAddress;
20
}
21
22
function removeRegisteredKey(address prosumerAddress) public isOwner {
23
delete registeredAddresses[prosumerAddress];
24
}
25
}
Listing 5.12: DSO code
The contract includes a modifier that is used when adding and removing registrations.
The modifier checks that the caller actually owns the smart contract. The attribute owner
is set when the smart contract is deployed, and there is no way of forging this property.
In our application, this smart contract is deployed by an admin.
5.2
Client
The client application is the prosumer’s entry point to the application. The client is devel­
oped in React and TypeScript, a popular and widely supported library for creating user­
facing web applications. The app uses the web3.js library, which is an Ethereum interface
made in JavaScript.
1
const provider = new Web3.providers.HttpProvider(ETH_URL);
2
const web3 = new Web3(provider);
3
return web3.eth.getAccounts();
Listing 5.13: web3.js
The web3.js library is used by creating a provider, which establishes a connection to a
running Ethereum instance. Depending on the URL, this can be a local instance or the
Ethereum mainnet. After connecting to the Ethereum instance, we can now interact with
the standard Ethereum protocol and, for example, get our connected Wallets using the
getAccounts() method.
5.2.1
Truffle and Ganache
We use the Truffle library to compile and integrate our Solidity smart contracts into the
client. The library can be used to deploy smart contracts on our Ethereum instance and
has testing capabilities to verify our smart contract logic. When our smart contracts are
compiled, we can interact with them from our client application. Below is an example of
how we interact with the Market smart contract and fetch all current offers.
1
export const marketInstance = (address: string) => {
2
const web3 = getWeb3();
3
return new web3.eth.Contract(Market.abi, address);
4
};
5
const getOffers = async (market: string) => {
6
const marketContract = marketInstance(market);
7
try {
Smart Grids Empowered
39
==PAGE:48==
8
const response = (await marketContract.methods
9
.getOffers().call())
10
return response.map((d) => offerParser(d));
11
} catch (error) {
12
console.error(error);
13
}
14
};
Listing 5.14: Using truffle to interact with the Market Smart Contract
To launch our own Ethereum blockchain, we use Ganache. Ganache is a tool within the
Truffle development suite designed to facilitate Ethereum blockchain development and
testing. Serving as a local blockchain emulator, we can utilize Ganache to simulate an
Ethereum network locally. It comes equipped with pre­funded accounts, eliminating the
need to acquire Ether on a real network for testing purposes.
5.2.2
React application
To interact with the market, we have designed a user­friendly interface. This interface pro­
vides users with a clear and intuitive platform to effortlessly view a list of available energy
offers. The interface enables users to easily create energy offers, allowing for flexibility in
specifying terms such as quantity and pricing. Furthermore, users can remove their offers
at any time, offering a dynamic and responsive marketplace. The user interface also facil­
itates the straightforward process of purchasing energy supplies, ensuring a hassle­free
experience for users engaging in energy transactions within our platform.
Figure 5.2: Marketplace page
Smart Grids Empowered
40
==PAGE:49==
5.3
Group signature service
To provide users with enhanced anonymity, we created a group signature service. The
off­chain service provides a REST API written in Python Flask to access the underlying
services. The service supports the following endpoints.
Path
Method
Input
Description
/add-member/[name]
GET
­
Adds new member to the group signature
and returns the user’s group key.
The route is protected with an API key.
/sign
POST
Message, Group Key
Signs a message with the user’s group key.
Returns the signature of the message.
/verify
POST
Signature, Message
Verifies a signature and the corresponding
message. Returns a boolean.
/open
POST
Signature, API key
Opens a signature and reveals the signer.
The route is protected with an API key.
Table 5.1: Endpoints for Group Signature Service
The table outlines key endpoints and describes their functionalities within the system. The
"/add-member/[name]" path allows the addition of a new member to the group signature,
returning the user’s group secret key. The input would usually be the user’s public wallet
or personal information, like a name or an ID, to allow identification. This operation is
protected by an API key to ensure access control, so only the DSO can add new members
to the group signature. The "/sign" path facilitates the signing of a message with the
user’s group key, generating the corresponding signature. The message is usually a
stringified version of an offer or a supply contract. This endpoint is open to the public,
but only valid group keys will give back a signature. The "/verify" path is open for the
public and verifies a given signature and its associated message, returning a boolean to
confirm authenticity. This endpoint is used for all interested parties to confirm the validity
of a supply contract or an offer. The "/open" path is protected by an API key, restricting
access to the DSO. This endpoint enables the opening of a signature to unveil the signer’s
identity. This set of endpoints, coupled with API key protection, ensures a robust and
secure mechanism for managing group signatures and associated operations.
5.4
Layer­2 implementation
As described in our design 4.4, we wanted to use Polygon to benefit from its scalability
advantages. We obtained a Polygon wallet to interact with the network to deploy our ap­
plication to Polygon. To enable smart contract deployment and transactions, we acquired
MATIC tokens, Polygon’s native cryptocurrency. With the tokens in hand, we deployed
our Ethereum­compatible smart contracts on the Polygon network. The integration of our
Polygon­wallet can be seen below.
1
polygon_infura_testnet: {
2
provider: () =>
3
new HDWalletProvider({
4
mnemonic: {
5
phrase: mnemonic ,
6
},
7
providerOrUrl:
8
"https://polygon -mumbai.infura.io/v3/" +
9
infuraProjectId ,
10
}),
Smart Grids Empowered
41
==PAGE:50==
11
network_id: 80001,
12
confirmations: 2,
13
timeoutBlocks: 200,
14
skipDryRun: true,
15
chainId: 80001,
16
},
Listing 5.15: Wallet integration to Polygon
In the code, we provide an HDWallet (Hierarchical Deterministic Wallet), a wallet gener­
ated from a single seed. The seed we provide is the mnemonic of our own Polygon­wallet.
The mnemonic is a sequence of 12 human­readable words that is our cryptographic key
to the wallet. When our wallet is available, we can now point the provider URL of our client
application to Polygon and use the application, which is now running on layer­2.
Smart Grids Empowered
42
==PAGE:51==
6
Testing
Having examined the details of our implementation, this section will provide proof of the
functionality of our system.
6.1
Unit testing
We implemented unit tests to verify the isolated behavior of our smart contracts. The unit
tests include the smart meter and DSO contracts. The market smart contract is based on
interaction with other contracts and will be tested in integration tests. Full test implemen­
tation can be found in Appendix A.
6.1.1
Smart meter
The testing of our smart meter revolves around its logging functionality. Logging is per­
haps the most crucial part of our system, as it provides proof of the prosumers’ energy
data. To test the functionality, we call the smart contract’s method createLog, where we
provide the production and consumption data for the interval. Afterward, we check the
state of the blockchain to assert that the actual event was emitted.
Another crucial function of the logging mechanism is that whenever there is a difference in
production and data, the surplus energy is updated with the net difference. The reliability
of this data is also crucial since a prosumer needs a surplus of energy to be allowed to
sell on the market.
The final functionality we tested was the smart meter’s ability to subtract stored energy.
This functionality is used whenever a prosumer is creating an offer.
6.1.2
DSO
The DSO is important for only allowing registered prosumers and smart meters the abil­
ity to provide data to the network. Therefore, our unit tests revolve around testing the
registration functionality.
The tests are relatively simple and revolve around testing values in the hashmap on the
DSO smart contract. By calling the method registerKey with the account address and
smart meter address of the prosumer, we thereafter check whether the state change is
present on the blockchain. Furthermore, we check whether a prosumer can use another
prosumer’s registration, which should fail. We lastly test the functionality of removing the
registration.
6.2
Integration testing
After testing our isolated smart contract logic, we progress with testing their interactions
with integration tests. Here, the tests focus on the Market smart contract since it employs
all of our fundamental logic for trading energy. The full tests can be found in Appendix B.
6.2.1
Adding and removing offers
We start by creating an offer on the Market smart contract and check that the state of the
blockchain represents our changes. We then create an offer containing more energy than
is currently stored to back the assumption that prosumers cannot offer more energy than
they currently have stored.
We do not allow prosumers to create offers with too long a lifespan, and we, therefore,
make a test to check that the offer will be declined if it has an invalid expiration date.
Smart Grids Empowered
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.1: Unit tests results
Our nonce functionality is tested by providing the same nonce twice, whereas our smart
contract logic should prevent that. Another security feature we check is the OTS (one­
time­secret). When a prosumer submits an offer, a new OTS is provided, and if an old one
is used, the offer should be rejected. Lastly, we check that we can also remove offers.
6.2.2
Buying offers
We start by trying to make a prosumer buy his own offer. This should not be allowed, and
the transaction reverts. We then proceed by trying to buy an expired offer. In the same
manner, the purchase should not be allowed. Lastly, we check that our procurement of
an offer succeeds and that the offer is no longer available on the market.
6.2.3
Contract state changes
The last integration test tests all states and ensures they are updated correctly in the
market and smart meter contracts.
In the first test, two offers are bought, and the test validates if the offers move to the
pending array. In the next test, the DSO rejects the two pending supply contracts, and
the validates the smart meter charge is returned to the seller.
Afterward, the test validates that events are emitted when pending supply contracts are
approved. Lastly, it tests the state of the pending supply contracts array is correct when
only one of the two pending supply contracts is approved.
Smart Grids Empowered
44
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.2: Integration tests results
6.3
Coverage
Test coverage indicates how much code is being covered in the tests. A higher test cov­
erage enhances bug detection and the reliability of the system. We used the solidity­
coverage framework for our tests.
Smart Contract
Statements
Branch
Functions
Lines
DSO
100%
87.5%
100%
100%
Market
100%
78.6%
100%
100%
SmartMeter
100%
87.5%
100%
100%
Table 6.1: Test coverage
Overall, we achieved a high test coverage with 100% of all smart contracts’ statements,
functions, and all lines of code covered. The relatively low branch coverage percentage
is due to Solidity’s require­function. Similar require checks are used throughout our
smart contracts, and checking all possible outcomes would lead to some redundancy in
our test cases.
6.4
Continuous integration
Our experience is that the larger an application grows, the more important testing be­
comes. Therefore, we developed our application using continuous integration (CI) to help
enforce our testing.
We used GitHub Actions to implement our CI pipeline. Our pipeline has two important as­
pects: building our client application and testing our Solidity smart contracts. Our pipeline,
therefore, consists of the following steps.
1. Install Node modules and build the application
2. Run linting, to catch programmatic errors or unused variables
3. Install Truffle and run an Ethereum emulation
4. Run Solidity unit and integration tests on the emulated blockchain
Smart Grids Empowered
45
==PAGE:54==
Our CI pipeline was run on every pull request trying to merge with our main branch. And
with branch protection we ensured that all new code had to pass our tests to merge.
This helped reduce a lot of errors and unintended bugs, especially when developing an
integration of React and Solidity, where type­checking is not always possible. The full CI
script can be found in Appendix C.
Smart Grids Empowered
46
==PAGE:55==
7
Evaluation
In the following section, we will evaluate the outcomes of our implementation. This evalua­
tion provides important performance metrics crucial for the overall success of our system.
7.1
TPS
To evaluate the scalability of our system, we measured the Transactions Per Second
(TPS) across three different blockchain environments. Initial testing was conducted on
our local Ethereum setup, Ganache, to assess TPS in a controlled local instance. Subse­
quently, we transitioned to Sepolia, a live testnet representing a layer­1 Ethereum imple­
mentation, suitable for smart contract testing before deployment to the mainnet. Lastly,
we conducted performance tests on Polygon, the layer­2 solution used in our implemen­
tation.
Our performance tests involved bundling varying numbers of transactions and submitting
them in a single call to the blockchain using the batchRequest feature from the web3 li­
brary. Throughout the testing process, we incrementally increased the number of batched
transactions from 5 to 30 to observe its impact on transaction throughput. Given the de­
pendency of transaction speed on network congestion, each batched request was exe­
cuted five times for each blockchain, and the average was calculated. Comprehensive
test results are provided in Appendix D.
When calculating TPS, we consider a transaction done when it is verified on the blockchain.
This point in a transaction’s lifecycle is often synonymous with Block Time (BT), represent­
ing the average duration for the blockchain to generate a new block. Block Time serves
as an important metric, reflecting the network’s efficiency by indicating the time taken for
transactions to be part of the immutable ledger. We can then define TPS calculations as
below.
TPSU =
T
t1 −t0
TPS = TPSU
BT
TPSU is the unverified transactions per second, T the amount of transactions over the
measured time t1 −t0. With this definition, we can calculate our TPS and compare the
results shown in Figure 7.1.
From the figure, it is apparent that interacting with our smart contracts on the pure Ethereum
layer­1 chain results in a low TPS. Ethereum has a block time of 15 seconds, which heavily
lowers the results. Using Polygon, however, gives a way more satisfying result. Benefiting
from the layer­2 architecture, both transaction throughput and block time are significantly
better, which is also easily seen in our results. Polygon has a block time of only 2 seconds,
which significantly benefits the system’s overall performance. Notably, is the increased
scalability of Polygon, as seen in the figure. The performance increases with the number
of transactions, and at 30 transactions fired simultaneously, Polygon achieves a 28 times
higher TPS then Ethereum.
7.2
Costs
Another important factor in measuring scalability is the cost associated with running the
system. When using blockchain, most transactions have a transaction fee. The fees
Smart Grids Empowered
47
==PAGE:56==
Txs
Ganache
Ethereum
Polygon
5
2.2
0.7
19.1
10
2.5
1.3
33.0
15
2.7
1.9
54.4
20
3.1
2.5
71.6
30
2.8
3.3
93.5
Figure 7.1: TPS measured with increasing amount of transactions (txs)
are measured in gas, and gas prices are listed in ETH. Deploying smart contracts and
transactions on Ethereum can be expensive since the prices of ETH have skyrocketed in
recent years. Consequently, gaining insight into the cost implications of various methods
and smart contract deployments within our system is essential. Table 7.1 presents a
comparative evaluation of gas costs between Ethereum and Polygon. Detailed test results
are available in Appendix E.
We evaluate all of our smart contracts by running integration tests. During the tests, all
smart contract functions are evaluated while keeping track of gas consumption from start
to finish. To measure the functions evenly, we calculate an average cost if a function is
called multiple times. Our evaluation also considers gas consumption during the deploy­
ment of smart contracts.
Initially, the integration tests were run on a local simulation of the Ethereum main chain us­
ing Ganache. The simulation uses the same gas usage and prices as the main Ethereum
chain. Therefore, it provides a realistic idea of the cost of running our system on the
Ethereum main chain.
Additionally, tests are conducted on the layer­2 solution, Polygon. We used the Mumbai­
testnet and acquired the MATIC token to deploy to the live Polygon chain.
Comparison
Based on our analysis, we have found that gas consumption remains consistent whether
our system runs on Ethereum or Polygon. To calculate the cost difference between the
two networks, we considered the gas and token prices for both Ethereum and Polygon.
The gas prices used in our evaluation were obtained from real­time values taken from
Smart Grids Empowered
48
==PAGE:57==
Methods
Ethereum
33 gwei/gas
2199.03 USD/ETH
Polygon
323 gwei/gas
0.71 USD/MATIC
Contract
Method
Avg. gas
consumption
USD
USD
DSO
registerKey
44323
3.22
0.010
DSO
removeRegisteredKey
14332
1.04
0.003
Market
setGroupKey
44799
3.25
0.010
Market
addOffer
256315
18.6
0.059
Market
buyOffer
129561
9.4
0.030
Market
removeOffer
45528
3.3
0.010
Market
validatePendingSupplyContracts
71589
5.2
0.016
SmartMeter
createLog
62715
4.55
0.014
SmartMeter
createSmartMeter
65383
4.74
0.015
SmartMeter
returnReservedBatteryCharge
44502
3.23
0.010
SmartMeter
setMarketAddress
27915
2.03
0.006
SmartMeter
subtractBatteryCharge
23133
1.68
0.005
Deployments
DSO
764722
55.49
0.175
Market
3716060
269.67
0.852
SmartMeter
1098594
79.72
0.252
Total
465.12 USD
1.47 USD
Table 7.1:
Transaction costs in Ethereum and Polygon.
Currency prices noted at
23/01/2024 at 15.00
https://etherscan.io/gastracker.
Although Ethereum requires fewer gwei (33) than Polygon (323) for gas consumption, the
cost of an ETH token is significantly higher than that of a MATIC token. This cost difference
is evident when we compare the prices for running our system’s core functionality ­ which
amounts to 465.12 USD on Ethereum and only 1.47 USD on Polygon. Hence, using
Polygon reduces costs by 99.7%.
Smart Grids Empowered
49
==PAGE:58==
8
Discussion
In this section we will discuss what benefits our solution brings, but also examine which
limitations and challenges still exist.
8.1
Key benefits
In the implementation of our system, we have reached the following benefits.
• Enabling peer­to­peer energy trading using blockchain
• Inherent high data integrity and tamper resistance due to cryptographic benefits of
blockchain
• High scalability due to layer­2 implementation of Polygon
• Enhanced privacy in trading for prosumers due to group signatures
We have demonstrated how a blockchain­based energy trading platform facilitates peer­
to­peer trade among prosumers within the smart grid. Our solution benefits from high
data integrity, leveraging the tamper­resistant nature of blockchain. Security is a central
focus, manifesting in a trustless system where prosumers are not dependent on trusting
their peers but rather on the system itself. This trustlessness is achieved through smart
contracts with clear, deterministic logic and built­in validation checks, ensuring that pro­
sumers cannot sell energy they do not possess, assuming the security of their physical
smart meters. Furthermore, our system protects our users’ identities, having implemented
group signatures to improve anonymity for trading partners.
8.2
Feature comparison
Having evaluated our system, we can compare features to existing research and solu­
tions in the industry. A considerable amount of interesting research has been made in
the area of smart grids and blockchain, and our comparison will focus on some of the
most frequently cited papers in this domain. The selected related works all have distinct
directions or other notable features. Consequently, we have compared our system with
some of the more impactful works. More recent research has also been undertaken, but
achieved similar results as the more impactful studies. Thus, they are omitted from this
comparison.
The authors of [26] propose an Ethereum layer­1 solution building an energy trading plat­
form for smart grids. While the authors provide an interesting solution, they face the scal­
ability and anonymity issues related to only utilizing layer­1 of Ethereum. Low TPS and
high operation costs reduce the impact of their solution, while their privacy concerns pose
a security risk. In [21], the authors showcase a P2P trading platform using a permissioned
blockchain with a novel market mechanism to facilitate trade between peers. However,
their contribution depends on pre­selected nodes to verify transactions on the blockchain,
limiting the decentralization of their solution. [44] propose an interesting scheme using
multi­signatures and anonymous messaging streams, leading to the authors claiming full
anonymity in their solution. Their system, however, is built on BitCoin and is not scalable
due to low TPS, high costs, and an inefficient consensus mechanism (PoW).
The project conducted in [25] is also built on an Ethereum layer­1 infrastructure and faces
scalability challenges.
However, this project achieved many great results since their
Smart Grids Empowered
50
==PAGE:59==
Proof­of­Concept was carried out in a real­life experiment in Denmark. A major contri­
bution to the smart grid and blockchain area came from [45], which in 2017 proposed
their original solution. Their solution has been implemented in multiple places worldwide
and is a great advancement for the industry. Their original solution, however, faces the
same decentralization issues as other consortium blockchains face. Therefore, they re­
newed their architecture in August 2023 and moved to a public blockchain. They utilize
Solana and its impressive layer­1 scalability, reaching very high TPS combined with a low
cost. However, because their solution is now available on a public blockchain, their users
are still at risk of losing their anonymity when trading energy. We have shown that our
system achieves decentralization, a scalable TPS, and low costs. However, even though
we have improved the anonymity in trading, privacy­related issues still exist. Moreover,
we have found that cost issues may arise in our system. These concerns will be discussed
in the following section.
Decentralized
Scalable TPS
Low cost
Anonymized trading
Agung et. al, 2022
Ethereum layer­1
√
­
­
­
Kang et. al, 2017
Permissioned blockchain
­
√
√
­
Aitzhan et. al, 2016,
BitCoin layer­1
√
­
­
√
The Energy Collective (DTU), 2020
Ethereum layer­1
√
­
­
­
Powerledger, original, 2017
Consortium blockchain
­
√
√
­
Powerledger, 2023 update
Solana layer­1
√
√
√
­
Our solution
Ethereum layer­2
√
√
√
(√)
Table 8.1: Feature comparison
8.3
Limitations & challenges
Creating a scalable, low­cost, public, yet anonymized energy trading platform comes with
many challenges. Some of which we have addressed and proposed solutions for. How­
ever, there are some problems we have not been able to solve fully in this iteration of our
thesis. In the following, we will discuss some of these limitations and problems.
8.3.1
Gas fees
When working with blockchain, there will always be some fee to be paid when making a
transaction. As discussed earlier, transaction fees are a security mechanism for reducing
illicit behavior on the blockchain. However, depending on which system is being built with
blockchain, the transaction fees can add up and be a huge cost for the system users.
Obviously, it is very expensive to run any system on the mainnet of Ethereum, which was
one of the reasons we utilized the layer­2 solution Polygon. As we showed in our evalu­
ation, using Polygon, we reduced our costs by 99.7%, which is very favorable. However,
since we are creating a system that heavily relies on data logging, we will make many
changes to the state of the blockchain. A household produces a log every 15 minutes.
That amounts to 96 logs a day and 35,040 logs a year. The yearly logging cost is then
0.014 USD per log times 35,040 logs per year = 490 USD. With 3.3 million households in
Smart Grids Empowered
51
==PAGE:60==
Denmark, the annual costs of transactions would amount to 1.62 billion USD. Moreover,
that is when using the low­cost transactions of Polygon. It is not feasible for an IT system
to have such high running costs when all transactions are fairly simple and do not have
high computational needs.
Other low­cost, high­TPS blockchain alternatives exist, such as Solana. However, us­
ing blockchain explorers, we have found that the average transaction fee on Polygon is
around 0.008 USD where, whereas Solana’s average transaction fee is about the same
at around 0.0085 USD [46, 47]. Solana used to have way lower transaction fees, but due
to the recent spike in the price of its native cryptocurrency SOL, prices are no longer what
they once were. Therefore, switching to Solana does not help lowering costs. Solana only
operates on layer­1, so with emerging layer­2 technologies made for Solana, such as Ni­
tro, prices could potentially be lower and feasible for a system like ours [48]. However,
these technologies are not in production yet, so only the future will tell.
8.3.2
Privacy
Keeping the users of our system private is one of the main focus points of this thesis. An
inherent level of privacy exists when using blockchain, with wallet addresses acting as
pseudonyms ­ being the only trace of a user. In some systems, this level of privacy is
more than sufficient. However, we wanted to improve the level of privacy since there are
weaknesses in wallet addresses, as discussed in section 3.2.
An adversary can obtain all activity performed by a wallet by scanning the network. Smart
contracts provide detailed information on every call, such as what parameters were used
and the wallet address of the caller. Due to the nature of blockchain, if the adversary
does not catch the traffic in real time, they can still scan the transaction history. There­
fore, we wanted our project to make a system incorporating enhanced privacy yet still be
transparent and public for onlookers.
One approach is to use ephemeral addresses, frequently changing your wallet address
by creating new ones. However, this approach requires users to transfer funds from their
old address to the new one, creating a new link. The authors of [49] also pinpoint that an
adversary can easily link ephemeral addresses. Mixer or tumbling services can be used;
however, they charge a fee for using them, which adds another level of costs we would
like to avoid.
In our approach, we utilized group signatures to hide the wallet address of a prosumer
when an offer is made or when a supply contract is agreed upon. This greatly benefits
the user’s privacy since it is not directly apparent who sells or buys energy. However,
as mentioned, we cannot claim to have implemented full anonymity. As we use a public
blockchain, we still reveal who made calls to a smart contract. In our case, an adversary
could scan the network and draw links from when an offer is made to when it is purchased.
Group signatures improve privacy, but using a simple public blockchain will still reveal
information about transactions that could lead to the linkability of users.
As discussed in Section 2.3, other means of privacy­enhancing exist in blockchain layer­2
solutions. In state channels, transactions between two parties are confidential, excluding
the initial and final transactions. While this presents a notable advantage, its impact on
privacy within our context is somewhat limited. Our primary goal is to establish an open
market structure that allows users to freely explore available offers. State channels are
less effective in this scenario since the visibility of all offers and agreed­upon contracts is
essential from a public perspective. State channels primarily enhance security in direct
peer­to­peer communication, making them less suitable for a public marketplace. Even
Smart Grids Empowered
52
==PAGE:61==
if state channels were employed to integrate communications with the marketplace, the
initiation and conclusion of the transaction would still be visible on the public blockchain.
A promising alternative of privacy­enhancing techniques is zero­knowledge rollups (ZK­
rollups). ZK­rollups offer an approach to privacy enhancement that allows transactions
to be verified without revealing any information about the transaction itself. This level
of confidentiality aligns more closely with the requirements of an open market structure
that keeps its users anonymous. Offers and supply contracts would still be available
to the public, but there would be no possibility for adversaries to link them to a wallet
address. ZK­rollups benefit by encrypting the details of each transaction. This means
that the specifics of a transaction, such as the sender, receiver, and transaction amount,
are concealed. Having only discovered the properties of ZK­rollups relatively late in our
thesis, we did not implement them in this iteration of our solution. However, we believe
that by adopting zero­knowledge rollups, the marketplace can maintain the desired level
of openness while providing the required level of user privacy.
Smart Grids Empowered
53
==PAGE:62==
9
Conclusion
In this thesis, we have implemented a Proof­of­Concept blockchain­based energy trading
platform that enables prosumers to trade in a P2P smart grid setting.
Our main contributions include seamless P2P trading, ensuring inherent data integrity and
tamper resistance, achieving high scalability through integrating Polygon’s layer­2 solu­
tion and enhancing user privacy by including group signatures. Implementing a nation­
wide solution poses many challenges where more research is needed, especially trans­
action costs and full anonymity. Although significantly reduced with Polygon, gas fees
remain a concern, particularly for high­frequency data logging transactions. While en­
hanced through group signatures, privacy faces limitations on a public blockchain, prompt­
ing consideration of advanced techniques such as zero­knowledge rollups for improved
user anonymity.
In conclusion, our PoC shows that P2P energy trading on smart grids can be achieved
through blockchain technology. While addressing current challenges, the system exem­
plifies the potential of decentralized, transparent, and privacy­conscious energy trading.
Future iterations may explore ZK­rollups and more cost­efficient solutions to implement
this in a full­scale nationwide implementation.
9.1
Future Work
As concluded in this thesis, there are improvements to be made to achieve a low­cost,
high­TPS energy trading platform, ensuring user anonymity. Even though reduced signif­
icantly, we have shown that costs will be a considerable expense in our solution. Future
work could explore whether immature layer­2 solutions for Solana lower costs. Another
direction would be to deploy a private blockchain. In a private blockchain, gas fees are
controlled by the owners, and thereby, the costs could be reduced. This would impose
low decentralization, but the trade­offs are worth considering.
Achieving full anonymity faces barriers due to transparency and verifiability requirements
on a public blockchain. ZK­rollups present an interesting opportunity for future work, of­
fering the potential for achieving the desired full anonymity. Exploring private blockchain
solutions could also contribute to resolving anonymity concerns.
The private blockchain research can pursue a private layer­2­chain with group signatures
instead of the inherent ECDSA signatures. The chain will still be pegged to the main chain
to utilize its security guarantees. Exploring alternative consensus protocols more suitable
for smart grids could be beneficial. Additionally, assessing use cases and their implemen­
tation within the smart grid framework would contribute to the holistic development of the
solution. Furthermore, ensuring that the blockchain solution meets the DSO’s guarantees
for interaction with the wholesale market is essential for practical implementation.
Smart Grids Empowered
54
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Satoshi Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A peer­to­peer electronic cash system”. In: Decentral­
ized business review (2008).
[2]
How Much Energy Does Bitcoin Consume? https://crypto.com/bitcoin/bitcoin-
energy-consumption. (Accessed on 01/07/2024).
[3]
Denmark Energy Information | Enerdata. https://www.enerdata.net/estore/energy-
market/denmark/. (Accessed on 01/07/2024).
[4]
PoW and PoS consensus mechanisms comparison. | Download Scientific Diagram.
https : / / www . researchgate . net / figure / PoW - and - PoS - consensus - mechanisms -
comparison_fig2_334061880. (Accessed on 01/23/2024).
[5]
Vitalik Buterin et al. “A next­generation smart contract and decentralized application
platform”. In: white paper 3.37 (2014), pp. 2–1.
[6]
Gas and fees | ethereum.org — ethereum.org. https://ethereum.org/en/developers/
docs/gas. [Accessed 21­01­2024].
[7]
Solidity — Solidity 0.8.23 documentation. https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.23/.
(Accessed on 01/21/2024).
[8]
Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) | ethereum.org — ethereum.org. https://ethereum.
org/en/developers/docs/evm. [Accessed 25­01­2024].
[9]
Qiheng Zhou et al. “Solutions to scalability of blockchain: A survey”. In: Ieee Access
8 (2020), pp. 16440–16455.
[10]
Jyoti Yadav and Ranjana Shevkar. “Performance­Based Analysis of Blockchain
Scalability Metric”. eng. In: Technical Journal / Tehnicki Glasnik (2021). ISSN: 18485588,
18466168.
[11]
Cosimo Sguanci, Roberto Spatafora, and Andrea Mario Vergani. “Layer 2 blockchain
scaling: A survey”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10881 (2021).
[12]
Dodo Khan, Low Tang Jung, and Manzoor Ahmed Hashmani. “Systematic literature
review of challenges in blockchain scalability”. In: Applied Sciences 11.20 (2021),
p. 9372.
[13]
Zero­Knowledge rollups | ethereum.org — ethereum.org. https://ethereum.org/en/
developers/docs/scaling/zk-rollups. [Accessed 17­01­2024].
[14]
ECDSA: Elliptic Curve Signatures ­ Practical Cryptography for Developers. https:
//cryptobook.nakov.com/digital-signatures/ecdsa-sign-verify-messages. (Accessed on
01/24/2024).
[15]
David Chaum and Eugène Van Heyst. “Group signatures”. In: Advances in Cryptology—
EUROCRYPT’91: Workshop on the Theory and Application of Cryptographic Tech­
niques Brighton, UK, April 8–11, 1991 Proceedings 10. Springer. 1991, pp. 257–
265.
[16]
Dan Boneh, Xavier Boyen, and Hovav Shacham. “Short group signatures”. In: An­
nual international cryptology conference. Springer. 2004, pp. 41–55.
[17]
Bart Preneel. “Cryptographic hash functions”. In: European Transactions on Telecom­
munications 5.4 (1994), pp. 431–448.
[18]
Smart Grid: A Beginner’s Guide — nist.gov. https://www.nist.gov/el/smart-grid/
about-smart-grid/smart-grid-beginners-guide. [Accessed 08­01­2024].
[19]
Energy Atlas: Graphics and license terms | Heinrich Böll Stiftung. https://www.
boell.de/en/2018/04/24/energy-atlas-graphics-and-license-terms?dimension1=ds_
energyatlas. (Accessed on 01/23/2024).
Smart Grids Empowered
55
==PAGE:64==
[20]
Roller på elmarkedet — energinet.dk. https://energinet.dk/el/elmarkedet/roller-pa-
elmarkedet/. [Accessed 17­01­2024].
[21]
Jiawen Kang et al. “Enabling localized peer­to­peer electricity trading among plug­
in hybrid electric vehicles using consortium blockchains”. In: IEEE transactions on
industrial informatics 13.6 (2017), pp. 3154–3164.
[22]
Esther Mengelkamp et al. “Designing microgrid energy markets: A case study: The
Brooklyn Microgrid”. In: Applied energy 210 (2018), pp. 870–880.
[23]
Zhetao Li et al. “Consortium blockchain for secure energy trading in industrial inter­
net of things”. In: IEEE transactions on industrial informatics 14.8 (2017), pp. 3690–
3700.
[24]
David Vangulick, Bertrand Cornélusse, and Damien Ernst. “Blockchain for peer­to­
peer energy exchanges: design and recommendations”. In: 2018 Power Systems
Computation Conference (PSCC). IEEE. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[25]
Pierre Pinson. The Energy Collective | Energiteknologi. https://energiforskning.dk/
en/node/15513. (Accessed on 12/05/2023).
[26]
Anak Agung Gde Agung and Rini Handayani. “Blockchain for smart grid”. In: Journal
of King Saud University­Computer and Information Sciences 34.3 (2022), pp. 666–
675.
[27]
Merlinda Andoni et al. “Blockchain technology in the energy sector: A systematic
review of challenges and opportunities”. In: Renewable and sustainable energy re­
views 100 (2019), pp. 143–174.
[28]
Keke Gai et al. “Privacy­preserving energy trading using consortium blockchain in
smart grid”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 15.6 (2019), pp. 3548–
3558.
[29]
Michael Fröwis et al. “Safeguarding the evidential value of forensic cryptocurrency
investigations”. In: Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation 33 (2020),
p. 200902.
[30]
Nicolas T Courtois and Rebekah Mercer. “Stealth address and key management
techniques in blockchain systems”. In: ICISSP 2017­Proceedings of the 3rd Inter­
national Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy. 2017, pp. 559–
566.
[31]
Shen Noether, Adam Mackenzie, et al. “Ring confidential transactions”. In: Ledger
1 (2016), pp. 1–18.
[32]
Torben Pedersen and Bent Petersen. “Explaining gradually increasing resource
commitment to a foreign market”. In: International business review 7.5 (1998), pp. 483–
501.
[33]
Ronald L Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Yael Tauman. “How to leak a secret: Theory and
applications of ring signatures”. In: Theoretical Computer Science: Essays in Mem­
ory of Shimon Even (2006), pp. 164–186.
[34]
Chao Lin et al. “Ppchain: A privacy­preserving permissioned blockchain architecture
for cryptocurrency and other regulated applications”. In: IEEE Systems Journal 15.3
(2020), pp. 4367–4378.
[35]
Keke Gai et al. “Permissioned blockchain and edge computing empowered privacy­
preserving smart grid networks”. In: IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6.5 (2019),
pp. 7992–8004.
[36]
Takeshi Miyamae et al. “ZGridBC: zero­knowledge proof based scalable and pri­
vate blockchain platform for smart grid”. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC). IEEE. 2021, pp. 1–3.
Smart Grids Empowered
56
==PAGE:65==
[37]
Zhitao Guan et al. “Achieving efficient and Privacy­preserving energy trading based
on blockchain and ABE in smart grid”. In: Journal of Parallel and Distributed Com­
puting 147 (2021), pp. 34–45.
[38]
Jonatan Bergquist et al. “On the design of communication and transaction anonymity
in blockchain­based transactive microgrids”. In: Proceedings of the 1st Workshop
on Scalable and Resilient Infrastructures for Distributed Ledgers. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[39]
Spyridon Samonas and David Coss. “The CIA strikes back: Redefining confidential­
ity, integrity and availability in security.” In: Journal of Information System Security
10.3 (2014).
[40]
Trusted Computing — cs.stanford.edu. https://cs.stanford.edu/people/eroberts/
cs201/projects/trusted-computing/what.html. [Accessed 25­01­2024].
[41]
Husstande og familier ­ Danmarks Statistik. https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/
emner/borgere/husstande- familier- og- boern/husstande- og- familier. (Accessed on
01/02/2024).
[42]
Adam Shostack. “Experiences Threat Modeling at Microsoft.” In: MODSEC@ MoD­
ELS 2008 (2008), p. 35.
[43]
Evangelos Deirmentzoglou, Georgios Papakyriakopoulos, and Constantinos Pat­
sakis. “A survey on long­range attacks for proof of stake protocols”. In: IEEE access
7 (2019), pp. 28712–28725.
[44]
Nurzhan Zhumabekuly Aitzhan and Davor Svetinovic. “Security and privacy in de­
centralized energy trading through multi­signatures, blockchain and anonymous
messaging streams”. In: IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing
15.5 (2016), pp. 840–852.
[45]
Power Ledger Whitepaper. https://www.powerledger.io/company/power- ledger-
whitepaper. (Accessed on 01/14/2024).
[46]
Average Daily Transaction Fee | PolygonScan. https://polygonscan.com/chart/avg-
txfee-usd. (Accessed on 01/19/2024).
[47]
Fee tracker ∙Metabase. https://beta-analysis.solscan.io/public/dashboard/06d689e1-
dcd7-4175-a16a-efc074ad5ce2. (Accessed on 01/19/2024).
[48]
Nitro. https://www.nitro.technology/. (Accessed on 01/19/2024).
[49]
Ryan Henry, Amir Herzberg, and Aniket Kate. “Blockchain access privacy: Chal­
lenges and directions”. In: IEEE Security & Privacy 16.4 (2018), pp. 38–45.
Smart Grids Empowered
57
==PAGE:66==
A
Unit Tests
A.1
SmartMeter
1
const SmartMeter = artifacts.require("SmartMeter");
2
const { getSecrets } = require("../utils/hash");
3
const {encodedSecret , hash} = getSecrets("secret");
4
5
contract("SmartMeter", (accounts) => {
6
let marketAddress = accounts[0];
7
let account = accounts[1];
8
const smartMeterAddress = accounts[2];
9
const marketAddress2 = accounts[3];
10
let smartMeter;
11
12
beforeEach(async () => {
13
smartMeter = await SmartMeter.new({ from: account });
14
await smartMeter.createSmartMeter(marketAddress , hash, {
15
from: smartMeterAddress ,
16
});
17
});
18
19
it("should create a log", async () => {
20
const result = await smartMeter.createLog(100, 50, {
21
from: smartMeterAddress ,
22
});
23
24
// Assuming you emit the Log event, you can check the event details
25
assert.equal(result.logs.length , 1, "Log event not emitted");
26
const logEvent = result.logs[0];
27
assert.equal(logEvent.event, "Log", "Incorrect event emitted");
28
assert.equal(
29
logEvent.args.c,
30
100,
31
"Incorrect intervalConsumption"
32
);
33
assert.equal(
34
logEvent.args.p,
35
50,
36
"Incorrect intervalProduction"
37
);
38
});
39
40
it("should get battery charge", async () => {
41
const batteryCharge = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(
smartMeterAddress);
42
assert.equal(batteryCharge , 0, "Initial batteryCharge should be 0");
43
await smartMeter.createLog(100, 150, { from: smartMeterAddress });
44
const batteryCharge2 = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(
smartMeterAddress);
45
assert.equal(batteryCharge2 , 50, "batteryCharge should be 50");
46
});
47
48
it("should subtract battery charge", async () => {
49
await smartMeter.createLog(100, 150, { from: smartMeterAddress });
50
const success = await smartMeter.subtractBatteryCharge(50,
encodedSecret , hash, smartMeterAddress , {
51
from: marketAddress ,
52
});
Smart Grids Empowered
58
==PAGE:67==
53
assert.isTrue(success.receipt.status);
54
});
55
56
57
58
it("Should return battery charge", async () => {
59
const batteryChargeBefore = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(
smartMeterAddress);
60
assert.equal(Number(batteryChargeBefore), 0, "The charge is not zero")
61
await smartMeter.returnReservedBatteryCharge(10, smartMeterAddress , {
from: marketAddress});
62
63
const batteryChargeAfter = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(
smartMeterAddress);
64
assert.equal(Number(batteryChargeAfter), 10, "The charge was not
returned");
65
});
66
67
it("Should set battery to 0 after log", async () => {
68
await smartMeter.returnReservedBatteryCharge(50, smartMeterAddress , {
from: marketAddress});
69
70
await smartMeter.createLog(80, 25, { from: smartMeterAddress });
71
const charge = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(smartMeterAddress);
72
assert.equal(Number(charge), 0, "The charge was not set to 0");
73
});
74
75
it("Should subtract 25 charge after log", async () => {
76
await smartMeter.returnReservedBatteryCharge(50, smartMeterAddress , {
from: marketAddress});
77
78
await smartMeter.createLog(50, 25, { from: smartMeterAddress });
79
const charge = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(smartMeterAddress);
80
assert.equal(Number(charge), 25, "The charge was not set to 25");
81
});
82
83
it("Should set market and return it", async () => {
84
let errorMessage = "";
85
await smartMeter.setMarketAddress(marketAddress2 , {from:
smartMeterAddress});
86
try {
87
const response1 = await smartMeter.subtractBatteryCharge(0,
encodedSecret , hash, smartMeterAddress , {from: marketAddress})
;
88
assert.isTrue(response1.receipt.status , false, "The charge was
subtracted");
89
} catch (error) {
90
errorMessage = error.data.stack;
91
if (!errorMessage) {
92
errorMessage = error.reason;
93
}
94
}
95
assert.equal(
96
errorMessage.includes("Only registered market can substract energy
"),
97
true,
98
"Not the right error"
99
);
100
101
const response2 = await smartMeter.subtractBatteryCharge(0,
encodedSecret , hash, smartMeterAddress , {from: marketAddress2});
Smart Grids Empowered
59
==PAGE:68==
102
assert.isTrue(response2.receipt.status , true, "The charge was not
subtracted");
103
});
104
});
A.2
DSO
1
const DSO = artifacts.require("DSO");
2
3
contract("DSO", (accounts) => {
4
let dso;
5
const userAddress = accounts[0]
6
const adminAddress = accounts[1];
7
const smartMeterAddress = accounts[2];
8
const userAddress2 = accounts[3];
9
const smartMeterAddress2 = accounts[4];
10
11
beforeEach(async () => {
12
dso = await DSO.new({from: adminAddress});
13
});
14
15
it("should register and validate registered", async () => {
16
const isRegistered = async () =>
17
await dso.isRegisteredKey(userAddress , smartMeterAddress);
18
19
assert.isFalse(await isRegistered(), "Key should not be registered");
20
21
await dso.registerKey(userAddress , smartMeterAddress , {
22
from: adminAddress ,
23
});
24
25
assert.isTrue(await isRegistered(), "Key is not registered");
26
});
27
28
it("should fail to register a key", async () => {
29
let errorMessage;
30
try {
31
await dso.registerKey(userAddress , smartMeterAddress , {
32
from: userAddress ,
33
});
34
} catch (error) {
35
errorMessage = error.data.stack;
36
if (!errorMessage) {
37
errorMessage = error.reason;
38
}
39
}
40
41
assert.equal(
42
true,
43
errorMessage.includes("Only owner can change key map")
44
);
45
});
46
47
it("should return false when key not registered", async () => {
48
49
const isRegistered = await dso.isRegisteredKey(
50
userAddress ,
51
smartMeterAddress
52
);
53
assert.isFalse(isRegistered , "Returned true on not registered key");
Smart Grids Empowered
60
==PAGE:69==
54
});
55
56
it("should remove a registered key", async () => {
57
const isRegistered = async () => await dso.isRegisteredKey(userAddress
, smartMeterAddress);
58
59
await dso.registerKey(userAddress , smartMeterAddress , {
60
from: adminAddress ,
61
});
62
assert.isTrue(await isRegistered(), "Key not registered");
63
64
await dso.removeRegisteredKey(userAddress , {
65
from: adminAddress ,
66
});
67
68
assert.isFalse(await isRegistered(), "Key not removed as expected");
69
});
70
71
it("should fail to remove registered key", async () => {
72
const isRegistered = async () => await dso.isRegisteredKey(userAddress
, smartMeterAddress);
73
74
await dso.registerKey(userAddress , smartMeterAddress , {
75
from: adminAddress ,
76
});
77
assert.isTrue(await isRegistered(), "Key not registered");
78
let errorMessage = "";
79
80
81
try {
82
await dso.removeRegisteredKey(userAddress , {
83
from: userAddress ,
84
});
85
} catch (error) {
86
errorMessage = error.data.stack;
87
if (!errorMessage) {
88
errorMessage = error.reason;
89
}
90
}
91
assert.equal(
92
true,
93
errorMessage.includes("Only owner can change key map")
94
);
95
96
assert.isTrue(await isRegistered(), "Key not removed as expected");
97
98
});
99
});
Smart Grids Empowered
61
==PAGE:70==
B
Integration tests
B.1
Adding an offer
1
const Market = artifacts.require("Market");
2
const DSO = artifacts.require("DSO");
3
const SmartMeter = artifacts.require("SmartMeter");
4
const { getSecrets } = require("../utils/hash");
5
const {encodedSecret , hash} = getSecrets("secret");
6
7
8
contract("Add Offer", (accounts) => {
9
let market;
10
let dso;
11
let smartMeter;
12
13
const admin = accounts[0];
14
const user = accounts[1];
15
const smartMeterAddress = accounts[2];
16
17
beforeEach(async () => {
18
dso = await DSO.new({ from: admin });
19
smartMeter = await SmartMeter.new({ from: user });
20
market = await Market.new(dso.address , smartMeter.address , { from:
admin });
21
22
await smartMeter.createSmartMeter(market.address , hash, {
23
from: smartMeterAddress ,
24
});
25
26
await dso.registerKey(user, smartMeterAddress , {
27
from: admin,
28
});
29
await smartMeter.createLog(10, 50, {
30
from: smartMeterAddress ,
31
});
32
});
33
34
it("Should add an offer", async () => {
35
const offerId = "id";
36
const amount = 1;
37
const price = 1;
38
const date = Date.now();
39
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
40
const nonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
41
await market.addOffer(
42
offerId ,
43
amount ,
44
price,
45
date,
46
smartMeterAddress ,
47
sellerSignature ,
48
nonce,
49
user,
50
encodedSecret ,
51
hash,
52
{
53
from: user,
54
}
Smart Grids Empowered
62
==PAGE:71==
55
);
56
57
const offer = await market.getOffer(offerId);
58
59
assert.equal(offer.id, offerId);
60
assert.equal(offer.price, 1);
61
assert.equal(offer.amount , 1);
62
assert.equal(offer.owner, user);
63
assert.equal(offer.active , true);
64
assert.equal(offer.nonce, nonce);
65
});
66
67
it("Should fail to make an offer because the amount is too high", async ()
=> {
68
const offerId = "id";
69
const amount = 100; // Too much energy
70
const price = 1;
71
const date = Date.now();
72
let errorMessage = "";
73
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
74
const nonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
75
76
try {
77
await market.addOffer(
78
offerId ,
79
amount ,
80
price,
81
date,
82
smartMeterAddress ,
83
sellerSignature ,
84
nonce,
85
user,
86
encodedSecret ,
87
hash,
88
{
89
from: user,
90
}
91
);
92
} catch (error) {
93
errorMessage = error.data.stack;
94
if (!errorMessage) {
95
errorMessage = error.reason;
96
}
97
}
98
99
assert.equal(
100
errorMessage.includes("Not enough stored energy"),
101
true,
102
"Not the right error"
103
);
104
});
105
106
it("Should fail to make an offer because of lifespan", async () => {
107
const offerId = "id";
108
const amount = 100; // Too much energy
109
const price = 1;
110
const date = Date.now() + 1000 * 60 * 60 * 24 * 14;
111
let errorMessage = "";
112
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
113
const nonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
114
115
try {
Smart Grids Empowered
63
==PAGE:72==
116
await market.addOffer(
117
offerId ,
118
amount ,
119
price,
120
date,
121
smartMeterAddress ,
122
sellerSignature ,
123
nonce,
124
user,
125
encodedSecret ,
126
hash,
127
{
128
from: user,
129
}
130
);
131
} catch (error) {
132
errorMessage = error.data.stack;
133
if (!errorMessage) {
134
errorMessage = error.reason;
135
}
136
}
137
138
assert.equal(
139
errorMessage.includes("Offers lifespan is too long"),
140
true,
141
"Not the right error"
142
);
143
});
144
145
it("Should allow two different nonces", async () => {
146
const offerId = "id";
147
const amount = 1; // Too much energy
148
const price = 1;
149
const date = Date.now();
150
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
151
const nonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
152
await market.addOffer(
153
offerId ,
154
amount ,
155
price,
156
date,
157
smartMeterAddress ,
158
sellerSignature ,
159
nonce,
160
user,
161
encodedSecret ,
162
hash,
163
{
164
from: user,
165
}
166
);
167
const newNonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
168
await market.addOffer(
169
offerId ,
170
amount ,
171
price,
172
date,
173
smartMeterAddress ,
174
sellerSignature ,
175
newNonce ,
176
user,
177
encodedSecret ,
Smart Grids Empowered
64
==PAGE:73==
178
hash,
179
{
180
from: user,
181
}
182
);
183
184
const offer = await market.getOffer(offerId);
185
assert.equal(offer.nonce, newNonce);
186
});
187
188
it("Should fail to reuse nonce", async () => {
189
const offerId = "id";
190
const amount = 1; // Too much energy
191
const price = 1;
192
const date = Date.now();
193
let errorMessage = "";
194
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
195
const nonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
196
try {
197
await market.addOffer(
198
offerId ,
199
amount ,
200
price,
201
date,
202
smartMeterAddress ,
203
sellerSignature ,
204
nonce,
205
user,
206
encodedSecret ,
207
hash,
208
{
209
from: user,
210
}
211
);
212
await market.addOffer(
213
offerId ,
214
amount ,
215
price,
216
date,
217
smartMeterAddress ,
218
sellerSignature ,
219
nonce,
220
user,
221
encodedSecret ,
222
hash,
223
{
224
from: user,
225
}
226
);
227
} catch (error) {
228
errorMessage = error.data.stack;
229
if (!errorMessage) {
230
errorMessage = error.reason;
231
}
232
}
233
234
assert.equal(
235
errorMessage.includes("Nonce was used recently"),
236
true,
237
"Not the right error"
238
);
239
});
Smart Grids Empowered
65
==PAGE:74==
240
241
it("Should fail because hash is updated", async () => {
242
const offerId = "id";
243
const amount = 1; // Too much energy
244
const price = 1;
245
const date = Date.now();
246
let errorMessage = "";
247
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
248
249
const { hash: newHash} = getSecrets("test2");
250
251
try {
252
await market.addOffer(
253
offerId ,
254
amount ,
255
price,
256
date,
257
smartMeterAddress ,
258
sellerSignature ,
259
Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000),
260
user,
261
encodedSecret ,
262
newHash ,
263
{
264
from: user,
265
}
266
);
267
268
await market.addOffer(
269
offerId ,
270
amount ,
271
price,
272
date,
273
smartMeterAddress ,
274
sellerSignature ,
275
Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000),
276
user,
277
encodedSecret ,
278
hash,
279
{
280
from: user,
281
}
282
);
283
} catch (error) {
284
errorMessage = error?.data?.stack;
285
console.log('errorMessage', errorMessage)
286
if (!errorMessage) {
287
errorMessage = error.reason;
288
}
289
}
290
291
assert.equal(
292
errorMessage.includes("The blinding factor was not correct"),
293
true,
294
"Not the right error"
295
);
296
});
297
298
it("Should be successfull with the new hash", async () => {
299
const offerId = "id";
300
const amount = 1; // Too much energy
301
const price = 1;
Smart Grids Empowered
66
==PAGE:75==
302
const date = Date.now();
303
let errorMessage = "";
304
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
305
306
const {encodedSecret: encodedSecret2 , hash: newHash} = getSecrets("
test2");
307
try {
308
await market.addOffer(
309
offerId ,
310
amount ,
311
price,
312
date,
313
smartMeterAddress ,
314
sellerSignature ,
315
Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000),
316
user,
317
encodedSecret ,
318
newHash ,
319
{
320
from: user,
321
}
322
);
323
await market.addOffer(
324
offerId ,
325
amount ,
326
price,
327
date,
328
smartMeterAddress ,
329
sellerSignature ,
330
Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000),
331
user,
332
encodedSecret2 ,
333
hash,
334
{
335
from: user,
336
}
337
);
338
// if no error is raised we get here
339
assert.equal(true, true, "");
340
} catch (error) {
341
errorMessage = error?.data?.stack ?? "";
342
}
343
});
344
345
it("Should remove added offer", async () => {
346
const offerId = "id";
347
const amount = 1;
348
const price = 1;
349
const date = Date.now();
350
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
351
const nonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
352
await market.addOffer(
353
offerId ,
354
amount ,
355
price,
356
date,
357
smartMeterAddress ,
358
sellerSignature ,
359
nonce,
360
user,
361
encodedSecret ,
362
hash,
Smart Grids Empowered
67
==PAGE:76==
363
{
364
from: user,
365
}
366
);
367
368
const offers = await market.getOffers();
369
assert.equal(offers.length , 1);
370
371
await market.removeOffer(offerId , {
372
from: user,
373
});
374
});
375
});
B.2
Buying an offer
1
const { getSecrets } = require("../utils/hash");
2
const Market = artifacts.require("Market");
3
const DSO = artifacts.require("DSO");
4
const SmartMeter = artifacts.require("SmartMeter");
5
const {encodedSecret , hash} = getSecrets("test1");
6
7
contract("Buy Offer", (accounts) => {
8
let market;
9
let dso;
10
let smartMeter;
11
12
const admin = accounts[0];
13
const user = accounts[1];
14
const validBuyer = accounts[2];
15
const smartMeterAddress = accounts[3];
16
const offerId = "id";
17
const amount = 1;
18
const price = 1;
19
const date = Date.now();
20
const sellerSignature = "signature1";
21
const buyerSignature = "signature2";
22
const nonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
23
24
beforeEach(async () => {
25
dso = await DSO.new({ from: admin });
26
smartMeter = await SmartMeter.new({ from: user });
27
market = await Market.new(dso.address , smartMeter.address , { from:
admin });
28
29
await smartMeter.createSmartMeter(market.address , hash, {
30
from: smartMeterAddress ,
31
});
32
33
await dso.registerKey(user, smartMeterAddress , {
34
from: admin,
35
});
36
await smartMeter.createLog(10, 50, {
37
from: smartMeterAddress ,
38
});
39
await market.addOffer(
40
offerId ,
41
amount ,
42
price,
43
date,
Smart Grids Empowered
68
==PAGE:77==
44
smartMeterAddress ,
45
sellerSignature ,
46
nonce,
47
user,
48
encodedSecret ,
49
hash,
50
{
51
from: user,
52
}
53
);
54
});
55
56
it("Should fail to buy own offer", async () => {
57
let errorMessage;
58
const validErrorMessage = "Owner cannot buy own offer";
59
try {
60
await market.buyOffer(offerId , buyerSignature , { from: user });
61
} catch (error) {
62
errorMessage = error.data.stack;
63
if (!errorMessage) {
64
errorMessage = error.reason;
65
}
66
}
67
68
assert.equal(
69
true,
70
errorMessage.includes(validErrorMessage),
71
"Wrong error message"
72
);
73
});
74
75
it("Should fail to buy expired offer", async () => {
76
const expiredOfferId = "expiredId";
77
const expiredDate = 1;
78
const validErrorMessage = "Cannot buy expired offer";
79
const newNonce = Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000);
80
let errorMessage;
81
82
await market.addOffer(
83
expiredOfferId ,
84
amount ,
85
price,
86
expiredDate ,
87
smartMeterAddress ,
88
sellerSignature ,
89
newNonce ,
90
user,
91
encodedSecret ,
92
hash,
93
{
94
from: user,
95
}
96
);
97
98
try {
99
await market.buyOffer(expiredOfferId , buyerSignature , {
100
from: user,
101
});
102
} catch (error) {
103
errorMessage = error.data.stack;
104
if (!errorMessage) {
105
errorMessage = error.reason;
Smart Grids Empowered
69
==PAGE:78==
106
}
107
}
108
109
assert.equal(
110
true,
111
errorMessage.includes(validErrorMessage),
112
"Wrong error message"
113
);
114
});
115
116
it("Should buy an offer", async () => {
117
let offers = await market.getOfferIDs();
118
assert.equal(offers.length , 1, "No offers found");
119
120
await market.buyOffer(offerId , buyerSignature , { from: validBuyer });
121
122
offers = await market.getOfferIDs();
123
assert.equal(offers.length , 0, "Too many offers");
124
});
125
126
it("Should set and get groupkey", async () => {
127
const groupKey = "groupkey";
128
await market.setGroupKey(groupKey , {from: admin});
129
const _groupKey = await market.getGroupKey();
130
131
assert.equal(groupKey , _groupKey , "They are not equal");
132
});
133
});
B.3
Testing state updates
1
const { getSecrets } = require("../utils/hash");
2
3
const Market = artifacts.require("Market");
4
const DSO = artifacts.require("DSO");
5
const SmartMeter = artifacts.require("SmartMeter");
6
7
const {encodedSecret , hash} = getSecrets("secret");
8
9
contract("State changes", (accounts) => {
10
let market;
11
let dso;
12
let smartMeter;
13
14
const admin = accounts[0];
15
const sellerAddress = accounts[1];
16
const smartMeterAddress = accounts[2];
17
const buyerAddress = accounts[3];
18
const sellerAddress2 = accounts[4];
19
const smartMeterAddress2 = accounts[5];
20
21
const createOffer = async(offer) => {
22
23
const sellerSignature = "signature";
24
25
await market.addOffer(
26
offer.offerId ,
27
offer.amount ,
28
offer.price,
29
offer.date,
Smart Grids Empowered
70
==PAGE:79==
30
offer.smartMeterAddress ,
31
sellerSignature ,
32
offer.nonce,
33
offer.sellerAddress ,
34
encodedSecret ,
35
hash,
36
{
37
from: offer.sellerAddress ,
38
}
39
);
40
return sellerSignature;
41
}
42
43
const buyOffer = async(offer) => {
44
const buyerSignature = "hej";
45
await market.buyOffer(offer.offerId , buyerSignature , { from:
buyerAddress });
46
}
47
48
beforeEach(async () => {
49
dso = await DSO.new({ from: admin });
50
51
smartMeter = await SmartMeter.new({ from: sellerAddress });
52
53
market = await Market.new(dso.address , smartMeter.address , { from:
admin });
54
55
await smartMeter.createSmartMeter(market.address , hash, {
56
from: smartMeterAddress ,
57
});
58
await smartMeter.createSmartMeter(market.address , hash, {
59
from: smartMeterAddress2 ,
60
});
61
62
await dso.registerKey(sellerAddress , smartMeterAddress , {
63
from: admin,
64
});
65
66
await dso.registerKey(sellerAddress2 , smartMeterAddress2 , {
67
from: admin,
68
});
69
70
await smartMeter.createLog(10, 50, {
71
from: smartMeterAddress ,
72
});
73
74
await smartMeter.createLog(10, 50, {
75
from: smartMeterAddress2 ,
76
});
77
78
const amount = 1;
79
const price = 1;
80
const date = Date.now() + 1000*60;
81
82
const offer1 = {sellerAddress: sellerAddress , smartMeterAddress:
smartMeterAddress , nonce: Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000),
offerId: "id1", amount: amount , price: price, date: date}
83
const seller1signature = await createOffer(offer1);
84
await buyOffer({...offer1 , sellerSignature: seller1signature}, "buyer1
", market);
85
86
Smart Grids Empowered
71
==PAGE:80==
87
const offer2 = {sellerAddress: sellerAddress2 , smartMeterAddress:
smartMeterAddress2 , nonce: Math.floor(Math.random() * 1000),
offerId: "id2", amount: amount , price: price, date: date}
88
const seller2signature = await createOffer(offer2);
89
await buyOffer({...offer2 , sellerSignature: seller2signature}, "buyer2
", market);
90
91
});
92
93
it("Validate both offers", async () => {
94
const pendingSupplyContracts = await market.getPendingSupplyContracts
();
95
96
assert.equal(pendingSupplyContracts.length , 2, "There is not 2 pending
supply contracts");
97
98
const indicies = [true, true];
99
100
const result = await market.validatePendingSupplyContracts(indicies , {
from: admin});
101
102
result.logs.forEach(event => {
103
assert.equal(event.args.sellerSignature == pendingSupplyContracts
[0].sellerSignature || event.args.buyerSignature ==
pendingSupplyContracts[1].buyerSignature , true, "Signatures
didn't match");
104
});
105
106
const newPendingSupplyContracts = await market.
getPendingSupplyContracts();
107
108
assert.equal(newPendingSupplyContracts.length , 0, "There is still
pending supply contracts");
109
110
const charge = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(smartMeterAddress);
111
assert.equal(Number(charge), 39, "The battery charge was returned");
112
113
});
114
115
it("Should fail to validate so the smart meter charge should be returned",
async () => {
116
117
const indicies = [false, false];
118
119
await market.validatePendingSupplyContracts(indicies , {from: admin});
120
121
const newPendingSupplyContracts = await market.
getPendingSupplyContracts();
122
123
assert.equal(newPendingSupplyContracts.length , 0, "There is still
pending supply contracts");
124
125
const charge = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(smartMeterAddress);
126
assert.equal(Number(charge), 40, "The battery charge was was not
returned");
127
});
128
129
it("Should emit one event and return the battery charge to the other one",
async () => {
130
const indicies = [false, true];
131
132
await market.validatePendingSupplyContracts(indicies , {from: admin});
Smart Grids Empowered
72
==PAGE:81==
133
134
const newPendingSupplyContracts = await market.
getPendingSupplyContracts();
135
136
assert.equal(newPendingSupplyContracts.length , 0, "There is still
pending supply contracts");
137
138
const charge = await smartMeter.getBatteryCharge(smartMeterAddress);
139
assert.equal(Number(charge), 40, "The battery charge was was not
returned");
140
141
});
142
143
it ("Should still have 1 offer in pending after the other has been removed
", async () => {
144
const indicies = [false];
145
146
await market.validatePendingSupplyContracts(indicies , {from: admin});
147
148
const newPendingSupplyContracts = await market.
getPendingSupplyContracts();
149
150
assert.equal(newPendingSupplyContracts.length , 1, "There is more or
less than 1 pending supply contract");
151
152
});
153
154
155
});
Smart Grids Empowered
73
==PAGE:82==
C
Continuous integration
C.1
GitHub Actions pipeline
1
name: Node.js CI
2
3
on:
4
push:
5
branches: ["main"]
6
pull_request:
7
branches: ["main"]
8
9
jobs:
10
build:
11
runs-on: ubuntu-latest
12
defaults:
13
run:
14
working -directory: ./client
15
steps:
16
- uses: actions/checkout@v3
17
18
- name: Cache Node.js modules
19
uses: actions/cache@v2
20
with:
21
path: |
22
~/.npm
23
./client/node_modules
24
/usr/local/lib/node_modules
25
/usr/local/share/.cache
26
key: ${{ runner.os }}-npm-${{ hashFiles('./client/package -
lock.json') }}
27
28
- name: Use Node.js 16.x
29
uses: actions/setup-node@v3
30
with:
31
node-version: 16.x
32
33
- name: Install dependencies
34
run: npm install
35
36
- name: Build
37
run: npm run build --if-present
38
39
- name: Lint
40
run: npm run lint
41
42
- name: Install Truffle
43
run: npm install truffle@5.11.5 -g && npm install
44
45
- name: Run Truffle in the background
46
run: truffle develop --log &
47
48
- name: Run Truffle tests
49
run: CI=true truffle test --network ci
Smart Grids Empowered
74
==PAGE:83==
D
Performance test
Numbers in these tables are raw transactions per second before verification, meaning
block time is not accounted for in these tables.
Polygon ­ Mumbai testnet
Txs / Run no.
1
2
3
4
5
Avg
5
39,5
37,1
39
40,8
34,9
38,26
10
25,7
78,7
67,4
78,3
79,6
65,94
15
114,2
106,3
114,5
107,2
102
108,84
20
140,9
150,9
146,9
144,7
132,4
143,16
30
197
205,8
184,6
174,4
172,9
186,94
Ethereum ­ Sepolia testnet
Txs / Run no
1
2
3
4
5
Avg
5
9,9
9,9
10,7
9,2
9,9
9,92
10
19,9
19,6
19,7
19,5
16,8
19,1
15
27,1
31,2
29,4
29,5
24,9
28,42
20
38,5
32,7
38,8
38,9
38
37,38
30
29,4
49,1
58,6
55,2
58,5
50,16
Ganache ­ localhost
Txs / Run no.
1
2
3
4
5
Avg
5
9,7
35,5
35,5
39,5
45,3
33,1
10
20,4
33,9
37,8
38,3
58,1
37,7
15
37,4
40
40,8
45,6
42,2
41,2
20
51,6
51,1
30,7
42,8
55,2
46,28
30
43,5
40,1
44,2
42,3
43,6
42,74
Smart Grids Empowered
75
==PAGE:84==
E
Costs test
Figure E.1: Costs test for Ethereum
Smart Grids Empowered
76
==PAGE:85==
Figure E.2: Costs tests for Polygon
Smart Grids Empowered
77
