==PAGE:1==
Optimisation of pipeline layout for hydrogen­
producing wind farms
Master Thesis
Ann­Katrine Christiansen (s184287)
Julius Pulvertaft Rasmussen (s184288)
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Management Engineering
==PAGE:2==
.5cm
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Hydrogen-producing wind farms are expected to play a pivotal role in the transition towards the
European target of climate neutrality by 2050. This thesis, developed in collaboration with the
wind farm developer Vattenfall, addresses the optimisation of the Wind Farm Pipeline Layout
Problem (WFPLP) for decentralised hydrogen-producing wind farms, where electrolysers are
located at each turbine. The objective of the WFPLP is to define the minimum-cost inter-array
pipeline layout, while satisfying constraints related to gas pipeline hydraulics. The WFPLP
combines two optimisation problems: the pipe sizing problem and the pipe routing problem.
For the pipe sizing problem, we propose a gas pipeline hydraulic model, specifying the relevant
equations for gas velocity and pressure drop, used to select pipe sizes and assess the feasibility of
pipeline layouts. Combining this with metaheuristics and exact models for the routing problem,
we establish a novel framework for optimising pipeline layouts for hydrogen-producing wind
farms. Using this framework, our study presents the first results for the WFPLP using branching
and string topologies, and extends the analysis by considering four scenarios that align the
problem closer to real-world wind farm projects. By comparing the results with similar studies
of cable routing at electrical wind farms, we conclude that pipeline layouts are only slightly more
cost-effective than cable layouts, indicating that hydrogen pipes are still too expensive.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis is prepared at the department of Technology, Management and Economics
at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
of Science degree in Business Analytics. This thesis is prepared over the course of one semester,
corresponding to a total of 60 ECTS-points.
We would like to express our gratitude to our company supervisors at Vattenfall, David Franz
Koza, Martin Philip Kidd, Jesper Muff Laursen and Thorkell Helgason for providing data,
expert insights, and feedback throughout the process.
Also, we extend profound gratitude
to our supervisor, Prof. David Pisinger, for his invaluable guidance and support throughout this
semester.
Ann-Katrine Christiansen (s184287)
Julius Pulvertaft Rasmussen (184288)
Kongens Lyngby, January 28, 2024
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Main contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Offshore Hydrogen-Producing Wind Farms
5
2.1
Introduction to wind farms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The wind farm pipeline layout problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Related Literature
10
3.1
Offshore hydrogen-producing wind farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Wind farm cable routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Gas pipeline hydraulics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Theory
14
4.1
Gas pipeline model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Construction heuristic tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Metaheuristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Mixed Integer Linear Programming model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Optimisation Setup
31
5.1
Wind farm instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Pipe types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Baseline scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Computational resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Analysis
37
6.1
Pipe sizing heuristic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Sweep multistart heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Neighbourhood exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.4
Simulated Annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.5
Variable Neighbourhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.6
Mixed Integer Linear Programming model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.7
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
7
What-if Experiments
71
7.1
Inclusion of export pipeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.2
Inclusion of installation costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.3
Balanced layout configurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.4
Limited available pipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
8
Discussion
86
8.1
Assumptions and scope limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
8.2
Pipe sizing optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8.3
Routing optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
8.4
Comparison of pipes and cables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
8.5
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
9
Conclusion
94
Bibliography
97
Appendix
104
A: Sweep multistart heuristic branching topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
B: Sweep multistart heuristic string topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
C: Simulated Annealing branching topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
D: Simulated Annealing string topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
E: Variable Neighbourhood Search branching topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
F: Variable Neighbourhood Search string topology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
G: MILP with sizing branching topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
H: MILP with sizing string topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
I: Balanced layouts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
J: Limited to two available pipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
K: Limited to three available pipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The transformation of the global energy landscape is rapidly unfolding, fuelled by escalating
concerns about climate change and the need for sustainable energy sources. Many European
nations struggle with their reliance on Russian gas, an issue further amplified by Russia’s re-
cent invasion of Ukraine, which increases the need for self-sustaining renewable energy sources.
Therefore, the majority of European nations are now heightening their renewable targets, and
offshore wind is set to be a focal point in these efforts. This is evident in the European Commis-
sion’s publication of REPowerEU from May 2022, where the union doubles down on its ambition
of achieving at least a 55% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 and climate neutrality
by 2050 (European Commission, 2022). As of January 2023, European countries individually
agreed on offshore wind ambitions, which add up to approximately 111 GW of installed capacity
in 2030 and around 317 GW by the mid 21st-century compared to 16.1 GW today (European
Commission, 2023).
Considering the future increase in installed offshore wind capacity, it should also call attention
to two significant challenges: energy storage and grid capacity. The irregular nature of wind
requires eﬀicient storage of the energy produced, and the current grid capacity of many Euro-
pean countries cannot handle the incomming electricity of large wind farms. Power-to-X and
specifically green hydrogen production from electricity is expected to be a pivotal solution to
address these challenges. REPowerEU sets a target of 10 million tons of domestic renewable
hydrogen production by 2030 and the European Commission estimates that green hydrogen
will meet 24% of the global energy demand by 2050 (European Commission, 2022) (European
Commission, 2020).
Although increased political ambitions for offshore wind and the emergence of storage solutions,
such as green hydrogen, set the industry up for a promising future, recent events have also put
pressure on the wind farm developers. The challenges are mainly fuelled by two developments,
namely, an increasingly competitive landscape from major oil companies venturing into renew-
ables, and the post-COVID economic ramifications culminating in surges in commodity prices
(Twidale and Chestney, 2023). Consequently, the optimisation of wind farm layouts becomes
increasingly important for maintaining competitiveness.
In this thesis, developed in collaboration with the wind farm developer Vattenfall, the opti-
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Main contributions
2
misation challenges traditionally associated with offshore electrical wind farms are addressed
and extended to the emerging concept of hydrogen-producing wind farms. Specifically, we fo-
cus on addressing the Wind Farm Pipeline Layout Problem (WFPLP) within the context of
decentralised hydrogen production setups, where electrolysers are located at each wind turbine.
Similar to its electrical counterpart, the Wind Farm Cable Routing Problem (WFCRP), the WF-
PLP aims to optimise the layout of hydrogen pipelines connecting multiple turbines to a central
connection point through the use of two topologies, strings and branching. The distinctions
between the WFCRP and the WFPLP primarily stem from the opportunities and constraints
presented by gas pipeline hydraulics compared to electrical cables.
Evaluating the pipeline layout configurations requires the development of swift engineering mod-
els.
The models must balance computational eﬀiciency with the ability to provide accurate
insights into layout feasibility. One complex aspect of this problem is the evaluation of pressure
drop along the pipes, which is a critical parameter for accurate predictions of hydrogen flow
in the network. Furthermore, the presence of constraints related to the maximum velocity of
hydrogen adds to the intricacies of this problem. Therefore, the optimisation problem bridges
the technical considerations of gas pipeline hydraulics with the financial implications of pipeline
layouts.
1.1
Main contributions
In this thesis, a novel approach to offshore wind farm optimisation is introduced by incorpo-
rating pipeline networks for hydrogen transport instead of traditional electrical cable networks.
Our work establishes a framework for optimising the WFPLP by integrating concepts from
gas pipeline hydraulics into well-known solution approaches from the wind farm cable routing
problem. The main contributions of our research are as follows:
• Gas pipeline model: A framework is developed for computing the gas velocities and changes
in pressure throughout a network of connected turbines by finding and combining equations
from the gas pipeline hydraulics literature.
• Insights from gas pipeline model: Valuable insights are extracted from the gas pipeline
model. In particular, that the gas velocity becomes the limiting factor in selecting pipe
diameters in most cases when considering the velocity and pressure constraints. Further-
more, initiating the process at different pressure levels is found to affect the number of
turbines that can be connected, consequently impacting the cost of inter-array pipeline
layouts.
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Main contributions
3
• Pipe sizing heuristic: A heuristic is developed utilising the gas pipeline model to select
cost-effective pipes, while also assessing the feasibility of the pipeline layout. Using that
gas velocity predominantly is the limiting factor, at the pressure levels considered, allows
us to speed up calculations in the optimisation.
• Metaheuristic implementation and tuning: Two metaheuristics, Simulated Annealing and
Variable Neighbourhood Search, are implemented and tuned to solve the WFPLP. By
combining the pipe sizing heuristic with known network optimisation techniques, it is
shown how to incorporate the constraints for gas pressure and velocity.
• Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model formulation: Recognising that gas ve-
locity is often the limiting factor, the WFPLP is simplified by fixing the pressure across the
network and performing the optimisation solely on the velocity constraint. This approach
allows us to construct an exact conservative model that finds optimal pipe connections
within a fixed pressure network. By applying the pipe sizing heuristic afterwards, the ini-
tially conservative pipe diameters can be reselected based on a more precise representation
of the network.
• Benchmarks: To our knowledge, these are the first results for the WFPLP using meta-
heuristics and exact methods on publicly available wind farm instances. Using the branch-
ing topology, both metaheuristics outperform the simplified exact model. Variable Neigh-
bourhood Search shows superior performance on large wind farm instances, while Simu-
lated Annealing achieves the best results on smaller wind farms. Using the string topology,
the exact model shows superior performance compared to the metaheuristics. This sets
a benchmark for future studies to compare their results against ours. Additionally, by
comparing our results with cable layouts in traditional electrical wind farms, our findings
contribute to the discussion of the feasibility of hydrogen-producing wind farms.
• What-if experiments: Four different experimental analyses are conducted to align the
WFPLP more closely with real-world wind farm projects.
These experiments include
considerations and solution approaches that contain the export pipe, installation cost,
limited pipe types, and the need for balanced layouts. This provides a more nuanced and
practical view of the challenges and solutions in pipeline layout optimisation.
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Thesis overview
4
1.2
Thesis overview
This thesis is structured to systematically present our approach to optimising pipeline layouts
in hydrogen-producing wind farms. Below is a brief overview of the focus of each chapter:
• Chapter 2: Offshore Hydrogen-Producing Wind Farms: explores the current state
of offshore hydrogen-producing wind farms and the main design concepts being considered.
Afterwards, the mathematical formulation of the WFPLP is defined, and the inputs and
outputs of the problem are listed.
• Chapter 3:
Related Literature: reviews related work, covering offshore hydrogen
production, wind farm cable routing, and pipeline hydraulics, to position our research
within a wider academic context.
• Chapter 4: Theory: presents the theory related to our optimisation strategies, covering
gas pipeline hydraulics, basic heuristic tools, metaheuristics, and the exact model.
• Chapter 5: Optimisation Setup: presents the basis for our optimisation setup. First,
an introduction is made to the wind farm instances and pipe data used in the following
analysis.
Afterwards, our baseline scenario, first presented in Chapter 2, is defined in
terms of specific input values for the WFPLP.
• Chapter 6: Analysis: presents the core of this thesis, which is the implementation, tun-
ing, and results of each optimisation method. The chapter concludes with a comparative
analysis, discussing the performance of each approach.
• Chapter 7: What-if Experiments: explores various scenarios and extensions of the
WFPLP to test the robustness and adaptability of our optimisation framework.
The
scenarios include experiments on the inclusion of export pipes, installation costs, limited
available pipe types, and balanced layouts.
• Chapter 8: Discussion: elaborates on the assumptions and limitations of the research
conducted in this thesis. Focus is placed on both the pipe sizing and routing optimisa-
tion problems, discussing consequences of modelling choices and proposing strategies to
mitigate these. Furthermore, the results of the WFPLP are compared to the results of its
electrical counterpart OWFCR by examining their cost-effectiveness. The chapter closes
by exploring potential ideas for future research within this study.
• Chapter 9:
Conclusion: summarises and concludes on the main findings from the
research conducted in this thesis.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Offshore Hydrogen-Producing Wind Farms
This chapter introduces the concept of hydrogen-producing wind farms, key stakeholders in their
development, and design concepts for the transmission infrastructure. This sets the stage for
the focal point of this thesis, the wind farm pipeline layout problem, which is formulated in the
last section with the inputs and outputs of the problem.
2.1
Introduction to wind farms
Offshore hydrogen-producing wind farms are primarily in the conceptual or pilot stage. They
are the subject of extensive research and development due to their potential to provide a flexible
energy solution for long-distance energy transmission and storage, as documented in (Ibrahim
et al., 2022), (Groenemans et al., 2022), and (Ramboll, 2021). These offshore wind farms are
designed to use wind energy to power electrolysers that split water into oxygen and hydrogen.
The development of offshore wind farms involves two primary stakeholders, the national authori-
ties and offshore wind farm developers. To establish new offshore wind farms, public authorities
organise energy tenders, where a specific site is awarded to one of the bidding developers. The
developers, which are companies such as Vattenfall, assess these projects and prepare their bids.
The design planning stage often involves collaborations with suppliers to determine the optimal
choice of turbines, foundation types, power transmission, and logistics. The need for design
optimisation is evident, since a major criterion for winning a tender is generally the cost of
electricity generation (Giebel and Hasager, 2016).
Wind farms can be conceptualised as being constructed from three main modules: the turbines,
the foundations, and the transmission infrastructure. For current electrical wind farms, the
transmission infrastructure consists of inter-array cables connecting the turbines to an offshore
substation, a larger export cable connecting the substation to the grid, and the substation itself
(Tyler Stehly and Patrick Duffy, 2022). For the future hydrogen-producing wind farms, three
main design concepts are being considered for the transmission infrastructure (DNV, 2023).
These concepts are illustrated in Figure 2.1 and are labelled as (I), (II), and (III). The first ap-
proach (I) is a decentralised system, where electrolysers are integrated at the foundation of each
==PAGE:12==
2.2 The wind farm pipeline layout problem
6
wind turbine. In this approach, an inter-array pipeline connects the turbines to a manifold or
central compressor, from where the hydrogen is transported to shore through a dedicated export
pipeline. The second approach (II) consists of offshore wind turbines generating electricity and
an offshore hydrogen production facility located on a central platform. In this setup, hydrogen
is produced offshore and subsequently transported to shore through a dedicated pipeline. Lastly,
the third approach (III) features a conventional offshore wind farm with electrical transmission
to the shore and a centralised onshore hydrogen production facility. In this thesis, we focus on
the decentralised approach (I), due to cost effectiveness explained in Section 3.1.
Figure 2.1: Three main design concepts for hydrogen-producing wind farms (DNV, 2023).
2.2
The wind farm pipeline layout problem
Based on the description of the decentralised concept for hydrogen-producing wind farms, we
define the Wind Farm Pipeline Layout Problem (WFPLP). The WFPLP aims to find the most
cost-effective pipeline layout for a wind farm connecting multiple turbines to a single or multiple
central manifolds. The precise locations of the turbines and manifolds within a specific wind
farm are assumed to be known. From the manifolds, an export pipe ultimately connects the
hydrogen production to an energy storage facility the gas grid at shore. The WFPLP combines
two separate optimisation problems. The first is the routing problem, which is largely similar
to the well-known cable routing problem for electrical wind farms. The second is the pipe sizing
==PAGE:13==
2.2 The wind farm pipeline layout problem
7
problem, where the goal is to determine the most cost-effective pipe sizes for a given wind farm
layout and pipe routing, while adhering to the gas pipeline hydraulic constraints.
In this thesis, the problem of interest is limited to only considering aspects of gas pipeline
hydraulics that cover constraints on the maximum pressure and velocity of hydrogen flowing
in the pipes. Therefore, constraints related to bend restrictions are not considered, and it is
assumed that noise, vibration, and erosional velocity are contained within the velocity constraint.
Additionally, the terrain morphology and obstacles on the seabed of the wind farm are not
considered.
In the optimisation of the WFPLP, two different topologies used to connect the turbines are
considered. The first topology, known as branching topology, allows multiple pipelines to enter a
turbine and exactly one pipeline to exit a turbine, connecting the turbines into a tree structure.
The second topology, called the string topology, is a subset of the branching topology, allowing
at most one pipeline to enter and exactly one pipeline to exit a turbine, connecting the turbines
into strings.
This dual approach allows to assess the cost-effectiveness of allowing branches
compared to restricting layouts to string structures.
2.2.1
Input data
The WFPLP takes multiple inputs related to different aspects of the problem definition. Gen-
erally, the input data contain information from the specific wind farm instance being solved,
the available pipes, the topology by which they are connected, and the gas pipeline hydraulic
constraints. Formally, the WFPLP requires the following information:
• The number of points in the site m + n, where the initial 1, ..., m points correspond to the
manifolds, while the subsequent m + 1, ..., m + n points denote individual wind turbines.
• The fixed two-dimensional coordinates (xi, yi) for each point i = 1, ..., m + n in the site.
• The hydrogen production of each turbine. In our case the turbines are of the same type
and produce a consistent amount of hydrogen H.
• A set of K available pipes characterised by a diameter dk, an internal roughness ek and a
cost per metre uk for k = 1, ..., K.
• An upper bound on the number of ingoing pipes that can be connected to the manifolds
Cm and the turbines Ct.
==PAGE:14==
2.2 The wind farm pipeline layout problem
8
• An upper bound on the maximum velocity Vmax and maximum pressure Pmax in the pipe
segments.
• The pressure level in the manifolds Pm, and the average flow temperature Tf of the pipes.
2.2.2
Solution output
Given the input data, a feasible solution of connected manifolds and wind turbines can be
visualised as a complete and loop-free graph GT = (V, T), where the edges (i, j) ∈T connect
the turbines with a pipe k(i, j) ∈K to the manifolds. The pipes are chosen to be the most
cost effective, that comply with the pipeline hydraulic constraints of pressure and velocity. An
example of a feasible layout solution using the branching and the string topology can be seen in
Figure 2.2. For this example, pipes provided by Vattenfall, ranging from 2 to 7 inches, are used.
For more information on the characteristics of the pipes, the reader is referred to Section 5.2.
(a) Example of a layout using branching topology.
(b) Example of a layout using string topology.
Figure 2.2: Examples of feasible pipeline layouts using the two topologies: strings and branch-
ing.
2.2.3
Cost function
The solutions obtained from the input data are associated with an overall cost calculated from
the cost per metre uk of each pipe k ∈K and the Euclidean distance dist(i, j) between the
==PAGE:15==
2.2 The wind farm pipeline layout problem
9
turbines i and j in the plane. The cost is given as follows:
cost(T) =
!
(i,j)∈T
uk(i,j) · dist(i, j),
(2.1)
For the heuristics used in this thesis, the cost function is extended to include penalties of addi-
tional pipes to the manifolds and turbines, as well as crossing pipes, since these are considered
possible sources of infeasibility. In addition to the cost of the pipes in eq. (2.1), the penalised
cost function also includes:
1. Connections to manifolds: The edges connected to each manifold are counted and an
additional penalty M1 is added to the solution cost for each connection exceeding the
specified limit Cm for each manifold.
2. Connections to turbines: The in-going edges connected to each turbine are counted, and
an additional penalty M2 is added to the solution cost for each connection exceeding the
defined limit Ct for each turbine.
3. Crossings: The number of edges crossing any other edges is counted, and for each crossing,
a penalty of M3 is added to the solution cost.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3
Related Literature
To place our thesis and the wind farm pipeline layout problem in the relevant context, we draw
from research conducted by numerous authors across different scientific fields. This review of the
literature can be broadly categorised into three areas, namely, the conceptualisation of offshore
hydrogen-producing wind farms, cable routing optimisation, and gas pipeline hydraulics.
Initially, we leverage techno-economic and conceptual design studies related to hydrogen-pro-
ducing wind farms to gain insight into the overall design and feasibility of such wind farms.
Afterwards, the core of the related work is from the domain of cable routing optimisation, as
the pipeline layout problem shares many of the same features. Lastly, in order to address the
gas pipe hydraulic constraints, we utilise textbook information on gas flow dynamics.
This,
combined with research on future hydrogen pipeline technologies and insights from the oil and
gas sector, provides an understanding of the gas flow constraints.
3.1
Offshore hydrogen-producing wind farms
Numerous studies have explored the concept of hydrogen-producing wind farms. These primarily
focus on a conceptual level to assess the potential benefits and limitations of the emerging
technology of producing green hydrogen from electricity.
A study, that looks at the advantages of hydrogen as a medium for energy storage, and a report
commissioned by the Danish Energy Agency conclude that hydrogen-producing wind farms are
expected to play a pivotal role in exporting green energy (Kiryanova et al., 2022) (Ramboll, 2021).
One driving factor is the superiority of gas transmission compared to electrical transmission.
Recent studies, such as (Ibrahim et al., 2022), (Wan et al., 2023), (Taieb and Shaaban, 2019), and
(Giampieri et al., 2023), examines the capital expenditure (CAPEX) for hydrogen transmission
compared to electrical transmission in the context of hydrogen-producing wind farms. These
studies consistently conclude that hydrogen transmission is preferable over longer distances due
to its lower transportation cost. This is supported by research in (Groenemans et al., 2022)
and (Pliszka et al., 2023), which finds that the decentralised concept of directly integrating an
electrolyser on each wind turbine, as seen in concept (I) in Figure 2.1, emerges as the most
cost-effective solution. In the latter study, the cost of hydrogen in the decentralised concept
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Wind farm cable routing
11
is estimated to be e2.09/kg compared to e3.86/kg in the conventional concept with onshore
electrolysis.
The collective findings from the referenced studies support the framework and aim of this the-
sis. They underscore the relevance of optimising pipeline layouts by demonstrating that the
decentralised concept for hydrogen-producing wind farms is more cost-effective compared to the
centralised concepts.
3.2
Wind farm cable routing
The wind farm pipeline layout problem shares many similarities with the wind farm cable routing
problem, thus it is relevant to explore the extensive research conducted in this field. The routing
optimisation methods used in this thesis are primarily based on the work of three prior cable
routing studies.
The first study (Cazzaro, Fischetti, et al., 2020) presents five metaheuristic schemes: Simulated
Annealing, Tabu Search, Variable Neighbourhood Search, Ant Colony Optimisation, and Genetic
Algorithm, alongside a construction heuristic named Sweep for initial high-quality solutions.
Notably, the Sweep heuristic achieved results within 8% of the optimal or best-known solution
for all instances tested in the study. Through comparative analysis on two datasets, Variable
Neighbourhood Search showed the best overall performance.
The second study focuses on balanced cable routing using both the branching and string topolo-
gies (Cazzaro and Pisinger, 2022a). The routing optimisation is based on a Large Neighbourhood
Search heuristic exploring increasingly larger neighbourhoods. The balancing is achieved using
a matheuristic approach combining techniques from metaheuristics and exact methods.
The third study (Fischetti and Pisinger, 2018b) focuses on optimising offshore wind farm cable
routing for different topologies using exact methods. Building upon a model from their previous
work, the study optimises branching, string, and closed-loop topologies. The performance of the
model and a comparison of the topologies are assessed based on real-world instances provided
by Vattenfall.
Numerous other authors have also looked into the wind farm cable routing problem, employing
a variety of exact methods and heuristics. In (Fischetti and Pisinger, 2018a), the cable routing
problem is proved to be NP-hard in certain cases, and is solved using exact methods.
The
use of exact methods is also demonstrated in (Bauer and Lysgaard, 2015), where the cable
routing problem is modelled as a vehicle routing problem, imposing a constraint of a single
==PAGE:18==
3.3 Gas pipeline hydraulics
12
cable entering a turbine. Other MILP models are developed in (Cerveira et al., 2016), focusing
on power losses in cables, and in (Klein and Haugland, 2019), specifically tailored for wind farms
with obstacle considerations. In (Fischetti and Fischetti, 2018) and (Berzan, 2011), matheuristic
approaches are presented, combining exact methods with heuristics to solve different versions of
the problem. The work in (Hertz et al., 2016) studies the problem for onshore cases, developing
a Mixed Integer Quadratic Programming model simplified to a MILP model, considering several
cable types.
Heuristic techniques constitute another significant area of study. For instance, the study in
(Li et al., 2008) proposed a hybrid genetic and immune algorithm, which was tested on an
offshore wind farm.
Further examinations of genetic algorithms are presented in (Chen et
al., 2009) and (Gonzalez-Longatt et al., 2012). The former assesses power losses, wind power
production, initial investment, and maintenance costs, while the latter modifies the algorithm to
accommodate different cable cross-sections. In (Dutta and Overbye, 2011), a heuristic approach
employing multi-level clustering for cable routing is explored. Other clustering methods such
as K-means, a self-organising map, and spectral clustering are proposed for clustering wind
turbines in (Yongqian et al., 2014) to estimate the energy production of the entire wind farm.
For a comprehensive review of offshore wind farm layout optimisation and electrical system
design methods, the reader is referred to (Hou et al., 2019).
In summary, the extensive body of research on the cable routing problem presents both heuristics
and exact methods. As the routing aspect of the cable routing problem and pipeline layout
problem are almost identical, we are able to modify and use some of these well-known methods
in this thesis.
3.3
Gas pipeline hydraulics
The domain of gas pipeline hydraulics is essential when addressing the pipe sizing aspect of the
wind farm pipeline layout problem. Gas pipeline hydraulics is a subdomain of fluid dynamics
and mechanics, which is rooted in physical chemistry. In this domain, we particularly rely on
the insights provided in textbooks, such as (Menon, 2005) and (Hayden and Stalheim, 2009)
to calculate the pressure and velocity of hydrogen within a pipeline. We also draw on research
from the oil and gas sector to gain insights on the modelling of pipeline networks.
Recent studies, such as (Wind, 2020) and (Díez, 2021), explore the maximum velocity con-
straints in a hydrogen pipeline. The first study investigates the technical aspects of offshore
hydrogen transport and highlights the importance of optimising pipeline systems to ensure ef-
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Gas pipeline hydraulics
13
ficient hydrogen transport from offshore wind farms to onshore facilities. The study concludes
that with current technology, the maximum allowed gas velocity should be 20-29 m/s. The
latter study specifically explores the effects that high-speed hydrogen flow through pipelines has
on the system’s integrity and operational noise levels. Here, gas velocities as high as 40-60 m/s
are considered. However, it is not concluded whether or not this would violate the system’s
integrity and noise level constraints.
Related work in terms of optimising pipeline diameters from a cost perspective can be found
from authors studying the oil and gas industry.
In (Rothfarb et al., 1970) and (Ejomarie
and Ebigenibo, 2020) offshore natural gas exploitation is studied, discussing techniques for
optimal pipeline diameter selection and cost-effective network structures. Another study (Ottoni
and Batista, 2022) focuses on designing gas networks given uncertain load evolution, using
a Multiobjective Variable Neighbourhood Search algorithm. An oil pipeline design problem,
similar to the wind farm pipeline layout problem, is studied in (Brimberg et al., 2003). In this
study, the configuration of the network and sizes of pipes are chosen to minimise construction
costs using both heuristics and exact methods. However, the study omits the pressure constraint
and pre-calculates pipe capacities.
Although the referenced studies from the oil and gas sector explore problems similar to the wind
farm pipeline layout problem, none offer a directly applicable pipe sizing model. Nevertheless,
certain concepts and approaches from these studies can serve as inspiration for developing a
dedicated model for pipeline layouts at hydrogen-producing wind farms. In this thesis, we aim
to bridge this gap, by constructing a pipe sizing heuristic that considers both the pressure and
velocity constraints.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 4
Theory
In this chapter, we explore the fundamental principles of gas pipeline hydraulics, specifying the
formulas that govern pressure and velocity in pipes applicable to hydrogen-producing wind farms.
Afterwards, the magnitudes of pressure drops and velocities are quantified within different pipes,
and the limiting factor between these is identified. This theory aims to address the required
knowledge to build a gas pipeline model used to solve the pipe sizing problem. Following this, we
introduce heuristic tools and an exact model, previously used to solve the cable routing problem
at electrical wind farms. These tools set the stage for our later adaption and implementation of
optimisation methods for the WFPLP.
4.1
Gas pipeline model
This section explains the technical aspects of gas pipeline hydraulics needed to understand the
pressure and velocity calculations used in a hydrogen pipeline network. Following this, a simple
network example is presented, accompanied by an analysis of the magnitudes of pressure and
velocity across different pipes. This theory originates from the Gas Pipeline Hydraulic course
by E. Shashi Menon (Menon, 2005).
Gases, such as hydrogen, are classified as compressible fluids because they are subject to volume
variations with changes in pressure and temperature. Consider a fluid flowing through a pipeline
from point A to B, as visualised in Figure 4.1. As the fluid flows, the pressure decreases due
to friction between the flowing gas and the pipe wall and the differences in height elevation,
which causes the gas to expand. Note that the total energy of a flowing fluid in a pipe remains
constant, however, different components of the fluid’s energy may transform from one form to
another (e.g. from pressure energy to kinetic energy). The relationship between the pressure
and the flow rate of the fluid is influenced by the gas properties and the pipe design, specifically
the diameter and internal roughness of the pipe.
==PAGE:21==
4.1 Gas pipeline model
15
Figure 4.1: Flow in a gas pipeline.
The volumetric gas flow rate QB [m3/day] for a pipe segment with length L [km], diameter D
[mm], inlet pressure P1 [Pa], outlet pressure P2 [Pa] and average flow temperature Tf [K] can
be defined by the General Flow Equation as follows:
QB = 1.1494 · 10−3
"TB
PB
# $
(P 2
1 −es · P 2
2 )
GTfLZf
%0.5
D2.5
(4.1)
The volumetric gas flow rate can vary with temperature and pressure, and QB is determined
from a reference to base conditions of temperature and pressure, defined as TB [K] and PB [Pa]
respectively. s [−] is the elevation adjustment parameter that accounts for the differences in the
height elevation of the pipe. Gas gravity G [−] is the ratio of the fluid’s density to that of a
standard fluid (for gases, the standard comparison is air), where density is defined as mass per
unit volume. The compressibility factor Z [−] represents the deviation of the gas from an ideal
gas at a given temperature and pressure.
The friction factor f [−] is calculated based on turbulent flow in a pipe with diameter D [m]
using the Colebrook-White equation as follows:
1
√f = −2log10
"
e
3.7D + 2.51
Re√f
#
(4.2)
Here, e [mm] is the absolute internal roughness of the pipe, and Re [−] is Reynolds number of
flow. Since the friction factor f appears on both sides of the equation, the calculation requires an
iterative trial-and-error approach. Initially, a guess of f is made (e.g. f = 0.02) and substituted
for the right-hand side of the equation. From this, a new approximation of f can be calculated,
and the process is iterated until the difference between the new and the previous approximated
f is less than some predefined tolerance level (e.g. 0.5 %).
Reynolds number of flow is calculated based on the gas properties, the velocity V [m/s] of the
==PAGE:22==
4.1 Gas pipeline model
16
gas flow in a pipeline, and the diameter D [m] of the pipe:
Re = ρ · V · D
µ
(4.3)
Here, ρ [kg/m3] and µ [kg/ms] represent the density and viscosity of the fluid at the flow
temperature Tf and pressure P2, respectively. The velocity of the gas V [m/s] depends on the
volumetric flow rate Q [m3/s] and the cross sectional area A [m2] of the pipe as follows:
Q = H
ρ = A · V =⇒V = Q
A
(4.4)
The mass flow rate is defined as H [kg/s], and it is the unit used to measure the production of a
turbine. The mass flow rate can be converted to the volumetric flow rate Q [m3/s] by dividing
by the density ρ [kg/m3] of the flow temperature Tf and the pressure P2. Note, that this Q
is different from QB, as the density is not determined from the base pressure and temperature
conditions. The velocity of gas through a pipeline varies, even if the diameter of the pipe remains
constant. This is due to compressibility effects, pressure variations, and temperature variations,
which impact the density of the fluid and, ultimately, the volumetric flow rate.
For hydrogen producing wind farms, the mass flow rate H is known, which enables the calculation
of other variables in the General Flow Equation such as the volumetric flow rate under base
conditions QB [m3/day], inlet pressure P1 [Pa], or the outlet pressure P2 [Pa]. For the purpose
of this thesis, the interest lies in calculating the magnitude of changes in pressure and velocity
for an entire wind turbine network starting from a central manifold, where the outlet pressure
P2 is known. Starting from the manifold, it is possible to calculate the inlet pressure for a
connected turbine by isolating P1 as follows:
P1 =
&"
QB
1.1494 · 10−3 · PB
TB
·
1
D2.5
#2
· GTfLZf + es · P 2
2
(4.5)
By iterating through the network, moving from one turbine to the neighbouring, it is possible
to calculate the inlet pressure Pi for each connected turbine i ∈V .
To provide a clearer understanding of the differences between pressure and velocity calculations
from an optimisation standpoint, Table 4.1 presents the execution times for various numbers of
pipe segments. The pressure drop calculation, being iterative, takes about 43 times longer than
the velocity calculation. While there is a notable difference in computational speed, both the
pressure and velocity calculations are relatively fast, with the former taking approximately 1.12
microseconds and the latter less than a microsecond per calculation. It is important to note
that before performing these calculations, the gas properties must be defined. This includes
defining the the compressibility factor Z, density ρ and viscosity µ based on the temperature,
outlet pressure, and mass flow rate for the pipe segment. This initialisation process takes about
==PAGE:23==
4.1 Gas pipeline model
17
500 microseconds. Therefore, while the velocity calculation is faster, the most significant factor
in overall computational time is the number of calculations required, rather than the speed of
the individual calculations.
Pipe segments
Turbines
Pressure calculation [µs]
Velocity calculation [µs]
1
2
1.12
0.03
50
51
56.00
1.30
200
201
224.00
5.19
Table 4.1: Running time of velocity and pressure calculations for different numbers of pipe
segments and turbines.
4.1.1
Pressure drop and velocity calculations for a simple network
In this subsection, the step-by-step process for performing the pressure and velocity calculations
is demonstrated for a simple pipeline network without elevation, as depicted in Figure 4.2. The
simple network consists of three wind turbines, each producing hydrogen with a rate of H = 363
kg/h, connected by pipes of length L = 5 km with diameters D = 4 inches (corresponding to
D = 101.6 mm = 0.1016 m) and an internal roughness e = 0.004 mm. Additionally, the average
flow temperature Tf is assumed to be 3◦C.
Figure 4.2: Pressure and velocity calculations in a simple pipeline network with a flow tem-
perature of 3◦C using 5 km 4-inch pipes with an internal roughness of 0.004 mm.
Before starting the calculations, it is necessary to determine the cumulative mass flow rate in
each pipe segment.
This results in a mass flow rate of 363 kg/h
60·60
= 0.1008 kg/s at the pipe
segments (a, b) and (c, m), while the mass flow rate in (b, m) is 2 · 0.1008 = 0.2017 kg/s, since
it carries the combined production of both wind turbines A and B. Given that the manifold is
==PAGE:24==
4.1 Gas pipeline model
18
equipped with two connected strings, the calculations can be initiated from either string. For
illustrative purposes, we opt to start calculating from the string with the highest number of
connected turbines.
The calculations are carried out iteratively, starting at the manifold where the pressure Pm is
known, and in this case, it is assumed to be 19 bar (corresponding to 19 ·105 Pa). The first step
in the calculation process involves defining the properties of hydrogen, which are derived from
the known pressure Pm and temperature Tf. These properties include the compressibility factor
Z = 1.0117, density ρ = 1.6489 kg/m3, and viscosity µ = 8.4559 · 10−6 kg/ms. Subsequently,
it becomes possible to calculate the volumetric flow Q within the pipe segment (b, m). This
calculation relies on the cumulative mass flow rate H of the segment and density ρ, as seen in
eq. (4.4):
Q = 0.2017 kg
s
1.6489 kg
m3
= 0.1223 m3
s
(4.6)
Using the volumetric flow rate Q in (b, m), the velocity within the pipe segment can be calculated
using eq. (4.4), where the cross-sectional area of a cylindrical pipe with diameter D is defined
as A = π
'
D
2
(2. The velocity in the pipe segment (b, m) becomes:
V =
0.1223 m3
s
π ·
'
0.1016 m
2
(2 = 15.1m
s
(4.7)
To calculate the pressure at B defined Pb, the friction factor in the pipe must be calculated.
Thus, the next step becomes the calculation of Reynolds number as given in eq. (4.3):
Re = 1.6489 kg
m3 · 15.1m
s · 0.1016 m
8.4559 · 10−6
kg
ms
= 298874
(4.8)
The obtained Reynolds number can then be used to compute the friction factor in eq. (4.2)
using the iterative approach previously described, yielding a friction factor of f = 0.0149. With
this parameter determined, the final step can proceed, which is to calculate the pressure Pb at
the turbine B using eq. (4.5). In this equation, the base pressure PB is set to 101353 Pa, the
base temperature TB is 15.56◦C, the gas specific gas gravity G is 0.06959, and the elevation
adjustment s = 0. By calculating the base density ρB = 0.0850 kg
m3 from the base pressure and
temperature, the base volumetric flow rate can be computed as:
QB =
363 · 2 · 24
kg
day
0.0850 kg
m3
= 204836 m3/day
(4.9)
Using all this, the pressure at turbine B is calculated as follows:
Pb =
)
*
*
+
,
204836 m3
day
1.1494·10−3 · 101353 Pa
288.71 K ·
1
(101.6 mm)2.5
-2
· 0.0695 · 276.15 K · 5 km · 1.0117 · 0.0149 + e0 · (19 · 105 Pa)2
= 2032903 Pa = 20.3 bar
(4.10)
==PAGE:25==
4.1 Gas pipeline model
19
With the pressure at turbine B of 20.3 bar, the same steps can be followed to calculate the
velocity in pipe (a, b) and the pressure Pa at turbine A with Pb as the known pressure. As
shown in Figure 4.2, the velocity in pipe (a, b) is 7.1 m/s and the pressure Pa at A is 20.7
bar. Similarly, the calculations can be performed for the other string (c, m) within the network
starting from the manifold again. The small example illustrates how the pressure and velocity
calculations are conducted from the manifold towards the outermost turbines. This approach
ensures that the pressure at branch connections remains balanced.
If the calculations were
performed in reverse, the pressures in two pipes combined in a branch could vary, potentially
causing the hydrogen to flow in the wrong direction.
4.1.2
Magnitude of pressure drop and velocity
This subsection explores the magnitude of the pressure drop and velocity in a pipe segment,
aiming to determine which of the two that emerges as the limiting factor when selecting pipes.
4.1.2.1
Pressure drop
From the General Flow Equation in eq. (4.1), it becomes evident that the base volumetric flow
rate Qb is approximately proportional to the square root of the difference in inlet and outlet
pressures
.
P 2
1 −P 2
2 , when the elevation adjustment parameter s is set to zero. Consequently,
the change in pressure is slightly curved, implying that a reduction in inlet or outlet pressure at
the same flow rate is not equally reflected throughout the pipeline.
Figure 4.3 shows the magnitude of the pressure drop for various outlet pressures P2 (ranging
from 10 to 40 bar) and pipe diameters D (ranging from 2 to 7 inches) considering different
internal roughness values e (ranging from 0.004 to 0.600 mm). The analysis is based on data
obtained from Vattenfall to realistically quantify the drop in pressure. It is assumed that the
mass flow H of a single turbine is 363 kg/h, that the average temperature Tf is 3◦C and that
the pipe segment L is 5 km long.
The figure illustrates that the pipe segment with the smallest diameter has the most significant
drop in pressure. This is due to higher frictional losses at smaller diameters. As seen in eq.
(4.4), the velocity is greater for lower cross-sectional areas and consequently the value of Reynolds
number becomes larger in eq. (4.3). The relationship between Reynolds number and the friction
factor is complex, but if Reynolds number is increased in turbulent flow, it usually leads to an
increase in the friction factor. In the end, a higher friction factor leads to a higher value of the
inlet pressure in eq. (4.5) indicating a higher pressure drop when calculating the difference from
the outlet pressure.
==PAGE:26==
4.1 Gas pipeline model
20
Figure 4.3: Pressure drop as a function of outlet pressure for different pipeline diameters.
Based on a mass flow rate of a single turbine (363 kg/h), an average temperature Tf of 3◦C and
a pipe segment length L of 5 km.
4.1.2.2
Velocity
The velocity of the gas in a pipe segment depends on the diameter D and the volumetric flow rate
Q through the pipe. As the diameter increases, so does the cross sectional area A = π
'
D
2
(2.
Therefore, the velocity is inversely proportional to the square of the diameter, which means
that a larger diameter results in a lower velocity when the flow rate is kept constant. On the
other hand, a higher flow rate results in a larger velocity, given that the pipe diameter remains
constant as seen in eq. (4.4). Additionally, temperature and pressure play a role in determining
the gas density ρ, which is used to calculate the volumetric flow rate Q from the mass flow rate
H, and hereby also influences velocity. At lower densities, often as a result of high temperatures
or low pressures, the velocity increases for a given mass flow rate.
Figure 4.4 shows the magnitude of the velocity for various mass flow rates (ranging from 8,712
to 130,680 kg/day, corresponding to the production of 1 to 15 turbines) and pipe diameters
(ranging from 2 to 7 inches) with an outlet pressure of 25 bar. The figure illustrates that the
velocity increases with the flow rate and that the smallest pipe diameter has the highest velocity.
A horizontal line is drawn at 25 m/s as a reference to the gas pipeline velocity limit. As described
in Section 3.3, current pipe technology allows for gas velocities of 20-29 m/s. In this thesis, the
gas velocity is set to 25 m/s. The smallest pipe exceeds the velocity limit when the flow rate
exceeds one turbine’s production, while the largest pipe can handle the hydrogen production of
13 turbines before exceeding the limit. Consequently, at an outlet pressure of 25 bar, none of
the available pipes is able to handle the hydrogen production of more than 13 turbines without
exceeding the velocity limit.
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Gas pipeline model
21
Figure 4.4: Velocity as a function of mass flow rate for different pipeline diameters. Based on
an outlet pressure of 25 bar, an average temperature Tf of 3◦C and a pipe segment length L of
5 km.
To expand on the link between pressure and velocity, Figure 4.5 illustrates that the velocity is
highest at low outlet pressures (e.g., 10 bar) and lowest at high outlet pressures (e.g., 40 bar).
Consequently, increasing pressure can help mitigate high velocities.
Figure 4.5: Velocity as a function of outlet pressure for different pipeline diameters. Based on
a mass flow rate of a single turbine (363 kg/h), an average temperature Tf of 3◦C and a pipe
segment length L of 5 km.
4.1.2.3
Limiting factor
From Figures 4.3 and 4.5, it is evident that both the pressure drop and the velocity have the
lowest magnitudes at high pressures. This suggests that operating at high pressures is ideal
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Gas pipeline model
22
to minimise the impact of both factors, assuming that it is not more expensive to operate
at higher pressures. However, considering that the pressure drop calculations are conducted
from the manifold towards the outermost turbines in the network, initiating with excessively
high pressure at the manifold is impractical. The reason is that there will be no room for the
pressure to increase, given a limitation on outlet pressure of the electrolysers.
Determining whether it is the pressure or the velocity that first reaches the limit of Vmax or Pmax
in a network depends on multiple factors, including the flow temperature, the outlet pressures,
the volumetric flow rates, the lengths, and pipe sizes for each pipe segment in the network.
Figure 4.6 evaluates the feasibility of a given pipe type across a range of pipe diameters ranging
from 2 to 7 inches, pressures ranging from 10 to 40 bar, and mass flow rates corresponding
to 1, 6 and 13 turbines. The different colours indicate whether violations occur for both the
velocity and pressure constraints or just one of them at different pressures and pipe types. The
calculations are based on an average temperature of 3◦C and a pipe segment length of 5 km,
and the results are compared against the constraints Vmax = 25 m/s and Pmax = 40 bar.
(a) Mass flow rate of 1 turbine.
(b) Mass flow rate of 6 turbines. (c) Mass flow rate of 13 turbines.
Figure 4.6: Assessment on the feasibility of a given pipe type across different pipe type diam-
eters ranging from 2 to 7 inches and pressures ranging from 10 to 40 bar. It indicates whether
violations occur for both velocity and pressure constraints, or just one of them. The calcula-
tions are based on a temperature Tf of 3◦C and a segment length of 5 km. The three subplots
illustrate results for mass flow rates corresponding to 1, 6, and 13 turbines. Constraints are
Vmax = 25 m/s and Pmax = 40 bar.
From Subfigure 4.6a it can be seen that at a mass flow rate corresponding to a single turbine, the
smallest pipe of 2 inches is only feasible at outlet pressures ranging from 23 to 34 bar. When the
outlet pressure is below 23 bar, velocity exceeds Vmax at 25 m/s. In contrast, at high pressure
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Construction heuristic tools
23
above 34 bar, the smallest pipe is not feasible due to a high inlet pressure as a result of the
pressure drop, violating Pmax of 40 bar. As the mass flow rate increases, fewer pipes become
available. Subfigure 4.6b shows violations in both velocity and inlet pressure constraints for the
two smallest pipes when the flow rate corresponds to the production of 6 turbines. Additionally,
velocity violations occur when the pressure is below 35 bar, while inlet pressure violations occur
at 35 bar and above for the remaining pipe diameters. Using this information and acknowledging
that pressure calculations are more complex and time consuming, as seen in Table 4.1, simplifying
calculations to primarily consider velocity at lower pressures could be justified, as velocity is the
limiting factor. This also holds for larger flow rates, as visualised in Subfigure 4.6c. However, at
high outlet pressures, the inlet pressure becomes the limiting factor, which must also be taken
into account.
This analysis is carried out on a segment length of 5 km, chosen to represent a long distance
between turbines at wind farms.
Notably, at shorter segment lengths, fewer violations are
observed in both velocity and pressure constraints, while at larger distances, more violations
occur. This pattern underscores the impact that segment length has on determining the limiting
factor within the network.
4.2
Construction heuristic tools
Moving to the domain of optimisation, this section focuses on the construction heuristics used
for the WFPLP in this thesis. The approach combines multiple methods to create the initial
network of connected turbines. Depending on the network topology, the layout strategy uses
either a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) algorithm for the branching topology, or a Nearest
Neighbour (NN) algorithm for the string topology. These are used in combination with a sweep
heuristic applied to group the turbines. For larger wind farm instances, a greedy clustering
algorithm is used to manage cases of multiple manifolds.
4.2.1
Minimum spanning tree
As a tool for solving the WFPLP using the branching topology, an undirected Minimum Span-
ning Tree can be computed to connect the turbines. MST algorithms, such as Prim’s (Prim,
1957), Kruskal’s (Kruskal, 1956), and Boruvka’s (Nešetřil et al., 2001), offer approaches to ad-
dress this. The MST is a subset of edges of a connected undirected graph that connects all
nodes together, using the minimum possible total edge distance without any cycles.
The MST algorithms are valuable heuristic tools for several reasons. First of all, they are fast
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Construction heuristic tools
24
to solve, having O(n2) time complexity with a proper implementation. In a simplified scenario
with uniform pipe types and no constraints besides network connectivity, the MST would also
theoretically represent the optimal solution, offering a baseline for comparison. The baseline,
combined with cost data for different pipe types, enables preliminary lower-bound cost estimates.
Despite the advantages the MST algorithms provide as a method, they have some limitations
when implemented as a standalone solution approach for the WFPLP. The most prominent
issue is that they often produce infeasible solutions to the WFPLP. This mainly occurs in the
MST when only few edges are connected to the manifold, which requires few pipes to sustain
the hydrogen production of a large number of turbines. Therefore, while MST in theory is the
cheapest solution in terms of pipe length, there may not exist pipe sizes that can accommodate
this level of flow, making the solution infeasible.
4.2.2
Nearest neighbour
Nearest neighbour (NN) (Cormen et al., 2001) is a heuristic approach often employed for solving
combinatorial optimisation problems such as routing problems.
As part of our construction
heuristic using the string topology, this method is used to connect the turbines to the manifold.
It is a straightforward and intuitive technique that builds a solution step by step by selecting
the nearest unvisited node from the current node until all nodes are visited.
Despite its simplicity, the NN method is known for its eﬀiciency in providing quick solutions,
having O(n2) time complexity, making it useful as part of an initial construction. However, like
the MST algorithms, it has some limitations if implemented as a standalone solution approach
for the WFPLP. In particular, it often creates an infeasible solution for larger wind farms, since
it relies on a single pipe connecting to the manifold, which is insuﬀicient to handle the production
demands of numerous turbines, such as for the MST. Another disadvantage is its short-sighted
nature, as it only considers the immediate next node without regard to the overall path, which
can lead to suboptimal routing and pipe crossings.
4.2.3
Sweep multistart
A sweep heuristic is presented in (Cazzaro, Fischetti, et al., 2020) and is used to obtain good
initial solutions to the cable routing problem in conventional electrical wind farms. The sweep
heuristic partitions turbines into balanced groups so that the collective production from turbines
in a given group can be accommodated by a single cable. This makes the problem similar to
the Bin Packing problem, since it becomes deciding which turbines to pack together in each
group. Where the number of turbines in each group can be predetermined for the cable routing
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Construction heuristic tools
25
problem, it will vary in the pipeline layout problem due to limitations from the pressure and
velocity constraints. In this thesis, an approach for the WFPLP is introduced that accounts for
the additional constraints related to pressure and velocity.
In general, the sweep heuristic takes three parameters: the starting turbine from which the
algorithm starts, the rotational direction for which turbines are scanned, either clockwise or
anti-clockwise, and the possible number of turbines per group. To begin with, the turbines are
organised based on their angular positions with reference to the central manifold. Then, in the
direction chosen from the designated starting turbine, the sweep rotation starts. In the cable
routing problem, turbines are added until the number of possible turbines is reached, and then
a new group is initialised. For the WFPLP, the decision on the turbine groups is more complex,
as every time a turbine is added to a group, the turbines are connected, and a feasibility check
is conducted to ensure that the pressure and velocity constraints are not violated within the
obtained tree component. Should the inclusion of an additional turbine lead to a violation of
either the velocity or pressure constraints, a new group with the violating turbine is initiated.
Similarly to the approach in (Cazzaro, Fischetti, et al., 2020), a sweep heuristic within a multi-
start scheme is considered, where every turbine is tried as the starting turbine.
Figure 4.7: An example of turbine partitioning of the Sweep heuristic, where the shaded areas
correspond to different partitions. The two larger groups have 13 and 9 turbines, respectively,
where the last group has 4 turbines.
In Figure 4.7 an example of a solution obtained using the sweep heuristic is shown. The sweep
heuristic is initiated from the turbine highlighted in green, proceeding in an clockwise direction.
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Construction heuristic tools
26
The turbines are added to the group iteratively until the feasibility check is violated.
This
process results in three distinct groups corresponding to the shaded areas. Specifically, the two
larger groups comprise 13 and 9 turbines, respectively, where the last smaller group consists of
4 turbines.
4.2.4
Greedy clustering
In cases where multiple export pipes and thereby multiple manifolds are used to accommodate
hydrogen transportation, an initial set partitioning algorithm is required to assign wind turbines
to specific manifolds before connecting the turbines. Various clustering algorithms have been
explored in studies, including (Yongqian et al., 2014), evaluating different methods such as K-
means, self-organising maps, and spectral clustering, mainly with the objective of forecasting
production in wind farm layouts. In our case, the clustering approach is used to obtain an initial
solution for WFPLP, which is later improved upon and thus simplicity is prioritised. Therefore, a
greedy algorithm is used, similar to an iteration of the K-means clustering algorithm (MacQueen
et al., 1967) to group wind turbines into K clusters.
The algorithm begins by initialising K centroids, which, in our case, correspond to the K man-
ifolds provided in the instance. The next step involves calculating the distance between each
turbine and the centroids, thereby assigning turbines to the nearest manifold cluster. The algo-
rithm is terminated at this point, as we are not considering relocating the manifolds. Typically,
in the K-means algorithm, the next step would be to recalculate the centroids as the mean of the
coordinates in each cluster. Afterwards, one would iterate through the assignment and update
steps until convergence is achieved, meaning the centroids no longer change significantly.
A limitation of the greedy clustering is the assumption that the clusters are spherical and have
the same variance, however, this is often not the case for the wind farm layouts, which can have
various shapes. Furthermore, it is possible for the algorithm to result in clusters of very different
sizes (Google, 2022). In the context of wind farms, this could mean unbalanced layouts, which
might not be desirable.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Metaheuristics
27
4.3
Metaheuristics
This section describes the application of metaheuristics for improving the pipeline layouts. Meta-
heuristics are high-level procedures designed to guide the search process towards eﬀicient solu-
tions. Building upon the initial solutions formed by the construction heuristics, two techniques
are applied: Simulated Annealing (SA) and Variable Neighbourhood Search (VNS).
4.3.1
Simulated Annealing
Simulated Annealing (SA), first presented in (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983), is a metaheuristic that
draws inspiration from the annealing process in metallurgy. In metallurgy this process is used for
removing imperfections in metals, and involves cycles of controlled heating and cooling, leading
to a material state with minimal energy.
In SA, temperature T is a key parameter that guides the local search process. It is systematically
decreased according to a defined schedule, typically using a factor α, where 0 < α < 1, to reduce
the temperature from an initial high value.
The temperature controls the likelihood of SA
accepting a solution that is worse than the current one, giving the metaheuristic an option to
escape from local optima in the hope of finding a global optimum. In practice, the temperature
is updated in each iteration as Tnew = α · Told.
The probability p of accepting a new solution, even if it worsens the current state, depends
on the current temperature and the difference in cost C between the current and candidate
solutions ∆C = Ccandidate −Ccurrent. In this thesis, the probability of acceptance is calculated
with the following equation:
p =





e
−∆C
T ,
if
∆C > 0
1,
if
∆C ≤0
(4.11)
In the original paper (Kirkpatrick et al., 1983), the calculation where ∆C > 0 is normalised
with the Boltzmann constant kb. However, in the context of optimisation problems outside of
physics, the Boltzmann constant is often set to 1 for simplicity, as it can be absorbed into the
temperature parameter.
As evident from eq. (4.11), the heuristic becomes less likely to accept higher cost solutions
as the temperature decreases, narrowing the search towards an optimum. Here, the concept
of reheating can be used as an important tool for the heuristic to potentially escape a local
optimum (Anagnostopoulos et al., 2006). With reheating, T is increased to some larger value
during the heuristic’s execution, which can be the starting temperature Tstart or some other
==PAGE:34==
4.3 Metaheuristics
28
chosen value. This increase in temperature allows the heuristic to accept worse solutions again
and thus possibly discover better solutions in other neighbourhoods. The strategy for when and
how to apply reheating can vary. In this thesis, the criterion for when to reheat is set to a
specific number of iterations without improvement. When reheating, it is important to save the
currently best found solution, as the following local search is not guaranteed to find a better
one. The cooling and reheating process is repeated until a predefined time limit is reached.
Simulated annealing is a flexible metaheuristic approach suitable for many different optimisation
problems, however, for it to work optimally, the temperature and decay factor must be chosen
carefully. The cooling schedule can be neither too fast nor too slow. Cooling too fast can result
in the heuristic converging to a local optimum it is unable to escape from, whereas, if it is
too slow, it may never converge. It is an approach that requires a relatively large number of
iterations, especially if the problem being solved is complex.
4.3.2
Variable Neighbourhood Search
Variable Neighbourhood Search (VNS), first presented in (Mladenović and P. Hansen, 1997)
is another metaheuristic that searches for a global optimum by exploring increasingly broader
neighbourhoods. In (Pierre Hansen et al., 2010), multiple applications and methods of VNS
are presented, and most consist of a Shaking phase, a Local Search phase, and a Neighbourhood
Change phase. The phases can be described as follows:
• Shaking: generate y′ by pertubating the current solution y at random to reach the k-th
neighbourhood.
• Local Search: from y′, run a local search until the solution stops improving to generate y′′.
• Neighbourhood Change: if the solution found by local search y′′ is cheaper than the current
solution y, update y = y′′ and reset the neighbourhood shaking counter k to 1. If the
solution is not improved after the local search phase, increment k = k+1 until a predefined
kmax is reached. The next shaking phase thus searches a more distant neighbourhood.
Choosing the maximum number of neighbourhoods kmax and the intensity of the neighbourhood
exploration strategy is critical for the success of VNS. A larger kmax allows for a wider search,
but also increases the computational time, while the shaking intensity must be balanced to
ensure diversity in solutions without hindering the search eﬀiciency. In this way, VNS is flexible
and can be adapted to various problem structures with the possibility of using many different
neighbourhood exploration strategies.
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
29
4.4
Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
This section describes an existing Mixed Integer Linear Programming model for offshore wind
farm cable routing, denoted OWFCR, from (Fischetti and Pisinger, 2018a). This model lays
the foundation for the exact model implemented for the WFPLP in the subsequent analysis.
The OWFCR model finds the optimal cable connections between turbines and substation(s),
minimising the total cable cost. Substations are central connection points that collect energy,
similar to the manifolds in the WFPLP. The OWFCR and the WFPLP share many similarities.
In the OWFCR network, the energy flow of each cable may not exceed the capacity of the
cables, and the energy flow leaving a turbine must be supported by a single cable. Furthermore,
a technical requirement is set on the number of cables Cs connected to each substation. To
reduce the risk of damage, crossing cable segments CS should be avoided.
The mathematical formulation of the OWFCR considers a graph of turbines, substations, and
edges represented by G = (V, E).
The set of nodes V is divided into (VS, VT ), where VT
contains the nodes corresponding to the turbines, and VS contains the nodes corresponding to
the substations. The original OWFCR formulation also considers optional Steiner nodes, which
are omitted in this representation, as they are mainly useful when considering obstacles, and
those are not taken into account in this thesis. Considering a set of cable types k ∈K, the
OWFCR uses the following decision variables:
• xk
i,j: binary variable, being 1 if the edge (i, j) is built of cable type k, otherwise 0.
• yi,j: binary variable, being 1 if the edge (i, j) is built, otherwise 0.
• fi,j: float variable, representing the energy flow in edge (i, j).
Using these decision variables, the OWFCR model formulation is presented below. The objective
of the model is to minimise the costs of the selected cables. The edge cost ck
i,j = uk · dist(i, j)
can be calculated for each edge (i, j) ∈E and for each cable type k ∈K, where uk is the cost
per unit and dist(i, j) is the Euclidean distance between i and j.
==PAGE:36==
4.4 Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
30
minimize:
!
(i,j)∈E
!
k∈K
ck
i,j · xk
i,j
(4.12)
subject to:
!
k∈K
xk
i,j = yi,j,
(i, j) ∈E
(4.13)
!
i∈V :i̸=h
(fh,i −fi,h) = Hh,
h ∈VT
(4.14)
!
k∈K
zk · xk
i,j ≥fi,j,
(i, j) ∈E
(4.15)
!
j∈V :j̸=h
yh,j = 1,
h ∈VT
(4.16)
!
j∈V :j̸=h
yh,j = 0,
h ∈VS
(4.17)
!
i∈V :i̸=h
yi,h ≤Cs,
h ∈VS
(4.18)
yi,j + yj,i + yh,r + yr,h ≤1,
∀CS [i, j] and [h, r]
(4.19)
xk
i,j ∈{0, 1},
(i, j) ∈E, k ∈K
(4.20)
yi,j ∈{0, 1},
(i, j) ∈E
(4.21)
fi,j ≥0,
(i, j) ∈E
(4.22)
Constraints in (4.13) ensure that only one cable type k ∈K can be selected for each built edge.
For wind turbine nodes, constraints in (4.14) stipulate that the energy flow exiting node h is
equal to the energy flow entering h plus the energy production Hh of that node h. Constraints
in (4.15) ensure that the flow in a built edge of cable k, does not exceed the capacity zk of that
cable type. Constraints in 4.16 ensure that only one cable can leave a turbine, while constraints
in 4.17 ensure that no cable leaves the substation. Constraints in 4.18 impose the maximum
number of cables Cs that can enter each substation, and similarly, constraints (4.19) prohibit
the building of crossing edges. Constraints in (4.20)-(4.22) ensure the domain of the decision
variables.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5
Optimisation Setup
Before starting the analysis aimed at optimising the WFPLP, this chapter outlines the specific
optimisation setup used in this thesis. Initially, the chapter presents the data set, which includes
the wind farm instances used to assess the performance of the optimisation methods and the
available pipes to choose from when constructing the layouts.
Following this, the baseline
scenario is introduced, where the values of the input parameters of the WFPLP are defined. The
chapter finishes with an overview of our computational resources for running the optimisation
methods.
5.1
Wind farm instances
The layout instances are provided by Vattenfall and were developed by (Cazzaro and Pisinger,
2022b) to realistically represent challenges encountered in the offshore wind farm industry. Each
instance consists of one or more zones, where each zone represents a separate wind farm area
with strategically placed turbines represented by two-dimensional coordinates. For each zone,
one or multiple substations have been added manually in (Cazzaro and Pisinger, 2022a) based
on the power production of electrical wind turbines. In the context of hydrogen-producing wind
farms, substations are not part of the decentralised concept with electrolysers at each turbine.
However, the substation locations have been approximated and assigned to represent manifolds,
where multiple smaller inter-array pipes are combined into one or more export pipes.
Table 5.1 provides an overview of the wind farm instances. For instance A, there are 2 zones,
each with a single manifold. This setup requires each manifold to accommodate the production
of 26 and 14 wind turbines for zones 1 and 2, respectively. The instance considering the largest
number of turbines is instance I, and it has a single zone with 4 manifolds, corresponding to
approximately 78 turbines per manifold. Generally, larger instances are more diﬀicult to solve,
as the number of possible pipe connections scales with the number of turbines. Specifically,
in the context of a directed graph, the number of potential connections can be expressed as
N(N −1), where N is the number of turbines, since each turbine can be connected to all nodes
but itself.
The wind farm instances are used to assess the performance of our optimisation methods, in-
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Pipe types
32
cluding the two metaheuristics and the exact model. The optimisation runs are carried out
independently for each zone in every instance, dividing it into 18 individual optimisation prob-
lems.
Instance
Zones
Manifolds
Turbines
Avg. turbines per manifold
A
2
1, 1
26, 14
26, 14
B
1
2
99
49.50
C
2
1, 1
60, 30
60, 30
D
1
3
170
56.67
E
3
1, 2, 1
7, 94, 36
7, 47, 36
F
2
2, 1
132, 26
66, 26
G
1
3
140
46.67
H
2
2, 1
158, 30
79, 30
I
1
4
313
78.25
J
3
2, 2, 1
136, 74, 25
68, 37, 25
Table 5.1: Details on the different instances, their corresponding number of manifolds, and the
number of turbines within each zone.
5.2
Pipe types
In the WFPLP, a pipe type is chosen for each pipe segment between the turbines.
Table
5.2 presents available pipes diameters to choose from, alongside with their absolute internal
roughness and the cost per metre (excl. installation costs), as provided by Vattenfall. Pipes with
diameters ranging from 2 to 7 inches are considered inter-array pipes, whereas those exceeding
10 inches are considered export pipes. This distinction is made due to variations in material,
where inter-array pipes need to be more flexible to reach the turbine above the water surface
from the seabed, while the export pipes are rigid at the seabed.
Inner diameter dk (inch)
Absolute internal roughness ek (mm)
cost pr. metre uk (€)
Array pipes
2
0.004
250
3
0.004
325
4
0.004
450
5
0.5
600
6
0.6
700
7
0.7
800
Export pipes
10
0.05
275
12
0.05
300
14
0.05
330
16
0.05
370
18
0.05
410
20
0.05
450
Table 5.2: Available pipes for optimising the WFPLP provided by Vattenfall.
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Baseline scenario
33
5.3
Baseline scenario
As a foundation for our analysis, a baseline scenario is defined to ensure consistency in evaluating
the results obtained from the metaheuristics, the exact model, and the experiments conducted.
The general input parameters for the WFPLP are presented in Section 2.2, and in this section
the baseline-specific input values are considered for our analysis.
Within this baseline framework, each wind turbine is estimated to generate H = 363 kg of
hydrogen per hour. This production rate corresponds to a turbine with a rated power of 20MW
per hour working at full capacity, requiring 55 kWh to produce 1 kg of hydrogen. For the pipeline
layout selection, the availability of all six inter-array pipe diameters provided by Vattenfall is
considered, as presented in Section 5.2. For simplicity, the modelling of the export pipeline is
excluded in this baseline scenario. However, the export pipeline is considered in the experiment
Inclusion of export pipes, presented in Section 7.1.
The optimisation of the WFPLP also seeks to reduce the occurrence of crossings, limit the num-
ber of connections to the manifold exceeding Cm, and restrict the number of in-going connections
to turbines exceeding Ct, using penalties M1, M2, and M3, respectively. These penalties are
set at a relatively large value, specifically M1 = M2 = M3 = 5 · 105, representing 5% to 10%
of the objective function, depending on the wind farm instance. Soft constraints are employed
because, depending on the number of turbines and manifolds on site and their position, there
may be situations that require additional connections to the manifold to ensure feasibility of
the pressure and velocity calculations. In our study, the constraints on the manifolds are set
to Cm = 10, where the constraints on the turbine connections differ depending on the topology:
Ct = 3 using the branching topology and Ct = 1 using the string topology.
In the WFPLP, gas pipeline hydraulics constraints impose limits on both the maximum pressure
and velocity within pipe segments of the layouts. These constraints are established using a
maximum velocity Vmax = 25 m/s and a maximum pressure Pmax = 40 bar. Additionally, a
flow temperature Tf = 3◦C is assumed throughout the network. The flow temperature, along
with the pressure at the end of the outgoing pipe, is important in determining the gas properties
used for calculating pressure and velocity in each pipe segment of the network. As previously
explained, the calculations of pressure and velocity within a network are initiated from the
manifolds using the known pressure Pm. The starting pressure influences the choice of feasible
pipe diameters due to too high velocities and/or pressures, as seen in Section 4.1.2.3, and can
therefore impact the layout and cost of the final solution.
To determine a suitable starting
pressure at the manifolds Pm, an initial experiment is conducted.
The experiment involves
running the sweep multistart construction heuristic for each wind farm instance, varying the
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Baseline scenario
34
manifold pressure Pm from 10 to 35 bar, and computing the non-penalised cost of the solution.
The results of this experiment are visualised in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Non-penalised cost of sweep multistart construction heuristic with manifold pres-
sure Pm varying from 10 to 35 bar for each instance.
The non-penalised cost functions obtained from varying the manifold pressure in the sweep mul-
tistart heuristic exhibit curvature, which represents the relationship between being constrained
by the velocity at low start pressures and the pressure drop at high start pressures. The dif-
ference in cost is most pronounced in instances with a large number of wind turbines, such as
instances I and J. In contrast, in smaller instances, such as A, B, and C, the difference in cost is
less significant. This observation can likely be attributed to the smaller absolute cost differences
between an optimal and a suboptimal layout in instances with fewer turbines.
Determining a suitable pressure in the manifold in all wind farm instances proves somewhat
challenging based solely on Figure 5.1. To establish a general manifold pressure level applicable
to all wind farm instances, an average min-max normalised cost function is computed and
visualised in Figure 5.2. The average normalised cost function provides clearer insights, revealing
that the optimal pressure falls within the range of 25 to 30 bar, with a more specific value of
Pm = 26 bar. In the baseline scenario, this pressure level is used at the manifold, ensuring a
compromise between velocity and pressure considerations in all instances.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Baseline scenario
35
Figure 5.2: Average min-max normalised cost of sweep construction heuristic with manifold
pressure Pm varying from 10 to 35 bar for each wind farm instance.
In the exact model constructed for the WFPLP, exact pressure and velocity calculations cannot
be performed due to the nonlinear formulas. The model relies on the finding that velocity serves
as the limiting factor at lower pressure levels, preventing pressure to exceed the maximum limit.
As a result, a conservative manifold pressure is needed to ensure that this holds. Therefore, in
the model, a manifold pressure of Pm = 20 bar is used.
Table 5.3 gives an overview of the optimisation parameters used in the baseline scenario. By
establishing this baseline scenario, we ensure that the performance evaluation of the optimisation
methods is conducted on consistent parameters.
Parameter
Value
Description
H
363 kg/h
Mass flow rate
K
6
Available pipe types
Cm
10
Max. connections to manifold
Ct
3 | 1
Max. connections to a turbine (branching | string)
Pmax
40 bar
Max. pressure
Vmax
25 m/s
Max. velocity
Pm
26 bar | 20 bar
Manifold pressure (heuristics | exact model)
Tf
3◦C
Flow temperature
M1, M2, M3
5 · 105€
Cost penalties
Table 5.3: Overview of input variables in baseline scenario.
==PAGE:42==
5.4 Computational resources
36
5.4
Computational resources
The outcomes of our analysis are related to the eﬀiciency of our code and the computational
resources used during the optimisation process. The optimisation models are implemented using
Julia code, and the source can be accessed in the following GitHub repository link.
Both the baseline scenario and what-if experiments run metaheuristics that terminate based
on a fixed time criterion of 30 minutes, on a computer equipped with a 4.2GHz Quad-Core
Intel Core i7 processor and 32GB of RAM. Similarly, the exact model is given a duration of 30
minutes to converge to either an optimal solution or the best solution obtained within that time
frame using the Gurobi optimiser. The Gurobi optimiser is known to be a powerful eﬀicient
solver, consistently showing to beat competing solvers (Gurobi, 2024). The exact model is run
on a less powerful computer, with 2GHz Quad-Core Intel Core i5 processor with 16GB RAM.
For some large zones in the wind farm instances, the model is not able to find a feasible solution
within the time limit of 30 minutes. Therefore, the running time has been increased for these to
two or six hours, depending on the size. Additionally, if the final solution from the exact model
contains crossings, non-crossing constraints are added for these and the new model is run.
The time limit of 30 minutes is selected based on a practical assessment of our computational
resources and the need to eﬀiciently process a significant number of wind farms with various
approaches in a reasonable time frame.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Analysis
With the optimisation setup introduced, we proceed to the analysis in this chapter. Building
directly upon the theoretical foundations from Chapter 4, the gas pipeline model and the cable
routing problem are translated into optimisation methods for the WFPLP. This chapter presents
the implementation, tuning, and results for each method when applied to optimise both the
branching and string topologies.
Initially in this chapter, the focus is on the pipe sizing problem by introducing the pipe sizing
heuristic, designed to integrate with the later methods that address the routing problem of the
WFPLP. For the routing problem, our version of the sweep multistart heuristic is presented, a
method that serves both as the construction heuristic for the metaheuristics Simulated Annealing
and Variable Neighbourhood Search and as a stand-alone optimisation method. Following this,
the chapter delves into our chosen neighbourhood search strategy for the routing optimisation
using metaheuristics, followed by sections describing the implementation, tuning, and results
of the metaheuristics. The final solution approach is the exact model, for which the WFPLP
version of the OWFCR model shown in Chapter 4 is presented. This chapter concludes with a
comparative analysis, where the performance of each solution method is evaluated against the
others across the different wind farm instances. Additionally, a comparison of the cost differences
between the best performing solution methods using the branching and string topologies is made.
6.1
Pipe sizing heuristic
This section addresses the pipe sizing problem of the WFPLP by introducing a heuristic used
to select cost-effective pipe sizes for a given pipeline layout, while adhering to the pressure and
velocity constraints. The heuristic chooses from the six inter-array pipes presented in Section
5.2, and checks if the selection is feasible based on the gas pipeline model introduced in Section
4.1.
The heuristic optimises the diameters of pipe segment in a layout solution graph GT = (V, T)
with edges directed from the manifold towards the outermost turbines. The heuristic follows the
steps presented in Algorithm 1 below, and initiates by taking a solution graph GT , the available
pipe types K, and the constraint limits for the velocity Vmax and pressure Pmax as input.
==PAGE:44==
6.1 Pipe sizing heuristic
38
Algorithm 1: PipeSizingHeuristic
Input: Layout GT , Pipe types K, Velocity constraint Vmax, Pressure constraint Pmax
1 GT ←ComputeCumulativeEdgeFlow(GT )
2 c ←InitialiseGasConstants()
3 for each pipe segment (i, j) ∈T do
4
p ←DefineGasProperties(Pi, c)
5
for each pipe type k ∈K do
6
V k
(i,j) ←CalculateVelocity(k, p)
7
GT (k(i, j)) ←SelectBestPipe(V k
(i,j), Vmax)
8
if no V k
(i,j) adheres to Vmax then
9
Mark layout as infeasible and break
10
Pj ←CalculatePressure(GT , Pi, c, p)
11
while Pj exceeds Pmax do
12
GT (k(i, j)) ←SelectNextLargerPipe(GT , K)
13
Pj ←CalculatePressure(GT , Pi, c, p)
14
if no K adheres to Pmax then
15
Mark layout as infeasible and break
16 return GT
In step 1, the cumulative mass flow rate is calculated for each pipe segment (i, j) ∈T. This
is done by traversing the layout solution GT from the outermost turbine to the manifold with
a modified Depth First Search algorithm, which sums the hydrogen production of each turbine
along the way. The necessary gas constants c used for the velocity and pressure calculations
are initialised in step 2.
These include the flow temperature Tf, the base pressure PB and
temperature TB, and the specific gas gravity G.
After these initial steps, the main part of the heuristic is executed corresponding to lines 3 to
15. For each pipe segment (i, j) ∈T, starting from the manifold root and moving towards the
outermost turbines, the heuristic conducts the following steps:
1. Define gas properties: In line 4, define the required gas properties p using the pressure Pi
at turbine i and the gas constants c. The properties include the compressibility factor Z,
the density ρ, and the viscosity µ. These allows us to compute the volumetric flow rates
Q and QB.
2. Calculate velocity: In lines 5-6, calculate the resulting velocity of selecting all available
pipes K using the diameter of the pipe and the volumetric flow as described in eq. (4.4).
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Sweep multistart heuristic
39
3. Select best pipe: In lines 7-9, select the smallest pipe type k(i, j) that adheres to the velocity
constraint Vmax for the segment. If no pipe can comply with the velocity constraint for
the segment, mark the solution as infeasible.
4. Calculate pressure: In line 10, calculate the pressure Pj at turbine j for the selected pipe
using the defined gas constants c and properties p, as described in eq. 4.5.
5. Check pressure: In lines 11-15, check that the resulting pressure Pj at turbine j adheres to
the pressure constraint Pmax. In case of non-compliance with the constraint, incrementally
choose a larger pipe and conduct the pressure calculation from step 4 again. If no pipe
can comply with the pressure constraint, mark the solution as infeasible.
If a feasible sizing solution is found, the output of the heuristic is the layout solution GT with
the selected pipes.
From Algorithm 1, it is evident that the pipe sizing heuristic starts by
determining the size of a pipe segment solely from the velocity calculation and then proceeds by
checking for compliance with the pressure calculation. This approach, allows us to reduce the
number of pressure calculations.
6.2
Sweep multistart heuristic
For the routing problem within the WFPLP, the sweep multistart heuristic serves as a construc-
tion heuristic for the later applied metaheuristics and as a stand alone solution approach. The
implementation and results of this heuristic are presented in this section. Expanding on the
theoretical foundation laid out in Section 4.2.3, this section describes how the heuristic has been
adapted to the WFPLP by incorporating our pipe sizing heuristic to account for the additional
constraints related to pressure and velocity. Lastly, the solutions constructed using the sweep
heuristic are shown.
6.2.1
Implementation
The sweep heuristic takes as input a wind farm instance π, for which the turbine and manifold
positions are fixed. Furthermore, it takes a starting turbine tstart from which the algorithm
begins and a direction for scanning the turbines d, which can be either clockwise or anti-clockwise.
The pseudocode for the sweep heuristic can be seen in Algorithm 2 below.
==PAGE:46==
6.2 Sweep multistart heuristic
40
Algorithm 2: SweepHeuristic(π)
Input: Windfarm instance π, starting turbine tstart, direction d
1 πclusters ←GreedyClustering(π)
2 ssweep ←∅
3 for πc in πclusters do
4
Cpolar ←CalculatePolarCoordinates(πc, tstart, d)
5
g ←[ ]
6
sprev ←∅
7
while unassigned turbines in Cpolar do
8
Cpolar, g ←AssignTurbineToGroup(g, Cpolar)
9
snet ←ConnectTurbines(g)
10
s ←PipeSizingHeuristic(snet)
11
if s is feasible then
12
sprev ←s
13
else
14
Cpolar ←UnassignTurbineFromGroup(g, Cpolar)
15
ssweep ←AppendGroupSolution(sprev)
16
g ←[ ]
17
ssweep ←AppendGroupSolution(sprev)
18 return ssweep
The process begins at line 1, where the turbines in the wind farm instance are assigned to a
manifold cluster using the greedy clustering algorithm. The manifold clusters are considered
individually when performing the sweep-line grouping. In line 2, an empty sweep solution is
constructed, which will be iteratively appended to as turbine groups are constructed. For each
manifold cluster, turbines are sorted based on their angular positions in reference to the central
manifold and the sweep direction in line 4. Then in line 8, starting from the designated starting
turbine, and until all turbines in the cluster have been assigned, a turbine from the cluster is
assigned to the group. After adding a turbine to the group, the turbines are connected, in
line 9, with a Minimum Spanning Tree algorithm using the branching topology and a Nearest
Neighbour algorithm using the string topology. Afterwards, in line 10, the connections between
the turbines are converted into specific pipes using the pipe sizing heuristic, where the feasibility
of pressure and velocity is examined. If the inclusion of the assigned turbine does not lead to
a violation of either the velocity or pressure constraints during pipe sizing, the heuristic saves
the solution as the previous solution in lines 11 and 12, and continues by assigning the next
turbine. In the case of a violation, lines 13 to 16 state that the assigned turbine is unassigned,
==PAGE:47==
6.2 Sweep multistart heuristic
41
the previous feasible solution is appended to the sweep solution, and the current group is reset.
The violating turbine is then reassigned to a new group. Once all turbines in a manifold cluster
have been assigned, the last group of the solution is saved. This process is repeated for every
manifold cluster, resulting in a solution for the entire wind farm instance.
The multistart scheme is implemented by running the sweep heuristic in Algorithm 2 with each
turbine in the instance as the starting turbine. This approach is denoted SweeepMultistartHeuristic(π)
in the presented psuedocode in the next sections.
6.2.2
Results
The results of applying the sweep multistart heuristic to all wind farm instances, are presented
in this subsection, starting with the branching topology, followed by the results from the string
topology. When examining the results, it might appear counter-intuitive that the direction of
the sweep line, whether clockwise or anti-clockwise, could affect the outcome when starting
from all turbines. Nevertheless, a small difference will be seen in the following subsections. This
difference arises due to two main reasons within our methodology:
1. Greedy nature of the pipe sizing heuristic: The pipe sizing heuristic selects pipes iteratively,
beginning at the manifold and moving outwards. Consequently, the innermost pipes are
always chosen based on the velocity constraint, as the pressure near the manifold is always
low enough. With the sweep multistart heuristic approach, where turbines are added to
a group one-by-one, smaller pipes are selected for the innermost pipe segments early in
the grouping process. In particular, if this segment is long, this results in a significant
pressure drop, which might make the addition of another turbine to the group infeasible.
For instance, in a feasible grouping for a clockwise sweep of turbines A, B, C, and D,
adding them anti-clockwise in the sequence D, C, B, A might make adding turbine B
infeasible. If both B and A had been added simultaneously the group would be feasible,
since the inner-most pipe segment would be wider and/or shorter. The inner-most pipe
would be shorter if turbine A is positioned closest to the manifold, and wider due to the
increased flowrate of adding an additional turbine.
2. Implementation of the Nearest Neighbour algorithm: In a number of cases in our wind farm
instances, two turbines can be located exactly the same distance from another turbine.
Given our implementation of the Nearest Neighbour algorithm for the string topology, the
ordering of angles leads to the selection of different turbines when sweeping in different
directions.
==PAGE:48==
6.2 Sweep multistart heuristic
42
6.2.2.1
Branching topology
Table 6.1 shows the results obtained from the sweep multistart heuristic using the branching
topology, where turbines are connected using the Minimum Spanning Tree algorithm, and the
sweep line rotation is carried out both clockwise and anti-clockwise. It can be seen that the
choice of the starting turbine significantly impacts the solutions obtained. Initiating the heuristic
from the most preferable starting turbine results in cost savings ranging from 9.0% to 28.1%,
compared to starting from the least preferable turbine considering both scanning directions.
Although testing all turbines as starting points might seem computationally ineﬀicient, the
computation time remains reasonably low, as it takes approximately one minute for the largest
instance I and only 10 seconds for the smallest instance A. As seen in the table, none of the
layout solutions are subject to crossing pipes.
Clockwise
Anti-clockwise
Instance
Time (s)
Best (M€)
Worst (M€)
Savings (%)
Crossings
Best (M€)
Worst (M€)
Savings (%)
Crossings
A
10
24.2
30.1
19.6
0
24.2
30.1
19.6
0
B
13
64.8
76.4
15.2
0
64.2
76.1
15.6
0
C
19
65.30
76.0
14.1
0
64.6
89.8
28.1
0
D
28
104.9
118.6
11.6
0
104.8
119.1
12.0
0
E
27
87.7
118.8
26.2
0
87.7
118.5
26.0
0
F
27
112.9
130.0
13.2
0
112.4
130.0
13.5
0
G
19
88.1
100.1
12.0
0
88.4
104.1
15.1
0
H
35
126.6
143.2
11.6
0
127.9
143.2
10.7
0
I
62
221.2
243.2
9.0
0
220.8
244.5
9.7
0
J
41
144.6
161.5
10.5
0
144.6
160.2
9.7
0
Total
1040.3
1197.9
0
1039.6
1215.6
0
Table 6.1: Results of running sweep multistart heuristic scanning the turbines both clockwise
and anti-clockwise for all wind farm instances using the branching topology.
Throughout this chapter, the layout of wind farm instance B serves as a visual reference for
observing changes or improvements in solutions. The smaller number of turbines in the wind
farm instance gives a clear understanding and examination of the layout variations. For readers
interested in exploring the layouts of other instances, these can be found in Appendix A. Figure
6.1 illustrates the branching layout constructed using the sweep multistart heuristic in an anti-
clockwise direction. Generally, the larger inter-array pipes are used to accommodate the flow
near the manifold, while the smaller inter-array pipes are used towards the leaves to form
branches. The sweep multistart heuristic constructs the Minimum Spanning Tree for each group,
ensuring that the turbines are connected using the shortest paths, which is also evident from
examining the layout for wind farm instance B.
==PAGE:49==
6.2 Sweep multistart heuristic
43
Figure 6.1: Layout constructed using sweep multistart heuristic in an anti-clockwise direction
using the branching topology on wind farm instance B.
6.2.2.2
String topology
Using the string topology, the turbines are connected by the Nearest Neighbour algorithm in
the sweep multistart heuristic. The results of this approach can be seen in Table 6.2. In general,
sweep solutions using the string topology have higher costs compared to those for the branching
topology. This difference can be attributed to the increased possibility of using smaller pipes
when creating branches. Additionally, the greedy nature of the Nearest Neighbour algorithm,
always selecting the nearest turbine, can lead to less successful layout formations. Consequently,
this may result in some turbines in the later part of the string having very long connections.
This is, among others, the case for the topmost string in the manifold to the bottom-left in wind
farm instance B, visualised in Figure 6.2.
Clockwise
Anti-clockwise
Instance
Time (s)
Best (M€)
Worst (M€)
Savings (%)
Crossings
Best (M€)
Worst (M€)
Savings (%)
Crossings
A
10.0
37.0
97.4
62.0
1
36.9
95.9
61.5
0
B
15.0
89.4
170.0
47.4
0
89.4
172.1
48.1
0
C
17.0
86.9
183.9
52.7
2
90.6
188.3
51.9
2
D
26.0
157.6
303.2
48.0
3
166.7
312.7
46.7
4
E
24.0
125.0
266.8
53.1
1
127.6
260.0
50.9
2
F
26.0
151.7
324.4
53.2
2
149.3
277.2
46.1
1
G
16.0
136.7
274.8
50.3
5
144.6
267.0
45.8
6
H
35.0
188.6
310.0
39.2
5
186.0
304.2
38.9
3
I
57.0
326.0
540.0
39.6
11
292.5
542.0
46.0
6
J
43.0
205.0
504.0
59.3
5
198.6
523.8
62.1
4
Total
1503.9
2974.5
35
1482.2
2943.2
28
Table 6.2: Results of running the sweep multistart heuristic scanning the turbines both clock-
wise and anti-clockwise for all wind farm instances using the string topology.
==PAGE:50==
6.2 Sweep multistart heuristic
44
The savings achieved by using the most preferable starting turbine ranges from 38.9% to 62.1%,
compared to choosing the least preferable one considering both scanning directions, which is
more pronounced than in the branching topology. This emphasises the clear advantage of im-
plementing the multistart scheme, especially using the string topology. Similarly to using the
branching topology, rotating in an anti-clockwise direction yields the best results, saving 21.7
M€ across all wind farm instances. These large savings can be partly credited to fewer crossings
across the instances, as sweeping in the anti-clockwise direction results in seven fewer cross-
ings. The running time of the multistart sweep heuristic is similar regardless of the algorithm,
Minimum Spanning Tree or Nearest Neighbour, used to connect the turbines.
Figure 6.2: Layout constructed using sweep multistart heuristic in an anti-clockwise direction
using the string topology on wind farm instance B.
Figure 6.2 shows the string layout of wind farm instance B obtained with the sweep multistart
heuristic. When examining the string components connected to the manifolds, it becomes ap-
parent that each tree component spans greater distances using the string layout compared to
using the branching layout. This variation is mostly due to the differences in nature between the
Nearest Neighbour and Minimum Spanning Tree algorithms. As a consequence, the outermost
turbines in a string component are positioned further away from the manifolds. At these longer
distances, the increase in pressure is greater, necessitating the use of larger array pipes for some
turbines positioned at the end of the string, due to the pressure becoming the limiting factor.
This phenomenon is observed in two string components connected to the top-right manifold.
The approach of using larger array pipes later in the component enables the inclusion of more
turbines within the same string. It is important to note that this effect might have been mit-
==PAGE:51==
6.3 Neighbourhood exploration
45
igated by allowing a larger pipe in earlier segments of the string component, thereby reducing
the pressure drop. However, this consideration is not assessed in the pipe sizing heuristic used
in this thesis. The layouts of the remaining wind farm instances can be seen in Appendix B.
6.3
Neighbourhood exploration
The neighbourhood exploration is a fundamental part of the metaheuristics implemented in this
thesis. Defining the neighbourhood essentially defines how the solution space of the routing
problem within the WFPLP is searched. This section is divided into two parts to describe how
the neighbourhood is defined and how to reduce the needed computations when moving from
one solution to another. The first subsection defines our neighbourhood by explaining how the
1-opt move is implemented and adapted to the WFPLP. The following subsection focuses on
the methods used to update and recalculate the solution after executing a 1-opt move.
6.3.1
1-opt move
In the metaheuristics, a 1-opt move is used to transition from one solution to a nearby one
within the solution space by changing a single edge in the solution. Given the constraints of the
WFPLP, each turbine node in a solution graph GT has exactly one outgoing edge. Lets denote
this edge (i, j) for a turbine labelled i. To execute the 1-opt move, the edge (i, j) is removed
and a new connection from node i is established to a different node in the tree jnew.
This
reconnection is subject to some restrictions. Firstly, i cannot reconnect to itself, and secondly, it
must avoid creating cycles. Using the string topology, there is an additional restriction, ensuring
the avoidance of creating branches. To account for this, the 1-opt move is restricted to nodes
using the string and branching topology as follows:
• String topology: jnew can be selected as the manifold nodes and the turbine nodes corre-
sponding to leaves of GT , excluding the leaf of the string component that extends back-
wards from i.
• Branching topology: jnew can be selected as the manifold nodes and the turbine nodes,
excluding the turbine nodes extending backwards from i to its leaves.
In the implementation, the selection of jnew is further restricted to nodes that are within a 5
km radius of i. This consideration is particularly important for larger instances, as connecting
turbines over longer distances is generally not preferred. However, manifold nodes are always
considered as potential connection points for jnew.
The distance restriction is illustrated in
==PAGE:52==
6.3 Neighbourhood exploration
46
Figure 6.3 below for wind farm instance D. The radius of 5 km is chosen to balance having
suﬀicient options for new edges with the goal of enhancing the computational speed. A visual
inspection of this figure shows that 24 different turbines are within the highlighted grey area
given by a 5 km radius.
Figure 6.3: Illustration of the distance restriction for the 1-opt move on wind farm instance
D. Potential jnew must be selected from within the circle or be a manifold node.
6.3.2
Post-move solution updates
The process of updating the solution following a 1-opt move is important in the WFPLP, since
it connects the optimisation to the gas pipeline model. As established earlier, the number of
calculations of the pressure drop and velocity represent the most computationally demanding
aspect of our problem. For eﬀiciency, we aim to minimise the frequency of these calculations.
Consequently, a method is designed to restrict our recalculations only to the segments of the
network directly impacted by the 1-opt move.
As detailed in Section 4.1, the relationship between flow rate, pressure, and velocity is com-
plex. Changes in flow rate affect pressure, which in turn influences velocity. Therefore, the
recalculations extend beyond the single edge modified in the 1-opt move. To manage this, the
recalculations are limited to two specific tree components of the network. These include the
component from the manifold to the leaves that includes node i before the move, denoted GT1,
and the component node i becomes part of after the move, denoted GT2. Figure 6.4 below
illustrates a 1-opt move for a simple network using the branching topology. From a current
solution we choose to move the edge (6, 5), coloured red in the directed tree on the left, and
connect node 6 to node 9 in the new solution, resulting in the new edge (6, 9). In addition to the
==PAGE:53==
6.3 Neighbourhood exploration
47
new edge, the affected edges of the new solution, for which pipe sizes need to be reselected, are
indicated with blue in the right tree. All other flows remain the same, indicated by the black
colour.
Figure 6.4: Illustration of the 1-opt move using the branching topology.
This targeted approach enables us to maintain all relevant information for the solution without
having to recalculate the entire network every time. In the end, the process of updating the
solution is as follows:
1. 1-opt move and component selection: Move to another solution in the neighbourhood as
described in Section 6.3.1. While performing the move, identify the affected components
GT1 and GT2 of the solution with a modified Depth First Search algorithm.
2. Applying the pipe sizing heuristic: On the affected components identified, apply the pipe
sizing heuristic from Section 6.1. The heuristic selects the most cost-effective pipe diame-
ters under the given pressure and velocity constraints.
3. Evaluating feasibility and cost: In some instances, the 1-opt move may lead to a solution
that does not meet the feasibility criteria for pressure and/or velocity in the pipe sizing
heuristic. In the implementation, such a solution is not accepted, and instead it would
proceed to select another potential jnew for node i.
However, as part of the Variable
Neighbourhood Search metaheuristic, the impact of choosing to accept infeasible solutions
in attempt to escape local minima is examined.
By iteratively applying this methodology, we strive to explore the solution space in an eﬀicient
manner. It allows balancing the computational demands with the need for precise calculations
for the solutions. In particular, this benefits the optimisation of larger instances with many
turbines.
==PAGE:54==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
48
6.4
Simulated Annealing
In this section, Simulated Annealing is presented as the initial metaheuristic approach for ad-
dressing the routing problem within the WFPLP. Building upon the theoretical principles laid
in Section 4.3.1, this section describes how this metaheuristic is implemented and tuned to solve
the WFPLP. Finally, the results of applying the metaheuristic on the wind farm instances are
revealed to demonstrate the performance.
6.4.1
Implementation
The implementation of Simulated Annealing is shown in Algorithm 3 below. The heuristic takes
as input a wind farm instance π and a reheat threshold creheat.
Algorithm 3: SimulatedAnnealing(π, creheat)
Input: Windfarm instance π, reheat threshold creheat
1 s ←SweepMultistartHeuristic(π)
2 Tstart, α, s ←InitialiseTempAndDecay(π, s)
3 T ←Tstart
4 c ←0
5 sbest ←s
6 while NOT Terminate(π, s) do
7
s′ ←Random1optMove(π, s)
8
s′, feasible ←PostMoveCalculations(π, s, s′)
9
δ ←Cost(π, s′) −Cost(π, s)
10
if (δ < 0 or P(e−δ/T )) and feasible then
11
s ←s′
12
if Cost(π, s′) < Cost(π, sbest) then
13
sbest ←s′
14
c ←c + 1
15
else
16
c ←c + 1
17
T ←T · α
18
if c > creheat then
19
c ←0
20
T ←Tstart
21 return sbest
==PAGE:55==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
49
The process begins in line 1 of the pseudocode by generating an initial solution s using the
SweepMultistartHeuristic function, based on a wind farm instance π. This allows the meta-
heuristic to start from an already feasible solution. In line 2, the parameters Tstart and α are
defined with an InitialiseTempAndDecay function. This function auto-tunes the temperature T
and decay α by an algorithm, which is described in detail in the next subsection. In lines 3-5 we
define the temperature T, a counter of non-improving iterations c, and save the initial solution
as our current best solution sbest.
The core of the heuristic is in its iterative process in lines 6-20, which executes until the time limit
is reached. Within each iteration, the heuristic generates a new candidate solution s′ through
the Random1optMove function, which modifies the current solution s at random based on the
criteria from Section 6.3.1. PostMoveCalculations are then executed to correctly calculate the
pressure and velocity for s′ and check feasibility based on the steps from Section 6.3.2. It is
important to note, that this is the step where the pipe sizing heuristic is incorporated. The
heuristic then computes the cost difference δ between the new and current solution.
The decision to accept a new solution is made in line 10. If δ is negative, indicating an improve-
ment, or if the solution meets a probabilistic criterion based on the current temperature T and
δ, the algorithm updates s to s′. For s′ to be accepted, however, it must be a feasible solution.
If the new solution proves to be superior, sbest is updated accordingly in lines 12-13. If not, the
heuristic increments the counter of non-improving iterations c.
Temperature update happens in each iteration of the while-loop, where T is reduced by multi-
plying with the decay factor α, gradually making the metaheuristic more greedy and less likely
to accept worse solutions. Lastly, the implementation incorporates a reheating mechanism. If
the counter c surpasses a predefined threshold creheat, suggesting a prolonged period without
significant improvement, the algorithm resets c to zero and reheats the temperature T to Tstart.
6.4.2
Tuning
The chosen tuning strategy for Simulated Annealing, in this thesis, is an auto-tuning of the
temperature and decay parameters from (Delahaye et al., 2018). The objective of this strategy
is to empirically find the most effective starting temperature and cooling rate, that guide the
heuristic in the optimisation eﬀiciently.
For the auto-tuning, the heuristic uses a set number of iterations K to understand the landscape
of the solution space by testing the differences between neighbouring solutions. For the testing,
an initial and a final acceptance probability γ and η are selected.
In our implementation,
==PAGE:56==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
50
γ = 0.9, η = 0.0000001 and K = 10000. The auto-tuning heuristic can be seen in Algorithm 4
and involves the following steps:
1. Start from an initial solution s.
2. For K iterations, generate neighbouring solutions s′ with the Random1optMove function.
3. Record the following data:
• δtotal: The cumulative sum of cost differences for worse solutions.
• β−: The count of worse solutions that are both accepted and not accepted.
• β+: The count of better solutions that are accepted.
4. Calculate an estimate of the total number of iterations µ the heuristic is expected to
perform, which is assessed based on the available time limit and the computational speed
(iterations per second).
The starting temperature Tstart and the decay α are then calculated using the formulas in eq.
(6.1) and (6.2), which incorporates the recorded information along with the initial and final
acceptance probabilities.
Tstart =
δtotal
log(
β−
β−γ−β+(1−γ))
(6.1)
α = exp

log(
−1
Tstartlog(η))
µ


(6.2)
With this tuning strategy, we attempt to select parameters that reflect the observed behaviour of
the solution space. By doing this, distinct parameters can be selected for each of the wind farm
instances in the optimisation. Thereby the unique characteristics, such as computational time
per iteration of larger instances compared to smaller instances, are taken into consideration.
A limitation of the auto-tuning approach is that a portion of the allocated optimisation time is
expended in determining optimal parameters, detracting from time spent on the actual meta-
heuristic optimisation. To mitigate this, the implementation is designed to save the best solution
encountered, sbest, while running the K iterations. Even though the auto-tuning heuristic is
not set up to necessarily find better solutions, since there is no temperature parameter in play,
it could happen that a better solution is found by random in the tuning phase. After the K
iterations, the best found solution sbest is returned together with Tstart and α.
==PAGE:57==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
51
A structured view of the implemented tuning algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 4 below.
Notably, it is similar in its composition to Simulated Annealing from Algorithm 3. The difference
is mainly the acceptance probability being fixed to γ in line 10 instead of being guided by the
temperature.
Algorithm 4: InitialiseTemperatureAndDecay(π, s)
Input: Windfarm instance π, solution s
1 K ←10000
2 γ ←0.9
3 β−, β+, δtotal, k ←0
4 η ←0.0000001
5 sbest ←s
6 while k < K and NOT Terminate(π, s) do
7
s′ ←Random1optMove(π, s)
8
s′, feasible ←PostMoveCalculations(π, s, s′)
9
δ ←Cost(π, s′) −Cost(π, s)
10
if (δ < 0 or rand(0,1) < γ) and feasible then
11
s ←s′
12
if δ < 0 then
13
β+ ←β+ + 1
14
if Cost(π, s′) < Cost(π, sbest) then
15
sbest ←s′
16
else
17
β−←β−+ 1
18
δtotal ←δtotal + δ
19
else
20
β−←β−+ 1
21
δtotal ←δtotal + δ
22
k ←k + 1
23 Tstart ←
δtotal
log(
β−
β−γ−β+(1−γ) )
24 α ←exp
" log(
−1
Tstartlog(η) )
µ
#
25 return Tstart, α, sbest
The concept of reheating is not included in the scope of our auto-tuning. Instead, to assess the
impact of reheating, a series of trial runs have been performed on wind farm instance B without
reheating and with reheating applied after intervals of 5,000, 10,000, and 50,000 iterations. In
==PAGE:58==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
52
the runs where reheating is scheduled after a fixed number of iterations creheat, the need to
calculate the expected number of iterations µ is replaced by creheat. This is done to suﬀiciently
decrease the acceptance probability before reheating each time. Table 6.3 compares the different
reheating scenarios for wind farm instance by showing the calculated starting temperature Tstart,
decay factor α, and the resulting cost of the pipeline layout.
Reheat after (iterations)
Tstart
α
Cost (M€)
5,000
2.158 · 107
0.99607
64.2
10,000
2.149 · 107
0.99804
63.1
50,000
3.349 · 107
0.99960
62.5
Never
5.488 · 106
0.99997
61.3
Table 6.3: Resulting starting temperature and decay factor for varying the number of iterations
before reheating the temperature on wind farm instance B.
Evidently, the lowest cost is achieved in the trial run without using reheating, and thus reheating
is not included in our final optimisation runs. The observed temperature values across all trial
runs align with the magnitude range of the cost of the objective function. The decay parameter α
is largest when not performing reheating and smallest when reheating often, as the temperature
must decrease suﬀiciently before it is increased again.
6.4.3
Results
In this section, we show the outcomes of optimising the WFPLP using Simulated Annealing on
all wind farm instances. To illustrate the solution search, Figure 6.5 presents solutions generated
over time by SA for wind farm instance B. The figure shows the variation of the solution cost
for the first 1000 seconds. Notably, it starts from a good solution constructed by the sweep
multistart heuristic. However, it takes nearly 8 minutes of optimisation before the solutions
generated by SA return to the cost of the sweep solution and start improving.
The figure
illustrates how, in the initial high-temperature phase, the heuristic explores costly solutions and
how the current solutions tend to improve over time. Furthermore, it is evident that when a local
minimum is reached, the heuristic is able to escape from it with a series of iterations exploring
worse solutions. With the cooling of the temperature over time, the accepted solutions have
fewer cost differences and bring us closer to the global minimum.
==PAGE:59==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
53
Figure 6.5: Solution search of Simulated Annealing during the first 1000 seconds for wind farm
instance B. Solution cost of solutions explored by SA are shown as blue scatter points. The best
solution, from when SA starts to improve on its own search, shown in orange. Overall best
solution seen shown in green.
6.4.3.1
Branching topology
The results of optimising Simulated Annealing using the branching topology are presented in
this section. The metaheuristic has been executed for a duration of 30 minutes on each zone in
each of the wind farm instances, starting from the solutions provided by the sweep multistart
heuristic. The performance of SA is evaluated by comparing the costs of the generated pipeline
layouts with those obtained from the sweep solution.
The optimal pipeline layouts are unknown for the wind farm instances used in this thesis. There-
fore, as a means of understanding the interval in which the optimal solution lies, we have estab-
lished cost bounds from the sweep multistart heuristic. For the lower bound, the cost of using
the smallest possible pipe with a diameter of 2 inches is calculated for all pipe segments, based
on the routing provided by the sweep solution. Likewise, the upper bound is estimated using
the largest pipe with a diameter of 7 inches for every segment. While the lower bound solutions
are infeasible for all instances, this methodology allows us to set a definitive lower bound that
is guaranteed to be less than any optimal solution. Similarly, the upper bound is assured to be
greater, providing a reasonable range within which the true optimal solutions are expected to
lie.
The results of the final optimisation runs for SA on all wind farm instances are reported in
==PAGE:60==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
54
Table 6.4. The table shows the most important figures, including the calculated bounds and the
cost of the sweep layout solutions and the SA layout solutions. The rightmost columns show
the improvement of SA over the sweep solution in percentage, the sweep solutions gap to the
calculated lower bound, and whether the final layout contains any pipe crossings. According to
the results, SA consistently improves on the sweep solutions by margins ranging from 2.4% to
6.5%, with the exception of the largest instance, instance I with 313 turbines, where it does not
find any improvement within the time limit. There are no crossings in the final layouts, and
across the board, the solutions obtained have a gap of 43.1% to 53.4% to the calculated lower
bounds.
Instance
UB (M€)
LB (M€)
Sweep (M€)
SA (M€)
SA impv. (%)
Sweep gap (%)
Crossings
A
42.4
13.2
24.2
23.2
4.1
43.1
0
B
107.0
33.4
64.2
62.0
3.4
46.1
0
C
102.0
31.9
64.6
60.4
6.5
47.2
0
D
176.8
55.2
104.8
100.0
4.6
44.8
0
E
147.2
46.0
87.7
82.7
5.7
44.4
0
F
173.0
54.1
112.4
107.0
4.8
49.4
0
G
138.5
43.3
88.4
85.5
3.3
49.4
0
H
205.9
64.4
127.9
122.1
4.5
47.3
0
I
329.7
103.0
220.8
220.8
0.0
53.4
0
J
239.0
74.7
144.6
141.2
2.4
47.1
0
Total
1661.5
519.2
1039.6
1004.9
0
Table 6.4: Results of Simulated Annealing using the branching topology.
Displayed in Figure 6.6 is the resulting pipeline layout for wind farm instance B using the
branching topology, as determined by the SA heuristic. In comparison to the previously shown
sweep layout solution in Figure 6.1, there is a notable increase in the usage of the smallest pipes.
This tendency is attributed to the increased branching pattern of the SA layout solution, which
includes more branches to individual turbines. As the smallest pipes are only feasible when
transporting the gas flow from a single turbine, it makes sense that this pattern can lead to cost
savings. In this context, another key observation from the figure is observed in the top-right
corner of the wind farm layout. In this area, two pipe segments are connected to the last turbines
in its components with 3-inch pipes. When the gas velocity is the limiting factor, 2-inch pipes
would be chosen for these segments, but in this case where the turbines are located far from
the manifold, the pressure constraint becomes the limiting factor. For the rest of the wind farm
instances, Appendix C contains the obtained pipeline layouts using the branching topology.
==PAGE:61==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
55
Figure 6.6:
Branching topology solution obtained by Simulated Annealing for wind farm
instance B.
6.4.3.2
String topology
The results of applying Simulated Annealing to optimise WFPLP using the string topology are
presented in this section. As for the branching topology, the metaheuristic has been applied to
all wind farm instances, starting from the solutions provided by the sweep multistart heuristic.
Again, the performance of SA is evaluated by comparing the costs of the generated pipeline
layouts with the calculated upper and lower bounds and with the sweep solution.
The results of the final optimisation runs are reported in Table 6.5. Compared to using the
branching topology, greater improvements are seen from the sweep solutions to the solutions
generated by SA with margins ranging from 6.0% to 35.0%. This difference arises because the
Nearest Neighbour algorithm, used in the sweep multistart heuristic for the string topology, is
less effective compared to the Minimum Spanning Tree algorithm used for the branching topology.
With the Nearest Neighbour algorithm, the layout solutions from the sweep multistart heuristic
often contain crossings. SA is unable to remove all of these, as instances D, H, I, and J still
contain crossings after the optimisation. This is despite the incorporation of the penalty term
M3 = 5 · 105€ in the objective function, designed to avoid such occurrences. Consequently, the
cost of these solutions are elevated due to the penalties. Across the board, the obtained layout
solutions from SA have a gap of 32.1% to 56.3% to the calculated lower bounds, similar to the
gaps seen using the branching topology.
==PAGE:62==
6.4 Simulated Annealing
56
Instance
UB (M€)
LB (M€)
Sweep (M€)
SA (M€)
SA impv. (%)
Sweep gap (%)
Crossings
A
52.1
16.3
36.9
24.0
35.0
32.1
0
B
126.9
39.7
89.4
69.8
21.9
43.1
0
C
117.7
36.8
90.6
73.1
19.3
49.7
0
D
198.3
62.0
166.7
132.2
20.7
53.1
1
E
173.9
54.4
127.6
100.9
20.9
46.1
0
F
200.4
62.6
149.3
140.4
6.0
55.4
0
G
160.2
50.1
144.6
100.6
30.4
50.2
0
H
244.0
76.2
186.0
160.0
14.0
52.4
2
I
379.5
118.6
292.5
271.1
7.3
56.3
4
J
265.1
82.8
198.6
176.8
11.0
53.2
2
Total
1918.1
599.5
1482.2
1248.9
9
Table 6.5: Results of Simulated Annealing using the string topology.
Figure 6.7 shows the resulting string layout solution from SA for wind farm instance B. In
comparison to the previously shown sweep layout solution in Figure 6.2, a notable improvement
in the pipeline layout is seen. The initial very long pipe segments for some of the outermost
turbines have been removed and the turbines seem to be more eﬀiciently connected to nearby
turbines. These changes are a result of adding more connections to the manifolds, increasing
from 5 to 8 connections at the top-right manifold and from 4 to 8 connections at the bottom-
left manifold when comparing to the sweep layout. Appendix D contains the pipeline layouts
obtained for all wind farm instances for SA using the string topology.
Figure 6.7: Solution obtained by Simulated Annealing on wind farm instance B using the
string topology.
==PAGE:63==
6.5 Variable Neighbourhood Search
57
6.5
Variable Neighbourhood Search
In this section, Variable Neighbourhood Search (VNS) is presented as the second metaheuristic
approach for addressing the routing problem within the WFPLP. Building upon the theory from
Section 4.3.2, this section describes how VNS is implemented and tuned to solve the WFPLP.
Finally, the results of applying the metaheuristic on the wind farm instances are presented to
demonstrate the performance.
6.5.1
Implementation
The implementation of VNS for the WFPLP is presented in Algorithm 5 below. The heuristic
takes as input a wind farm instance π.
Algorithm 5: VariableNeighborhoodSearch(π)
Input: Windfarm instance π
1 s ←SweepMultistartHeuristic(π)
2 sbest ←s
3 k ←1
4 kmax ←MaxNeighborhoods
5 while NOT Terminate(π, sbest) do
6
s′ ←Shake(π, sbest, k)
7
s′′ ←LocalSearch(π, s′)
8
if Cost(π, s′′) < Cost(π, sbest) then
9
sbest ←s′′
10
k ←1
11
k ←k + 1
12
if k > kmax then
13
k ←1
14 return sbest
The VNS heuristic begins with the generation of an initial solution s using the SweepMulti-
startHeuristic function on the wind farm instance π, as indicated in line 1. This initial solution
serves as the starting point for the exploration process and allows the heuristic to start from an
already feasible solution. This solution is saved as the best solution found so far, sbest in line
2. The heuristic then defines the starting neighbourhood index k = 1 in line 3 and a maximum
neighbourhood index kmax in line 4. The value of k determines how many perturbations are
performed to the current best solution in the shaking phase.
==PAGE:64==
6.5 Variable Neighbourhood Search
58
The main loop of the heuristic, spanning lines 5-13, is executed until the time limit is reached.
Within each iteration of this loop, the heuristic performs the following steps:
1. Shaking: Line 6, the Shake function generates a new solution s′ by exploring the k-th
neighbourhood of the current best solution sbest. In our case, k consecutive random 1-opt
moves are made using the principles from Section 6.3.1.
2. Local search: Line 7 applies a LocalSearch function to the new solution s′ until the so-
lution stops improving. In our case, the 1-opt move is used in the search. Both a first-
improvement or best-improvement scheme have been implemented and tested, and the
results are shown in the following subsection.
3. Solution update: Lines 8-11 check if the locally optimised solution s′′ from the local search
step is better than the current best solution sbest. If the cost of s′′ is less than the cost of
sbest, it becomes the new best solution, and the neighbourhood index k is reset to 1. If s′′
is not better, the heuristic increments k to move to a more distant neighbourhood in the
next iteration.
4. Neighbourhood index reset: If the neighbourhood index k exceeds the maximum allowed
kmax, checked in lines 12-13, it is reset to 1.
Finally, the heuristic returns the best solution sbest it has found in line 14. In the implementation
of VNS, it is noteworthy that the integration of the pipe sizing heuristic occurs in lines 6 and
7 of the pseudocode. This specific inclusion is what mainly differentiates our approach for the
WFPLP from a typical routing problem.
6.5.2
Tuning
A benefit of the Variable Neighbourhood Search heuristic is that it only has one parameter,
kmax, to tune.
However, in the preliminary tuning phase, we also experiment with various
modifications of the heuristic. These modifications focus on two main aspects:
1. Allow infeasible solutions: Testing allowing infeasible solutions in the shaking phase that do
not meet the velocity and pressure constraints. This approach aims to understand whether
allowing temporary infeasible solutions can potentially lead to better overall solutions in
subsequent phases of the heuristic.
2. Local search strategy: Evaluating the performance of different schemes in the local search
phase. Specifically, comparing the performance of a first-improvement scheme against a
==PAGE:65==
6.5 Variable Neighbourhood Search
59
best-improvement scheme. In the first-improvement approach, the first 1-opt move that
improves upon the current solution is accepted, whereas the best-improvement strategy
searches the entire neighbourhood and selects the best found 1-opt move.
In contrast to our approach with Simulated Annealing, where the tuning of parameters are
integrated into the final optimisation runs through the auto-tuning process, the tuning of VNS
is carried out in advance. Again, the tuning process is conducted on wind farm instance B using
the branching topology, testing combinations of different kmax with the two modifications given
above. Regarding the parameter kmax, in the shaking phase, the values kmax ∈{2, 3, 4, 5, 6} are
tested. The insights from this preliminary tuning are then used to set the parameters for the
final VNS runs for all wind farm instances.
Figure 6.8 presents the outcomes of using either a first-improvement or best-improvement scheme
with or without allowing infeasible solutions over a range of kmax values on wind farm instance
B. The first-improvement scheme, without allowing infeasible solutions, achieves the lowest costs
for all values of kmax and is lowest at kmax = 2 and kmax = 4. In particular, for both local search
strategies, disallowing infeasible solutions outperforms allowing infeasible solutions for all kmax
except kmax = 2.
Figure 6.8: Performance comparison for allowing or disallowing infeasible solutions in combi-
nation with using first-improvement or best-improvement in local search for Variable Neighbour-
hood Search using the branching topology for wind farm instance B.
Based on the findings in Figure 6.8, the first-improvement scheme without allowing infeasible
solutions is selected for the main optimisation runs. Since it is not possible to empirically assess
whether kmax = 2 or kmax = 4 is optimal from the tests, we draw inspiration from the results
from (Cazzaro, Fischetti, et al., 2020) in cable routing, where kmax = 4 is found to be optimal.
==PAGE:66==
6.5 Variable Neighbourhood Search
60
Choosing a moderate value for kmax is also reasonable, since the goal is to balance a suﬀicient
exploration of the solution space while keeping the focus on promising solutions.
6.5.3
Results
The results of the optimisation runs using VNS are presented in this section. As in the previous
section for SA, the results are divided into two parts focusing on using the branching topology
and using the string topology. Again, the metaheuristic is run for a duration of 30 minutes on
each zone in each instance.
6.5.3.1
Branching topology
Using the branching topology, the results of the optimisation runs for VNS on all wind farm
instances are reported in Table 6.6. According to the results, VNS consistently improves on the
sweep solutions by margins ranging from 3.2% to 6.2%. Unlike SA, VNS is also able to improve
on the sweep solution for the largest wind farm instance, instance I. There are no crossings in
the final layouts, and across the board, the obtained solutions have a gap of 43.1% to 50.9% to
the calculated lower bounds.
Instance
UB (M€)
LB (M€)
Sweep (M€)
VNS (M€)
VNS impv. (%)
Sweep gap (%)
Crossings
A
42.4
13.2
24.2
23.2
4.1
43.1
0
B
107.0
33.4
64.2
61.4
4.4
45.6
0
C
102.0
31.9
64.6
60.8
5.9
47.5
0
D
176.8
55.2
104.8
101.3
3.3
45.5
0
E
147.2
46.0
87.7
84.3
3.9
45.4
0
F
173.0
54.1
112.4
106.9
4.9
49.4
0
G
138.5
43.3
88.4
82.9
6.2
47.8
0
H
205.9
64.4
127.9
122.3
4.4
47.3
0
I
329.7
103.0
220.8
209.6
5.1
50.9
0
J
239.0
74.7
144.6
140.0
3.2
46.6
0
Total
1661.5
519.2
1039.6
992.7
0
Table 6.6: Results of Variable Neighbourhood Search using the branching topology.
Displayed in Figure 6.9 is the pipeline layout for wind farm instance B, as determined by VNS
using the branching topology. Similarly to the layout generated by SA, there is a notable increase
in the usage of the smallest pipes due to a higher number of branches compared to the sweep
solution. The layout solutions for VNS and SA share similarities, however, the construction of
the layout around the bottom-left manifold is considerably different, due to fewer connections
to the manifold. The VNS layout solutions for all instances using the branching topology can
be found in Appendix E.
==PAGE:67==
6.5 Variable Neighbourhood Search
61
Figure 6.9: Solution obtained by Variable Neighbourhood Search on instance B for the branch-
ing topology.
6.5.3.2
String topology
The results of VNS using the string topology are reported in Table 6.7 below. Again, larger
improvements from the sweep solutions to the VNS solutions are seen using the string topology
compared to using the branching topology. The layout solutions improve with 9.4% to 35.0%.
The solutions of the VNS heuristic for instances D, H, I, and J contain crossings, similar to
those observed in the SA solutions for the same instances. This recurring pattern could suggest
that our neighbourhood search strategy does not effectively address or resolve crossings. The
instances containing crossings are also some of the largest wind farms in our data set. The size
of these layouts likely contribute to the diﬀiculty in completely eliminating crossings.
Instance
UB (M€)
LB (M€)
Sweep (M€)
VNS (M€)
VNS impv. (%)
Sweep gap (%)
Crossings
A
52.1
16.3
36.9
24.0
35.0
32.1
0
B
126.9
39.7
89.4
70.5
21.1
43.7
0
C
117.7
36.8
90.6
69.9
22.8
47.4
0
D
198.3
62.0
166.7
131.2
21.3
52.7
1
E
173.9
54.4
127.6
93.8
26.5
42.0
0
F
200.4
62.6
149.3
123.4
17.3
49.3
0
G
160.2
50.1
144.6
101.3
29.9
50.5
0
H
244.0
76.2
186.0
159.8
14.1
52.3
2
I
379.5
118.6
292.5
264.9
9.4
55.2
3
J
265.1
82.8
198.6
172.6
13.1
52.0
1
Total
1918.1
599.5
1482.2
1211.4
7
Table 6.7: Results of Variable Neighbourhood Search using the string topology.
==PAGE:68==
6.6 Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
62
Figure 6.10 shows the layout generated by VNS using the string topology for wind farm instance
B. As seen for SA, the resulting string layout of VNS exhibits great improvements from the
previously shown sweep solution in Figure 6.2. Again, the improvements results in an increase
in the number of connections to the manifold increasing from 5 to 8 at the top-right manifold
and from 4 to 9 at the bottom-left manifold compared to the initial sweep solution. For all
string pipeline layouts generated by VNS, the reader is referred to Appendix F.
Figure 6.10: Solution obtained by Variable Neigbourhood Search on wind farm instance B
using the string topology.
6.6
Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
In this section, we present the implementation of the exact model designed to solve the WFPLP
by adjusting the OWFCR model seen in Section 4.4. This section concludes with a presentation
of the results obtained by the exact model on the wind farm instances.
6.6.1
Implementation
Constructing an exact model for the WFPLP proves quite complex due to the non-linearity of the
pressure and velocity calculations needed for selecting pipes. This complexity has necessitated
a creative approach to simplify the WFPLP and integrate constraints that give reasonably
accurate results. Our approach is grounded in insights from Section 4.1.2.3 on limiting factors,
where it was found that the velocity becomes the limiting factor for the pipe selection, when
the pressure in the network is low (e.g., 20 bar). Using this insight, only the velocity constraint
==PAGE:69==
6.6 Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
63
needs to be considered, as the pressure constraint is exceeded at higher pressures. This allows
us to eliminate a large part of the complexity. From the velocity calculation, the maximum
mass flow rate for each pipe can be computed, ensuring that the velocity (and ultimately the
pressure) remain within the acceptable limits of Vmax and Pmax.
Using this simplification to calculate fixed pipe capacities, the basic OWFCR model from (Fis-
chetti and Pisinger, 2018a) can be used with just a few modifications.
These modifications
mainly involve the addition of constraints for a maximum number of pipes Ct that can enter a
turbine, and the way the maximum edge capacity zk is pre-calculated. Other differences from
the OWFCR model to the WFPLP model are merely notational. These include considering
a selection of pipes k ∈K instead of cables and denoting the partitioning of nodes V in our
network G = (V, E) as (VM, VT ), where VT contains nodes corresponding to turbines and VM
contains nodes corresponding to manifolds.
Our constructed exact model for the WFPLP takes the input parameters presented in Section
5.3, except for the large penalties M1, M2, and M3, as these are modelled using hard constraints.
The decision variables for the WFPLP model are similar to those of the OWFCR model and
are as follows:
• xk
i,j: binary variable, being 1 if edge (i, j) is built of pipe type k, otherwise 0.
• yi,j: binary variable, being 1 if edge (i, j) is built, otherwise 0.
• fi,j: float variable, representing the mass flow rate in edge (i, j).
Using these decision variables, the adjusted formulation is almost identical to the OWFCR
model. Therefore, we only highlight the new and modified constraints in the following, to avoid
redundancy with the OWFCR presentation in Section 4.4.
!
i∈V :i̸=h
yi,h ≤Ct,
h ∈VT
(6.3)
!
k∈K
zk · xk
i,j ≥fi,j,
(i, j) ∈E
(6.4)
In the MILP model constraints (6.3) are introduced on the maximum number of pipes Ct that
can enter a turbine. The chosen value for Ct changes when differentiating between the two
typologies: strings (Ct = 1) and branching (Ct = 3).
Constraints (6.4) ensure that the mass flow in a built edge of pipe type k, does not exceed the
mass flow capacity zk of that pipe. Ideally, we would choose the maximum mass flow rate zk
==PAGE:70==
6.6 Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
64
of each pipe k, ensuring that neither pressure nor velocity exceeds Pmax and Vmax, respectively.
However, calculating the maximum mass flow rate solely from the velocity is reasonable when
the pressure in the network is not too large, as velocity becomes the limiting factor. By isolating
the mass flow H in the formula for velocity in eq. (4.4), the maximum mass flow rate zk [kg
/h] in a pipe of type k with diameter dk [m] can be calculated from a maximum velocity Vmax
[m/s] as follows:
zk = Vmax · π
"dk
2
#2
· (24 · 3600) · ρ
(6.5)
The calculation depends on the density ρ [kg / m3] determined from the flow temperature Tf
and the pressure at the pipe segment entering the turbine. Using a fixed moderate pressure
throughout the network results in velocity calculations, that tend to be higher than the actual
values. Therefore, with this conservative estimation of the velocity, it is often found viable to
select smaller pipes, particularly the outermost ones, where the pressure is highest. Therefore,
after solving the MILP model, the pipe sizing heuristic is applied on the solutions.
The exact model runs until the specified time limit is reached. If it is unable to find the fixed
pressure optimal solution within this time frame, the best-found solution is returned. In case
any crossings are identified in the obtained solution, the model is rerun with the additional
non-crossing constraint outlined in Section 4.4.
The MILP solutions are significantly influenced by the chosen pressure level across the network.
Therefore, while the model produces optimal solutions based on the given fixed pressure level,
the actual pressure varies throughout the network in reality. This variance results in solutions
that may not be optimal in an absolute sense, but are reasonably good. In the following, p-
optimal is written to indicate that it is only optimal from a fixed pressure perspective, and not
necessarily when considering the actual pressure in the network.
6.6.2
Results
The results of the optimisation of the WFPLP using the implemented MILP model are presented
in this section. As for the metaheuristics, the results are divided into two parts, focusing on the
string and branching topologies, respectively. The exact model has also been run for each zone
in each instance, starting with an initial running time of 30 minutes. For some of the zones,
no feasible solutions were found within the time limit. Therefore, to obtain a feasible solution,
these instances have been run for a longer duration of time, indicated by star symbols (no star
= 30 minutes, * = 2 hours, ** = 6 hours) in the tables.
==PAGE:71==
6.6 Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
65
6.6.2.1
Branching topology
The results of running the MILP model on each instance using the branching topology can be
seen in Table 6.8. Within the time limit, the model was able to find the p-optimal solution
(denoted O) for six of the zones in the instances, while 10 of the zones terminated on the time
criterion (denoted T). The model was unable to find feasible solutions for the largest zone, zone
1 in instance I, even within the increased time limit.
While the heuristic methods SA and
VNS using the branching topology showed no crossings, the MILP model finds a layout solution
with two crossings for wind farm instance H zone 1. An advantage of the MILP model is that
crossings can be removed through the non-crossing constraint, by adding the new crossings and
rerunning the model. However, due to limitations in computational resources, each optimisation
run for a zone is limited to a maximum of four attempts, resulting in a cap of 24 hours for the
extended running times of 6 hours each.
Instance
Term.
LB (M€)
MILP(M€)
Sizing (M€)
MILP gap (%)
Sizing impv. (%)
Crossings
A
O, O
28.8
28.8
23.3
0.0
19.1
0
B
T
69.1
76.8
63.8
10.0
16.9
0
C
T, T
71.4
76.1
61.7
6.2
18.9
0
D
T
109.2
125.0
102.9
12.6
17.7
0
E
O, T, T
95.6
102.3
84.1
6.5
17.8
0
F
T**, O
123.9
133.8
110.3
7.4
17.6
0
G
T
92.8
105.6
87.3
12.1
17.3
0
H
T**, O
138.2
151.6
140.7
8.8
7.2
2
I
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
J
T, T, O
155.8
173.7
143.1
10.3
17.6
0
Total
884.8
973.7
817.2
2
Table 6.8: Results of the MILP model using the branching topology. The termination criterion
is given for each zone, finding the p-optimal solution is denoted O, while termination due to
reaching the time limit is denoted T. Longer running times are used in zones with star symbols
(* = 2 hours, ** = 6 hours). A dash (-) indicates that no feasible solutions were found within
the extended time limit.
The solutions found using the MILP model all fall within a 12.6 % gap to the lower bound found
by the Gurobi optimiser. From the obtained solutions, improved pipe choices from applying our
pipe sizing heuristic leads to cost savings ranging from 7.2% to 19.1% in all wind farm instances.
These substantial savings are attributed to the high velocity in the pipe segments, resulting
from the low fixed pressure used throughout the network. Calculating the actual pressure at
each pipe segment enables the selection of smaller pipes, especially towards the leaves of the tree
components. This is evident when examining changes in pipe sizes of the MILP solution before
and after applying the pipe sizing heuristic. Figure 6.11a shows the MILP model solution for
wind farm instance B before, while Figure 6.11b shows the pipe sizes after applying the pipe
sizing heuristic. Note that the pipe connections are identical, and the heuristic focuses solely
==PAGE:72==
6.6 Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
66
on adjusting the pipe sizes. Without examining the exact differences between Figure 6.11a and
6.11b, it is clear from a glance that smaller pipe sizes can be used for many of the outermost
pipe segments and branches, indicated by the blue colour.
(a) MILP layout.
(b) MILP layout after applying pipe sizing.
Figure 6.11: Layout solutions for the MILP model using the branching topology for wind farm
instance B.
Similar to the layout generated by the sweep multistart heuristic, the MILP solution layout
contains larger pipes for certain segments at the end of a component connected to the top-right
manifold, after applying the pipe sizing heuristic. This behaviour of the pipe sizing heuristic
is less favourable, given that the larger pipes in these locations are used to counteract pressure
increases rather than accommodate increased hydrogen flow.
Asides from this observation,
the solution produced by the MILP model in wind farm instance B has a higher number of
components connected to the top-right manifold compared to the sweep, SA, and VNS solutions,
primarily due to the limitations of the fixed pressure assumption. As a consequence of this, the
use of smaller pipes near the manifold becomes feasible, and interestingly, the largest pipe
remains unused. The MILP model solutions using the branching topology after applying the
pipe sizing heuristic can be found in Appendix G for the remaining instances.
6.6.2.2
String topology
The results of the MILP model using the string topology are presented in Table 6.9.
The
optimisation of the string topology proves to be more challenging, with p-optimal solutions
achieved for 4 of the zones in the wind farm instances, while 13 zones are terminated based on
the time criterion. Similarly to using the branching topology, finding feasible solutions for zone
1 in instance I within the increased time limit was not possible.
The solutions obtained from optimising the sweep multistart heuristic with either SA or VNS
using the string topology, included crossings in the layout for four of the larger wind farm
==PAGE:73==
6.6 Mixed Integer Linear Programming model
67
instances. However, using non-crossing constraints for the MILP model mitigated crossings for
three of the wind farm instances. Similarly to the branching topology, zone 1 in instance H still
has crossings that our computational limitations prevent from being removed.
Examining the results, the gap to the lower bound has expanded to being within 18.5% com-
pared to using the branching topology, reflecting the increased diﬀiculty of the string topology.
Additionally, applying the pipe sizing heuristic leads to an improvement by a range of 7.3% to
18.4%.
Instance
Term.
LB (M€)
MILP (M€)
Sizing (M€)
MILP gap (%)
Sizing imp. (%)
Crossings
A
O, O
29.4
29.4
24.0
0.0
18.4
0
B
T
68.0
82.7
69.4
17.8
16.1
0
C
T, T
72.0
80.8
67.1
10.9
17.0
0
D
T*
111.3
136.5
111.6
18.5
18.2
0
E
O, T, T
95.6
112.3
92.5
14.9
17.6
0
F
T*, T
124.0
143.9
118.0
13.8
18.0
0
G
T**
96.9
111.7
91.6
13.2
18.0
0
H
T**, T
138.6
165.2
153.1
16.1
7.3
2
I
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
J
T**, T, O
160.6
190.4
158.2
15.7
16.9
0
Total
896.4
1052.9
885.5
2
Table 6.9: Results of the MILP model using the string topology. The termination criterion
is given for each zone, finding the p-optimal solution is denoted O, while termination due to
reaching the time limit is denoted T. Longer running times are used in zones with star symbols
(* = 2 hours, ** = 6 hours). A dash (-) indicates that no feasible solutions were found within
the extended time limit.
In the MILP string layout for wind farm instance B shown in Figure 6.12a, the turbines seem
to be effectively interconnected to nearby turbines, following the natural lines of their position.
Similarly to using the branching topology, a larger number of connections to the manifolds is
observed, and the limit of Cm = 10 is met at the top-right manifold.
(a) MILP layout.
(b) MILP layout after applying pipe sizing.
Figure 6.12: Layout solutions for the MILP model using the string topology for wind farm
instance B.
==PAGE:74==
6.7 Comparison
68
Applying the pipe sizing heuristic on the MILP solutions, results in smaller pipes for a large part
of the network. This is particularly noticeable when comparing the MILP solution in Figure
6.12a for wind farm instance B with the pipe-optimised solution in Figure 6.12b. The string
solution found after applying the pipe sizing heuristic shares similarities to the branching pipe
choices, notably in terms of the less favourable use of larger pipes towards the end of one of the
components and the tendency of not using the largest pipe. For the remaining string pipeline
layouts found using the MILP model, the reader is referred to Appendix H.
6.7
Comparison
This section is dedicated to a comparison of the various solution methods used to solve and
optimise the WFPLP throughout this thesis. The results of our metaheuristics and exact model
are compared for all of the wind farm instances. Furthermore, the cost implications of choosing
to use the branching topology versus the string topology are evaluated.
When examining the results of the optimisation methods using the branching topology presented
in Table 6.10, it is evident that both the metaheuristics and the exact model successfully improve
on the baseline sweep layout solutions. Notably, both metaheuristics, VNS and SA, consistently
outperform the MILP model across all wind farm instances. Generally, it can be seen that,
SA is favourable in small wind farm instances, where VNS is advantageous in larger wind farm
instances.
Across all wind farm instances, VNS reaches the lowest total cost of 992.7 M€
compared to SA of 1004.9 M€. This substantial difference is mainly attributed to VNS being
able to improve upon wind farm instance I, as the difference in performance among the other
wind farm instances is less preeminent. VNS finds the lowest cost layouts in five wind farm
instances, while SA achieves the lowest cost layouts in four wind farm instances. Both SA and
VNS find the same solution for wind farm instance A.
Instance
Sweep (M€)
SA (M€)
VNS (M€)
MILP w. Sizing (M€)
A
24.2
23.2
23.2
23.3
B
64.2
62.0
61.4
63.8
C
64.6
60.4
60.8
61.7
D
104.8
100.0
101.3
102.9
E
87.7
82.7
84.3
84.1
F
112.4
107.0
106.9
110.3
G
88.4
85.5
82.9
87.3
H
127.9
122.1
122.3
140.7
I
220.8
220.8
209.6
-
J
144.6
141.2
140.0
143.1
Total
1039.6
1004.9
992.7
*817.2
Total excl. I
818.8
784.1
783.1
817.2
Table 6.10: Results of optimisation methods on all wind farm instances using the branching
topology. *note that wind farm instance I is not included in the total for MILP with pipe sizing.
==PAGE:75==
6.7 Comparison
69
In light of the results for VNS and SA, it is challenging to declare one method as superior to the
other. The performance of both methods is likely influenced by randomness in their approaches,
specifically the random moves in SA and the shaking mechanisms in VNS. Furthermore, the
comparatively poor performance of the MILP model can be explained by several factors. Firstly,
the use of a lower manifold pressure in the MILP model can result in sub-optimal routing of
the pipeline layout. Additionally, the diﬀiculty of solving the WFPLP using exact methods is
reflected in the results, as the MILP model is unable to reach p-optimal solution within the time
limit for most wind farm instances.
Moving to the results of the optimisation methods using the string topology, Table 6.11 shows
that the metaheuristics and the exact model again improve upon the layouts found using the
baseline sweep heuristic. Contrary to using the branching topology, the MILP model outper-
forms both VNS and SA across most instances. For the smallest wind farm instance, instance
A, all methods converge to the same solution cost. However, the MILP model achieves the
lowest cost layouts for the remaining wind farm instances, with the exception of the largest
wind farm instance, instance I, where it failed to find a feasible solution within the time limit.
When comparing the results of the metaheuristics against each other, VNS outperforms SA in
all wind instances except instances B and G. Generally, when examining the optimised string
layouts, the difference between the number of turbines in the string component with the most
and the least turbines was quite large, which makes the exploration of more balanced layouts
an interesting extension.
Instance
Sweep (M€)
SA (M€)
VNS (M€)
MILP w. Sizing (M€)
A
36.9
24.0
24.0
24.0
B
89.4
69.8
70.5
69.4
C
90.6
73.1
69.9
67.1
D
166.7
132.2
131.2
111.6
E
127.6
100.9
93.8
92.5
F
149.3
140.4
123.4
118.0
G
144.6
100.6
101.3
91.6
H
186.0
160.0
159.8
153.1
I
292.5
271.1
264.9
-
J
198.6
176.8
172.6
158.2
Total
1482.2
1248.9
1211.4
*885.5
Total excl. I
1189.7
977.8
946.5
885.5
Table 6.11: Results of optimisation methods on all instances using the string topology. *note
that wind farm instance I is not included in the total for MILP with pipe sizing.
The performance of the exact model compared to the metaheuristics using the string topol-
ogy can suggest a couple of important considerations. Firstly, the neighbourhood exploration
strategy used in VNS and SA could be less suited to the nature of using the string topology.
Secondly, the initial solutions provided by the sweep multistart heuristic are worse using the
==PAGE:76==
6.7 Comparison
70
string topology than using the branching topology. This difference in the starting solution could
lead to a disadvantage for the metaheuristics in the string topology.
In concluding our comparative analysis, the focus is on the cost differences between the best
solutions found using the branching and string topologies. As seen in Table 6.12, most string
topology layouts are approximately 10% to 13% more expensive than their branching counter-
parts. The exceptions include wind farm instance A, where the cost difference is just 3.5%, and
instances H and I where the string layouts are 25.4% and 26.4% more expensive. For wind
farm instance H, it is highlighted that this could be attributed to the MILP solution containing
crossings, and for instance I, this could be due to the MILP model not finding a feasible string
solution. The consistent cost savings in favour of using the branching topologies are in line with
our expectations, as the less restrictive nature of these layouts typically allows for a shorter
routing.
Instance
Best branching (M€)
Best strings (M€)
Delta (M€)
Difference (%)
A
23.2
24.0
0.8
3.5
B
61.4
69.4
8.0
13.0
C
60.4
67.1
6.7
11.1
D
100.0
111.6
11.6
11.6
E
82.7
92.5
9.8
11.9
F
106.9
118.0
11.1
10.4
G
82.9
91.6
8.7
10.5
H
122.1
153.1
31.0
25.4
I
209.6
264.9
55.3
26.4
J
140.0
158.2
18.2
13.0
Total
989.2
1150.4
161.2
Table 6.12: Comparison of best results using branching and string topologies for all wind farm
instances.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7
What-if Experiments
In the preceding chapters, we analysed the core aspects of the WFPLP, comparing different
optimisation methods on the baseline scenario.
Building upon this foundation, this chapter
investigates a series of extensions and modifications to the pipeline layout problem.
These
experiments are designed to test the robustness of our existing solutions and to explore the
implications of introducing new variables and constraints into the problem.
The first experiment focuses on including the export pipes that lead from the offshore wind farm
to shore in the optimisation framework. Specifically, it aims to shed light on the consequences of
choosing different sizes for export pipes on the layout of inter-array pipes. Next, the impact of
incorporating installation costs for the array pipes is examined. This experiment is important for
understanding the implications on the pipeline layout when varying the cost of installation. The
third experiment is on the concept of balanced layouts, where the effects of ensuring that the tree
components of turbines connected to a manifold are approximately equal in size are investigated.
Finally, the scenario of having limited pipe types available is explored. By constraining the
options to 2 and 3 pipe types, this experiment sheds light on the implications of such limitations
on the overall layout solutions.
7.1
Inclusion of export pipeline
In this section of the thesis, we examine the inclusion of the export pipe in our pipeline layout
optimisation framework. Our main objective is to establish a framework that includes the export
pipe in the optimization process and to identify the key challenges involved in this integration.
A central aspect of this experiment revolves around the challenges related to the high gas velocity
within the export pipe, especially when the flow of hydrogen is transported from a large number
of turbines to shore. Here, special attention is paid to the velocity calculations for the export
pipe. We also explore the potential of increasing the outlet pressure at shore as a means of
managing and reducing the velocity within the export pipe. Moreover, our framework is applied
to a specific wind farm instance to demonstrate its practical implications.
By varying the
diameters of the export pipes, an analysis of how these variations influence both the cost and
the velocity distribution within the system is presented.
==PAGE:78==
7.1 Inclusion of export pipeline
72
7.1.1
Challenges with gas velocity
Building on the consideration from above, we turn to the specific types of export pipes available
for our study. These pipes were presented in Section 5.2 and range in diameter from 10 to 20
inches. It is necessary to have larger diameters for the export pipe than for the inter-array pipes
because they accommodate a substantially larger flow of hydrogen.
To illustrate the challenges of gas velocity in the export pipe, Table 7.1 below presents the
resulting inlet pressures at the manifold Pm along with the velocities in the export pipe from
the manifold to the shore Vm,s for each available pipe diameter. These calculations are computed
for a scenario of 50 turbines connected to a single manifold, which is a reasonable representative
of the analysed wind farm instances used in this thesis. The table also presents the results for
distances of 25, 50 and 100 kilometres to the shore and with different levels of outlet pressure
10, 15 or 20 bar at the shore Ps. The table cells are coloured green if Pm and Vm,s do not exceed
the constraints of 40 bar and 25 m/s respectively.
Pm (bar)
Vm,s (m/s)
Export diameters
10
12
14
16
18
20
10
12
14
16
18
20
Ps
Dist. to Shore
25 km
40.9
26.7
19.5
15.5
13.3
12.1
114.0
79.2
58.2
44.5
35.2
28.5
50 km
56.9
36.5
25.6
19.5
16.0
13.8
114.0
79.2
58.2
44.5
35.2
28.5
10
100 km
79.9
50.6
34.9
25.8
20.3
16.8
114.0
79.2
58.2
44.5
35.2
28.5
25 km
42.4
29.0
22.5
19.1
17.4
16.5
76.2
52.9
38.9
29.8
23.5
19.1
50 km
58.1
38.2
28.0
22.5
19.5
17.8
76.2
52.9
38.9
29.8
23.5
19.1
15
100 km
80.8
51.9
36.7
28.1
23.2
20.2
76.2
52.9
38.9
29.8
23.5
19.1
25 km
44.5
31.9
26.1
23.3
21.9
21.1
57.4
39.8
29.3
22.4
17.7
14.3
50 km
59.7
40.5
31.0
26.2
23.6
22.2
57.4
39.8
29.3
22.4
17.7
14.3
20
100 km
82.0
53.6
39.0
31.1
26.7
24.1
57.4
39.8
29.3
22.4
17.7
14.3
Table 7.1:
Manifold pressure Pm and gas velocity in export pipe Vm,s for different shore
pressures, export pipe diameters and distances to shore. The flow rate is equal to 50 turbines.
A notable insight from the table is the high velocity in the export pipes, often exceeding the 25
m/s constraint. According to Vattenfall, an outlet pressure at shore of 10 bar is a reasonable
assumption. For this pressure, even the largest 20-inch export pipe yields a velocity of 28.5 m/s.
When investigating higher pressures on the shore, only the two largest export pipes become
viable at a shore pressure of 15 bars, while the three largest export pipes are feasible at 20
bars. For reference, a paper on the Dutch gas transport system states that the system operates
at pressures between 8 bar and 41 bar (Gasunie Transport Services B.V., 2014). These high
velocities are partly a result of the way the calculations are made. Throughout this thesis, the
velocity is calculated based on the outlet pressure of a pipe segment. However, this approach can
be viewed as conservative, as the velocity of gas is higher at lower pressures. Therefore, since
the average pressure through the pipe is greater than the outlet pressure, the average velocity
==PAGE:79==
7.1 Inclusion of export pipeline
73
within the pipe does not equal the calculated velocity from the outlet pressure alone. Another
observation from the table is that many of the export pipes are feasible when considering only
the pressure constraint, with feasible manifold pressures ranging from 12 to 39 bar. In this
context, it is important to consider the findings of Section 5.3, where it was shown how the
value of Pm impacts the cost of the array pipeline layout.
In a real-world context, the adherence to a 25 m/s velocity limit within the export pipe depends
on its technical specifications. It may either be viewed as a rigid, absolute constraint, not to
be exceeded at any point along the pipe, or as a more flexible average constraint, where the
average velocity within the pipe should not exceed this threshold. If considered as an average,
the velocity could potentially be calculated based on the pipe’s average pressure, resulting in
a lower estimate. This distinction becomes particularly relevant for export pipes due to their
length and the significant pressure difference between inlet and outlet.
Depending on the technical specifications of the export pipe and the interpretation of the velocity
calculation, we suggest different approaches to address the challenges regarding the gas velocity.
• Strict constraint scenario: If 25 m/s is a non-negotiable limit, wind farm developers might
need to install multiple export pipes or use even larger pipes for connecting a larger number
of turbines to shore.
• Flexible constraint scenario: If the velocity limit can be viewed as an average, the velocity
can be calculated based on the pipe’s average pressure. Alternatively, it might be feasible
to employ a higher outlet pressure in the export pipe, coupled with subsequent depressuri-
sation technologies, to ensure compatibility with the existing gas grid infrastructure.
The inclusion of the export pipe in the pipeline layout optimisation shows to be a complex and
challenging task from a technical perspective when it comes to the gas velocity. This complexity
is mainly due to the intricacies of gas pipeline hydraulics, which become increasingly challenging
when considering longer pipe segments. Therefore, the extended length of export pipes compared
to the inter-array pipes amplifies the dynamic factors of pressure and velocity variations.
7.1.2
Cost analysis
The main objective of the WFPLP is the cost optimisation of the inter-array pipeline layout. This
objective is also essential when incorporating the export pipe into the system, as it introduces
additional cost to the scope. The cost analysis of the inclusion of the export pipe therefore
==PAGE:80==
7.1 Inclusion of export pipeline
74
requires an evaluation of its impact on the overall cost, when looking at both the inter-array
pipes and export pipe cost.
In this section, the framework previously described is applied to a specific wind farm instance
to analyse the cost implications. This analysis includes varying the diameters of the export
pipes and examining their effects on the cost distribution between the inter-array and export
pipes. Additionally, the gas velocity in the export pipe both for the strict and flexible constraint
scenario is considered. This focus is to quantify how changes in export pipe diameters influence
the cost of the inter-array pipeline layout and the export pipe itself.
The analysis focuses on wind farm instance A, zone 1, which is selected for its relatively small size,
with only 27 turbines connected to a single manifold. This instance enables an analysis with less
velocity related challenges. Furthermore, the simplicity of having a single export cable supports
a clear understanding of the system’s dynamics, as multiple manifolds with different export
cables would result in a range of manifold pressures and export velocities, complicating the
analysis. For this specific case study, the wind farm is situated 50 km from the shore connection
point. To mitigate gas velocity challenges, the outlet pressure at shore has been increased from
10 bar to 15 bar. This adjustment is made based on the assumption that some depressurising
technology can be applied at shore to be compatible with the assumed grid pressure of 10 bar.
For the case study, the applied methodology involves testing each of the available export pipe
diameters to determine the resulting manifold pressure. Our sweep multistart heuristic, which
is known from the previous chapters to produce good solutions eﬀiciently, is used to create the
inter-array pipeline layout for each manifold pressure. Lastly, the total cost, comprising both
the inter-array pipeline layout and 50 km of export pipe, is computed. The resulting cost and
velocity distribution can be seen below in Figure 7.1. The chart visualises the cost split between
inter-array and export pipes for each of the available export pipe diameters, as represented by
the bars. Additionally, on a secondary y-axis, the gas velocity within the export pipe is included,
illustrated by two lines. The red line represents what can be termed the strict constraint scenario,
where the gas velocity is calculated using the shore outlet pressure of 15 bars. In contrast, the
orange line indicates the flexible constraint scenario, where the velocity calculation uses the
average pressure within the export pipe, calculated as the mean of the outlet pressure and the
manifold pressure.
==PAGE:81==
7.1 Inclusion of export pipeline
75
Figure 7.1: Cost and velocity distribution of export pipe diameter case study on wind farm
instance A, zone 1. Outlet pressure at shore is 15 bar.
An important observation from the chart is that the total cost is lowest with the second smallest
export pipe of 12 inches.
This outcome is attributed to a more favourable pressure at the
manifold, leading to a cheaper inter-array pipeline layout. The smallest export pipe of 10 inches
results in a manifold pressure of 34 bar, which is unreasonably high for an optimal array pipeline
layout, as outlined in Section 5.3. In contrast, a 12-inch export pipe results in a manifold pressure
of 24 bar, close to the identified optimal pressure of 26 bar. While the two smallest export pipes
lead to the cheapest solutions, they are not feasible in the strict constraint scenario, as illustrated
by the red line in Figure 7.1. However, if the calculation can consider the average pressure, then
the 12-inch export pipe becomes a viable option, as shown by the orange line.
Concluding the section on the inclusion of the export pipe, it is clear introducing this component
into the WFPLP adds another layer of complexity, particularly due to the considerations around
gas pipeline hydraulic over longer distances. The analysis has demonstrated that the choice of
export pipe diameter is an important factor that influences both the cost and the feasibility
of the pipeline system. Smaller diameters, while cost-effective, result in higher velocities, that
often violate the velocity constraint of 25 m/s. In our case study, the 12-inch pipe aligns closely
with the optimal manifold pressure and remains feasible under the flexible constraint scenario.
However, as indicated in Table 7.1, larger wind farm instances with more turbines connected to
each manifold increases the velocity challenges. For such scenarios, the wind farm developers
must consider solutions to mitigate the issues and ensure the system’s technical and economic
viability.
==PAGE:82==
7.2 Inclusion of installation costs
76
7.2
Inclusion of installation costs
In this section of our what-if experiments, we explore the impact of including installation costs
into the pipeline layout optimisation. The aim is to understand how different magnitudes of
installation costs might influence the resulting layouts. The experiment is carried out using the
branching topology and the optimisation is performed using Variable Neighbourhood Search
heuristic with the exact same implementation as described in Section 6.5.
To the best of our knowledge, there are currently no publicly available cost estimates for instal-
lation costs of inter-array pipelines at offshore wind farms. However, according to experts at
Vattenfall, the installation costs can be assumed to be similar to those of installing electrical
cables. In (Gonzalez-Rodriguez, 2017), a range of installation costs for inter-array cables are
quoted in 2016 prices, ranging from €59/m to €331/m. For this analysis, an average of these
figures has been calculated and adjusted to 2023 prices to align with the pipe procurement costs
provided by Vattenfall, resulting in an adjusted cost of €170/m in end-of-year 2023 terms. In
addition to projecting the prices from 2016 to 2023, two additional scenarios have been included,
where the installation cost is two and three times larger than the base value, respectively, to
test the sensitivity of the results.
When including the installation cost in the optimisation, the natural expectation is that there
will be a preference towards shorter layouts, even if it means selecting larger pipes for some pipe
segments. Our findings in Table 7.2 support this expectation. The table compares the total
distance of the inter-array pipelines from our baseline scenario, which does not factor in installa-
tion costs, with the three different scenarios where installation costs are €170/m, €340/m, and
€510/m, respectively. The results show that when the installation cost increases, the distance
of the resulting pipeline layout generally decreases. Here, it is important to acknowledge that
using a metaheuristic, such as VNS for the optimisation, introduces an element of uncertainty
in the results, since it does not necessarily find the optimal solution. This could explain the
deviations from the expected trend for certain wind farm instances. Although the trend towards
shorter layouts is evident, the savings in total pipeline distance between the various installations
cost scenarios only range between 1.9% to 6.8% when including an instillation cost of €170/m.
==PAGE:83==
7.2 Inclusion of installation costs
77
Installation €0/m
Installation €170/m
Installation €340/m
Installation €510/m
Instance
Dist. (km)
Dist. (km)
Diff. (%)
Dist. (km)
Diff. (%)
Dist. (km)
Diff. (%)
A
53.3
52.3
-1.9
52.3
-1.9
51.2
-3.9
B
138.1
130.9
-5.2
132.3
-4.2
130.8
-5.3
C
135.4
128.7
-4.9
127.9
-5.5
125.9
-7.0
D
235.3
219.3
-6.8
216.1
-8.2
215.0
-8.6
E
193.8
183.0
-5.6
179.4
-7.4
177.6
-8.4
F
221.1
214.4
-3.0
213.8
-3.3
213.0
-3.7
G
173.5
169.9
-2.1
168.9
-2.7
172.2
-0.7
H
263.1
256.6
-2.5
253.4
-3.7
253.2
-3.8
I
428.8
408.0
-4.9
405.0
-5.6
402.5
-6.1
J
312.9
294.7
-5.8
287.7
-8.1
286.7
-8.4
Total
2155.3
2057.8
2036.8
2028.1
Table 7.2: Total pipeline distance for scenarios of different magnitudes of installation cost.
To illustrate how installation costs affect the pipeline layouts, Figure 7.2 shows the resulting
configurations for wind farm instance B under the different installation cost scenarios.
At
first glance, the changes may not be immediately apparent, but there is a reduction in branch
connections in scenarios with installation costs compared to the baseline without installation
cost. Consequently, there are also fewer segments using the smallest 2-inch pipes in layouts
where installation costs are considered.
(a) Installation cost €0/m
(b) Installation cost €170/m
(c) Installation cost €340/m
(d) Installation cost €510/m
Figure 7.2: Comparison of pipeline layouts with different installation costs.
==PAGE:84==
7.3 Balanced layout configurations
78
To assess the cost implications of changes in pipeline layout, Table 7.3 presents a breakdown
of pipe and installation costs for the different scenarios and wind farm instances. Surprisingly,
including installation costs of €170/m in the optimisation yields lower pipe costs compared to
the VNS. This could be explained by the neighbourhood search in the baseline scenario, which,
without considering installation costs, may overly favour creating more branch connections as a
means to reduce pipe sizes and save costs. However, while this approach reduces pipe sizes, it
might lead the VNS heuristic into local optima with sub-optimal routings. With the inclusion
of installation costs, the optimisation weights eﬀicient routing higher, thus potentially avoiding
layouts with excessive branching. Therefore, this unexpected cost reduction might be a result
of a more balanced trade-off between pipe size and layout length.
Installation €0/m
Installation €170/m
Installation €340/m
Installation €510/m
Instance
Pipes (M€)
Pipes (M€)
Inst. (M€)
Pipes (M€)
Inst. (M€)
Pipes (M€)
Inst. (M€)
A
23.2
23.2
8.9
23.2
17.8
23.8
26.1
B
61.4
61.3
22.3
61.5
45.0
62.2
66.7
C
60.8
59.6
21.9
60.3
43.5
61.0
64.2
D
101.3
100.4
37.3
101.2
73.5
101.4
109.6
E
84.3
82.6
31.1
83.4
61.0
83.9
90.6
F
106.9
106.3
36.5
106.7
72.7
107.4
108.6
G
82.9
83.4
28.9
84.3
57.4
85.4
87.8
H
122.3
122.1
43.6
123.8
86.2
122.9
129.1
I
209.6
207.6
69.4
208.6
137.7
209.3
205.3
J
140.0
139.4
50.1
140.4
97.8
141.1
146.2
Total
992.7
985.9
350.0
993.4
692.6
998.4
1034.2
Table 7.3: Pipe and installation cost for scenarios of different magnitudes of installation cost.
In summary, the analysis of installation costs demonstrates a clear impact on the pipeline layouts.
It is evident that as installation costs increase, the optimisation process tends to favour shorter
layouts. This finding aligns with our expectations, as higher installation costs incentivise more
compact designs.
Furthermore, an intriguing observation from our study is the influence of
installation costs on the metaheuristic performance. When these costs are included, there is an
improvement in the effectiveness of the routing optimisation.
7.3
Balanced layout configurations
In this section, we explore the concept of balanced layout configurations using the string topology.
The goal of this experiment is to examine the impact balanced configurations have on the costs of
the solutions and to understand how the balanced pipeline layouts differ from the non-balanced
layouts. A layout is said to be balanced if all tree components connected to the manifold contain
the same number of turbines. In the case where the number of tree components connected to the
manifold is not a divisor of the number of turbines, a balanced layout may have tree components
==PAGE:85==
7.3 Balanced layout configurations
79
containing one additional turbine.
In general, including the balanced constraint will lead to more expensive solutions. However,
offshore wind farm developers have preferred balanced layouts for electrical wind farms (Cazzaro
and Pisinger, 2022a). This is due to the practical implications of power transformers sharing the
same design at the substation, which reduces the costs of spare components and maintenance
in the event of failure. Similarly, for hydrogen-producing wind farms, connecting fewer, similar
sized pipes with the same hydrogen flow to a manifold, could easily be conceived to share
similar practical implications compared to connecting different pipe sizes with different flows at
the manifold.
The experiment is carried out using the exact model, and our approach is inspired by the work
of (Cazzaro and Pisinger, 2022a) balancing cable routing of wind farms. The balanced layouts
are ensured by adding two additional constraints to the MILP model formulation from Section
6.6:
fi,h ≤
7Nm −1
Cm
8
· H
h ∈VM, (i, j) ∈E
(7.1)
fi,h ≥
9Nm −1
Cm
:
· H · yi,h
h ∈VM, (i, j) ∈E
(7.2)
Where (7.1) and (7.2) ensure a solution is balanced by imposing an upper and lower bound on
the allowed mass flow of the selected pipes entering the manifolds. Nm represents the number
of nodes for each manifold and is calculated as the ceil-rounded result of the total number of
nodes N divided by the number of manifolds M. This calculation assumes an equal distribution
of turbines for each manifold, which may not align with the actual turbine positions. For the
WFPLP, the number of pipe connections Cm to the manifolds cannot be calculated directly,
as it is influenced by variations in pressure and velocity over different distances in a layout.
By examining the layouts obtained in the analysis, we have estimated that small wind farm
instances often have 10 turbines in a string component connected to the manifold, while large
instances typically have 9. Using these estimates, Cm can be computed by dividing the number
of turbines for each manifold N−M
M
by the expected number of turbines in each string, that is
either 10 or 9, depending on the size of the wind farm instance.
The results of the balanced MILP model using the string topology are presented in Table 7.4.
Optimising the layouts to account for balanced strings proves to be more challenging than
solving the baseline model. p-optimal solutions were achieved for four of the zones in the wind
farm instances, while 10 zones terminate based on the time criterion. Even within the increased
time limit, the model was unable to find solutions for the four largest zones, namely zone 1 in
instances D, G, H, and I, which all have 140 or more wind turbines. This implies the increased
==PAGE:86==
7.3 Balanced layout configurations
80
diﬀiculty in adding the balance constraints to the unbalanced string topology. Additionally, as
seen for the MILP string solution for wind farm instance H in the analysis, there are 13 crossings
across three wind farm instances that could not be eliminated within four 6-hour optimisation
runs. Once again, allowing an even longer computation time could effectively address these
crossings.
Instance
Zone
Term.
LB (M€)
MILP (M€)
Sizing (M€)
MILP gap (%)
Sizing imp. (%)
Crossings
A
1
T
22.1
23.8
19.1
7.1
19.7
0
A
2
O
10.9
10.9
8.5
0.0
22.0
0
B
1
T**
76.9
89.4
72.6
14.0
18.8
0
C
1
T
48.6
56.0
47.6
13.2
15.0
0
C
2
T
28.4
30.4
25.3
6.6
16.8
0
D
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
E
1
O
7.8
7.8
6.4
0.0
17.9
0
E
2
T**
68.9
84.9
73.7
18.8
13.2
1
E
3
T
30.6
33.9
28.1
9.7
17.1
0
F
1
T**
110.9
132.8
123.4
16.5
7.1
3
F
2
O
23.6
23.6
19.1
0.0
19.1
0
G
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
H
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
H
2
T
26.5
27.9
22.9
5.0
17.9
0
I
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
J
1
T**
105.6
128.4
153.3
17.8
-19.4
9
J
2
T
49.3
57.0
46.6
13.5
18.2
0
J
3
O
20.8
20.8
16.8
0.0
19.2
0
Total
630.9
727.6
663.4
13
Table 7.4: Results of the balanced MILP model for the string topology for each zone. Finding
the p-optimal solution is denoted O, while terminating due to reaching the time limit is denoted
T. Longer running times are used in zones with star symbols (* = 2 hours, ** = 6 hours). A
dash (-) indicates that no feasible solutions were found within the extended time limit.
Table 7.5 compares the results of the balanced and unbalanced MILP solutions using the string
topology. The cost increase associated with considering balanced strings is €113.9 M across the
14 zones for which feasible layouts were obtained within the time limit. This cost increase is not
evenly distributed between wind farm instances, as the cost increase ranges from 6.5% to 68.4%.
However, the majority of the results fall within the range of 10% to 20%. Most of the unbalanced
solutions have a difference of 7 to 9 turbines in the string component when comparing the string
with the most turbines to the one with the least turbines. Introducing the balanced constraints
ensures that this difference is equalised.
==PAGE:87==
7.3 Balanced layout configurations
81
Unbalanced
Balanced
Instance
Zone
Term.
Sizing (M€)
Balance diff.
Term.
Sizing (M€)
Balance diff.
Delta (M€)
Cost inc. (%)
A
1
O
16.4
8
T
19.1
1
2.7
16.5
A
2
O
7.6
7
O
8.5
0
0.9
11.8
B
1
T
69.4
8
T**
72.6
1
3.2
4.6
C
1
T
44.7
7
T
47.6
0
2.9
6.5
C
2
T
22.4
7
T
25.3
0
2.9
12.9
D
1
T*
111.6
9
-
-
-
-
-
E
1
O
3.8
2
O
6.4
0
2.6
68.4
E
2
T
62.9
7
T**
73.7
1
10.8
17.2
E
3
T
25.8
9
T
28.1
0
2.3
8.9
F
1
T*
100.5
8
T**
123.4
1
22.9
22.8
F
2
T
17.5
8
O
19.1
1
1.6
9.1
G
1
T**
91.6
9
-
-
-
-
-
H
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
H
2
T
20.3
8
T
22.9
0
2.6
12.8
I
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
J
1
T**
100.1
8
T**
153.3
1
53.2
53.1
J
2
T
43.6
9
T
46.6
1
3.0
6.9
J
3
O
14.5
9
O
16.8
1
2.3
15.9
Total
885.5
663.4
113.9
Total ***
549.5
663.4
113.9
20.7
Table 7.5: Result comparison of the unbalanced and balanced MILP model using the string
topology for each zone. Finding the p-optimal solution is denoted O, while terminating due to
reaching the time limit is denoted T. Longer running times are used in zones with star symbols
(* = 2 hours, ** = 6 hours). A dash (-) indicates that no feasible solutions were found within the
extended time limit. The Total*** row only sums wind farm instances that are solved using both
the unbalanced and balanced layouts. The columns Balance diff. show the difference between
the number of turbines in the string components with the most and the least turbines.
The balanced layout for wind farm instance B is visualised in Figure 7.3. The resulting layout
contains fewer connections to the manifolds compared to the string MILP model layout in Figure
6.12a. This reduction is attributed to the minimised difference between the number of turbines
in each string. The balanced layouts for the remaining instances can be seen in Appendix I.
Figure 7.3:
Balanced layout solution for the MILP model using the string topology after
applying the pipe sizing heuristic for wind farm instance B.
==PAGE:88==
7.4 Limited available pipes
82
The experiment with balanced string layouts demonstrates that it is feasible to incorporate
balance constraints into the exact model for the WFPLP. However, it requires an estimate of
the number of connections to the manifolds, which unlike the cable routing problem cannot be
directly precalculated. Additionally, the cost increase associated with operating with balanced
strings depends on the specific wind farm instance being examined. For the balanced layouts to
be beneficial, the cost increase must outweigh the potential savings associated with restricting
the layout configuration.
7.4
Limited available pipes
In this section, we explore the experiment of having a limited set of pipe options when construct-
ing a pipeline layout for a wind farm. The baseline scenario assumes that all six inter-array pipes
are available to design the pipeline layout. However, this assumption may not align with real-
ity, as operating with fewer pipes might be more cost-effective, both in terms of procurement
by benefiting from quantity discounts and in installation expenses due to streamlined logistics,
reduced complexity, and maintenance. We examine the pipeline layouts obtained by restricting
the options to two and three pipe types, respectively, per wind farm instance using the branching
topology.
The experiment of limited available pipes is conducted based on the good initial solutions ob-
tained using the branching topology, from the sweep multistart heuristic.
The heuristic is
executed for each unique combination of a subset of pipes. The number of possible combina-
tions can be calculated using the binomial coeﬀicient C(n, k) =
n!
k!(n−k)!, which represents the
number of ways to choose k elements from a set of n distinct elements without regard to order.
Doing these calculations yields 15 unique pipe combinations when restricted to two pipes (k = 2)
and 20 unique pipe combinations when restricted to three pipes (k = 3). Although the number
of combinations is large, it is viewed as a simple and reasonable approach in practice due to the
computational eﬀiciency of the sweep multistart heuristic. The experiment is carried out using
the following two steps for each chosen k:
1. List distinct combinations: List the distinct ways to choose k pipes of the six available
pipe diameters.
2. Find best combination: For each distinct combination of pipes, run the sweep multistart
heuristic and save the most cost effective combination.
The results of restricting the number of pipe options available to two pipes can be seen in Table
==PAGE:89==
7.4 Limited available pipes
83
7.6. In general, it is most cost effective to choose a small-to-medium inter-array pipe diameter
of 3 or 4 inches along with a medium-to-large inter-array pipe diameter of 5, 6 or 7 inches. For
small instances, with the exception of instance C, the best combination is to use inter-array
pipes with diameters of 3 and 5 inches. For medium-sized instances, opting for a larger medium-
to-large inter-array pipe diameter gives the best combination of pipes with diameters of 3 and
6 inches. In the case of large instances, even larger pipes must be chosen, resulting in the best
combination of inter-array pipes with diameters of 4 and 7 inches.
It is evident, that the choice of pipe sizes depends on the wind farm instance size, as the pipes
must accommodate both the increased hydrogen flow and the longer distances between manifolds
and turbines. Restricting the number of pipes to two increases the cost of the sweep multistart
heuristic with 17.2% across all wind farm instances. This cost increase must offset the cost
reductions in procurement and installation expenses for the layouts to be considered preferable.
Instance
Sweep Cost (M€)
Best choice (inches)
Cost (M€)
Cost Increase (%)
A
24.2
3, 5
28.6
18.2
B
64.2
3, 5
76.3
18.8
C
64.6
3, 6
74.3
15.0
D
104.8
3, 6
123.4
17.7
E
87.7
3, 5
103.0
17.4
F
112.4
4, 6
130.0
15.7
G
88.4
3, 6
103.8
17.4
H
127.9
3, 6
148.7
16.3
I
220.8
4, 7
259.9
17.7
J
144.5
3, 6
170.5
18.0
Total
1039.6
1218.5
17.2
Table 7.6: Results of limiting the available pipes to two pipe diameters.
Table 7.7 shows the results of limiting the available pipes to three pipe diameters. Similarly to
the limitation of two pipes, specific pipe patterns are selected based on the wind farm instance
size. In instances with multiple smaller zones, such as instances A and E, the best combination
of inter-array pipes has diameters of 3, 4, and 5 inches. For the remaining small and medium-
sized instances, the best combination uses inter-array pipes with diameters of 3, 4 and 6 inches.
In larger instances, choosing pipes with diameters of 3, 5, and 7 inches gives the best results.
Allowing three pipes instead of two reduces the impact of the cost increase substantially, across
all instances solutions are on average 8.1% more expensive than the baseline sweep solution.
==PAGE:90==
7.4 Limited available pipes
84
Instance
Sweep Cost (M€)
Best choice (inches)
Cost (M€)
Cost Increase (%)
A
24.2
3, 4, 5
26.0
7.4
B
64.2
3, 4, 6
69.9
8.9
C
64.6
3, 4, 6
69.5
7.6
D
104.8
3, 4, 6
114.4
9.2
E
87.7
3, 4, 5
93.9
7.1
F
112.4
3, 4, 6
120.4
7.1
G
88.4
3, 4, 6
96.3
8.9
H
127.9
3, 5, 7
137.3
7.3
I
220.8
3, 5, 7
236.9
7.3
J
144.5
3, 4, 6
159.3
10.2
Total
1039.6
1123.9
8.1
Table 7.7: Results of limiting the available pipes to three pipe diameters.
Limiting the pipe diameters available impacts the resulting layouts. Figures 7.4a and 7.4b depict
the most cost-effective layouts for instance B using two and three pipe diameters, respectively.
Interestingly, the layouts are quite different. In the case of the two pipe limitation, each tree
component comprises fewer turbines because the largest pipe cannot accommodate the same
hydrogen flow, necessitating more connections to the manifold compared to the layout restricted
to three pipes. Additionally, under the constraint of three pipe diameters, a larger degree of
smaller branches is observed, as these can be constructed using the most cost-effective chosen
pipe diameter. However, constructing numerous smaller branches, in the two pipe limitation, is
not as favourable, as the cost reduction is less significant. This becomes more apparent when
comparing it with the best sweep solution constructed using all six array pipes presented in
Figure 6.1.
(a) Limited to two pipe diameters. Best combina-
tion is to use pipes with diameters of 3 and 5 inches.
(b) Limited to three pipe diameters. Best combi-
nation is to use pipes with diameters of 3, 4, and 5
inches.
Figure 7.4: Best pipeline layout from sweep multistart heustistic when limited to two and
three pipe diameters.
==PAGE:91==
7.4 Limited available pipes
85
Appendix J and Appendix K depict the best sweep multistart layout obtained for the remain-
ing wind farm instances, when limited to two and three pipes, respectively. Generally, in the
obtained layouts, the number of connections to the manifold is determined by the size of the
largest pipe in the set of available pipes. Similarly, the number of small branches is determined
by the cost effectiveness of the smallest available pipe.
From this experiment, it becomes evident that limiting the number of available pipe options
results in an increase in the cost of the pipeline layout. For an increase in cost to be preferable,
one must weigh the benefits of using fewer pipes. After examining the options of limiting to two
and three pipes, we find that the advantage of using the branching topology, which is to use
small pipes to create branches, is most pronounced when opting for three available pipe types.
This is also quantified in cost savings, being at or below 10% for all wind farm instances tested.
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
In this thesis, we introduced a novel approach to offshore wind farm optimisation, focusing on
hydrogen-producing wind farms instead of traditional electrical wind farms. By integrating con-
cepts from gas pipeline hydraulics with well-known optimisation methodologies for the wind farm
cable routing problem, an attempt has been made to establish a framework for analysing and
optimising the WFPLP. The analysis shows promising results, yet also contains clear limitations.
In the discussion chapter, we reflect on the implications of our findings and the effectiveness
of our proposed methodologies. We also consider the challenges encountered, the limitations of
our study, and the potential areas for future research that our work has opened up.
The discussion chapter is structured into five sections. The first section delves into the major
assumptions and areas left out of scope, which have inevitably influenced results. The second
section is a discussion specifically for the pipe sizing optimisation, and the third section addresses
the effectiveness of the chosen routing optimisation methods. In the fourth section, we discuss the
broader implications of our work, particularly when comparing pipeline layouts with electrical
cables. The final section outlines our suggestions for future research within this field.
8.1
Assumptions and scope limitations
While our analysis has been conducted to model a real-world scenario of offshore hydrogen
transport, it is important to recognise that assumptions have been made to simplify the problem
and some aspects are beyond the scope of this study. These limitations have impacted the results
and their applicability to actual hydrogen-producing wind farms.
In the context of gas pipeline hydraulics, our study simplifies the velocity and pressure drop
calculations by not considering elevation differences and assuming a constant temperature. The
selection of a constant temperature of 3◦C in our model was made somewhat arbitrarily and, in
a more realistic setting, should ideally be based on the average temperature of the North Sea or
another area of interest. However, it is worth noting that temperature only marginally affects
the calculations. Furthermore, bend restrictions are not considered, and noise and vibration
constraints are assumed to be contained within the velocity constraint of 25 m/s. Other as-
sumptions for hydrogen flow include that the electrolysers can output hydrogen at all pressures
==PAGE:93==
8.2 Pipe sizing optimisation
87
below the constraint of 40 bar. In addition, it is assumed that the manifold pressure is fixed
for all wind farm instances in our modelling. In real-world applications, this pressure may vary
from project to project, affecting the optimal pipeline layout. An individual manifold pressure
for each wind farm instance could quickly be identified using the approach from Section 5.3 by
testing a range of pressures with the sweep multistart heuristic.
The routing optimisation does not include the avoidance of obstacles, which deviates from many
real-world wind farms. Obstacles are seabed areas where pipes cannot be installed. Although our
optimisation could be adapted to account for obstacles with known methods from the literature,
our current approach does not include this.
In a broader context, our focus has been specifically on the pipeline layout optimisation of inter-
array pipelines. Therefore, we have not looked into other significant components of hydrogen-
producing wind farms.
Notably, the export pipe is only included as an experiment and is
not a core part of the WFPLP presented in this thesis. Besides this, the specific electrolyser
technology to be used has not been assessed, including how fluctuating wind conditions affect
the electrolyser performance and thus the hydrogen flow in the pipeline.
8.2
Pipe sizing optimisation
A core part of the WFPLP is the complexity of gas pipeline hydraulics, which determines the
pipe sizing and feasibility of layouts. The pipe sizing heuristic developed and implemented in
this thesis is based on the insight that, in most cases, velocity is the limiting factor in the
pipe selection. Consequently, the pressure calculation within the pipe sizing heuristic is often
a means to determine the correct velocity rather than directly determining the pipe size. The
main reason for applying this insight has been to enhance the computational eﬀiciency of the
heuristic.
In the cases where velocity is the limiting factor for all pipe segments, we proclaim that the
pipe sizing heuristic provides the optimal pipe selection. For these segments, the smallest pipes
that comply with the velocity constraint are selected, and since the pressure increase is larger in
smaller pipes and the velocity is lower at higher pressures, increasing the size of a pipe anywhere
in the layout would never be advantageous. Therefore, the optimal pipeline layout is expected
to have pipe diameters decreasing from the manifold towards the outermost turbines. However,
as seen throughout the analysis chapter, for a few string components, the greedy structure of the
pipe sizing heuristic can result in layouts where larger pipe diameters are selected towards the
outermost turbines. This can occur when the pressure constraint becomes the limiting factor as
==PAGE:94==
8.2 Pipe sizing optimisation
88
a consequence of a tree component extending a long distance from the manifold.
The limitations of the pipe sizing heuristic only became apparent to us after examining the final
results. Therefore, we were not able to implement an improved version in the main analysis.
However, to showcase how to mitigate these limitations, a simple repair pipe sizing heuristic
is proposed in this section. This heuristic is applied on the final solutions and works by itera-
tively attempting to increase pipe diameters in the tree components where the problem occurs.
Specifically, the heuristic increases the pipe diameters, starting from the pipe connected to the
manifold, until the component has decreasing pipe sizes towards the outermost turbine. The
problem with the original pipe sizing heuristic is most prominent in the solutions obtained by the
MILP model using the string topology. Therefore, we display the impact of the repair heuristic
on these layouts in Table 8.1.
Instance
Affected strings
MILP w. sizing (M€)
Repair heuristic (M€)
Delta (M€)
Delta (%)
A
0
24.0
24.0
0.0
0.0
B
1
69.4
69.1
-0.3
-0.4
C
1
67.1
66.7
-0.4
-0.6
D
0
111.6
111.6
0.0
0.0
E
0
92.5
92.5
0.0
0.0
F
1
118.0
118.2
0.2
0.2
G
0
91.6
91.6
0.0
0.0
H
3
153.1
151.4
-1.7
-1.1
J
1
158.2
157.6
-0.6
-0.4
Total
7
885.5
882.7
-2.8
-0.3
Table 8.1: Results of applying the repair heuristic to solutions obtained from the MILP model
including the original pipe sizing using the string topology.
As seen in the table, the problem with the original pipe sizing heuristic affects only 7 string
components within the wind farm instances, highlighting that the issue is uncommon. These
string components are found in wind farm instances B, C, F, H, and J. Notably, the repair
heuristic is able to improve the solutions by a range of 0.4% to 1.1%, with the exception of wind
farm instance F. For instance F, the repair heuristic actually increases the cost of the solution
by 0.2%, showing that this approach does not necessarily improve the pipe choices. This is
a consequence of the pipe connected to the manifold in the affected string component being
relatively long. Therefore, increasing the size of this pipe segment does not offset the savings
achieved by decreasing the outermost pipe segments. To further illustrate the changes made
by the repair heuristic, Figure 8.1 shows the layouts before and after applying it to wind farm
instance B. When looking at Figure 8.1a, the affected string component can be seen spanning
from the top-right manifold to the top-right corner. In Figure 8.1b, it is visible that the repair
heuristic is able to achieve decreasing pipe sizes towards the outermost turbine by increasing
the pipe diameter of the pipe segment connected to the manifold.
==PAGE:95==
8.3 Routing optimisation
89
(a) Before repair heuristic.
(b) After repair heuristic.
Figure 8.1: Layout solutions using the string topology for wind farm instance B before and
after applying the repair pipe sizing heuristic.
Our proposed repair heuristic is able to improve on most of the layouts limited by the pressure
constraint. However, there are multiple ways to address this problem. A simple alternation
would be to start by increasing the size of the shortest pipes in a component rather than starting
from the manifold. Another approach is to develop a more advanced pipe sizing heuristic in
a metaheuristic framework, initiated by using the largest pipes for all pipe segments and then
gradually decreasing the pipe diameters based on cost savings. However, when exploring these
alternatives, one must consider the computational eﬀiciency of the pipe sizing heuristic.
In
this thesis, the pipe sizing is applied in each iteration of Simulated Annealing and Variable
Neighbourhood Search, thus the speed of the pipe selection is essential.
8.3
Routing optimisation
The routing optimisation of the WFPLP has been conducted using metaheuristics and an exact
model using both the branching and string topologies. Generally, in the branching topology,
the metaheuristics resulted in the best layouts, while in the string topology, the exact model
resulted in the best layouts. This difference is likely due to us favouring the branching topology
during the initial analysis and heuristic implementation. This is especially reflected in the sweep
multistart construction heuristic and in the neighbourhood exploration.
Using the string topology, the sweep multistart construction heuristic uses a Nearest Neighbour
algorithm, where turbines are iteratively connected to their nearest neighbouring turbine. How-
ever, the greedy nature of this algorithm often leads to starting solutions that are worse than
using the Minimum Spanning Tree in the sweep multistart heuristic for the branching topology.
To address this difference, an approach could instead be to solve the path version of the Trav-
==PAGE:96==
8.3 Routing optimisation
90
elling Salesman Problem (TSP) to optimality. Despite the initial string layouts being worse
than the branching layouts, they provide a feasible starting point for the metaheuristics. Con-
sequently, if the optimisation process using these metaheuristics is done effectively, this initial
difference should not significantly impact the final results.
Based on our results for the string topology, we question the suitability of the chosen neighbour-
hood exploration for finding optimal string layouts. This is a consequence of the 1-opt move,
where the possible feasible moves are few, as it can only perform moves to leaves of other string
components or the manifold. An interesting addition could be to include a 2-opt move, where
two pairs of turbines are exchanged between adjacent string components. This could possibly
allow for faster and better alternations of the layouts in the optimisation. A 2-opt move could
also help mitigate the occurrence of crossings in the final solutions. One option is that the
optimisation process in the metaheuristics directly identifies the location of the crossings and
attempts to resolve them. Another option is to apply a post-processing heuristic that targets
the crossings and remove them one at a time in the final layout.
Experimenting with multiple, more advanced neighbourhood exploration methods could also be
an advantage for the branching topology. The potential benefit is found in the limitation of our
current exploration method, as seen in Section 7.2, regarding the inclusion of installation costs.
Here, it was found that the inclusion of an installation cost of €170 led to more cost-effective
layouts compared to not including the installation cost. This is likely a result of the 1-opt move’s
neighbourhood search focus on reducing pipe sizes by creating more branch connections, leading
to a local optimum with sub-optimal routing. By including installation costs, the optimisation
focus shifts to more eﬀicient routing, potentially avoiding layouts with excessive branching. This
causes us to reach another local optimum, in this case, an optimum that is better.
The limitations of the exact model primarily include its slow processing speed for larger instances,
often requiring six hours to find feasible solutions. Adding constraints for specific configurations
like balanced layouts only worsen this issue. Additionally, a notable limitation is the necessary
simplification of the problem, due to the non-linear pressure calculations, achieved by fixing the
pressure across the network.
Overall, the presented methods for solving the routing problem in the WFPLP generally produce
good layouts. This conclusion is drawn from both visual assessments of the layouts and the
observation that using the branching topology, our metaheuristics outperform the exact model.
Nevertheless, there is room for improvement in the neighbourhood search, particularly in its
handling of crossings and strings.
==PAGE:97==
8.4 Comparison of pipes and cables
91
8.4
Comparison of pipes and cables
As a part of the discussion of results, we reflect on the implications of our findings. Specifically,
we aim to assess the economic feasibility and potential benefits of hydrogen-producing wind
farms when comparing the transmission of hydrogen to electrical cables. In this thesis, publicly
available wind farm instances from (Cazzaro and Pisinger, 2022b) have been used, for which the
Wind Farm Cable Routing Problem (WFCRP) has also been analysed in (Cazzaro and Pisinger,
2022a). This provides us with a benchmark of costs for the WFCRP, which can be compared
against our obtained costs for the WFPLP.
Table 8.2 presents the comparison of cost for the inter-array transmission layout between the
WFCRP and the WFPLP, both using the branching topology. The cable cost used in (Cazzaro
and Pisinger, 2022a) is taken from (Das and Cutululis, 2017) which was published in 2017. To
ensure a fair comparison, the cable costs are adjusted to end-of-year 2023 prices. For context,
the cost per metre for cables in the adjusted figures is either €310 or €434, depending on the
cable size, compared to the range of pipe costs from €250 to €800 per metre, as detailed earlier
in Table 5.2 in the optimisation setup. In Table 8.2, the column listing costs for the WFPLP
reflects the best values found across SA, VNS, and the exact model.
Instance
WFCRP (M€2017)
WFCRP (M€2023)
WFPLP (M€2023)
Delta (M€2023)
Delta (%)
A
18.88
24.42
23.2
-1.2
-5.0
B
48.00
62.08
61.4
-0.7
-1.1
C
46.25
59.81
60.4
0.6
1.0
D
83.86
108.45
100.0
-8.5
-7.8
E
64.91
83.94
82.7
-1.2
-1.5
F
82.66
106.90
106.9
0
0
G
66.19
85.60
82.9
-2.7
-3.2
H
98.19
126.98
122.1
-4.9
-3.8
I
175.35
226.77
209.6
-17.2
-7.6
J
112.02
144.87
140.0
-4.9
-3.4
Total
796.31
1029.82
989.2
-40.6
Table 8.2: Comparison of transmission layout cost for the WRCRP and WFPLP using the
branching topology. WFCRP costs are from (Cazzaro and Pisinger, 2022a). The delta columns
represents the difference between the WFCRP and WFPLP cost in 2023 prices.
From the table, it can be observed that using the branching topology, the WFPLP solutions are
generally cheaper than the WFCRP for all wind farm instances, with the exception of instance
F where costs are the same, and wind farm instance C where it is slightly more expensive.
The savings range from €0.7 M to €17.2 M across wind farm instances, translating into a cost
reduction of 1.1% to 7.8%.
The comparison using the string topology shows a more varied
outcome, as indicated in Table 8.3. For instances C, H, and I, the costs associated with the
==PAGE:98==
8.4 Comparison of pipes and cables
92
WFCRP are actually lower than those for the WFPLP. It is important to note that for wind
farm instance I, with the largest difference, we were unable to solve it using the MILP model.
This likely contributes to the less competitive results for this wind farm instance and perhaps
skews the results when looking at the total cost across all instances. Excluding these three
instances, the WFPLP shows savings ranging from 0.6% to 10.7% per instance compared to the
WFCRP using the string topology.
Instance
WFCRP (M€2017)
WFCRP (M€2023)
WFPLP (M€2023)
Delta (M€2023)
Delta (%)
A
20.79
26.89
24.0
-2.9
-10.7
B
54.08
69.94
69.4
-0.5
-0.8
C
51.83
67.03
67.1
0.1
0.1
D
96.07
124.24
111.6
-12.6
-10.2
E
71.98
93.09
92.5
-0.6
-0.6
F
94.09
121.68
118.0
-3.7
-3.0
G
75.41
97.52
91.6
-5.9
-6.1
H
114.10
147.56
159.8
12.2
8.3
I
202.51
202.51
264.9
62.4
30.8
J
127.20
164.50
158.2
-6.3
-3.8
Total
908.06
1114.96
1157.1
42.14
Table 8.3: Comparison of transmission layout cost for the WRCRP and WFPLP using the
string topology. WFCRP costs are from (Cazzaro and Pisinger, 2022a). The delta columns
represents the difference between the WFCRP and WFPLP cost in 2023 prices.
While we consider this to be the most objective comparison achievable within the scope of our
study, there are some factors that impact the applicability of the results. Firstly, this thesis
does not consider obstacles in the optimisation of the WFPLP unlike the study of the WFCRP.
Although this difference is unlikely to drastically change the cost implications, it is a notable
difference. Secondly, and more significantly, the turbine capacity in our analysis is assumed
to be 20MW, compared to the 15MW turbines used in the WFCRP study. This difference in
capacity results in a higher hydrogen output compared to a scenario of 15MW turbines. If the
production had been lower in our study, the optimal pipes would necessarily also have been
smaller, resulting in a lower total cost.
Another important consideration when comparing hydrogen-producing wind farms with electri-
cal wind farms is the export transmission infrastructure. While not included in the comparison
tables above, it is generally recognised that hydrogen transport has advantages over longer dis-
tances. This is mostly due to the lower energy losses in pipes compared to cables and the relative
smaller costs of pipes compared to cables. This advantage suggests that hydrogen production
may be more cost-effective for wind farms situated further from shore, as supported by e.g.
(Groenemans et al., 2022) and (Pliszka et al., 2023).
In summary, the cost comparisons in Tables 8.2 and 8.3 do not depict the hydrogen setup as
==PAGE:99==
8.5 Future work
93
favourably as some other studies, such as (Groenemans et al., 2022). In this study, they conclude
that the inter-array infrastructure cost per MWh is $2.9 for electricity and $0.7 for hydrogen.
This is supported by an article discussing a Danish company, CIP, and their development of
energy-island projects. In the article, a representative from CIP claims that the cost of trans-
porting hydrogen is only 20% of the cost associated with electrical transport (FinansWatch,
2024). In contrast, another study that examines holistic energy system optimisation concludes
that onshore electrolysis should be preferred over offshore electrolysis. This preference is partly
due to the ability to use the excess heat generated by onshore electrolysers for district heating
networks (Gea-Bermúdez et al., 2023).
8.5
Future work
To the best of our knowledge, this thesis is the first dedicated study of the optimisation of
pipeline layouts at hydrogen-producing wind farms. Given this, there are several opportunities
to expand upon the research introduced here. An immediate extension could involve refining the
optimisation processes by including obstacle considerations and exploring alternative method-
ologies for the pipe sizing and routing optimisation. The abundance of research conducted in
the WFCRP offers a repository of strategies that can be adapted and applied for routing opti-
misation. Specifically for the pipe sizing heuristic that includes the pressure drop and velocity
calculations, experts from the field of physical chemistry should review or be included in the
development to confirm the validity.
Exploring the impact of gas pressure within pipelines also presents a significant opportunity
for future research. Various studies on hydrogen-producing wind farms have assumed higher
pressure levels than considered in this thesis. For instance, in (DNV, 2023), a compressor is
suggested on each turbine to increase the pressure to 100-150 bar, and (Groenemans et al., 2022)
argues for the use of PEMEL electrolysers capable of producing hydrogen at pressures up to 80
bar. An increased pressure of this magnitude could dramatically decrease gas velocity, allowing
for the selection of smaller pipe diameters, and thereby significantly decreasing the cost. Here,
it is important to consider the additional cost of compressors or the cost difference of a standard
PEM or alkaline elektrolyser to the PEMEL electrolyser in the analysis.
Finally, while we in this chapter have discussed our results in comparison to the cost of inter-
array cables, a more direct comparison using the same parameters and methodologies for both
cables and pipelines would yield a more accurate assessment. Preferably, this study should also
include the export infrastructure from the wind farm to shore. Such a study would offer a clearer
understanding of the respective advantages and costs of each transmission method.
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
As we navigate our path towards achieving climate neutrality by 2050, the development of green
hydrogen production, particularly through wind farms, is emerging as a key strategy. Hydrogen-
producing wind farms are expected to address some of the major challenges in renewable energy,
grid capacity and energy storage.
The growing political ambitions has heightened the com-
petition, where the optimisation of wind farm layouts have become increasingly important to
maintain competitiveness.
This thesis, developed in collaboration with the wind farm developer Vattenfall, addresses one of
the optimisation challenges associated with transitioning from traditional electrical wind farms
to hydrogen-producing wind farms with pipeline networks. Specifically, focusing on the context
of decentralised hydrogen production setups, we explore how to optimise the Wind Farm Pipeline
Layout Problem (WFPLP). Our work establishes a novel framework for optimising the WFPLP
by integrating concepts from gas pipeline hydraulics into well-known solution approaches from
the Wind Farm Cable Routing Problem (WFCRP). We explore the WFPLP using two topologies:
branching with turbines connected in tree structures, and strings with turbines connected in
strings.
The framework for optimising the WFPLP is based on insights gained from exploration of gas
pipeline hydraulics, specifically the gas pipeline model of pressure and velocity calculations for
pipe segments. In particular, we recognise that the velocity becomes the limiting factor of the
two in selecting pipe diameters in most cases. This insight is used to develop a computationally
eﬀicient pipe sizing heuristic that, given a layout, utilises gas velocity and pressure calculations to
select cost-effective pipes, while also assessing the feasibility of the layout. By combining our pipe
sizing heuristic with known network optimisation techniques for the routing problem, we are able
to implement and tune two metaheuristics, Simulated Annealing and Variable Neighbourhood
Search, to optimise the WFPLP.
Relying on the same insight, we are able to construct an exact optimisation method, by simpli-
fying the WFPLP with fixed pressure throughout the network. This allows us to construct a
Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model optimising the WFPLP solely on the veloc-
ity constraint. This gives us an exact conservative model that finds optimal pipe connections
within a fixed pressure network. By afterwards applying the pipe sizing heuristic, we are able
==PAGE:101==
9 Conclusion
95
to re-select the initially conservative pipe diameters based on a more precise representation of
the network.
The performance of the optimisation approaches are evaluated on realistic wind farm instances
provided by (Cazzaro and Pisinger, 2022b). We can conclude that the layout solutions of the two
optimisation approaches on the wind farm instances are reasonably good. SA and VNS show
superior performance for the WFPLP using the branching topology, where SA is favourable
optimising small wind farms, and VNS is advantageous optimising larger wind farms. On the
contrary, for the WFPLP using the string topology, the MILP model provides better layout
solutions for the majority of the wind farm instances. This difference can be attributed to the
implementation of the metaheuristic favouring the branching topology.
With these results, we are the first to share results for the WFPLP on publicly available wind
farm instances. These results set a benchmark for future studies to measure their results against.
Comparing our results for hydrogen-producing wind farms with results for traditional electrical
wind farms, shows that pipeline layouts are 1.1% to 7.8% cheaper compared to cable layouts
on the same instances using the branching topology. We conclude that pipeline layouts are
only slightly more cost-effective than cable layouts, indicating that hydrogen pipes are still too
expensive.
To align the WFPLP more closely with real-world wind farm projects, we have conducted
four different experimental analyses.
These experiments include considerations and solution
approaches that contain the export pipe, installation cost, limited pipe types, and the need for
balanced layouts. In analysing the export pipe for large wind farms, we find its inclusion in the
optimisation to be diﬀicult for two main reasons. Firstly, the gas velocity within the export pipe
often exceeds the limit for larger wind farms. Secondly, the choice of export pipe determines
the manifold pressure, which is found to have a significant influence on the layout of inter-array
pipelines in the initial gas pipeline hydraulic analysis. The experiment regarding installation
costs confirmed that as the installation costs increase, the preferred layouts tend to be shorter.
Surprisingly, we found some of our best overall solutions in this analysis, which questions the
effectiveness of our neighbourhood exploration strategy. The impact of balancing string layouts
is shown to be a price increase ranging from 10% to 20% for the majority of wind farm instances.
This additional expense should be considered in light of the practical advantages that balanced
layouts offer. The analysis of having a limited range of pipe types indicates that it, across wind
farm instances, is 17.2% and 8.1% more expensive compared to the baseline scenario when being
limited to two and three pipes, respectively. Furthermore, it shows that the choice of pipe types
varies between smaller and larger wind farms.
==PAGE:102==
9 Conclusion
96
With this thesis on the optimisation of the Wind Farm Pipeline Layout Problem, we present
some of the first results within the field of optimisation of hydrogen-producing wind farms.
Through this contribution, we hope to give inspiration for future research within the field and
thereby contribute to the path towards a greener future.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
Anagnostopoulos, A., Michel, L., Van Hentenryck, P., & YA, V. (2006).
A simulated annealing approach to the traveling tournament problem.
Journal of Scheduling, 9, 177–193. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10951-006-7187-8
Bauer, J., & Lysgaard, J. (2015). The offshore wind farm array cable layout problem: a planar
open vehicle routing problem. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 66(3),
360–368. https://ideas.repec.org/a/pal/jorsoc/v66y2015i3p360-368.html
Berzan, C. (2011). Algorithms for cable network design on large-scale wind farms.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:35469003
Brimberg, J., Hansen, P., Lin, K.-W., Mladenović, N., & Breton, M. (2003).
An oil pipeline design problem. Operations Research, 51(2), 228–239.
https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:inm:oropre:v:51:y:2003:i:2:p:228-239
Cazzaro, D., Fischetti, M., & Fischetti, M. (2020).
Heuristic algorithms for the wind farm cable routing problem. Applied Energy, 278,
115617. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115617
Cazzaro, D., & Pisinger, D. (2022a).
Balanced cable routing for offshore wind farms with obstacles. Networks, 80(4),
386–406. https://doi.org/10.1002/net.22100
Cazzaro, D., & Pisinger, D. (2022b).
Variable neighborhood search for large offshore wind farm layout optimization.
Computers Operations Research, 138, 105588.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2021.105588
Cerveira, A., de Sousa, A., Pires, E., & Baptista, J. (2016). Optimal cable design of wind
farms: The infrastructure and losses cost minimization case.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 31, 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2016.2521700
==PAGE:104==
Bibliography
98
Chen, Z., Zhao, M., & Blaabjerg, F. (2009).
Optimisation of electrical system for offshore wind farms via genetic algorithm.
IET Renewable Power Generation, 3(2), 205–216.
https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-rpg:20070112
Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L., & Stein, C. (2001).
Introduction to algorithms (2nd). The MIT Press.
Das, K., & Cutululis, N. A. (2017). Offshore wind power plant technology catalogue -
components of wind power plants, ac collection systems and hvdc systems.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:116053267
Delahaye, D., Chaimatanan, S., & Mongeau, M. (2018).
Simulated annealing: From basics to applications. Handbook of Metaheuristics.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:69698790
Díez, N. G. (2021). Wp1e – impact of high speed hydrogen flow on system integrity and noise.
DNV. (2023). Cost and performance data for offshore hydrogen production.
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Energioer/cost_performance_data_offshore_
hydrogen_production.pdf
Dutta, S., & Overbye, T. (2011).
A clustering based wind farm collector system cable layout design.
https://doi.org/10.1109/PECI.2011.5740480. 2011 IEEE Power and Energy Conference
at Illinois, PECI 2011 ; Conference date: 25-02-2011 Through 26-02-2011
Ejomarie, E., & Ebigenibo, S. (2020). Optimal design of gas pipeline transmission network.
Volume 8, 918–933.
European Commission. (2020).
Questions and answers: A hydrogen strategy for a climate neutral europe.
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_20_1257
[Accessed: (10-10-2023)]
European Commission. (2022). Repower eu: Communication from the commission to the
european parliament, the european council, the council, the european economic and
social committee and the committee of the regions. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2022%3A230%3AFIN
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
99
European Commission. (2023).
Member states agree new ambition for expanding offshore renewable energy.
https://energy.ec.europa.eu/news/member-states-agree-new-ambition-expanding-
offshore-renewable-energy-2023-01-19_en
FinansWatch. (2024). Nyt cip-selskab skal modne energiø-projekter inden frasalg.
https://finanswatch.dk/Finansnyt/article16777981.ece [Accessed: (22-01-2024)]
Fischetti, M., & Fischetti, M. (2018). Matheuristics. In Handbook of heuristics (pp. 121–153).
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07124-4_14
Fischetti, M., & Pisinger, D. (2018a).
Optimizing wind farm cable routing considering power losses.
European Journal of Operational Research, 270(3), 917–930.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.07.061
Fischetti, M., & Pisinger, D. (2018b).
Optimal wind farm cable routing: Modeling branches and offshore transformer modules.
Networks, 72. https://doi.org/10.1002/net.21804
Gasunie Transport Services B.V. (2014).
Ontwerp uitgangspunten transportsysteem (Technical Report).
Gasunie Transport Services B.V. file-WDJQBZOrsTLjkG9tvDr3FLEq Final version
Gea-Bermúdez, J., Bramstoft, R., Koivisto, M., Kitzing, L., & Ramos, A. (2023).
Going offshore or not: Where to generate hydrogen in future integrated energy systems?
Energy Policy, 174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2022.113382
Giampieri, A., Ling-Chin, J., & Roskilly, A. P. (2023).
Techno-economic assessment of offshore wind-to-hydrogen scenarios: A uk case study.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2023.01.346
Giebel, G., & Hasager, C. B. (2016). An overview of offshore wind farm design.
In W. Ostachowicz, M. McGugan, J.-U. Schröder-Hinrichs, & M. Luczak (Eds.),
Mare-wint: New materials and reliability in offshore wind turbine technology
(pp. 337–346). Springer International Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-39095-6_19
==PAGE:106==
Bibliography
100
Gonzalez-Longatt, F., Wall, P., Regulski, P., & Terzija, V. (2012). Optimal electric network
design for a large offshore wind farm based on a modified genetic algorithm approach.
IEEE Systems Journal, 6, 164–172. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSYST.2011.2163027
Gonzalez-Rodriguez, A. G. (2017). Review of offshore wind farm cost components.
Energy for Sustainable Development, 37, 10–19.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esd.2016.12.001
Google. (2022). K-means advantages and disadvantages.
https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/clustering/algorithm/advantages-
disadvantages [Accessed: (15-11-2023)]
Groenemans, H., Saur, G., Mittelsteadt, C., Lattimer, J., & Xu, H. (2022).
Techno-economic analysis of offshore wind pem water electrolysis for h2 production.
Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering, 37, 100828.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2022.100828
Gurobi. (2024). https://www.gurobi.com/solutions/gurobi-optimizer/ [Accessed: (03-01-2024)]
Hansen, P. [Pierre], Mladenovic, N., & Moreno-Pérez, J. (2010).
Variable neighbourhood search: Methods and applications. 4OR, 175, 367–407.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-009-0657-6
Hayden, L., & Stalheim, D. (2009). Asme b31.12 hydrogen piping and pipeline code design
rules and their interaction with pipeline materials concerns, issues and research.
https://doi.org/10.1115/PVP2009-77159
Hertz, A., Marcotte, O., Mdimagh, A., Carreau, M., & Welt, F. (2016).
Design of a wind farm collection network when several cable types are available.
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 68.
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41274-016-0021-6
Hou, P., Zhu, J., Ma, K., Yang, G., Hu, W., & Chen, Z. (2019). A review of offshore wind farm
layout optimization and electrical system design methods.
Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, 7(5), 975–986.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40565-019-0550-5
Ibrahim, O. S., Singlitico, A., Proskovics, R., McDonagh, S., Desmond, C., & Murphy, J. D.
(2022). Dedicated large-scale floating offshore wind to hydrogen: Assessing design
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
101
variables in proposed typologies. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 160,
112310. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112310
Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C., & Vecchi, M. (1983). Optimization by simulated annealing.
Science (New York, N.Y.), 220, 671–80. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.220.4598.671
Kiryanova, N., Matrenin, P., Mitrofanov, S., Kokin, S., & Safaraliev, M. K. (2022).
Hydrogen energy storage systems to improve wind power plant eﬀiciency considering
electricity tariff dynamics. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 47(18),
10156–10165. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2022.01.152
Klein, A., & Haugland, D. (2019).
Obstacle-aware optimization of offshore wind farm cable layouts.
Annals of Operations Research, 272. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2581-5
Kruskal, J. B. (1956).
On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling salesman problem.
Proceedings of the American Mathematical society, 7(1), 48–50.
Li, D., He, C., & Fu, Y. (2008). Optimization of internal electric connection system of large
offshore wind farm with hybrid genetic and immune algorithm.
2008 Third International Conference on Electric Utility Deregulation and Restructuring
and Power Technologies, 2476–2481.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:42926843
MacQueen, J., et al. (1967).
Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations. Proceedings
of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, 1(14),
281–297.
Menon, E. S. (2005). Gas pipeline hydraulics. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420038224
Mladenović, N., & Hansen, P. [P.]. (1997). Variable neighborhood search.
Computers Operations Research, 24(11), 1097–1100.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-0548(97)00031-2
Nešetřil, J., Milková, E., & Nešetřilová, H. (2001). Otakar borůvka on minimum spanning tree
problem translation of both the 1926 papers, comments, history.
==PAGE:108==
Bibliography
102
Discrete Mathematics, 233(1), 3–36.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0012-365X(00)00224-7. Czech and Slovak 2
Ottoni, L., & Batista, L. (2022). Multicriteria analysis of natural gas network pipe sizing
design under load-evolution uncertainty.
Journal of Control, Automation and Electrical Systems, 33.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40313-022-00932-z
Pliszka, D., Gourlay, C., Abdullazada, N., Brice, C., Bouras, N., Lesort, A.-L., Ott, J.,
McWhirr, C., & MacLeay, A. (2023).
Fixed Wind Architecture Comparison for Offshore Green Hydrogen Production.
Day 3 Wed, May 03, 2023, D031S033R007. https://doi.org/10.4043/32317-MS
Prim, R. C. (1957). Shortest connection networks and some generalizations.
Bell System Technical Journal, 36, 1389–1401.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:120649066
Ramboll. (2021). Export potential ccus ptx technology. https:
//ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/ptx/ptx_and_ccus_technology_export_potential.pdf
Rothfarb, B., Frank, H., Rosenbaum, D., Steiglitz, K., & Kleitman, D. (1970).
Optimal design of offshore natural-gas pipeline systems. Oper. Res., 18, 992–1020.
https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.18.6.992
Taieb, A., & Shaaban, M. (2019). Cost analysis of electricity transmission from offshore wind
farm by hvdc and hydrogen pipeline systems, 632–636.
https://doi.org/10.1109/GTDAsia.2019.8715900
Twidale, S., & Chestney, N. (2023). Why the offshore wind power industry has hit turbulence?
https://www.oedigital.com/news/507910-why-the-offshore-wind-power-industry-has-
hit-turbulence
Tyler Stehly and Patrick Duffy. (2022). 2021 cost of wind energy review.
https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy23osti/84774.pdf
Wan, J., Kang, J., Han, X., & Yan, H. (2023).
Economic analysis of different technical scenarios for hydrogen production from
offshore wind power (Q. Yang, J. Li, K. Xie, & J. Hu, Eds.), 1214–1229.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
103
Wind, T. O. (2020).
North sea energy technical assessment of hydrogen transport , compression , processing
offshore as part of topsector energy : Tki offshore wind & tki new gas.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:244770229
Yongqian, L., Gao, X., Yan, J., Han, S., & Infield, D. (2014). Clustering methods of wind
turbines and its application in short-term wind power forecasts.
Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy, 6. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4898361
==PAGE:110==
Appendix
A: Sweep multistart heuristic branching topology
Instance A
Instance B
Instance C
Instance D
==PAGE:111==
A: Sweep multistart heuristic branching topology
105
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:112==
B: Sweep multistart heuristic string topology
106
Instance I
Instance J
B: Sweep multistart heuristic string topology
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:113==
B: Sweep multistart heuristic string topology
107
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:114==
C: Simulated Annealing branching topology
108
Instance I
Instance J
C: Simulated Annealing branching topology
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:115==
C: Simulated Annealing branching topology
109
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:116==
D: Simulated Annealing string topology
110
Instance I
Instance J
D: Simulated Annealing string topology
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:117==
D: Simulated Annealing string topology
111
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:118==
E: Variable Neighbourhood Search branching topology
112
Instance I
Instance J
E: Variable Neighbourhood Search branching topology
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:119==
E: Variable Neighbourhood Search branching topology
113
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:120==
F: Variable Neighbourhood Search string topology
114
Instance I
Instance J
F: Variable Neighbourhood Search string topology
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:121==
F: Variable Neighbourhood Search string topology
115
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:122==
G: MILP with sizing branching topology
116
Instance I
Instance J
G: MILP with sizing branching topology
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:123==
G: MILP with sizing branching topology
117
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:124==
H: MILP with sizing string topology
118
Instance J
H: MILP with sizing string topology
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:125==
H: MILP with sizing string topology
119
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:126==
I: Balanced layouts
120
Instance J
I: Balanced layouts
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:127==
I: Balanced layouts
121
Instance C
Instance E
Instance F
Instance H
==PAGE:128==
J: Limited to two available pipes
122
Instance J
J: Limited to two available pipes
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:129==
J: Limited to two available pipes
123
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:130==
K: Limited to three available pipes
124
Instance I
Instance J
K: Limited to three available pipes
Instance A
Instance B
==PAGE:131==
K: Limited to three available pipes
125
Instance C
Instance D
Instance E
Instance F
Instance G
Instance H
==PAGE:132==
K: Limited to three available pipes
126
Instance I
Instance J
