==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
January 2024
Master’s Thesis
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Author:
Mathias Micheelsen Lowes
Sudent number:
s183983
Date of submission:
22nd of January 2024
Supervisors:
Professor
Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
Clinical Associated Research Professor
Klaus Fuglsang Kofoed
Co-Supervisors:
Ph.D Stud.
Kristine Aavild Juhl
Ph.D Stud.
Michael Huy Cuong Pham
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The left ventricle myocardium (LVM) is the muscle that is responsible for pumping oxygenated blood
into the human body. If the blood supply to the LVM is decreased or completely ceased, some areas
of the LVM will die, resulting in a myocardial infarction (MI) also known as a heart attack. Studies
have indicated that four key characteristics of the LVM can influence the prevalence of MI, namely:
a) Asymmetrical remodelling of the LVM, b) The amount of fat and scar tissue deposits in the LVM,
c) An increased amount of trabeculation in the left ventricle (LV), d) A decrease in left ventricular
systolic function.
This project attempts to measure and visualise four features of the LVM, each of which is directly
linked to one of the four characteristics associated with risk of MI. The goal is to extract the following
features from cardiac functional analysis computed tomography scans: a) The thickness of the LVM,
b) The distribution of Hounsfield units (HU) inside the LVM, c) The amount of trabeculation inside
the LV, d) The strain of the LVM during a cardiac cycle.
The thickness of the LVM was successfully calculated and visualised. Likewise, the HU distribution
inside the LVM was successfully estimated by sampling HU values inside the LVM. Finding the
direct relation between HU and fat/scar tissue was difficult and the most interpretable results were
obtained when thresholding for fat values. Segmentation of trabeculation inside the LV proved to
be difficult and the acquired results are hard to interpret. The strain analysis was dependent on a
registration, which turned out to be quite non-uniform, resulting in the calculated strains not being
representative of the actual strain in the LVM. For visualisation, bullseye plots was successfully
implemented and used for visualisation of all features. These plots can convey information about
the LVM features while still displaying the spatial distribution in the LVM.
This project serves as a preliminary exploration, preceding investigation into the correlation between
these features and the prevalence of MI.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Myocardial Characteristics’ Relation to Myocardial Infarction . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.2
Medical Image Analysis for Myocardial Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.3
Strain Analysis for Myocardial Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Aim of the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Background
8
2.1
The Human Heart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Myocardial Infarction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Computed Tomography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Data
11
4
Methods
13
4.1
Left Ventricle Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.1
TotalSegmentator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Inner and Outer Myocardium Wall Correspondence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.1
Myocardium Thickness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.2
Hounsfield Unit Estimation in the Myocardium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Strain Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3.1
Temporal Non-rigid Implicit Surface Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3.2
Strain Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Analysis of Myocardium Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4.1
Left Ventricle 17-Segment Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4.2
Visualization Using Bullseye Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Results
25
5.1
Segmentation of the Left Ventricle Myocardium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Myocardium Thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Hounsfield Unit Sampling in the Myocardium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Trabeculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Myocardial Strain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5.1
Surface Registration of Myocardia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5.2
Strain Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Discussion
35
6.1
Measurement of Myocardium Characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.1
Asymmetrical Remodeling of the Myocardium
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
i
==PAGE:4==
6.1.2
Fat and Scar Tissue in the Left Ventricle Myocardium . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.3
Trabeculation Inside the Left Ventricle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1.4
Left Ventricular Systolic Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Segmentation of the Left Ventricle Myocardium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.3
Bullseye Plots as a Visualization Tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Limitations of CFA CT Scans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.5
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Conclusion
42
8
References
43
A Methods
50
A.1 Myocardium Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.2 Signed Distance Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B Results
52
B.1
Segmentations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
ii
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The human heart is the most vital organ in the human body. It supplies oxygenated blood to the
whole body by functioning as a pump. The myocardium is the muscle that makes the human heart
beat and is thus responsible for the functioning of the entire body. It is located in the wall of the four
chambers of the heart, see Figure 1.1a. The myocardium around the left ventricle (LV) is especially
important as it is responsible for pumping oxygenated blood throughout the human body. The left
ventricle myocardium (LVM) is heavily dependent on incoming supply of blood from the coronary
arteries, see Figure 1.1b. Decreased or completely ceased blood flow from the coronary arteries
can result in a myocardial infarction (MI), commonly known as a heart attack. The symptoms of
MI can vary from chest pain to heart failure, and can in severe cases cause sudden cardiac death [1].
MI is not an uncommon coronary event, with a global prevalence of 3.8% for individuals < 60 years
and 9.5% for individuals > 60 years [50]. The death rate of MI within one year has been determined
to be around 11.7% [34].
(a) Modified figure from [14].
(b) Original figure from [11].
Figure 1.1: Illustrations of the heart: (a) shows a cross section of the heart, illustrating the septum (part
of LVM), the LVM (part of the myocardium) and the myocardium. (b) shows the outside of the heart with
the coronary arteries.
Detecting the risk of MI occurring prior to the event will allow for preventive actions, however this
detection is no simple feat. Several factors influence the risk of MI occurring and in many cases the
1
==PAGE:6==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 1 – Introduction
detection of a previous milder infarction can be the best way to locate patients in risk of a severe
infarction [31, 64]. Studies indicate four key characteristics that correlate with an increased risk MI
and the prevalence of previous MI:
a) Asymmetrical remodelling of the left ventricle myocardium [25, 54].
b) The amount of fat and scar tissue deposits in the left ventricle myocardium [48, 36, 55, 19].
c) An increased amount trabeculation in the left ventricle myocardium [53, 20].
d) A decrease in left ventricular systolic function [51, 61, 13].
Asymmetrical remodelling of the LVM refers to the myocardium growing and deforming unevenly.
This asymmetry is often a product of other underlying diseases such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(thickening of muscles in the heart) or aortic stenosis (narrowing of the aortic valve) [25]. Left
ventricle asymmetry can be associated with risk of MI and cardiovascular events and be seen as a
predictor for patients needing aortic valve replacement [54, 25]. For assessment of LVM asymmetry
the thickness distribution of the myocardium must be determined.
Scar tissue and fat deposits in the myocardium can arise from different reasons, e.g. previous MI [48]
or a disease such as type 2 diabetes [19]. This tissue can be associated with an increased risk of
cardiovascular diseases and events [36, 55]. Thus, detecting the scar tissue and fat deposits provides
an opportunity for preventive actions. Observation of fat and scar tissue is dependent on the density
related values derived from the computed tomography (CT) scan, as fat and scar tissue is less dense
than normal soft tissue.
Trabeculation refers to the presence muscular projections or ridges inside the LV, in contrast to the
usual smooth inner surface of the LV. The amount of trabeculation of the left ventricle is associated
with increased risk of cardiovascular events e.g. MI [53]. To investigate trabeculation of the LV, the
LV must be segmented into three volumes: the free volume, the trabeculated area and the LVM.
This segmentation is illustrated in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Segmentation of the left ventricle. Schematic and short-axis view of the segmentation of LVM,
trabeculated area, and free volume. Asterisk marks papillary muscles which are not included in any volume.
Modified figure from [53].
Left ventricular systolic function refers to the left ventricle’s ability to contract and eject blood
during each heartbeat. A simple measure for this is the ejection fraction (EF), the amount of blood
ejected from the ventricle in comparison with ventricle size (see Section 2.1 for more information).
However, this does not measure the local behaviour of the left ventricle myocardium, which is an
important aspect of the LV function [51, 61]. Several approaches utilise a strain measurement of the
myocardium to determine its systolic function [47, 58, 24]. This measure is also used as a predictor
of patients with prior undetected MI [13, 46].
2
==PAGE:7==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 1 – Introduction
1.1
Related Work
1.1.1
Myocardial Characteristics’ Relation to Myocardial Infarction
Asymmetrical Myocardium remodelling
A number of clinical studies indicate that asymmetrical remodelling of the myocardium can be a
predictor of prior MI cases. Asymmetrical myocardium wall thickening is by Kwiecinski et al. [25]
defined as the myocardium wall locally being ≥13mm and being > 1.5-fold the thickness of the
opposing myocardium wall.
Kwiecinski et al. conducted a cohort study of patients with aortic
stenosis, where they classified 26% of the patients to have an asymmetric myocardium using MRI
scans.
During follow up with a median of 28 months, they had 86 events occur, of which 72
were aortic valve replacements (AVR) and 14 were deaths. The hazard ratio for these events from
having asymmetrical myocardium was calculated to be 2.15 (95% CI: [1.29, 3.59]). From which
they conclude asymmetric myocardium to be an independent predictor for needing aortic valve
replacement or death in the cohort.
A similar study was conducted by Sigvardsen et al. [54], where the implication of having left ventric-
ular asymmetry in patients asymptomatic aortic valve stenosis was investigated. They found that
the risk of needing AVR when having left ventricular asymmetry was around three times as high.
The calculated hazard ratio was 3.16 (95% CI: [1.77, 5.66]), and thus it is highly significant. The
conclusion of Sigvardsen et al. is the same the conclusion of Kwiecinski et al. [25]; asymmetrical LV
is an independent predictor of needing AVR.
Both Singh et al. [57] and Paquin et al. [41] correlates post-MI patients with a prevalence of aortic
stenosis. Paquin et al. [41] also found that the progression of aortic stenosis is accelerated after
MI occurrence. This suggest that post-MI patients are more exposed to aortic stenosis, making
asymmetrical remodelling of the LV is even more dangerous in this patient group.
However, not all studies correlate asymmetrical LVM with only increased risk of aortic stenosis and
MI. A cohort study of young white males by Lee et al. [26] shows left ventricular myocardium remod-
elling as a response to exercise. They studied participants using MR before and after undergoing a
12-week training period consisting of over 40 hours of training per week. Before the exercise period
asymmetrical myocardium was present in 2% of participants and after in 10% of participants. Thus,
they conclude the asymmetry of the myocardium to be a physiological response to the exercise. This
study only investigates a specific cohort and the relation between asymmetrical LV and exercise.
The relation between asymmetrical LV and aortic stenosis as well as MI, is still prevalent as the
previous studies conclude.
Scar and Fat Tissue in the Myocardium
Scar and fat tissue in the myocardium are often results of the myocardium remodelling after prior
MI [36, 3]. For this reason it is an interesting characteristic of the myocardium to investigate. Musa
et al. [36] have measured scar tissue in a cohort with severe aortic stenosis, with the result that
scar tissue could be used as an independent predictor for both cardiovascular death and all-cause
mortality. They also concluded that every 1% scar burden increase was associated with 11% higher
all-cause mortality hazard. The conclusions hold for both patients with scars attributed to MI and
scars from non-MI.
Silva and Mello [55] have examined 40 samples of left ventricle tissue from human cadavers. They
determined the fat deposition in the left ventricle (FDLV) and found correlations of high FDLV with
several unhealthy lifestyles e.g. smoking and alcoholism, but also with acute myocardial infarction
3
==PAGE:8==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 1 – Introduction
as the cause of death (p < 0.05). They argue that FDLV can be used as an additional tool for
cardiovascular risk assessment.
Instead of looking at the amount fat or scar tissue in the LVM, Kashiwagi-Takayama et al. [19]
analyse the average Hounsfield unit (HU) of the LVM in a non contrast CT scan. The HU is a
relative measure of tissue density (see Section 2.2 for a detailed description). The cohort in the
study consists of diabetes type 2 patients, a group where epicardial fat (fat around the heart) is
more commonly found [15]. The authors find significant positive correlation between the mean HU
in the myocardium and the EF of the patient (p = 0.0004). Since fat tissue has lower HU than
muscle tissue and a high EF means a better pumping ventricle, less myocardial fat means a better
pumping left ventricle according to the results of Kashiwagi-Takayama et al.
Trabeculation of the Left Ventricle
Trabeculation in the LV is a debated topic. Some studies conclude the importance of trabeculation in
relation to cardiovascular events [53, 20]. Other studies conclude that the amount of trabeculation is
neither correlated with cardiovascular events [70] or the general left ventricular systolic function [69].
Sigvardsen et al. [53] have studied over 10,000 CT scans from individuals from the Copenhagen
General Population Study [5]. For each scan they measured the amount of trabeculated mass in
the LV. They ordered the individuals into quartiles based on the amount of trabeculated mass. By
looking at the number of cardiovascular events in the groups with the least and most trabeculated
mass, they found that the hazard ratio was 1.64 (95% CI: [1.30, 2.08]). From this they make the
conclusion that increased trabeculation in the LV is independently associated with an increased rate
of cardiovascular events.
Kawel-Boehm et al. [20] did a study on the myocardial function of the LV and the assciation with
the amount of trabeculation in the LV. They used data from the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atheroscle-
rosis [9], where they found ∼1100 elligeble participants. Their general finding was that greater
trabeculation is associated with worse function of the LV and that hypertrabeculation can be an
indicator of disease.
In contrast to Sigvardsen et al. [53] and Kawel-Boehm et al. [20], the article “Left Ventricular
Hypertrabeculation Is Not Associated With Cardiovascular Morbity or Mortality: Insights From the
Eurocmr Registry” by Zemrak et al. [70] concludes, as the title suggests, that greater trabeculation
of the LV is not associated with an increase in risk of cardiovascular events. This study is based
on ∼800 randomly selected cases from EuroCMR Registry [7]. They analyse all-cause mortality,
risk of heart failure, stroke and other major adverse cardiovascular events independently.
The
overall finding is the hypertrabeculation in the LV is not an indicator of greater risk concerning
cardiovascular events.
Left Ventricular Systolic Function
A common consequence of MI is left ventricular systolic dysfunction [46]. This makes the function of
the LV an interesting characteristic to track. The article “Global longitudinal strain: a novel index of
left ventricular systolic function” by Reisner et al. [47] introduces the index global longitudinal strain
(GLS) which they use to measure global left ventricular function. GLS is a relative measurement
of the difference in the length of the left ventricle during contraction. They determine the global
left ventricular function on echocardiography data using GLS. Reisner et al. distinguishes between a
post-MI group and a control group using a cutoff value of -21% on the GLS measure. This yields a
92% sensitivity and 89% specificity in their small study, showing the potential of GLS for assessment
of left ventricular function.
4
==PAGE:9==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 1 – Introduction
Fent et al. [13] also measured GLS on patients with prior MI as well as a control group. All of
the patients had a normal EF (≥55%). The GLS was significantly lower (p = 0.012) in the group
with prior MI. Thus, they conclude that a patient should investigated for prior MI if lowered GLS
is detected.
In the article titled “Myocardial strain imaging: how useful is it in clinical decision making?”,
Smiseth et al. [58] examine the clinical uses of strain. They conclude that GLS can be used to
identify systolic dysfunction in patients with preserved EF. However, they also go beyond GLS and
analyse the regional strain of the left ventricular myocardium. The regional strain can be used for
locating myocardial ischaemia, a partial blocking of a coronary artery causing reduced blood flow to
part of the LVM, in turn causing reduced pumping function of the heart. Smiseth et al. claim that
myocardial ischaemia causes the LVM to move abnormally, explaining why it can be found using
regional strain analysis. Extended ischaemia may get worse over time, thus causing MI [38].
The correlation between strain and MI is also explored by Torres et al. [62]. Using speckle-tracking
echocardiography (STE) Torres et al. showed that remodelling of the LVM post-MI induced regional
changes in the myocardial strain. Over a 28-day period from recorded MI they showed that the
strain in the MI affected zones decrease while it increased in the non-affected zones. The study does
not include information about the severity of the investigated MI. However, they are able to identify
changes in myocardial strain and stiffness over the 28-day period.
1.1.2
Medical Image Analysis for Myocardial Investigation
It is crucial to have a proper segmentation of the left ventricle myocardium for investigation of
the four myocardium characteristics The segmentation will be used in the calculations of all the
characteristics. The following papers present deep learning methods which can be used for whole
heart segmentation (segmentation of the human heart into chambers, valves and myocardia) on CT
scans. The segmentation performances reported by the papers are summarized in Table 1.1.
The nnU-Net by Isensee et al. [16] is a segmentation pipeline based on the original U-Net [49] which
primarily focuses on 3D medical data. It utilises three different U-Net configurations when doing
segmentations. All of the hyperparameters for the different U-Nets in nnU-Net are handled by their
pipeline, meaning that you will get the optimal hyperparameters for your data and your hardware
setup. For more information about the nnU-Net see Section 4.1.1. The nnU-Net continues to be
the model of choice for medical image segmentation for several different applications including glioma
segmentation with missing MRI sequences [43], abdomen organ and tumor segmentation [67] and
abdominal CT of kidney cancer segmentation [29]. In recent times the authors have also improved
upon the original nnU-Net with the extended nnU-Net, which shows slightly better performance [17].
As a trained instance of the nnU-Net Wasserthal et al. [65] presents TotalSegmentator. It is trained
to segment 117 anatomic structures of the human body, including the abdomen, the cardiovascular
system, the skeleton and more. It is trained on CT scans from various scanners, institutions and
protocols, making it a robust segmentator.
The paper “Deep learning-based whole-heart segmentation in 4D contrast-enhanced cardiac CT”
by Bruns et al. [8] aims to segment the heart from a series of CT scans taken over a heart beat,
commonly known as cardiac functional analysis (CFA). They use a 3D U-Net and show its ability
to generalize on the temporal data, by including segmentations from both mid-systolic, end-systolic,
mid-diastolic and end-diastolic phase of the heart. This enables their model to segment over a whole
CFA scan.
Myronenko et al. [37] presents an approach to utilise the 4D structure of CFA CT scan with a 4D
U-Net, inputting a whole CFA series in a forward pass. Instead of having dense annotated 4D data,
5
==PAGE:10==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 1 – Introduction
they annotate random CT scans from the CFA series, ending up with approximately 20% of the CT
scans being annotated. The training is then done with a loss function consisting of two terms, a
sparse loss which only calculates the loss if there is a given label and a regularization term to ensure
consistency in the temporal dimension. They claim, that eventhough they do not report the higest
dice scores, then their segmentations are still very consistent over time and at times better than the
corresponding labels.
Network
Task
Dice score
ROI
nnU-Net [16]
AMOS2022 [18]
0.8864
Abdomen
Extended nnU-Net [17]
AMOS2022 [18]
0.9013
Abdomen
TotalSegmentator [65]
CT scans from University Hospital Basel 1
0.943
Whole body
3D U-Net [8]
Whole Heart Segmentation Challenge [71]
0.913
Whole heart
4D U-Net [37]
CCTA sequences from Massachusetts General Hospital2
0.85
0.9
LV
LVM
Table 1.1: Comparison of different heart segmentation networks evaluated on different tasks.
1.1.3
Strain Analysis for Myocardial Investigation
The movement of the LVM during a cardiac cycle (a single heartbeat) is a complex topic. Different
parts of the LVM contract in different ways, requiring local analysis of strain for the most accurate
model of the LVM’s movement. Sinclair et al. [56] calculate strain on magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) data.
They calculate a deformation gradient for time step t between for each point in
the myocardium by least-squares minimization. The minimization uses point correspondence to
minimize the difference between the given point and its local neighbourhood before and after the
transformation induced from time step t. The strains are mapped on a 4D cardiac motion atlas
(reference model) for the LVM. Afterwards, the strains are used for clinical biomarker estimation
via a linear discriminant analysis.
Another calculation of ventricular strain is that of Suever et al. [60]. Through the usage of dis-
placement encoding with stimulated echoes (DENSE) MRI, they calculate strain both the left and
the right ventricle. The strain calculation is done using manual annotations of the myocardia in
each slice in LV short axis view. From the DENSE MRI it is possible to extract Eulerian displace-
ment vectors, an Eulerian displacement field for each time frame. This displacement field is then
estimated using radial basis functions from which the strains are calculated.
Myocardial strain analysis with computed tomography data has been shown to be feasible by Vach
et al. [63]. Initially, a radiologist segments the myocardium from a CT scan. Hereafter, feature-
tracking software (Segment CT, Medviso, Lund, Sweden) is used for the strain calculation. The
strain is calculated in a 2D slice of the LVM at a time and is calculated for multiple axes in the
myocardium.
The GLS from the CT scan is compared with the traditional medium for strain
calculation, the echocardiogram. They compare strain from CT and strain from echocardiogram
finding a moderate correlation between the two, though CT underestimates the strain. However,
they conclude that strain from CT is feasible to calculate and have a high intra- and inter-reader-
reliability, i.e. consistency in measurements from the same reader (intra) and other readers (inter).
1The data is from polytrauma patients who received whole body CT scan at University Hospital Basel from 2011
to 2020. Dataset not publicly available.
2The dataset consists of 61 4D CCTA scans from Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA with only
segmentations of the left ventricle (LV) and the left ventricle myocardium (LVM). Dataset not publicly available.
6
==PAGE:11==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 1 – Introduction
1.2
Aim of the Project
The clinical foundation for this project is the hypothesised correlation between the four introduced
myocardial characteristics and an increased risk of cardiovascular events. However, investigating
these clinical hypotheses on a large cohort is infeasible for this project.
Instead, the aim of this project is developing robust methods for the calculations underlying the
testing of the clinical hypotheses. The goal is to measure and visualise the following four features
of the left ventricle myocardium:
a) The thickness of the left ventricle myocardium.
b) The distribution of Hounsfield units inside the left ventricle myocardium.
c) The amount of trabeculation inside the left ventricle.
d) The strain of the left ventricle myocardium over a cardiac cycle.
These four features of the left ventricle myocardium are directly correlated with the four character-
istics of the left ventricle myocardium.
7
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
The Human Heart
The heart is the organ responsible for pumping blood around the human body. It consists of four
chambers. Two reservoir and conduit chambers called atrias, and two thicker more forceful chambers
called ventricles. The heart can be further divided in to a right and left side each containing one
atria and one ventricle. The right atria receives deoxygenated blood from the body. This blood
flows into the right ventricle (RV) where it is pumped out into the lungs to be oxygenated. The
now oxygenated blood flows from the lungs into the left atrium and into the left ventricle, where
it is pumped out into the systemic circulation through the aorta. See Figure 1.1a for a detailed
illustration of the heart chambers.
The contraction of the different chambers is controlled by a structured electrical system, sending
pulses to the different myocardia controlling when they contract. The muscle that encapsulates the
left ventricle is particularly thick and strong, in order to pump the blood forcefully to the rest of
the body. This is the left ventricle myocardium (LVM). A part of the LVM is bordering both the
LV and the RV, this part is called the interventricular septum.
Functionally, a heart cycle is divided into diastole and systole. During diastole, the ventricles are
filled with blood. During systole, the ventricles contract. Four valves between the atria, ventricles,
lungs and aorta ensures that blood flows in the correct direction.
After the contraction of the
ventricular myocardium, the muscles relax again and blood flows from the left atrium into the left
ventricle. The point in time where the left ventricle is filled with the highest and lowest amount
of blood is called the end diastole (ED) phase and the end systole (ES) phase, respectively. The
difference in the blood pool between these phases is the amount of blood pumped out by the left
ventricle during a heart beat. This measure is termed stroke volume. Stroke volume divided by
ED volume is then the ejection fraction (EF), which is a relative measure of how much volume the
ventricle can pump out compared to its size [23].
The function of the heart is evaluated by cardiac output. This is the product of the stroke volume
and the heart rate.
The body’s demand for oxygenated blood changes, e.g. during exercise or
stress, and the cardiac output is thus altered by increasing the heart rate and/or the stroke volume.
During continuous stress, the heart can adapt by increasing its muscular wall, thereby providing an
increased stroke volume.
8
==PAGE:13==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 2 – Background
2.1.1
Myocardial Infarction
The muscles in the heart itself also need oxygenated blood in order to function. They receive this
blood from the coronary arteries (see Figure 1.1b). The coronary arteries supply blood to the
myocardium from the outside, except in the septum. This part of the myocardium is supplied with
blood from a coronary artery inside the septum itself.
If the coronary arteries fail to deliver a
sufficient amount of blood to the myocardium, the part of the myocardium with blood deficit may
die. This can happen if a blood clot appears in one of the coronary arteries, the bigger the blood clot
is, the earlier it will block the artery and more of the myocardium will not get sufficient amount of
oxygenated blood. This event is termed myocardial infraction (MI). When the muscle tissue in the
myocardium dies, a remodelling process takes place. Muscle tissue may turn into connective tissue
with no contractile function, and part of the heart loses its ability to contract. Compensatory, the
muscle wall may increases in size, and the chambers dilate to compensate for the reduced function.
2.2
Computed Tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is a non-invasive scanning technique which is used for obtaining vol-
umetric scans i.e. 3-dimensional scans of a patient. The scanner is cylindrical (see Figure 2.1a),
and has a small x-ray beam in one end and detectors for the beam in the other end. The patient
lies inside the scanner and a single slice of the CT scan is obtained by turning the cylinder whilst
shooting x-ray beams. These x-rays beams are then used in inverse problem solving to calculate
the given slice. This slice lies in the axial plane of the CT coordinates which are illustrated in
Figure 2.1b. After scanning a single slice the patient is moved incrementally forward to compute
the next slice. By stacking the slices the volumetric CT scan is obtained. The resolution in the
axial direction is dependent on how much the patient is moved at a time.
When doing CT scans the timing is commonly such that the heart is in what is called best-phase.
The best-phase is the point in time where the heart movement is at a minimum and is typically
during the diastole phase when the hear chambers are passively filled with blood.
(a) Sketch of a CT scanner with the x, y, z coordinate
system. Original figure from [33].
(b) Illustration of a human in the RAS/LPS coordinate
system. Original figure from [35].
Figure 2.1: Illustrations of coordinate systems used in medical imaging. The planes in (b) correspond to
the coordinate system in (a) as: green: axial plane (xy), blue: coronal plane (xz), red: sagittal plane (yz).
The values in a CT scan are computed in the Hounsfield unit (HU). This is a fixed gray scale unit
9
==PAGE:14==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 2 – Background
unlike other intensity based measures. The higher density of a material, the higher its HU will be.
Each CT scanner is calibrated such that distilled water has HU = 0 and air has HU = −1000. To
make the blood more visible in a CT scan the patient is often given contrast dye into their blood
stream. This makes the HU of blood go from ∼50 to ∼400, resulting in a larger contrast when
comparing blood to other soft tissue that often has HU in the range of 50 to 300. Because of its low
density the fat tissue has HU values < −50.
With modern CT scanners it is possible to capture a single CT scan very fast. This opens the pos-
sibility for doing multiple CT scans over a single cardiac cycle, a technique called cardiac functional
analysis (CFA). In a CFA CT scan several CT scans are taken over the course of a cardiac cycle,
which amounts to a single 4D scan or a temporal scan. The CFA is triggered by the electrocardio-
gram (ECG) of the patient, such that the end diastole phase of the heartbeat is in the beginning of
CFA cycle. This makes the CFA cycle begin at R wave of the ECG signal and last until the next
R wave. Thus, the CFA cycle covers a complete RR interval amounting to a whole heart beat, see
Figure 2.2 for an illustration of ECG signal.
Figure 2.2: Sketch of an electrocardiogram, with markings for the different types of waves P Q, R, S, T.
Original figure from [28].
The rotation speed of modern scanners are 0.275 rotations per second. However, due to the con-
struction of the scanner the temporal resolution the CFA series is 20 CT scans in one RR-interval.
To accomplish this the scanner uses multiple detectors for the x-ray beams, acquisition of scans over
several heartbeats aligned using the ECG measurements as well as sophisticated interpolation and
reconstruction algorithms [45]. When dividing the CFA series into 20 regular CT scans the scans are
referenced by percentage, such that the first scan is at 0%, the second at 5% etc. It follows that the
CT scans in the CFA cycle are not all scans where the heart is in best-phase. Thus, there is more
heart movement in each scan, sometimes resulting in more noisy or blurred scans when comparing
with best-phase CT. The number of slices in each of the CFA CT scans is also lowered, making the
single CT scan faster to acquire, but worsening the resolution in the axial direction.
10
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Data
The data used for this project is part of the Copenhagen General Population Study (CGPS) (also
known as Herlev-Østerbro undersøgelsen). The CGPS is a health study of the general Danish pop-
ulation started back in 1975 [2]. The focus of the study is primarily prevention of coronary heart
disease and stroke. However, during the development of the study more focus areas have emerged,
such as describing prevalence and incidence of diseases in a randomly selected representative popu-
lation sample. The CGPS consists of randomly selected participants between the ages 20 and 100.
The contribution of the participants include detailed questionnaires, providing blood samples, ECG,
as well as other physiological measurements. Since 2010 the CGPS was expanded with an additional
cardiac CT examination of eligible participants, who fulfilled the requirements: individuals > 40
years, non-pregnant and normal kidney function. From 2020 and onwards the scanning protocol was
changed to include CFA scans. In total the CGPS includes CT scans of more than 10, 000 patients
by now, of which around 1, 200 of the patients also have conducted a CFA CT scan [5, 44]. It is a
small subset of these CFA CT scans that will primarily be used as the data in this project.
Some of the methods in this project should yield different results on patients with previous MI.
Therefore, a small subset consisting of an infarct population is created. These cases are handpicked
by a myocardium expert as having had MI previously.
In this report results are only shown for two distinct patients and in some cases only for one. The
patients will be referred to as SP01 and MI02, for the patient from the standard population and from
the post-MI population, respectively. However, more than these two patients were used for ensuring
the robustness of the methods. Slices from a CT scan in the CFA series of the two patients SP01
and MI02 are visualised in Figures 3.1 and 3.2, respectively.
(a) Axial plane.
(b) Coronal plane.
(c) Sagittal plane.
Figure 3.1: Example of a CT scan from a CFA series of patient SP01.
From these figures it can be observed that there are some general differences between the two CT
scans. The contrast between blood and soft tissue e.g. LVM is greater for patient SP01. The scan
11
==PAGE:16==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 3 – Data
(a) Axial plane.
(b) Coronal plane.
(c) Sagittal plane.
Figure 3.2: Example of a CT scan from a CFA series of patient MI02.
for patient MI02 appears to be more noisy than that of patient SP01. The shape of organs of the
two patients are also different due to anatomical variations, this also includes the shape of the LV.
12
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 4
Methods
Several methods needs to be developed for investigation of the four myocardium features. All of the
methods are dependent on the segmentation of the LVM from the CT scan. The procedure for this
segmentation is initially presented in Section 4.1, in which the segmentation of the trabeculation
inside the LV is also presented. Section 4.2 introduces correspondence between the inner and outer
walls of the LVM, which is used for measuring thickness and for sampling HU values. The theoretical
foundation of the strain analysis is described in Section 4.3. Lastly, the visualisation tool used
for all of the features, the bullseye plot, is motivated by the 17 segment model and presented in
Section 4.4.
4.1
Left Ventricle Segmentation
Figure 4.1:
Illustration of segmentation
classes: blood pool (purple), trabeculation
(green), septum (blue) and LVM (red).
Note: the blood pool and trabeculation
overlaps in some locations.
The left ventricle consists of four subclasses that are to
be segmented:
• The left ventricle blood pool.
• The trabeculated area.
• The left ventricle myocardium.
• The septum of the left ventricle myocardium.
The classes are visualised in Figure 4.1.
There is an
overlap between the blood pool and trabeculation, these
can be separately examined in Figures 4.2a and 4.2c.
Segmentations from TotalSegmentator will be used as a
starting point for the segmentation pipeline.
TotalSeg-
mentator can do whole heart segmentation. This includes
the classes left ventricle myocardium, inner left ventri-
cle and right ventricle which will be utilised (see Sec-
tion 4.1.1 for more information). However, the border
between the segmentations of left ventricle myocardium
and the inner left ventricle are not sufficiently accurate so
these cannot be fully relied on. The subclasses of the LV
are identified as follows:
13
==PAGE:18==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
The blood pool is found by dilating the segmentation of inner LV from TotalSegmentator, this
now covers an area that encapsulates the inner part of the left ventricle and some of the LVM. This
area consists mostly of the blood inside the left ventricle, trabeculation and muscle. Due to the
contrast dye in the blood during the CT scan the blood pool shows a much higher HU value than
the tissue in the LV. Thus, the segmentation of the blood pool can be solved with a thresholding
inside the dilated segmentation. For this thresholding Otsu’s method [40], which minimizes the
intra-class variance for the two classes blood and muscle, is applied.
The trabeculated area poses a greater segmentation challenge than the blood pool, as it consists
of the mixture of blood and tissue. The existing segmentation of the blood pool is utilised, as the
blood pool overlaps with the trabeculated area. The trabeculated area contains blood all the way
out to the inner wall of the LVM in a convoluted fashion. Thus, doing a morphological closing
operation on the convoluted part of the blood pool achieves the outer boundary of the trabeculated
area. Likewise, doing a morphological opening operation and achieves the inner boundary of the
trabeculated area. The difference in closed blood pool and opened blood pool gives the trabeculated
area inside the LV. The procedure is illustrated in Figure 4.2 where the blue line in Figure 4.2b
shows the border from the morphological opening operation and the red line shows the boundary
from the morphological closing operation.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.2: The morphological procedure for segmentation of the trabeculated area. (a) depicts the blood
pool segmentation, (b) depicts the inner border (blue) and the outer border (red) of the trabeculation, (c)
depicts the final segmentation of trabeculated area.
The left ventricle myocardium has an inner wall and an outer wall, both need to be detected
in order to produce a successful segmentation. The inner wall is defined as the outer border of
the combined segmentations of blood pool and trabeculation.
The outer wall is segmented by
TotalSegmentator.
The interventricular septum is the part of the myocardium which lies between the two ventricles.
The segmentation of this is based on the already existing segmentation of the LVM. At each point
on the inner wall of the LVM a vector is constructed to connect to the outer wall of the LVM. If
this vector ends at a point which lies next to the right ventricle, then the part of the myocardium
between the start and the end of the vector is considered as septum. The calculation of these vectors
are described in Section 4.2.
14
==PAGE:19==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
4.1.1
TotalSegmentator
Wasserthal et al. [65] presents TotalSegmentator as a whole body segmentation tool for CT data.
The TotalSegmentator framework is an nnU-Net, trained on 1200 CT scans. The general version
of TotalSegmentator can segment 117 different classes on a single CT scan. However, they have a
specialised version which has been finetuned on the classes of the heart only and providing higher
resolution segmentations. The TotalSegmentator framework will be used in the project to get an
initial segmentation of the left ventricle and the left ventricle myocardium.
nnU-Net
The nnU-Net (no new U-Net) by Isensee et al. [16] is a self-adapting framework for medical image
segmentation. The key part of the framework is its self-configuration based on the dataset and
available hardware. This includes automatically calculating image resampling, image normalization
and post-processing (e.g. connected components) all depending on the dataset provided to the
framework. For a more detailed description of the framework see Figure 4.3, which includes a
graph describing the causality of the parameters.
Figure 4.3: Overview of the nnU-Net framework. Red boxes indicates parameters found from the data,
green boxes are parameters calculated from heuristics and blue boxes are fixed parameters. The yellow
boxes indicate the inference with the trained model. Original figure from [16].
The neural network part of the nnU-Net consists of three different U-Nets:
• 2D U-Net operates on the slices of the data in the axial plane. This does not aggregate
information in the z-axis, however it adds a robustness factor.
• 3D U-Net is used in a patch based manner due to limitations in GPU memory. This comes
with a decrease in contextual information, and therefore the patches also overlap by half of
the patch size.
• U-Net Cascade is meant to address the shortcoming of using a patch based 3D U-Net, by
using downsampled data (which is not cropped) that can fit into the GPU memory.
The
U-Net cascade consists of two 3D U-Nets, one which predicts a segmentation on the whole
downsampled image and one which takes this prediction as an input and upscales this to the
full resolution.
15
==PAGE:20==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
After training in a 5-fold cross-validation manner, the best model or ensemble of models is chosen
depending on the score on the final test set.
4.2
Inner and Outer Myocardium Wall Correspondence
After obtaining a successful segmentation of the LVM, it is desired to find correspondence between
the inner myocardium wall and the outer myocardium wall. This will be used in the calculation of
the myocardium thickness and the Hounsfield unit (HU) distribution of the myocardium. For this
task it is natural to consider the inner wall and the outer wall of the LVM as two distinct meshes
instead of the whole LVM as one binary segmentation.
Using marching cubes [30] followed by
Laplacian smoothing [59] on the inner wall and the outer wall of the LVM, two meshes are extracted
- the inner mesh and the outer mesh.
The correspondence between the inner wall and the outer wall of the LVM can be considered as
point correspondence for every point on the inner mesh to a point on the outer mesh. This point
correspondence is considered as vectors from all points on the inner wall of the myocardium to
any point on the outer wall of the myocardium. This can naively be done by finding the closest
point on the outer mesh for each point on the inner mesh. However, an approach like this will
result in vectors pointing to many of the same points on the outer mesh and some areas of the
outer mesh will not be covered at all. This is due to small ridges and imperfections on the outer
myocardium wall. To mitigate this problem each vector is smoothed by its closest neighbouring
vectors. For a single vector the closest n neighbours points on the inner mesh from the start point
of the vector are found.
These vectors are now weighted proportionally to the inverse distance
from the current starting point with the current vector having a weight of one. The weights are
normalized to sum to one before the new smoothed vector is calculated. This is done for all vectors
between the myocardium walls and repeated n iterations times. For this project the constants
n neighbours=20 and n iterations=5 are used, these gives a good balance of smoothness and
computational efficiency.
The smoothing changes the lengths of the vectors, and consequently the endpoint of the vector
might no longer be on the outer mesh. Therefore, a ray is cast along the direction of vector to
determine the intersection with the outer mesh. This intersection point is now the new endpoint of
the vector, which ensures that all vectors start on the inner mesh and end on the outer mesh.
The procedure of obtaining the vectors between the myocardium walls, smoothing them and tracing
them to the outer surface is also described in Algorithm 1 found in Appendix A.1. In Figure 4.4,
a two-dimensional example of the vector smoothing is illustrated. The three dimensional result of
creating vectors between the myocardium walls is illustrated in Figure 4.5. Specifically, it can be
seen in Figure 4.5b that the vectors seem to cover the whole myocardium densely. The vectors
between the inner and outer myocardium walls will be referred to as myocardium vectors.
4.2.1
Myocardium Thickness
The myocardium vectors give a point correspondence from each point on the inner myocardium wall
to a point on the outer myocardium wall. These vectors go across the left ventricle myocardium,
and can therefore be used for measuring the thickness of the myocardium. This is simply done by
finding the corresponding vector for each point and using the length of the vector as the thickness
of the myocardium at the given point.
16
==PAGE:21==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.4: A 2D example of the smoothing of vectors between the inner and outer myocardium walls. (a)
shows the inner and outer walls as lines in 2D, instead of the 3D meshes. (b) shows the vectors constructed
from each point on the inner wall to the closest on the outer wall. (c) shows the same vectors as the second
picture after the smoothing and ray tracing procedure.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Visualization of myocardium vectors. (a) shows 20% of the vectors along with inner and outer
surfaces of the LVM all embedded in a CT slice. (b) show all myocardium vectors along with the inner
surface of the LVM.
4.2.2
Hounsfield Unit Estimation in the Myocardium
It is needed to have a generalized sampling method for the estimation of HU in the LVM to ensure
the intepretability of the HU values. This is constructed using the myocardium vectors. For a single
point on the inner mesh the following procedure is executed:
• Map the point of the inner mesh to the voxel grid of the CT scan to sample the first HU value.
• Construct a point which is 0.5 mm from the starting point in the direction of the corresponding
myocardium vector. Sample HU from this point.
• Increment the distance from the starting point by 0.5 mm and sample again. Repeat until the
end point of the myocardium vector is reached. As the mean thickness of the LVM is around
10 mm, there are around 20 samples of HU for a single vector.
17
==PAGE:22==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
The obtained HU values can now be grouped by which point from the inner wall they are from,
the distance from the inner myocardium wall or which of the left ventricle 17-segments the point is
located in. Yielding several different ways of visualisation.
The HU values in the interventricular septum part of the LVM should have a different distribution
than the rest of the LVM. Inside the septum flows a coronary artery supplying blood for the septum,
this should give a spike in HU values. For the rest of the LVM the coronary arteries are on the
outside of the myocardium and thus not part of the measured HU. Splitting the HU measurement
into septum and not septum is done as a sanity check for the sampling method, and in order to give
more interpretative results. Otherwise, the results would average over two different HU distributions
- the septum and the remainder of the LVM.
Another approach to saving the sampled HU values for each point on the inner wall, is to count the
fraction of the these values, which are in the range of fat tissue, i.e. HU below −50. This gives an
estimate of how much fat is present along the vector of the given point. If done for all points, it
should give the distribution of fat from the inner myocardium wall to the outer myocardium wall.
4.3
Strain Analysis
During a heartbeat the left ventricle myocardium contracts in order to pump oxygenated blood
from inside the left ventricle to the whole body. This contraction of the myocardium happens in
multiple directions, i.e. longitudinal, radial and circumferential directions. The contractions should
be distributed somewhat uniformly in a healthy myocardium. However, in patients with previous
MI or other cardiovascular diseases the contraction can happen in only some part of the myocardium
due to e.g. dead muscle tissue, which can show in the strains of the myocardium [62].
To analyse the contractions of the LVM during a cardiac cycle, a registration of the LVM segmenta-
tions attained from the CFA series is performed. The scans are registered temporally, i.e. the scan
at 0% to the scan at 5% and so forth, to get the strain during a cardiac cycle. However, they are also
registered from the ED phase to the ES phase in order to calculate the strain from maximum dilation
to maximum contraction of the LVM. For the registration the tool elastix by Klein et al. [22] is
used. The strain calculated from the transformation is a description of the local deformation the
transformation induces. Positive strain in a specific direction equates to local expansion in the given
direction, while negative strain equates to local compression. The strain will be extracted in the
three directions: longitudinal, radial and circumferential.
4.3.1
Temporal Non-rigid Implicit Surface Registration
Since the left ventricle moves during a heartbeat the registration starts off with a simple rigid
transformation between the two myocardia in the registration.
The rigid transformation is not
used in any of the strain calculations. This gives an initial alignment to afterwards calculate a
B-spline transformation using elastix.
For the registration in elastix a direct registration of
the myocardium segmentations is avoided. Instead the signed distance field of the segmentations
are used for the registration.
This has previously been done by Paulsen et al. [42], but recent
methods also show that the use of distance fields can improve the registration accuracy [66, 68].
The registration is between a fixed myocardium and a moving myocardium, and the distance fields
of these myocardia are denoted by IF and IM, respectively. The distance fields are defined as 3D
volumes with the same dimensions as the CT scan. Each triplet of indices (i, j, k) in the 3D voxel
grid which the volume is defined on, has a corresponding point in 3D (x, y, z). Thus, the distance
fields can be evaluated on the points x ∈R3 by interpolation. In Figure A.1 in Appendix A.2
18
==PAGE:23==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
an example of a distance field used for strain analysis is shown.
The transformation is denoted as T : ΩF ⊂R3 →ΩM ⊂R3, and is a transformation from the fixed
myocardium domain to the moving myocardium domain. Here ΩF denotes the domain of the fixed
myocardium, i.e. all the points of the voxel grid which IF is defined on, and likewise for ΩM. The
mathematical definition of the B-spline transformation is
T µ(x) = x + u(x) = x +
X
xk∈Nx
pkβ3
x −xk
σ

,
(4.1)
where β3 is the cubic B-spline polynomial with pk as the B-spline parameters. The symbol xk
denotes the control points of the B-splines, which is defined as a regular grid over the fixed image.
The control points are sampled from Nx which is the set of control points within the compact
support of β3   x−xk
σ

. The point where the transformation is evaluated is denoted x and the overall
displacement of this point in transformation is denoted u(x).
The transformation T µ is calculated in elastix using adaptive stochastic gradient descent [21].
The loss function L(µ) for the adaptive stochastic gradient descent is a weighted combination of
three metrics:
LMSE(µ) =
1
|ΩF |
X
xi∈ΩF
(IF (xi) −IM (T µ (xi)))2 ,
(4.2)
LBE(µ) = 1
P
X
exi

∂2T µ
∂x∂xT (exi)

2
F
,
(4.3)
LCP(µ) = 1
P
X
xF i
∥xMi −T µ (xF i)∥2 ,
(4.4)
L(µ) = λ1LMSE(µ) + λ2LBE(µ) + λ3LCP(µ).
(4.5)
The first part of the loss LMSE(µ) (4.2) is the mean squared error between the fixed distance
field evaluated at the points of the fixed domain and the moving distance field evaluated at the
transformed fixed points. In this equation |ΩF | is the number of points in ΩF .
The second loss term LBE(µ) (4.3) is a bending energy penalty term. This penalizes the second order
derivative of the transformation evaluated at the P number of points exi, which are sample points for
this loss term. A penalty of the second order derivative gives a more uniform transformation and less
sharp changes in the transformation, e.g. less high expansion areas neighbouring high compression
areas.
The third loss term LCP(µ) (4.4) is from corresponding points in the moving myocardium and the
fixed myocardium. These points are derived from the LV 17 segment model (see Section 4.4.1), and
are constructed as the center of mass of each segment and the intersections between the segments.
This loss is calculated as the mean squared difference of the corresponding points in the moving
domain and the transformed fixed domain.
The final loss L(µ) (4.5) is a weighted combination of the three loss terms with the weights λ1, λ2, λ3,
where P
i λi = 1. After minimizing the loss through a number of iterations the final transformation
T µ from IF to IM is calculated.
4.3.2
Strain Calculation
The displacement u(xi) can be extracted for all points xi ∈ΩF from the transformation of the
registration between distance fields. For a single point xi ∈ΩF the following calculations are done
19
==PAGE:24==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
in order to gauge the local strain on the myocardium surface. The displacement field u(xi) from
the given point xi is calculated and from this, the displacement gradient ∇u ∈R3×3 is defined
∇u =
 ∂ui
∂xj

.
(4.6)
The deformation gradient F ∈R3×3 is a representation of the local rotation, shear and stretch. It
is defined as
F = ∇u + I,
(4.7)
with I denoting the identity matrix. The determinant of F is refered to as the Jacobian determinant
or just the Jacobian. The magnitude of the Jacobian is the factor with which the neighbourhood
around a point expands with during the transformation. The deformation gradient can by itself not
be used for measuring the amount of local deformation as it is not null for rigid body transforma-
tions [39].
To get a normalized measure of the deformation during the transformation the Green-Lagrange
strain is calculated as
E = 1
2
 F T F −I

.
(4.8)
Since the point for which this strain is calculated has the coordinates xi = (xi, yi, zi)T , the strain
tensor has the coordinates
E =


Exx
Exy
Exz
Eyx
Eyy
Eyz
Ezx
Ezy
Ezz

.
(4.9)
The strains in the x-, y- and z-directions are hard to interpret as the myocardium lies skewed in the
human body. Thus, the strain tensor is mapped to a local coordinate system defined by the three
vectors:
(a) Radial: The normalized myocardium vector, either starting or ending in xi (defined in Sec-
tion 4.2).
(b) Longitudinal: The vector from xi to the apex point of the myocardium. This vector is
orthogonalized w.r.t. (a) using Gram-Schmidt and then normalized.
(c) Circumferential: The vector in the circumferential direction around the myocardium is
calculated as the cross product of (a) and (b).
These vectors form an orthonormal basis in a local coordinate system for each point xi ∈ΩF . The
vectors are used to create the matrix R = [a, b, c], which is used for a change of basis on the strain
matrix as
Elocal = RT ER.
(4.10)
This strain matrix now has the coordinates
Elocal =


Err
Erl
Erc
Elr
Ell
Elc
Ecr
Ecl
Ecc

,
(4.11)
with r, l and c denoting the radial, longitudinal and the circumferential directions, respectively. The
strain in the radial direction is now saved for the point xi as Err, likewise for Ell and Ecc. This
strain is a percentage of the local expansion in the radial direction. Thus, a strain of e.g. Err = −0.2
corresponds to 20% contraction in the radial direction in the mapping T : ΩF →ΩM at point xi.
The strain calculation can be done for all points xi ∈ΩF , but for the visualisation it is only done
for the myocardium surface where Err, Ell and Ecc are saved per point.
20
==PAGE:25==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
4.4
Analysis of Myocardium Features
The previous sections covers the methods for obtaining features of the LVM. A neat way of visualising
these features for analysis is with the bullseye plot. The bullseye plot can be used depict values for
the whole surface of the myocardium while still showing the spatial distribution of the values. It is
motivated from the 17-segment model of the LV, which separates the LVM into 17 segments. These
segments can be compared for a given value to observe the change over the myocardium.
4.4.1
Left Ventricle 17-Segment Model
To have a standardized way of analysing segments of the LVM, the left ventricle 17-segment model
from the American Heart Association [10] is implemented. The 17 segments are created using the
long and short axis view of the myocardium (see the illustration in Figure 4.6) as follows:
• In the longitudinal axis, the apex is identified from the myocardium’s tip to the initiation of
the inner blood pool or trabeculation.
• The remaining myocardium is divided into three segments along the longitudinal axis (from
apex to mitral valve); Apical, Mid-cavity and Basal.
• The apical segment is divided into four segments each part occupying 90◦of the myocardium,
seen from the short axis view, where the septum is covered by the segment called the sepal.
• The basal and mid cavity segments are divided into six parts each occupying 60◦of the
myocardium, seen from the short axis view. This division is such that the anteroseptal and
inferoseptal segments cover the septum.
Figure 4.6: The 17-segment model of the myocardium, shown in long-axis and short-axis views. Original
figure from [27].
The output of employing the 17-segment model can be seen in Figure 4.9a as a 3-dimensional
rendering. Additionally, the two images in Figure 4.8 show slices of the segmentation from the
17-segment model in both short axis and long axis views.
21
==PAGE:26==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
4.4.2
Visualization Using Bullseye Plots
After the segmentation of the myocardium into the 17-segment model, the segments can be visualised
as a bullseye plot, where the segments are projected down from the short-axis view to a 2D plane.
The bullseye plot is a polar plot, utilising the angles which the basal, mid-cavity and apical parts
of the myocardium is divided by. The general form is visualised in Figure 4.7, where the segments
are named and numbered.
In Figure 4.7, the 17 segments are also divided into three different zones dependent on which major
coronary artery that supports the segment of the myocardium with blood: left anterior descending
artery (LAD), right coronary artery (RCA), and the left circumflex coronary artery (LCx). However,
this division is not always correct due to natural anatomical variability among humans.
Figure 4.7: The bullseye plot in the generic form with numbers for each section. The names corresponding
to the number are also shown. Original figure from [27].
In the procedure of creating a bullseye plot the segmentation of the LVM and a specific set of values
to show is needed. As the bullseye plot is a polar plot, these values now need to be associated
with polar coordinates. Thus, it is necessary to have have a set of corresponding angles, radii and
values. The radii and angles are illustrated in Figure 4.8, with r, θ denoting the radius and angle,
respectively. The whole segmentation of the myocardium into 17 segments is also visualised, even
though it is only the outer ring which is used for the bullseye plot creation. The angles, radii and
values are calculated as follows:
• Values will either be stored in the form a segmentation, where each voxel has a specific value,
or in the form of a mesh, where each point has a specific value. In either case, the values have
to be projected onto the outer wall of the myocardium, and if the values come from a mesh,
they have to be transformed to a volumetric segmentation in the given voxel grid. This is
done by iterating through the points and projecting the value of interest into the voxel grid.
Since the mesh is denser than the volume, there should be enough points for projection from
the points to the volume, such that there is no gaps in the volume representation. Often there
will be more than one point per voxel, then the value of interest is averaged over the voxel.
The output of this is a one voxel thick volume of the outer myocardium wall containing the
desired values.
• Radii are defined in the bullseye plot using the slices of the myocardium in the short axis
coordinate system. The tip of the apex is defined as having radius 0, the next slice of the
myocardium to have radius 1 and so forth.
• Angles are found per slice in the volume containing the desired values, where the values form
a one pixel thick circular shape in each slice of the volume. The centre of mass for the LVM
is calculated and the two coordinates in the short axis plane are extracted. The angle is for
each point calculated as the angle between the given point in short axis coordinates and the
22
==PAGE:27==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
centre of mass in short axis coordinates.
Figure 4.8: Visualization of the polar coordinates of the bullseye plots.
To provide an intuitive understanding of the projection, Figure 4.9 shows both a 3D rendering of
the 17-segment model and the bullseye plot of the 17 segments. This illustrates how the values on
the outer wall of the myocardium is projected down with the polar coordinates. The bullseye plot
in Figure 4.9b deviates slightly from the more generic one in Figure 4.7. However, this is a result
of the generation of the segments being dependent on the length of the myocardium and the nearest
neighbour interpolation of transforming from long-short axis coordinate system to the standard CT
coordinate system.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: The 17-segment model shown as a 3D rendering (a) and the bullseye projection of the 17-
segment model (b).
The bullseye plots will be used for depicting the measurements of all four myocardium features:
• The thickness is calculated from the myocardium vectors and from the vectors can be directly
projected into a bullseye plot.
23
==PAGE:28==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 4 – Methods
• The HU values can be averaged over the myocardium vectors or the percentage of fat voxels
can be calculated for the myocardium vectors. These values can from the vectors be mapped
into a bullseye plot.
• The amount of trabeculation in a point is found by following the corresponding myocardium
vector inward and calculate the length the vector goes through trabeculation before it hits
the inner blood pool. This length is for each myocardium vector projected into the bullseye
coordinate system.
• The strains can be calculated per point in the fixed image domain. By calculating the strains
on the outer surface of the LVM they can be depicted into bullseye plots.
24
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 5
Results
The results of the investigation of robust methods for measuring and visualising the four selected
features of the LVM are presented in this chapter. Since the feature calculations depend on the
segmentation of the LVM this is shown firstly in Section 5.1.
The mathematical investigation of asymmetrical remodelling, amount of fat and scar tissue and
amount of trabeculation are presented as visualisations of thickness, HU values and trabeculation
found in Sections 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4, respectively. These visualisations are shown for both patient
SP01 and MI02. The general idea behind this comparison is to show differences between the two
patients and demonstrate how the methods for finding myocardial features behave on the different
groups.
The results related to the left ventricular systolic function, the strain analysis, are found in Sec-
tion 5.5. This consist of the surface registration and the strain calculations. The strain analysis is
only shown for patient SP01 as the results from both populations convey similar information.
5.1
Segmentation of the Left Ventricle Myocardium
The segmentation of the left ventricle myocardium of patient SP01 and patient MI02 are visualised in
Figures 5.1 and 5.2. The three cross sectional views of the CT scan and the segmentation are taken
roughly in the middle of the segmentation for each axis. The 3D rendering in Figures 5.1b and 5.2b
are made by 3D Slicer [12] which uses the flying edges algorithm [52] for surface creation. The inner
part of the LV is filled with contrast enhanced blood, which the segmentation of the LVM should
not cover. The segmentation of the LV blood pool is visualised in Figure B.1 in Appendix B.1.
25
==PAGE:30==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
(a) Axial plane.
(b) 3D rendering.
(c) Coronal plane.
(d) Sagittal plane.
Figure 5.1: Segmentation of the left ventricle myocardium for patient SP01.
(a) Axial plane.
(b) 3D rendering.
(c) Coronal plane.
(d) Sagittal plane.
Figure 5.2: Segmentation of the left ventricle myocardium for patient MI02.
26
==PAGE:31==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
5.2
Myocardium Thickness
The inner and outer myocardium walls are extracted from the segmentation of the LVM and are
now used for the calculation of myocardium thickness.
Due to the contraction of the left ventricular myocardium, the thickness of the myocardium changes
over a heartbeat. This change in thickness is seen in Figures 5.3 and 5.4, where the myocardium
thickness of two patients are shown in both the ED and ES phases.
For both myocardia the
histograms show, how the thickness distribution has been shifted with some millimeters from the
ED to the ES phase. When comparing the two patients, the histograms of the thickness in the
ED phase (Figures 5.3a and 5.4a) are quite similar. However, the histograms of the ES phase
(Figures 5.3b and 5.4b) are different, with the thickness of patient MI02 resembling less of a
normal distribution, than that of patient SP01.
The bullseye plots of the myocardium thickness show the physical locations of the thicknesses.
By comparing thickness in ED and ES it is possible to get a sense of where the contraction of
the myocardium is happening.
Patient SP01’s myocardium contracts more or less uniformly as
Figures 5.3c and 5.3d shows. This is in contrast to the myocardium of patient MI02, where the
right side of the LVM has a substantially larger change in thickness than the left side.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3: The thickness of the myocardium from patient SP01 shown in histograms and bullseye plots.
(a) and (c) show the ED phase while (b) and (d) show the ES phase.
27
==PAGE:32==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4: The thickness of the myocardium from patient MI02 shown in histograms and bullseye plots.
(a) and (c) show the ED phase while (b) and (d) show the ES phase.
5.3
Hounsfield Unit Sampling in the Myocardium
The myocardium vectors are sampled every 0.5 mm and every sample point is mapped to the CT
volume to calculate the HU value at the point. The HU is averaged for every distance and plotted
as a function of the distance from the inner myocardium wall in Figure 5.5. The LVM is divided
into septum and not septum, which in both Figures 5.5a and 5.5b have quite different HU values.
The segmentation of the septum for patient SP01 can be found in Figure B.2 in Appendix B.1.
Comparing HU values of patient SP01 and patient MI02, there is a clear difference in the range of
HU. In general the infarct patient has values 50 HU lower than the standard patient. The peak of
the septum curve is around 8 mm from the inner myocardium wall for both patients, but there is a
difference in around 100 HU of the peak values.
In Figure 5.5 the HU values are divided into bins based on distance from the inner wall, these
bins are then averaged in the figure. Another way to visualise the HU of the samples is to average
over each vector instead, to show the spatial distribution of HU in the myocardium walls. This
is visualised in bullseye plots in Figure 5.6. In general these plots show how patient SP01 has a
higher average HU than patient MI02. Both of the patients have some local extrema in the physical
HU distribution.
28
==PAGE:33==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
(a) Patient SP01.
(b) Patient MI02
Figure 5.5: Average HU based on distance from inner myocardium wall, vertical lines correspond to one
standard deviation in either direction. The HU is divided into septum and not septum for the plot.
(a) Patient SP01.
(b) Patient MI02.
Figure 5.6: HU values averaged over the myocardium walls i.e. averaged along each myocardium vector.
(a) Patient SP01.
(b) Patient MI02.
Figure 5.7: Average HU in each of the 17 segments in the myocardium, vertical lines correspond to one
standard deviation in either direction.
Using the 17 segment model, all samples from the vectors in each segment are averaged in order to
29
==PAGE:34==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
get a mean value and standard deviation per segment. These mean values and standard deviations
are shown in Figure 5.7.
It is observed that the trends for the segments are similar in both
Figures 5.7a and 5.7b. However, the plot for patient MI02 is shifted around 50 HU down on the
y-axis in comparison with patient SP01. In both patients the segments covering most of the septum
(segments 2, 3, 8, 9, 14) tend to have higher average HU values than the other segments.
The percentage of fat tissue in the LVM is visualised in Figure 5.8 for the two patients SP01 and
MI02. Comparing the two patients there seems to be significantly more fat tissue spread out in
patient MI02. Both the area and intensity of fat tissue, is larger in patient MI02.
(a) Patient SP01.
(b) Patient MI02.
Figure 5.8: Percentage of fat tissue between myocardium walls, calculated over each myocardium vector.
5.4
Trabeculation
The segmentation of trabeculation in a CT scan is visualised for patient SP01 and patient MI02 in
Figures 5.9 and 5.10. Both figures show the trabeculated area as a small ring just inside the inner
myocardium wall. The trabeculated area covers some of the rigged part of the blood pool. This is
seen in the coronal plane of the segmentation (Figure 5.9c) in the bottom part, where both blood
and muscle in a short band are part of the trabeculated area. However, it is difficult to see the exact
texture which the trabeculation covers in these figures.
In Figure 5.11 the amount of trabeculation for two patients is shown in bullseye plots.
Both
patients have trabeculation in most parts of the myocardium with values between 2 mm and 6 mm.
Each patient has a maxima where the trabeculation reaches around 14 mm locally.
30
==PAGE:35==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
(a) Axial plane.
(b) 3D rendering.
(c) Coronal plane.
(d) Sagittal plane.
Figure 5.9: Segmentation of the trabeculated area inside the left ventricle for patient SP01.
(a) Axial plane.
(b) 3D rendering.
(c) Coronal plane.
(d) Sagittal plane.
Figure 5.10: Segmentation of the trabeculated area inside the left ventricle for patient MI02.
31
==PAGE:36==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
(a) PatientSP01.
(b) Patient MI02.
Figure 5.11: Amount of trabeculation inside myocardium visualised as bullseye plots.
5.5
Myocardial Strain
5.5.1
Surface Registration of Myocardia
The transformation of the left ventricle myocardium from the ED phase to the ES phase for pa-
tient SP01 has been calculated using the elastix toolbox.
This transformation can be seen in
Figure 5.12, where the myocardium in Figure 5.12a is transformed to fit the myocardium in
Figure 5.12b. Visually the transformation from ED to ES seems to be close to the actual my-
ocardium in the ES as Figure 5.12c shows. There are some spots for both the inner and the outer
myocardium walls, where the registration does not line up. The ripples on the surfaces are voxel
sampling artefacts.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.12: Registration from ED to ES for patient SP01. (a) myocardium in ED phase, (b) myocardium
in ES phase, (c) myocardium transformed from ED to ES (purple) overlaid the myocardium in ES (cyan).
The fitted myocardium is shown in Figure 5.13 with a colour coding representing the normal
direction before the transformation. The colour coding makes the contractions in Figures 5.13b
and 5.13c easier to spot, as the change in colour is swift in these spots. This can be spotted in e.g.
the middle of Figure 5.13b, where the transformed myocardium contracts more locally.
32
==PAGE:37==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.13: The transformed myocardium for patient SP01 shown from three different angles. The colour
coding corresponds to the x-direction of the surface normal before transformation. Red denotes surface
normal in the positive x-direction while blue denotes negative x-direction.
The yellow, green and cyan
denotes x-direction normals in between 1 and -1.
5.5.2
Strain Calculation
The main feature of the transformation from the registration is the calculation of myocardial strain
induced by the transformation. The strains of the transformation in shown in Figure 5.12 are
visualised in bullseye plots in Figure 5.14. The plots show the strain from the outside surface
of the LVM in the transformation.
Overall, the radial strain is positive throughout the whole
myocardium. This translates into the myocardium becoming thicker in the transformation. The
longitudinal strain is mostly negative, corresponding to lengthwise local contraction in most parts
of the myocardium. However, some places do have positive values equivalent of some lengthwise
expansion in these places. The circumferential strain is also generally negative or close to zero.
There are two spots in the circumferential strain which are more negative than the rest and some
small spots with positive strain.
(a) Radial strain.
(b) Longitudinal strain.
(c) Circumferential strain.
Figure 5.14: Strain on the outer surface of the myocardium for the transformation from ED to ES in
patient SP01.
The development of myocardial strain can be found by calculating strain sequentially for all 20 CT
scans in the CFA series. This is visualised in Figure 5.15 for both the mean value of the strains
and for a single point during the series. When looking at the mean strain values for all the points
the longitudinal strain and the circumferential strain have negative values in the first part of the
CFA series. They have the lowest values around 30-35% into the CFA series which is also where the
ES phase lies. Physically this corresponds to the myocardium length shortening and a reduction of
33
==PAGE:38==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 5 – Results
the myocardial circumference in general. After the peak in negative strain the longitudinal strain
goes back to around zero while the circumferential strain becomes quite positive. The radial strain
starts off by going from 0.0 to 0.2 from ED to ES. In other words, the myocardium becomes 20%
thicker when going from ED to ES. After the ES phase the radial strain is constant at around 20%.
The tracking of strain in the centre of mass of segment 8 (Figure 5.15b) has some similar trends to
the tracking of mean strain. The longitudinal strain and the circumferential strain become negative
when going from ED to ES and then rise afterwards. The radial strain becomes positive from ED
to ES and stays somewhat positive. In general the strain captured in the centre of mass for segment
8 are more noisy than the mean strains of Figure 5.15a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.15: Cumulative strain over a CFA series for patient SP01. (a) shows the mean strain of the LVM,
(b) shows the strain for the centre of mass of segment 8.
34
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6
Discussion
The four introduced LVM characteristics related to MI, correspond to the four introduced features.
The goal of this project was to develop methods for measuring and visualising these features, the
outcome from this is evaluated in Section 6.1. There is no ground truth of any of the measured
features of the myocardium.
Thus, the evaluation of the features is based more in the visual
representation and how plausible the physical implications of the measured feature are.
Afterwards, the segmentation of the LVM, the evaluation of bullseye plots and the limitations of CFA
CT scans are discussed in Sections 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4. Finally, a perspective on future applications
of the work is presented in Section 6.5.
6.1
Measurement of Myocardium Characteristics
6.1.1
Asymmetrical Remodeling of the Myocardium
The thickness measurement of the LVM is done to assess whether the myocardium is asymmetric
or not. This can be done visually from the bullseye plot while keeping the definition of asymmet-
rical LVM from Kwiecinski et al. [25] in mind; the myocardium wall locally being ≥13 mm and
being > 1.5-fold the thickness of the opposing myocardium wall in the ED phase. The thickness
measurement of the LVM seems very physically plausible. Examining the bullseye plots in (c) and
(d) of Figures 5.3 and 5.4 provides insight of the thickness distribution of the LVM. The LVM is
generally thicker in the ES state, when it is contracted. This corresponds to the physical intuition
that if the LVM becomes shorter in length and smaller in circumference during contraction then it
has to become thicker, as there is the same amount of muscle tissue.
The asymmetrical myocardium definition is in the ED phase and from the thickness plots of this
phase the two patients do not have an asymmetrical myocardia. However, in the ES phase of the
infarct patient (Figure 5.4d) the right part of the LVM appears to be thicker than the left side
of the LVM. This is also apparent in the thickness histogram where most distributions follow a
Gaussian with a left tail. The distribution in Figure 5.4b does not appear Gaussian, as the peak
around 13 mm is too large.
The bullseye plots for thickness are quite interpretative in relation to the physical shape of the LVM.
Except at the outer edges of the plot. Some values here approach 0 mm while others are cut off
around 10 mm. This is generally due to unclear point correspondence at the edge of the myocardium
35
==PAGE:40==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 6 – Discussion
and how abrupt the segmentation of the myocardium stops at the top. In general, the left edges of
the plot have lower measured thickness and sometimes bullseye plots are lacking values in this part
of the plot. This can be explained by the aortic valve which the LV pumps blood through. The
angle of the aortic valve compared to the long axis through the LV can differ from patient to patient
also in different phases. This explains the irregularities in this part of the bullseye plots.
6.1.2
Fat and Scar Tissue in the Left Ventricle Myocardium
The goal of sampling HU in the LVM is to relate the sampled values with fat and scar tissue in the
LVM. The sampled HU values are averaged over length from inner wall, the myocardium vectors and
the 17 segments illustrated in Figures 5.5, 5.6 and 5.7, respectively. The average over distance is
separated into a septum and not septum part for better interpretability of the graphs. It is clear
that there is a difference between the septum and the rest of the LVM, due to the coronary artery of
the septum. However, these graphs do not convey information about fat and scar tissue in the LVM.
The graphs mostly depict the general difference in the HU of the different myocardia. A plausible
explanation for this difference in HU is a higher degree of myocardial ischemia in the infarct patient,
leading to less contrast filled blood flowing into the myocardium during the CT scan. Both of the
graphs depicts high HU values within the first mm of the myocardium wall in comparison to the
rest of the LVM. This is probably due to a high degree of smoothing of the inner wall, voxelization
effects or mapping errors from the mesh to the volume. All of which can move the first sampling
point in towards the blood pool.
The goal of the bullseye plot of the HU distribution is to locate areas in the LVM with a trend of
lower values. These areas would correspond to local fat or scar tissue. In the plots in Figure 5.6
there is substantial variation over the HU values for both patients. If all of these variations are from
fat and scar tissue there would be a substantial amount of fat and scar tissue scattered through
the LVMs of both patients. Instead it seems more plausible that the variation in intensity in the
bullseye plots are caused by the differences in perfusion of blood in the myocardium. Some of the
variations could also be attributed to noise in the scans.
The idea of averaging the values of the bullseye plots by the 17 segments is two-fold: Firstly, there
are fewer values to keep track of and a local cluster of fat or scar tissue remain visible. Secondly,
if a cluster is present in one of the segments the mean value of this segment will be significantly
lower than the rest of the segments. For this to be true the fat or scar tissue would have to occupy
most of the segment. A small cluster would not have such a big impact on the mean value and
would likely not be noticed. Furthermore, the standard deviation within each segment is around
50 −100 HU and a small cluster of scar or fat tissue would not be such a big outlier based on HU
values. Additionally, the 17 segments will only show the cluster if it is confined to one segment.
The segments of the 17 segment model is based on angles and lengths, not directly on which of the
coronary arteries supply the given part of the myocardium. Thus, there is no guarantee for e.g. scar
tissue from previous MI to be encapsulated in one segment only.
The results of direct measurement of fat tissue in the LVM by thresholding HU are shown in
Figure 5.8. This shows where in the LVM the prevalence of fat lies. Both patients seem to have
some clusters of fat in the myocardium, although the clusters in the infarct patients appear to be
larger. This is both by value, which corresponds to the amount of fat voxels in the direction between
the myocardium walls, and by number of nonzero points in the bullseye plot. The places containing
fat tissue can be matched up with the slightly darker areas in Figure 5.6. Although, the extent to
which the HU plot is darker in some areas is hard to spot without knowing it. Thus, the visualisation
presented in Figure 5.8 is necessary for accurately assessing the amount of myocardial fat.
36
==PAGE:41==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 6 – Discussion
6.1.3
Trabeculation Inside the Left Ventricle
Contrary to the other myocardial characteristics in this project, the trabeculation inside the LV
is measured directly. The segmentations in Figures 5.9 and 5.10 show attempts to measure the
trabeculation. These segmentations cover the perimeter of the blood pool and ridges of tissue next
to it. However, in the axial and the sagittal plane a part of the segmentation covers a larger dark
area.
This area is the part of the papillary muscles and should therefore not be considered as
trabeculation. In the coronal plane the top left part of the segmentation appears to be part of the
blood pool and not trabeculated area.
Some of the pitfalls in the segmentation of trabeculation can be attributed to the segmentation
procedure. The segmentation of trabeculation is based on morphological operations of the LV blood
pool and some of these operations seemingly do not generalize to all myocardia. This can explain
some of the mistakes in the segmentation. Although, finetuning the parameters of the operation
will help, the probability that this would generalize is poor. Another segmentation method for the
trabeculation is needed for optimal results.
The definition of trabeculated area is also a bit vague. It can be unclear what exactly is part of
the LVM, the trabeculated area and the blood pool. The segmentation in Figure 5.9a shows this
well. Here the top left part of the segmentation seems to be the border between the blood pool and
the LVM. However, there could be some small ridges in the blood pool causing the classification as
trabeculation instead of blood pool or LVM. By analysing Figure 5.11b (showing the distribution
of trabeculation inside the LV) it it seen that there are almost no zero values. This corresponds to
having trabeculation on the entire inner myocardium. This is possible, but it is inconsistent with
the reportings of [53, 20, 69]. It is more plausible that this is the border between blood pool and
LVM, which has been segmented as trabeculation.
The bright areas of Figure 5.11 should ideally be areas of great trabeculation. However, as the
segmentation of trabeculation covers the papillary muscles as well, it is more likely that these are
responsible for the bright spots. Thus, the bullseye plots of trabeculation do not convey as much
information about the trabeculation as the views of the segmentation do.
6.1.4
Left Ventricular Systolic Function
Assessment of the left ventricular systolic function is conducted in this project by strain analysis.
The strain analysis relies on a registration of the LVM in one phase to the LVM in another phase.
Thus, an inadequate registration will give unreliable strains, which in turn will give the wrong
interpretation of the LVM caontractions. The registration from ED to ES, shown in Figure 5.12,
initially appears to be a good registration. However, Figure 5.13 shows the registration to not
be completely uniform. The colour coding in the figure shows that a substantial amount of the
LVM has been transformed closely together. Meaning that although the registration looks good in
Figure 5.12c, the registration will not be optimal for strain calculation.
The strains in Figure 5.14 show some of the expected tendencies, i.e. positive radial strain, negative
longitudinal and circumferential strain, but the distributions of the strains in the LVM are not very
uniform. Especially, the longitudinal and circumferential strains show areas of great negative strain,
which are neighbouring areas of great positive strain.
This would imply that some part of the
LVM becomes longer and some parts become shorter when the LVM contracts. The expectation
here would be that the whole myocardium contracts and the longitudinal strain should generally
be negative. The radial strain seems the most reasonable of the calculated strains. It implies that
the myocardium overall becomes thicker going from ED to ES as expected. The problem with the
radial strain is that the local maximum values are quite high. An expansion of 0.8 implies that
37
==PAGE:42==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 6 – Discussion
the myocardium is almost doubling in thickness, which is outside of the normal reported range of
40%-50% radial expansion [58, 6].
The cumulative mean strain of a cardiac cycle (Figure 5.15) shows the correct tendencies during
the first part the cycle, but then it has one great pitfall: the strains do not sum to zero in the end of
the CFA cycle. The implication of the graph in Figure 5.15a is that overall the LVM has expanded
∼20% in both the radial and the circumferential directions during a cardiac cycle. This would on
average give the LVM a 20% larger circumference and increase its thickness by 20%. Obviously this
is not the case, the size of the myocardium does not substantially change after each cardiac cycle.
Instead, the desired outcome is that all strains start and end in zero. The cumulative strain of a
single point in the CFA series (Figure 5.15b) is quite noisy and ends with too much positive radial
and longitudinal strain. The noise may come from non-uniformness of the transformations, as there
can be expansion at this exact point but enough contraction in the neighbourhood such that it in
general contracts.
The calculated strains are derived from the myocardia registration, and due to the non-optimal
transformation, the calculated strains do not precisely correspond to the movement of the LVM.
Nevertheless, the strains do show a general alignment with the transformation. For instance, the
areas of high negative strain located just above the center in Figures 5.14b and 5.14c seem to
correlate with the significant contraction depicted in Figure 5.13b. This suggests that the strain
calculation is accurate, while the transformation may be flawed. However, the cumulative strains do
not converge to zero. This raises the possibility that the strain calculation itself may be incorrect or
inconsistent. Whether the strains are calculated correctly from the transformation cannot be said
with certainty as there is an additional problem in the transformations.
The non-optimal transformation for this registration can be attributed to several factors. The most
prominent factor is too much freedom in the transformation. Having a more restricted transforma-
tion can make the registration worse, but it can also force it to be more uniform. A restriction tried
in this project is the bending energy loss term LBE(µ) (4.3), penalizing high second order derivatives
in the transformation. This is interpreted as penalizing areas of high compression next to areas of
high expansion. The used weighting of bending energy penalty at 0.4 could be too low, although
this is already a substantial part of the loss. Thus, another loss penalizing non-uniformness could be
needed or other types of transformations, as Geometry-constrained diffusion [4], should be explored.
An improvement in the registration could be made by having the corresponding points, used in the
corresponding points loss LCP(µ) (4.4), convey more information. Using the 17 segments to create
control points can only convey the information which the 17 segments are created from. This is the
length of the LVM in the long-axis and the orientation of the LV center compared to the RV center.
The control points from the 17 segments are evenly spread out, thus they should enforce a more
uniform transformation. However, the control points could have a physical meaning, which would
convey more information. Control points with physical meaning could be:
• Border points of start and stop of the interventricular septum.
• Start point of papillary muscles.
• Splits of the coronary arteries.
Unlike the 17 segment control points these points would give a better indication of the actual
movement of the LVM during a heart beat.
38
==PAGE:43==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 6 – Discussion
6.2
Segmentation of the Left Ventricle Myocardium
The segmentation of the LVM (Figures 5.1 and 5.2) is essential for the four myocardial features
measured. An incorrect segmentation of the myocardium will directly influence the measurement of
features. Each of the features will be influenced as:
a) The thickness of the LVM is calculated by the distance from the inner to the outer border of
the LVM segmentation. Thus, over segmentation or under segmentation will lead to flaws in
the borders, which will directly affect the thickness estimation over the LVM.
b) The HU sampling starts at the inner wall of the LVM segmentation and ends at the outer
wall. Sampling HU in an over segmented LVM will sample values outside the actual LVM, e.g.
blood, air or other soft tissue. This will give an incorrect estimate of the HU distribution and
the goal of assessing scar and fat tissue from HU becomes more unreliable. Likewise, sampling
HU in an under segmented LVM will not sample some places of the myocardium. This is less
problematic as wrong values will not be sampled, although the HU sampling will not represent
the actual distribution of HU in the LVM.
c) The trabeculaiton is influenced the least by incorrect LVM segmentation, as it is more reliant
on the inner blood segmentation. However, a completely wrong segmentation of the LVM will
lead to the blood pool segmentation not covering the whole blood pool. In turn making the
segmentation of trabeculaiton wrong.
d) The registration of two LVMs is dependent on the LVM segmentations. If one LVM is over
segmented and the other LVM is under segmented, then the registration will compress more
locally than the myocardium actually does and the calculated strain will not represent the ac-
tual strain in the LVM. Thus, the strain calculations are very dependent on the segmentations
of the LVM being accurate.
Overall the segmentation of the LVM is of high quality. However, there are parts of the segmentation
which are under segmented. The segmentation of patient SP01 does not surround the aortic valve,
seen in the top left and top right part of Figures 5.1c and 5.1d, respectively. In the coronal plane
the outer border seems to be cut off with almost straight lines. The part of the aortic valve is
slightly better segmented for patient MI02, though it is still under segmented. The inner borders of
both segmentations are also not perfect. There are small patches of blood included as part of the
LVM, though they should be part of the trabeculated area. These flaws in the segmentation will
affect the measured features in some ways. Generally the small flaws in the segmentation do not
alter the conclusions of the effectiveness of the measurements, as the measures can be viewed with
this in mind. Although, this could be an issue for the further testing of the clinical hypothesis from
the derived features.
6.3
Bullseye Plots as a Visualization Tool
The bullseye plots are an effective way of communicating measurements of the LVM in a 2D plot
while maintaining the physical neighbourhood of the values. By saving the values of interest in
either a mesh or a one voxel thin segmentation the values can be projected down to the bullseye
plot. This implies that any type of measurement which changes spatially in the myocardium can be
shown in the bullseye plot. For this project this includes: the 17 segment model, LVM thickness,
average HU, amount of fat, amount of trabeculation and strains. The correspondence between the
physical placement in the bullseye plot is what is visualised in Figure 4.9. This is also seen when
comparing Figure 5.13 to Figure 5.14, where the high negative longitudinal and circumferential
strains align with the compression of the transformed coloured LVM.
39
==PAGE:44==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 6 – Discussion
In several of the bullseye plots there is a problem with the values on the outer border. A reasonable
explanation for this is not from the projection from 3D into the bullseye plot, but instead it is
the myocardium vectors at the top of the myocardium which are the cause of the problem. The
first bullseye plot of the 17 segments (Figure 4.9b) has no anomalies. While the bullseye plots
of thickness, HU sampling and strain, who all heavily rely on the myocardium vectors, has these
anomalies in the border. If the bullseye plots left out some of the top slices the appearance would be
prettier. This would of course negate some of the information in these slices and a better approach
would be to make a more robust approach for the myocardium vector generation at the top of the
LVM.
6.4
Limitations of CFA CT Scans
Working with CFA CT scans gives opportunities for e.g. myocardial strain analysis or comparing the
thickness of the LVM in the ED and ES phases. However, it still has its limitations in this project.
The resolution of a CT scan in a CFA series is significantly lower in the z-axis compared to the x-
and y-axis. This is seen somewhat in the initial showcase of the data (Figure 3.1), but it is more
apparent in the segmentations of the LVM (Figure 5.1) and the trabeculated area (Figure 5.9). It
is the coronal and sagittal planes which show the resolution in the z-direction. As a consequence of
this the segmentations are also of lower resolution in the z-axis. When the segmentation is converted
into a surface representation it raises the question: How much should the surface be smoothed? If
the surface is not smoothed then the jagged part of the segmentation will show in the surface. If
the surface is smoothed too much the jagged part will disappear, but so will all of the other details
on the surface. It is important to find a good balance in the amount of surface smoothing, and from
some of the figures it would appear that not sufficient smoothing has been done. The myocardia in
Figure 5.12 have jagged parts, which resembles insufficient smoothing. The same can indirectly be
seen in Figure 5.4, where the bullseye plots of the thickness shows some patterns in the top and
bottom. These patterns could very well stem from the segmentation at this place being too jagged.
Having a higher resolution in the z-direction could yield segmentations of higher quality and these
problems could be avoided.
The temporal resolution for CFA CT scans is 20 scans per RR-cycle, so if a patient has a resting heart
rate of 60 bpm, this gives a frame rate of 20 frames per second (fps). Other types of imaging used for
strain analysis have a higher temporal resolution. Two methods which have also been used for LVM
strain analysis are speckle tracking echocardiography (STE) and Doppler tissue imaging (DTI).
These methods require frame rates of 40-80 fps and ≥140 fps, respectively [32]. The difference
in the frame rates compared to the CFA CT is substantial and the lower frame rate may cause
larger differences in the myocardium between each frame, leading to the registration of myocardia
having more pitfalls. A low frame rate can also have the consequence that the actual ES phase of
the myocardium is not captured. The ES phase is the point of maximal contraction in the LVM
and this only lasts a fraction of a second. Thus, there is great chance of missing this point in time
with the CFA CT scans. The biggest advantage CFA CT has in strain analysis is the 3D spatial
resolution compared to the 2D spatial resolution of STE and DPI. This gives the opportunity to
analyse strain in the whole LVM at a time instead of only in a single slice.
6.5
Future Work
The motivation for measuring the four myocardium features is their relation to MI. Thus, for each
of the features individually it would be of great interest to measure the correlation with MI. This
40
==PAGE:45==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 6 – Discussion
could be investigated using a simple approach where each feature is condensed into a single number:
a) The thickness is condensed into a binary variable telling if the LVM is asymmetric or not.
b) The HU values are used to calculate the overall percentage of fat tissue in the LVM.
c) The trabeculation can be compressed into a relative measure of the trabeculation volume
compared to the overall LV volume.
d) The strain offers insight of the systolic function of the LV. The deviation of strain in a patient
compared to the healthy strain distribution can be used as a measurement.
These numbers can now be individually correlated with MI utilising the data the Copenhagen
General Population Study to test the clinical hypotheses.
However, each feature need not be simplified into a single number for the testing of the clinical
hypotheses. Instead the bullseye representation of each feature could be the input into a bigger
data driven machine learning model. The output of such a model would then be a risk factor for a
patients risk of suffering a cardiovascular event. This model can be trained to have an explainable
latent space, which gives the possibility of finding clusters in the latent space. These clusters have
the possibility to be interpretable. E.g. a cluster of patients with asymmetric LVM and a very
deviating systolic function could correlate with risk of MI or other cardiovascular event. By using a
model with a good latent space representation it is also feasible to add other patient data as age, sex
patient journals etc. This can give new clusters or make the risk assessment itself more accurate.
Ultimately, the objective is to measure the four mentioned features directly after a patient has
undergone a CFA CT scan in the hospital.
The features passed into a model trained for risk
assessment of cardiovascular events, thereby helping doctors with the risk stratification of the patient
and taking the correct course of action. The feasibility of using such a model in a clinical setting
remains to be investigated. Nevertheless, the calculation of the myocardium features is an initial
step towards such a model.
41
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
This project introduces four different characteristics for the left ventricle myocardium which have
previously been shown to correlate with incidents of myocardial infarction.
From each of these
characteristics a feature is derived. This project sought to measure and visualise these features.
The features; myocardium thickness and HU distribution of the myocardium, were successfully
measured. The myocardium thickness appears to be realistic and the visualisations are intuitive to
understand. The measurement of HU in the myocardium are hard to interpret initially. However,
despite the measurements themselves being noisy, the visualisation of fat thresholding evidently
provides the distribution of fat tissue in the LVM. The segmentation of trabeculation in the LV
proved to be more difficult than expected. The definition is often ambiguous and the inclusion of
the papillary muscles in the segmentation has compromised the interpretability of the results. The
calculation of strain during a cardiac cycle shows great promise. Unfortunately, the transformation
from which the strains are calculated had problems with non-uniformity. This led the transformation
to be less realistic. Thus, the computed strains were not the actual strain of the myocardium, but
a representation of the transformation.
The method for displaying information of the LVM in bullseye plots works for most types of infor-
mation. The bullseye plots keeps the spatial information of the values intact while projecting the
values of the LVM into a 2D representation. They were successfully implemented for the presenta-
tion of myocardial thickness, fat percentage and strains. The visualisation of HU distribution and
trabeculation were also possible with the bullseye plots, although more cumbersome to analyse.
The work of this thesis serves as preliminary work for the investigation of the LVM features and
the correlation with MI as well as other cardiovascular events.
The features of the LVM and
visualisation of these, were the focus of this project.
A procedure for the measurement of four
myocardium features is suggested. Two of the features were measured with success while the other
two posed more challenging. Correlating the features with MI is the next step of the investigation.
42
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 8
References
[1]
A. Selcuk Adabag. “Sudden Death After Myocardial Infarction”. In: JAMA 300.17 (Nov.
2008), p. 2022. issn: 0098-7484. doi: 10.1001/jama.2008.553. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1001/jama.2008.553.
[2]
Yasmine Aguib and Jassim Al Suwaidi. “The Copenhagen City Heart Study (Østerbroundersøgelsen)”.
In: Global Cardiology Science and Practice 2015.3 (July 2015), p. 33. issn: 2305-7823. doi:
10.5339/gcsp.2015.33. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.5339/gcsp.2015.33.
[3]
Sung Soo Ahn, Young-Jin Kim, Jin Hur, Hye-Jeong Lee, Tae Hoon Kim, Kyu Ok Choe,
and Byoung Wook Choi. “CT Detection of Subendocardial Fat in Myocardial Infarction”.
In: American Journal of Roentgenology 192.2 (2009), pp. 532–537. issn: 1546-3141. doi: 10.
2214/ajr.08.1608. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.2214/AJR.08.1608.
[4]
Per Rønsholt Andresen and Mads Nielsen. “Non-rigid registration by geometry-constrained
diffusion”. In: Medical Image Analysis 5.2 (2001), pp. 81–88.
[5]
Louise Kleis Axelsen. url: https://www.herlevhospital.dk/afdelinger-og-klinikker/
klinisk- biokemisk- afdeling/forskning/Sider/Herlev- oesterbroundersoegelsen.
aspx.
[6]
Bernadette Brady, Gerard King, Ross T. Murphy, and Declan Walsh. “Myocardial strain: a
clinical review”. In: Irish Journal of Medical Science (1971 -) 192.4 (Nov. 2022), pp. 1649–
1656. issn: 1863-4362. doi: 10.1007/s11845-022-03210-8. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s11845-022-03210-8.
[7]
Oliver Bruder, Anja Wagner, et al. European Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (eurocmr)
Registry – Multi National Results from 57 centers in 15 countries - journal of cardiovascular
magnetic resonance. 2013. url: https://jcmr-online.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.
1186/1532-429X-15-9#Abs1.
[8]
Steffen Bruns, Jelmer M. Wolterink, et al. “Deep learning-based whole-heart segmentation
in 4D contrast-enhanced cardiac CT”. In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 142 (2022),
43
==PAGE:48==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 8 – References
p. 105191. issn: 0010-4825. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.105191.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482521009859.
[9]
Gregory Burke, Joao Lima, Nathan D. Wong, and Jagat Narula. “The Multiethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis”. In: Global Heart 11.3 (2016). Legacy of Multiethnic Study of Atherosclerosis,
pp. 267–268. issn: 2211-8160. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gheart.2016.09.001.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2211816016307128.
[10]
Manuel D. Cerqueira, Neil J. Weissman, et al. “Standardized Myocardial Segmentation and
Nomenclature for Tomographic Imaging of the Heart”. In: Circulation 105.4 (2002), pp. 539–
542. doi: 10.1161/hc0402.102975. url: https://doi.org/10.1161%2Fhc0402.102975.
[11]
Coronary Arteries — The Texas Heart Institute. https://www.texasheart.org/heart-
health/heart-information-center/topics/the-coronary-arteries/. Accessed: 2024-
01-05. 2024.
[12]
A. Fedorov, R. Beichel, et al. “3D Slicer as an Image Computing Platform for the Quantitative
Imaging Network”. In: Magnetic Resonance Imaging 30.9 (2012), pp. 1323–1341.
[13]
Graham J. Fent, Pankaj Garg, et al. “The utility of global longitudinal strain in the identifica-
tion of prior myocardial infarction in patients with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction”.
In: The International Journal of Cardiovascular Imaging 33.10 (Apr. 2017), pp. 1561–1569.
issn: 1573-0743. doi: 10.1007/s10554-017-1138-7. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10554-017-1138-7.
[14]
Heart Anatomy — The Texas Heart Institute. https : / / www . texasheart . org / heart -
health/heart-information-center/topics/heart-anatomy/. Accessed: 2024-01-05. 2024.
[15]
Gianluca Iacobellis. “Local and systemic effects of the multifaceted epicardial adipose tissue
depot”. In: Nature Reviews Endocrinology 11.6 (Apr. 2015), pp. 363–371. issn: 1759-5037.
doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2015.58. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrendo.2015.58.
[16]
Fabian Isensee, Jens Petersen, et al. “nnU-Net: Self-adapting Framework for U-Net-Based
Medical Image Segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1809.10486 (2021). arXiv: 1809.10486. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.10486.
[17]
Fabian Isensee, Constantin Ulrich, Tassilo Wald, and Klaus H. Maier-Hein. Extending nnU-Net
is all you need. 2022. arXiv: 2208.10791 [eess.IV].
[18]
Yuanfeng Ji, Haotian Bai, et al. “AMOS: A Large-Scale Abdominal Multi-Organ Benchmark
for Versatile Medical Image Segmentation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08023 (2022).
[19]
Risa Kashiwagi-Takayama, Junji Kozawa, et al. Myocardial fat accumulation is associated with
cardiac dysfunction in patients with type 2 diabetes, especially in elderly or female patients: A
retrospective observational study - cardiovascular diabetology. 2023. url: https://cardiab.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12933-023-01782-y.
[20]
Nadine Kawel-Boehm, Robyn L McClelland, et al. Hypertrabeculated left ventricular my-
ocardium in relationship to myocardial function and fibrosis: The multi-ethnic study of Atheroscle-
rosis. 2017. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5584648/.
44
==PAGE:49==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 8 – References
[21]
Stefan Klein, Josien P. W. Pluim, Marius Staring, and Max A. Viergever. Adaptive stochastic
gradient descent optimisation for Image Registration - International Journal of Computer
Vision. 2008. url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11263-008-0168-y.
[22]
Stefan Klein, Marius Staring, Keelin Murphy, Max A. Viergever, and Josien P.W. Pluim.
“elastix: a toolbox for intensity-based medical image registration”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Medical Imaging 29.1 (2010), pp. 196–205.
[23]
A Kosaraju, A Goyal, Y Grigorova, et al. “Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction”. In: (2023).
[Updated 2023 Apr 24]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing;
2023 Jan-. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459131/.
[24]
T. Kuznetsova, L. Herbots, T. Richart, J. D’hooge, L. Thijs, R. H. Fagard, M.-C. Herregods,
and J. A. Staessen. “Left ventricular strain and strain rate in a general population”. In:
European Heart Journal 29.16 (July 2008), pp. 2014–2023. issn: 1522-9645. doi: 10.1093/
eurheartj/ehn280. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehn280.
[25]
Jacek Kwiecinski, Calvin W L Chin, et al. “Adverse prognosis associated with asymmetric
myocardial thickening in aortic stenosis”. In: European Heart Journal - Cardiovascular Imaging
19.3 (2017), pp. 347–356. doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jex052. url: https://doi.org/10.1093%
2Fehjci%2Fjex052.
[26]
Phong T. Lee, Marc R. Dweck, Sparsh Prasher, Anoop Shah, Steve E. Humphries, Dudley J.
Pennell, Hugh E. Montgomery, and John R. Payne. “Left Ventricular Wall Thickness and
the Presence of Asymmetric Hypertrophy in Healthy Young Army Recruits”. In: Circulation:
Cardiovascular Imaging 6.2 (2013), pp. 262–267. doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.112.979294.
[27]
Left Ventricular Segments for Echocardiography and Cardiac Imaging. url: https://ecgwaves.
com/topic/left-ventricular-segments-echocardiography-cardiac-imaging/.
[28]
Chung-Chih Lin, Chih-Yu Yang, Zhuhuang Zhou, and Shuicai Wu. “Intelligent health monitor-
ing system based on smart clothing”. In: International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks
14.8 (Aug. 2018), p. 155014771879431. issn: 1550-1477. doi: 10.1177/1550147718794318.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1550147718794318.
[29]
Yubai Liu, Fucang Jia, and Shouliang Qi. “Minimal Information Loss Attention U-Net for
abdominal CT of kidney cancers segmentation”. In: Jan. 2019. doi: 10.24926/548719.030.
[30]
William E. Lorensen and Harvey E. Cline. “Marching cubes: A high resolution 3D surface
construction algorithm”. In: Proceedings of the 14th annual conference on Computer graphics
and interactive techniques. SIGGRAPH ’87. ACM, 1987. doi: 10.1145/37401.37422. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/37401.37422.
[31]
Leonardo De Luca, Luca Paolucci, et al. “Current management and prognosis of patients
with recurrent myocardial infarction”. In: RCM 22.3 (2021), pp. 731–740. doi: 10.31083/j.
rcm2203080.
45
==PAGE:50==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 8 – References
[32]
Victor Mor-Avi, Roberto M Lang, et al. “Current and Evolving Echocardiographic Techniques
for the Quantitative Evaluation of Cardiac Mechanics: ASE/EAE Consensus Statement on
Methodology and Indications Endorsed by the Japanese Society of Echocardiography”. In:
(2011). doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2011.01.015.
[33]
Richard L. Morin, Thomas C. Gerber, and Cynthia H. McCollough. “Radiation Dose in Com-
puted Tomography of the Heart”. In: Circulation 107.6 (Feb. 2003), pp. 917–922. issn: 1524-
4539. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000048965.56529.c2. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.
CIR.0000048965.56529.C2.
[34]
Samaneh Mozaffarian, Korosh Etemad, Mohammad Aghaali, Soheila Khodakarim, Sahar So-
toodeh Ghorbani, and Seyed Saeed Hashemi Nazari. Short and long-term survival rates fol-
lowing myocardial infarction and its predictive factors: A study using National Registry data.
2021. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8742861/.
[35]
MRI Plane Mathematics. https://my-ms.org/mri_planes.htm. Accessed: 2023-12-20. 2023.
[36]
Tarique A. Musa, Thomas A. Treibel, et al. “Myocardial Scar and Mortality in Severe Aortic
Stenosis: Data From the BSCMR Valve Consortium”. In: Circulation 138 (18 2018), p. 1935.
issn: 15244539. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032839. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6221382/.
[37]
Andriy Myronenko, Dong Yang, et al. 4D CNN for semantic segmentation of cardiac volumet-
ric sequences. 2019. arXiv: 1906.07295 [eess.IV].
[38]
N Ojha and AS Dhamoon. “Myocardial Infarction”. In: (2023). [Updated 2023 Aug 8]. In:
StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2023 Jan-. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537076/.
[39]
X. Oliver and C. Agelet de Saracibar. Continuum Mechanics for Engineers. Theory and Prob-
lems. 2nd. 2017. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.25821.20961. url: http://hdl.handle.net/2117/
102979.
[40]
Nobuyuki Otsu. “A Threshold Selection Method from Gray-Level Histograms”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 9.1 (1979), pp. 62–66. doi: 10.1109/TSMC.
1979.4310076.
[41]
Am´elie Paquin, Ons Marsit, et al. “Progression of aortic stenosis after an acute myocardial
infarction”. In: Open Heart 9.1 (June 2022), e002046. issn: 2053-3624. doi: 10.1136/openhrt-
2022-002046. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/openhrt-2022-002046.
[42]
R. R. Paulsen, K. K. Marstal, S. Laugesen, and S. Harder. “Creating Ultra Dense Point
Correspondence Over the Entire Human Head”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Image
Analysis. Vol. 10270. Springer, 2017, pp. 438–447. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-59129-2_37.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-59129-2_37.
46
==PAGE:51==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 8 – References
[43]
Hugh G. Pemberton, Jiaming Wu, et al. “Multi-class glioma segmentation on real-world data
with missing MRI sequences: comparison of three deep learning algorithms”. In: Scientific
Reports 13.1 (2023). Published on 2023/11/02, p. 18911. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-023-44794-0.
[44]
Michael Huy Cuong Pham. Projects – RH-CT. url: https://rh-ct.org/projects/.
[45]
Michael Huy Cuong Pham, Kristian Altern Øvrehus, and Klaus Fuglsang Kofoed. “Patient
Preparation and Image Acquisition”. In: Practical Guide to Cardiac CT. In press. Copenhagen,
Denmark, 2024.
[46]
A Radhakrishnan, H Sharma, et al. “Left ventricular function and clinical heart failure after
myocardial infarction revascularized with percutaneous coronary intervention - comparison be-
tween STEMI and NSTEMI in modern practice”. In: European Heart Journal - Cardiovascular
Imaging 22.Supplement 1 (Jan. 2021). issn: 2047-2412. doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jeaa356.027.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ehjci/jeaa356.027.
[47]
Shimon A Reisner, Peter Lysyansky, Yoram Agmon, Diab Mutlak, Jonathan Lessick, and Zvi
Friedman. “Global longitudinal strain: a novel index of left ventricular systolic function”. In:
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography 17.6 (June 2004), pp. 630–633. issn:
0894-7317. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2004.02.011. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
echo.2004.02.011.
[48]
William J. Richardson, Samantha A. Clarke, T. Alexander Quinn, and Jeffrey W. Holmes.
Physiological Implications of Myocardial Scar Structure. 2015. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c140067.
url: https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fcphy.c140067.
[49]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for
Biomedical Image Segmentation. 2015. arXiv: 1505.04597 [cs.CV].
[50]
Nader Salari, Fatemeh Morddarvanjoghi, Amir Abdolmaleki, Shabnam Rasoulpoor, Ali Asghar
Khaleghi, Leila Afshar Hezarkhani, Shamarina Shohaimi, and Masoud Mohammadi. The global
prevalence of myocardial infarction: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 2023. url: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10122825/.
[51]
Jaskanwal D Sara, Takumi Toya, Riad Taher, Amir Lerman, Bernard J Gersh, and Nandan
S Anavekar. “Asymptomatic Left Ventricle Systolic Dysfunction”. In: European Cardiology
Review 2020;15:e13. (2020). doi: 10.15420/ecr.2019.14. url: https://doi.org/10.
15420/ecr.2019.14.
[52]
William Schroeder, Rob Maynard, and Berk Geveci. “Flying edges: A high-performance scal-
able isocontouring algorithm”. In: 2015 IEEE 5th Symposium on Large Data Analysis and
Visualization (LDAV). IEEE, Oct. 2015. doi: 10.1109/ldav.2015.7348069. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/LDAV.2015.7348069.
47
==PAGE:52==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter 8 – References
[53]
Per E Sigvardsen, Andreas Fuchs, Jørgen T K¨uhl, Shoaib Afzal, Lars Køber, Børge G Nordest-
gaard, and Klaus F Kofoed. “Left ventricular trabeculation and major adverse cardiovascu-
lar events: the Copenhagen General Population Study”. English. In: European Heart Jour-
nal Cardiovascular Imaging 22.1 (2021). Published on behalf of the European Society of
Cardiology. All rights reserved. © The Author(s) 2020. For permissions, please email: jour-
nals.permissions@oup.com., pp. 67–74. issn: 1525-2167. doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jeaa110.
[54]
Per Ejlstrup Sigvardsen, Linnea Hornbech Larsen, et al. “Prognostic implications of left ven-
tricular asymmetry in patients with asymptomatic aortic valve stenosis”. In: European Heart
Journal - Cardiovascular Imaging 19.2 (2017), pp. 168–175. doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jew339.
url: https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fehjci%2Fjew339.
[55]
Ricella Maria Souza da Silva and Roberto Jos´e Vieira de Mello. “Fat deposition in the left
ventricle: descriptive and observacional study in autopsy”. In: Lipids in Health and Disease
16.1 (2017). doi: 10 . 1186 / s12944 - 017 - 0475 - 9. url: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 %
2Fs12944-017-0475-9.
[56]
Matthew Sinclair, Devis Peressutti, et al. “Myocardial strain computed at multiple spatial
scales from tagged magnetic resonance imaging: Estimating cardiac biomarkers for CRT pa-
tients”. In: Medical Image Analysis 43 (Jan. 2018), pp. 169–185. issn: 1361-8415. doi: 10.
1016/j.media.2017.10.004. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2017.10.004.
[57]
Gurpreet K. Singh, Pieter van der Bijl, Laurien Goedemans, E. Mara Vollema, Rachid Abou,
Nina Ajmone Marsan, Jeroen J. Bax, and Victoria Delgado. “Prevalence of Aortic Valve
Stenosis in Patients With ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction and Effect on Long-
Term Outcome”. In: The American Journal of Cardiology 153 (Aug. 2021), pp. 30–35. issn:
0002-9149. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2021.05.012. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
amjcard.2021.05.012.
[58]
Otto A. Smiseth, Hans Torp, Anders Opdahl, Kristina H. Haugaa, and Stig Urheim. “Myocar-
dial strain imaging: how useful is it in clinical decision making?” In: European Heart Journal
37.15 (Oct. 2015), pp. 1196–1207. issn: 1522-9645. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv529. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehv529.
[59]
O. Sorkine, D. Cohen-Or, Y. Lipman, M. Alexa, C. R¨ossl, and H.-P. Seidel. “Laplacian surface
editing”. In: Proceedings of the 2004 Eurographics/ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on Geometry
processing. SGP04. ACM, July 2004. doi: 10.1145/1057432.1057456. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/1057432.1057456.
[60]
Jonathan D. Suever, Gregory J. Wehner, et al. “Right Ventricular Strain, Torsion, and Dyssyn-
chrony in Healthy Subjects Using 3D Spiral Cine DENSE Magnetic Resonance Imaging”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 36.5 (May 2017), pp. 1076–1085. issn: 1558-254X.
doi: 10.1109/tmi.2016.2646321. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2016.2646321.
[61]
Laurens F. Tops, Victoria Delgado, Nina Ajmone Marsan, and Jeroen J. Bax. “Myocardial
strain to detect subtle left ventricular systolic dysfunction”. In: European Journal of Heart
48
==PAGE:53==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter – References
Failure 19.3 (Nov. 2016), pp. 307–313. issn: 1879-0844. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.694. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1002/ejhf.694.
[62]
William M. Torres, Julia Jacobs, Heather Doviak, Shayne C. Barlow, Michael R. Zile, Tarek
Shazly, and Francis G. Spinale. “Regional and temporal changes in left ventricular strain and
stiffness in a porcine model of myocardial infarction”. In: American Journal of Physiology-
Heart and Circulatory Physiology 315.4 (Oct. 2018), H958–H967. issn: 1522-1539. doi: 10.
1152/ajpheart.00279.2018. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00279.2018.
[63]
Marius Vach, Johanna Vogelhuber, et al. “Feasibility of CT-derived myocardial strain mea-
surement in patients with advanced cardiac valve disease”. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (Apr.
2021). issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-88294-5. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1038/s41598-021-88294-5.
[64]
Yun Wang, Jing Li, et al. “Risk Factors Associated With Major Cardiovascular Events 1
Year After Acute Myocardial Infarction”. In: JAMA Network Open 1.4 (Aug. 2018), e181079–
e181079. issn: 2574-3805. doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.1079. eprint: https://
jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/articlepdf/2696505/wang\_2018\_oi\
_180076.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.1079.
[65]
Jakob Wasserthal, Hanns-Christian Breit, et al. “TotalSegmentator: Robust Segmentation of
104 Anatomic Structures in CT Images”. In: Radiology: Artificial Intelligence 5.5 (2023). doi:
10.1148/ryai.230024. url: https://doi.org/10.1148%2Fryai.230024.
[66]
Menglin Wu, Xuchen He, Fan Li, Jie Zhu, Shanshan Wang, and Pablo D. Burstein. “Weakly
supervised volumetric prostate registration for MRI-TRUS image driven by signed distance
map”. In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 163 (2023), p. 107150. issn: 0010-4825. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107150. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0010482523006157.
[67]
Yajun Wu, Ershuai Wang, and Zhenzhou Shao. Fast abdomen organ and tumor segmentation
with nn-UNet. 2023. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=oTI5UIgCrY.
[68]
Y. Yang, S. Hu, L. Zhang, and D. Shen. “Deep learning based brain MRI registration driven by
local-signed-distance fields of segmentation maps”. In: Medical Physics 50.8 (2023), pp. 4899–
4915. doi: 10.1002/mp.16291. url: https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.16291.
[69]
Filip Zemrak, Mark A. Ahlman, et al. “The Relationship of Left Ventricular Trabeculation to
Ventricular Function and Structure Over a 9.5-Year Follow-Up”. In: Journal of the American
College of Cardiology 64.19 (Nov. 2014), pp. 1971–1980. issn: 0735-1097. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2014.08.035. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2014.08.035.
[70]
Filip Zemrak, Zahra Raisi-Estabragh, et al. “Left Ventricular Hypertrabeculation Is Not As-
sociated With Cardiovascular Morbity or Mortality: Insights From the Eurocmr Registry”. In:
Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine 7 (2020). issn: 2297-055X. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2020.
00158. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcvm.2020.00158.
[71]
Xiahai Zhuang, Lei Li, et al. “Evaluation of algorithms for multi-modality whole heart seg-
mentation: an open-access grand challenge”. In: Medical image analysis 58 (2019), p. 101537.
49
==PAGE:54==
Appendix A
Methods
A.1
Myocardium Vectors
Algorithm 1 Calculation of vectors between the inner and outer myocardium walls.
1: procedure MyocardiumVectors(mesh inner, mesh outer)
2:
vectors ←[ ]
3:
for each point in mesh inner do
4:
closest point ←findClosestPoint(mesh outer, point)
5:
vector ←closest point −point
6:
vectors.append(vector)
7:
end for
8:
for iteration in n iterations do
9:
i ←0
10:
for each point in mesh inner do
11:
closest indices ←findNClosestPoints(mesh inner, point,n neighbours)
12:
closest vectors ←vectors[closest indices]
13:
vector smooth ←smoothVector(vector, closest vectors)
14:
vectors[i] = vector smooth
15:
i ←i + 1
16:
end for
17:
end for
18:
for each vector in vectors do
19:
vector ←traceVectorToSurface(mesh outer, vector)
20:
end for
21:
return vectors
22: end procedure
50
==PAGE:55==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter A – Methods
A.2
Signed Distance Fields
(a) Axial plane.
(b) Coronal plane.
Figure A.1: Example of a signed distance field used for the registration. It is derived from the myocardium
segmentation.
51
==PAGE:56==
Appendix B
Results
B.1
Segmentations
(a) Axial plane.
(b) 3D rendering.
(c) Coronal plane.
(d) Sagittal plane.
Figure B.1: Segmentation of the blood pool inside the left ventricle for patient SP01.
52
==PAGE:57==
Measurement of Left Ventricle Myocardium Features
Chapter B – Results
(a) Axial plane.
(b) 3D rendering.
(c) Coronal plane.
(d) Sagittal plane.
Figure B.2: Segmentation of the septum (green) shown along with the left ventricle myocardium (red)
and the right ventricle (blue) for patient SP01.
53
