==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Human-centered Artificial Intelligence
Exploring Multimodal Data Integration in
Large Language Models and LLM-based
Generative AI Modeling
by
Milad Taghikhani
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Nicki Skafte Detlefsen
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Tel: +45 45 25 30 31
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) represent a significant advancement
in the field of Artificial Intelligence. These models are capable of performing a variety
of different tasks, such as text-to-image generation, multimodal question answering,
interactive chat support, and accessibility enhancement, leveraging their integrated
understanding of different modalities.
In this work, we developed an MLLM by
combining a pre-trained Large Language Model with pre-trained image encoder and
decoder models. Our model utilizes one of the most recent architectures called ”GILL”
to generate multimodal image-text output.
We enable the model to comprehend
image and text data by mapping the output of a visual encoder to the input space
of a large language model. The model can generate images alongside text by further
mapping the output of the language model to the input of a text-to-image decoder
model. This model is trained eﬀiciently by utilizing pre-trained vision and language
components that are kept frozen during training. The developed model is capable of
performing tasks such as visual question answering, multimodal dialogue, and text-
to-image generation while handling long image-text inputs.
We conduct various experiments intending to improve the performance of the
model and analyze its capacity. Our results show that the architecture is modular
and the pre-trained components can be swapped with stronger or fine-tuned models.
Moreover, we show that by careful architectural adjustments, the model’s performance
in certain aspects can improve.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This research was conducted at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
Kongens Lyngby, 28th January 2024
Milad Taghikhani
(s212518)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, my thesis
supervisor, for his solid support and guidance throughout the course of this thesis.
His expertise and insightful feedback have been invaluable.
I am deeply thankful to my family for their love, understanding, and encourage-
ment, which gave me the strength and peace of mind necessary to pursue my academic
goals. Their amazing support has been a cornerstone of my journey.
A special word of thanks goes to my sister, Parastoo, for her endless encourage-
ment, and the countless ways she has supported me. She has always been there for
me, like a guiding light.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
Introduction
1
1
Background
3
1.1
Transformer Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Positional Embeddings and Self-Attention Mechanism . . . . .
5
1.1.2
Vision Transformers (ViTs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Large Language Models (LLMs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.1
Core Principles of LLM Functioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.2
Data Collection and Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.3
Compute Resources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.4
Model Size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2.5
LLM Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.6
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
Vision-Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.3.1
Contrastive Learning in CLIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.2
Text-to-Image Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.4
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.4.1
Principles of Multimodal Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.4.2
Multimodal Output Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2
Dataset
23
2.1
CC3M Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.2
CC12M Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
Data Preprocessing Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
3
Methods
29
3.1
Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Training Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.1
Learning to Process Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2.2
Learning to Produce Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Inference Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.1
Decision Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2
Image Retrieval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.3
Image Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Results & Discussions
39
4.1
Training Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Evaluation Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Training on a More Complex Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Evaluating Modularity of the LLM Component . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.6
Architectural Adjustments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.7
Fine-tuning the Text-to-Image Generator Using DreamBooth Technique 63
5
Conclusion
71
5.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
In the rapidly evolving field of Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language Processing
(NLP) plays a vital role in bridging the gap between human communication and
computer understanding. NLP enables humans to communicate with computers in
an intelligent and eﬀicient way. The main goal of using NLP is to enable computers
to understand the context of any text in human language. There are a variety of
applications of NLP. Some of the most prominent ones are machine translation such as
Google translate, speech recognition tools such as SIRI and Alexa, sentiment analysis,
and language generation in chatbots such as ChatGPT, Google Gemini, etc [1, 2].
There have been many advancements in this field in recent years and yet there is
room for further progress.
Large Language Models (LLMs) are at the forefront of these advancements. LLMs
are sophisticated algorithms that process, generate, and understand natural language
in ways similar to human thinking. These models, central to the progress in AI, go
through extensive training on large-scale text data, enabling them to show remarkable
performance in a wide range of cognitive tasks by finding meaningful patterns in text.
They empower computer systems not only with the ability to interpret and respond in
human language but also to excel in tasks like text generation, language translation,
and text summarization. Therefore, these models are, in some way, reshaping our
interaction with technology [3].
Integrating additional data modalities, such as images, into traditionally unimodal,
text-based LLMs can substantially expand their capabilities. This enhancement not
only overcomes the limitations of text-only models but also significantly improves
the performance of LLMs. Consequently, this led to the development of Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs), which feature a wider set of skills and an in-
creased level of overall comprehensiveness of image-text data. This expansion into
vision-enhanced capabilities allows these models to interpret visual content and also
creatively generate images, bridging the gap between textual and visual understand-
ing. This dual functionality of processing and generating image-text data opens new
doors to applications of such models in various fields such as digital media creation
in arts, image interpretation in healthcare, education through interactive materials,
and offering transformative assistance to visually impaired individuals [4,5].
In this work, we aim to develop an eﬀicient model that leverages the ability of
image-text processing and image-text generation by utilizing pre-trained vision and
language models. Using pre-trained models increases the eﬀiciency of the training
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
procedure of such MLLMs as these models are kept frozen during training.
We
fuse image and text data into an LLM by implementing the most recent techniques
to develop a model with the ability to generate images as well as text data [6–8].
Generating Images with Multimodal Language Models (GILL) was introduced as one
of the first models with the ability to process and produce image data alongside
text data, within a multimodal dialogue framework [9]. In our work, we develop an
eﬀicient MLLM by mapping the output of a visual encoder to the input of an LLM and
further mapping the LLM output to an image decoder to generate images, inspired by
GILL architecture. This MLLM is capable of performing tasks such as text-to-image
generation, visual question answering (VQA), and multimodal dialogue.
First, we analyze the behavior of our model when exposed to more diverse training
data and assess its generalization capabilities.
Following that, we investigate the
modularity of the architecture by swapping the LLM component with similar variants
and stronger models.
Then, we train different variants of the model by adjusting different parts of the
architecture, aiming to increase the performance.
Lastly, we evaluate the generalization capabilities of the model when using a fine-
tuned text-to-image decoder. In this way, the performance of the proposed model
and the capacity of its architecture is thoroughly investigated.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Background
In the past decade, the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI), has been evolving rapidly
towards a direction to create machines and software capable of intelligent behavior.
Machine learning as a key part of AI has been crucial in driving these advancements
forward.
Over the years, many different machine learning methods, models, and
architectures have been introduced in the area, each one with its own significance
and impact in solving a wide range of tasks intelligently. Among all these methods,
Deep learning has been playing a very important role in achieving the main goal of
having intelligent machines [10]. Deep learning is a sophisticated method in machine
learning characterized by multi-layer neural networks inspired by the human brain
with the ability to recognize complex patterns in pictures, text, sounds, and other
data types to produce accurate insights and predictions. Deep learning techniques
facilitated the creation of numerous models that have shown remarkable proficiency
across various fields of AI such as natural language processing (NLP), computer vision,
and conversational AI.
In the following chapter, we will dive into the fundamental concepts and methods
used in this work, by providing the basic knowledge essential to understanding the
proposed model and enabling a clear overview of the components of the architecture
[10]. A key component in most of the deep learning networks used in computer vision
and language models is the transformer neural network.
In the following section,
the network architecture, main features, and applications of transformers in language
modeling and computer vision are described.
1.1
Transformer Neural Networks
Transformer models have been a key part of most of the recent advanced AI models
since their emergence in 2017 [11]. The invention of such models marked a significant
leap in AI, revolutionizing generative AI models.
More specifically, transformers
enhanced the sequential data processing and improved content generation.
Transformers quickly gained popularity due to several key strengths such as ”Paral-
lel Processing”, ”Positional Encoding”, ”Attention Mechanism”, and ”Scalability and
Flexibility”. These features make transformers outperform other previous models like
RNNs and LSTM in different tasks and benchmarks [12, 13]. Transformers follow
a sequence-to-sequence (or Seq2Seq) neural network architecture. Seq2Seq models
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Background
have an encoder-decoder structure in which the encoder takes the input sequence and
maps it to a higher dimensional space known as the ”embedding space” of the model.
Embedding space refers to a mathematical space in which the inputs are represented
as numbers in a multi-dimensional space. These inputs can be sequences of words,
sentences, images, or any other data type. After encoding the input, the resulting
abstract vector is fed into a decoder that is responsible for decoding the encoder’s
output into an output sequence in one of the data formats mentioned before.
In Fig. 1.1 a transformer model consisting of different interconnected modules
and layers is shown. The left block is a stack of N encoders and the right one is a
stack of N decoders.
Figure 1.1. Transformer model architecture; Encoder (left) and Decoder (right) [11]
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Transformer Neural Networks
5
1.1.1
Positional Embeddings and Self-Attention Mechanism
In the following part, we will briefly touch upon the two main features of the trans-
former architecture which make them remarkably eﬀicient.
Positional Embeddings: Positional embeddings embeddings in transformers,
provide essential information about the sequence order of the input data. They are
added to both the encoder and decoder parts. Since transformers inherently lack
the understanding of sequence position, positional embeddings ensure that the model
maintains the order of information throughout the processing stages. These embed-
dings are particularly beneficial for processing long data sequences.
Attention mechanism: Attention mechanism is a process that allows the model
to focus on specific parts of the input while processing the others. Self-attention is a
specific type of attention that enables a model to weigh the importance of different
parts of the input based on their relation to each other. Self-Attention mechanism,
known as the key innovation in transformer architecture, has been introduced as a
pivotal feature to enable the model to dynamically weigh the significance of different
parts of the input data for more effective processing and understanding [11]. In [11]
an attention function is described as a mapping operator that maps a query and a
set of key-value pairs to an output, where the query(Q), keys(K), values(V), and
the output are all vectors:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√dk

V
(1.1)
Where
• Q: The Query is the current item (such as a word or token) that the model is
trying to interpret or encode. (Q ∈RN×dk) where N is the number of query
elements and dk is the dimension of the key vectors.
• K: The Keys are representations of all items (words or tokens) in the sentence,
serving as the targets that the query interacts with. (K ∈RM×dk) where M is
the number of key/value pairs.
• V: The Values are the actual data (word or token), associated with their corre-
sponding keys. (V ∈RM×dk)
• Scaling Factor √dk: The scaling factor is used to solve the vanishing gradient
problem that can occur when the dot products are very large [14].
In the traditional attention mechanisms, the model computes a single attention
weight matrix [15]. However, here the authors found multi-head attention much more
beneficial since it allows the model to linearly project the queries, keys, and values
multiple times with different learned linear projections. This results in multiple sets
of queries, keys, and values, with each set corresponding to a different ”head”, and
each head capturing a different aspect of the input sequence. Multi-head attention is
calculated as follows:
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Background
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, . . . , headh)W O
headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(1.2)
where W Q
i , W K
i , W V
i , W Oare parameter matrices.
It is worth mentioning that in some contexts, particularly in sequence-to-sequence
tasks like language translation or text generation, certain positions should not be
considered. For example, attending to future tokens in language modeling should be
avoided in these tasks. This is handled through masking by the ”Masked Multi-Head
Attention” layer in the decoder block of the transformer architecture, see Fig. 1.1.
Readers seeking more detailed information about transformers are advised to refer
to the original paper which covers the other components of the architecture such as
”Feed Forward” and ”Add & Norm” layers in more detail [11].
1.1.2
Vision Transformers (ViTs)
The advantages of transformers are not only limited to NLP domain and text data.
The Attention mechanism used in transformers is also applicable to image processing
tasks. Unlike Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) that locally process images,
ViTs treat an image as a sequence of fixed-size segments called patches and apply self-
attention mechanisms to capture global dependencies between these patches [16,17].
This is similar to what happens during tokenization in processing text data within
transformers. This approach allows the model to focus on the most informative parts
of the image, leading to more eﬀicient and often more accurate image processing. A
ViT architecture overview designed for image classification is shown in Fig. 1.2.
The overall workflow of such a model consists of the following steps [16]:
1. Split the image into smaller patches of fixed size.
2. Flatten the image patches.
3. Create lower-dimensional linear embeddings from these flattened image patches.
4. Add the positional embeddings to each of the created embeddings.
5. Prepend a ”Class Token” [CLS] as well as positional embeddings to the pro-
jected embeddings to serve as a placeholder for aggregating information. This
token can be used in ViTs designed for classification tasks. [CLS] token is used
in the ”MLP Head” (Multi-Layer Perceptron Head) or ”Classification Head” of
the encoder of the model.
6. The resulting sequence is fed to a transformer encoder to predict the class label
of the input image.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Large Language Models (LLMs)
7
Figure 1.2. Vision Transformer (ViT) architecture overview; ViT (left), Transformer en-
coder (right) [16]
ViTs have redefined the landscape of computer vision. Despite their strengths,
these models are computationally intensive and require training on massive datasets,
without such datasets, they are prone to overfitting.
1.2
Large Language Models (LLMs)
LLMs represent a significant advancement in the field of AI, specifically in the NLP
field. Transformers as the main component used in LLM architecture were described
in the previous section.
These large-scale transformer-based language models are
trained on vast, extensive textual data, demonstrating their proficiency in different
language-related tasks such as text generation, summarization, question answering,
and sentiment analysis by effectively identifying and understanding patterns in human
language text data [18].
In this section, we will describe how LLMs function, outline their well-known ar-
chitectures, and briefly discuss the training procedures and the training data involved.
1.2.1
Core Principles of LLM Functioning
The overall idea of a large language model is to predict the next word in a sequence
in an unsupervised learning manner. Understanding how a language model handles
input text is key to comprehending its capabilities. From initial input to the final
output, the process involves the following main steps [18]:
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Background
Tokenization: During tokenization, the input text is broken into smaller units,
such as words or subwords by a tokenizer. Tokenizer is an important tool for dividing
text into manageable pieces that the model can interpret.
Embedding: The tokens are then converted into numerical values within an
embedding space. LLM embedding space is a high-dimensional space where words
with similar meanings are positioned closer to each other. This enables the model to
understand linguistic relationships.
Processing: The embeddings are processed through the model’s layered neu-
ral network. This is where transformers come into play. All tokens are processed
simultaneously through the transformer layers.
Contextualization: In this step, the model uses complex algorithms and trans-
formers, including attention mechanisms, to interpret the context and relationships
between the tokens. Each token is contextualized considering the entire sequence, see
Sec. 1.1.1.
Output Generation: The contextually enriched representations of each token
are passed through a final linear layer of the model to produce logits. The logits are
a set of scores for each word in the model’s vocabulary. Based on this contextual
understanding and probability calculations on logits, the model predicts and assem-
bles the next part of the text. In fact, the model estimates the probability of each
potential next token and selects the one with the highest likelihood to continue the
response.
Iteration: The output sequence generation continues by iterating over each token.
During each iteration, the model applies its understanding of context, attention, and
probability to generate the next appropriate token. The process continues until a
complete and coherent response is generated and a stop criterion has been met. The
stop criterion is often an ”end of sequence” token generated by the model. An overview
of the above steps in LLM functioning is shown by an example in Fig. 1.3
1.2.2
Data Collection and Preparation
Development of large language models involves training on massive amounts of text
data and corpora which is essential for LLMs to acquire language generation and
understanding abilities. This data is a mixture of general and specialized text gath-
ered from sources like web pages, books, and conversations, and is preprocessed to
remove noise, redundancy, irrelevance, and harmful content by employing different
strategies. The dataset sizes for training LLMs typically range from tens of gigabytes
to several terabytes. The overall quality and distribution of the data significantly
affect an LLM’s performance. It is important to ensure the data diversity and quality
to maximize the model’s effectiveness and generalization capabilities [20].
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Large Language Models (LLMs)
9
Figure 1.3. An illustration of LLM functioning in completing an input sequence [19].
1.2.3
Compute Resources
LLMs require significant computational resources to be trained and function eﬀi-
ciently. Training these models involves dealing with vast datasets, demanding the
processing of billions of words going through multiple layers of neural networks si-
multaneously. Besides, the deployment of such models and real-time interaction with
them is computationally expensive.
Consequently, due to the utilization of trans-
formers with simultaneous processing capabilities in LLM architecture, the Graphics
Processing Unit (GPU) is the needed hardware for this task [21].
A GPU is a powerful computing hardware that excels in parallel processing, mak-
ing it ideal for handling complex, data-intensive tasks. As the LLMs grow in size and
complexity, the demand for GPUs with higher amounts of memory also increases. It
is also worth mentioning that in many training scenarios, multiple GPUs are linked
together for distributed computing to perform multiprocessor training [22].
1.2.4
Model Size
The size of a large language model is typically measured in terms of the number of
parameters it contains. These parameters are the weights in the neural network of the
model that are adjusted during the training. The sizes of LLMs can vary from millions
to hundreds of billions or even trillions of parameters depending on the complexity
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Background
of the model’s architecture. A good example of a massive-sized recently developed
model is GPT-4 which is reported to have approximately 1 trillion parameters [23].
Figure 1.4. LLMs growth in size over the last 5 years [24].
1.2.5
LLM Training
Training is a fundamental stage in the development of LLMs as in any other machine
learning model. This process can involve supervised, semi-supervised, and unsuper-
vised approaches as learning techniques, depending on the training strategy employed
for the model. Training time is also a considerable factor in LLM training as it can
vary from days to weeks or even months, depending on different factors such as avail-
able computational resources, the model’s size, and the volume of training data.
Pre-training and Fine-tuning
The initial phase of LLM training is called Pre-training where the model is trained
on a vast dataset to learn general language patterns, structures, and contextual re-
lationships. This foundational learning enables the model to understand a language.
After the pre-training phase, the pre-trained model can be fine-tuned for specific
tasks or applications. The objective of fine-tuning is to train the model on a more spe-
cific dataset tailored to a particular task or domain, e.g. legal text, medical journals,
chats and conversations, etc. Various fine-tuning techniques including approaches
like transfer learning, domain or task-specific learning, few-shot or zero-shot learning,
and prompt-based fine-tuning, are available to adapt language models to certain tasks
and improve their performance [25,26].
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Large Language Models (LLMs)
11
1.2.6
Architecture
LLMs evolved over time with various architectures, each of them offering different
features and capabilities. Prior to the introduction of transformer models, Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) [27] and Long Short-Term Memory Networks (LSTMs) [28]
were at the forefront of language modeling. However, with the arrival of transformers,
they quickly became the dominant architecture in the area. Therefore, many other
architectures used transformers as their backbone, developing and expanding on top
of the transformer framework to increase eﬀiciency. LLM architectures can broadly
be categorized into three main types:
• Encoder-only Models: These models contain only the encoder part of a trans-
former architecture. They are typically used for understanding and processing
text. This happens by encoding the input text and creating a representation
that captures the meaning and context of the text. Encoder-only models are
used in tasks like text classification, sentiment analysis, and question answering,
where comprehending the context and meaning of the text is crucial. Exam-
ples of such models are BERT and its variants like RoBERTa, DistilBERT, and
ALBERT [29–32].
• Decoder-only Models: Decoder-only models consist of the decoder part of
a transformer architecture only. These models are used for generating text. In
these models, the decoder reads a sequence of tokens and predicts the next
token in the sequence. Moreover, Decoder-only models leverage the ”attention
mechanism” as well. They are used in tasks like generating text, creative writing,
and any other task where producing coherent text is necessary. GPT series,
including GPT-2, GPT-3, and GPT-4, are examples of decoder-only models
[6,33–35].
• Encoder-decoder Models: These models combine both an encoder and a de-
coder in a single framework. The encoder processes the input text and creates
the contextual representation and the decoder uses this representation to gen-
erate output. In these models, the encoder and decoder are trained together to
handle tasks that involve both understanding and generating text. Tasks like
translation, text summarization, and question answering.
Examples of such
models are T5 and BART models [36,37].
• Other Models: There might be models with unique combinations of encoder-
only, decoder-only, and encoder-decoder models which do not completely fit into
any of the above categories. XLNet is an example of such models [38].
We will briefly explain the most well-known and widely utilized LLM architectures in
the following:
• BERT: Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) is a
transformer-based, encoder-only language model which was a groundbreaking
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Background
model in the field of language modeling developed by Google. BERT was one
of the first language models to utilize the transformer architecture.
BERT
is designed for bidirectional context understanding, meaning that the model
processes the input text by looking at the context from both sides, before and
after a given token. The bidirectional approach allows BERT to have a good
comprehension of the sentence structure and the meaning of words in context.
Moreover, Bidirectional processing makes BERT architecture suitable for tasks
like text classification, question answering, sentence similarity, and language
understanding [29].
• GPT: Generative Pretrained Transformer (GPT) is another variation of transformer-
based language models. GPT is decoder-only and optimized for generative tasks.
The GPT series, developed by OpenAI, was yet another significant leap in the
world of large language models [6]. Unlike BERT, GPT models process the input
in a unidirectional manner. It processes text in a single direction, usually from
left to right. This means it only considers the context that comes before a token,
not after. The unidirectional nature of this model is particularly suited for text
generation, where the model needs to predict the next word in the sequence,
based on the previous words. These models are used in tasks like coherent text
creation, summarization, translation, and developing conversational agents, e.g.
chatbots. GPT model has different successors like GPT-2 [33], GPT-3 [34] and
GPT-4 [35] where each version represents a significant advancement in terms of
model size, complexity, and capabilities.
• T5: T5, or ”Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer,” is an encoder-decoder transformer-
based language model developed by Google Research. The core idea behind T5
is to convert every NLP task into a text-to-text format. This means that tasks
such as translation, question answering, and classification are all treated as tasks
where the model converts input text into output text. For example, a sentiment
analysis task is re-framed as translating a sentence into the words ”positive” or
”negative”. T5 is mostly known for this ”one-size-fits-all” approach. While the
general-purpose nature of T5 is an advantage in many scenarios, it can some-
times be less effective than models with the ability to be specifically fine-tuned
or designed for particular tasks [36].
• XLNet: XLNet, developed by researchers at Google Brain and Carnegie Mellon
University represents another implementation of a language model based on the
transformer framework. XLNet uses a permutation-based training strategy. In
this method, the model considers all possible arrangements of the words in a
sentence, which is different from the usual approach in other models that read
the text in a fixed order (either left-to-right or right-to-left). XLNet outperforms
other similar models like BERT in different tasks, however, its complexity in
implementation and training can lead to some challenges, particularly in terms
of computational resources and the expertise required to effectively fine-tune
and optimize its parameters for specific applications [38].
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Vision-Language Models
13
The architectures mentioned above represent some of the most fundamental and
well-known models in the field. Additionally, there are other newly developed models,
each with its own specific architecture and training methodology. Among these, some
are open source, such as PALM [39], FALCON [40], LLAMA [41,42], and OPT [43],
while models like BARD [44] and CHINCHILLA [45] are privately held.
In the
subsequent chapter will provide more detailed information and descriptions of the
Llama and OPT models that are used in this work.
1.3
Vision-Language Models
The vision-language model field has been rapidly developing in the past years. The
designing approach and training methods of such models have been a hot topic in AI
research recently. A vision-language model is a model that combines both the vision
and language modalities to process or generate images (vision), natural language text
(language), and content that combines both elements. The vision part of these models
processes the image features typically by dividing it into a grid of smaller segments
called patches, while the language part encodes text information using tokenization.
In vision-language models, the model learns to map the information from both of
the modalities to each other and also learns to understand images and transform the
knowledge into text embeddings or vice-versa. For example, if there is a dog in an
image, the model will learn to connect it with similar words in the text descriptions
corresponding to that image, see Fig. 1.5.
Vision-language models have the capability to perform a variety of tasks. These
tasks vary from generative tasks such as text-to-image generation, image captioning,
and Visual Question Answering (VQA) to classification and retrieval tasks [46]. The
first pioneer model, ViLBERT [47], was successful in adapting BERT (see Sec. 1.2.6)
as a language model to handle multimodal inputs involving both visual and textual
data. This approach set the stage for many other remarkable developments such as
CLIP [7], DALL-E [48], and BLIP [49].
Figure 1.5. An illustration of vision-language model functioning [50]
==PAGE:24==
14
1 Background
In this section, we are going to describe an influential technique in the vision-
language field, Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [7], which is used in
our work. Moreover, we briefly discuss a subset of vision-language models used for
generating images as one of the main functionalities of our proposed model.
1.3.1
Contrastive Learning in CLIP
Contrastive learning is a technique in machine learning, that is used for learning effec-
tive data representations by contrasting similar (positive) and dissimilar (negative)
pairs of data points [51–53]. Contrastive learning was used as a central mechanism
in [7].
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP), as a core inspiration for most
vision-language and multi-modal models, bridges the gap between image and text
data by training a text encoder and a ViT-like image encoder together [7,54]. CLIP
is trained on large datasets of image, caption pairs. The model learns to match the
representation of images with their corresponding text description. In other words,
the model is trained to minimize the distance of matching text-image embeddings,
while maximizing the distance of non-matching pairs and pushing them apart.
CLIP pre-training strategy consists of the following steps:
• The input texts and images are encoded as text feature vectors (T1, T2, ..., TN)
and images feature vectors (I1, I2, ..., IN), by going in batches through a typical
text encoder and a ViT-like image encoder. Each of the extracted text vectors
is an abstract, contextualized representation of the input texts. Each of the
extracted image vectors can be thought of as a summary of the input image.
• The model is trained to maximize the similarity of corresponding image-text
pairs and minimize it for non-corresponding pairs. This is done using a con-
trastive loss function, such as InfoNCE loss:
LInfoNCE = −E

log
exp(sim(I, T)/τ)
P
T −∈T −exp(sim(I, T −)/τ)

(1.3)
where sim(I, T) and sim(I, T −) are the cosine similarity between similar and
dissimilar pairs respectively. τ is the temperature parameter that scales the
similarity measure.
Similarity values for matching pairs are highlighted in blue in the similarity matrix
as seen in Fig. 1.6. In this way, they are mapped to a similar region in the embedding
space, closely together, while the rest of the similarities (non-matching) need to be
kept lower and separated.
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Vision-Language Models
15
Figure 1.6. CLIP architecture overview [7]
CLIP is designed to understand and relate text and image data and also is trained
on a large variety of image and text pairs. When CLIP is pre-training, the model has
learned a combined embedding space of matching image and text data. This enables
the text encoder and image encoder within the CLIP architecture to stand out for their
effective feature extraction abilities and can be used separately as feature extractors
for different purposes. All these enable CLIP to excel in many different tasks and
capabilities. CLIP can perform well in tasks like ”Zero-Shot Image Classification”,
”Text-to-Image Matching”, ”Image-to-Text Matching”, ”Visual Question Answering”,
”Cross-Modal Transfer Learning”, and ”Style Transfer” and ”Content Generation”.
1.3.2
Text-to-Image Generation
Originally, machine learning models in image generation were focused on only using
visual data. However, with the integration of NLP capabilities, models like DALL-E,
CLIP, and others have made it possible to generate complex, detailed images from
textual descriptions [7,48]. Text-to-image generation is the task of creating realistic
images based on text descriptions. The idea of generating images from the text first
was introduced in [55] with the use of a conditioned GAN network on detailed text
descriptions. Several recent works have used diffusion models for image generation
==PAGE:26==
16
1 Background
from text and improved the quality of the generated image [56–58].
Models like
Dall-E [48], MidJourney [59], and Stable Diffusion [58] represent the state-of-the-art
advancements in text-to-image generation models. These models have applications
in many fields including arts, design, marketing, education, and content creation. In
the following section, we will describe the well-known ”Stable Diffusion” model which
was used as the image generation backbone of our model [58].
Stable Diffusion
Diffusion models have been highly successful in synthesizing high-quality images from
text prompts [60]. The process of denoising in these models is quite computationally
expensive. The Stable Diffusion model utilizes a particular type of diffusion model
called the ”Latent Diffusion Model” [58]. Latent diffusion models apply the diffusion
process in lower dimensional latent space instead of the actual pixel space of the
image. Therefore, the memory and computational time are reduced. Moreover, the
model learns to generate compressed representations of the image.
Stable Diffusion is trained on billions of images [58, 61].
During training, the
model uses latent images encoded from the training data and adds noise to them
over several iterations using a diffusion algorithm. As the noise is added, the image
becomes noisier, and at a high enough level, resembles pure noise.
Given inputs
like the number of iterations (t) and a text prompt, the model learns to predict and
reverse this noise addition. In this way, it learns to generate detailed images based
on text descriptions, see Fig. 1.7.
A latent diffusion model has three main components:
• An autoencoder (VAE) [62]
• A U-Net [63]
• A text-encoder, e.g. CLIP’s Text Encoder [64]
Each of these components and their role in the architecture are briefly explained
below:
Variational Autoencoder (VAE): The VAE model has two parts, an encoder
and a decoder [62]. The encoder converts an image to a lower-dimensional represen-
tation of it, known as latents. The encoder output goes through a diffusion process
while training and the result is passed to the U-net model. The VAE decoder is only
used during the inference phase to convert denoised latent into an actual image.
U-Net: The U-Net network consists of an encoder and a decoder part, both
containing ResNet blocks [14]. U-net network learns to denoise latents, conditioned
on text embeddings from the text-encoder as guidance via cross-attention layers and
skip connections, see Fig. 1.8.
Text-Encoder: A simple transformer-based text-encoder which transforms the
input prompt into an embedding space that serves as the input for the U-Net. These
embeddings are used as guidance while training U-net for denoising. Inspired by [65],
==PAGE:27==
1.3 Vision-Language Models
17
the model does not train a text encoder from scratch, instead, it uses an already
trained text encoder e.g. CLIP.
There is another component in a latent diffusion model called Schedueler. The
scheduler is used to add noise to the image and refine it via a scheduler algorithm [66].
Schedulers are responsible for computing the predicted denoised image, from the
previous noisy representation and the predicted noise residual. There are different
scheduler algorithms can be used such as PNDM [67] (default for Stable Diffusion),
DDIM [67], K-LMS [66], etc. each having their own, pros and cons [68]. The expla-
nation of the scheduler algorithms is beyond the scope of this work.
Figure 1.7. Stable diffusion inference process [69]
==PAGE:28==
18
1 Background
Figure 1.8. Latent Diffusion Model [58]
1.4
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
MLLMs are one of the latest developments in the field of AI. They are created by
Incorporating other data modalities (e.g. images) into LLMs. All multimodal models
are not necessarily MLLMs. An MLLM can refer to a model that utilizes an LLM as
the backbone and brain of the model. For example, text-to-image models mentioned
in the previous section are multimodal, but not MLLM, as they do not have a LLM
component. The concept of multimodality can be interpreted as the following [70]:
• Input and output have different modalities (e.g. text-to-image, image-to-text)
• Multimodal inputs (e.g. a model that can process both text and images)
• Multimodal outputs (e.g. a model that can generate both text and images)
• Multimodal inputs and outputs (e.g. a model with the ability to process and
generate both text and images)
Research in this area is quite dynamic and moving forward quickly. Several works
have been focused on developing MLLMs, each with different capabilities, different
modality fusion strategies, and different learning and training processes [4,5].
In this section, we briefly explore the field of MLLMs by describing main principles
of MLLMs in some of the latest architecture with a primary focus on text and image
modalities.
==PAGE:29==
1.4 Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
19
1.4.1
Principles of Multimodal Training
From a general perspective, a multimodal model can consist of the following parts:
1. An encoder to generate embeddings for each data modality in the model.
2. A strategy to fuse and align the embeddings of different modalities into a unified
multimodal embedding space
3. An LLM model to generate text with the ability to condition responses on other
modalities such as images. This is of course the case in generative MLLMs.
4. A visual component to generate image data in the case of image generator
models.
In an ideal scenario, it is better to utilize pre-trained models for the three components
mentioned above to have faster and more eﬀicient training.
A key part of designing a MLLMs is the strategy used for creating the fused mul-
timodal embedding space (Item No.2 above). Recent works have introduced different
approaches for this purpose. We briefly mention some of these approaches below:
Contrastive Learning: Using a contrastive approach to create a joint embed-
ding space for image and text, a commonly used approach that was introduced in
CLIP [7]. This approach was explained in the previous section (1.3.1) in more detail.
PrefixLM: In the Prefix Language Modeling (PrefixLM) approach the models
learn to fuse image and text embeddings jointly, by using images as a prefix to the
language model. In this approach, the model is trained to predict the next token
given the image input as the prefix to the tokenized text input. Building upon this
idea, a model can receive a concatenated image patch sequence as a prefix to the text
sequence input. Fig. 1.9 (left) shows the prefixLM approach of the SimVLM model
which is introduced in [71].
Frzoen PrefixLM: Fig. 1.10 resembles a model using frozen PrefixLM. Here,
text and input image data are passed to separate image encoder and language models.
Moreover, only the parameters of the image encoder are updated during training while
the language model parameters are kept frozen. Using a frozen pre-trained language
model without the need for fine-tuning is a much more eﬀicient approach compared to
training it from scratch. [8] uses the Frozen PrefixLM approach. The generated image
embeddings are used as prefixes to the pre-trained frozen language model attention
layers in a similar fashion in PrefixLM.
Vision-Language Mapping Using Translation Parameters: The core idea
is to translate encoded image features into language embeddings that encapsulate
visual information. The image encoder is kept frozen. In this approach, the model
learns translation parameters that map from image features to text embedding space.
This translation enables the large language model to understand visual information
as inputs. Then, the embedded text and image data are concatenated and used as
the LLM input. Models like MAGMA [72], LLaVA [73], FROMAGe [74], BLIP-2 [75]
and Flamingo [76] use this approach in a certain manner.
==PAGE:30==
20
1 Background
Figure 1.9. PrefixLM pre-training diagram [71]
Figure 1.10. Frozen PrefixLM pre-training scenario [8]
==PAGE:31==
1.4 Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
21
1.4.2
Multimodal Output Generation
There have been plenty of works done with a focus on processing multimodal inputs.
However, the ability to generate multimodal output is yet to be explored.
Many
different use cases would benefit from multimodal output generation. For instance,
consider a scenario when one asks a chatbot like ChatGPT [2] to explain a machine
learning concept. A complete answer would be better understood through the use
of images, graphs, or even animations, as well as the text output. To produce such
outputs, a model initially needs to generate blended coherent output and further
process that to produce multimodal outputs, such as text and image alongside each
other. This is the key challenge in designing such models.
In recent works, several approaches proposed to tackle this problem. For example,
CM3 outputs HTML data that can be used to be compiled as webpages with images,
links, formatting, and text [77]. FROMAGe proposes an eﬀicient method enabling
pre-trained language models to be grounded in the visual domain. This allows the
model to process arbitrarily interleaved text and image data to generate text that is
interleaved with retrieved images [74]. GILL is another interesting work, that builds
upon FROMAGe [74] by generating novel images in the output, as well as retrieving
images and generating text [9]. The work in this project is inspired by the GILL [9]
model and investigates its architecture capacities and limitations. Upon the start of
this project, GILL was one of the first and only models with the ability to generate
coherent image (and text) output. Throughout the course of this work, other models
were introduced with multimodal output generation abilities such as NExT-GPT [78],
GPT-4 [35,79], and Gemini [80].
As was pointed out before, this field is evolving quite fast, with new models and
methods being introduced frequently. In this section, we endeavored to explain the
essential knowledge regarding multimodal models and review the literature on the
field. The upcoming sections will detail our work while highlighting the challenges
and key findings.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2
Dataset
A very important part of training MLLMs is the data used for this purpose. Con-
sidering the nature of MLLMs, the datasets required often contain different data
types. In our project, as we are working with a multimodal language model with
image generation and image processing capabilities, we need a dataset with both im-
age and text data. In this work, we train our models on the Conceptual Captions
(CC3M) dataset, containing approximately 3 million image-text pairs [81]. Moreover,
the Conceptual Captions 12M (CC12M) dataset is also used to investigate the im-
pact of using a different dataset on training and the performance of the proposed
model [82]. CC12M is a much more diverse version of CC3M, specifically curated to
be used for vision-language pre-training. The subsequent sections will provide further
information regarding the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the datasets, as well
as data preparation process details.
2.1
CC3M Dataset
The main dataset used for this project is CC3M. This dataset is sourced from the web
and the raw captions are automatically extracted from the alt-text HTML attribute
associated with web images. The authors developed a pipeline that uses automatic
image captioning to extract, filter, and transform the image-caption pairs, to achieve
a clean, balanced, and informative dataset, see Fig. 2.1 and Fig. 2.2. This is a unique
dataset offering a wide range of images and captions that are more reflective of real-
world scenarios compared to other datasets curated in controlled environments.
In the original version of the dataset presented in [81], more than 5 billion images
from around 1 billion English web pages were analyzed. After using filtering criteria,
text transformation, and analysis techniques, the dataset was split into a training set
with 3.3M image-URL/caption pairs and a validation set of 15.8K image-URL/caption
pairs. Some of the data has been taken down from the web throughout time, therefore,
our version of the dataset is slightly different from the original version.
Tab. 2.1 shows general statistics that are calculated over the Train and Validation
set of our version of the data. In our version of the dataset, we used around 2.7M
image-caption pairs with more than 45K unique tokens for training, and 12.7K pairs
with approximately 10K unique tokens for validation set. The mean, standard devia-
tion, and median values for tokens-per-caption over training and validation splits are
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Dataset
Figure 2.1.
The pipeline used in CC3M for data extraction, filtering and transforming
process [81]; Two left columns are original extracted image and captions; The rightmost
column shows the results after applying the pipeline.
Figure 2.2. Samples of CC3M with the transformed caption alongside the respective raw
Alt-text extracted from the web [81].
==PAGE:35==
2.2 CC12M Dataset
25
shown to be consistent at around 10.3, 4.7, and 9.0 respectively, see Tab. 2.1. These
values are close to what was presented in [81], meaning that the data that was lost
over time does not affect the quality of the dataset.
Table 2.1. Statistics over Training and Validation splits for CC3M used in our work; The
number of unique data examples, unique token, mean/std/median of tokens-per-caption in
each set are shown.
Examples
Unique
Tokens
Tokens/Captions
Mean
StdDev
Median
Train
2,700,207
45,471
10.2
4.7
9.0
Valid.
12,693
9,925
10.3
4.6
9.0
2.2
CC12M Dataset
Another dataset that was used in this work is CC12M or Conceptual 12M [82].
CC12M is essentially an extension of the CC3M dataset, which is larger and also
covers a much more diverse set of visual concepts. It significantly expands the orig-
inal dataset by including more image-caption pairs extracted from web pages on
the internet. CC12M uses a more relaxed pipeline compared to the original CC3M
dataset. This dataset is specifically meant to be used for vision-language pre-training.
Moreover, it is meant to be disjoint from CC3M, but the intersection is found to be
non-zero and around 63K URLs.
The richer diversity in CC12M comes from the
relaxation of filters used to obtain the data to create this dataset. Some of the key
advantages of CC12M compared to CC3M are using a smaller ratio for dimension
reduction, more eﬀicient usage of token <PERSON>, and longer caption lengths due to
relaxed text filters [82]. Samples of CC12M are shown in Fig. 2.3.
The issue of data loss over time still exists in CC12M as well.
The original
version comes with around 12.4M image-text pairs, while our version consists of 9.2M
pairs (around 638K unique tokens), about 3 times larger than CC3M. We did not
split CC12M into training and validation sets, as we are just using this dataset for
training the model and use the same validation set of CC3M for comparison purposes.
Tab. 2.2 shows a comparison between the basic statistics of the CC3M train set and
CC12M. As it can be seen in Tab. 2.2, CC12M has a lower token (word count) to type
(vocabulary size) ratio, showing a more diverse distribution of the concepts captured.
Moreover, the average caption length is much longer in CC12M. These features are
achieved due to the relaxation of filters in CC12M.
Fig. 2.4 shows the world clouds of CC3M and CC12M captions. We observe that
token <PERSON> appears much more frequently in CC12M due to its eﬀicient use in
CC12M. Moreover, the effect of removing hypernymization is observed in tokens like
”artist” and ”player” [81, 82]. Hypernymization is a process in linguistics and NLP
where words or phrases are replaced with their hypernyms.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Dataset
Figure 2.3. Examples of image-caption pairs in CC12M; Even though the alt-texts do not
provide exact descriptions of the corresponding image, they are quite valuable visual concept
learning resources due to the applied relaxation to the filtering process [82]
Table 2.2.
A comparison between the number of examples, token-to-type ratio, as an
indicator of the diversity of vocabulary used, and average caption length of CC3M and
CC12M
Examples
Token/Type
Avg. caption length
CC3M train
2,700,207
608.5
10.2 ± 4.7
CC12M
9,200,655
309.3
21.4 ± 16.9
Figure 2.4. Wordclouds of top 100 tokens in CC3M (left) and CC12M (right).
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Data Preprocessing Details
27
2.3
Data Preprocessing Details
The content of such datasets is extracted from the web and often has substantial
size and requires a significant amount of storage. Consequently, Downloading them
is slightly different from just simply downloading a compressed folder containing the
examples. Therefore, we had to use a tool called ”img2dataset” for downloading such
large data. img2dataset is a Python package that is used to facilitate downloading
images at scale from a list of URLs and organizing them into a suitable format for
machine learning tasks. This tool allows one to download millions of images eﬀiciently
by processing multiple URLs concurrently. Additionally, the ability to resize images
on the fly, multiple format conversion support, data organization, and error handling
are some of the practical features of the img2dataset library [83].
Datasets like CC3M and CC12M are usually published as .tsv files (Tab-separated
values) containing the image URL and its corresponding caption. We downloaded
CC3M and CC12M with an image size of 256 by 256 pixels, using the .tsv file and
img2dataset. Downloading the data with a normal DTU cluster machine [84] took
around 1 hour for CC3M and 5 hours for CC12M. Following that, the data needed to
be prepared in a way to be suitable for training our model. img2dataset downloads
images in partitions and the corresponding captions are stored in a .json file. There-
fore, the downloaded data needs to be formatted as a .tsv file as shown in Fig. 2.5,
where each line contains the caption followed by the respective image file name. The
actual image files should be stored in a separate directory. CC12M takes up roughly
330GB of storage and CC3M around 90GB.
Figure 2.5. A snippet of CC3M data .tsv file, where each row contains a caption and the
corresponding image file name; The data needs to be arranged in this way to be prepared
as the input of our model.
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
In this chapter, we present the methods and the architecture used to tackle the task
of extending LLMs to generate images. More specifically, using GILL1 architecture
we develop an MLLM with the ability to comprehend image and text as well as
generating image and text outputs. Our overall goal is to increase the performance
of the architecture. The mathematical aspects of the methods used in this study are
also briefly touched upon. The primary focus of our efforts in this project revolves
around the following points:
• Train a baseline model with the original architecture.
• Use more varied training data and assess the generalization capacity of the
model.
• Swap the language model with stronger variants and assess the model’s modu-
larity and compare the performance with the baseline.
• Adjust the architecture and some of its parameters to improve the overall per-
formance.
• Fine-tune the image generation backbone and analyze the model capacity to
handle a fine-tuned image generator.
In this chapter, we first explain the main components of the proposed architecture,
the training approach, and the implemented methodologies. Then, we describe the
experiments we conducted to evaluate the model’s performance and present the results
of our evaluations.
3.1
Model Architecture
Our MLLM can process and understand multiple types of data, and rely on sophisti-
cated training and application processes. Fig. 3.1 shows an overview of the proposed
MLLM architecture. The architecture consists of three main pre-trained components,
i.e. a visual encoder, an LLM, and an image decoder model.
1Generating Images with Multimodal Large Language Models [9]
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Methods
Figure 3.1. Overview of the proposed model
In the following, we will describe the mechanisms behind the proposed architecture
and explain how it learns to comprehend image and text data as well as generate text
and image outputs.
We will cover the details of our model’s training phase, its
functionality during the inference phase, the various components of the model, and
how they interact. First, the training strategy of the developed model is described.
Then, the inference phase consists of using a decision model, image retrieval, and
image decoder is explained.
Training our model has two main stages, including learning to process images and
learning to produce images.
3.2
Training Phase
Training an MLLM that integrates language and vision components is a challenging
task. Training such a model and its elements from scratch would be significantly inef-
ficient and resource-intensive. Therefore, utilizing pre-trained and frozen components
would be a practical approach for training. This bypasses many of the diﬀiculties as-
sociated with developing an MLLM from the ground up. A frozen component refers
to a model that has already been trained for a specific task on a large dataset and is
ready to be used as a starting point for further training. Often, the weights of such
models are kept frozen during training or only a small number of weights (parameters)
are fine-tuned if needed. In general, during training our MLLM uses:
• A frozen LLM to process and generate text data.
• A frozen visual encoder to process image data.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Training Phase
31
• A frozen text encoder to train the model for producing embeddings used for
image generation.
The training process of our model consists of two main learning stages:
1. Learning to Process Images.
2. Learning to Produce Images.
3.2.1
Learning to Process Images
The main goal in teaching the model to process image and text is to adjust a frozen
LLM so it can complete any sequence containing a random mixture of image and
text inputs. Considering an image x and its descriptive caption y, we first extract
the visual features of the input image vϕ(x) ∈Rd using a pre-trained frozen visual
encoder. The extracted feature vector is essentially the pooler output of the visual
encoder which is in dimension d. d is the hidden size of the output of the visual
encoder. Then, a linear mapping Wcap ∈Rd×ke is trained to map the extracted
visual embeddings vϕ(x) to a sequence of k visual vectors (visual tokens) of dimension
e. This linear mapping layer is what we described in Sec. 1.4.1 as vision-language
mapping using translation parameters.
Here, e is the input embedding dimension of the LLM. The caption y is also
tokenized as a sequence of tokens (s1, ..., sT ) with the associated tokenizer of the
LLM. This tokenized sequence is then concatenated with the extracted visual feature
vectors and used as the input to the LLM, see Fig. 3.2.
The resulting sequence containing visual information of the input image alongside
the corresponding caption is fed to the frozen LLM. At this moment, the model is
trained to predict the next token to generate a caption, conditioned on the image
vectors and the tokenized ground truth caption. This is optimized by calculating
a Cross Entropy Loss between the generated caption and the actual caption.
In
other words, Wcap is trained on image-caption pairs, by minimizing the negative
log-likelihood loss lc(x, y) of the token sequence (s1, ..., sT ), given the previous tokens
(s1, ..., st−1) and visual feature vectors vϕ(x). This trains a translation mapping to
translate image data into the embedding space of the LLM. lc is calculated as follows:
lc(x, y) = −
T
X
t=1
log pθ(st | vϕ(x)T Wcap , s1, ..., st−1)
(3.1)
As shown in Fig.
3.2, the visual encoder weights (ϕ) and the LLM weights
(θ) are kept frozen. The only trainable (unfrozen) part of the model is the linear
mapping(Wcap). Therefore, training speed and eﬀiciency are significantly improved.
The approach used here is essentially the standard image captioning training with
minor modifications to serve our objective. By doing this, our model learns how to
process image and text data.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Methods
Figure 3.2.
”Learning to process images” stage of training; At this stage, the model
learns to comprehend image-text data by optimizing lc; Image x is encoded using visual
encoder vϕ, mapped to LLM input space (dim e) using Wcap, concatenated as k visual tokens
with tokenized caption y and used as LLM input; LLM generated output is optimized by
comparing to the ground truth caption using Cross-Entropy loss.
3.2.2
Learning to Produce Images
A special token [IMG] is added to the vocabulary of the LLM to enable the model to
produce image outputs. The hidden states that are produced for the [IMG] tokens
are responsible for generating their corresponding visual information in the output.
r image tokens are appended to the image caption to train the model for image
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Training Phase
33
generation and then the entire sequence is fed to the LLM. The language model
produces a sequence of embeddings for both the text tokens and the [IMG] tokens,
see Fig. 3.3.
We aim to train the model for producing [IMG] tokens. To do so, a trainable
matrix Eimg ∈Rr×e is added to the embedding matrix of the frozen LLM to represent
the embeddings of r[IMG] tokens. The training is done by minimizing the negative
log-likelihood of producing the first [IMG] token, conditioned on previously generated
tokens lp(y):
lp(y) = −log p{θ ∪Eimg} ([IMG1] | s1, ..., st)
(3.2)
This is essentially the usual caption generation training objective for language
models. In this setup, the LLM weights θ are kept frozen, and only the Eimg matrix
is optimized throughout training. Furthermore, the generated [IMG] token sequence
is appended to each caption. Therefore, the generated caption from LLM contains
visual information in embeddings of [IMG] tokens and text data. It is important to
mention that during inference, we set the model to generate the rest of the [IMG2],
... ,[IMG{r}] tokens when the first [IMG1] token is generated. This is described in
more detail in the ”Inference” Sec. 3.3. At the same time, the corresponding image is
passed to the visual encoder to extract its visual features, see Fig. 3.3. The extracted
visual features are used in the training process for image retrieval.
Training for Image Retrieval: In the image retrieval training approach, the
first image token [IMG1] from the LLM output is passed to a linear layer and is
compared with the output of the visual encoder, see Fig. 3.3. These two outputs
are compared by calculating the ”InfoNCE” loss.
This is similar to the standard
training objective for image retrieval applied in the previous works and described in
Sec. 1.3.1 [7,51]. By doing so, the model learns to map to an embedding space where
image feature vectors and the generated text vectors are semantically similar.
Proceeding with the mathematical details, the model simply learns a linear map-
ping Wt2i ∈Re×p (e being the LLM input dimension) that maps the first [IMG] token
to a p-dimensional space. Another linear mapping Wi2t ∈Rd×p (d being hidden size
of visual encoder output) is also learned to map the pooled visual output of the visual
encoder vϕ(x) to a p-dimensional space. These mapped vectors represent the image
and text embeddings. Lastly, the model is trained by minimizing the InfoNCE loss
lr(xi, yi) [54]:
lr(xi, yi) = −log
exp(sim(xi, yi, Wt2i)/τ)
PN
j=1 exp(sim(xj, yi, Wt2i)/τ)
−log
exp(sim(xi, yi, Wi2t)/τ)
PN
j=1 exp(sim(xi, yj, Wi2t)/τ)
(3.3)
where the similarity is calculated as:
sim(x, y, W) =
 WT vϕ(x)
T  WT h{θ∪Eimg}(y, [IMG1])

||WT vϕ(x)||
WT h{θ∪Eimg}(y, [IMG1])

(3.4)
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Methods
Training for Image Generation: The model learns to generate image outputs
by translating the [IMG] tokens into a relevant space within the input space of an
image generation model (Gψ). For this purpose, the entire [IMG] tokens sequence
([IMG1], ... , [IMG{r}]) is passed to a module called GILLMapper, and there-
after to a linear mapping layer, see Fig.
3.3.
The resulting output is trained by
minimizing the ”MSE Loss” against the encoded input caption. This caption is en-
coded by the text encoder of the text-to-image generation model.
Figure 3.3. ”Learning to produce images” stage of training; At this stage, the model learns
to produce embeddings that could be interpretable by the image generation backbone Gψ
and optimizing retrieval loss lr and image generation loss lg; A trainable matrix Eimg is
added to LLM’s weights matrix θ; LLM generated outputs go through image retrieval and
image generation process; wi2t and wt2i are trainable matrices used for retrieval; fw are
trainable weights of GILLMapper module and Tψ is the text-to-image text encoder.
GILLMapper GILLMapper is a lightweight 4-layer encoder-decoder transformer
with adjustable parameters w, see Fig. 3.4. GILLMapper module (fw) is conditioned
on the [IMG] embeddings (h{θ∪Eimg}(y, [IMG])) and L learnt query embeddings
(q1, ..., qL) ∈RL×m. L is maximum length of the input sequence in the text-to-image
generation model (Gψ). m is the query embedding dimension of GILLMapper. These
learnable query embeddings are used to enable GILLMapper to extract sequences of
L features from the [IMG] hidden states in the LLM. Essentially, GILLMapper is
used to produce the sequence embeddings that the text-to-image generator model
expects to receive from the [IMG] tokens. More details on how exactly GILLMapper
performs in the image generation process are provided in 3.3.3.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Training Phase
35
Figure 3.4. GILLMapper module; This module is used to prepare the LLM generated [IMG]
embeddings in a way to be interpretable by the text-to-image decoder; The [IMG] embed-
dings are passed to GILLMapper encoder, L learned queries are passed to the GILLMapper
decoder and the resulting output after a linear transformation is ready to be passed to image
decoder.
Finally, image generation training is done by minimizing the MSE loss (lg(y)) of
the GILLMapper module outputs against the encoded output of the generation model
text encoder (Tψ):
lg(y) =
fw
 h{θ∪Eimg}(y, [IMG{1}]), ..., h{θ∪Eimg}(y, [IMG{r}]), q1, ..., qL

−Tψ(y)
2
2
(3.5)
Essentially, by using information from Tψ the model learns a mapping from the out-
put representations of LLM to the input space of Gψ. It is worth noting that this
procedure does not require the text-to-image generation model during training, there-
fore the Tψ embeddings can be computed in advance which leads to a much more
eﬀicient training.
As the last training objective, for a batch of image-text pair (xi, yi), the sum of
the captioning loss lc ( Eq. 3.1), image token prediction loss lp (Eq. 3.2), generation
loss lg (Eq. 3.5), and retrieval loss lr (Eq. 3.3) is calculated:
min
Wi2t,Wt2i,Wcap,Eimg,w,q1:L
1
N
N
X
i=1
 lc(xi, yi) + lp(yi) + lg(yi) + lr(xi, yi)

(3.6)
By optimizing this multitask loss, (Eq. 3.6) the model is trained to process images
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Methods
(lc), produce [IMG] tokens (lp), generate images (lg), and retrieve images (lr), which
enables the model to cover a wide variety of vision and language tasks.
3.3
Inference Phase
The inference phase in the proposed model consists of two main processes, Image
Generation and Image Retrieval.
During inference, the text and image inputs are passed to the model the same way
as in the training process. The LLM takes these inputs and generates a text alongside
[IMG] tokens. At this moment, the model needs to decide whether it should generate
an image or retrieve one. This choice is made by a decision model. The decision model
uses the [IMG] tokens hidden states as the input and outputs a decide to either follow
the retrieval procedure or the generation procedure, see Fig. 3.5.
Figure 3.5. Model behavior during Inference phase; Encoded image and tokenized caption
are passed to the LLM; The generated [IMG] embeddings by LLM goes through a decision
model and retrieval or generation decision is made; During retrieval, [IMG] embeddings
are compared with a pool of candidate images and the most similar is retrieved; During
generation, [IMG] embeddings passed to GILLMapper and then to the text-to-image decoder.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Inference Phase
37
3.3.1
Decision Model
By producing [IMG] tokens, the model aims to generate image outputs. However,
the decision of whether to retrieve an existing image or generate a new one remains
a challenge. The decision model is the proposed solution to this challenge [9]. The
decision model is a linear classifier that is trained on the [IMG] token hidden states.
This classifier is a simple fully connected neural network, see Fig. 3.6. An annotated
dataset was created to assess whether images generated by a text-to-image model
(Gψ) or images retrieved by CLIP ViT-L (vϕ) from CC3M examples better match
the same input prompts. In this way the decision model. This dataset is used to train
the decision model to decide generating or retrieving. More details on annotations
and data collection are provided in [9].
Figure 3.6.
An illustration of the decision model used in the architecture to decide for
image retrieval or generation; [IMG] embeddings are passed to a decision classifier and the
final decision is either ”ret” for image retrieval or ”gen” for image generation.
3.3.2
Image Retrieval
During inference, the model follows the standard procedure for image retrieval [7].
In the retrieval process, [IMG] embeddings are additionally passed to a linear layer.
Following that, the cosine similarity between the [IMG] embeddings and the image
embeddings of a pool of candidate images are calculated and the image with the
highest score is chosen to be retrieved, see Fig.3.5. Note that the image embeddings
of the dataset (i.e. the pool of candidate images) can be precomputed in advance to
accelerate the inference procedure in image retrieval.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Methods
3.3.3
Image Generation
In order to generate new images during inference phase, the [IMG] embeddings are
passed to the GILLMapper module. GILLMapper predicts a sequence of embeddings
that is applicable as the input to text-to-image generator image decoder, see Fig. 3.5
to be changed with a more illustrative inference figure). In other words, GILLMapper
is translating the [IMG] tokens embeddings to the input space of the text-to-image
model. In [9] it is shown that using the GILLMapper module, and multiple [IMG]
tokens, is more eﬀicient compared to just using simple linear layers. This is because
the text-to-image generation models usually require very dense information to have
an acceptable performance.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Results & Discussions
In this chapter, we describe a series of experiments conducted to explore the model’s
potential and enhance the architecture. Moreover, we discuss the efforts made to
improve the performance of the model by adjusting the architecture. Our experiments
in this regard are structured around the following schemes:
• Analyzing the generalization capacity of the model by training on a diversified
dataset.
• Swapping the LLM component with a different variation.
• Adjusting the architecture to improve performance.
• Fine-tuning the text-to-image generation model.
We have performed a variety of experiments to investigate each of the mentioned
items above. In this way, the model architecture and its capacity for improvement
are extensively investigated. Moreover, a variety of results of these investigations are
presented, discussed, and evaluated.
The chapter begins with an overview of the training setup and a description of
our evaluation metrics. This is followed by a description of the baseline model used
for our evaluations. Lastly, the details of the conducted experiments are provided.
4.1
Training Setup
In most of the experiments, we follow a default setup for training and architecture
parameters. However, we apply exceptions in some of the individual experiments. In
the default setup, we train the model on CC3M [81] with around 2.8M image-text
pairs. We pair up two random examples from the dataset during training with a
probability of 0.5. This means that half of the time, the training input is a single
image-caption pair, while the rest of the time the training input contains a sequence
of two mixed images and captions. Moreover, the captions are concatenated. This
is found to be encouraging the model to attend more explicitly to relevant images
within an image-text sequence [74].
The LLM used in our setup in most of the experiments is OPT-6.7B [43]. The
OPT model is briefly explained in Sec. 4.5. This model produces hidden states hθ
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Results & Discussions
with embedding dimension e = 4096.
CLIP ViT-L [7, 85] is used as the visual
encoder model to extract image feature vectors (vϕ) in the captioning (learning to
process image stage) and image retrieval process. For the text-to-image generation
backbone (Gψ) we chose to use Stable Diffusion v1.5 [58, 86] with L = 77 input
dimension.
We use k = 4 visual tokens, and r = 8 learnt [IMG] tokens. GILLMapper query
embedding dimension is set to m = 512. The retrieval dimension is set to p = 256
and the generation dimension is set to p = 768. All pre-trained model weights are
kept frozen during all experiments.
We only train the linear layers Wi2t, Wt2i,
Wcap, the [IMG] embedding matrix Eimg, and GILLMapper parameters w and
query vectors q1:L. These architecture hyperparameters are previously introduced
Sec. 3.1. The training happened in bfloat16 precision [87], using Adam [88] optimizer
(β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95) with a learning rate of 0.001.
Eventually, we only optimized around 250M to 300M parameters during our train-
ing. This is significantly fewer than the number of existing parameters in each of the
LLM and visual components used in this architecture. This is due to utilizing the
frozen visual and language components in our architecture. We tried three different
batch sizes for training, 32, 64, and 128. Large batch sizes, 64 and 128 took more
than a day to train. Therefore, we only conduct one experiment with batch size 64
and one with batch size 128 to study the effect of batch size in our training. The
results are presented in Sec. 4.3.
The rest of the experiments are performed with batch size 32 for 20K iterations
(10 epochs of 2K training steps), which takes around 12 hours using one A100 GPU
with 80GB VRAM on a machine in DTU HPC cluster [84]. The training time could
be reduced by employing distributed training strategies. In the following section, we
briefly describe distributed training strategies. In this work, we have tried to apply
distributed training in our training strategy.
However, the lack of computational
resources and long queues for using DTU HPC cluster machines prevented us from
applying distributed training during the timing scope of this project.
Distributed Training
In general, the computational complexity of computer vision and NLP tasks is quite
high. Often the training of such models requires solving gradient descent of millions
or billions of parameters.
Thus, these computations are highly resource-intensive
and require significant time and resources.
Distributed training, is a widely used
technique for speeding up such tasks by using multiple processing across several GPUs.
Implementing distributed training could potentially lead to 80% increase in training
speed, depending on the number of GPUs used [89].
Common terminologies used in distributed training are:
• Node: A machine or a computer in a distributed setup, possibly containing
multiple GPUs/CPUs.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Training Setup
41
• World Size: Total number of processes participating in the training (often equal
to the number of GPUs across all nodes), see Fig. 4.1.
• Process: An instance of the training script, typically running on a single com-
putational unit.
• (Global) Rank and Local Rank: (Global) Rank is a unique identifier for each
process in the entire distributed training. Local Rank is the identifier for a
process within a single node, see Fig. 4.1.
• Master Process: The process responsible for coordination and synchronization
tasks in distributed training.
• Backend: Technology used for inter-process communication (e.g., NCCL, Gloo,
MPI).
Figure 4.1. An illustration of a distributed training setup [90]
There are two main categories of distributed training:
Model Parallelism: This approach involves splitting a model across multiple
GPUs/nodes for training. This method is used when there are memory constraints
and a model is too large to fit on a single machine, or certain components of the
model demand more computational resources than the others, see Fig. 4.2(a).
Data Parallelism: Data parallelism involves dividing the dataset across multiple
GPUs/nodes, where each unit processes a part of the data and synchronizes model
updates across all machines, after each training step. This approach is more common
and less complex than model parallelism. It is used in scenarios where the model is
large and the training data is massive. This synchronization happens typically using a
technique called gradient averaging, see Fig. 4.2(b). The following steps are repeated
for each batch of data:
1. Gradient Computation: Each machine computes gradients using its own data.
2. Gradient Averaging: Gradients from all machines are averaged.
3. Weight Update: Model weights are adjusted with averaged gradients.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Results & Discussions
4. Weight Broadcasting: Updated weights are shared with all machines.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2. Overview of Distributed training methods; (a) Model parallelism; (b) Data
parallelism [91].
Several prominent frameworks including PyTorch Distributed, TensorFlow with
Distributed Strategy, Horovod, and PyTorch Lightning have been developed for dis-
tributed training. PyTorch is the most commonly used framework and has the best
balance between ease of use and control, without giving up performance. To capital-
ize on the work already done for distributed training, we briefly explain the packages
used in Pytorch for distributed training [92,93].
torch.distributed: This package consists of different built-in communication
protocols and backend support like MPI, Gloo, and NCCL. The package allows
for eﬀicient inter-process communication (IPC) and synchronization across multiple
processes or machines. DistributedDataParallel (DDP): DDP parallelizes model
training across multiple GPUs/machines. In DDP each process drives its own GPU,
and only gradients are communicated between the processes.
A simplified view of the steps involved in setting up distributed training in Pytorch
is as follows:
1. Initialize the Process Group: torch.distributed.init_process_group sets
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Evaluation Methods
43
up the communication backend (like NCCL or MPI) and determines how pro-
cesses will communicate.
2. Partitioning the Dataset: The dataset needs to be partitioned and distributed
across the available processes. PyTorch provides DistributedSampler to auto-
matically partition the data across multiple processes.
3. Model Wrap with DDP:DistributedDataParallel will replicate the model on
each process/GPU and handle the distribution of the data and the aggregation
of gradients.
Pytorch performs the optimization and backward passes as usual, but each process
operates on a different subset of the data. Gradients are automatically synchronized
across the processes during the backward pass. PyTorch supports several backends
like NCCL (optimized for NVIDIA GPUs), Gloo (a more general approach suitable
for both CPUs and GPUs), and MPI for eﬀicient communication.
As mentioned before, we have tried to implement distributed training using Py-
torch Distributed.
However, due to the lack of computational resources for each
individual working with the DTU HPC cluster and queuing among multiple users, it
was not feasible to proceed as initially planned. Moreover, distributed training for
such a big model requires access to specific layers of the cluster configuration. In gen-
eral, preparing such setup requires a time-intensive alignment with our setup which
was out of the scope of this project. Consequently, we ended up having to train our
model with the usual centralized training approach, using a single machine with a
large GPU memory (A100, 80GB). If we were able to perform distributed training, we
could increase the training speed by up to 80%, depending on the number of GPUs
used.
4.2
Evaluation Methods
Evaluation of models with image-text input and outputs is diﬀicult since there are not
a lot of standard benchmarks available for a comprehensive assessment yet. There-
fore, we follow the same evaluation methods used in prior works [9,74] as well as the
standard assessment of training and evaluation loss for every experimental configura-
tion. In this work, the focus of our evaluation is more on the image generation ability
of the model rather than image retrieval. We need to define a task for evaluating
the performance of image generation in our model. This task aims to evaluate the
image generation capability of the model while handling long image-text inputs. The
evaluation task is as follows:
Generating Images using Visual Storytelling (VIST): In the proposed eval-
uation scenario we use Visual Storytelling (VIST) [94]. VIST is a dataset of text and
image examples with sequences of 5 images and corresponding captions that cre-
ate a story, see Fig. 4.3. We take the story of images in sequence (SIS) samples
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Results & Discussions
of the dataset.
A story sequence of 4 images and corresponding captions as well
as the 5th caption are passed to our model, i.e., a sequence of ”<text1><img1>, ...
<text4><img4>,<text5><
>”. The task here is to generate the image correspond-
ing to the 5th caption. This task requires not only processing the last text input but
also the previous image-text inputs. In this way, we evaluate the ability of the model
to process multimodal interleaved input in image generation.
In this scenario, the generated image (<img5>) is evaluated using the CLIP Sim-
ilarity metric [9,74]. To obtain CLIP similarity, a CLIP ViT image encoder is used
to get the pooled representation of the generated image and the corresponding grand
truth image. The cosine similarity score between the two encoded images is CLIP
similarity.
The higher the score, the more similar the generated image is to the
actual image, indicating better performance in image generation. For the image re-
trieval ability of the model, we will only present the evaluations of the ”validation
loss” values.
Figure 4.3. An example of VIST dataset, in stories of images in sequence (SIS) format to
use for model evaluation [94].
The other metrics that we use for evaluation are as follows:
• Image generation metrics:
– MSE_loss: The validation Mean Squared Error during the ”Learning to
produce images” stage. This loss evaluates the model’s ability to map the
output of the LLM to the input of the text-to-image generator for image
generation.
– CLIP_similarity: Similarity of the generated image averaged over around
5K VIST stories compared to the ground truth images.
• Image retrieval metrics:
– Contrastive loss: The InfoNCE loss during the ”Learning to produce
images” stage.
– Top1_accuracy1: The top1 accuracy of the retrieved image [95].
1Top-1 accuracy means the model’s most likely prediction is correct
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Baseline Model
45
• Text generation metrics:
– CE_loss: The validation Cross-Entropy loss during the ”Learning to pro-
cess images” stage. This loss evaluates the model’s ability in image-text
input comprehension.
– Sequence_top1_accuracy1: The top1 contrastive accuracy of the gen-
erated tokens in a caption [95].
In addition to the above metrics, we will showcase some qualitative results generated
from our model for some of the experiments.
4.3
Baseline Model
The architecture and parameters introduced in Sec. 4.1 are used to set a baseline
model for our experiments. The data needs to be prepared before starting a training
job, as described in Sec. 2.3. Therefore, we precompute the text embeddings of the
captions of our training data using the text encoder of the text-to-image component
(e.g. Stable diffusion). This is done to improve the training time of the model. After
training, we prune unnecessary pre-trained weights from the checkpoint of the trained
model and keep just the necessary trained weights. This helps save disk space. This
is achievable since most of the weights in the model are frozen and can be loaded
during inference.
Only a few trained mapping layers and [IMG] embeddings are
necessary to be kept in a checkpoint. After training the main part of the model, the
Decision Classifier needs to be trained. The decision model is not used during the
main training stages. Therefore, it was trained separately after the training of the
other components.
We trained our baseline model 5 times with 5 different seed values to ensure the
reliability and consistency of our metrics for evaluation. The average and standard
deviation of 5 different experiment results are calculated see, Tab. 4.1. Therefore, any
increase or decrease outside the range of standard deviation in the values of metrics
is considered due to the modification in the experiment, not random initialization in
training. We assume the reported variability in the results of the baseline training is
the same across all other experiments. However, a robust assessment requires this to
be done for every single experiment we conduct.
Lastly, we evaluated the effect of batch size in our training. The results of this
evaluation are shown in Tab. 4.2. These results show that if the batch size increases,
we get better results for image retrieval and image generation metrics while the text
generation metrics decrease. There are several assumptions to explain why this hap-
pens. Since we are training on a large amount of data, sometimes, using larger batch
sizes helps the model to get more stable and accurate gradient estimations [96, 97].
Moreover, when the batch size is small, the gradient update has high variance and
is noisy. Conversely, with large batch sizes, the batch gradient closely matches the
true gradients [98, 99]. In our case, the additional noise in small batch sizes is not
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Results & Discussions
Table 4.1. Evaluation metrics used to assess the model’s performance which is averaged
over 5 random seeds; Detailed description of each metric is found on section 4.2
Metric Type
Evaluation Metric
Avg. ± Std.
Image generation metrics
Generation_MSE_loss
14.98494 ± 0.0821
CLIP_similarity
0.6345 ± 0.0051
Image retrieval metrics
Contrastive_loss
3.9594 ± 0.0125
Top1_acc
31.14334 ± 0.1925
Text generation metrics
CE_loss
3.97024 ± 0.10612
Sequence_top1_acc
36.03798 ± 0.6958
beneficial and leads to erratic updates, which results in higher loss values, see Tab.
4.2.
Overall, the optimal batch size often depends on the specific context, model archi-
tecture, training environment, and dataset. Batch size should more or less treated as
a hyperparameter to tune for handling memory and time constraints. Our findings on
different batch sizes are applicable exclusively to this architecture and similar setups.
Therefore, our results show that bigger batch sizes are a better choice for our model.
Table 4.2. Evaluation metrics for training with 3 different batch sizes, bsize 32, bsize 64,
bsize 128
Batch Size
Img Gen Met
Img Ret Met
Txt Gen Met
Gen
MSE_l
CLIP
sim
Cont_l
(InfoNCE)
Top1
acc
Crs
entpy_l
Seq
top1_acc
32
14.9869
0.6381
3.9531
31.2741
4.0129
35.5365
64
14.3019
0.6367
3.7344
35.5370
4.2169
34.7505
128
13.6735
0.6390
3.5625
38.3894
4.3741
33.9474
(Img Gen Mets) →Image Generation Metrics
(Img Ret Mets) →Image Retrieval Metrics
(Txt Gen Mets) →Text Generation Metrics
(Gen_MSE_l) →Generation_MSE_loss
( CLIP_sim) →CLIP_similarity
(Cont_l(InfoNCE)) →Contrastive_loss (InfoNCE)
(Crs_entpy_l) →Cross_entropy_loss
(Seq_top1_acc) →Sequence_top1_acc
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Training on a More Complex Dataset
47
4.4
Training on a More Complex Dataset
In this experiment, we trained the model using a more diverse data set compared to
the baseline model. This enables us to evaluate the model’s generalization and the
capacity to handle larger datasets. CC12M is chosen as the training dataset for this
experiment since it is a more diverse dataset, curated for vision-language training,
see Sec. 2.2. We used the CC3M validation set to compare the performance with our
baseline. In this experiment, we only focus on the model generation capabilities and
do not assess the image retrieval functionality.
Figure 4.4 shows the MSE validation loss calculated vs.
training step in the
”Learning to produce image” stage. It can be seen that MSE loss is slightly higher in
training with CC12M compared to CC3M. This is due to the greater diversity and
complexity in CC12M, which led to higher evaluation loss values. Different datasets
can influence the learning dynamics of a model. A more varied dataset that leads to
a higher evaluation loss, might encourage the model to generalize and perform better
on real-world data. Moreover, results from Tab. 4.3 show that training the model
on CC12M increased the CLIP Similarity score from 0.6381 (CC3M) to 0.6450. This
validates that our model was able to handle more complex data during training and
generalize better in performance.
Figure 4.4.
The Mean Squared Error in the ”Learning to produce image” stage; This
evaluates the model’s ability to map the output of the LLM to the input of text-to-image
generator for image generation; Comparing baseline model trained on CC3M dataset (base-
line) vs. the model trained on CC12M dataset.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Results & Discussions
Table 4.3. CLIP Similarity score for baseline model vs the model trained on CC12M data;
A higher score indicates better performance
Model
CLIP similarity (↑)
CC3M (Baseline)
0.6381
CC12M
0.6450
Fig. 4.5 and Fig. 4.6 show the qualitative results of the generated output of the
models in two different tasks. The improvement in the model’s ability to generalize
when using a more complex dataset is more evident in these qualitative results. Fig.
4.5 shows the generated output by the two models using the same text input prompt
(”an astronaut riding a horse on mars”). Fig. 4.5 (b) is trained CC12M. Some of
the noticeable differences in the generated image with the model which is trained
on CC12M compared to CC3M (Fig. 4.5 (a)) are the more detailed field behind the
astronaut, enhanced specifics of the horse, and a more natural horse riding pose. This
confirms that the model trained on the CC12M dataset has improved in capturing
more details and generalizing better.
Fig. 4.6 shows another example of the outputs generated by the two models. These
examples are generated using ”image + text” input prompts. The model trained on
CC12M demonstrates improved generalization by accurately recognizing details in
the input image such as the table with a plant on top. Additionally, it successfully
generated the windows, the coffee table, and the rug on the floor on the output. The
distinct brick pattern on the wall behind the couch is also an interesting catch by the
model, see Fig. 4.6(b). These are the details that are not considered in the output
generated by the model trained on the CC3M, see Fig. 4.6(a)
Overall, we demonstrated that the model achieves better generalization through
the use of more diverse datasets, evidenced by quantitative results and qualitative
examples in tasks such as text-to-image generation and processing text-image inputs.
4.5
Evaluating Modularity of the LLM Component
In Sec. 3.1 it is described that the proposed architecture is modular. The LLM com-
ponent of the architecture is kept frozen during the training of the model. Therefore,
it can be swapped with other similar models. In this section, we evaluate the modu-
larity by training our model with a different LLM component. Moreover, we try to
implement stronger and larger LLM components and assess the model’s performance.
To achieve these, we chose Llama2 [42,100] as another LLM component for the model
and compared it with our baseline model which uses OPT LLM [43]. Tab. 4.4 shows
the performance comparison of these two models on different standard benchmarks.
It is clear that Llama2 is a stronger LLM compared to OPT.
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Evaluating Modularity of the LLM Component
49
Figure 4.5. The results of the text-to-image task comparing models trained on CC3M and
CC12M datasets; The generated outputs with the prompt ”An astronaut riding a horse on
mars”; (a) Outputs generated by the model trained on CC3M; (b) Outputs generated by
the model trained on CC3M; Noticeable difference in small details such more detailed field
behind the astronaut, more natural horse riding pose, and more details in the generated
image of the horse with the model using CC12M.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Results & Discussions
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.6. Comparing the details of the generated outputs of models trained on CC3M
and CC12M; (a) The multimodal input prompt (image + text) ”A picture of this, but in
blue”; (b) Output generated by the model trained on CC3M; (c) Output generated by the
model trained on CC12M, The differences are marked with yellow arrows.
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Evaluating Modularity of the LLM Component
51
Table 4.4. OPT and Llama2 performance on standard benchmarks [101–106]; 7B and 13B
variants; Values have been averaged and rounded for simplification.
Model
MMLU
BoolQ
PIQA
HellaSwag
Winogrande
ARC-e
ARC-c
OPT
∼40%
∼60%
∼70%
∼50%
∼60%
∼55%
∼35%
Llama2
∼50%
∼80%
∼80%
∼80%
∼70%
∼75%
∼45%
A brief overview of each of the LLM variants is provided below:
OPT
Open Pre-trained Transformer (OPT), is a family of decoder-only LLMs developed
and released by Meta AI [43]. These models are similar in nature to the well-known
OpenAI Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) models. They are designed for
a wide range of NLP tasks, such as text generation, translation, summarization, and
question-answering.
The dataset used for pre-training OPT models comprises ap-
proximately 180 billion tokens which contain the contamination of different datasets
used in prior open source LLMs. OPT models are a suite of decoder-only pre-trained
transformers with variants ranging from 125M to 175B parameters. OPT-175B is
comparable to GPT-3 in performance, but it was developed with significantly less
computational power and in a shorter time frame. The goal of the OPT models is to
replicate GPT-3’s capabilities while ensuring open access and broader usability [43].
The architecture details of the two variants of the OPT model, used in this work are
presented in Tab. 4.5.
Llama2
Large Language Model Meta AI (Llama2) is one of the latest open-source large lan-
guage models released by Meta [11]. Llama2 is a decoder-only LLM that shares much
of the same architecture and pre-training settings as its predecessor, Llama1 [41].
Below are some of the highlights of Llama2 architecture:
Pre-normalization: Llama2 has been trained on over 2 trillion tokens which
enables this model to have a larger context length compared to previous open-source
LLMs. A pre-normalization technique using the RMSNorm normalization function
[107] is implemented in Llama2 to improve the training stability and to simplify the
massive 2 trillion token training data. In this technique, instead of normalizing the
output layer, the input of each transformer sub-layer is normalized.SwiGLU activa-
tion function: The ReLU activation function is changed with SwiGLU [108] to im-
prove performance. This is an inspiration from PaLM [39] model architecture.Rotary
embeddings:
Llama models use a new positional embedding method called ”Rotary
positional embeddings (RoPE)” [109].Attention mechanisms:
Llama2 employs
two specific attention mechanisms. Grouped Query Attention (GQA) [110] and Ghost
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Results & Discussions
Attention (GAtt) [42]. Note that the GQA is only used in variations with bigger than
13B parameters. Llama2 model has different pre-trained and fine-tuned variations
ranging from 7 billion to 70 billion parameters. Llama-2-7b-chat-hf is a 7 billion
parameter version of Llama2 that is created by supervised fine-tuning. Llama-2-7b-
chat-hf is iteratively refined using Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) and is trained on over 1 million new human annotations for chat purposes.
The ”hf” part in the name indicates that the model is converted to the Hugging Face
Transformers format. We used the Llama-2-7b-chat-hf variant in our experiments.
For simplicity, we will refer to this model as Llama2-7b throughout this work. The
architecture details of the Llama2 model used in our work are presented in Tab. 4.5.
We evaluate the architecture’s modularity by training our model with Llama2-7B
LLM and comparing the performance with the baseline model. Tab. 4.6 shows that
the ”top1 sequence accuracy” in the model using Llama2 (47.52%) is higher compared
to OPT (35.53%). Furthermore, Fig. 4.7(a) shows that the Cross-Entropy loss is
lower in the model using Llama2 as the LLM compared to OPT. This demonstrates
that using Llama2 as the LLM resulted in better text generation due to higher top1
sequence accuracy. Llama2 also has better image comprehension abilities compared
to OPT, as the Cross-Entropy loss is lower.
Nevertheless, the model using Llama2 is not performing as well as OPT in image
generation. This is shown by higher MSE loss in Fig. 4.7(b) and lower CLIP similarity
score (0.6285) in Tab. 4.6 for Llama2 compared to OPT (0.6381). Therefore, we can
conclude that OPT is a better option for image generation in this setup and Llama2
Table 4.5. Architecture details of OPT 6.7B and 13B variants and Llama2 7B. Number of
layers (#L), Number of attention heads (#H), embedding size (dmodel), feed-forward network
dimension (ffn_dim), number of unique words that model understands (Vocab size), whether
the same word embeddings used for input and output or not (Tie_word_embs), learning
rate (LR), global batch size (Batch)
Model
#L
#H
dmodel
ffn_dim
Vocab
size
Tie
word_embs
LR
Batch
OPT-6.7B
32
32
4096
16,384
50,272
True
1.2e−4
2M
OPT-13B
40
40
5120
20,480
50,272
True
1.0e−4
4M
Llama2-7B
32
32
4096
11,008
32,000
False
3.0e−4
4M
Table 4.6. CLIP similarity score and Top1 sequence accuracy comparison between OPT
6.7B and Llama2 7B.
Model
CLIP similarity (↑)
Top1 sequence accuracy
OPT-6.7B
0.6381
35.53%
Llama2-7B
0.6285
47.52%
==PAGE:63==
4.5 Evaluating Modularity of the LLM Component
53
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7.
(a) The Cross-Entropy loss in the ”Learning to process image” stage; This
evaluates the model’s ability in image-text input comprehension; (b) The Mean squared
error in the ”Learning to produce image” stage; This evaluates the model’s ability to map
the output of the LLM to the input of the text-to-image generator for image generation;
Comparing the models trained using OPT (baseline) and Llama2 as the LLM component.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Results & Discussions
is performing better in text generation.
The CLIP similarity score of Llama2 shows its poor performance in image gener-
ation compared to the OPT model, see Tab. 4.6. This can be observed in Fig. 4.8
which shows the results of a VIST example used for calculating the CLIP similarity
for the model using OPT-6.7 and the model trained on Llama2-7B. In Fig. 4.8, the
statue highlighted by the yellow arrow demonstrates the superior generalization of
the OPT-6.7 model in managing long image-text sequences, as well as its enhanced
image generation performance compared to Llama2.
Unlike OPT, Llama2 does not ”tie” its word embeddings in the architecture, see
Tab. 4.5. Weight Tying is a technique used in the internal neural network of a lan-
guage model. It involves sharing the same sets of word embeddings in the embedding
matrix for input (encoder) and output (decoder) in the LLM, see Fig. 4.9 [111]. In
our proposed architecture, we add [IMG] tokens and a trainable matrix Eimg to the
embedding matrix of the LLM. This enables the LLM to produce representations for
image generation, see Sec. 3.2.2. Since Llama2 does not use weight tying, adding a
trainable matrix Eimg presumably reduced Llama2’s performance in generating the
[IMG] embeddings. Therefore, this suggests that the poor performance of Llama2
in image generation is due to this architectural difference between Llama2 and OPT.
This is merely an assumption, and further investigation is required during the training
process to obtain more details which is out of the scope of this work.
We have trained the model with OPT-13B LLM to analyze its performance using
a stronger LLM component. Fig. 4.10(a) shows the Cross-Entropy loss in the ”learn-
ing to process image” stage. We observe that using OPT-13B as the LLM resulted
in a small decrease in the Cross-Entropy loss value in image processing. Additionally,
the top1 sequence accuracy has slightly increased from 35.53% with OPT-6.7B LLM
to 37.73% using OPT-13B, see Tab. 4.7. These changes in performance are fairly
small compared to our baseline model. However, the VQA example shown in Fig.
4.11 indicates that the model trained with OPT-13B is performing quite better com-
pared to one with OPT-6.7B. It is noticeable that OPT-13B was able to accurately
identify different elements such as ”syrup”, ”whipped cream”, and ”fruit preserves”
and demonstrates an improved interpretation of the input image in the generated
output caption compared to OPT. On the other hand, OPT-13B CLIP similarity
score (0.6280) is lower than OPT-6.7B (0.6381), see Tab.4.7. Moreover, Fig. 4.10(b)
shows that the MSE loss value in OPT-13B is slightly higher than OPT-6.7B.
Often, it is expected that using larger LLMs can increase the performance of the
Table 4.7.
CLIP similarity score and the top1 sequence accuracy comparison between
OPT-6.7B and OPT-13B.
Model
CLIP similarity (↑)
Top1 sequence accuracy
OPT-6.7B
0.6381
35.53%
OPT-13B
0.6280
37.73%
==PAGE:65==
4.5 Evaluating Modularity of the LLM Component
55
Figure 4.8. Comparing the generated results of the model using OPT-6.7B and Llama2-7B
with the ground truth image in a VIST example; It can be seen that the model using OPT-
6.7B performed better in understanding the long image-text story sequence and generated a
more similar result to the ground truth image; The statue mentioned in the story is shown
by the yellow arrow in the generated output by the model using OPT-6.7B; However, the
model trained with Llama2-7B was not successful in generating the statue on its output.
Figure 4.9. A general illustration of a model with weight tying (right) and a model without
weight tying (left) [112].
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Results & Discussions
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10. (a) The Cross-Entropy loss in the ”Learning to process image” stage; This
evaluates the model’s ability in image-text input comprehension; (b) The Mean squared
error in the ”Learning to produce image” stage; This evaluates the model’s ability to map
the output of the LLM to the input of the text-to-image generator for image generation;
Comparing the models trained using OPT-6.7B (baseline) and OPT-13B as the LLM com-
ponent.
==PAGE:67==
4.6 Architectural Adjustments
57
Figure 4.11. Generated output in VQA task using OPT-6.7B and OPT-13B models; The
input prompt is ”A picture of?” + an image; (a) generated output by OPT-6.7; (b) generated
output by OPT-13B; It can be seen that OPT-13B performed better in this task and was
able to correctly identify different elements in the picture such as syrup, whipped cream,
and fruit preserves.
model. However, given the complexity of the architecture, this may not always be the
case. There exist a few assumptions to account for this observation. The dataset we
used for training such a large model with a 13B LLM is fairly small. Large models like
OPT-13B are more prone to overfitting when training data is insuﬀicient. Moreover,
for the sake of consistency in our comparison, we used the same hyperparameters
and training setup as in the baseline model.
However, it is important to adapt
the training setup and architecture hyperparameters to the complexity of the model.
Lastly, There’s a possibility that a bottleneck in a different part of the architecture
is preventing the model’s improvement.
4.6
Architectural Adjustments
In this section, we aimed to increase the model performance, by adjusting some parts
and parameters of the architecture. The adjustments we made to the architecture
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Results & Discussions
are as follows:
• Using more visual tokens (k).
• Using a nonlinear mapping layer and transformer instead of the linear mapping
for Wcap.
• Using a larger transformer instead of GILLMapper (fw).
First we adjust the number of visual vectors (k) in the architecture. This param-
eter represents the number of visual tokens to map the visual feature vector of the
input image to the input space of the LLM, see Sec. 3.2. We increased the k from
k = 4 in the baseline model to k = 8 and k = 12 to evaluate the effect of having more
visual vectors to encode the input image. Fig. 4.12(a) shows that the Cross-Entropy
loss in the ”learning to process image” stage slightly decreased. Furthermore, we can
see that the MSE loss did not change, see Fig. 4.12(b). Tab. 4.8 shows that the top1
accuracy has increased from 35.53% to 38.40%, while the CLIP similarity decreased
from 0.6351 to 0.6258. This suggests that by using more visual tokens, the model
is performing better in text generation and input image interpretation while image
generation performance decreases. Overall, it seems using k = 4 visual vectors should
suﬀice to encode the input images in our experiment.
Table 4.8.
CLIP similarity score and top1 sequence accuracy in models with different
numbers of visual vectors used to encode the input image
Model
CLIP similarity (↑)
Top1 sequence accuracy
4 visual tokens (Baseline)
0.6381
35.53%
8 visual tokens
0.6206
38.02%
12 visual tokens
0.6258
38.40%
Another architectural adjustment we explored was using a nonlinear mapping
layer in the input.
Moreover, we also analyzed using a more complicated neural
network i.e., a simple transformer for this mapping. This is done to investigate the
suitable complexity for the mapping layer (Wcap) that can keep as much as possible
information in the encoded visual vector during mapping.
In the baseline architecture, the encoded input image is mapped to the input space
of the LLM using a single linear layer (Wcap). We adjusted this mapping layer by
using a nonlinear neural network instead. This network contains 2 nonlinear layers
equipped with batch normalization layers, ReLU activation functions [113] and a 3rd
linear layer at the end, see Fig.4.13. Additionally, we have also tried using a simple
transformer network for this mapping layer. We used a 2-layer encoder transformer
for this purpose, see Fig. 4.13. Fig. 4.14 shows that using a nonlinear layer for this
mapping layer has the smallest Cross-Entropy loss value compared to a linear mapping
or a transformer mapping. Moreover, top1 sequence accuracy in Tab. 4.9 slightly
==PAGE:69==
4.6 Architectural Adjustments
59
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12. (a) The Cross-Entropy loss in the ”Learning to process image” stage; This
evaluates the model’s ability in image-text input comprehension; (b) The Mean squared
error in the ”Learning to produce image” stage; This evaluates the model’s ability to map
the output of the LLM to the input of the text-to-image generator for image generation;
Comparing the models trained using 4 (baseline), 8, and 12 visual vectors.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Results & Discussions
increased from 35.53% using linear mapping to 36.28% with nonlinear mapping. It is
also noticeable that the accuracy dropped significantly from 35.53% in linear mapping
to 25.88% using transformer mapping. CLIP similarity score does not significantly
change by applying nonlinear mapping (from 0.6381 in linear mapping to 0.6372 in
nonlinear mapping) while it drops to 0.5865 using transformer mapping. This suggests
that the mapping layer should be a simple network rather than a complex one like
a transformer. However, adding nonlinearity does not improve the image generation
ability while it slightly improves the text generation and input image comprehension.
Table 4.9.
CLIP similarity score and top1 sequence accuracy in models with mapping
networks in the input.
Model
CLIP similarity (↑)
Top1 sequence accuracy
Linear mapping
0.6381
35.53%
Non-linear mapping
0.6372
36.28%
Mapping using transformer
0.5856
25.88%
In our architecture, GILLMapper is used to map the LLM outputs to text-to-image
component input. Another adjustment is to replace GILLMapper with a larger trans-
former to improve our model image generation capability. The baseline GILLMapper
is a 4-layer encoder-decoder transformer with 4 attention heads. In our experiment,
we used a larger 8-layer encoder-decoder transformer with 8 attention heads. The
results of this experiment are shown in Tab. 4.10. We can see that the model using
a larger GILLMapper is performing better in image generation. CLIP similarity im-
Figure 4.13. (a) The 3-layer nonlinear neural network used for mapping the pooler output
of the visual encoder to the input space of the LLM; (b) The 2-layer encoder transformer
used for mapping the pooler output of the visual encoder to the input space of the LLM.
==PAGE:71==
4.6 Architectural Adjustments
61
Figure 4.14.
The Cross-Entropy loss in the ”Learning to process image” stage; This
evaluates the model’s ability in image-text input comprehension; Comparing models using
different input mapping networks
proved from 0.6351 with a 4-layer GILLMapper to 0.6451 using an 8-layer GILLMap-
per. This suggests that a larger GILLMapper performs better in generalizing longer
sequences containing multiple images and texts as well as image comprehension. Fig.
4.15 shows the qualitative results of the generated output for a multimodal (text +
image) input and compares the model with a larger GILLMapper with our baseline
model. It can be seen that the model with a larger GILLMapper generated the other
piece of furniture present in the input image and was more successful in comprehend-
ing the input image. Investigating more complex modules and larger transformers
has required more computational power than what was at our disposal. Therefore,
we leave that exploration for future work.
Overall, the results in this section suggest that using more visual vectors (k) or a
nonlinear mapping in the input appears to be the right adjustment for enhancing the
Table 4.10. CLIP similarity score; Comparing baseline model with a model using a larger
transformer as GILLMapper module.
Model
CLIP similarity (↑)
GILLMapper (Baseline)
0.6381
Larger GILLMapper
0.6461
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Results & Discussions
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.15. Comparing the details of the generated outputs of the baseline model and
the model with larger GILLMapper ; (a) The multimodal input prompt (image + text)
”A picture of this, but in blue”; (b) Output generated by the baseline model; (c) Output
generated by the model trained with larger GILLMapper, the difference is marked with
yellow arrows.
==PAGE:73==
4.7 Fine-tuning the Text-to-Image Generator Using DreamBooth Technique
63
model’s performance in text generation. Moreover, our findings show that employing
a larger transformer module in GILLMapper seems to be the most effective approach
to improve image generation capabilities.
4.7
Fine-tuning the Text-to-Image Generator Using
DreamBooth Technique
In this section, we analyze the capabilities of our model in handling a fine-tuned
text-to-image generation component. Stable Diffusion is used as the base model for
fine-tuning the text-to-image component. In order to fine-tune this component, we
use the DreamBooth technique. Below is a brief explanation of this technique:
DreamBooth [114] is a technique that introduces new concepts to text-to-image
diffusion models using a specific form of fine-tuning. The key innovation of Dream-
Booth is its ability to personalize a generative model for a specific subject by only
using a small amount of additional training data.
For example, DreamBooth en-
ables Stable Diffusion [58] to be trained on specific subjects or entities. DreamBooth
technique works as follows:
• The training data for this task needs to be at least 3-5 images of the specific
subject. These images should showcase the subject in various contexts, poses,
or environments for better generalization.
• First, the low-resolution text-to-image model (VAE component, see Sec. 1.3.2)
is fine-tuned. In this stage, we use images paired with a text prompt containing
the unique identifier of the subject plus the subject’s class label (e.g., ”A photo
of a mqft person”).
• In parallel, a ”class-specific prior preservation loss” that benefits from the se-
mantic prior of the model is applied. This loss encourages the model to gener-
ate different instances belonging to the subject’s class by using the part of the
prompt that contains the class name(e.g., A photo of a person). Moreover, it
also mitigates the problem of language drift. In language drift the model loses
prior understanding gained in the pre-training process. This usually happens
when a pre-trained model is fine-tuned.
• In the second step of fine-tuning, the super-resolution component (U-Net com-
ponent, see Sec.
1.3.2) is fine-tuned with pairs of low-resolution and high-
resolution images taken from the input images set. This allows the model to
preserve the small details of the subject.
In essence, the DreamBooth method supervises the model with its own generated
samples, so it retains the prior knowledge when fine-tuning happens.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Results & Discussions
Fig. 4.16 shows the subject images that we used for fine-tuning. We used the
[person] class as the target class to fine-tune the text-to-image generator. stable-
diffusion-v1-5 is used as the text-to-image base model for fine-tuning.
Figure 4.16. The data samples used for fine-tuning the text-to-image component. Images
of the same person in different contexts, poses, or environments as required for Dreambooth
technique.
The prompt we used for fine-tuning was ”A photo of mqft person”.
We tried
different combinations of training steps and learning rates to get acceptable results.
The training steps range from 600 to 2000.
Two learning rates for training were
chosen, 5e−6 as high and (1e−6) as low values.
The learning rate is too high in Fig. 4.18 and low in Fig. 4.17. Clearly, the
image quality degrades a lot due to the high learning rate in Fig. 4.18. Therefore,
we choose the low value, 1e−6, for the learning rate to fine-tune the stable diffusion
model. Moreover, we choose training steps = 800 as it generated the smoothest
pictures among other training steps see, Fig. 4.17.
After fine-tuning the image generator, we train our model with the default training
setup and analyze its outputs. We used different input prompts to assess our model’s
ability to generalize on the added concept to the finetuned image generator.”mqft”
person is used in the input prompts since it was implemented for teaching a new
specific subject of the class ’person’ to the image generator model.
Fig.
4.19 shows the generated image output using different input prompts all
containing ”mqft person”. Looking at the figures, we can see that our model is able
to understand the concept of the ”mqft person” and generate a fairly similar output to
the target subject of fine-tuning. The model was also successful in producing closely
related patterns in facial elements like the beard, eyes, lips, and etc.
Moreover, we passed an image of the fine-tuning subject as the input to our model
==PAGE:75==
4.7 Fine-tuning the Text-to-Image Generator Using DreamBooth Technique
65
and asked for three different perspectives of the input image. Fig. 4.20 shows that
the fine-tuned model can maintain the main characteristics of the specific fine-tuning
target. Additionally, we passed the same input to our baseline model. It can be seen
that the generated outputs are images of random people and are not similar to the
fine-tuning subject. Overall, the discussed results confirm the ability of our model
to generalize and comprehend the concepts used for fine-tuning the text-to-image
component.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Results & Discussions
Figure 4.17. Generated samples by the fine-tuned Stable Diffusion model, with learning
rate = 1e−6 and different training steps ranging from 600 to 2000 in each row; 800 training
steps seems to suﬀice.
==PAGE:77==
4.7 Fine-tuning the Text-to-Image Generator Using DreamBooth Technique
67
Figure 4.18. Generated samples by the fine-tuned Stable Diffusion model, with learning
rate = 5e−6 and different training steps ranging from 600 to 2000 in each row; This learning
rate clearly leads to quality degradation in the generated sample.
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Results & Discussions
Figure 4.19. Comparing the generated output of the baseline model with the fine-tuned
model in text-to-image generation task, using the same prompts, targeting the fine-tuning
subject ”mqft person”; (a) Baseline model outputs; (b) Fine-tuned model outputs; It is clear
that the fine-tuned model could generalize on the fine-tuning subject and generate relevant
pictures of the subject.
==PAGE:79==
4.7 Fine-tuning the Text-to-Image Generator Using DreamBooth Technique
69
Figure 4.20. Comparing the generated output of the baseline model with the fine-tuned
model in multimodal dialogue task, using the same prompts, targeting the fine-tuning subject
”mqft person”; (a) Input (text + image); (b) baseline model outputs; (c) fine-tuned model
outputs; It is clear that the fine-tuned model could generalize better on the fine-tuning
subject and generate relevant pictures of the subject considering the input.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The presented work in this thesis aimed to develop a Multimodal Large Language
Model (MLLM) capable of image processing and image generation. We fused a pre-
trained Large Language Model (LLM) with frozen vision encoder and image decoder
to develop a model with the ability to generate images alongside text output. We used
the most recent methods to combine image and text embeddings and were inspired
by GILL architecture to develop our model. This model is capable of performing
in tasks like Visual Question answering and text-to-image generation while handling
long image-text input sequences.
First, we have trained our model on a large, diverse data set and analyzed its
behavior and performance. Our analysis revealed that our architecture is capable of
handling large image-text datasets and demonstrates solid generalization abilities in
generating both image and text outputs. Moreover, we trained different variants of
our model using alternative LLMs, such as Llama2 and OPT-13B, to validate the
modularity of the architecture. Our results confirmed that the language component
of the model is modular. In addition, our results indicated that simply scaling up to
an LLM or opting different model, does not guarantee improved performance. We
assume that scaling up the LLM should be done together with modifications to the
training setup or using a larger training dataset to improve the model’s performance.
Then, we modified various parts and parameters of the architecture to enhance
the model’s performance.
We employed different mapping layers, such as nonlin-
ear mapping and transformer mapping, to map the embedding space of the vision
encoder to a large language model. Our experiments show that complex mapping
layers often lead to a decline in performance. Thus, a simple linear mapping layer
is likely the best choice. We also implemented a larger transformer compared to the
GILLMapper module which maps the embedding space of the language model to a
text-to-image generator. The results show that this modification fairly improved the
image generation performance.
Lastly, we evaluated the model’s generalization capabilities when using a fine-
tuned text-to-image decoder. We found that our model is able to comprehend the
target subject of fine-tuning and generalize on it.
Overall, we tried to analyze the capacity of the proposed model and its perfor-
mance by adjusting different parts of its architecture.
In a broader context, the
proposed methodology for integrating a Large Language Model (LLM) with vision
models appears to exhibit satisfactory performance as a comprehensive MLLM. How-
==PAGE:82==
72
Conclusion
ever, to enhance the model’s individual abilities, careful adjustments are required in
certain parts of its architecture. These modifications may not necessarily improve the
model’s overall performance in all aspects but rather improve a specific ability while
potentially causing a decrease in other abilities.
5.1
Limitations
In this research, we encountered some limitations which are as follows:
• The model generation capabilities rely on an LLM component. Therefore our
model is also subject to many of the typical limitations in LLMs such as hallu-
cinations, lack of coherent sentence generation in the output, etc.
• Training such large models requires a lot of computational resources and time.
We utilized the full extent of our available resources to train this model. How-
ever, having access to more powerful computational resources would allow for
further investigations.
• We particularly faced challenges with limited storage capacity, especially in
managing the training data and the checkpoints of the trained model. This
prevented us from conducting more comprehensive experiments concerning the
training data.
5.2
Future Work
There are plenty of areas of future work that exist to build upon the findings of this
work. Some of the potential pathways include:
• Individual pre-trained visual and language components of our model can be
scaled up to stronger variants to push the capabilities of the model and investi-
gate potential improvements in certain tasks.
• The model can be trained on large datasets that are closer to modern standards
and are typically used for training such large models.
Besides, other types
of cross-modal datasets such as interleaved image-text data can be used for
training.
• Other fusion strategies to condition the model on the input image data can be
investigated.
• Fine-tuned LLM and text-to-image generators can be employed to tailor the
model for downstream applications such as image editing.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
“Introducing gemini: our largest and most capable ai model.” https://blog.
google.com.
[2]
“Introducing chatgpt.” https://openai.com.
[3]
A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, “Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners,” 2019.
[4]
S. Yin, C. Fu, S. Zhao, K. Li, X. Sun, T. Xu, and E. Chen, “A survey on
multimodal large language models,” 2023.
[5]
J. Wu, W. Gan, Z. Chen, S. Wan, and P. S. Yu, “Multimodal large language
models: A survey,” 2023.
[6]
A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, I. Sutskever, et al., “Improving lan-
guage understanding by generative pre-training,” 2018.
[7]
A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, et al., “Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” 2021.
[8]
M. Tsimpoukelli, J. Menick, S. Cabi, S. M. A. Eslami, O. Vinyals, and F. Hill,
“Multimodal few-shot learning with frozen language models,” 2021.
[9]
J. Y. Koh, D. Fried, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Generating images with multimodal
language models,” 2023.
[10]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep learning. MIT press, 2016.
[11]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, et al., “Attention is all you need,” 2023.
[12]
S. Karita, N. Chen, T. Hayashi, et al., “A comparative study on transformer vs
rnn in speech applications,” in 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding Workshop (ASRU), IEEE, Dec. 2019.
[13]
L. Franco, L. Placidi, F. Giuliari, I. Hasan, M. Cristani, and F. Galasso, “Under
the hood of transformer networks for trajectory forecasting,” 2022.
[14]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition,” 2015.
==PAGE:84==
74
Bibliography
[15]
D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate,” 2016.
[16]
A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image
recognition at scale,” 2021.
[17]
K. O’Shea and R. Nash, “An introduction to convolutional neural networks,”
2015.
[18]
H. Naveed, A. U. Khan, S. Qiu, M. Saqib, S. Anwar, M. Usman, N. Akhtar,
N. Barnes, and A. Mian, “A comprehensive overview of large language models,”
2023.
[19]
Simon Prince, “Training and fine-tuning large language models.” https://www.
borealisai.com/.
[20]
Z. Wang, W. Zhong, Y. Wang, Q. Zhu, F. Mi, B. Wang, L. Shang, X. Jiang,
and Q. Liu, “Data management for large language models: A survey,” 2023.
[21]
N. Maslej, L. Fattorini, E. Brynjolfsson, J. Etchemendy, K. Ligett, et al., “Ar-
tificial intelligence index report 2023,” 2023.
[22]
S. Dash, I. Lyngaas, J. Yin, X. Wang, R. Egele, G. Cong, F. Wang, and P. Bal-
aprakash, “Optimizing distributed training on frontier for large language mod-
els,” 2023.
[23]
Wikipedia contributors, “Gpt-4 — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.” https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=GPT-4&oldid=1100665433,
2024.
[Online; accessed 18-January-2024].
[24]
“The
promise
and
perils
of
large
language
models.”
https://
twosigmaventures.com.
[25]
J. Howard and S. Ruder, “Universal language model fine-tuning for text classi-
fication,” 2018.
[26]
L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, and P. M. and,
“Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” 2022.
[27]
A. Sherstinsky, “Fundamentals of recurrent neural network (rnn) and long short-
term memory (lstm) network,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 404,
p. 132306, Mar. 2020.
[28]
R. C. Staudemeyer and E. R. Morris, “Understanding lstm – a tutorial into
long short-term memory recurrent neural networks,” 2019.
[29]
J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2019.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
75
[30]
Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis,
L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pre-
training approach,” 2019.
[31]
V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” 2020.
[32]
Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Soricut, “Albert:
A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations,” 2020.
[33]
A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever, et al., “Lan-
guage models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI blog, vol. 1, no. 8,
p. 9, 2019.
[34]
T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, et al., “Language models are few-shot learn-
ers,” 2020.
[35]
OpenAI, “Gpt-4 technical report,” 2023.
[36]
C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y. Zhou,
W. Li, and P. J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
text-to-text transformer,” 2023.
[37]
M. Lewis, Y. Liu, N. Goyal, M. Ghazvininejad, A. Mohamed, O. Levy, V. Stoy-
anov, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training
for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension,” 2019.
[38]
Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, and Q. V. Le, “Xlnet:
Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding,” 2020.
[39]
A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, et al., “Palm: Scaling language modeling
with pathways,” 2022.
[40]
E. Almazrouei, H. Alobeidli, A. Alshamsi, et al., “The falcon series of open
language models,” 2023.
[41]
H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, et al., “Llama: Open and
eﬀicient foundation language models,” 2023.
[42]
H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, et al.,
“Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” 2023.
[43]
S. Zhang, S. Roller, N. Goyal, M. Artetxe, M. Chen, S. Chen, et al., “Opt:
Open pre-trained transformer language models,” 2022.
[44]
“An overview of bard.” https://ai.google.com.
[45]
J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, et al., “Training
compute-optimal large language models,” 2022.
==PAGE:86==
76
Bibliography
[46]
J. Zhang, J. Huang, S. Jin, and S. Lu, “Vision-language models for vision tasks:
A survey,” 2023.
[47]
J. Lu, D. Batra, D. Parikh, and S. Lee, “Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic
visiolinguistic representations for vision-and-language tasks,” 2019.
[48]
A. Ramesh, M. Pavlov, G. Goh, S. Gray, C. Voss, A. Radford, M. Chen, and
I. Sutskever, “Zero-shot text-to-image generation,” 2021.
[49]
J. Li, D. Li, C. Xiong, and S. Hoi, “Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
training for unified vision-language understanding and generation,” 2022.
[50]
P. Zhang, X. Li, X. Hu, J. Yang, L. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Choi, and J. Gao,
“Vinvl: Revisiting visual representations in vision-language models,” 2021.
[51]
T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework for
contrastive learning of visual representations,” 2020.
[52]
P. Khosla, P. Teterwak, C. Wang, A. Sarna, Y. Tian, P. Isola, A. Maschinot,
C. Liu, and D. Krishnan, “Supervised contrastive learning,” 2021.
[53]
K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for unsu-
pervised visual representation learning,” 2020.
[54]
A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with con-
trastive predictive coding,” 2019.
[55]
S. Reed, Z. Akata, X. Yan, L. Logeswaran, B. Schiele, and H. Lee, “Generative
adversarial text to image synthesis,” 2016.
[56]
A. Nichol, P. Dhariwal, A. Ramesh, P. Shyam, P. Mishkin, B. McGrew,
I. Sutskever, and M. Chen, “Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation
and editing with text-guided diffusion models,” 2022.
[57]
A. Ramesh, P. Dhariwal, A. Nichol, C. Chu, and M. Chen, “Hierarchical text-
conditional image generation with clip latents,” 2022.
[58]
R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” 2022.
[59]
“Midjourney.com.” https://www.midjourney.com/.
[60]
J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” 2020.
[61]
C. Schuhmann, R. Beaumont, R. Vencu, C. Gordon, R. Wightman, M. Cherti,
et al., “Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-
text models,” 2022.
[62]
D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” 2022.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
77
[63]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation,” 2015.
[64]
“Huggingface transformers.cliptextmodel.” https://huggingface.co/.
[65]
C. Saharia, W. Chan, S. Saxena, L. Li, J. Whang, E. Denton, et al., “Pho-
torealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding,”
2022.
[66]
T. Karras, M. Aittala, T. Aila, and S. Laine, “Elucidating the design space of
diffusion-based generative models,” 2022.
[67]
L. Liu, Y. Ren, Z. Lin, and Z. Zhao, “Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion
models on manifolds,” 2022.
[68]
S. Patil, P. Cuenca, N. Lambert, and P. von Platen, “Stable diffusion with
diffusers,” Hugging Face Blog, 2022.
[69]
Onkar Mishra, “Stable diffusion explained.” https://medium.com/.
[70]
Chip Huyen, “Multimodality and large multimodal models (lmms).” https:
//huyenchip.com/.
[71]
Z. Wang, J. Yu, A. W. Yu, Z. Dai, Y. Tsvetkov, and Y. Cao, “Simvlm: Simple
visual language model pretraining with weak supervision,” 2022.
[72]
C. Eichenberg, S. Black, S. Weinbach, L. Parcalabescu, and A. Frank, “Magma
– multimodal augmentation of generative models through adapter-based fine-
tuning,” 2022.
[73]
H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee, “Visual instruction tuning,” 2023.
[74]
J. Y. Koh, R. Salakhutdinov, and D. Fried, “Grounding language models to
images for multimodal inputs and outputs,” 2023.
[75]
J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image
pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models,” 2023.
[76]
J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, et al.,
“Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning,” 2022.
[77]
A. Aghajanyan, B. Huang, C. Ross, V. Karpukhin, H. Xu, N. Goyal, et al.,
“Cm3: A causal masked multimodal model of the internet,” 2022.
[78]
S. Wu, H. Fei, L. Qu, W. Ji, and T.-S. Chua, “Next-gpt: Any-to-any multimodal
llm,” 2023.
[79]
“Gpt-4.” https://openai.com.
[80]
G. Team, “Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models,” 2023.
==PAGE:88==
78
Bibliography
[81]
P. Sharma, N. Ding, S. Goodman, and R. Soricut, “Conceptual captions: A
cleaned, hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning,”
in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) (I. Gurevych and Y. Miyao, eds.), (Mel-
bourne, Australia), pp. 2556–2565, Association for Computational Linguistics,
July 2018.
[82]
S. Changpinyo, P. Sharma, N. Ding, and R. Soricut, “Conceptual 12m: Pushing
web-scale image-text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts,” 2021.
[83]
R. Beaumont, “img2dataset: Easily turn large sets of image urls to an image
dataset.” https://github.com/rom1504/img2dataset, 2021.
[84]
DTU Computing Center, “DTU Computing Center resources,” 2022.
[85]
“clip-vit-large-patch14.” https://huggingface.co/.
[86]
R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pp. 10684–10695, June 2022.
[87]
M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, et al., “Ten-
sorflow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous distributed systems,”
2016.
[88]
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2017.
[89]
V. Campos, F. Sastre, M. Yagües, M. Bellver, X. Giró-i Nieto, and J. Torres,
“Distributed training strategies for a computer vision deep learning algorithm
on a distributed gpu cluster,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 108, pp. 315–324,
2017.
[90]
“Getting started with pytorch distributed.” https://medium.com/.
[91]
“A gentle introduction to distributed training of ml models.” https://medium.
com/.
[92]
“Getting started with distributed data parallel.” https://pytorch.org/.
[93]
“Pytorch distributed overview.” https://pytorch.org/.
[94]
Ting-Hao, Huang, F. Ferraro, N. Mostafazadeh, I. Misra, A. Agrawal, et al.,
“Visual storytelling,” 2016.
[95]
“Evaluating models using the top n accuracy metrics.” https://medium.com/.
[96]
M. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Chen, and A. J. Smola, “Eﬀicient mini-batch training for
stochastic optimization,” in Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 661–670, 2014.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
79
[97]
S. L. Smith, P.-J. Kindermans, C. Ying, and Q. V. Le, “Don’t decay the learning
rate, increase the batch size,” 2018.
[98]
S. McCandlish, J. Kaplan, D. Amodei, and O. D. Team, “An empirical model
of large-batch training,” 2018.
[99]
G. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Nado, J. Martens, S. Sachdeva, G. E. Dahl, C. J. Shallue,
and R. Grosse, “Which algorithmic choices matter at which batch sizes? insights
from a noisy quadratic model,” 2019.
[100] “Introduction to llama2.” https://ai.meta.com.
[101] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and J. Stein-
hardt, “Measuring massive multitask language understanding,” 2021.
[102] C. Clark, K. Lee, M.-W. Chang, T. Kwiatkowski, M. Collins, and K. Toutanova,
“Boolq: Exploring the surprising diﬀiculty of natural yes/no questions,” 2019.
[103] Y. Bisk, R. Zellers, R. L. Bras, J. Gao, and Y. Choi, “Piqa: Reasoning about
physical commonsense in natural language,” 2019.
[104] R. Zellers, A. Holtzman, Y. Bisk, A. Farhadi, and Y. Choi, “Hellaswag: Can a
machine really finish your sentence?,” 2019.
[105] K. Sakaguchi, R. L. Bras, C. Bhagavatula, and Y. Choi, “Winogrande: An
adversarial winograd schema challenge at scale,” 2019.
[106] P. Clark, I. Cowhey, O. Etzioni, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, C. Schoenick, and
O. Tafjord, “Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 rea-
soning challenge,” 2018.
[107] B. Zhang and R. Sennrich, “Root mean square layer normalization,” 2019.
[108] N. Shazeer, “Glu variants improve transformer,” 2020.
[109] J. Su, Y. Lu, S. Pan, A. Murtadha, B. Wen, and Y. Liu, “Roformer: Enhanced
transformer with rotary position embedding,” 2023.
[110] J. Ainslie, J. Lee-Thorp, M. de Jong, Y. Zemlyanskiy, F. Lebrón, and S. Sanghai,
“Gqa: Training generalized multi-query transformer models from multi-head
checkpoints,” 2023.
[111] O. Press and L. Wolf, “Using the output embedding to improve language mod-
els,” 2017.
[112] “Deep learning bible - 3. natural language processing - eng..” https://
wikidocs.net/book/8027.
[113] A. F. Agarap, “Deep learning using rectified linear units (relu),” 2019.
==PAGE:90==
80
Bibliography
[114] N. Ruiz, Y. Li, V. Jampani, Y. Pritch, M. Rubinstein, and K. Aberman,
“Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven
generation,” 2023.
