==PAGE:1==
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems:
A Case Study of Electric Grids
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Dinesh Kumar Khadka
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads , Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section of Software and Process
Engineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree of Master of Science in
Computer Science and Engineering.
Dinesh Kumar Khadka ­ s220073
Signature
Date
ii
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
28 January 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Cyber­Physical Systems (CPSs) are complex systems that blend physical entities (hard­
ware) with computational and communication technology. CPSs have become increas­
ingly prevalent in various domains in recent years. For example, electric grids are a no­
torious example of a CPS: they consist of various physical components such as power
generation plants, transmission lines, substations, and consumer endpoints (e.g., electric
cars, smart homes) are integrated with computational and communication technologies.
Analysing CPSs is crucial for ensuring their quality and correctness. Often, this is done
by first creating formal models of a CPS at hand (representing abstractly the system’s
behaviour, structure, and inter­component interactions), and then applying analytic tech­
niques of choice on top of them. CPSs are highly dynamic in nature, potentially hav­
ing multiple constantly changing components (e.g., consumer endpoints in electric grids).
This complicates the process of creation of clear and accurate system models and hence
hinders further analysis.
To address the issue with dynamically changing models, one may use model discovery
techniques existing in the literature. In this project, we focus on Process Mining (PM) — a
set of data­driven techniques for the discovery, validation, and improvement of operational
processes — and study how it can be applied to the discovery and potential analysis
of Cyber­Physical System models, with a particular focus being made on electric grids.
The goal of this project is to study how PM can be systematically incorporated into the
domain of CPS analysis, starting from understanding (and preparing) data from available
CPS logs, and going towards concrete proposals of suitable log formats and process
formalisms as well as potential adoption of other analytic PM techniques.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my deepest gratitude to all those who have helped me through­
out this project. Especially following individuals for their invaluable contributions to the
successful completion of this thesis.
Andrey Rivkin, Assistant Professor, Software Systems Engineering at DTU Compute.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation and gratitude to my supervisor, Andrey,
for his unwavering support and insightful feedback. He consistently provided guidance
and advice whenever I needed it, from the beginning to the end of the project. His com­
ments and feedback were very constructive while writing my thesis. Thank you for all your
support and suggestions.
Giovanni Meroni, Assistant Professor, Software Systems Engineering DTU Compute
I would also like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Giovanni, for his invaluable
guidance and suggestions throughout the project. In particular, his constructive feedback
during the intermediate thesis progress presentation was instrumental. His suggestions
helped to enhance my content while writing my thesis. Thank you for all your support and
suggestions.
Hugo Andres Lopez Acosta , Associate Professor, Software Systems Engineering, DTU
Compute
I would also like to acknowledge and thank my supervisor, Hugo, whose invaluable feed­
back and suggested research papers were very helpful. While writing the thesis, his
constructive comments helped me to correct my shortcomings. Thank you for all your
support and suggestions.
Kai Heussen, Senior Researcher, Distributed Energy Systems Department of Wind and
Energy Systems
I would also like to extend my gratitude to my Domain expert, Kai, for his support and guid­
ance. His feedback was very crucial throughout this project. Besides his busy schedule,
he was there for this project. His contribution to this project is beyond mere gratitude.
Thank you for all your feedback and suggestions.
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my better half Rekha Thapa Khadka for
her unwavering love and steadfast support, to my parents Durga Bahadur Khadka (Baba),
Gyandhari Khadka(Mummy), my brother Kamal Khadka and my sister Sangita Khadka for
their endless love and support.
In a special dedication, I offer this thesis to my soon­to­be­born daughter, Dishi Khadka,
who will grace our lives on March 26, 2024. May this work be a testament to the aspirations
and dreams we hold for her future.
iv
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Problem Definition
5
2.1
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Research Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Related Works
7
4
SYSLAB
9
4.1
Electric Microgrids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2
Experimental Lab Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5
Iterative Data Processing and Discovery
15
5.1
Iteration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.2
Iteration 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.3
Iteration 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
Final Iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Result and Discussion
39
7
Recommendation
41
8
Conclusion and Future Works
43
Bibliography
45
A Appendix
47
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This is the modern tech­driven world.
Industries continue to grow with the improve­
ment in technology. The integration of physical and cyber systems has given an up­
ward push to the idea of Cyber­Physical Systems. Cyber­Physical Systems (CPSs) are
a rapidly growing field that integrates physical processes, computation, and network­
ing(communications) into a robust and complex interconnected system [1]. These sys­
tems are characterized by several features such as sensing and actuation, computational
intelligence, network connectivity, and feedback control [2].
In our tech­driven world,
these systems are revolutionizing the tech industries by blending the digital and physi­
cal worlds. CPSs have a wide range of applications [3]. The autonomous vehicle relies
on CPS, Smart manufacturing is one of the leading application domains. Similarly, health
care, energy, and infrastructure are other examples where CPSs play a pivotal role.
Electric grids are one of the prime examples of CPS since they include multiple cyber
components such as controllers, sensors, and networks along with physical components
such as Batteries, Generator Power plants, and so on. The challenges associated with
CPS can be diverse.
Cyber­Physical Systems are always challenging to manage and optimize because they
are highly interconnected and very complex. It consists of a very dynamic and complex
physical system [2] which brings a lot of challenges to develop and integrate the com­
putational system that can effectively control and coordinate these devices. Some key
challenges are defined as follows,
• CPS consists of complex interactions between physical and computational compo­
nents. It is a challenging task to understand the behavior and visualize those com­
plex interactions. It is crucial to understand that there is variability in the documen­
tation of CPS processes [4]. Some CPS environments may have well­documented
processes. Whereas, in many cases, there might be a lack of comprehensive doc­
umentation due to the complexity, evolving, and dynamic nature of the system. So
in many cases, the data preparation phase is crucial while applying Process min­
ing in Cyber­Physical Systems. Some research such as [5][6] showed that Process
mining techniques can be effectively used in various CPS domains to identify the
anomalies in the system.
• The dynamic behavior of CPS adds challenges during the analysis of the dynamic
processes.
• The fault detection and diagnosis is also another challenge in CPS
Various approaches can be relevant to tackle the issues associated with Cyber­Physical
Systems. Formal verification methods [7] can play a vital role in the safety of CPS. Ma­
chine Learning [8] is also can be applied to analyze the patterns, make predictions, and
optimize the performance of CPS. Process mining is another approach that can be valu­
able in addressing the challenges within CPS.
Process mining [9] is a data­driven approach that involves the analysis of the events ex­
tracted from the system. This young research discipline fits well between machine learn­
ing and data mining approaches [10]. It is a useful approach to discover how processes
are executed in the system. It helps organizations to understand and optimize their busi­
ness processes. The starting point of the process of mining is always the extraction of the
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
1
==PAGE:10==
event log from the system. These logs generally contain the record of event activities that
occur during the execution of the processes in the system. It includes information about
when and what was performed by whom. Event logs may contain errors, missing values,
outliers (irrelevant information), and duplicates. This is why thorough data cleaning is a
most needed pre­requisite of Process mining. The generated data may not always be
in a suitable format for process mining, so the transformation of raw data into an event
log is also crucial. This involves aggregating data and identification of cases and activi­
ties. There are three main Process mining techniques: process discovery, conformance
checking, and process enhancement.
Figure 1.1: Process Mining Types and Positioning [10]
This thesis has used the process discovery technique to identify the behavior of the pro­
cesses. These techniques utilize Process mining algorithms to produce a model without
any prior information [11]. Some very common process models can be, process maps or
process trees. A process map is a visual representation of the sequence of activities in
a process, for example, Petri nets. In a process tree, processes are decomposed into hi­
erarchical structures. In this thesis, since there was no existing system model to validate
against, we used Domain expert’s feedback to validate the discovered process model.
Process mining emerges as a useful method that offers techniques to find a better under­
standing of Complex CPS Processes. It can serve as a visual storyteller for the complex
interaction between cyber and physical components within CPS. It identifies the relation­
ship between different system components by providing the details of their interactions.
By making use of the event logs generated during these interactions, Process mining
helps to extract relationships and potential bottlenecks and has the ability to identify the
anomalies and patterns associated with faults [6]. This thesis focuses on finding the pos­
sibilities and opportunities to apply Process mining for electric grids a prime example of a
Cyber­Physical System.
It is crucial to acknowledge that the data utilized in this study was generated from a
carefully designed experimental lab ( SYSLAB ). This experimental workshop provides
a controlled environment for the exploration of various scenarios and conditions. It also
provides valuable insights into the potential behaviors of an electric grid under different
circumstances. While there is a distinction between real­world and simulation data, it
2
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:11==
is important to highlight that the utilization of simulation data does not diminish the sig­
nificance of the findings presented in this study. Instead, it provides the foundation for
understanding strategies that could be applied to real­world scenarios.
1.1
Goal
The primary goals of this thesis are to integrate Process Discovery techniques into the
domain of Cyber­Physical Systems (CPS) analysis, with a particular focus on electric
grids. It includes exploring the application of PM for the discovery and potential analysis of
CPS models, understanding and preparing data from available CPS logs, understanding
the process behavior, and proposing suitable log formats.
1.2
Thesis Outline
The rest of the thesis is structured as follows,
• Chapter 2 describes the application of Process mining in understanding and iden­
tifying the behavior of CPS processes.
• Chapter 3 presents a short literature review on the applicability of Process mining
in various CPS domains.
• Chapter 4 introduces in details SYSLAB setup.
• Chapter 5 describes the iterative data processing and discovery for understanding
and improvement of behavior of the processes and findings of each iteration
• Chapter 6 presents result and discussion.
• Chapter 7 presents the recommendations for log adjustment.
• Chapter 8 presents the conclusion and discusses the possible future works.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:13==
2
Problem Definition
The logs extracted from Cyber­Physical Systems, particularly electric grids are character­
ized by data from various sources, including sensors, SCADA ( Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition ) [12] system, and communication networks. The data may be inconsis­
tent, incomplete, or incompatible with existing Process mining tools and frameworks. The
lack of standardized log formats adds to the challenge and hampers the seamless appli­
cation of Process Mining techniques. To provide a clear and accessible understanding of
the process in the electric grids, comprehensive data preparation and pre­processing are
crucial. This thesis is expected to contribute to incorporating Process mining to discover
the behavior of the processes within the context of electric grids.
This thesis aims to address the following research questions
2.1
Research Question
• How can the data from CPS logs, especially those from electric grids, be effectively
understood and prepared for analysis using Process mining techniques?
– Can Process mining be used to discover and analyze the process behavior of
the electric grid?
– Can we use Process mining results to find a set of recommendations on how
to improve the underlying logging process?
2.2
Research Strategy
In this thesis, we first explored the problem to understand the data, domain, and goal.
After understanding the problem, we identified our research questions as in Section 2.1.
Then we moved into the next phase where we applied Process mining techniques to
achieve the goal of the thesis. Figure 2.1 shows the flow of the research strategy.
Figure 2.1: Research Strategy
Understanding the Problem
This was the early phase of the project, where our total focus was to understand Cyber­
Physical Systems and the feasibility of Process mining to capture the behavior of the
Cyber­Physical Systems.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
5
==PAGE:14==
Set Goal
The goal of the project was to identify a better log format to generate the data from the
electric grid which contains complete information for further processing.
Explore Related Work
By reviewing different research papers, we explored how Process mining was being used
in the field of Cyber­Physical Systems.
Understanding the domain
In this project, the data for research was collected from SYSLAB established in DTU Electro.
So understanding the domain was also very crucial. In Section 4, we have explained the
domain system in detail.
Research Question Identification
After understanding the problem and exploring the existing research, we came up with
some research questions as described in 2.1 that this project will seek to answer.
Data Collection
Data was generated during the lab experiment in the SYSLAB and provided by SYSLAB
Domain Expert.
Iterative Data Preparation
To make the collected data ready to use for Process mining, we had to do extensive data
pre­processing throughout the iterations. Data preparation was crucial for this project
because we were focusing on refining the process model generated from the event log in
each iteration with data manipulation.
Iterative Process Discovery
In each iteration, processes were evolving to reflect the behavior of the process execution
in the system. It involved an iterative cycle of discovery, analysis, validation, and refine­
ment to gradually improve the accuracy and representation of the discovered process
model.
• Initial Discovery: The initial iteration produced a preliminary process model from
the event log using a Process mining algorithm which provided an understanding of
the observed process model based on the available logs.
• Analysis, Validation, and feedback ­ The discovered model was then analyzed
and validated by Domain expert to identify if the model aligns with the actual behavior
of the system execution. Domain expert’s feedback played a crucial role in this
phase.
• Reiteration and Refinement: The refinement of the model was repeated until a
satisfactory level of accuracy and alignment with reality was achieved. Refinement
was always based on insight gained from analysis and feedback from previous iter­
ations.
Feedback
In each iteration, feedback was received from Domain expert and was always crucial in
refining the process discovery.
6
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:15==
3
Related Works
This thesis studies the use of Process mining in Cyber­Physical Systems. Some relevant
studies associated with the use of Process mining in Cyber­Physical Systems have been
reported previously [6] [13] [5] [14]. Although the electric grids are a different domain, the
past studies gave us valuable insights into processing CPS logs for different purposes
such as anomaly detection, cyber­attacks, and plant topology.
The research paper [6] explores a novel approach to identify abnormal behaviors ( anoma­
lies ) and cyber­attacks within the industrial control system ( ICS ) by making use of Pro­
cess mining techniques. This method relies on the log captured from ICS and employs a
formalized pre­processing and transformation to make them suitable for Process mining
analysis. This method employs process discovery and conformance­checking analysis
to compare the generated process model with the predefined process model and iden­
tify the deviations. It also provides practical recommendations for logging practices on
the ICS devices based on the experimental findings. The proposed method has demon­
strated success in detecting ICS cyber­attacks. It also shows its efficiency in comparison
to the widely used intrusion detection system ( IDS ) snort. Another [13] presents the ap­
proach for the semi­automatic processing of sequences of observations from the sensor
network to extract a process model that describes the dynamic aspects of the monitored
environment. Here the main focus is an analysis of the data collected from the sensor net­
work. It illustrates the application of the proposed system to simulate data collected from
RFID readers, GPS devices, and contact sensors in a logistic scenario. It emphasizes the
proposed approach in providing insight into the behavior of the observed Cyber­Physical
System by enabling conformance checking and addressing challenges in applying Pro­
cess mining techniques to events collected from sensor networks. In [5], researchers
introduce a framework for extracting plant topology using Process mining and alarm data
in industrial settings. It offers a simpler yet efficient plant topology for fault analysis, root
cause identification, and fault propagation path discovery. The motivation arises from the
challenges of fault detection in computer­controlled plants, where alarms are triggered by
faults, and a single fault can lead to multiple alarms due to interconnected plant compo­
nents. This method utilized Process mining algorithms for modeling processes based on
the recorded events. This research emphasizes the event­based nature of alarm data and
its chronological order, making it suitable for Process mining. The application of Process
mining techniques in industrial control systems, focusing on modeling, verification, and
enhancement of Cyber­Physical Systems based on recorded data logs is discussed in
[14]. Process discovery generates a model from recorded events logs and conformance
checking compares generated models with other event logs to identify deviations. These
deviations lead to identifying unusual behavior in the industrial control system, anomaly
detection, cyber­attacks, and alarm analysis in the industrial control system.
These works collectively provided valuable insight into our understanding of using Process
mining in Cyber­Physical Systems.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:17==
4
SYSLAB
SYSLAB [15] is located at DTU Risø campus. It serves as an experimental facility de­
signed for testing advanced control and communication concepts in power grids. Power
grids refer to the interconnected network of electrical components, including generators,
transformers, transmission lines, etc. [16]. Figure 4.1 shows the overview of SYSLAB.
The electrical foundation of SYSLAB comprises a 400V, 3­phase grid equipped with 16
busbars and 119 automated coupling points. This setup enables the establishment of
diverse grid topologies through the utilization of a central crossbar switch. SYSLAB pro­
vides the flexibility to connect to the campus distribution grid through multiple interconnec­
tion points, operate autonomously in island mode, or be divided into several independent
microgrids.
Figure 4.1: SYSLAB Configuration Overview[15]
SYSLAB is a system with distributed and decentralized control. It aggregates VPP( Virtual
Power Plant ), microgrids, agents, local energy markets, etc [17]. To be a test bed for
different smart grid concepts, SYSLAB does not enforce a particular control architecture
by design. Every energy resource in this lab has its own controller node with no implicit
assumption about the relationship between nodes. The interaction between entities is
defined in software, not hardware [18].
In SYSLAB, several hardware units are connected through physical networks, both elec­
trical and heat systems. To each hardware unit is attached a SYSLAB Node, each of
which forms a part of SYSLAB network through software, called the SYSLAB platform.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 4.2: SYSLAB Platform [18]
Figure 4.2 shows an example of SYSLAB platform. This platform acts as a hardware
abstraction platform, translating functional calls into action on the unit. Since each unit
has a separate SYSLAB node and SYSLAB platform [18] is running independently on
each node, SYSLAB allows various distributed and/or decentralized control mechanisms
to be implemented and tested.
Unit
Machine
B2B Converter
syslab­04
Dump load
syslab­05
Mobile load 1
syslab­16
Mobile load 2
syslab­17
Mobile load 3
syslab­18
Gaia WT
syslab­03
Vanadium battery
syslab­12
PVI 17
syslab­07
PV715
syslab­10
PV319
syslab­24
Capacitor Bank 1
syslab­19
Flexhouse 1
syslab­08
Flexhouse 3
syslab­27
Diesel generator
syslab­02
Table 4.1: Overview of SYSLAB Components
Table 4.1 presents the SYSLAB Node ( Machine ) and their corresponding devices( Unit
). For example, the machine syslab04 is responsible for carrying out the operations be­
longing to the B2B Converter.
4.1
Electric Microgrids
Microgrids are localized power grids that operate with a degree of autonomy, enabling
them to manage their own energy generation, distribution, and consumption [18]. This
autonomy allows microgrids to adapt to local conditions and provide a reliable source
of power even when the main power grid is unavailable. When it is connected to the
main power grid, it can offer services such as peak shaving, reactive power support, or
black­start support. When the connection to the main grid is disrupted, microgrids can
seamlessly transition into islanded mode. In this mode, microgrid operates independently,
relying on its own distributed energy resources ( DERs ) [19] to meet the power needs of
its local consumers.
10
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:19==
4.1.1
Physical Components of Microgrids
Unit
Machine
B2B Converter
syslab­04
Dump load
syslab­05
Mobile load 1
syslab­16
Mobile load 2
syslab­17
Mobile load 3
syslab­18
Gaia WT
syslab­03
Vanadium battery
syslab­12
PVI 17
syslab­07
PV715
syslab­10
PV319
syslab­24
Table 4.2: Physical Components of the Microgrids
A Unit is an independent hardware device, connected to an electrical grid. Each unit
is typically connected to a SYSLAB Node which comprises the driver, communication,
and hardware abstraction software for the particular unit [18]. Table 4.2 illustrates some
physical units and corresponding SYSLAB Node. In other words, the SYSLAB node is
a physical machine that handles the interaction between SYSLAB Platform software and
the hardware unit. Figure 4.3 shows the configuration of microgrid.
Figure 4.3: Micro Grid Configuration [20]
4.1.2
Computational Components
The electric grid comprises eight controllers each with a specific role in managing the
grid’s operations.
• Battery Controller: This Controller manages the charging and discharging of a
battery storage system, storing excess electricity during periods of low demand and
supplying power during peak demand or grid disruption
• Ammonia controller: This controller controls and manages the power for ammonia
production plant.
• Mobile load Controller: This controller regulates the power consumption of mobile
loads such as electric vehicles by adjusting their charging rates.
• Supervisory Controller: This controller acts as the central coordinator of the grid.
It monitors the overall grid state and sets set points for other controllers.
• Dump Load Controller: This Controller activates a dump load, which dissipates
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
11
==PAGE:20==
excess electricity when power generation exceeds demand, preventing voltage fluc­
tuation and maintaining grid stability.
• Power 2x Controller: This Controller Manages a power amplifier that can double
the power output of the grid providing additional power during the period of high
demand.
• V2G controller: This controller enables vehicle­to­grid ( V2G ) capabilities, allowing
electric vehicles to feed excess power back into the grid when not in use.
• PV Local Controller:
This Controller manages PV system ( Photovoltaic System
), optimizes the output of the solar panel and ensures their integration with the grid.
Other computational components are sensors, host machines, and communication net­
works.
4.2
Experimental Lab Setup
Figure 4.4 illustrates how groups of students were running their experiments in the lab.
Figure 4.4: CPS Experimental Lab Setup
• Group ­ Students are divided into groups. Each group has its group­id such as
Team A and Team B.
• Host ­ Each group is assigned to the host machine from where they execute their
experiment.
• Controllers ­ In the lab, group students are required to design and implement their
controller and use this lab experiment setup to test the result of their implementation.
12
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:21==
• SYSLAB­Node Machine ­ Each unit in the grid is associated with a distinct SYS­
LAB Node [20]. It is responsible for all the tasks related to the particular hardware
unit. For example, the SYSLAB Node machine syslab-05 is handling all the tasks
related to the Dump Load hardware unit in the grid. In each SYSLAB node, a soft­
ware platform named SYSLAB platform is running independently which acts as a
hardware abstraction platform and translates all the function calls from user­defined
controllers into the actions on the unit. For example, the Vanadium Battery has the
function setActivePowerSetpoint which sets the target discharge rate for its in­
verter. A call to this function is translated by SYSLAB platform into a change in the
state of the inverter’s internal control circuit to direct it to the target discharge rate.
In this experiment, a group of students was required to design and implement a controller.
Groups were categorized in two ways: microgrid and hybrid power plant and they had dif­
ferent goals. The controller implemented by microgrid group should put the system into
island­ready­mode [20], where the exchange with the external grid is eliminated and the
controller implemented by the hybrid power plant group should take an external modifi­
cation to its initial setpoint and actuate the variety of internal units to match the external
setpoint as closely as possible.
Logs used in this thesis are owned and provided by Domain expert so are not publicly
available and we have not explicitly asked for permission to make them public.
What kind of electric grid does it simulate in reality?
This lab experiment setup simulates microgrids which are small, independent power grids
that can operate independently of the main power grid. They are often used in remote
or isolated communities, or in areas where the main power grid is unreliable. Microgrids
can be powered by a variety of sources, including solar panels, wind turbines, and diesel
generators.
Building upon these foundational concepts, the following section explores an iterative
approach to data processing and discovery with the data sourced from the experimental
microgrid.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:23==
5
Iterative Data Processing and Discovery
Process discovery is an integral part of the process of mining. After the event data ex­
traction from Domain system, process discovery algorithms are used to create a process
model. It captures the observed behavior from the event log. As [9] says ”the event data
cannot be assumed to be complete”, in the case of the electric grid, extracted data can
be huge and continuously updated with a new set of information. So it can be challenging
to discover the process model that represents the complete behavior of the system but
it helps to identify the key issues in the system such as bottleneck, inefficient or unusual
execution of the task. We created an approach as in Figure 5.1 which integrates refine­
ment of the underlying process behavior with an iterative approach. All the iterations run
through phases: data pre­processing ( if needed ), discovery, and feedback from Domain
expert.
Figure 5.1: Iterative Approach for Data Processing and Discovery
5.1
Iteration 1
5.1.1
Data Collection
Data was generated during the lab experiment of the course Design and Implementation
of Coordinated Distributed Energy System in the Department of Wind and Energy
Systems in June 2023. It is a 3­week course for bachelor­level students. The primary fo­
cus of the course is to provide hands­on experience in building distributed energy systems
[21]. We have described the microgrid used for the experiment in Chapter 4. We received
the data in two sets. The first data set was available at the beginning of the project. The
second data set was available later after some improvements in the old data set.
Data was logged in two ways: implicit and explicit. The set point log SP was the result
of implicit logging. For implicit logging, the process of logging was built into a software
library designed and built by a Domain expert. Users did not have to explicitly manage or
control the logging; it happened automatically or was handled by the infrastructure. This
logging kept a record of the unit being invoked. The event log EV was the result of explicit
logging. The explicit log captured all the activities related to the controller execution of
the experiment run from the host. Students were responsible for the information recorded
in the log. The users of these logs were lab supervisors and researchers. For example,
ongoing research for monitoring purposes was using these data. Domain expert used
these data to observe and analyze the activities taking place in the lab and to supervise
and guide their learning experiences.
5.1.2
Data Pre­processing
Data pre­processing is a crucial step in Process mining where collected data is pre­
processed and transformed into a structured format [22]. The processed data can effec­
tively be analyzed by using different Process mining tools. A thorough data pre­processing
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
15
==PAGE:24==
ensures the quality and consistency of the data which increases the accuracy and relia­
bility of the outcomes obtained through Process mining analysis.
Data Cleaning
Since there were two different logs, we had to do data cleaning for each log separately. We
discovered 27,137 numbers of inconsistent and erroneous data in EV log and removed
them from the log. There were not any missing values but there were numerous duplicate
data. There were 3079587 numbers of duplicate data out of 3787685. We used only one
from the duplicates and the rest were removed.
(a) EV Log
(b) SP Log
Figure 5.2: Duplicates vs Unique Data
In SP log, there was not so much inconsistent data but we discovered 215003 numbers
of data used for testing purposes ( according to Domain expert ). All these records were
removed from the log after getting approval from Domain expert. After cleaning those
irrelevant data, there were 6912238 numbers of data left in the log. Among those data,
we discovered 6524373 numbers of duplicate data and 387865 unique data. We used only
one from the duplicates and the rest were removed. Figure 5.2 illustrates the distribution
of duplicate and unique data in the original log.
Data Transformation
The provided data was in txt format. Different information was separated by using some
delimiters. In SP log there were two separators: || and - and in EV log only - was the
separator. So the first task here was to transform the data so that they all have consistent
separators. We used ; as the common delimiters for both logs.
1
%% text to be replaced
2
search_text1 = " - "
3
search_text2 = "||"
4
%% text to replace by
5
replace_text = ";"
Listing 5.1: Changing Delimiters
16
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:25==
These transformations paved the way for transforming data into csv format. After trans­
forming data into ”CSV” format, the next task was to find some column names( headers )
for each column that existed in the newly generated CSV file.
For this purpose, we went through the script that was used to generate the logs. We
identified some header names for SP log as in Listing 5.2 and for EV log as in Listing 5.3
1
%% SP Log Columns Headers
2
column_names = ["TIMESTAMP", "LOG_TYPE", "SESSION_ID", "HOST_ID", "UNIT_DEVICE
", "API", "SP_PAYLOAD"]
Listing 5.2: SP Log Columns Headers
1
%% EV Log Columns Headers
2
column_names = ["TIMESTAMP", "LOG_TYPE", "CREATED_ID", "INFO", "FILE_NAME", "
CONTROLLER", "FUNCTION","EV_PAYLOAD"]
Listing 5.3: EV Log Columns Headers
After creating the header name for each column, we observed the actual data in each
row and column( Cell ). We discovered several unnecessary extra information in the cell
value of some columns.
Old Data
New Data
1
SenderID:158527715294
158527715294
2
Unit­URL:http://syslab­s01.syslab.dk:8080/typebased
_WebService_Battery/VRBBatteryWebService/battfh1/
syslab­s01­battfh1
3
SessionID:30fd6e2a­0f35­11ee­8c30­0024e8fcf7de
30fd6e2a­0f35­
11ee­8c30­
0024e8fcf7de
4
ArgValue:(­4.9,)
­4.9
Table 5.1: Data Transformation
We transformed the data as shown in Table 5.1. This Table is only a small example of the
data transformation and how we approach transformation. There were numerous other
data, that were transformed using the same logic.
5.1.3
Maping of Log into Event Log
What is an Event Log?
Event log [23] captures the information about events that occur during the execution of
business processes. Key components of the events log are caseId, Timestamp, and
Activity. Case IDs are the unique identifiers for the case, the timestamp records the time
of event occurred, activity describes the specific task that took place. In this thesis, we
had to map the log information to these attributes while converting the log into an event
log. We used Disco while mapping the log into the event log.
The logs generated from the experimental lab did not explicitly correlate each event to a
particular case or process instance. In fact, these logs were just a collection of records.
As we discussed earlier in Section 5.1.1, EV logs contained the controller’s activities, and
SP log contained records of the invocation of the units during set point adjustment.
In SP log data were arranged in the following columns
• TIMESTAMP ­ It contained the recording time of the particular information.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
17
==PAGE:26==
• LOG_TYPE ­ It contained the type of log.
• SESSION_ID ­ It contained the Identification for each session established with a
unit.
• HOST_ID ­ It contained the Identification for the host, from where groups run the
experiments
• UNIT_DEVICE ­ It contained the names of the unit and device being invoked.
• API ­ It contained the API being used to call the web services of the related unit.
• SP_PAYLOAD ­ It contained the information regarding the set point adjustment.
In EV log data were arranged in the following columns
• TIMESTAMP ­ It contained the recording time of the data.
• LOG_TYPE ­ It contained the type of log.
• CREATED_ID ­ It was a randomly generated number.
• FILE_NAME ­ It contained the name of the file they used to implement the controller.
• CONTROLLER­ It contained the names of the controllers being implemented.
• EV_PAYLOAD ­ It contained information regarding the controller’s actions.
Mapping SP Log into Event Log
In this initial phase of the data processing, we decided to check every session of the
experiments. To convert the log into an event log, we mapped SESSION_ID as case ID.
Since in each session, a unit was being invoked, we chose UNIT_DEVICE as activity and
finally the TIMESTAMP as a timestamp.
Timestamps
CaseID
Activity
2023­06­19 16:00:39,300
SID_1
syslab­s01­battfh1
2023­06­19 16:00:40,244
SID_1
syslab­s01­battfh1
2023­06­19 16:00:41,305
SID_2
syslab­17­mobload2
Table 5.2: Example SP Event Log( Iteration 1 )
EV log
Since EV log was missing some crucial information such as host and session information,
we could not work with EV log even after data pre­processing for this iteration. It was
decided to work with this log after getting feedback from Domain expert.
5.1.4
Process Discovery
It is the task of automatically extracting a process model from the event logs. It was ex­
pected that this task would provide a valuable understanding of the underlying processes.
With the discovered process model, we anticipated having a comprehensive understand­
ing of the sequence of activities, dependencies, and potential bottlenecks.
We chose to use the Disco application which uses Fuzzy Miner [24] to generate the pro­
cess model. Since we were dealing with less structured processes, we believed that disco
was the right choice to simplify complex process maps in an interactive way. The Fuzzy
Miner [24] is a discovery algorithm that is suitable for analyzing less structured processes
18
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:27==
and complex business process models. It can handle variations and exceptions and can
identify the most common paths through the process.
SP Log Process Model
We used Process mining tool Disco to generate the process model for SP event log as in
Table 5.2 where SESSION_ID was the case ID. The generated process graph depicted
how each unit was invoked in different sessions. For example in Figure 5.3, the unit
syslab­31­battemu was accessed in 420 sessions. This process model gave us a view
of what was happening with respect to the occupation of the unit. We identified 1768
sessions with variations in duration. Figures 5.4 and 5.5 illustrate how events and units
were distributed in the discovered process model.
Figure 5.3: Part of Holistic View of SP Event Log ­ Iteration 1 [See Appendix A.1]
Figure 5.4: Units over Session in Discovered Process Model
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.5: Event Over Session in Discovered Process Model
Figures 5.6 shows some inconsistencies discovered from the process model. Some ses­
sions were running over 24 hours. In contrast to that some sessions had even less than
1 sec of running time. This was interesting to see such variations in the duration of each
session.
(a) Session with 0 ms Duration
(b) Session with More than 24 hrs Duration
Figure 5.6: Example Duration of Some Sessions
5.1.5
Validation and Feedback
Since there was no existing model to compare with, we had to confirm every finding with
Domain expert. The discovered process model was presented to Domain expert along
with all the findings. We also informed the situation with EV log. Even though the process
model was interesting for Domain expert, he was not quite sure that the process model
represented the behavior of the process happening in the experimental lab. Some of the
feedback and suggestions we got from Domain expert were as follows:
20
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:29==
• If the sessions were running more than 30 minutes then there must be a fault that
occurred during the experiment.
• If the session was running less than 3 minutes then it must be due to a bug in the
implementation.
• If sessions had a very high number of events then it must be due to some of the
group forgetting to set the delay during the experiment.
• Session ID is a UUID for distinct connection with Unit.
• For the missing information in EV log, he suggested the possibility of mapping that
missing information from SP log by merging two logs.
5.1.6
Iteration Summary
In this iteration, we explored data collection, data pre­processing, and process discovery
from the collected data. We learned how crucial is the logging process for capturing
the relevant information. The data pre­processing phase highlighted the significance of
data cleaning for effective process discovery. The transformation of data from raw logs
to a structured format illustrated the necessity of consistent delimiters. The discovered
process model was missing the granularity but it helped us to understand the relation
between sessions and unit. Even though the process model did not depict actual process
behavior in the system, it was useful to identify some key issues. It helped us to discover
the existence of bottleneck behavior in the process which was causing a delay in the
process execution. Domain expert remained a key part of the process. The feedback
gained from Domain expert suggested some key issues to be tackled in the next iteration.
5.2
Iteration 2
In this iteration, we tried to tackle all the issues that were identified in the previous iteration
and utilized feedback from Domain expert. We again had to do some data pre­processing
such as merging two logs, data filtration, and log transformation before moving forward
with new process discovery.
5.2.1
Merged EV log
In the case of EV log, the most crucial information such as host and session information
was missing. So there was no possibility of converting the original EV log into the event log
without having that information. So we decided to merge ( keep data from both files in the
same file ) SP and EV logs to see the possibilities of mapping at least host information from
SP log to EV log. Since Domain expert already informed us that session information in
EV log and SP log were completely different, we decided to see the possibility of mapping
host information only. Even if these logs were generated during the same experiments,
they were missing connection.
After merging two logs there were numerous empty rows and columns. We manually
attempted to find the pattern of how information was being arranged after merging. We
discovered some interesting patterns.
• There was no overlapping of the timestamp of two logs
• We found two logs were being logged alternatively which was one after another,
First EV and then SP.
• We assumed the pattern of HOST_ID was being arranged in the merged log and filled
the missing HOST_ID in the column.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
21
==PAGE:30==
1
2
%% Fill empty cells in the HOST_ID column from bottom to top
3
previous_value = None
4
for index, value in reversed(enumerate(HOST_ID)):
5
if is_na(value):
6
# If the cell is empty, fill it with the previous non-empty
value
7
df.at[index, HOST_ID] = previous_value
8
else:
9
# If the cell is not empty, update the previous_value
10
previous_value = value
Listing 5.4: Pseudocode for Filling Missing HOST_ID
As a result of the merging of two logs, EV log also had information that could be used
to map it to the event log. We chose HOST_ID as case ID, and TIMESTAMP as a times­
tamp. Since every time hosts were executing the controllers, we chose CONTROLLER as
the activity.
Timestamps
CaseID
Activity
2023­06­19 16:00:39,300
HOST_1
battery_local_control
2023­06­19 16:00:40,244
HOST_1
battery_local_control
2023­06­19 16:00:41,305
HOST_1
dumpload_local_control
Table 5.3: Example EV Event Log ( Iteration 2 )
Two logs were completely distinct, even though we were trying to merge two logs, it was
just to check the possibility of mapping missing host information in EV log.
We also tried another way to merge the log where we identified the time interval of the
particular host in SP log and mapped it to EV log information that falls in the same time
interval.
Figure 5.7: Example of Host Information Mapping Based on Time Interval
As shown in Figure 5.7, we can see an overlapping between two hosts. So we decided to
continue with the bottom­up filing approach as in Listing 5.4 rather than mapping based
on the time interval.
EV Log Process Model
After mapping HOST_ID from SP log to EV log, we load the new EV event log to Disco.
It generated a spaghetti process model ( a model with spaghetti processes). Spaghetti
22
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:31==
processes [10] are dense and unstructured processes. This model was difficult to under­
stand holistically. However, to discover how the different controllers were being executed
from different hosts, we filtered the process model based on the host. Figure in 5.8 shows
how different controllers were being invoked from a host. This host was filtered from the
discovered process model.
Figure 5.8: Process Execution From One Filtered Host ­ EV log
As in Figure 5.9 we observed, that some hosts were dealing with more than 20000 events.
Since EV log was missing session information, we could not see how these events were
distributed over the session, because the hosts were computers from where a group of
students ran the experiment in different sessions.
Figure 5.9: Event Over Host Distribution in Discovered Process Model
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
23
==PAGE:32==
5.2.2
SP Log Data Filtration
In this iteration, data filtration was very crucial to remove the session with issues identified
in the previous discovery with SP log. We filtered out the session with unexpected execu­
tion time. We also needed to avoid the session with too many events. So to achieve this
goal, we applied two filters: case duration and number of case events to the discovered
process model in Disco.
• We limited the duration of the session from a minimum of 3 min to a maximum of 30
minutes, according to the feedback received in the previous iteration.
• We limited the number of events that a session can consist of a minimum of 1 and
a maximum of 1800 ( 60 events per minute ).
This filtration reduced the number of cases from 1768 to 150. The new filtered process
was assumed to be complete sessions with no bugs, bottlenecks, or delays.
Regeneration of SP Log
The filtration applied in the process model only cleared out some existing issues but it
did not change process behavior in the process model. So we decided to recreate SP
log after applying filtration parameters without altering the originality of the log. All the
data belonging to SP log were in place except the data with issues. We used the Disco
application to export the new log in a CSV format. We manually checked the CSV file if
there was any extra column added by the Disco application that was not in the original
log. We found some Variations column and removed it. Finally, a cleaned new SP log
was ready to be processed further.
In this iteration, while converting SP log into an event log, we decided to map HOST_ID as
case ID, UNIT_DEVICE as activity, and TIMESTAMP as a timestamp.
Timestamps
CaseID
Activity
2023­06­19 16:00:39,300
HOST_1
syslab­18­mobload3
2023­06­19 16:00:40,244
HOST_1
syslab­s01­battfh1
2023­06­19 16:00:41,305
HOST_2
syslab­17­mobload2
Table 5.4: Example SP Event Log( Iteration 2 )
SP Log Process Model
From the newly created SP Log, we discovered processes represented by host ID. We
identified 10 hosts that were being used by students to run their experiments. In Figure
5.10 we can see how different units were associated with a host.
24
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.10: Activities Execution form a Host
5.2.3
Validation and Feedback
For the validation of newly identified process behavior through the process model, iden­
tified processes were presented to Domain expert.
• He approved the way we regenerate the new SP log. We explained how we mapped
the host information from SP log to EV log by merging two logs.
• He made it clear that the process model generated from EV log did not represent
the real process execution in the experimental lab. He suggested that the sessions
in SP log and EV log were different and also the merging of two logs did not provide
a usable EV log.
• He suggested that the process model generated from SP Log only showed which
activities were invoked from the host. It lacked granularity in the process and failed
to address the real behavior of experiments. The activities run from the host were
not always sequential.
Analysis
In this iteration, we attempt to discover process behavior with different approaches than
iteration 1. We especially, tried to see how the experiments were running from the host.
Since Domain expert suggested that these process models were still not able to illustrate
how experiments were running in the lab, we might need to re­assess the way we were
creating the event log in future iterations. let’s discuss what we learned from this iteration.
• The logs generated from microgrid experiments did not explicitly correlate each
event to a particular case or process instance. This means we needed to manually
create combinations of tasks to formulate event activities. For example, only choos­
ing UNIT_DEVICE did not reveal the behavior of how activity in the experiments was
running. In the next iteration, we should come up with a solution for this problem.
• EV log also did not contain the information about the units( device ) so it would not
reveal the unit being invoked.
• Controller had different activities to perform, one of the activities was sending the set
point. When we observed the merged log, we discovered, that SP log information
was logged after the controller sent the set points. In Figure 5.11 information with
yellow color is from EV log and sky blue is from SP log.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.11: Merged Log EV and SP
• This means SP log recorded the information of the one activity ( set point ) sent by
the controller.
• To see the system’s full behavior, we had to observe the process model generated
from both logs.
5.2.4
Preliminary Recommendation for Log Adjustment
Since we discovered what we were missing in EV log and even merging and mapping of
the information was also not producing the result as expected, we decided to propose to a
Domain expert the possibility of re­logging the data with some preliminary improvements
which were the inclusion of GROUP_ID, HOST_ID, and SESSSION_ID in EV log.
5.2.5
Iteration Summary
In this iteration, our primary goal was to refine our approach to process discovery based on
the feedback and challenges encountered in the previous iteration. The absence of criti­
cal information in EV log hindered a holistic view of the system’s behavior. While merging
EV and SP logs, we explored the possibility of mapping missing information, specifically
HOST_ID. The process model generated from both EV and SP logs revealed a lack of
granularity, especially in illustrating how experiments run in the lab. With this understand­
ing of the limitation, we acknowledged the necessity of comprehensive logging to capture
all the relevant aspects of the experiment. Based on our observation, we proposed the
inclusion of some critical information such as HOST_ID in EV log. This adjustment aimed
to provide a more detailed and interconnected view of the experiment’s execution which
provides a better understanding of the system’s behaviour. With the consideration of
the identified challenges and proposed adjustments, the next iterations should explore
in­depth event interaction.
5.3
Iteration 3
We got the new dataset where EV log was logged as per the recommendation. It included
group, host, and session data along with other existing information. However, the new
data set also had some issues because it contained a new EV log but missed the corre­
sponding SP log. So there was no choice for us to work with SP log from an older data
set and EV log from the newer data set.
In this iteration, we were focusing mostly on the solution to the issue raised in the pre­
vious iteration. In Iterations 1 and 2, we were mostly focused on determining the case
ID that could represent the instances of the process. Even though it did not provide a
good solution for us, processes in iteration 2 were evolving more than in iteration 1. We
understood that in this microgrid experimental lab, experiments were the process done
26
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:35==
by students by using Host machine, and experiments were represented by a session or
group of sessions. As we already identified in the previous iteration it was not possible to
see the whole process behavior in the same model, we had to produce different process
models for different logs separately. During an experiment, a group of students executed
their controller from a particular host and the controller had its activities( actions ), among
different actions of the controller, one of the actions was to send the set point to the par­
ticular device.
In this iteration, we not only discovered the behavior of the process from the top level but
also through the individual host and sessions running from the host. For example, in the
first part, we discovered the complete model of experiments running in the system where
multiple experiments were being executed from multiple hosts. But in the second part,
we explored how experiments were being executed from individual hosts.
5.3.1
SP Log
Mapping Log in to Event Log
The timestamps in SP log were mapped to the timestamps for the new event log. Since we
were looking for a holistic view of the experiment, we took HOST_ID as case ID. We already
learned from the previous iteration that we could not represent the correct behavior by
selecting only UNIT_DEVICE as activity. So to represent the activity, in this iteration, we
decided to combine at least two columns UNIT_DEVICE and the SESSION_ID. It represented
what the host was doing in a particular session with the particular device as in Figure 5.12.
Every time the host needed to invoke the unit, it created a session with the particular unit.
Figure 5.12: SP Event Log Activities
Timestamp
CaseID
Activity
2023­06­20 09:03:30,326
Host_1
SID_01_BATT
2023­06­20 09:03:30,330
Host_1
SID_01_BATT
2023­06­20 09:03:30,340
Host_1
SID_02_DUMPLOAD
Table 5.5: Example SP Event Log
Process Model of SP Log
By using Disco, we identified the overall behavior of the experiment running from the
hosts. The process model not only identified the number of events associated with each
host but also presented how the experiments unfolded from each host. Figure 5.13 shows
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
27
==PAGE:36==
only a part from the holistic process model. The process graph shows that hosts were
engaged with multiple devices in multiple sessions during the experiment.
Figure 5.13: Part of Processes From Holistic Model of SP Log [See Appendix A.9]
Events were distributed over 16 hosts where some hosts were engaging with more than
8 thousand events and some were engaging below 5.
Figure 5.14: Event Over Host
The process model also discovered that different hosts were running experiments con­
currently. For example when HostX was running some of its tasks, other HostY was also
running its tasks during a similar period.
28
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.15: Example of Two Hosts Running Parallel Experiments
To see more granularity in the process behavior, we had to look at each host individually.
It was crucial to see how students were running their experiments from the host. Observ­
ing all the hosts at the same time did not give us the details we wanted to explore. So
we filtered the discovered processes in Disco based on the HOST_ID. Each hosts were
exported as a log in XES format. Since in the previous iteration, we could not identify the
concurrent processes unfolding from the host in SP log, we decided to use an inductive
miner to generate the process model for each host.
HOST_16 Process Model
This was one of the hosts that was discovered. We used an Inductive Miner to discover
the Petri net of the process model in the hope that we could discover the parallel activities.
The Inductive Miner is designed to automatically discover process models from event logs
but its simplicity and ability to handle a wide range of processes, including those with
concurrency and loops sets it apart from other miners. The inductive miner [25] employs
a divide­and­conquer approach, recursively breaking down the event log into sub­logs
until a detailed and coherent process model is generated which means the sub­logs are
decomposed until they refer to single activity [10].
Figure 5.16 is the Petri net discovered for a single host ( HOST_16 ). It represents the
execution of the events along with all the repetitive behavior of the session during the
occupation of the unit.
Figure 5.16: Part of Host_16 Process Model [See Appendix A.2]
5.3.2
EV Log
Mapping Log in to Event Log
While converting EV log into the event log, we mapped HOST_ID as the case ID for the new
event log and TIMESTAMP as a timestamp. For event activities, we combined SESSION_ID
and CONTROLLER as shown in Figure 5.17.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.17: EV Event Log Activities
Table 5.6 shows the example of the EV event log.
Timestamps
CaseID
Activity
2023­06­19 16:00:39,300
HOST_1
SID_01_Controller1
2023­06­19 16:00:40,244
HOST_1
SID_01_Controller1
2023­06­19 16:00:41,305
HOST_2
SID_01_Controler2
Table 5.6: Example EV Event Log
Process Model For EV Log
Figure 5.18: Part of Holistic Process Model for EV Log [See Appendix A.3]
Figure 5.18 is the part of holistic model of EV log process discovery. From the process
model, we identified 5 hosts from where students were running experiments and multiple
hosts were running concurrently. However, the process model was producing the depen­
dencies in between the sessions while invoking the controller during the experiment.
30
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:39==
5.3.3
Validation and Feedback
For the validation of our findings, Domain expert went through the process model for SP
and EV logs.
• We got positive feedback for the newly discovered process model since the model
was quite similar to what was happening in the experimental lab.
• He agreed that activities from different hosts run concurrently as we discovered.
• He validated the discovery of how the experiments were unfolding from the host’s
perspectives but the process model was not able to point out how individual sessions
were executed. It showed all of them in sequential order. Domain expert suggested
that this should not always be the case.
• Even in the Petri net discovered using the Inductive miner, there was dependency
in the execution of the session. Domain expert said one session should not be
dependent on another session. There should be co­existence of the activities and
more granularity in the process model.
5.3.4
Iteration Summary
Even though the missing corresponding SP log for the new EV log brought challenges, we
continued to refine our process models and address the shortcomings highlighted in pre­
vious phases. This iteration showed the critical role of correctly determining the case ID
for the process instances. It provided us more comprehensive representation of activities
during specific sessions with particular devices. This iteration also showed that creating
separate process models for each log type allows for a more accurate representation of
the experimental process because of their distinct roles and characteristics. The identifi­
cation of process behavior where different hosts were running parallel or concurrent was
also crucial in this iteration.
5.4
Final Iteration
Through a series of iterative phases, we observed that the behavior of the experimental
electric grid can be effectively captured using Process discovery techniques. It allowed us
to understand and represent how the grid behaves during the experiments. With the valu­
able input received from Domain expert in the previous stage of our work, we addressed
the remaining issues in this last iteration.
5.4.1
Identification of Parallel Activities
In the course of our process model refinement across various iterations, we identified an
issue where processes were organized in a fixed, sequential manner by unfolding events
one after the other. While this sequential approach brought a sense of order, it often led to
experiments being interconnected, inflexible, and not reflecting the behavior of real­world
experimental grid simulation. To address this issue, we split the logs into K­fold based
on the host. As a result, we got 8 host clusters for SP log and 5 host clusters for EV log.
Next, we convert each of the clusters from both logs into an event log.
For each host cluster from SP log,
We mapped the information to the event log as follows,
• SESSION_ID was taken as caseID.
• For activity, we combined column of HOST_ID, SESSION_ID and UNIT_DEVICE. We
decided to include all this information for activity, to make sure that the discovered
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
31
==PAGE:40==
process model has all the information to have a complete understanding of process
execution.
• TIMESTAMP was taken as timestamp.
With this mapping, we got an event log for each host cluster, as in Table 5.7.
Timestamps
CaseID
Activity
2023­06­19 16:00:39,300
SID1_1
HOST_1_SID_1_UNIT_DEVICE1
2023­06­19 16:00:40,244
SID1_2
HOST_1_SID_2_UNIT_DEVICE2
2023­06­19 16:00:41,305
SID1_3
HOST_1_SID_3_UNIT_DEVICE2
Table 5.7: Example Event Log for HOST1 from SP Log
Figure 5.19 shows the behavior of the processes unfolded from a host. It shows flexibility
in the execution of the activities by overcoming the persistent sequential execution that
existed in the previous model.
Figure 5.19: Part of Process Execution from a Host ­ SP Log [See Appendix A.4]
For clusters from EV log,
We mapped the information to the event log as follows,
• SESSION_ID was taken as caseID.
• For activity, we combined column of HOST_ID, SESSION_ID and CONTROLLER. It gave
an illustration of how controllers were running in different sessions from a host.
• TIMESTAMP was taken as timestamp.
With this mapping, we got an event log for each host cluster, as in Table 5.8.
32
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:41==
Timestamps
CaseID
Activity
2023­06­19 16:00:39,300
SID1_1
HOST_1_SID_1_CONTROLLER1
2023­06­19 16:00:40,244
SID1_2
HOST_1_SID_2_CONTROLLER2
2023­06­19 16:00:41,305
SID1_3
HOST_1_SID_3_CONTROLLER2
Table 5.8: Example Event Log for HOST1 from EV Log
Figure 5.20 shows the process model looks more flexible than in the previous iteration
where sessions are running freely without dependability
Figure 5.20: Part of Process Execution from Host 1 ­ EV Log [See Appendix A.5]
5.4.2
Identification of Co­Existed Activities
As we got feedback from Domain expert that there could be more than one activity run­
ning during the same period, we decided to use Declarative Process mining to address
the issue. Declarative Process mining is an approach used to analyze and understand the
processes by using logical rules and constraints ( templates ). Unlike traditional Process
mining, declarative Process mining [26] is based on the declarative specification of the
processes based on the rules that constrain the legal execution of the process. In this
approach, Declared models( i.e. models produced using Declare language ) define the
constraints and rules of the process and specify the relationship between different activi­
ties. Declare miner is a tool or technique that extracts the information from event logs and
discovers the declared models. We used CoExistence( a,b ) Declare constraint which
is defined as shown in Figure 5.21.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.21: CoExistence Declare Constraint
We used CoExistence Declare constraint to identify the coexisting activities while the
processes were unfolding from the hosts. Figures 5.22 and 5.23 are the Declared models
produced by using the Declare miner in RuM application.
Figure 5.22: Part of Declared model with Co­Existing Activities for One Host ­ SP Log
[See Appendix A.6]
Figure 5.23: Part of Declared model with Co­Existing Activities for One Host­ EV Log
[See Appendix A.7]
34
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:43==
5.4.3
Identification of Controller’s Action
The current EV log did not include such a set of actions explicitly. We believed if we iden­
tified these actions, the process model could have more granularity. We came up with a
solution to address the issue. Since we had to preserve the originality of the log, we found
a solution from what we already had. In the log, there was a payload message for each
session belonging to every controller. We wrote a program that automatically reads that
payload message to determine some actions of the controller. This approach introduced
a new column in EV log that consists of categorized actions related to a particular con­
troller in different timestamps. Figures 5.24 and 5.25 are some examples of interpretation
and results of this approach.
We designed Pseudocode 1 to address the scenario of payload message interpretation.
Given a set of payloads, denoted as P and their corresponding interpretations in set C,
represented by ci for each payload pi, the algorithm iterates through the payloads. For
each payload, it checks, if it is interpreted as the corresponding element in C. If a match is
found, the corresponding interpretation in set CA, denoted as cai, is updated accordingly.
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for Payload Interpretation
1: Input: P ­ Set of payloads
2: Output: CA ­ Set of corresponding interpretations in CA ( Controller Actions )
3: for i ←1 to n do
4:
pi ←payload element in P
5:
ci ←corresponding interpretation in C
6:
cai ←corresponding element in CA
7:
if pi is interpreted as ci then
8:
cai ←ci
9:
end if
10: end for
Figure 5.24: Example Interpretation of Payload
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.25: Example EV Log with New Controller Action Column
Mapping Log in to Event Log
Since we had already clustered the host, the mapping of the information to the event log
for each host was defined as,
• SESSION_ID was taken as caseID.
• For activity, we combined column of HOST_ID, SESSION_ID and CONTROLLER and
CONTROLLER_ACTIONS.
• TIMESTAMP was taken as timestamp.
Timestamps
CaseID
Activity
2023­06­19 16:00:39,300
SID1_1
HOST_1_SID_1_CONTROLLER1_ACTION1
2023­06­19 16:00:40,244
SID1_1
HOST_1_SID_1_CONTROLLER2_ACTION2
2023­06­19 16:00:41,305
SID1_1
HOST_1_SID_2_CONTROLLER2_ACTION3
Table 5.9: Example EV Event Log for a Host
Process Model
After the inclusion of controller actions in EV log, we observed more granularity in the
process model as in Figure 5.26. Each transition in the process model shows the action
performed by the corresponding controller.
36
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.26: Part of Process Execution from Host 1 ­ EV Log [See Appendix A.8]
5.4.4
Iteration Summary
In this phase of our work, we focused on understanding and improving the behavior of the
processes by addressing the issues identified in previous phases. The limitations where
processes were overly sequential, and lacked flexibility were addressed in this iteration.
We also identified the coexisting activities using Declarative Process mining, which an­
alyzes processes based on logical rules. To see more granularity in the process model,
we implemented a solution to interpret payload messages associated with controller ex­
ecutions, adding a new column to EV log. This allowed us to understand how controllers
operated during different sessions. We got positive feedback from Domain experts for the
way we interpret payload messages.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:47==
6
Result and Discussion
A series of iterations were conducted to understand the dynamics of the electric grid and
accomplish the answers to research questions established for the thesis. The objective
of these iterations was to develop an evolving process model. In each successive it­
eration, the process models demonstrated an improvement, reflecting a more accurate
representation of the underlying system behavior. While addressing the primary research
question, how data from CPS logs, particularly those from electric grids, can be effec­
tively understood and prepared for analysis using Process mining techniques, we went
through a series of iterations with data preparation, discovery, validation, and feedback
for progressive improvement in capturing the process behavior of the experimental elec­
tric grid. This also positively answered the research question related to the possibility of
using Process mining to discover and analyze the process behavior of electric grids.
In the first iteration, we conceptualized the existing logging system and identified the
nature of the data being logged, such as who is using the data, who is responsible for
producing the log, and the reason why the data is being logged. After a thorough data
pre­processing, we cleaned the data and removed the duplicates. The finding from this
iteration suggested that the logging system needs improvement as more than 80% of the
data were duplicates. Here, we discovered the first­ever holistic process model from the
data but it was not good enough to show the real underlying process behavior. We also
identified some inconsistencies in the log recording. In the second iteration, by utilizing
the feedback from Domain expert, we identified the underlying processes unfolding from
different hosts. We worked with both SP and EV logs. We spotted that EV log was miss­
ing some key information and we came up with a concept to merge the two logs to map
the missing information in EV log from SP log, such as host information. We discovered
the processes from both logs and they have similar patterns but missing the granularity.
Furthermore, we found how the logs were created and executed, realizing that one log
( EV ) talks controller being implemented and the other ( SP ) talks about the set point
information sent by the controller. These logs were recorded simultaneously one after
another ( First EV and then SP ). We took advantage of these findings and decided to
suggest generating new logs with some additional information at least in EV log. Unfor­
tunately, in the newly generated data set, we received only EV log but not SP Log. In the
third iteration, processes evolved to be clearer and more granular, reflecting the closer
behavior as in real lab experiments. Some interesting finding includes the identification of
hosts running concurrently but activities unfolding from the hosts were still sequential. In
the final iteration, We addressed the issues that arose during the previous phases such
as events executed in the process were still behaving in sequential execution or having
some dependencies during execution. In addition to this, we also addressed other issues
such as adding more granularity in processes and identification of coexisting activities.
The journey of this research was filled with numerous challenges that not only added com­
plexity to the research but also sparked curiosity, demanding persistent effort to overcome
them. We began the project with a significantly limited knowledge of domain systems (
SYSLAB ), electric grids, their operation, and the nature of the data they generate. The
absence of existing reference models for the CPSs under study added another layer of
complexity. For every output, we had to have confirmation ( validation ) from Domain
expert which significantly delayed the research activities which in turn challenged time
management for this research. The missing information in the logging data, especially in
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
39
==PAGE:48==
EV log presented more challenges. Crucial data entries such as host, group, or session
information for understanding the system’s behavior, were unavailable in EV log in the
first data set. Even after we got the new data set, we got only EV log and missed the
corresponding SP log. The existence of two separate logs: EV and SP, but with missing
connections between them, further complicated the research. These log issues had a sig­
nificant impact on this research result. This restricted us from discovering the complete
( starting from controller implementation to unit occupation ) behavior of the processes
from the same data set. Therefore, our result only presents process behavior from indi­
vidual logs from different data sets. We received valuable feedback from Domain expert
but limited ( not enough ) interviews with him may have impacted the quality of our find­
ings. Additional perspectives could have been uncovered with extensive engagement with
Domain expert which could have potentially improved the quality of the results while dis­
covering the behavior of the process in the system. Possibly, we could have an improved
and more informed recommendation of the new log format.
40
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:49==
7
Recommendation
With the understanding of the distinct nature of EV and SP logs, we propose the adoption
of the new log format to enhance the comprehensibility and alignment of the logged data.
The process in the lab is documented in two stages: the first involves the implementa­
tion of the controller by a group of students, utilizing a unique host machine. The second
stage begins when the controller sends points to a particular unit. The first stage is ex­
plicitly logged in EV log, while the second stage is implicitly logged in SP Log. To capture
the complete behavior of a process, it is essential to align and compare the discovered
processes from both EV and SP logs. The distinction between EV and SP logs results
in the creation of different session IDs during the logging process. Host information is
crucial for associating processes with specific hosts, as a host can run more than one
session during an experiment. The reliance on session IDs alone becomes inadequate,
as processes may have different session IDs despite belonging to the same experiment.
Proposed Log Format:
We recommend the introduction of an experiment ID in both EV and SP logs. The Experi­
ment ID serves as a unifying identifier for processes associated with the same experiment
and also helps in bridging the gap created by the distinct session IDs in two logs.
Recommended Components
• TIMESTAMP ­ Record the happening time of events and actions within the experi­
ments, also aiding in the chronological understanding of the process.
• Group ID ­ Identifies the group responsible for running the experiments.
• HOST ID ­ Identifies the specific host machine involved in the experiment, enabling
the association of processes with respective hosts.
• EXPERIMENT ID ­ Uniquely identifies the experiment running by the groups of
students using the host.
• SESSION ID ­ Uniquely identifies the occupation of Controller or Unit during the
experiment. These are completely different and unique in both logs.
• CONTROLLER NAME AND CONTROLLER ACTION ­ It identifies the name of the
controller and the type of action.
• UNIT NAME AND DEVICE NAME ­ Includes the Specific Unit and related Device
information.
• PAYLOAD ­ Captures relevant data associated with an event or operation. For
example in the case of EV log, it includes the detail of controller actions and in the
case of SP log, it includes the value of set point.
Each host can be associated with more than one experiment and an experiment includes
one or more sessions. Group, Host, and Experiment information are common in both logs
but not the session information.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 7.1: Example EV Log
Figure 7.2: Example SP Log
By incorporating experiment IDs in both logs, we ensure a more coherent and unified
representation of processes by allowing for a holistic understanding of the experiment’s
progression from initiation to completion. This proposed log format aims to enhance the
clarity, alignment, and reliability of the logged data, facilitating more effective analysis and
interpretation of experimental processes.
42
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:51==
8
Conclusion and Future Works
We worked in the circumstance with almost zero knowledge of the domain. We always
had to talk to domain experts to validate the model. Although initial understanding was
limited, the feedback gained from the domain expert was valuable in advancing toward
our objective. To address the established goal and research questions, we went through
multiple iterations to refine the behavior of the identified processes using process discov­
ery. We understood how crucial it is to set the log properly. If logging is not set properly,
no matter what we are going to do, we are getting meaningless results. We came up with
set­up recommendations to adjust and improve the logging system.
The study has the potential to be beneficial to SYSLAB, where data for this research
was sourced. With proper identification and addressing of issues within the existing log,
we have recommended comprehensive improvements. The recommended log format
has the potential to provide SYSLAB with a more informative and transparent record by
enhancing the clarity of all experiments conducted. The data generated through the im­
plementation of these new logs have the potential to contribute to the lab’s ambition to
automate lab supervision and process monitoring projects for the identification of faults
and anomalies.
In the future, this thesis can also be extended to see the applicability of single­log by
removing the concept of the implicit and explicit log. Though the research was based on
the limited data resource generated from a particular experimental grid, our intention goes
beyond the experimental grid. With the understanding of the key issues addressed in this
thesis such as the identification of parallel activities, coexisting activities, etc, we believe
it provides practical insights for understanding the behavior of the process in electric grids
in the real world. The challenges that we addressed and the recommended solution can
contribute to the academic community by creating a base to discover and interpret the
complex behavior in Cyber­Physical Systems.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Yang Liu et al. “Review on cyber­physical systems”. In: IEEE/CAA Journal of Auto­
matica Sinica 4 (1 Jan. 2017), pp. 27–40. ISSN: 23299274. DOI: 10.1109/JAS.2017.
7510349.
[2]
Liang Hu et al. “Review of cyber­physical system architecture”. In: 2012, pp. 25–30.
ISBN: 9780769546698. DOI: 10.1109/ISORCW.2012.15.
[3]
Volkan Gunes et al. “A survey on concepts, applications, and challenges in cyber­
physical systems”. In: KSII Transactions on Internet and Information Systems 8 (12
Dec. 2014), pp. 4242–4268. ISSN: 22881468. DOI: 10.3837/tiis.2014.12.001.
[4]
Torsten Bandyszak et al. “Model­based Documentation of Context Uncertainty for
Cyber­Physical Systems”. In: 2018 IEEE 14th International Conference on Automa­
tion Science and Engineering (CASE). 2018, pp. 1087–1092. DOI: 10.1109/COASE.
2018.8560480.
[5]
Amir Neshastegaran, Ali Norouzifar, and Iman Izadi. “A Framework for Plant Topol­
ogy Extraction Using Process Mining and Alarm Data”. In: (Apr. 2020). URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2005.01615.
[6]
David Myers et al. “Anomaly detection for industrial control systems using pro­
cess mining”. In: Computers and Security 78 (Sept. 2018), pp. 103–125. ISSN:
01674048. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2018.06.002.
[7]
Stefan Mitsch and André Platzer. “ModelPlex: verified runtime validation of verified
cyber­physical system models”. In: Formal Methods in System Design 49 (1­2 Oct.
2016), pp. 33–74. ISSN: 15728102. DOI: 10.1007/s10703-016-0241-z.
[8]
Hossein Mohammadi Rouzbahani et al. “Anomaly detection in cyber­physical sys­
tems using machine learning”. In: Springer International Publishing, Mar. 2020,
pp. 219–235. ISBN: 9783030385576. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-38557-6_10.
[9]
Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “Foundations of Process Discovery”. In: Process Mining
Handbook. Ed. by Wil M. P. van der Aalst and Josep Carmona. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2022, pp. 37–75. ISBN: 978­3­031­08848­3. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-031-08848-3_2. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-08848-3_2.
[10]
Wil Van der Aalst. Process mining: Data science in action. Springer Berlin Heidel­
berg, Jan. 2016, pp. 1–467. ISBN: 9783662498514. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-49851-
4.
[11]
Wil Aalst. “Process discovery from event data: Relating models and logs through
abstractions”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Dis­
covery 8 (Feb. 2018), e1244. DOI: 10.1002/widm.1244.
[12]
Geeta Yadav and Kolin Paul. “Architecture and security of SCADA systems: A re­
view”. In: International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 34 (2021), p. 100433.
ISSN: 1874­5482. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2021.100433. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1874548221000251.
[13]
Dragos Repta et al. “Automated process recognition architecture for cyber­physical
systems”. In: Enterprise Information Systems 12 (8­9 Oct. 2018), pp. 1129–1148.
ISSN: 17517583. DOI: 10.1080/17517575.2018.1521997.
[14]
Midhun Xavier et al. “Process mining in industrial control systems”. In: vol. 2022­
July. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2022, pp. 1–6. ISBN:
9781728175683. DOI: 10.1109/INDIN51773.2022.9976111.
[15]
ERIGrid. https://erigrid.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/ERIGrid-RI-Description_
DTU_v01.1.pdf. 2016.
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
45
==PAGE:54==
[16]
Xi Fang et al. Smart grid ­ The new and improved power grid: A survey. 2012. DOI:
10.1109/SURV.2011.101911.00087.
[17]
Anna Magdalena Kosek. https://mobile.aau.at/selforganized- wiki/images/f/fa/
Kosek.pdf. 2016.
[18]
https://wiki.syslab.dk/. 2016.
[19]
Prasenjit Basak et al. “Microgrid: Control techniques and modeling”. In: 2009 44th
International Universities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC). 2009, pp. 1–5.
[20]
Kai Heussen. Lecture notes in Distributed Control Systems. May 2023.
[21]
DTU. https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/46045. 2023.
[22]
Heidy M. Marin­Castro and Edgar Tello­Leal. Event log preprocessing for process
mining: A review. Nov. 2021. DOI: 10.3390/app112210556.
[23]
Wil Van Der Aalst. Process mining: Overview and opportunities. July 2012. DOI:
10.1145/2229156.2229157.
[24]
Christian W. Günther and Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “Fuzzy Mining – Adaptive Process
Simplification Based on Multi­perspective Metrics”. In: Business Process Manage­
ment. Ed. by Gustavo Alonso, Peter Dadam, and Michael Rosemann. Berlin, Hei­
delberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 328–343. ISBN: 978­3­540­75183­0.
[25]
José Manuel Colom and Jörg Desel. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformat­
ics): Preface. 2013. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-38697-8.
[26]
Claudio Di Ciccio and Marco Montali. “Declarative Process Specifications: Reason­
ing, Discovery, Monitoring”. In: Process Mining Handbook. Ed. by Wil M. P. van der
Aalst and Josep Carmona. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 108–
152. ISBN: 978­3­031­08848­3. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-08848-3_4. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-08848-3_4.
46
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
Figure A.1: Holistic View of SP Event Log ­ Iteration 1
Figure A.2: Host_16 Process Model
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.3: Holistic Process Model for EV Log
48
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.4: Part of Process Execution from a Host ­ SP Log
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.5: Process Execution from Host 1 ­ EV Log
50
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.6: Declared model with Co­Existing Activities for One Host ­ SP Log
Figure A.7: Declared model with Co­Existing Activities for One Host­ EV Log
Figure A.8: Process Execution from Host 1 ­ EV Log
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.9: Processes From Holistic Model of SP Log
52
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
==PAGE:61==
Process Mining for Cyber­Physical Systems: A Case Study of Electric Grids
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads , Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
