==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
Measuring and modeling methionine in complex, fungally fermented solid state food
systems
Aditya Leju Chacko s212923
Project Supervisors
Anne S. Meyer
Noël Jung
ECTS: 30
==PAGE:2==
January 28, 2024
2
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
Contents
Assignment Text
1
1
Acknowledgement
2
Abstract
3
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Fungal amino acid profile transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Assays used to study the fermentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
3,5-dinitrosalicylicacid (DNS) Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.2
Methionine Synthase Assay (Cobalamin independent) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Methods & Materials
10
2.1
Pea-Tempeh Fermentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
Preperation of Substrate and Inoculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Harvesting and Processing the Pea-Tempeh Fermentations
. . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
DNS Assay procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Finding the optimum dilution range for the DNS assay . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
DNS Assay on multiple extractions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Methionine Synthase Assay procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Optimizing the Methionine Synthase Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Comparing Peas with Pea-Tempeh fermentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Cobalamin Dependent Methionine Synthase Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.7
Time Course Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.8
Free amino acid extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.9
Statistical Tools used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
i
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
3
Results
22
3.1
Finding the optimum dilution range for the DNS assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
DNS assay on Multiple extractions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.1
Experiments to obtain ideal reaction times (Experiment 1 & 2)
. . . . . . . .
24
3.3.2
Experiments to find the ideal extract volume and concentration(Experiment 3
& 4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.3
Experiments to find out the ideal controls(Experiment 5 & 6) . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.4
Experiments to define the linear range (Experiment 7, 8 & 9) . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.5
Experiment to check for Inhibition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Comparing Peas and Tempeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5
Cobalamin Dependent Methionine Synthase Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.6
Time Course Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.6.1
0 hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.6.2
24 hours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.6.3
48 hours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.6.4
72 hours
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.6.5
Comparison across each time point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.6.6
Methionine Synthase Assay on 72 hour Fermentations
. . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.6.7
Free methionine content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4
Discussions
62
4.1
Solid-State Fermentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.2
Homogenization and Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3
Assessment of the Assays used during the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.3.1
DNS Assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.3.2
Methionine Synthase Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
ii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
4.4
Time Course Experiments(DNS-Assay) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.5
Methionine Synthase Assay (72 hours)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.6
Free Methionine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5
Conclusions
69
6
Appendix
75
6.1
DNS assay - standard curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2
Absorbance values for the Methionine Synthase Assay (72 hour fermentations) . . . .
77
6.3
Standard Curve - free Methionine Quantification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.4
Python script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.5
Tukey Kramer HSD Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
iii
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
Assignment Text
Objective: 1) To investigate methionine levels in fungally fermented pea systems. 2) investigate if fun-
gal methionine synthase levels and activity may play a role in enhancing methionine levels in fungally
fermented plant foods (with and without cobalamine). 3) To examine diffusion of a relevant fluores-
cein marked protease in solid plant food matrix models (confocal laser scanning microscopy) in rela-
tion to the time course of the fungal growth (the fungal growth yield could involve image processing).
Work content: Detailed study of at least two relevant solid state fungal strain fermentations, e.g. one
Aspergillus spp. and one Rhizopus sp. (the protease will be available). Experimental and modeling
work to be performed: • Fungal solid state fermentations for a pea system (document reproducibility)
• Methionine determination by the methionine kit • Methionine synthase assay (already run in in the
group) • Fluorescein-tagging of a fungal protease • Examine and quantify macromolecular protease dif-
fusion in theory and practice (practice: by microscopy) in solid plant food matrix models • Optional: If
time permits, include quantitative diffusion studies of other relevant enzymes, e.g. secreted proteases
or carbohydrate processing enzymes Learning objectives: Gain practical and theoretical knowledge
of methionine synthases. Obtain experience with methionine synthase enzyme assay. Gain detailed
knowledge of practical extraction of molecules (enzymes) from fungal mycelia. Be able to conduct crit-
ical assessment of enzyme protein diffusion data and methods published in the research literature.
Be confident with confocal laser scanning microscopy technology for quantitative molecular diffusion
measurement. Be able to communicate how plant protein foods and this MSc research work relate to
the SDGs. Be able to communicate research results and theory through a scientific report and an oral
presentation.
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Acknowledgement
I would like express my sincerest gratitude to my supervisors Anne S. Meyer and Noël Jung for their
constant support and guidance throughout this thesis project. I would like to also thank Jesper Holck
for his help during the later stages of my thesis and for the amino acid quantification.
I would also like to express my gratitude and appreciation for my peers working at DTU Bioengineering.
The enthusiasm and the dedication of my peers in their respective work has been inspiring and has
helped me in bringing the best out of myself.
Lastly, I would like to thank my friends and family for being a pillar of support for me through this
journey.
2
==PAGE:8==
Abstract
The Master Thesis project focuses on studying Solid-State fermentations using the DNS assay and the
cobalamin independent methionine synthase assay. The project also focused on trying to measure
an increase in the free methionine content in the fermentations. The fermentation focused upon in
this project is tempeh, based on fermenting Yellow Peas (Pissum sativum) using Aspergillus oryzae and
Rhizopus oryzae. The DNS assay was used to study the effect solid state fungal fermentation has on
reducing sugars while the methionine synthase assay was used to measure the concentrations of cobal-
amin independent methionine synthase enzyme present in the solid state fermentations. The project
also focused on producing these fermentations at different time durations, along with preparing ex-
tractions through which they could be studied using the assays. The assays were also optimized for
the project and were largely successful at providing insight into the fermentations. However, the me-
thionine synthase assay could not be used to study all the fermentation samples produced. The free
methionine content was also successfully measured in the fermentations providing sufficient evidence
of an increase with increasing duration of the fermentations.
3
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Fermentation is an ancient technology or tool human cultures and societies in many parts of the world
have been using dating back to a few thousand years [1] [2] . Fermentation as a process can be defined
as the transformation of a particular food or beverage through microorganisms that use the food or
beverage as a substrate for growth and other metabolic activities, which gives rise to an altered food
product [3]. One of the main reasons foods have been fermented by human beings is that it improves
the shelf life and storage capacity of various foods [4] [5]. Along with this, fermented foods also pro-
vide an altered taste and texture to the food [3]. In recent years, fermented foods have gained a lot
of popularity due to a variety of health benefits associated to it [6]. Studies on the nutritional aspects
of fermented foods have shown that fermentation of food enhances the nutritional aspects of it by
reducing its antinutritional properties[3], improving the content of vitamins and probiotics [7] and the
protein biovailibility [8]. In the 21st Century, there has also been an increase in people’s interest to con-
sume more plant based foods over animal based alternatives over concerns of the environment and
various humanitarian reasons [9] [10] [11]. However, while comparing the protein content in conven-
tional animal based protein sources and plant based protein sources, animal based sources of protein
are better at supplying essential amino acids because of higher digestibility and better amino acid com-
position [12] [13], with studies that also suggest that it contributes to more lean muscle mass [14]. The
increased demand to consume more plant based foods, suggests that technologies need to be devel-
oped to improve the quality of protein present in plant foods [15]. Fungal Fermentation of plant foods
could potentially be one of these technologies as it can improve the PDCAA(Protein Digestability Cor-
rected Amino Acid Score) of plant foods [16] [17]. The Proferment project focuses on creating a yellow
pea based tempeh (a food traditionally based on soybean) through the use of solid state fungal fer-
mentation with the aim of enhancing the methionine content present in the yellow peas and creating
a plant based food product rich in protein. The master thesis project focuses on determining a method
to measure the increase in cobalamin independent methionine synthase, an enzyme that is responsi-
ble for the formation of Methionine [18] which is found in various fungal species [19] [20] and to gain
an idea about the reducing sugars present in the pea-tempeh using the DNS assay [21] [22]. Another
objective of the project is also to investigate if the methionine content present in peas increases due
to fungal fermentation.
4
==PAGE:10==
1.1
Fungal amino acid profile transformation
1.1
Fungal amino acid profile transformation
The substrate used for the fermentation in this project is Yellow Peas (Pisum sativum). Yellow peas are
commonly used as a plant based source of protein [23]. However, Yellow peas are also known to have
low amounts of certain amino acids such as Methionine [24] [25] [26].The aim of the project is to im-
prove the content of methionine present in the yellow peas by fermenting it with certain fungal strains.
Aspergilus oryzae a filamentous fungi widely known for producing fermented foods like miso and shoyu
[27] has been shown to increase the methionine content present in soy through dry fermentation [28].
Rhizopus oligosporus, another edible filamentous fungus [29] is also shown to improve the total free
amino acid content [30] and increase amino acid, vitamins and antioxidant levels during the fermen-
tation of Brewers Spent Grain [31]. Fungal fermentations using Rhizopus oryzae have also shown to
improve the Methionine content during Soy Bran fermentation [32]. Traditionally, Tempeh is a product
obtained from the fermentation of Soybean primarily using Rhizopus oligosporus [33] and also Rhizo-
pus oryzae and Aspergilus oryzae [34]. In the current project the two fungi used to ferment the Yellow
Peas so that the fermentations can later be studied in detail will be Rhizopus oryzae (IBT 7729) and
Aspergilus oryzae (IBT 21458). While investigating the role of methionine in plants, it is important to
consider that it is not only used as a building block for proteins but it also plays a key role in methylation
events within the cell [35]. Hence a hypothesis is made that the free methionine content present in the
pea-tempeh fermentation could be contributing to the overall methionine levels. In this project, the
free methionine content associated with the fermentation is analysed. While the a study was initiated
to also study the methionine present in proteins, this couldn’t be finished before the thesis project.
1.2
Assays used to study the fermentation
The two main aspects of the fermentation that are studied in this project using assays are: 1) The fungal
transformation of polysaccharides and complex carbohydrates present in the substrate as a means to
gain an estimation of the growth and activity of the fungal species on the substrate and 2) To measure
the concentration of cobalamin-independent methionine synthase, an enzyme that is responsible for
the formation of Methionine. The fungal interaction with the various polysaccharides present in the
Peas is studied using the DNS assay section 1.2.1 and the release of methionine Synthase during the
fermentation is studied by the methionine synthase assay section 1.2.2.
5
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Assays used to study the fermentation
1.2.1
3,5-dinitrosalicylicacid (DNS) Assay
The DNS assay is a widely used method for measuring the content of reducing sugars present in a sample
[21]. The principle of the DNS assay is that the DNS reacts with the reducing end of a sugar in order to
produce 3-amino-5-nitrosalicylic acid which is orange-red in color [22] [21].
Figure 1: 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid(DNS) reaction with a reducing end to form 3-amino-5-nitrosalicylic acid
In a solution where DNS reacts with the reducing sugar, the formation of the orange red color in the
solution is used to indirectly determine the reducing sugar content in that respective solution. Over a
particular concentration range the increasing orange-red color can be measured in terms of absorbance
in a spectrophotometer at 540nm [21] and this is used to make correlations with the reducing ends
that have reacted with the DNS. These correlations can be made by developing a standard curve. A
standard curve can be prepared by making dilutions of glucose solutions with known concentrations
and subjecting these solutions to DNS reactions for the same durations and temperature as the sample
that is being studied. From here the signal generated for the DNS reaction of different glucose dilutions
is recorded to obtain a standard curve that correlates the absorbance(540nm) with the glucose content
present in the solution. This standard curve is used to estimate the reducing ends present in the sample
subjected to the DNS reaction by correlating the absorbance signal generated by the sample to the
equivalent amount of glucose present in the solution in g/L. The reducing ends obtained from the
absorbance correlations using the standard curve are thus represented by their glucose equivalent (g/l).
Both the fungal strains chosen for the fermentations in the project have shown to degrade complex
polysaccharides and starches [36] [37] [38] which can be used as a parameter to represent the growth
and activity of the fungi by using the DNS Assay based on the procedure mentioned in section 2.3.
6
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Assays used to study the fermentation
1.2.2
Methionine Synthase Assay (Cobalamin independent)
The methionine synthase assay measures the amount of substrate, the enzyme methionine synthase
converts to a measurable product. The amount of product formed within a particular time frame is
used to gauge the amount of methionine synthase present in the sample being tested. 2 key reactions
take place while performing the methionine synthase assay. First, the methionine synthase uses the
substrates 5- methyltetrahydropteroyltriglutamate ((6S)CH3-H4PteGlu3) and L-Homocysteine (L-HCY)
to give Methionine and Tetrahydropteroyltri-L-glutamate (H4PteGlu3) [18].
Figure 2: Representation of the conversion of L-Homocysteine to L-methionine by cobalamin independent
methionine synthase
After a desired time duration to conduct the reaction, a stop solution consisting of 60% Formic acid
and 5M HCL is used to arrest the reaction [18]. The mixture containing stop solution is heated at 80ºC
[18] inorder for the H4PteGLu3 to react with the formic acid to produce Methenyl-H4PteGlu3 and water.
The absorbance signal of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3 is measured at a wavelength of 350 nm in a spectropho-
tometer and this is used to determine the amount of substrate that was converted by the methionine
synthase in a given time duration. The reaction for this is given below [18]
7
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Assays used to study the fermentation
Figure 3: Reaction of H4PteGLu3 with the stop solution to form
5,10-methenyltetrahydropteroyltri-v-L-glutamate(Methenyl-H4PteGlu3)
For every molecule of Methionine producedbythemethioninesynthasereaction, a molecule ofH4PteGLu3
is released. While the solution containing stop solution is heated at 80ºC, H4PteGLu3 reacts with the
stop solution and gets converted to Methenyl-H4PteGlu3. Hence, the number of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3
molecules present is proportional to the Methionine produced. This is used to indirectly calculate the
rate of the methionine synthase reaction based on Michaelis Menten kinetics [39].
Figure 4: Michaelis-Menten curve that shows how the rate of an enzyme catalyzed reaction depends on the
substrate concentration. Initial velocity V0 (µM/min) represents the rate of the reaction and S represents the
Substrate concentration
The curve present in the above figure (fig. 4) can be given by the following expression [39]
V0 =
Vmax[S]
Km + [S]
(1.1)
8
==PAGE:14==
1.2
Assays used to study the fermentation
Based on the above equation, if the Substrate concentration is much greater than the KM ([S] > > > KM
) then the equation eq. (1.1) can be re written as follows [39]
V0 = Vmax
(1.2)
Vmax can also be represented as Vmax = kcat × Etot where kcat is the rate constant in (1/min) and Etot
is the Enzyme concentration in µM. If the methionine synthase reaction takes place in the linear range
and the rate constant is known, then the enzyme concentration can be calculated. The values kcat used
to determine the enzyme concentration for Rhizopus oryzae and Aspergilus oryzae are 1.18 and 3.35
(1/min) based on previous work [40].
9
==PAGE:15==
2
Methods & Materials
In order to study the fermentation process and subject it to the assays mentioned in the section 1.2,
the pea-tempeh fermentations are produced according to the process described in section 2.1. The
samples of the fermentation to be studied are processed such that the proteins and sugars of interest
are present in a liquid medium based on the Extraction process mentioned in section 2.2. Both the DNS
assay and the methionine synthase assays are optimized to the fermentation extracts as mentioned in
section 2.3.1 and section 2.4.1 respectively. After optimizing the assays to work with the fermentation
extracts, the fermentation is studied at multiple time points based on section 2.7.
2.1
Pea-Tempeh Fermentations
The process of producing pea-tempeh fermentations that can be subjected to the DNS Assay and the
methionine synthase assay takes place in 2 major steps: 1. Preparation of substrate (Peas) and innoc-
ulating the Substrate with the desired fungal strain 2. Harvesting & processing of the fermentations.
2.1.1
Preperation of Substrate and Inoculation
The pea-tempeh fermentations take place in falcon tubes such that 10g(+/- 0.1g) of wet peas is used as
the substrate required for the fermentation. Firstly, based on the number of fermentations that need
to be set up, the total weight of the wet peas needed is calculated. The wet peas consist of 60% dry
weight of peas and 40% water. Based on this the total dry weight of the peas required is taken. To these
dry peas, 3 times the mass of them in autoclaved Milli-Q water is added to them and the peas are left
to swell for 16 hrs at 4ºC. During this period, the container holding the peas is covered with tin foil.
This period of time allows the dry peas to swell up as they absorb the added water to them. After 16
hours, 10 g of the wet peas are weighed out into falcon tubes. The falcon tubes in which the peas are
placed will act as the containers where the fermentation takes place. A hole is poked into the lids of the
falcon tubes using a BD microlance needle in order to provide sufficient amount of ventilation to the
fungus during the fermentation. A tin foil wrapper is added around the lid and the lid is left unscrewed
over the falcon tube. The falcon tubes with the substrate are now placed in an autoclave at 121ºC for
20 mins. After autoclaving the peas, the substrate is ready for the fungi to ferment it. The substrate
is inoculated with an undiluted fungal spore suspension of 100,000 spores and the inoculated falcon
tubes are now covered in tin foil sleeves and placed in a fungal incubator at 30ºC for the desired time
10
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Extraction
of the fermentation.
2.1.2
Harvesting and Processing the Pea-Tempeh Fermentations
After incubating the substrate with the fungal strain for a desired time in the fungal incubator, the
pea-tempeh is taken out of the incubator and the weight of each fermentation is measured. After the
fermentations are weighed, the fermentations along with the falcon tubes containing them are placed
in a freeze drier (model: ScanVac freeze dryer-Cool safe) for 72 hours at -103ºC at 0.01 mBar. The freeze
drier is used to remove the moisture from the fermented product so that each fermentation has the
same amount of moisture content (close to 0) [41]. The fermented pea-tempeh product consists of the
substrate along with the fungal biomass growing on it as shown in the figure below fig. 5.
Figure 5: A picture of the crossection of 72 hour Pea-Tempeh fermentations. The white substance is the fungal
biomass with the Peas (Substrate) embedded in it
In order to subject equal parts of the fungal biomass and the substrate to the assays, after the freeze
drying process, the fermentations are homogenized in a BOSCH coffee grinder for 30 seconds. The
powder of the fermentation obtained is assumed to be a homogenous mixture. After homogenizing
the fermentations they are stored at -20ºC. The homogenized mixtures of the fermentations are later
subjected to the extraction process as described below in section 2.2.
2.2
Extraction
The homogenised mixture of the fermentation sample that is to be studied is first weighed out in a 2mL
Eppendorf tube. The weight is taken to be such that it is approximately equal to 100 mg with a tolerance
11
==PAGE:17==
2.3
DNS Assay procedure
of +/- 3mg. After the weight of the sample is taken, 2 steel balls are added to the Eppendorf tube. After
this, 20 mM Tris-HCl & 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4 Buffer is added to the Eppendorf tube. The volume of the
buffer added is(in µ L) 15 times the measured weight of the homogeneous mixture (1500µL of buffer
for 100mg of the homogeneous mixture). After adding the buffer, the Eppendorf tubes containing the
buffer and the steel balls are subjected to the action of a tissue lyser at 30Hz for 30 seconds. The
tissue lyser disrupts the tissues bringing out all the cellular material into the Buffer. The samples are
now centrifuged at 4ºC at 15000 G for 10 mins. This is done to separate the particulate matter from
the liquid buffer containing the soluble cellular material. From the Eppendorf tubes containing the
sample, 1mL of the supernatant is taken into a 1.5mL Eppendorf tube and this is the extract from the
fermentation. This extract is subjected to the DNS assay and the methionine synthase assay.
In order to study the free form methionine present in the pea-tempeh, the buffer used for the extraction
process is different. The buffer used in this case is a solution which consists of 0.8% trichloroacetic acid
and 14% ethanol as the solvent has been known to recover free amino acids from pea flour [42].
Figure 6: The steps involved in the extraction process as described in the procedure
2.3
DNS Assay procedure
The DNS assay is used to measure the number of reducing ends present in the sample. The extract
supernatants are prepared as described in section 2.2. After preparing the extracts, a 96 micro well
plate (plate A) is taken and placed on ice. To this, 100 µL of DNS solution is added in the desired
wells. Then, 100 µL of the extract supernatant of a desired dilution is added to the wells containing
the DNS solution. The dilution of the extract supernatant is determined based on the experiment in
section 2.3.1. Alongside conducting the DNS reactions with the extract supernatant samples, a standard
curve is also prepared in order to measure how many reducing ends are present in the sample in terms
of the glucose equivalent (g/L) . For this, glucose solutions of varying concentrations were added to
separate wells containing the DNS solution. The varying concentration of glucose is decided based on
12
==PAGE:18==
2.3
DNS Assay procedure
the dilution of the extract chosen for the assay as described in section 2.3.1 and section 3.1. After the
addition of the glucose solution and the extract supernatants, the microwell plate (Plate A) is taken
off the ice and placed in a waterbath at 95 ºC for 10 mins. The reason for choosing a water bath is to
provide uniform heating to each of the wells. Another microwell plate (plate B) is prepared by adding
100µL of water in the desired wells. Once the DNS reaction is complete, 100 µL of the reacted DNS
solution is pipetted out into plate B (from plate A to plate B). This new plate (plate B) is placed in the
spectrophotometer in order to measure the absorbance signal from the DNS reaction at 540nm. For
controls of the DNS reaction with the extract solution, a zero point reading is prepared in the new plate
(plate B). The wells where the zero point reactions were conducted have the exact same material as the
wells which consisted of extract supernatant that reacted with the DNS. The only difference being that
the extract in these wells have not reacted with the DNS and thus would give the zero point of the DNS
reaction. For the wells that represent the zero point reaction, 50µL of sample (extract supernatant) and
50µL of DNS were added along with 100µL of water. These volumes were taken to maintain the same
ratio of water to extract and DNS solution from plate A.
Figure 7: The main steps involved in performing the DNS assay (section 2.3)
2.3.1
Finding the optimum dilution range for the DNS assay
The ideal dilution of the extract supernatant used for the DNS assay is determined such that it is within
the values that are represented by the standard curve. The ideal dilution in this experiment refers to
the extract dilution before adding the solution to plate A (section 2.3). The standard curve for the DNS
assay is generated between a glucose concentration of 0 g/l and 2 g/l (0,0.2,0.5,0.8,1,1.2,1.5 and 2g/L).
The absorbance signal thus produced by the DNS reaction of the extract supernatant should be within
the absorbance signals generated by the glucose solution with 0 g/l of glucose and 2 g/l of glucose
in order to determine the glucose equivalent of the reducing end. The following extract supernatant
dilutions were tested to determine which one of them was the most appropriate to be used for the DNS
13
==PAGE:19==
2.4
Methionine Synthase Assay procedure
Assays to assess the fermentations: Pure Extract supernatant (Extract) , 50 % Extract Supernatant with
50% Milli-Q water (Extract (1:2)), 20% Extract with 80% Milli-Q water (Extract (1:5)) and 10% Extract
with 90% Milli-Q water. The ideal dilution range for the Extract supernatant to be used for the DNS
assay is between 1:2 and 1:5, which was decided based on the results obtained in section 3.1. Based
on the ideal dilution range the glucose concentrations used to develop the standard curve have also
been altered to best represent the dilutions (0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8 and 1 g/L).
2.3.2
DNS Assay on multiple extractions
A DNS assay was also performed on multiple extract supernatants (extracts 1-6) obtained using the ex-
traction process (section 2.2) from the same fermentation. This experiment was performed to check if
the absorbance signal produced by the DNS assay is uniform for different extract supernatants obtained
from the same fermentation mix, thus giving an idea about the uniformity of the extraction process.
6 extract supernatants were produced from a 72 hour Rhizopus oryzae fermentation. These extracts
were diluted to a 1:5 dilution and were subjected to the DNS assay based on the procedure in sec-
tion 2.3. The 1:5 dilutions prepared represent the extract concentration before adding it to the 200µL
reaction well. The results of this experiment are present in section 3.2.
2.4
Methionine Synthase Assay procedure
The methionine synthase assay is used to measure the concentration of cobalamin independent me-
thionine synthase present in the extract supernatant and is carried out in 96 microwell plates. Firstly,
the extract supernatant is prepared as mentioned in section 2.2. After obtaining the extract super-
natant, the reaction mixture necessary for conducting the assay is prepared. The reaction mixture
consists of 35mM K3PO4 Phosphate Buffer (7.2 pH), 50mM Tris-HCl Buffer (7.2 pH), 0.1mM MgSO4
solution, 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and the reaction substrates, which are 2mM L-HCY (Homocys-
teine) and 0.15mM (6R,S)CH3-H4PteGlu3 respectively. The total quantities required of each of these
substances are mixed in an Eppendorf tube or falcon tube depending on the number of reactions that
need to be run. The volumes of substances are calculated considering a reaction volume of 200µL in
each well of the micro-well plate. At first the reaction buffers are mixed followed by the addition of
Homocysteine (L-HCY) and (6R,S)CH3-H4PteGlu3. The Eppendorf tube/falcon tube containing the re-
action mix is then covered by an aluminium foil in order to protect it from light and is kept on ice. After
preparing the reaction mix, another mixture called the extract mix is prepared with the total volume
14
==PAGE:20==
2.4
Methionine Synthase Assay procedure
of extract supernatant that is required along with the total volume of additional makeup water (water
required to maintain 200µL of the reaction volume). The total volume of extract supernatant and wa-
ter is obtained based on the number of reaction wells considering a total reaction volume of 200µL.
After preparing both mixtures, the volume of the reaction mix required for each individual microw-
ell plate is pipetted into the desired wells of the microwell plate. After this, the plate is placed in a
thermomixer where the reaction mix is equilibrated at 30 ºC for 2 minutes at 600 rpm. The choice of
controls/backgrounnd used for the assay is described in more detail in section 2.4.1 and section 3.3.3.
After 2 minutes, the plate is taken out of the thermomixer and the extract mix that is required for each
well is pippetted into the respective wells. The plate is then once again placed in the thermomixer
at 30ºC for a desired time period at 600rpm for the reaction of L-HCY and (6S)CH3-H4PteGlu3 to take
place. After 60 mins, 1/4th the volume of the reaction mix (in this case 50µL of 200µL) is added to
the reaction wells to arrest the reaction. After the addition of the stop solution, the plate is placed in a
thermomixer at 80ºC at 600 rpm for 10 minutes in order for the H4PteGlu3 to react with the formic acid
to form Methenyl-H4PteGlu3. During the heating of the plate at 80ºC, a lot of precipitate is generated
which needs to be separated from the liquid reaction mix. This is done using a centrifuge operating at
4400rpm and 4ºC for 10 mins. After 10 mins in the centrifuge, 100 µL of the liquid solution in the plate
is pippetted out without disrupting the pellet into another new plate. This new plate is placed into the
spectrophotometer and the absorbance is measured at a wavelength of 350nm. The absorbance sig-
nal measured is then correlated to the formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3 using a standard curve that
was prepared from previous work in the project [40]. The equation for this standard curve is given as
follows:
Absorbance(350nm) = 0.008765811 × Concentration(µM) + 0.002204149
(2.1)
Based on the standard curve’s equation, the concentration of the Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) can be
obtained using the absorbance signal generated by its formation.
15
==PAGE:21==
2.4
Methionine Synthase Assay procedure
Figure 8: The main steps involved in performing the cobalamin-independent methionine synthase assay
(section 2.4)
2.4.1
Optimizing the Methionine Synthase Assay
The time required to generate a readable and a linear signal during the reaction of L-HCY and (6R,S)CH3-
H4PteGlu3 is unclear since the amount of methionine synthase present in the extract supernatant is
unknown. Similarly, the amount of extract supernatant that is to be taken in each individual reaction
well is also unclear such that a signal is obtained in the desirable range of the spectrophotometer.
In order to optimize the methionine synthase assay in the context of using it with the extract super-
natants, certain experiments were conducted to optimize the experimental conditions. These opti-
mization experiments were carried out on extract supernatants obtained from biological replicates of
72 hour Rhizopus oryzae fermentations. While running the optimization experiments to find out the
ideal extract supernatant volume in the reaction well and the ideal reaction time, two different types
of reaction controls have also been explored i.e. The use of denatured extract supernatants(used as
a background) and the use of another reaction mix without the presence of L-HCY. The denatured ex-
tract supernatant as the name suggests consists of proteins that have been denatured. Due to this, the
signal generated by the denatured extract during the assay won’t consist of the signal that is formed
from the presence of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3. This can be used to differentiate the signal contributed by
the reaction mix and the extract mix from the signal generated by product formation. The proteins
in the extract supernatant in this case are denatured by heating the extract supernatant at 99ºC in
16
==PAGE:22==
2.4
Methionine Synthase Assay procedure
a thermomixer for 10 mins. The idea behind using the controls without L-HCY is that since L-HCY is
one of the two reaction substrates for the methionine synthase reaction, the absence of it wont cause
the reaction to take place thus giving a signal that only consists of the absorbance contributed by the
methyl group((6R,S)CH3-H4PteGLu3), the reaction buffers and the extract supernatant. The controls
without L-HCY is prepared by the substituting the volume of L-HCY required for the Assay with Milli-Q
water. The decisions for the ideal reaction times, the ideal volume of extract supernatant, the use of an
appropriate control for the assay have been decided by running some optimization experiments which
are summarized in the section 2.4.1. In the section 2.4.1, in experiment 4 and 5, 100(x7.5) refers to the
extract supernatant prepared only by adding half the buffer added during the extraction process (7.5x
the weight of the buffer in µL as opposed to 15x in section 2.2) making the extract supernatant twice
as concentrated.
17
==PAGE:23==
2.4
Methionine Synthase Assay procedure
Experiment
Number
Experiment Title
Controls
Extract Vol-
umes (µL)
Results
1
Methionine Synthase Assay at 0
and 20 mins
Denatured
60
section 3.3.1
2
Methionine Synthase Assay at
0,40 and 60 mins
Denatured
60
section 3.3.1
3
0 and 60 mins Methionine Syn-
thase Assay
Denatured
100
section 3.3.2
4
60 min reactions for different
extract concentration (60µL and
100µL from standard x15 stock
and 100µL from 7.5x stock)
Denatured
60,
100,
100(x 7.5)
section 3.3.2
5
60 min reactions for different
extract concentration (60µL and
100µL from standard x15 stock
and 100µL from 7.5x stock)
Without L-HCY
60,
100,
100(x 7.5)
section 3.3.3
6
time course at 0, 20, 40 and 60
mins
Without L-HCY
100
section 3.3.3
7
Time course at 0, 20, 40 and 60
mins(for 3 Biological replicates)
Without L-HCY
100
section 3.3.4
8
Time course at 0,1,1.5 and 2
hours (for 2 biologial replicates)
Without L-HCY
100
section 3.3.4
9
Time course at 0,20,30,40,50,60
mins(for 3 biologial replicates)
Without L-HCY
100
section 3.3.4
10
Experiment to check for inhibi-
tion
Without L-HCY &
Denatured
30 & 60
section 3.3.5
Table 1: Summary of Experiments conducted to optimize the methionine synthase assay
Based on the experiments described in section 2.4.1, and performed in section 3.3.1, section 3.3.2 and
section 3.3.3 and section 3.3.4 , the ideal extract volume to be used for the assay is 100µL (from an
extract supernatant prepared by adding 15x the weight of the Extract in µL based on section 2.2) and
the ideal controls to be used is the reaction mix without L-HCY. An attempt was also made to define
a linear range where the product formation takes place linearly with time and it was confirmed to be
between 0 and 60 mins(however this trend was not as evident in experiment 9 from section 2.4.1 which
is discussed in more detail in section 3.3.4). Since the extract supernatant consists of different types
of substances in it along with the methionine synthase, another experiment is performed to check if
there are any inhibitors that could potentialy affect the signal generated by the methionine synthase
(Experiment 10 in section 2.4.1). This experiment is performed by the addition of pure methionine
synthase from Aspergilus sojae (referred to as Pure Enzyme) of a known concentration to the reaction
wells consisting of a known extract volume and the methionine synthase assay is performed. In this
experiment, 4 different conditions were tested: 1) Pure Enzmye + Denatured Extract 2) Pure Enzyme
18
==PAGE:24==
2.5
Comparing Peas with Pea-Tempeh fermentations
+ 30µL Extract 3) Pure Enzyme + 60µL Extract 4) Only Pure Enzyme. These conditions were chosen to
observe how the Pure Enzyme interacts with different extract volumes and also how the pure enzyme
interacts with denatured extract. The Pure Enzyme assay acts as a benchmark or control to compare
the absorbance values generated from the other 3 conditions. Based on the results for this experiment
no inhibition was observed in between the 0 and 60 min range section 3.3.5.
2.5
Comparing Peas with Pea-Tempeh fermentations
The Pea - Tempeh fermentations produced based on the procedure provided in section 2.1 is compared
to Yellow Peas Pissum sativum (referred to as Peas) using the DNS assay and the Methionine Synthase
assay as developed based on the previous sections. This comparison of the Peas and the pea-tempeh
using both assays acts a validation to perform further detailed experiments on the Pea-tempeh fer-
mentations (section 2.7). Three biological replicates of 72 hour Pea-tempeh fermentations produced
by Rhizopus oryzae and three replicates of unfermented Yellow Peas are processed and homogenized
based on the procedure mentioned in section 2.1.2. The finished homogenized mixture of the peas
and the pea-tempeh are then subjected to the extraction process from section 2.2 and the extract su-
pernatants obtained are subjected to the DNS assay and the Methionine Synthase assay based on the
procedure optimised for the extract supernatants. The results obtained for the assays comparing the
peas and the pea-tempeh fermentations are present in section 3.4.
2.6
Cobalamin Dependent Methionine Synthase Assay
Although the project focuses on measuring the presence of cobalamin independent methionine syn-
thase, certain fungal strains have also reported to posses the cobalamin dependent methionine syn-
thase [43] due to which an experiment was conducted where the pea-tempeh fermentations were sub-
jected to the cobalamin dependent methionine synthase assay. The cobalamin dependent methionine
Synthase assay was used to check if there is any observable activity for the cobalamin dependent me-
thionine synthase enzyme. The procedure for the assay is similar to that of the cobalamin independent
methionine synthase assay with a few key differences. Those being, the addition of Hydroxycobalamin
[44], S-adenosylmethionine and a different Methyl donor(5-methyltetrahydrofolate). The assay is per-
formed on extract supernatants obtained during the extraction process (section 2.2) and is carried out
in 96 micro well plates with a reaction volume of 200 µL in each reaction well. Similar to section 2.4,
an extract mix is prepared from the extract supernatant. The reaction mix is prepared consisting of
19
==PAGE:25==
2.7
Time Course Experiments
100mM K3PO3 (pH = 7.2), 0.05 mM Hydroxycobalamin, 0.019 mM S-adenosylmethionine, 9.732 mM
DTT, 0.5 mM L-HCY and 0.015 mM 6R,S-CH3H4Folate based on the concentrations provided by [18]
with the only difference being the use of hydroxycobalamin [44] instead of aquacobalamin. The other
steps involved in the cobalamin dependent assay is the same as the section 2.4 and the end product
that is measured is methenyltetrahydrofolate. The results of this assay are present in section 3.5
2.7
Time Course Experiments
In order to get a better insight on how the fermentation process takes place with regards to the number
of reducing ends formed, Pea-Tempeh fermentations were produced with different incubation times
(0, 24, 48 and 72 hours) and were subjected to the DNS Assay. At each time point, fermentations
were produced using 2 different fungal strains Aspergilus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae with 4 biological
replicates at each time point for each strain. Along with this, the fermentations were also compared
to uninoculated Peas in replicates of 3 at each time point which acted as Controls. The DNS assay was
performed on extract supernatants prepared based on the extraction process developed in section 2.2.
Each extract supernatant was subjected to the DNS Assay in triplicates(3 reaction wells for the same
fermentations). The results for the DNS assay at different time points of the Fermentation are present
in section 3.6. From the fermentations produced for the time course experiments, the 72 hour fermen-
tations for both Aspergilus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae were subjected to the cobalamin independent
methionine synthase assay with the optimized parameters as discussed in section 2.4 and section 2.4.1.
The assay was performed at different reaction times(0,20,40 and 60 mins) to get a linear product forma-
tion with respect to time which was ultimately used to estimate Cobalamin independent Methionine
Synthase concentrations. The results of this are present in section 3.6.6.
2.8
Free amino acid extraction
Samples prepared to analyse the free methionine present in the pea-tempeh was done in collaoration
with one of the project supervisors (N. Jung). The extract supernatant prepared is based on the proce-
dure mentioned in section 2.2 with the buffer used for free amino acid extraction(0.8 % trichloroacetic
acid 14 % ethanol buffer). The extract supernatant obtained was diluted to 1/5 times in 0.05 mM nor-
valine solution (Internal standard). The diluted samples was prepared according to the waters AccQ kit
[45]. However, two key modifications were made: 1) the samples were prepared in PCR tubes, before
being transferred into a HPLC vial. 2) For the unincoculated samples of 0hrs,24hrs and 48 hrs half the
20
==PAGE:26==
2.9
Statistical Tools used
volumes stated in the manual were used. The quantification of free methionine was done by a stan-
dard curve. The standard curve consisted of pierce amino acid standard H [46] with added cysteic acid,
methionine sulfone and norvaline diluted in water. After the dilutions were prepared and other prepa-
rations were done as per the AccQ user manual standard curve, the standard curve was prepared with
samples having methionine concentrations between 0.1 and 8 µM. HPLC-MS based methionine quan-
tifications were conducted by Jesper Holck (a collaborator from the department) based on the AccQ
user manual and as described by [47] with unpublished modifications. The methionine amounts were
normalized based on the internal standard and calculated with a standard curve fig. 54. The methionine
area calculated in the standard curve was done using a Polynomial fit by Jesper.
2.9
Statistical Tools used
In order to analyse the results obtained from the different experiments performed three main statis-
tical tools were used: 1) The student’s T Test on microsoft excel with the threshold p value of 0.05 to
reject the null hypothesis 2) One way ANOVA test performed on Python using the function f_oneway
from the scipy.stats library. 3) Tukey Kramer HSD test using the pairwise _tukeyhsd function from the
statsmodels.stats.multicomp library. The code used to perform these statistical tests are attached to
the Appendix section (section 6.4).
21
==PAGE:27==
3
Results
3.1
Finding the optimum dilution range for the DNS assay
The dilutions mentioned in section 2.3.1 were subjected to the DNS assay based on the procedure de-
scribed in section 2.3 except that the reaction volumes taken have been scaled down to 100 µL from
200µL. This is because the volume of the extract supernatant generated was not enough to generate
all the dilutions that were tested from one single extraction. The dilutions mentioned are the extract
dilutions before adding the extract to the DNS reaction wells (section 2.3.1). Two extract supernatant
solutions (Extract 1) and (Extract 2) were prepared from the same biological replicate of the fermenta-
tion based on the extraction process mentioned in section 2.2 and the assay was performed in triplicates
with the following results:
Figure 9: Absorbance signal measured at 540nm for the DNS reaction for different dilutions of the extract
supernatant. Extract1-2 are extract supernatants obtained from the same fermentation. The dilutions tested
are 1:10, 1:5, 1:2 and pure extract supernatant. Respective dilutions between the extract 1 and extract 2 are
not significantly different from each other based on T tests at the 0.05 level
22
==PAGE:28==
3.2
DNS assay on Multiple extractions
Figure 10: Standard curve obtained for Glucose solution with concentrations varing from 0 g/l to 2 g/l. The
absorbance of the 0g/l glucose solution was subtracted from all values and the trendline was forced through 0
Based on the Absorbance signals received it can be observed that the absorbance(540nm) generated by
the DNS reaction of the pure extract exceeds the values provided by the standard curve. Hence the pure
extract needs to be diluted before subjecting it to the DNS reaction. The dilution in between 1:5 and
1:2, produces signals that are in the readable and reliable range of the spectrophotometer and are also
represented by the standard curve values. Hence the ideal dilution range for the extract is considered to
be between 1:5 and 1:2. Accordingly, the glucose concentrations used to prepare the standard curve
were changed to best represent the dilution range (section 2.3.1).The extract supernatants obtained
from the same fermentation (Extract 1 and Extract 2) were also compared to each other using the T
Test at the 0.05 level for every dilution. From the T tests performed, the absorbance values generated by
the different dilutions of Extract 1 and Extract 2 were statistically identical to each other. This indirectly
hints towards the uniformity produced from the extraction process.
3.2
DNS assay on Multiple extractions
A DNS assay was performed on 1:5 dilutions of 6 different extracts obtained from the same fermenta-
tion mix as described in section 2.3.2. The 1:5 dilution here is the extract concentration before being
added to the DNS reaction wells. The absorbance values obtained for the DNS reaction of the extract
supernatants at 540 nm is given below.
23
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 11: Absorbance signal measured at 540nm for the DNS reaction of Extract 1-6 obtained from the same
fermentation. The absorbance values obtained are statistically identical to each other based on an ANOVA test
at the 0.05 level.
An ANOVA test was performed at the 0.05 level, on the absorbance values generated by the DNS re-
actions of extract 1-6. Based on the ANOVA test, the absorbance values generated by the extracts are
statistically identical to each other. This indirectly tells us that the extraction process (section 2.2) pro-
duces uniform extracts as far as the reducing ends present are concerned. It it important to note the
absorbance values obtained are not calculated upto the original concentration of the extract. However,
the main objective of the experiment was only to explore uniformity of the extraction.
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
As mentioned in section 2.4, the methionine synthase assay used to measure the concentration of the
methionine synthase in the extract needs to be optimised in order to find out the ideal reaction parame-
ters to have the most accurate and meaningful measurements as possible. The following are the results
for the experiments performed to optimize the reaction conditions as mentioned in section 2.4.1.
3.3.1
Experiments to obtain ideal reaction times (Experiment 1 & 2)
The experiments 1, 2 in section 2.4.1 are used to find out the ideal reaction times in order to obtain the
highest possible signal generated by the formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3.
24
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Experiment 1 saw a small increase in absorbance signal while comparing the absorbance signals from
the reactions at 0 mins to 20 mins. The difference in absorbance signal generated by the extract be-
tween the 0 min reaction and the 20 min reaction was 0.0086 which could be interpreted as an increase
in signal due to the methionine synthase reaction. Since the increase in is in the third digit after the
decimal point, the reactions are conducted at higher time points to see if the trend of observing an
increasing signal over time continues which is what is observed in Experiment 2 as shown in the below
figure (fig. 12). The differences between the absorbance signals generated by the extracts and the de-
natured extracts(background) are as follows for 0, 40 and 60 mins respectively. -0.0026, 0.017, 0.0143.
T tests were performed comparing the signal generated by the extract and the denatured extract at
0,40 and 60 mins at the 0.05 level. The p values suggest that the differences between the signal from
the extract and the background is statistically significant for 40 and 60 mins but is statistically insignif-
icant for the 0 min reaction. This might suggest that the signals obtained for the extract at 40 and 60
mins is from the the formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3. From the fig. 12, there is an increasing trend
in the signal generated by the extracts. However, the signals generated by the denatured extracts are
quite high in comparison to the extract. The possible reasons for this is explored in section 3.3.3. The
difference between the absorbance of extracts and the denatured extracts(signal related to product
formation) don’t show a growing difference across the 3 different time points(-0.0026, 0.017, 0.0143
for 0,40 and 60 mins). This could be due to the variations between the signal generated by the dena-
tured extracts across each time point. However, the coefficient of variance (COV%) calculated between
the denatured extract signals across 0,40 and 60 mins is only 2.57% (COV %). This is potentially hinting
towards a possibility that there is inherently low enzyme concentrations present in the extract. The
conclusion from the experiment however is that the highest possible signal is obtained at 60 mins.
25
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 12: Absorbance signals measured for reactions at 0,40 and 60 mins (Experiment 2). Extract represents
the assay with the intact enzyme. Denatured extract contains heat inactivated enzyme.
3.3.2
Experiments to find the ideal extract volume and concentration(Experiment 3 & 4)
Experiment 1 and experiment 2 help in determining the time at which the highest signal is generated
for the extract. However the difference between the signal generated by the extract and the denatured
extract was observed to be very small. The volume of the extract supernatant used in these experiments
was 60µL in a total reaction volume of 200µL. In experiment 3 and experiment 4, different volumes and
concentrations of extract supernatant are added to the reaction wells maintaing the same total reaction
volume (200µL). The changes that occur in the signal generatedby the extractand the denatured extract
from the different volumes and concentrations are given below.
Experiment 3 compares the signal generated at 0 mins and 60 mins for an increased extract volume
in the reaction wells, from 60 µL in experiment 1 and 2 to 100µL in Experiment 3 section 2.4.1. The
absorbance signal obtained for these experiments are shown below.
26
==PAGE:32==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 13: Absorbance signals obtained at 0 and 60 mins (Experiment 3).Extract represents the assay with the
intact enzyme. Denatured extract contains heat inactivated enzyme.
The difference in absorbance between the extracts and the denatured extracts at 0 mins and 60 mins is
0.0045 0.0432 respectively. The difference in absorbance between the extract and denatured extract
signals (Formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3) at 60 mins is much higher than the difference observed in
experiment 1 at 60 mins (0.0143). T tests were performed comparing the signals from the extract and
the denatured extract at 0 and 60 mins at the 0.05 level. Based on the T tests, the signal generated by
the extract and the denatured extract at 60 mins are statistically different and at 0 mins are statistically
identical. In order to closely compare different volumes and concentrations, another experiment (Ex-
periment 4 from section 2.4.1) is conducted where reaction wells contain 60µL of extract denoted by
Extract(60µL) , 100µL of extract denoted by Extract(100µL) and 100 µL of extract with twice the extract
concentration as previous two reaction wells, denoted by Extract(2x) as mentioned in section 2.4.1 in
section 2.4.1. All the reaction wells in experiment 4 consist of a total reaction volume of 200µL. The
methionine synthase assay was conducted at 60 mins for the three different conditions mentioned.
The results for this experiment is given below.
27
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 14: Absorbance signals(350nm) obtained at 60 mins for the methionine synthase assay (Experiment 4).
Extract(60µL) and Extract(100µL) represents the reaction wells with 60µL and 100µL of extract supernatant.
Extract(2x) represents reaction wells that consist of 100µL of extract supernatant with two times the stock
concentration. Extract represents the assay with the intact enzyme. Denatured extract contains the heat
inactivated enzyme.
From the results it can be seen that with increasing extract content in the reaction wells (either by in-
creasing extract volume or increasing stock concentration), the absorbance signal measured increases.
However, this increase is also observed for the signals generated by the denatured extract . The dif-
ference between the signal generated by the extract and the signal generated by the denatured ex-
tract is 0.033 for Extract(60µL), 0.0295 for Extract (100µL) and 0.0324 for Extract(2x). As the content
of extract supernatant increases in the reaction wells, the concentration of the proteins present in it
also increases since the extracts are obtained from the same homogenized fermentation mixture. This
means that the methionine synthase that is present in the reaction wells will also increase in concen-
tration. However, difference in absorbance (signal developed from product formation) between the
different extract volumes and concentration does not reflect this. One reason for this could be that
since the signal generated by the denatured extract is also increasing with the increasing extract su-
pernatant, the absorbance signal contributed by the methionine synthase reaction is getting covered
up by the high signal generated by the background. The coefficient of variance calculated between
the signals generated by the background for Extract(60µL), Extract(100µL) and Extract(2x) is 18.143 %.
This could be due to denaturing of the extract supernatant itself since the denatured extract solution
turns more turbid as the denatured proteins become insoluble in the solution. The increased turbidity
might interfere with the absorbance signal measured in the spectrophotometer in the final step of the
assay(fig. 8). The high signal generated by the denatured extract solution (relative to the extract) can
28
==PAGE:34==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
also be observed in the results obtained for experiment 2 in fig. 12. Due to this, experiments were con-
ducted to check if better difference in signals were obtained by substituting the use of the denatured
extract as a background with controls that did not contain L-HCY in the reaction mixture.
3.3.3
Experiments to find out the ideal controls(Experiment 5 & 6)
Experiment 5 is conducted with the same conditions as the previous experiment (Experiment 4) as
seen in section 2.4.1 except for the controls in the experiment. The control used in this experiment
is a reaction mix that does not contain L-HCY as mentioned in section 2.4.1. The absorbance signal
generated by the extract and by the control without L-HCY is given below
Figure 15: Absorbance signals(350nm) obtained at 60 mins for the methionine synthase assay (Experiment 5).
Extract(60µL) and Extract(100µL) represents the reaction wells with 60µL and 100µL of extract supernatant.
Extract(2x) represents reaction wells that consist of 100µL of extract supernatant with two times the stock
concentration. Control here is the reaction mix without L-HCY
A similar trend is observed in comparison to the previous experiment (Experiment 4) where the signal
generated by the control is increasing. The increase in signal generated by the control could be due to
the increasing extract concentration in the reaction wells and may not be related to the type of control
used for the reaction. The coefficient of variance(COV%) obtained between the signals generated by
the control without L-HCY is 18.61%, which is similar to the COV% obtained between the controls of
Experiment 4. However, the difference between the absorbance signal of the extract and the control is
29
==PAGE:35==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
more pronounced when using the controls without L-HCY. The below figure fig. 16 shows the difference
between the signal generated by the extract and the control (signal generated by the Methionine syn-
thase reaction). The signal generated is 0.0423 for Extract(60µL), 0.0509 for Extract(100µL) and 0.0557
for Extract(2x). While there is an increase in the signal contributed by the methionine synthase, it is
not in proportion to the increasing extract concentration and volume.
Figure 16: Difference in Absorbance between Extract and control(Experiment 5).Extract(60µL) and
Extract(100µL) represents the reaction wells with 60µL and 100µL of extract supernatant. Extract(2x)
represents reaction wells that consist of 100µL of extract supernatant with two times the stock concentration.
Although the trend of the results obtained from Experiment 4 and Experiment 5 are similar, using the
control without L-HCY shows a higher separation (difference) between the signal generated by the
extract and the control.
The results obtained in Experiment 2 of section 3.3.1 shows that the difference in absorbance between
the extract and the denatured extract does not follow a linear increase. This could be due to the high
signals generated by the background. This experiment was repeated with the same conditions except
for the controls (Experiment 6 in section 2.4.1) with an additional time point at 20 mins. Additionally,
the extract supernatant used is from a different batch of fermentation. The fermentation used to ob-
tain extracts in experiment 6 is from a biological replicate of a 72 hour Rhizopus oryzae fermentation
(section 3.3.4). The denatured extract is replaced by the control without L-HCY. The absorbance signals
generated by the extract and the control is given in the figure below (fig. 17).
30
==PAGE:36==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 17: Absorbance signal measured for the Extract and the Control at 0,20,40 and 60 mins(Experiment 6).
Extract represents the reaction wells where the methionine synthase reactions takes place. Control here is the
reaction wells without L-HCY
The absorbance signal generated by the controls are not high in the initial time points to generate a
negative difference as observed with the controls in experiment 2. Another parameter to note between
the two backgrounds is Coefficient of Variance(COV%), which is 2.57% for experiment 2 and 1.91%
for experiment 6. It is important to note however that this reduction is by a small margin and it is
unclear if the reduction in COV% is due to the fact these variations were observed in two different
experiments or if the reduction in COV% is observed by changing the controls. An ANOVA test was
performed comparing the signals generated by the control at 0, 20, 40 and 60 mins at the 0.05 level.
The results from the ANOVA suggests that the signal generated by the control are statistically identical
to each other. The difference between the signal generated by the Extract and the control is following
a linear increase across increasing time points as shown below (fig. 18) as the trendline generated has
a good fit (R2 of 0.9937) to the points plotted.
31
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 18: Absorbance signal measured for the Extract and the Control (Experiment 6).The difference in
absorbance here is the difference obtained between the signal generated from the extract and the control from
fig. 17. The equation and the R2 value present in the figure is that of a linear trendline that is fit to the data.
3.3.4
Experiments to define the linear range (Experiment 7, 8 & 9)
Experiment 7,8 and 9 focuses on inspecting the linearity observed in experiment 6 in greater detail.
The extract supernatants used in these experiments are from biological replicates of 72 hour Rhizopus
oryzae fermentations. Biological replicates of the fermentations used are referred to as Replicate 1,
Replicate 2 and Replicate 3. The results obtained from experiment 6 is from Replicate 1. Experiment
7 (similar to experiment 6) is performed with the 3 replicates with an intention to see if the previous
linearity observed is reproducable. The below figures, fig. 19, fig. 20 and fig. 21 show the Absorbance
values generated by the reaction wells with extract and the controls.
32
==PAGE:38==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 19: Absorbance signal measured at 350nm for the extract and the Control over 0,20,40 and 60 mins for
Replicate 1 (Experiment 7). Extract represents the reaction wells where the methionine synthase reactions
takes place. Control here is the reaction wells without L-HCY
Figure 20: Absorbance signal measured for the Extract and the Control over 0,20,40 and 60 mins for Replicate
2(Experiment 7). Extract represents the reaction wells where the methionine synthase reactions takes place.
Control here is the reaction wells without L-HCY
33
==PAGE:39==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 21: Absorbance signal measured for the Extract and the Control over 0,20,40 and 60 mins for Replicate
3(Experiment 7). Extract represents the reaction wells where the methionine synthase reactions takes place.
Control here is the reaction wells without L-HCY
Based on the figures, a conclusion can be made that the signal of the reaction well where the methion-
ine synthase assay takes place (Extract) progressively increases with time, except for that of Replicate 2
over 40 and 60 mins. The control values seem to fluctuate with all 3 replicates. An ANOVA Analysis was
preformed on the signals generated by the controls at 0,20,40 and 60 mins for all 3 replicates at the
0.05 level. Based on the ANOVA tests, the controls for replicate 1 are statistically identical over each
time point but the controls for replicate 2 and 3 are not. Upon inspecting the experimental procedure,
no clear reason can be provided for the statistical difference of the controls for replicate 2 and 3. The
coefficient of variance (COV%) between the signals generated by the control at 0,20,40 and 60 mins are
2.8% 2.81% 2.11% for replicate 1 to 3 respectively. The difference between the absorbance signals of
the extract and the control at each time point is calculated for each replicate and is presented in fig. 22.
Despite the observed disturbance in the signal, the R2 values for a linear fit are 0.9958, 0.8978 and
0.862 for the Replicates 1,2 and 3. While the best fit is obtained for Replicate 1, the R2 values obtained
for Replicate 2 and Replicate 3 still depict a linear trend. It must also be noted that the trendlines were
only obtained using 4 points and that measuring more points between 0 and 60 mins will give more
clarity towards the observed linear trend. The linear effect has also not be explored beyond the 60 min
time point, which is something the next experiment(experiment 8 from section 2.4.1) focuses on.
34
==PAGE:40==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 22: Difference between the Absorbance Signal generated by the extract and the controls for each
replicate over time (Experiment 7). Replicate1-3 here are biological replicates of a Rhizopus oryzae
fermentation. Difference in absorbance is obtained from the signals presented in fig. 19, fig. 20, fig. 21 for
replicates 1-3 respectively
Experiment 8 was conducted with the aim of running the methionine synthase assay over the 60 mins
time point to observe for a possible linear rise and a greater signal seperation. In Experiment 8, the
methionine synthase assay was conducted over 0 hours, 1 hour, 1.5 hours and 2 hours. The methionine
synthase assay was performed using 2 biological replicates (Replicate 1 and Replicate 2) the same as
the ones used in Experiment 7. The absorbance signals observed for both replicates in fig. 23 and fig. 24
show that after the 1 hour mark there is not a significant increase in the absorbance signal generated by
the extract where the methionine synthase reaction takes place. ANOVA tests were performed for the
signals generated by the extract at 1,1.5 and 2 hours for both replicates at the 0.05 level. The results
from the ANOVA test suggest that increase in absorbance after 1 hour is statistically insignificant. This
suggests that after the 1 hour time point, the absorbance signals generated by the extract are no longer
linear.
35
==PAGE:41==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 23: Absorbance signal measured for the Extract and the Control over 0,1,1.5 and 2 hours for Replicate
1(Experiment 8).Extract represents the reaction wells where the Methionine Synthase reactions takes place.
Control here is the reaction wells without L-HCY
Figure 24: Absorbance signal measured for the Extract and the Control over 0,1,1.5 and 2 hours for Replicate
2(Experiment 8).Extract represents the reaction wells where the Methionine Synthase reactions takes place.
Control here is the reaction wells without L-HCY
The non linearity or the plateauing in the absorbance signal can also be observed while plotting the
absorbance difference between the methioine synthase reaction(Extract) and the controls. However
the linear fits generated show a decent fit (R2 value of 0.93 and 0.85 for replicate 1 and 2). This may
be because the linear trendline is established for only 4 points.
36
==PAGE:42==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 25: Difference between the Absorbance Signal generated by the reaction and the controls for each
replicate over 0,1,1.5 and 2 hours (Experiment 8). Difference in absorbance is obtained from the signals
presented in fig. 23 and fig. 24 for replicate 1 and 2 respectively.
This leads to exploring more time points within 60 mins to explore and solidify the linear rise in the ab-
sorbance signals generated by the methionine synthase reaction. Experiment 9 is conducted similarly
to Experiment 7 and 8 with the difference being that Experiment 9 was conducted with the intention
of adding more time points between 0 and 60 mins. The time points at which the methionine synthase
assay was conducted for experiment 9 was 0,20,30,40,50 and 60 mins respectively for 3 different bi-
ological replicates (Replicate 1, Replicate 2 and Replicate 3), the same as in experiment 7 and 8. The
absorbance values for the extract and the controls along with the absorbance difference between the
Extract and the Control are given by the figures below.
37
==PAGE:43==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
(a) Absorbance values for the Extract and the
Control
(b) Difference in absorbance
Figure 26: (a)The absorbance values at 350nm for the Extract and the Control over each time point along with
the difference in absorbance over time for Replicate 1.(b) Difference in absorbance between the extract and the
control over time for replicate 1. The time points at which the assay takes place is 0,20,30,40,50 and 60 mins.
Extract represents the reaction wells where the methionine synthase reactions takes place. Control here is the
reaction wells without L-HCY
(a) Absorbance values for the Extract and the
Control
(b) Difference in absorbance
Figure 27: (a)The absorbance values at 350nm for the Extract and the Control over each time point along with
the difference in absorbance over time for Replicate 2.(b) Difference in absorbance between the extract and the
control over time for replicate 2. The time points at which the assay takes place is 0,20,30,40,50 and 60 mins.
Extract represents the reaction wells where the methionine synthase reactions takes place. Control here is the
reaction wells without L-HCY
38
==PAGE:44==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
(a) Absorbance values for the Extract and the
Control
(b) Difference in absorbance
Figure 28: (a)The absorbance values at 350nm for the Extract and the Control over each time point along with
the difference in absorbance over time for Replicate 3.(b) Difference in absorbance between the extract and the
control over time for replicate 3. The time points at which the assay takes place is 0,20,30,40,50 and 60 mins.
Extract represents the reaction wells where the methionine synthase reactions takes place. Control here is the
reaction wells without L-HCY
Based on the figures it seems that there is a numerical increase in the absorbance signal of the extract.
However the coefficient of variance(COV%) between the absorbance values of the extract signal from
20 mins to 60 mins are 1.913 % 1.69% and 2.382 % for Replicate 1,2 and 3 respectively. ANOVA tests
were performed between the signals generated by the extract at 0,20,30,40,50 and 60 mins for all 3
replicates. Based on the ANOVA tests, The signals generated by the extract of replicate 1 are statistically
different. A further analysis was performed using the Tukey HSD test which suggested that there was
a statistical difference only when comparing the signal at 0 mins and that the rest of the signals were
statistically identical. The adjusted p-values obtained from the Tukey HSD test are present in table 13.
There was no statistical difference observed between the signals generated by the extract for replicate
2 based on the ANOVA test. From the ANOVA test, the signals generated by the extract for replicate
3 are statistically different. From a further Tukey HSD test, a statistical difference was only observed
between the signals at 0 and 50 mins, 0 and 60 mins and 30 and 60 mins (table 14). The coefficient of
variance(COV%) for the signal generated by the control across at 0,20,30,40,50 and 60 mins are 3.56%
3.89% 3.74% for replicates 1,2 and 3. ANOVA tests were also performed on the signals generated by
the control at 0,20,30,40,50 and 60 mins for each replicate at the 0.05 level. From the ANOVA tests,
the signals generated by the control was statistically different for all 3 replicates. However, from the
adjusted p values obtained by performing the Tukey HSD tests (table 15, table 16 and table 17) the
only signal statistically different from the rest is that of the 0 min control signal. This can also be seen
from the absorbance signals present in the above figures. The linear trendline for the difference in
39
==PAGE:45==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
absorbance also has a poor fit when compared to the R2 values of the previous experiments. Based
on the coefficient of variance observed between the signals, the ANOVA tests and the Tukey HSD tests,
both for the extract and the control, it can be said that the signal generated from the product formation
is very less in this experiment. The reason for the very poor signal is not certain. One plausible rea-
son could be that the homogenous mixture of the fermentation taken to prepare the extract has less
Methionine synthase. However, for the extracts generated from same fermentations, a better signal
seperation was observed in the previous experiments (experiment 7 and 6).
3.3.5
Experiment to check for Inhibition
An experiment was additionally carried out to check if the extract supernatant consists of any inhibitory
substance. The experiment to test for inhibition is based on the procedure described in section 2.4.1.
The extract supernatant consists of many other soluble proteins and other compounds apart from the
methionine synthase which is being studied. This could lead to a possible inhibitory interaction that
could explain the low absorbance signal contributed by the methionine synthase reactions measured
from the previous experiments. The figure below (fig. 29) consists of the absorbance signals measured
for the reaction samples and the controls for the methionine synthase assay at 60 mins.
Figure 29: Absorbance values measured at 350 nm for the methionine synthase assay at 60 mins for the
reaction samples along with the Controls. Pure Enzyme here refers to purified methionine synthase from
Aspergillus sojae. Extract is taken from a 72 hour Rhizopus oryzae fermentation
The reaction samples here consisted of the entire reaction mix along with a combination of Extract
40
==PAGE:46==
3.3
Methionine Synthase Assay
and pure Methionine Synthase obtained from Aspergillus sojae refered to as Pure Enzyme in the figure
fig. 29. The pure enzyme was added to the reaction wells to observe if there is any particular sub-
stance present in the extract supernatant that will inhibit the activity of the pure enzyme. In order to
observe if the extract supernatant had any effect on the absorbance signal generated by the action of
the pure enzyme, the difference in absorbance values between the reaction samples and the control
was calculated as shown in the figure below (fig. 30). In the case that the extract supernatant contains
any inhibitory substance, the difference in absorbance between the reaction samples and the control
for the reaction wells where only pure enzyme was subjected to the assay should be more than the
difference in absorbance, where the reaction samples consist of the pure enzyme and the extract su-
pernatant. However, from the fig. 30, this is not the case. The difference in absorbance values for the
reaction wells with 60µL extract + Pure Enzyme (0.069) and 30µL + Pure Enzyme (0.072) is higher than
the difference in absorbance values observed for the reaction wells with pure enzyme (0.054). The
higher values obtained for the reaction wells with 60µL extract + Pure Enzyme and 30µL + Pure Enzyme
suggests that both the pure enzyme added and the methionine synthase present in the extract from
the fermentation is active. The assay was also performed on reaction wells with 60µL denatured extract
+ pure enzyme which produced a difference in absorbance of 0.048 which is lower than reaction wells
with both the extract and the pure enzyme. A T Test performed at the 0.05 level on the differences
in absorbance obtained for the 60µL denatured extract + pure enzyme and the pure enzyme which
suggests that the values obtained for both reaction conditions are statistically different. Although it is
worth taking into the consideration that the differences between the means (0.048 & 0.054 respec-
tively) is only 0.005 which could be used as an argument to suggest that values compared are very
similar to each other. Another T Test performed at the 0.05 level between the difference in absorbance
values obtained for the 60µL extract + Pure Enzyme and 30µL extract + Pure Enzyme suggests that both
groups are statistically similar to each other hinting that the difference in methionine synthase present
in 30µL and 60µL of extract is insignificant.
41
==PAGE:47==
3.4
Comparing Peas and Tempeh
Figure 30: The difference between the Absorbance signals obtained for the reaction samples and the control.
The reaction samples consist of the entire reaction mix and the Controls are the reaction mix without L-HCY.
Pure Enzyme here refers to purified Methionine Synthase from Aspergillus sojae. Extract is taken from a 72
hour Rhizopus oryzae fermentation
From the fig. 30 a conclusion can be made that the low absorbance values generated from the methio-
nine synthase assays in the previous experiments could be due to inherently low methionine synthase
concentration present in the extract supernatants rather than the presence of a potential inhibitor
atleast within the time frame of 60 mins for the methionine synthase assay. It is also worth noting that
the extract volumes taken are not the ideal extract volume(100µL) decided based on the experiments
from section 3.3.2.
3.4
Comparing Peas and Tempeh
The experiments performed to compare the peas with the pea-tempeh fermentations are based on sec-
tion 2.5. The pea-tempeh fermentations used in this experiment are 72 hour Rhizopus oryzae fermen-
tations. In the below figure (fig. 31), the absorbance values obtained for the methionine synthase as-
say comparing the peas(three replicates) and pea-tempeh fermentations(three replicates) are present.
The absorbance values obtained are from running the assay at 60 mins for the extract supernatants
and controls without L-HCY for the peas and the pea-tempeh. The absorbance signals generated by
the extract and the control are different for the tempeh and the peas although they are signals ob-
tained from the same reaction time (60mins). This is because, the fermentation mix used to obtain the
extract is different for the peas and the tempeh. In order to compare the peas and the pea-tempeh in
42
==PAGE:48==
3.4
Comparing Peas and Tempeh
the context of the methionine synthase assay, the difference between the absorbance signal generated
by the extract and control is inspected. The difference in absorbance signal between the extract and
the control for the Tempeh 1-3 are 0.025,0.020,0.033 respectively and the difference in absorbance
values for the Peas 1-3 are -0.0016, 0.004, 0.001 respectively. The values are noticeably higher for the
pea-tempeh when compared to the peas. This is also observed by performing T Tests at the 0.05 level,
comparing the signal generated by the extract and control for the three replicates of the pea-tempeh
and the peas. Based on the T-tests, the difference observed between the extract and control signals is
statistically significant for all three replicates of the pea-tempeh. However, the difference between the
extract and control signals for the peas is statistically insignificant for all three replicates. This suggests
that the difference in absorbance observed can be correlated to the formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3
as described in section 1.2.
Figure 31: Absorbance signal measured for the Extract and the Control at 60 mins for the Peas and the Tempeh.
Tempeh 1-3 represents the Biological replicates of 72 hour Pea-Tempeh fermentations and Peas 1-3 represents
the extract taken from yellow peas (Pissum sativum)
A DNS assay was also carried out based on the procedure in section 2.3 to compare the reducing ends
present in the pea-tempeh fermentations and the peas. The results of this experiment are present
in the figure below (fig. 32).The standard curve used to obtain the reducing ends in terms of glucose
equivalents are present in section 6.1 (fig. 45). From the figure below a difference can be observed
between the reducing ends present in the peas and the pea-tempeh fermentations. The reducing ends
measured in Tempeh 1-3 are 0.151, 0.170, 0.304 g/L repsentively. The reducing ends measured in
Peas1-3 are 0.009, 0.012 and 0.012 g/L respectively.
43
==PAGE:49==
3.5
Cobalamin Dependent Methionine Synthase Assay
Figure 32: Reducing ends present in the extract supernatant obtained from peas and pea-tempeh expressed in
terms of glucose equivalent in g/L. The reducing ends present are obtained from a DNS assay. Tempeh 1-3
represents the Biological replicates of a 72 hour Rhizopus oryzae Pea-Tempeh fermentation and Peas 1-3
represents yellow peas (Pissum sativum)
An ANOVA test was performed at the 0.05 level, comparing the reducing ends obtained from the DNS
assay for the different peas and pea-tempeh samples. Based on the ANOVA test, the reducing ends
present are statistically different for the samples. A further Tukey Kramer HSD test was also carried
out to compare the reducing ends generated from each sample, the results of which are in the table
(table 12). From the adjusted p-values obtained by comparing the Absorbance from the DNS, it can
be concluded that the reducing ends present in the peas and the pea-tempeh are statistically different
from each other and that the reducing ends present in the peas are statistically identical to each other.
Based on the reducing ends present in pea-tempeh samples, Tempeh 1 and Tempeh 2 are statistically
identical to each other but are statistically different from Tempeh 3 suggesting variation amongst the
biological replicates.
3.5
Cobalamin Dependent Methionine Synthase Assay
Based on the procedure mentioned in section 2.6, the extract supernatant obtained from a 72 hour
Rhizopus oryzae fermentation was subjected to the cobalamin dependent methionine synthase assay,
the results for which are in the figure below (fig. 33). The fig. 33 consists of the absorbance values
measured for the cobalamin dependent methionine synthase assay performed for 60 mins. The signals
generated by the extract supernatant was compared to the signal generated by denatured extracts
which acted as a background (similar to section 3.3.1 ). The extract supernatants were subjected to
44
==PAGE:50==
3.5
Cobalamin Dependent Methionine Synthase Assay
the assay at different dilutions and volumes. Extract(60µL) represents the absorbance signal generated
when 60µL of the extract supernatant is added to the reaction well. Extract(100µL) represents the
absorbance signal generated when 100µL of the extract supernatant is added to the reaction. Extract
(2x) represents the absorbance signal generated when 100µL of the extract supernatant two times the
concentration used in the previous 2 conditions is added to the reaction well (section 2.4.1).
Figure 33: Absorbance signal measured for the cobalamin dependent methionine synthase assay at 350nm.
Extract(60µL), Extract(100µL) and Extract (2x) represents reaction wells containing 60µL of extract supernatant,
100µL of extract supernatant and 100µL of Extract supernatant two times the stock concentration. Denatured
extract was used as a background for the assay.
T tests were performed at the 0.05 level comparing the absorbance signal obtained from the dena-
tured extract and the extract for each dilution (Extract(60µL),Extract(100µL) and Extract (2x) respec-
tively).From the T tests, a statistically significant difference was observed between the absorbance val-
ues generated by the denatured extract and the extract for Extract(60µL),Extract(100µL), but no statis-
tically significant difference was observed between the absorbance values generated by the denatured
extract and the extract for Extract(2x). A difference observed for Extract(60µL),Extract(100µL) suggests
that there might be a possible signal that is contributed by the final product formation, indicating that
the cobalamin dependent methionine synthase is active. However, this is contradicted by the T test re-
sults for the differences observed for Extract(2x). Since each extract dilution was taken from the same
fermentation mix, the results should be indicating a similar result for all dilutions suggesting that the
experiment provides inconclusive results.
45
==PAGE:51==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
3.6
Time Course Experiments
The results for the DNS assay performed based on the procedure mentioned in section 2.3, on the
pea-tempeh fermentations are given below based for each time point of the fermentation. The extract
supernatant for each biological replicate of the fermentations are subjected to the DNS assay in trip-
licates. The extract supernatants of each fermentation subjected to the DNS assay are represented as
follows: Strain - Time Duration - Replicate Number. The Strain is denoted by A for Aspergillus oryzae ,
R for Rhizopus oryzae and U for Uninoculated Samples. The Time Duration is represented by 0,24,48
and 72 for 0 hours, 24 hours, 48 hours and 72 hours respectively. The Replicate Number is denoted
by 1-4 accordingly. The number of reducing ends obtained from the DNS assay are equated to the
fermentation biomass by representing the reducing ends as glucose equivalent(mg)/fermentation(g).
This is obtained by first, correlating the signal from the DNS reaction of the samples to the standard
curve from which the glucose equivalent(g/l) is obtained. The glucose equivalent is then multiplied by
the total volume of the buffer added to obtain the extract supernatant(15 x the weight of the homoge-
nous mixture in µL) giving the glucose equivalent in g (converted to mg). The glucose equivalent(mg)
is then divided by the weight of the homogenous mixture(fermentation) used to prepare the extract
supernatant giving the glucose equivalent (mg)/fermentation(g). The standard curves used to obtain
the glucose equivalent of the reducing ends is present in section 6.1 (fig. 46, fig. 47, fig. 48 and fig. 49)
3.6.1
0 hours
The figure below (fig. 34) represents the reducing ends present in the extract supernatant obtained
from the 0 hour fermentation samples subjected to the DNS assay. The extract supernatant was diluted
to 40% concentration(40 µL of extract supernatant along with 60µL of Milli-Q water) before subjecting
it to the assay.
46
==PAGE:52==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Figure 34: Glucose equivalent(g/L) of the reducing ends that reacted with the DNS solution (0 hours).The x-axis
in the figure contains the labels for the fermentation samples that were incubated for 0 hours where A,R
represents the strain used for the fermentation (Aspergillus, Rhizopus) and U represents Un-inoculated
samples. Numbers 1-4 here represent replicates. The results displayed are calculated up to the original
concentration of the extract supernatant
From the glucose equivalent (g/l) obtained for the reducing ends, the reducing ends present are rep-
resented per weight of the fermentation biomass in terms of glucose equivalent(mg)/Fermentation(g)
as shown in the table below. The below table also shows the coefficient of variance (COV %) measured
between the triplicates of the extract supernatant subjected to the DNS assay.
Fermentations
Glucose equivalent (mg)/Fermentaion(g)
COV
A-0-1
1.579
3.731
A-0-2
1.666
5.076
A-0-3
1.453
3.005
A-0-4
1.466
3.828
R-0-1
1.529
3.573
R-0-2
1.579
3.646
R-0-3
1.666
3.270
R-0-4
1.804
2.020
U-0-1
1.366
1.309
U-0-2
1.090
0.517
U-0-3
1.190
1.770
Table 2: Glucose equivalent (mg) per gram of the Fermentation mix for each Fermentation at 0 hours. A,R
represents the strain used for the fermentation (Aspergillus oryzae, Rhizopus oryzae) and U represents
Un-inoculated samples. Numbers 1-4 here represent replicates.
Multiple T Tests were conducted at the 0.05 level, between the mean values of the Glucose equiva-
lent(mg)/Fermentation(g)(Column 2 from the table table 2) to compare the strains with each other
as well as the unincoluated samples. Each set compared consisted of the mean values obtained for
the biological replicates. When comparing the values obtained for Rhizopus oryzae(R-0-1 to R-0-4)
47
==PAGE:53==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
and Aspergillus oryzae(A-0-1 to A-0-4), no statistically significant difference was found. There was
also no statistically significant difference found while comparing the uninoculated samples with the
Aspergillus oryzae samples. But there was a statistically significant difference obtained when compar-
ing the uninoculated samples and the Rhizopus oryzae samples. The overall coefficient of variance
(COV%) observed for all the mean values obtained is 14.1%.
3.6.2
24 hours
The following figure (fig. 35 ) represents the reducing ends in glucose equivalent(g/l) present in 24 hour
Aspergillus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae fermentations along with the uninoculated controls. The DNS
assay was performed based on the procedure mentioned in section 2.3 with an extract supernatant
diluted to 40% (40 µL of extract supernatant along with 60µL of MiliQ water). This dilution is the extract
concentration before adding it to the reaction wells.
Figure 35: Glucose equivalent(g/L) of the reducing ends that reacted with the DNS solution (24 hours).The
x-axis in the figure contains the labels for the fermentation samples that were incubated for 24 hours where A,R
represents the strain used for the fermentation (Aspergillus oryzae, Rhizopus oryzae) and U represents
Un-inoculated samples. Numbers 1-4 here represent replicates. The results displayed are calculated up to the
original concentration of the extract supernatant
The table below (table 3) contains the average values of the glucose equivalent obtained for the reduc-
ing ends in mg per gram of the fermentation biomass (glucose equivalent(mg)/Fermentation(g)). These
averages values were obtained by the triplicates of each extract supernatant that was subjected to the
DNS assay. The below table also contains the Coefficient of Variance(COV %) between these triplicates.
A T test was performed at the 0.05 level, comparing the reducing ends (glucose equivalent(mg)/fermen-
tation(g)) obtained for the biological replicates of Rhizopus oryzae with the reducing ends obtained for
48
==PAGE:54==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Fermentations
Glucose equivalent (mg)/ Fermentation (g)
COV (%)
A-24-1
10.313
8.090
A-24-2
9.482
0.517
A-24-3
14.078
4.301
A-24-4
19.052
7.041
R-24-1
14.179
6.677
R-24-2
10.439
3.476
R-24-3
11.194
5.569
R-24-4
12.265
8.043
U-24-1
1.662
4.005
U-24-2
0.982
1.916
U-24-3
1.095
3.967
Table 3: Glucose equivalent (mg) per gram of the Fermentation mix for each Fermentation at 24 hours. A,R
represents the strain used for the fermentation (Aspergillus oryzae, Rhizopus oryzae) and U represents
Uninoculated samples. Numbers 1-4 here represent replicates
the biological replicates of Aspergillus oryzae. According to the results of the T test, the 24 hour fer-
mentations of both strains are statistically identical within the context of comparing the reducing ends
present (Glucose equivalent (mg)/ Fermentation (g)). T tests were also performed at the 0.05 level,
comparing the Glucose equivalent(mg)/Fermentation(g) values of the uninoculated samples with both
the strains. The reducing ends present in the fermentations of both strains were found to be statisti-
cally different from the uninoculated samples. However, the coefficient of variance(COV%) obtained
amongst the biological replicates themselves is 32.99 % and 13.5% for Aspergillus Oryzae and Rhizopus
Oryzae respectively.
3.6.3
48 hours
The fig. 36 represents the reducing ends present in the 48 hour Aspergillus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae
fermentations. The Extract dilution used for the DNS assay at the 48 hour time point is 1:5 ( 20µL Extract
and 80 µL of Milli-Q water in each reaction well ).
49
==PAGE:55==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Figure 36: Glucose equivalent(g/L) of the reducing ends that reacted with the DNS solution (48 hours).The
x-axis in the figure contains the labels for the fermentation samples that were incubated for 48 hours where A,R
represents the strain used for the fermentation (Aspergillus oryzae, Rhizopus oryzae) and U represents
uninoculated samples. Numbers 1-4 here represent replicates. The results displayed are calculated up to the
original concentration of the extract supernatant.
The below table 4 consists of the average value of the reducing ends present, represented by the glu-
cose equivalent(mg) obtained per gram of the fermentation(g). The table also consists of the coefficient
of variance (COV %) between the triplicates of the extract supernatants subjected to the DNS assay.
Fermentation
Glucose equivalent (mg) / Fermentation(g)
COV (%)
A-48-1
15.748
7.77
A-48-2
14.89
6.59
A-48-3
9.06
3.54
A-48-4
9.21
4.88
R-48-1
13.35
6.50
R-48-2
18.32
6.51
R-48-3
15.27
6.72
R-48-4
15.07
5.59
U-48-1
0.504
0.66
U-48-2
0.302
2.04
U-48-3
0.227
1.37
Table 4: Glucose equivalent (mg) per gram of the Fermentation mix for each Fermentation at 48 hours. A,R
represents the strain used for the fermentation (Aspergillus oryzae, Rhizopus oryzae) and U represents
Un-inoculated samples. Numbers 1-4 here represent replicates
A T Test was performed at the 0.05 level, comparing the average values of the reducing ends present
from table 4 for Aspergillus oryzae fermentations and the Rhizopus oryzae fermentations. Based on
the T-test, the difference between fermentations produced by both strains are statistically insignificant
while comparing the reducing ends (Glucose equivalent (mg) / Fermentation(g)).T tests were also per-
50
==PAGE:56==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
formed at the 0.05 level, comparing the Glucose equivalent(mg)/Fermentation(g) values of the uninoc-
ulated samples and both the strains. Based on the T-tests, the reducing ends present in the 48 hour
fermentations of both strains are statistically different from the uninoculated samples. The variations
between the average values produced by the biological replicates themselves were 29.33 % for As-
pergillus oryzae and 13.33 % for Rhizopus oryzae.
3.6.4
72 hours
The fig. 37 represents the reducing ends (glucose equivalent (g/L)) present in the extract supernatant
for each fermentation that was incubated for 72 hours. The Extract dilution used, was the same as the
DNS assay performed on the 48 hour sample which is 1:5 (20µL Extract Supernatant and 80µL Mili Q
water).
Figure 37: Glucose equivalent(g/L) of the reducing ends that reacted with the DNS solution (72 hours).The
x-axis in the figure contains the labels for the fermentation samples that were incubated for 72 hours where A,R
represents the strain used for the fermentation (Aspergillus oryzae, Rhizopus oryzae) and U represents
Un-inoculated samples. Numbers 1-4 here represent replicates. The results displayed are calculated up to the
original concentration of the extract supernatant
The table 5 consists of the reducing ends represented by the glucose equivalent (mg) obtained per gram
of the fermentation (glucose equivalent (mg)/ Fermentation(g)) for each biological replicate along with
the uninoculated controls. The table also consists of the coefficient of variance(COV%) between the
extract supernatants of each fermentation subjected to the DNS assay.
From the average values of the reducing ends obtained from table 5, a T Test was performed at the 0.05
level, comparing the reducing ends present in the replicates of the Aspergillus oryzae based fermen-
tations with the reducing ends present in the replicates of theRhizopus oryzae based fermentations.
51
==PAGE:57==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Fermentation
Glucose equivalent (mg)/ Fermentation(g)
COV (%)
A-72-1
16.77
2.41
A-72-2
6.065
1.63
A-72-3
14.184
3.33
A-72-4
15.186
4.18
R-72-1
20.975
2.64
R-72-2
26.814
3.78
R-72-3
44.08
3.17
R-72-4
23.48
3.49
U-72-1
3.01
4.07
U-72-2
1.87
3.52
U-72-3
2.10
4.97
Table 5: Glucose equivalent (mg) per gram of the Fermentation mix for each Fermentation at 72 hours.A,R
represents the strain used for the fermentation (Aspergillus, Rhizopus) and U represents un-inoculated samples.
Numbers 1-4 here represent replicates
The result of the T test suggests that the fermentations produced by both the strains have a statistically
significant difference. T tests at the 0.05 level were also performed comparing the glucose equiva-
lent(mg)/Fermentation(g) values of the uninoculated samples and glucose equivalent(mg)/Fermenta-
tion(g) values of both the strains. This result of this T test suggested that the reducing ends present
in the 72 hour fermentations of Aspergillus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae are statistically different from
the uninoculated samples. The coefficient of variance(COV%) observed between the average values of
the reducing ends present in the biological replicates are 36.6% and 36.2% for Aspergillus oryzae and
Rhizopus oryzae.
3.6.5
Comparison across each time point
The below figure (fig. 38) represents the average value for the reducing ends present per weight of the
the fermentation biomass(glucose equivalent(mg)/fermentation(g)),for all time points of the fermen-
tation and for both the fungal strains (Aspergillus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae) along with the uninoc-
ulated controls. The average value here is the mean obtained for all 4 replicates of each strain at each
time point.
52
==PAGE:58==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Figure 38: The average value for reducing ends present (Glucose equivalent(mg)/Fermentation(g)) for all
replicates for each time point of the fermentations for Aspergillus oryzae, Rhizopus oryzae and the uninoculated
control. Glucose equivalent(mg)/Fermentation(g) here refers to the reducing ends present per weight of the
fermentation biomass
The highest average value obtained across each time point for Aspergillus oryzae is at 24hours (13.23
Glucose equivalent(mg)/Fermentation(g)) and for Rhizopus oryzae the highest average value obtained
is at 72 hours (28.8 equivalent(mg)/Fermentation(g)). An ANOVA test was performed at the 0.05 level,
to compare the average values across each time point for Aspergillus oryzae which suggested that the
values belonging to each time point are statistically different from each other. A Tukey Kramer HSD test
was also performed to see the statistical difference between each time point, the adjusted p values for
which are present in the table below.
Group 1
Group 2
P-adjusted
A-0
A-24
0.0037
A-0
A-48
0.0071
A-0
A-72
0.0042
A-24
A-48
0.9
A-24
A-72
0.9
A-48
A-72
0.9
Table 6: Adjusted p values generated by performing a Tukey Kramer HSD test by comparing each individual
groups values with the other. A here represents the fermentations produced using Aspergillus oryzae and 0-72
represents the time points of the fermentation
From the table (table 6) a conclusion can be made that there is a significant difference between the
values obtained at 0 hours in comparison with every other time point. However, there doesnt seem
to be a statistically significant difference for the values obtained for the 24 hour, 48hour and the 72
hour fermentations. This might indicate that the fungi is most active at degrading the reducing sugars
53
==PAGE:59==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
present in the substrate between the 0 hour and 24 hour time points. Similarly an ANOVA test at the
0.05 level, was also performed comparing the values obtained for the Rhizopus oryzae fermentations
across each time point. Based on the results of the ANOVA test, the values obtained at each time point
of the fermentation are statistically different from each other. A further Tukey Kramer HSD test was
performed to compare the similarities and differences in the values obtained for each time point in
comparison with the values obtained for other time points. The adjusted p values from this test are
presented in the table below.
Group 1
Group 2
P-adjusted
R-0
R-24
0.0759
R-0
R-48
0.0155
R-0
R-72
0.001
R-24
R-48
0.78
R-24
R-72
0.004
R-48
R-72
0.0197
Table 7: Adjusted p values generated by performing a Tukey Kramer HSD test by comparing each individual
groups values with the other. R here represents the fermentations produced using Rhizopus oryzae and 0-72
represents the time points of the fermentation
From the table (table 7), the 0 hour fermentations seem to be statistically identical to the the 24 hour
fermentations. The 24 hour fermentations are statistically identical to the 48 hour fermentations too.
However, the probability of having identical values is much higher when comparing the 24 hour and
48 hour fermentations as opposed to while comparing the 24 hour and the 0 hour fermentations(78%
for 24 hours to 48 hours and 7.59% for 0 hours to 24 hours). There is also a statistically significant
difference between the 48 hour and the 72 hour fermentations. From the Tukey Kramer test it appears
that the fungi is more active in the 48 hour to 72 hour interval of the fermentation. A similar ANOVA
test at the 0.05 level, was also performed for the uninoculated controls across each time point. The
results from the ANOVA test suggested that the values are statistically different from each other for the
uninoculated controls. A further Tukey Kramer HSD test was performed to compare the values across
each time point with each other. The adjusted p-values obtained are presented in the table below
table 8. From the table it appears that the values obtained for the 72 hour uninoculated samples are
statistically different from the values obtained at 0 hours, 24 hours and 48 hours. The average value
for the reducing ends at 72 hours is also higher than the values obtained at the other time points. The
reason for this could be due to biological variation.
54
==PAGE:60==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Group 1
Group 2
P-Adjusted
U 0
U 24
0.9
U 0
U 48
0.0733
U 0
U 72
0.0232
U 24
U 48
0.0632
U 24
U 72
0.0268
U 48
U 72
0.001
Table 8: Adjusted P values obtained after performing the Tukey Kramer HSD comparing the values.U here
represents the uninoculated controls and 0-72 represents the time points of the fermentation
The coefficient of variance (COV%) observed between the biological replicates across each time point
is also calculated and presented in the table below table 8. From this table a trend of increasing COV%
is observed for each species with increasing time. The implications of these variations observed is
discussed in detail in section 4
Time (hours)
Aspergillus oryzae(COV%)
Rhizopus oryzae(COV%)
0
6.538
7.344
24
32.994
13.503
48
29.340
13.339
72
36.603
36.201
Table 9: COV % observed between the reducing ends present amongst the biological replicates across each time
point.
3.6.6
Methionine Synthase Assay on 72 hour Fermentations
The methionine synthase assay was performed on 72 hour Aspergillus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae fer-
mentations at 0,20,40,60 mins. The difference in Absorbance between the extract and the control
at each time point was correlated to the formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3 based on the standard
curve equation eq. (2.1) mentioned in section 2.4. The figures below (fig. 39 and fig. 40) consist of the
Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) formed over time for different biological replicates of Aspergillus oryzae and
Rhizopus oryzae respectively. The figures also consists of the linear trendlines for each replicate along
with its respective R2 value and equations.
55
==PAGE:61==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Figure 39: Formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) from 0 to 60 mins for 72 hour Aspergillus oryzae
fermentations. In the legend, A represents Aspergillus oryzae and 1-4 represents the number of biological
replicates.The figure also consists of linear trendlines for product formation over time for each replicate with
the respective equation and R2 value
In the figure fig. 39, the linear trendlines obtained for the formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) over
time have an R2 value of 0.9155, 0.9929, 0.9913 and 0.09821 for the replicates 1-4 respectively. Based
on the R2 values it can be said that the linear trendlines fit the data well enough and that the formation
of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) represents that the cobalamin independent methionine synthase present
in the extract supernatant is acting in the zero order linear range of the MM curve fig. 4. The slope
calculated for these plots are now used as the Vmax values(µM/min) for the equation eq. (1.2) and can
be used in the expression Vmax = kcat × Etot. Based on the kcat values discussed in section 1.2.2(kcat
= 3.35 1/min), the concentration of the enzyme was obtained and is presented in the table below
(table 10). The coefficient of variance (COV %) amongst the enzyme concentrations calculated for the
72 hour Aspergillus oryzae fermentations is 5.55 %.
56
==PAGE:62==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Fermentations
Cobalamin
Independent
Methionine Synthase Con-
centration (µM)
A-72-1
0.036
A-72-2
0.039
A-72-3
0.041
A-72-4
0.038
Table 10: Cobalamin Independent Methionine Synthase concentration (µM) calculated for Aspergillus oryzae 72
hour fermentations. A represents Aspergillus oryzae and 1-4 represents the biological replicates).
Similarly the formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) is also calculated for each assay time point based
on the difference in absorbance values for the methionine synthase reaction wells and the control. For
the Rhizopus oryzae 72 hour fermentations, the Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) formation is plotted over
assay time for each biological replicate as shown below (fig. 40). Linear trendlines were plotted for the
Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) formation over time for each biological replicate with R2 values of 0.9892,
0.9738, 0.9676 and 0.947 for replicates 1-4 respectively. Since the values in the figure fit well for the
linear trendlines it is assumed that the enzyme is acting in the linear (0 order range) of the MM curve
(fig. 4).
57
==PAGE:63==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Figure 40: Formation of Methenyl-H4PteGlu3(µM) from 0 to 60 mins for 72 hour Rhizopus oryzae
fermentations. In the legend, R represents Rhizopus oryzae and 1-4 represents the number of biological
replicates. The figure also consists of linear trendlines for product formation over time for each replicate with
the respective equation and R2 value
Based on equation (eq. (1.2)), slope values for each trendline represent the Vmax of the methionine syn-
thase enzyme present. Using a kcat value of 1.18(1/min) from section 1.2.2,the enzyme concentrations
were obtained as follows (table 11).
Fermentations
Cobalamin
Independent
Methionine Synthase Con-
centration (µM)
R-72-1
0.048
R-72-2
0.041
R-72-3
0.091
R-72-4
0.044
Table 11: Cobalamin Independent Methionine Synthase concentration (µM) calculated for 72 hour Rhizopus
oryzae fermentations. R represents Rhizopus oryzae and 1-4 represents the biological replicates)
The COV% calculated for the Cobalamin Independent Methionine Synthase Concentration (µM) ob-
tained for the Rhizopus oryzae is 41.69%. The coefficient of variance observed is much more than that
of the enzyme concentrations calculated for Aspergillus oryzae fermentations. This is largely because
58
==PAGE:64==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
of the high enzyme concentration obtained for the third replicate(R-72-3) which is 1.72 standard devi-
ations higher than the mean. A T Test was performed at the 0.05 level, comparing the enzyme concen-
trations calculated for the Aspergillus oryzae and the Rhizopus oryzae fermentations. The results from
the T test suggests that the enzyme concentrations calculated are statistically different in the extract
supernatants from the fermentations of both strains.
A figure representing the concentrations of cobalamin independent methionine synthase for both fungi
is given below (fig. 41)
Figure 41: The concentration of cobalamin independent methionine synthase (µM) for Aspergillus oryzae and
Rhizopus oryzae determined from the methionine synthase assay
3.6.7
Free methionine content
The free methionine content(nmol/g) present in the Aspergillus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae fermenta-
tions have been calculated for each time point of the Time Course experiment. The free methionine
content present in the Aspergillus oryzae fermentations are present below fig. 42.
59
==PAGE:65==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
Figure 42: The presence of free methionine(nmol/g) in the extract supernatant of the Aspergillus oryzae
fermentations at each time point of the fermentation. A represents Aspergillus oryzae and 0,24,48,72
represents the fermentation time points.
The free methionine content is at its highest at 0 hours and is at its lowest at 24 hours. After 24 hours
a steady increase is observed in the free methionine content of the fermentations. Similarly, the free
methionine content is also calculated for the Rhizopus oryzae fermentations as shown in fig. 43.
Figure 43: The presence of free methionine(nmol/g) in the extract supernatant of the Rhizopus oryzae
fermentations at each time point of the fermentation. R represents Rhizopus oryzae and 0,24,48,72 represents
the fermentation time points.
Similar to the free methionine content present in the Aspergilus oryzae fermentations, the highest
amount of free methionine for the Rhizopus oryzae fermentations is present at 0 hours. The lowest
amount of free methionine is present at 24 hours after which a steady increase is observed over 48 and
60
==PAGE:66==
3.6
Time Course Experiments
72 hours. The free methionine content is also measured in the uninocculated controls and is presented
below fig. 44. The free methionine does decrease over time but its not as low as the free methionine
observed in the pea-tempeh fermentations at 0 hours.
Figure 44: The presence of free methionine(nmol/g) in the extract supernatant of the uninocculated samples at
each time point of the fermentation. U represents the uninocculated samples and 0,24,48,72 represents the
fermentation time points.
The possible reasons as to why the free methionine first decreases in value and then proceeds to in-
crease for both fungi, along with the steady free methionine observed for the uninoculated controls is
discussed in section 4.
61
==PAGE:67==
4
Discussions
4.1
Solid-State Fermentations
The fermentations produced during the course of this project are evaluated based on the use of the DNS
assay and the cobalamin independent methionine synthase assay. Based on the results obtained from
the DNS Time Course experiments (section 3.6), the fermentations performed are successful from the
information obtained by the controls of the Time Course experiments. The controls used in the Time
Course were the 0 hour fermentations and the uninoculated controls. The 0 hour fermentation gives
an idea of the entire fermentation setup without the incubation period (the period where the growth
of the fungi on the substrate takes place). The uninoculated controls gives an idea about the incubation
process without the fungal species. The uninoculated controls also takes into account other potential
phenomena such as oxidation of the peas over time in the incubator. When viewing the results of the
time course experiment, the reducing ends present at 24,48 and 72 hours of the fermentations showed
statistically significant differences when comparing the fermentations produced by each strain with the
Uninoculated samples (section 3.6) while also being numerically higher in value (as seen in fig. 38). This
implies that the fungi was active and that the changes observed in reducing ends was due to an increase
in fungal activity at 24, 48 and 72 hours rather than from the extended incubation times validating the
success of the fermentations. The procedure used for producing the tempeh was optimized to create
the most visually appealing tempeh based on previous unpublished work from the project supervisor.
4.2
Homogenization and Extraction
The Homogenization process as described in section 2.1.2, is done under the assumption that a uniform
mixture is produced through visual inspection. It could be possible that the Bosch coffee grinder used
for producing the mixtures may not be adequate enough to produce a homogenous mixture. In the
case that the mixture produced is not homogenous there can be a chance for the mixture to segregate
based on the particle size distribution present. Even though this may be the case, the results from
the DNS experiment performed on multiple extraction shows uniformity in the extract supernatants
(section 3.2). Although the extract supernatant is unifrom on the basis of the DNS assay performed, a
similar experiment was not performed using the Methionine Synthase assay. Another point to consider
with the extract supernatant is that it is a solution consisting of many different proteins and other
cellular material present in it. The implications of this are discussed in the section below (section 4.3).
62
==PAGE:68==
4.3
Assessment of the Assays used during the project
4.3
Assessment of the Assays used during the project
The assays used to study the fermentations are selected on the basis that they are only intended to
measure the presence of reducing sugars in the case of DNS and concentration of Methionine Synthase
in the case of the Methionine Synthase assay. The presence of different substances present in the
extract supernatant could be something that interferes with the assay’s intended use. Each assay also
had to be optimized to produce meaningful data that can be used to evaluate the fermentations. The
optimization process along with the effect that the nature of the extract supernatant might have on the
assays is discussed below.
4.3.1
DNS Assay
The procedure used for performing the DNS assay in the project has certain steps that are prone to large
amounts of variations between experiments, particularly with the heating step involving the water bath
section 2.3. The water bath is used to provide even heating to the microwell plate containing the DNS
solution and the extract supernatant, so that the DNS can react with the reducing ends present. The
water level present in the water bath is not always the same between different DNS assay experiments
which means the extent of heating provided between different experiments varies giving an irregular-
ity between different assays. For this reason, a standard curve equating glucose (g/l) to absorbance
from the DNS reaction is prepared in every plate that is immersed into the water bath. Another issue
experienced with the DNS assay was the presence of air trapped between the different wells of the
plate while immersing it in the Water bath. This issue was fixed by using a weight to secure the plate
in place and expel any trapped air. Apart from some of the practical challenges encountered while
performing the assay, the DNS assay is also shown to overestimate the reducing ends present in the
presence of amino acids [48]. This can lead to an inaccurate estimation of the reducing ends present in
the extract supernatant since the extract supernatant also consists of proteins. Another point to note
is that the DNS reacts with a broad variety of compounds that consist of a reducing end and the extract
supernatant could consist of different kinds of reducing sugars which can also lead to inaccuracies while
estimating the reducing ends [49]. Despite some of these drawbacks, the deviations observed between
the technical replicates (triplicates of the extract supernatant subjected to DNS) have been consistently
low every time the DNS assay was used. This is noticable, in the Time Course experiments when ob-
serving the coefficient of variance in the tables showing the reducing ends (section 3.6). The DNS assay
is also convenient to use and is simple to setup since there is only 1 reaction step involved. Since the
63
==PAGE:69==
4.3
Assessment of the Assays used during the project
project did not focus on identifying and studying the different kinds of reducing sugars present, the non
specificity of the DNS assay is not of too much concern. Hence, the DNS assay is good enough for the
purpose of this project since it gives an estimation of the reducing ends present in the extract super-
natant. The reducing ends present is used as a reference to check how active the fungal strains are in
degrading reducing sugars when compared to the different time points of the fermentation. The opti-
mization process for the DNS assay was also fairly straight forward. The only parameter that needed
to be optimized was the dilution of the extract which was determined in section 3.1. After obtaining
the ideal dilution range, the glucose values (g/l) for the standard curve were adjusted to fit the general
values observed with the extract dilution. The dilutions used for the assays were 40% extract for 0 and
24 hours and 1:5 or 20% extract for 48 and 72 hours. The change in dilutions from 0 to 24 hours was
done since it was expected that the reducing ends produced in the 48 hour and 72 hour fermentations
would be more than the 0 and the 24 hours.
4.3.2
Methionine Synthase Assay
The measurementof enzyme concentrationpresentinthe extractsupernatantisdone indirectlythrough
the methioninesynthase assay. The final productinthe Methioninesynthaseassay(Methenyl-H4PteGlu3)
is formed from the reaction of a by product (H4PteGlu3, resulting from the action of the Methionine
synthase) with the stop solution (section 1.2.2). The extract supernatant consists of different proteins
and other substances that could possibly interfere with the process of the assay acting as inhibitors.
This is explored with the inhibition test performed on the extract supernatant using the methionine
synthase assay section 3.3.5. Based on the inhibition test performed there was no clear evidence that
any inhibitory substance was playing an undesired role in the assay. It is important to note that this test
was performed on 60 min methionine synthase reactions and was not explored in the reactions taking
place above the 60 min mark. The assay used also has high signals measured for the background/con-
trol as observed from earlier experiments (section 3.3).
Due to this, the assay had to be optimized to obtain the maximum possible signal seperation. Optimiz-
ing the Methionine synthase assay was not as straight forward as it was for the DNS assay since multiple
parameters needed to be optimized. From the experiments exploring the absorbance signal for differ-
ent reaction times, 60 mins generally gave the highest absorbance signal values. While increases were
observed above 60 mins, the increase in absorbance signal was not proportional to the reaction times
(Experiment 8 in section 3.3.4). Different extract volumes and concentrations were also experimented
64
==PAGE:70==
4.3
Assessment of the Assays used during the project
with to find out which extract concentration gives the highest absorbance signal (section 3.3.2). While
the signals were increasing by increasing the volume of the extract and the concentrations, the sig-
nals generated by the controls also increased from the additional extract content. It is for this reason
that the difference in absorbance signal between different volumes and concentrations was not pro-
portional which mean’t that the signal seperation could not be improved by increasing either extract
concentration or volume. Experiments were also conducted to explore if the signal generated by the
control or the background could be reduced. Denatured extracts (extracts where the proteins present
were denatured through heat inactivaton) were explored as a background for the assay and the control
explored was the reaction mix where L-HCY was substituted with Milli-Q water in the reaction mix (Con-
trol without L-HCY). The decision was made to use the control without L-HCY as the standard on the
premise that the denatured extracts had more precipitate which could interfere while reading the signal
in the spectromphotometer, making the controls without L-HCY give lower variations. Although dur-
ing experiment 9 (section 3.3.4) where the linearity was tested, the deviations observed in the control
were more than the previous experiments. It would have been ideal to have an experiment where both
controls were compared together using the same extract supernatant within the same experimental
setup to get a better idea if using the controls without L-HCY would provide a better signal seperation
and lower deviations. Regardless, the choice for using controls without L-HCY as the standard seems
better as opposed to the denatured extract, since there is no confirmation that all the proteins present
in the extract are denatured during the denaturing process. A linear range was determined for the
methionine synthase assay(section 3.3.4) between 0 and 60 mins and this linearity was observed to
occur in multiple experiments for the extracts from biological replicates of 72 hour fermentations.The
linear trend however was not as evident for experiment 9 where the methionine synthase assay was
conducted over 0,20,30,40,50 and 60 mins (section 3.3.4). This is also the same experiment where
the most deviations were observed with the control signal. In order to rule out the possibility that the
deviations in control were contributing to the lack of linearity, ANOVA and Tukey Kramer tests were
performed for the absorbance signal generated by the extracts which suggested that the increase over
time was not statistically significant. This implied that there was a high possibility of very low enzyme
concentration in the extract supernatant tested. This lack of linearity however was not observed for
the previous experiment where extracts from the same fermentation were tested(Experiment 6,7 and
8 section 3.3.3 and section 3.3.4). The conclusion hence, is that experiment 9 probably had a system-
atic problem associated with it that could not be identified. An experiment comparing the deviations
between signal seperations of extract and control for multiple extractions from the same fermentation
65
==PAGE:71==
4.4
Time Course Experiments(DNS-Assay)
could have provided valuable information on the lack of linearity observed in experiment 9. In sum-
mary the main challenge that was experienced while working with the methionine synthase assay is
that when the difference in signal between the extract and the control is very small, it becomes diffi-
cult to associate this difference to the working of the assay or if the difference is from experimental
variations. The particular assay is chosen despite these inconveniences, because of its uniqueness of
being a non-radioactive assay. The advantages of which are reduced costs and also reducing dangerous
radioactive waste [18].
4.4
Time Course Experiments(DNS-Assay)
The Time Course experiments consisted of subjecting the fermentations produced by two different fun-
gal strains Rhizopus oryzae and Aspergillus oryzae at 4 different time points (0,24,48 and 72 hours) to
the DNS and the methionine synthase assay(only for 72 hours). Based on the results obtained for the
DNS assay in section 3.6, there is an observable difference in the reducing ends produced by the fermen-
tations across different time points and also between the different fungi. A trend is observed where the
reducing ends continue to increase with increasing fermentation time for both strains. However, the
rates at which this increase is observed is different for both strains as observed from the Tukey Kramer
HSD tests in section 3.6.5. For the Aspergillus oryzae fermentations, the most pronounced differences
observed between the reducing ends present in adjacent time points was between the 0 hour and the
24 hour fermentations (table 6). There was no statistically significant differences observed between
the reducing ends present in the 24,48 and 72 hour fermentations. From this it could be concluded
that between 0 and 24 hours the fungi breaks down the reducing sugars without consuming it, and
after the 24 hour mark, the fungi reaches an equilibrium between consuming the already broken down
reducing sugars and degrading more complex reducing sugars belonging to the substrate. However,
a different trend was observed when inspecting the Rhizopus oryzae fermentations. After comparing
the Rhizopus oryzae fermentations at each time point using the Tukey HSD test, the 0 hour and the 24
hour reducing ends are statistically similar to each other and the 24 hour and the 48 hour reducing
ends are statistically similar to each other. A statistically significant difference was however, observed
between the 48 hour and the 72 hour fermentations (table 7). This suggests that in the 48 to 72 hour
time frame, the fungal degradation of the polysaccharides and carbohydrates is more than the con-
sumption of the broken down sugars for the Rhizopus oryzae fermentations. That being said an overall
increase in the average number of reducing ends present is observed from 0 hours to 72 hours for the
Rhizopus oryzae fermentations. Across each time point while comparing the fermentations produced
66
==PAGE:72==
4.5
Methionine Synthase Assay (72 hours)
by both fungi, a statistically significant difference was observed only for the 72 hour fermentations.
While trends between the fungi and also across each time point was observed, it is important to also
note the coefficient of variance(COV%) observed within biological replicates of each strain (table 9).
These variations appear to be increasing with incubation time and could be attributed to biological
variations that are naturally occurring. It could also be that with increasing time there is more inaccu-
racies produced with the DNS assay as discussed in section 4.3.1. Having more replicates at each time
point despite not being the most practical option could reveal more about the nature of this variation.
4.5
Methionine Synthase Assay (72 hours)
Methionine Synthase assay was also performed for the 4 biological replicates of the Rhizopus oryzae
and Aspergillus oryzae fermentations at 72 hours. The assay was performed such that a linear trendline
was obtained for the increasing product formation (Methenyl-H4PteGlu3)) for each replicate of both
strains. The trendline obtained was used to calculate the maximum rate (Vmax) of the methionine syn-
thase enzyme present in the extract. The trendlines seem to posses a reasonably good fit as observed
in fig. 39 and fig. 40. From the rate of product formation calculated, the kcat value that was obtained
based on previous work [40] was applied to obtain the enzyme concentrations. The kcat values chosen
however are from Aspergillus sojae and Rhizopus delemar for Aspergillus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae.
The kcat value of Aspergillus sojae was selected to calculate methionine synthase concentration of As-
pergillus oryzae since they both are similar to each other and are used to create fermented foods [50]
[51]. Similarities have also been observed between Rhizopus oryzae and Rhizopus delemar [52]. De-
spite the similarities present there is no certainty that the kcat values for the cobalamin independent
methionine synthases of these species are similar. While comparing the linearity trend observed be-
tween both strains, the difference in absorbance(product formed) is much higher in the Aspergillus
oryzae giving a higher Vmax for the Aspergillus oryzae strains. However from table 10 and table 11, the
concentration of methionine synthase present is higher for Rhizopus oryzae due to the different kcat
values. The Methionine Synthase concentration in the extract supernatants of both fungal strains are
also statistically different based on a T test performed (section 3.6.6). While optimizing the assay, the
fermentations used for the experiments were Rhizopus oryzae fermentations. It would have been valu-
able to perform these optimization experiments with some of the Aspergillus oryzae fermentations to
study the linearity trend since the signal seperation observed was higher. It would have also been valu-
able to perform the optimization experiments with fermentations from different time points as there
could have been more methionine synthase concentration in some of the earlier time points. The me-
67
==PAGE:73==
4.6
Free Methionine
thionine synthase assay could not be completed for the rest of the time points in the Time Course
experiments due to a shortage of time.
4.6
Free Methionine
The free methionine content was evaluated for the Aspergillus oryzae, Rhizopus oryzae fermetations
and the uninoculated controls at 0,24,48 and 72 hours of the fermentation. For both the strains of the
fermentation, the free methionine content was highest at 0 hours and lowest at 24 hours. However, the
free methionine progressively increased at 48 hours and 72 hours. For the controls, the free methio-
nine content doesn’t go through any drastic changes and remains rather stable at every fermentation
time point. This confirms that the initial dip in free methionine and the steady increase later is con-
tributed by the fungi. Both fungi could be consuming all the free methionine at the initial phases of the
fermentation and re-purposing it for metabolic ativities. As the fungi starts to grow further, the fungi
starts to create more free methionine by possibly secreting its own enzymes(methionine synthase). A
better idea of the total methionine content would have been obtained if the methionine present in the
proteins were also known. However, from the increasing free methionine it can be assumed that the
total methionine content also increases.
68
==PAGE:74==
5
Conclusions
During the course of the project, the pea-tempeh fermentations prepared for Asergilus oryzae and Rhi-
zopus oryzae have been successful. Although the assays used to study the fermentation may not repre-
sent the most accurate attributes of the pea-tempeh fermentations, they worked as intended and are
good at providing insight into the metabolic activities of the fungi during the fermentation time course.
While time points selected to evaluate the fermentations provide useful insights into the carbohydrate
degradation of the fungi, it would be valuable to inspect the fermentations between the 0hour and 24
hour time point especially for the Aspergilus oryzae fermentations. Based on the variations observed
between the reducing ends obtained for each time point, it would also be of value to include more
replicates for each strain at different time points. While the Methionine Synthase assay was success-
ful at estimating the concentration of methionine synthase present in the 72 hour fermentations, it
would have been more insightful if the concentration profile would have been obtained across each
time point of the fermentation. The free methionine content observed at the different time points of
the fermentation suggests that the fungi contributes to increasing the methionine content at the later
stages of the fermentations, however a better insight would have been obtained if the methionine syn-
thase concentrations were also calculated at each time point along with the methionine present in the
proteins.
69
==PAGE:75==
REFERENCES
References
[1] Elizabeth Caplice and Gerald F Fitzgerald. Food fermentations: role of microorganisms in food
production and preservation. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 50(1):131–149, 1999.
[2] Jyoti Prakash Tamang, Paul D Cotter, Akihito Endo, Nam Soo Han, Remco Kort, Shao Quan Liu,
Baltasar Mayo, Nieke Westerik, and Robert Hutkins. Fermented foods in a global age: East meets
west. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 19(1):184–217, 2020.
[3] Netsanet Shiferaw Terefe. Food fermentation. In Reference Module in Food Science. Elsevier,
2016.
[4] Eirini Dimidi, Selina Rose Cox, Megan Rossi, and Kevin Whelan. Fermented foods: definitions and
characteristics, impact on the gut microbiota and effects on gastrointestinal health and disease.
Nutrients, 11(8):1806, 2019.
[5] Ramesh C Ray and VK Joshi. Fermented foods: past, present and future. Microorganisms and
fermentation of traditional foods, pages 1–36, 2014.
[6] Gabriel Vinderola, Paul D Cotter, Miguel Freitas, Miguel Gueimonde, Hannah D Holscher, Patricia
Ruas-Madiedo, Seppo Salminen, Kelly S Swanson, Mary Ellen Sanders, and Christopher J Cifelli.
Fermented foods: a perspective on their role in delivering biotics. Frontiers in Microbiology,
14:1196239, 2023.
[7] Iñaki Diez-Ozaeta and Oihana Juaristi Astiazaran. Fermented foods: An update on evidence-based
health benefits and future perspectives. Food Research International, 156:111133, 2022.
[8] Anna Kårlund, Carlos Gómez-Gallego, Jenni Korhonen, Outi-Maaria Palo-Oja, Hani El-Nezami, and
Marjukka Kolehmainen. Harnessing microbes for sustainable development: Food fermentation as
a tool for improving the nutritional quality of alternative protein sources. Nutrients, 12(4):1020,
2020.
[9] Carmelia Alae-Carew, Rosemary Green, Cristina Stewart, Brian Cook, Alan D Dangour, and
Pauline FD Scheelbeek. The role of plant-based alternative foods in sustainable and healthy food
systems: Consumption trends in the uk. Science of the Total Environment, 807:151041, 2022.
[10] Stephanie Jeske, Emanuele Zannini, and Elke K Arendt. Past, present and future: The strength
of plant-based dairy substitutes based on gluten-free raw materials. Food research international,
110:42–51, 2018.
[11] Kandi Sridhar, Said Bouhallab, Thomas Croguennec, Denis Renard, and Valérie Lechevalier.
Recent trends in design of healthier plant-based alternatives: Nutritional profile, gastroin-
70
==PAGE:76==
REFERENCES
testinal digestion, and consumer perception.
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition,
63(30):10483–10498, 2023.
[12] Li Day, Julie A Cakebread, and Simon M Loveday. Food proteins from animals and plants: Dif-
ferences in the nutritional and functional properties.
Trends in Food Science & Technology,
119:428–442, 2022.
[13] Insaf Berrazaga, Valérie Micard, Marine Gueugneau, and Stéphane Walrand. The role of the an-
abolic properties of plant-versus animal-based protein sources in supporting muscle mass main-
tenance: a critical review. Nutrients, 11(8):1825, 2019.
[14] Meng Thiam Lim, Bernice Jiaqi Pan, Darel Wee Kiat Toh, Clarinda Nataria Sutanto, and Jung Eun
Kim. Animal protein versus plant protein in supporting lean mass and muscle strength: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutrients, 13(2):661, 2021.
[15] Amanda Gomes Almeida Sá, Yara Maria Franco Moreno, and Bruno Augusto Mattar Carciofi. Food
processing for the improvement of plant proteins digestibility. Critical reviews in food science and
nutrition, 60(20):3367–3386, 2020.
[16] Jasper Zwinkels, Judith Wolkers-Rooijackers, and Eddy J Smid. Solid-state fungal fermentation
transforms low-quality plant-based foods into products with improved protein quality.
LWT,
184:114979, 2023.
[17] Xiaoyu Feng, Ken Ng, Said Ajlouni, Pangzhen Zhang, and Zhongxiang Fang. Effect of solid-state
fermentation on plant-sourced proteins: A review. Food Reviews International, pages 1–38, 2023.
[18] James T Drummond, Joseph Jarrett, Julio C Gonzalez, Sha Huang, and Rowena G Matthews. Char-
acterization of nonradioactive assays for cobalamin-dependent and cobalamin-independent me-
thionine synthase enzymes. Analytical biochemistry, 228(2):323–329, 1995.
[19] Jennifer Scott and Jorge Amich. The role of methionine synthases in fungal metabolism and viru-
lence. Essays in Biochemistry, 67(5):853–863, 2023.
[20] M. Saint-Macary, Crystel Barbisan, M. Gagey, Océane Frelin, R. Beffa, M. Lebrun, and M. Droux.
Methionine biosynthesis is essential for infection in the rice blast fungus magnaporthe oryzae.
PLoS ONE, 10, 2015.
[21] Abdul Aala Najmus Saqib and Philip John Whitney.
Differential behaviour of the dinitros-
alicylic acid (dns) reagent towards mono-and di-saccharide sugars.
Biomass and bioenergy,
35(11):4748–4750, 2011.
[22] Ruofei Hu, Lu Lin, Tingjun Liu, Pingkai Ouyang, Beihai He, and Shijie Liu. Reducing sugar content in
71
==PAGE:77==
REFERENCES
hemicellulose hydrolysate by dns method: a revisit. Journal of Biobased Materials and Bioenergy,
2(2):156–161, 2008.
[23] Hefei Zhao, Chun Shen, Zijian Wu, Zhong Zhang, and Changmou Xu. Comparison of wheat, soy-
bean, rice, and pea protein properties for effective applications in food products. Journal of food
biochemistry, 44(4):e13157, 2020.
[24] Pascal Leterme, Thierry Monmart, and Evelyne Baudart. Amino acid composition of pea (pisum
sativum) proteins and protein profile of pea flour. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture,
53(1):107–110, 1990.
[25] Wendy J Dahl, Lauren M Foster, and Robert T Tyler. Review of the health benefits of peas (pisum
sativum l.). British Journal of Nutrition, 108(S1):S3–S10, 2012.
[26] Stefan HM Gorissen, Julie JR Crombag, Joan MG Senden, WA Huub Waterval, Jörgen Bierau, Lex B
Verdijk, and Luc JC van Loon. Protein content and amino acid composition of commercially avail-
able plant-based protein isolates. Amino acids, 50:1685–1695, 2018.
[27] Masayuki Machida, Osamu Yamada, and Katsuya Gomi. Genomics of aspergillus oryzae: learning
from the history of koji mold and exploration of its future. DNA research, 15(4):173–183, 2008.
[28] Tadzhibova Polina Yu et al. Bioconversion of soy under the influence of aspergillus oryzae strains
producing hydrolytic enzymes. Foods and Raw materials, 9(1):52–58, 2021.
[29] Steven Wainaina, Afrilia Dwi Kisworini, Marizal Fanani, Rachma Wikandari, Ria Millati, Claes
Niklasson, and Mohammad J Taherzadeh. Utilization of food waste-derived volatile fatty acids for
production of edible rhizopus oligosporus fungal biomass. Bioresource technology, 310:123444,
2020.
[30] Tri Handoyo and Naofumi Morita. Structural and functional properties of fermented soybean
(tempeh) by using rhizopus oligosporus. International Journal of food properties, 9(2):347–355,
2006.
[31] Sachindra T Cooray and Wei Ning Chen. Valorization of brewer’s spent grain using fungi solid-state
fermentation to enhance nutritional value. Journal of Functional Foods, 42:85–94, 2018.
[32] Taiana Denardi-Souza, Kelly Cristina Massarolo, Sabina M Tralamazza, and Eliana Badiale-Furlong.
Monitoring of fungal biomass changed by rhizopus oryzae in relation to amino acid and essential
fatty acids profile in soybean meal, wheat and rice. CyTA-Journal of Food, 16(1):156–164, 2018.
[33] Samsul Rizal, Maria Erna Kustyawati, Udin Hasanudin, et al. The growth of yeast and fungi, the
formation of β-glucan, and the antibacterial activities during soybean fermentation in producing
tempeh. International Journal of Food Science, 2021, 2021.
72
==PAGE:78==
REFERENCES
[34] Antje Borzekowski, Riyan Anggriawan, Maryeni Auliyati, Hans-Jörg Kunte, Matthias Koch, Sascha
Rohn, Petr Karlovsky, and Ronald Maul. Formation of zearalenone metabolites in tempeh fermen-
tation. Molecules, 24(15):2697, 2019.
[35] Stéphane Ravanel, Bertrand Gakière, Dominique Job, and Roland Douce. The specific features
of methionine biosynthesis and metabolism in plants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 95(13):7805–7812, 1998.
[36] S. Kavitha, H. Shyamala, G. Muralikrishna, M. C. Varadaraj, and E. Rati Rao. Starch and cell wall
degrading enzymes from fungal organisms grown on cereal and millet brans. European Food
Research and Technology, 220:560–564, 2005.
[37] T. Matsuzawa, A. Watanabe, T. Shintani, K. Gomi, and K. Yaoi. Enzymatic degradation of xyloglu-
cans by aspergillus species: a comparative view of this genus. Applied Microbiology and Biotech-
nology, 105:2701 – 2711, 2021.
[38] D. Pleissner, T. H. Kwan, and C. Lin. Fungal hydrolysis in submerged fermentation for food waste
treatment and fermentation feedstock preparation. Bioresource technology, 158:48–54, 2014.
[39] Albert L Lehninger, David L Nelson, and Michael M Cox. Lehninger principles of biochemistry.
Macmillan, 2005.
[40] Tomás Vellozo Echevarría. Enzyme kinetics and functional characterization of methionine syn-
thases. Master Thesis, 2023.
[41] S Marfu’ah, JNW Karyadi, MA Akbar, DI Imaniar, and FIP Hati. Physical quality change of tempeh
during freeze drying. In IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, volume 365,
page 012047. IOP Publishing, 2019.
[42] Sylwia Kowalska, Edward Szłyk, and Aneta Jastrzębska. Simple extraction procedure for free amino
acids determination in selected gluten-free flour samples. European Food Research and Technol-
ogy, pages 1–11, 2022.
[43] Małgorzata Orłowska, Kamil Steczkiewicz, and Anna Muszewska. Utilization of cobalamin is ubiq-
uitous in early-branching fungal phyla. Genome Biology and Evolution, 13(4):evab043, 2021.
[44] Joseph T Jarrett, Celia W Goulding, Kerry Fluhr, Sha Huang, and Rowena G Matthews. Purification
and assay of cobalamin-dependent methionine synthase from escherichia coli. In Methods in
enzymology, volume 281, pages 196–213. Elsevier, 1997.
[45] Waters Corporation.
AccQ•Tag Ultra Derivatization Kit.
https://www.waters.com/
webassets/cms/support/docs/715001331.pdf, July 2014. Accessed: 27/01/24.
73
==PAGE:79==
REFERENCES
[46] Thermo Fisher Scientific.
Product Name:
Amino Acid Standard H.
https://www.
thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/20088. Accessed: 27/01/24.
[47] Rasmus Dahl-Lassen, Jan van Hecke, Henning Jørgensen, Christian Bukh, Birgit Andersen, and Jan K
Schjoerring. High-throughput analysis of amino acids in plant materials by single quadrupole mass
spectrometry. Plant Methods, 14:1–9, 2018.
[48] Ricardo Sposina Sobral Teixeira, Ayla Sant’Ana da Silva, Viridiana Santana Ferreira-Leitão, and
Elba Pinto da Silva Bon. Amino acids interference on the quantification of reducing sugars by
the 3, 5-dinitrosalicylic acid assay mislead carbohydrase activity measurements. Carbohydrate
research, 363:33–37, 2012.
[49] Douglas B Rivers, Stephen J Gracheck, Lindley C Woodford, and George H Emert. Limitations of the
nns assay for reducing sugars from saccharified lignocellulosics.[trichoderma reesei]. Biotechnol.
Bioeng.;(United States), 26(7), 1984.
[50] Thomas R Jørgensen. Identification and toxigenic potential of the industrially important fungi,
aspergillus oryzae and aspergillus sojae. Journal of food protection, 70(12):2916–2972, 2007.
[51] Sardjono, Yang Zhu, and Wieger Knol. Comparison of fermentation profiles between lupine and
soybean by aspergillus oryzae and aspergillus sojae in solid-state culture systems. Journal of agri-
cultural and food chemistry, 46(8):3376–3380, 1998.
[52] Ayumi Abe, Yuji Oda, Kozo Asano, and Teruo Sone. Rhizopus delemar is the proper name for
rhizopus oryzae fumaric-malic acid producers. Mycologia, 99(5):714–722, 2007.
74
==PAGE:80==
6
Appendix
6.1
DNS assay - standard curves
Figure 45: Standard Curve used to obtain Glucose Equivalents(g/l) in order to compare the reducing ends in
peas and pea-tempeh.The absorbance of the 0g/l glucose solution was subtracted from all values and the
trendline was forced through 0
Figure 46: Standard Curve used to obtain Glucose Equivalents for 0 hour fermentations.The absorbance of the
0g/l glucose solution was subtracted from all values and the trendline was forced through 0
75
==PAGE:81==
6.1
DNS assay - standard curves
Figure 47: Standard Curve used to obtain Glucose Equivalents for 24 hour fermentations.The absorbance of the
0g/l glucose solution was subtracted from all values and the trendline was forced through 0
Figure 48: Standard Curve used to obtain Glucose Equivalents for 48 hour fermentations.The absorbance of the
0g/l glucose solution was subtracted from all values and the trendline was forced through 0
76
==PAGE:82==
6.2
Absorbance values for the Methionine Synthase Assay (72 hour fermentations)
Figure 49: Standard Curve used to obtain Glucose Equivalents for 72 hour fermentations.The absorbance of the
0g/l glucose solution was subtracted from all values and the trendline was forced through 0
6.2
Absorbance values for the Methionine Synthase Assay (72 hour fermentations)
(a) A-72-1
(b) A-72-2
Figure 50: The absorbance values for the Extract and the Controls at 0,20,40 and 60 mins for 72 hour Aspergilus
oryzae fermentations. Extract represents the reaction wells in which methionine synthase reaction takes place.
Control consists of reaction mix without L-HCY.
77
==PAGE:83==
6.2
Absorbance values for the Methionine Synthase Assay (72 hour fermentations)
(a) A-72-3
(b) A-72-4
Figure 51: The absorbance values for the Extract and the Controls at 0,20,40 and 60 mins for 72 hour Aspergilus
oryzae fermentations.Extract represents the reaction wells in which methionine synthase reaction takes place.
Control consists of reaction mix without L-HCY.
(a) R-72-1
(b) R-72-2
Figure 52: The absorbance values for the Extract and the Controls at 0,20,40 and 60 mins for 72 hour Rhizopus
oryzae fermentations.Extract represents the reaction wells in which methionine synthase reaction takes place.
Control consists of reaction mix without L-HCY.
(a) R-72-3
(b) R-72-4
Figure 53: The absorbance values for the Extract and the Controls at 0,20,40 and 60 mins for 72 hour Rhizopus
oryzae fermentations.Extract represents the reaction wells in which methionine synthase reaction takes place.
Control consists of reaction mix without L-HCY.
78
==PAGE:84==
6.3
Standard Curve - free Methionine Quantification
6.3
Standard Curve - free Methionine Quantification
Figure 54: Standard Curve used to quantify the free methionine present in the extracts. The y axis represents
area under the curve. The x axis represents the methionine concentration
6.4
Python script
1 #!/usr/bin/env python3
2 import pandas as pd
3 from scipy.stats import f_oneway
4 from statsmodels.stats.multicomp import pairwise_tukeyhsd
5
6 def read_and_prepare_data(file_path):
7
# Loading the Excel file(ANOVA_excel)
8
data = pd.read_excel(file_path , header=1)
9
10
# Reshaping the data to a long format with a unique value name
11
data_long = data.melt(id_vars=['Set names'], var_name='Measurements',
value_name='UniqueValues')
12
13
# Cleaning any NaN values
14
data_long = data_long.dropna(subset=['UniqueValues'])
15
16
return data_long
17
18 def perform_anova(data_long):
79
==PAGE:85==
6.5
Tukey Kramer HSD Test
19
# Group data by 'Set names'
20
grouped_data = data_long.groupby('Set names')['UniqueValues']
21
22
# Extracting each group as a separate list for ANOVA
23
anova_data = [group.astype(float) for _, group in grouped_data]
24
25
# Performing the ANOVA test
26
return f_oneway(*anova_data)
27
28 def perform_tukey_hsd_test(data_long):
29
# Perform Tukey HSD test
30
tukey = pairwise_tukeyhsd(endog=data_long['UniqueValues'].astype(float)
,
31
groups=data_long['Set names'],
32
alpha=0.05)
33
return tukey
34
35 def main():
36
file_path = 'ANOVA_excel.xlsx'
#ANOVA_excel is the file name
37
data_long = read_and_prepare_data(file_path)
38
39
anova_result = perform_anova(data_long)
40
print("ANOVA Test Results:")
41
print("P-Value:", anova_result.pvalue)
42
print("F-Statistic:", anova_result.statistic)
43
44
tukey_result = perform_tukey_hsd_test(data_long)
45
print("\nTukey HSD Test Results:")
46
print(tukey_result)
47
48 if __name__ == "__main__":
49
main()
Listing 1: Code used to perform ANOVA test and Tukey Kramer HSD test
6.5
Tukey Kramer HSD Test
80
==PAGE:86==
6.5
Tukey Kramer HSD Test
Group 1
Group 2
P-Value
Peas 1
Peas 2
0.9
Peas 1
Peas 3
0.9
Peas 1
Tempeh 1
0.001
Peas 1
Tempeh 2
0.001
Peas 1
Tempeh 3
0.001
Peas 2
Peas 3
0.9
Peas 2
Tempeh 1
0.001
Peas 2
Tempeh 2
0.001
Peas 2
Tempeh 3
0.001
Peas 3
Tempeh 1
0.001
Peas 3
Tempeh 2
0.001
Peas 3
Tempeh 3
0.001
Tempeh 1
Tempeh 2
0.5683
Tempeh 1
Tempeh 3
0.001
Tempeh 2
Tempeh 3
0.001
Table 12: P values obtained from performing a Tukey Kramer HSD test on the absorbance signal generated from
the DNS assay for Peas1-3 and Tempeh1-3.Tempeh 1-3 represents the Biological replicates of 72 hour
Pea-Tempeh fermentations and Peas 1-3 represents the extract taken from yellow peas (Pissum sativum)
Group 1
Group 2
P-Adjusted
0mins
20 mins
0.0089
0mins
30 mins
0.0432
0mins
40 mins
0.0171
0mins
50 min
0.0012
0mins
60 mins
0.0053
20 mins
30 mins
0.9
20 mins
40 mins
0.9
20 mins
50 min
0.7822
20 mins
60 mins
0.9
30 mins
40 mins
0.9
30 mins
50 min
0.3078
30 mins
60 mins
0.7822
40 mins
50 min
0.5799
40 mins
60 mins
0.9
50 min
60 mins
0.9
Table 13: adjusted P values obtained from performing the Tukey HSD test on the absorbance signal generated
by the extract for replicate 1 at each time point of the assay (experiment 9)
81
==PAGE:87==
6.5
Tukey Kramer HSD Test
Group 1
Group 2
P-Adjusted
0mins
20 mins
0.0701
0mins
30 mins
0.3295
0mins
40 mins
0.0581
0mins
50 min
0.0225
0mins
60 mins
0.001
20 mins
30 mins
0.9
20 mins
40 mins
0.9
20 mins
50 min
0.9
20 mins
60 mins
0.1013
30 mins
40 mins
0.8471
30 mins
50 min
0.556
30 mins
60 mins
0.0186
40 mins
50 min
0.9
40 mins
60 mins
0.1215
50 min
60 mins
0.2828
Table 14: adjusted P values obtained from performing the Tukey HSD test on the absorbance signal generated
by the extract for replicate 3 at each time point of the assay (experiment 9)
Group 1
Group 2
P-Adjusted
0mins
20 mins
0.2173
0mins
30 mins
0.0039
0mins
40 mins
0.001
0mins
50 min
0.0017
0mins
60 mins
0.0141
20 mins
30 mins
0.2173
20 mins
40 mins
0.0141
20 mins
50 min
0.0978
20 mins
60 mins
0.5674
30 mins
40 mins
0.5674
30 mins
50 min
0.9
30 mins
60 mins
0.9
40 mins
50 min
0.8326
40 mins
60 mins
0.2173
50 min
60 mins
0.7663
Table 15: adjusted P values obtained from performing the Tukey HSD test on the absorbance signal generated
by the control for replicate 1 at each time point of the assay (experiment 9)
82
==PAGE:88==
6.5
Tukey Kramer HSD Test
Group 1
Group 2
P-Adjusted
0mins
20 mins
0.0214
0mins
30 mins
0.0012
0mins
40 mins
0.001
0mins
50 min
0.001
0mins
60 mins
0.0119
20 mins
30 mins
0.5227
20 mins
40 mins
0.3455
20 mins
50 min
0.3455
20 mins
60 mins
0.9
30 mins
40 mins
0.9
30 mins
50 min
0.9
30 mins
60 mins
0.704
40 mins
50 min
0.9
40 mins
60 mins
0.5227
50 min
60 mins
0.5227
Table 16: adjusted P values obtained from performing the Tukey HSD test on the absorbance signal generated
by the control for replicate 2 at each time point of the assay (experiment 9)
Group 1
Group 2
P-Adjusted
0mins
20 mins
0.0056
0mins
30 mins
0.001
0mins
40 mins
0.001
0mins
50 min
0.001
0mins
60 mins
0.0107
20 mins
30 mins
0.6271
20 mins
40 mins
0.3621
20 mins
50 min
0.7608
20 mins
60 mins
0.9
30 mins
40 mins
0.9
30 mins
50 min
0.9
30 mins
60 mins
0.4264
40 mins
50 min
0.9
40 mins
60 mins
0.2108
50 min
60 mins
0.5602
Table 17: adjusted P values obtained from performing the Tukey HSD test on the absorbance signal generated
by the control for replicate 3 at each time point of the assay (experiment 9)
83
