==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Using Graph Representation Learning to
Uncover Structure in Crime Networks
Amalie Lerke Hess (s183987)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Network science and graph-structured data can be found anywhere and the abil-
ity to use mathematical modeling techniques on such networks is of interest in
a variety of research areas to uncover meaningful insights from networks with a
specific emphasis on Social Network Analysis, SNA. In SNA, the nodes represent
individuals and the edges among these represent different connections which can
indicate various types of relationships. The application of SNA forms the basis
for understanding group dynamics and societal structures.
The main objective of this thesis is to leverage advanced graph representation
learning methods for the in-depth analysis of publicly available networks, specif-
ically those documenting social interactions among individuals involved in crim-
inal activities. The primary focus will be on publicly available networks associ-
ated with three distinct mafia clans; two of which multiple layers are the building
blocks for the network structures, capturing diverse forms of communication or
connections revealed through different investigative procedures.
In particular, the project will explore latent variable modeling approaches, such
as Stochastic Block Modeling (SBM) and Latent Space Modeling (LSM) to un-
cover prominent network structures providing a nuanced understanding of com-
munity dynamics and uncovering hidden patterns of association. These methods
will be compared to existing state-of-the-art methods for community detection
and link prediction.
Additionally, predictive modeling approaches will be uti-
lized for the quantification of the identified structures’ validity stemming from
the applied modeling techniques.
An extended SBM class (ESBM) inferring
groups of nodes from common connectivity patterns leveraging the availability of
a range of Gibbs-type priors will be explored in the partitioning process. A hy-
brid membership-latent distance model (HM-LDM) allows for the identification
of prominent distinct network structures. It enables the controlling of simplex
side lengths to ensure identifiability.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has a scope of 30 ECTS points and was prepared at the Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of
Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring the degree Master of
Science in Mathematical Modelling and Computation during the period from
28-08-2023 to 28-01-2024.
Kongens Lyngby, January 28, 2024
Amalie Lerke Hess (s183987)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Morten Mørup, DTU Compute - Depart-
ment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, for the great supervision
and inspiration throughout the entire process.
I would furthermore like to thank my colleagues at the investigative unit at
Copenhagen Police for the encouragement and guidance regarding the relevance
of research in relation to police work.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
0.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
0.1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1
Data
5
1.1
The Infinito Operation Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
The Montagna Operation Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
The Oversize Operation Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Overview of Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Methods
11
2.1
Graph Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Adjacency Matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.2
Multilayer Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.3
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Graph Representation Learning (GRL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Community Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Network Community Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
Spectral Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.3
Louvain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.4
Stochastic Block Models (SBM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.5
The Infinite Relational Model (IRM) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.6
The Extended Stochastic Block Model (ESBM) . . . . . . .
27
2.3.7
Degree-Corrected SBM (DC-SBM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3.8
Stochastic Block Models on Multilayer Networks . . . . . .
33
2.3.9
Latent Space Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
2.3.10 The Hybrid Membership Latent Distance Model
. . . . . .
37
2.4
Link Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
2.4.1
Baseline Heuristic Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.4.2
Stochastic Block Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.4.3
Latent Distance Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
2.4.4
Our Link Prediction Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
2.4.5
Evaluation of Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3
Results
47
3.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.2
The Infinito Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.2.1
Network Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.2.2
Community Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.2.3
Link Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.3
The Montagna Operation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.3.1
Network Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.3.2
Community Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.3.3
Link Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.4
The Oversize Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
3.4.1
Network Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
3.4.2
Community Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
3.4.3
Link Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4
Discussion
79
4.0.1
The Infinito Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.0.2
The Montagna Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
4.0.3
The Oversize Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.0.4
Current Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
4.0.5
Broader Impacts for Law Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
5
Conclusion
83
Bibliography
85
Appendix
91
Spectral Clustering Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
The Multinomial Stochastic Block Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
Prediction in ESBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
Data Preparation for link prediction using MST . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
Eigenvalues of the Graph Laplacians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Trace Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Multilayer ESBM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
==PAGE:11==
0.1 Introduction
1
0.1
Introduction
The analysis of social networks can be a useful tool for uncovering structural pat-
terns in networks such as identifying key persons, discovering hidden patterns,
and visualizing the structures of networks. Covert networks encoding relation-
ships among criminals are inherently diﬀicult to analyze and often possess strong
resilience to disruption, thus motivating the use of graph representation learning
techniques to uncover their intrinsic structure [1].
Knowledge regarding net-
work properties and community structures e.g., to identify influential individuals
and detect subgroups can enable law-enforcement agencies to make calculated
decisions, design targeted interventions, and disrupt criminal activities more ef-
ficiently. Graph representation learning techniques are designed to capture un-
derlying patterns and dependencies in graph-structured data, thus making these
methods well suited for modeling crime networks [2]. The use of social network
analysis, SNA, to study the structure of criminal organizations has gained in-
creased popularity in recent years [3, 4, 5].
This thesis will explore the usability of different graph representation learning
techniques to uncover community structures in criminal organizations. The study
will compare the latent structures uncovered from SBM and LDM and ponder on
the merits and limitations of each of the applied methods. The predictive perfor-
mance of the methods will be used as guidance for assessing the applicability to
such networks.
Many researchers have worked on different datasets regarding the operations
targeting the Italian Mafia clans. Social network analysis tools such as centrality
measures and subgroup formations to describe the structure and importance of
these networks have been the primary focus. A research conducted on all six net-
works had a focus on quantifying the impact of missing data scenarios through
graph distances [4]. Several works have considered the different datasets individ-
ually. In regards to using SNA in crime prevention instances, some work has also
made use of hierarchical clustering algorithms where, firstly, a criminal network
was partitioned into subgroups using a clustering algorithm and, secondly, block
modeling techniques were used to extract interaction patterns between these sub-
groups [6]. A combination of social network analysis and econometric analysis of
link formation has been applied by [7]. More recently [8] proposed a new class
of extended stochastic block models applied to one of the networks considered in
this work.
The relevance and usability of learning and uncovering community structures
in networks has gained much attraction. Current state-of-the-art algorithms for
community detection consist of the Louvain algorithm [9] optimizing the modu-
==PAGE:12==
2
Contents
larity for group identification and spectral clustering [10] leveraging spectral prop-
erties to partition data points into cohesive groups in high-dimensional spaces. A
popular option for model-based approaches is the Stochastic Block Model (SBM),
a generative model for inference and partitioning of networks [11]. An extension
to the classical SBM by replacing the Dirichlet-multinomial process with the al-
ternative Chinese Restaurant Process (CRP) for the node partitioning process
has been considered by [12, 13].
In [14] Mixed Membership Stochastic Block
Models advance probabilistic modeling techniques to capture complex commu-
nity structures in networks with flexible and nuanced node memberships. Latent
Space Models allow for a powerful way to learn low-dimensional latent represen-
tations [15]. Latent Distance Models to position nodes in the latent space and
are highly useful for modeling complex networks and their interactions [16]. The
Hybrid-Membership Latent Distance Model (HM-LDM) by [17] has been devel-
oped as an unsupervised representation learning allowing for soft assignments of
community memberships controlled by the simplex volume defined by the latent
node representations.
0.1.1
Problem Statement
This thesis aims to leverage graph representation learning techniques, specifi-
cally focusing on link prediction and community detection, to analyze publicly
available static networks that depict the social interactions among criminal enti-
ties. The study will employ a variety of graph theoretical methods to investigate
the underlying communities and network structures within these criminal net-
works. Different datasets on the Italian mafia with varying layers stemming from
different investigative proceedings will be compared [18, 19, 20]. The research
will exploit latent variable modeling techniques to uncover network structures
[21].
Furthermore, predictive modeling techniques will be employed to assess
the robustness and validity of these identified structures. Specifically, the study
will explore an extended version of the stochastic block model (SBM) as well as
a hybrid membership latent distance model (HM-LDM) that incorporates soft
membership through a latent distance model with a Poisson likelihood function
[8, 17]. The research will conduct both quantitative and qualitative assessments.
The quantitative assessment involves evaluating the performance of the model in
terms of link prediction, where the objective is to predict missing links [22]. The
qualitative assessment focuses on community detection and analysis.
==PAGE:13==
0.1 Introduction
3
0.1.1.1
Research Questions
What are the merits and limitations of stochastic block modeling (SBM)
as opposed to soft assignments and flexible embedding approaches us-
ing latent distance modeling (LDM) when considering link prediction
and community discovery?
The thesis will consider the applications of stochastic block models (SBM) and the
hybrid membership latent distance model (HM-LDM) for community detection in
criminal network datasets to unveil key complex block structures. A qualitative
assessment of the uncovered community structures will be made by reordering
the adjacency matrices according to identified community memberships.
The
task of performing link prediction will make a quantitative assessment of the
proposed methods by computing the ROC curves and corresponding AUC-ROC
scores. Soft assignments and flexible embedding approaches will be tested using
a variety of latent dimensions and the assignment of community memberships
will be controlled using the simplex volume defined by the latent representations
of the nodes.
How can additional network layers be incorporated in the SBM and
LDM frameworks, and what insights can be derived from the com-
parative analysis across network layers in contrast to collapsing the
network layers?
Both the SBM and the LDM frameworks will be applied to three different Mafia
clan networks of various layers carrying information on different forms of con-
nections identified between the actors. A comparative analysis of the commu-
nity structures identified resulting from the application of the SBM and LDM
frameworks along with state-of-the-art alternatives will be conducted across the
network layers. The thesis will put an emphasis on how multiple network lay-
ers can be incorporated into the SBM with different prior specifications. Two
main approaches will be presented to allow for the incorporation and collapsing
of multiple layers. Assuming the clustering structure is equal across the different
network layers, we look into the situation where the layers have a shared link
probability and the case where we layer-specific link probabilities are assumed.
Based on the learned network structures what revelations can be made
regarding the composition of criminal organizations and what limita-
tions and pitfalls do such assessments entail considering data sensitive-
ness and bias and implications for predictive policing?
Based on the learned network community structures using several different meth-
ods, both hard assignments and soft assignments, insights into the composition
of criminal organizations can be revealed through the application of SBM and
HM-LDM from reordered adjacency matrices. The methods applied can be used
==PAGE:14==
4
Contents
in co-occurrence to offer more nuanced representations of relationships, captur-
ing the complex covert dynamics in criminal networks.
In the discussion, we
will touch upon how our findings can guide predictive policing strategies while
taking precautions of legal and ethical considerations to ensure responsible use
and awareness of potential biases in data collection methods.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Data
This work will focus on six real criminal networks all related to the Italian Mafia.
The networks to be considered are the result of three different Mafia operations;
the Montagna Operation, the Infinito Operation, and the Oversize Operation.
The agents and links in each network have been identified using different tech-
niques. The construction of a graph from the data highly depends on the in-
formation available in the pre-trial detention order and falls within the class
of co-offending networks [23].
It should be noted, that the construction of a
co-participation network is very dependent on the assessment conducted by the
public prosecutor. The three operations forming the foundation for the six net-
works will now be presented.
1.1
The Infinito Operation Dataset
The Infinito Operation dataset is data on the attendance of suspected members of
the Lombardian ’Ndrangheta criminal organization at summits. These summits
are meetings taking place to make decisions of some importance to address and
solve internal problems and to establish roles and powers. These summits have
taken place between 2007 and 2009 [4]. Data is given as a 2-mode matrix with a
size of 156×47 persons by events with undirected binary ties. The 47 columns in
the data represent different physical meeting places and the 156 rows represent
persons. A binary encoding is then given between person and place to indicate
whether or not a person has been present at the particular summit. The atten-
dance at summits was registered by police authorities through wiretapping and
observations during this investigation called ”Operazione Infinito”. The data is
available at UCINET through [19]. This has been reconstructed by the document
”ORDINANZA DI APPLICAZIONE DI MISURA COERCITIVA con mandato
di cattura - art.
292 c.p.p.
-” [24].
The data is reconstructed by a judicial
document regarding the pre-trial detention order prompted by the preliminary
investigation judge.
The original 2-mode matrix with the various mafiosi in the rows and the differ-
ent summits in the columns has been restructured to make an adjacency matrix
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Data
representing the connections between the Mafiosi. A link between two nodes is
created when these have been present at the same summit. It is possible to en-
rich this dataset with additional information in ”Operazione Infinito” (pp. 21-32)
where a list of the different locali along with members and their roles are to be
found [25]. From the original 2-mode matrix an unweighted and undirected graph
with 156 nodes and 1619 edges is created. As an initial pre-processing step, we
exclude from the analysis those individuals who never attended a summit, those
who have not been recognized during the investigation process, as well as those
who are not known to be part of the organization La Lombardia. This leaves us
with a binary, undirected adjacency matrix with 118 nodes and 1229 edges.
Figure 1.1: Infinito Network with single layer
1.2
The Montagna Operation Dataset
The Montagna Operation was an investigation by the Public Prosecuter’s Oﬀice
in Messina, Sicily, that ended in 2007 and was conducted by the Special Unit of
the Italian Police. It was focused on the Sicilian Mafia groups or clans known as
the ”Mistretta” family and the ”Batanesi” clan. These clans infiltrated multiple
economic activities between 2003 and 2007 [4]. The primary data source for this
dataset is the pre-trial detention order issued by the Preliminary Investigation
Judge of Messina on March 14, 2007. Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) relied
on the depositions of collaborators of justice, stakeouts, and wiretapping [26].
The dataset is created by the authors of [26] who have generated two criminal net-
works directly from court data. These two datasets can be visually represented
by undirected and weighted graphs, in which each node represents an individ-
ual and edges show mutual interactions among these individuals. The meetings
dataset captures physical meetings among suspects and has been derived from
police surveillance data while the phonecalls dataset connects individuals having
had phonecall interactions and stems from eavesdropping. The meetings network
contains 101 nodes and 256 edges while the phone calls network has 100 nodes
and 124 edges.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 The Oversize Operation Dataset
7
The two networks are derived from a thorough analysis of textual judicial docu-
ments. They do not contain any sensitive information and have thus been made
publicly available [26]. The dataset used in this work containing the two networks
has been obtained through zenodo [18].
The following figure shows the two different multi-layer views of the Montagna
network.
(a) Multilayer Montagna Network
(b) Aggregate Montagna Network
Figure 1.2: The two different multi-layer network views for analysis approaches
The Montagna network consists of the two layers of meetings and phonecalls
which have been visualized in figure 1.2a. These two layers share 47. The ag-
gregate network in figure 1.2b allows for constructing a single-layer network by
aggregating multiple networks. This has been obtained from a multilayer network
by summing over edges over all layers for each node.
1.3
The Oversize Operation Dataset
The Oversize Operation was an investigation running from 2000 to 2006 targeting
more than 50 suspects. The trial lasted from 2007 to 2009. Most of the suspects
were aﬀiliated with the Calabrian ’Ndragheta clan, a mafia from Calabria, which
is a southern Italian region [4]. The Oversize Operation data consists of three
networks, corresponding to three different stages of the criminal proceedings;
wiretap records, arrest warrant, and judgment. Each of these networks has 182
nodes corresponding to the individuals involved in illicit activities related to the
’Ndragheta clan. The wiretap records network has 247 edges representing wiretap
conversations transcribed by the police. The arrest warrant network consists of
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Data
189 edges which accommodates a selection of the transcripts and other relevant
information from informants and other investigative activities such as physical
surveillance. The judgment network outlines the trial and includes information
from multiple sources of evidence, among which wiretapping and audio surveil-
lance are found. This network has 113 edges [4].
The three datasets from the Oversize Operation are available on Figshare [20]. A
zip file is supplied containing the three networks as binary unweighted adjacency
matrices in CSV format.
The following figure displays the two different multi-layer views of the Oversize
network.
(a) Multi-layer Oversize Network
(b) Aggregate Oversize Network
Figure 1.3: The two different multi-layer network views for analysis approaches
All three of the layers, which have been visualized in figure 1.3a, consist of the
same set of 182 nodes while edges between these vary due to the relations captured
from the different investigate procedures. The aggregate network in figure 1.3b
allows for constructing a single-layer network by aggregating multiple networks.
1.4
Overview of Networks
Sections 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 have provided some background material for the oper-
ations that have resulted in the six different graph-structured criminal networks
dataset we are considering in this thesis. Table 1.1 gives a summary of the types
of actors and connections these networks display and it further introduces the
abbreviations that we will use extensively in the analyses to come.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Overview of Networks
9
Investigation
Abbreviation
Nodes
Edges
Montagna Operation
MN
PC
Suspects
Physical Meetings
Phonecalls
Infinito Operation
SN
Suspects
Surveillance
Oversize Operation
WR
AW
JU
Suspects
Wiretap records
Arrest warrant
Judgment
Table 1.1:
Overview of characteristics of the different criminal networks
datasets.
Most of the existing studies regarding criminal networks focus on limited case
studies and rely on singular sources of information.
This is often due to the
diﬀiculty in obtaining access to data of a criminal nature.
The network properties and characteristics of the six different graph-structured
datasets can help get a simple and quick overview of the core features of the
networks.
Network
# of nodes
# of edges
Directionality
Weightedness
MN
101
256
Undirected
Weighted
PC
100
124
Undirected
Weighted
SN
118
1229
Undirected
Unweighted
WR
182
247
Undirected
Unweighted
AW
182
189
Undirected
Unweighted
JU
182
113
Undirected
Unweighted
Table 1.2: Core numbers and graph types of the networks.
Tables 1.1 and 1.2 above give a brief overview of the general core properties of
the different datasets. As can be derived from the table, we are considering both
weighted and unweighted networks, all undirected, and with varying number of
layers. However, the two weighted networks, Montagna Meetings, and Montagna
Phonecalls, will be transformed into unweighted networks for the following anal-
yses to come.
As introduced in the problem statement, this thesis will consider multilayer net-
works using different approaches. The two primary lines of action to consider
multilayer networks include firstly handling the different layers separately and
then making a comparative analysis across the network layers, and the second
approach consists of collapsing the network layers. As already presented, the two
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Data
operations Montagna and Oversize have multiple layers. The Oversize operation
will be attacked straightforwardly since all layers share the same actors. However,
the Montagna Operation has two layers where only a subset of nodes from each
layer is shared. When applying the various approaches for community detection
and link prediction, we choose to find the set of 47 common people between these
two layers in the Montagna network. This leaves us with two network layers over
a common set of actors and where each layer has its own set of connections. The
following table summarizes the graph structures of these network subsets that we
will now refer to as MNsub and PCsub.
Network
Edges
Nodes
MNsub
54
47
PCsub
32
47
Table 1.3: Network Measures for the subgraphs of common nodes for MN and
PC in Montagna.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Methods
In this chapter, we lay the foundation by introducing basic concepts of graph and
network theory, providing a comprehensive overview of modeling methods. Our
focus then shifts to the task of community detection, where we delve into the
methodologies employed. This includes a detailed exploration of the Stochastic
Block Model (SBM) and Latent Distance Model (LDM) frameworks. Concluding
this section, we address the challenge of link prediction and illuminate how the
chosen methods are suitably applied in this context.
2.1
Graph Theory
A graph is a mathematical structure used to model the pairwise relation between
objects. It is the collection of nodes with edges connecting pairs of nodes. Graphs
are data structures with a universal application for describing complex systems.
In the world of social networks, graphs are used for describing human social in-
teractions. The nodes represent individuals while the edges represent relations
among the individuals. Network Science is an extension of graph theory to study
complex networks often by the use of Social Network Analysis (SNA) to investi-
gate social structures [27].
Formally, a graph G = (V, E) is defined by a set of vertices V and a set of
edges E = {(i, j) : i ∈V ∧j ∈V} between pairs of vertices [28]. In the context
of network science, vertices are often referred to as nodes while edges are called
links. An edge going from node u ∈V to node v ∈V is denoted (u, v) ∈E. We
are only considering simple graphs, which means that there is at most one edge
between each pair of nodes, there are no self-loop i.e. no edges between a node
and itself, and all edges are undirected, i.e. (u, v) ∈E ↔(v, u) ∈E. A subgraph
H of the graph G is a graph whose nodes and links are subsets of the nodes and
links in G.
The six networks in table 1.1 are defined by
Ni = (V, Ei), i ∈{MN, PC, SN, WR, AW, JU},
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Methods
where V is the set of nodes or vertices and Ei is the set of edges or links for a
given network i. Any pair of nodes in the network connected by a link is denoted
(x, y) ∈Ei, with x, y ∈V [1].
2.1.1
Adjacency Matrix
A convenient way of representing a graph is through an adjacency matrix A of
size |V| × |V|. All nodes in a given graph index a certain row and column in
the adjacency matrix. This then enables a representation of the presence or ab-
sence of edges as entries in the adjacency matrix. Each element in the adjacency
matrix aij ∈A is given by the link between a node-pair (i, j). Binary graphs
have binary adjacency matrices and have aij = 1 if there is an edge between
node i and node j and aij = 0 when there is no such edge between the node-pair
(i, j). The elements in the diagonal of the adjacency matrix are assumed to be
zero, thus indicating that the graph contains no self-loops. If the graph is undi-
rected, then the associated adjacency matrix will be symmetric, i.e. aij = aji,
all eigenvalues are real, λ1 ≥λ2 ≥... ≥λn, and the corresponding eigenvectors,
v1, v2, ..., vn, will form an orthonormal basis in Rn [27]. Common graph types
involve directed, undirected, and bipartite graphs and all these can be either
weighted or unweighted. When a graph is said to be weighted, each link or edge
is said to have an associated strength [13]. This in turn will result in a non-binary
adjacency matrix with entries encoding the weight between any two nodes given
as a positive or negative integer value aij ∈Z. The weighted adjacency matrix
of the graph is denoted W = (wij)i,j=1,...,n.
Undirected graphs have one or more connected components, meaning subgraphs
in the network in which any two nodes are connected by paths. Directed graphs
can either have weakly or strongly connected components. A weakly connected
component has paths in at least one direction, while a strongly connected com-
ponent has paths in both directions. For a strongly connected component, every
node is reachable from every other node of that component or subgraph. An
illustration of the typical different graph types is available in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Basic different graph types.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Graph Theory
13
2.1.2
Multilayer Graphs
We make an important distinction between single-layer networks and multilayer
networks.
Both types will be studied in this thesis as a natural consequence
of the structure of the data on the Italian Mafia. A single-layer network is a
social network represented as a network with only one layer, while a multilayer
network is a social network represented as a set of layers, where nodes in the
different layers refer to a global set of actors [29]. We consider an undirected
multilayer graph G = V, E, where the set of vertices V has N elements and the
edge set E contains edges of L different types of relations between the vertices.
An undirected multilayer network of L layers can also be considered a collection
of graphs G = {G(1), ..., G(L)} over the common set of vertices or nodes. The
adjacency matrix can be extended to encompass this multilayer graph structure
of the network. This means that the adjacency matrix A consists of elements
Aij that are L-dimensional vectors Aij = {A(1)
ij , A(2)
ij , ..., A(L)
ij }. An alternative
perspective would be to view the multilayer graph as a collection of L N × N
adjacency matrices {A(1), A(2), ..., A(L)}, where each of these corresponds to a
layer or type of relation between the entities. A vector of degrees of node i is
defined as di = {d(l)
i ; m = 1, ..., L}, where d(l)
i
= P
j A(l)
ij is the node’s degree of
the lth type [30].
2.1.3
Metrics
Some fundamental graph metrics used extensively to describe and capture net-
work structures will now be presented. A path in a network is a sequence of
nodes where each node is connected to the next node along the path by an edge.
The average path length, ⟨d⟩, is a descriptive measure of the average distance
between all pairs of nodes in the graph defined as
⟨d⟩=
X
i,j∈N
dij
n(n −1),
(2.1)
where dij is the shortest path between the two nodes i and j [31]. There exist
several different ways in which a graph can be examined in network science. These
different characteristics or metrics can be computed for each observed network.
Often used metrics include the degree distribution, which is the distribution of the
number of edges for each node, the clustering coeﬀicient, which is the tendency of
vertices to cluster together in tightly knit groups, the characteristic path length,
which is the average number of edges required to move from one node to another,
and many more [13]. Analyzing these measures can uncover organizing principles
creating the observed network’s topology. The degree distribution, pk, gives the
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Methods
probability that a node selected at random in the graph has a degree k. The
degree of a vertex vi ∈V is defined as
di =
n
X
i=1
wij.
(2.2)
The degree matrix D is a diagonal matrix with the degrees d1, ..., dn of each ver-
tex on the diagonal.
Centrality is an intrinsic relational concept.
A central actor might be impor-
tant because it is connected to a large number of different nodes or because it is
connected to other important nodes [29]. Centrality refers to the importance of a
node in a given network. There exist many measures for network centrality, how-
ever, the most common metrics are degree centrality and betweenness centrality.
Degree centrality evaluates the local importance of a node within the graph. For
a given node i, the degree centrality CD(i) of i is defined as
CD(i) =
X
j∈V,j̸=i
aij =
ki
n −1,
(2.3)
where aij indicates the elements of the adjacency matrix A, ki is the degree of
the ith node and n is the size of the network [32].
The Betweenness Centrality (BC) measures how often a node acts as a connec-
tion along the shortest path between two other nodes. It is defined as the sum
of the fraction of all pairs of shortest paths that pass through the node i
BC(i) =
X
j,x∈N
σ(j, x|i)
σ(j, x) ,
(2.4)
where N is the set of nodes, σ(j, x) is the number of shortest σ(j, x)-paths, and
σ(j, x|i) is the number of such paths that pass through the node i other than (j, x).
The clustering coeﬀicient (CC) is a measure of the degree to which nodes in
a graph tend to cluster together.
In such a sense, it quantifies the extent to
which a given node’s neighbors are also connected. A higher clustering coeﬀi-
cient indicates a higher level of local connectivity within the graph [26]. It is
defined as
CCi =
2Ti
ki(di −1),
(2.5)
where Ti is the number of triangles through node i and ki is the degree of node i.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Graph Representation Learning (GRL)
15
2.2
Graph Representation Learning (GRL)
To understand and unveil networks and their underlying structures, researchers
make use of graph analysis tools. One of the leading ways to analyze networks
is using Graph Representation Learning (GRL) techniques involving link predic-
tion, node classification, network reconstruction, and community detection. The
main objective of graph representation learning is to find a mapping, through
a learning process, projecting a network into a low-dimensional latent space in
which the node similarity in the graph is translated to node similarity in the la-
tent space, this means that related nodes are placed in close vicinity in the latent
space [21].
This thesis delves into the core aspects of GRL, with a specific emphasis on com-
munity detection and link prediction, where latent space models and stochastic
block models will be utilized. Latent space models offer an effective approach by
embedding nodes into a latent space where the communities correspond to clus-
ters. Link prediction is another important application of GRL, aiming to forecast
potential links between nodes. Latent space models, which position nodes in a
latent space based on observed connections, and stochastic block models, which
assume the existence of latent blocks affecting edge formation, are employed for
both community detection and link prediction. These endeavors aim to enhance
our understanding of network dynamics, uncover hidden structures, and provide
valuable insights into the relationships within complex systems.
2.3
Community Detection
The undertaking of conducting community detection on different criminal net-
works is a complex yet crucial venture in understanding structural patterns and
dynamics within such networks. Criminal networks fall within the category of
covert networks and can exhibit intricate connections and organizational struc-
tures that can be unveiled through advanced analytical techniques in represen-
tation learning. This task will be tackled by applying a variety of community
detection methods, each with its unique approach and strengths. Methods to be
explored include spectral clustering, Louvain, Stochastic Block Models (SBM),
and Latent Distance Models (LDM). Furthermore, models allowing for soft com-
munity assignments using the Hybrid Membership Latent Space Models will be
explored. Extensions to multilayer networks are also presented in the following.
We first present different network community structures which can be analyzed
through a visual inspection of reordered adjacency matrices, according to the par-
titioning process of the methods. Then the different algorithms follow in order
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Methods
from simplest to more advanced.
2.3.1
Network Community Structures
The visual inspection of reordered adjacency matrices according to the partition-
ing process in the SBM and latent communities in the LDM is an important part
of analyzing what the methods can reveal regarding different structural patterns
in networks. Figure 2.2 displays core community structures visible through the
adjacency matrix [33].
Figure 2.2: Community structures.
If networks display a hierarchical structure it implies that nodes can be orga-
nized into multiple levels with some nodes acting as higher-level hubs connecting
clusters of nodes [34]. When assessing the adjacency matrix, one might observe
clear block structures along the diagonal or off-diagonal, representing different
hierarchical levels. If a network has a core-periphery structure, there is a presence
of a densely connected core of nodes, surrounded by a less connected periphery.
The core nodes are likely to form a dense cluster when inspecting the ordered
adjacency matrix, while the periphery nodes have sparser connections [35]. An
assortative structure in networks exhibits a tendency for nodes with similar de-
grees to be connected. On the contrary, networks of disassortative structures
have nodes with high degrees connected to nodes with low degrees. In this case,
the adjacency matrix might display a more scattered pattern. The network can
also display weak or strong community patterns.
A weak community pattern
suggests the presence of loosely connected groups of nodes. A strong community
pattern appears when a node i has more links within the community than with
the remaining graph [34]. Vertical network structures indicate the presence of
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Community Detection
17
nodes that connect across different layers or levels in the network. A horizontal
structure, on the other hand, implies strong connections within a specific layer or
level in the network [36]. These patterns can provide insights into the underlying
organization and dynamics of a network.
2.3.2
Spectral Clustering
Clustering is one of the most widely used techniques for exploratory data analy-
sis with a broad range of applications. Spectral clustering has many advantages
over traditional algorithms. The results obtained from spectral clustering often
outperform traditional approaches, it is simple to implement, and can be solved
eﬀiciently through simple, standard linear algebra methods [10]. Spectral clus-
tering is a popular technique for community detection and graph partitioning. It
involves using the eigenvectors corresponding to the smallest eigenvalues of the
Laplacian matrix to embed nodes into a lower-dimensional space, in which cluster-
ing is then performed. The objective of clustering is to split the data points into
multiple groups such that points within the same group are similar and points in
different groups are dissimilar to each other. A graphical representation of the
main objective of community detection can be seen in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Community detection
2.3.2.1
Graph Laplacian
One of the fundamental tools used for spectral clustering is graph Laplacian
matrices. In the following, it will be assumed that the graph G is an undirected,
weighted graph with an associated weight matrix W, in which wij = wji ≥0.
The unnormalized graph Laplacian matrix is defined as
L = D −W,
(2.6)
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Methods
where D is the degree matrix and W is the adjacency matrix. The unnormal-
ized graph Laplacian matrix is symmetric and positive semi-definite. This matrix
and its eigenvalues and eigenvectors can be used to describe many properties of
graphs. If G is an undirected graph with non-negative weights, then the multi-
plicity k of the eigenvalue 0 of L equals the number of connected components
A1, A2, ..., Ak in the graph. The eigenspace of this 0 eigenvalue is spanned by the
indicator vectors 1A1, 1A2, ..., 1Ak of those components [10].
Two different matrices are called the normalized graph Laplacian in the liter-
ature. They are closely related and defined as
Lsym := D−1/2LD−1/2 = I −D−1/2WD−1/2
Lrw := D−1L = I −D−1W.
(2.7)
Just as for the unnormalized graph Laplacian, the multiplicity of the eigenvalue
0 of the normalized graph Laplacian is related to the number of connected com-
ponents. If we let G be an undirected graph with non-negative weights, then
the multiplicity k of the eigenvalue 0 of both Lsym and Lrw equals the number
of connected components A1, A2, ..., Ak in the graph. The eigenspace of this 0
eigenvalue of the matrix Lrw is spanned by the indicator vectors 1Ai of those
components. The eigenspace of this 0 eigenvalue of the matrix Lsym is spanned
by the vectors D1/21Ai [10]. As an example, figure 2.4 displays plots of the 10
smallest eigenvalues of the different Laplacian matrices on the Montagna Oper-
ation meetings network layer. Equivalent plots for the other networks can be
found in appendix 5.
Figure 2.4: 10 smallest eigenvalues of different Laplacians of the MN graph.
In figure 2.4 five zero-eigenvalues can be observed, thus implying that the net-
work has 5 connected components.
The first non-zero eigenvalue, the Fiedler
value, provides a one-dimensional representation of the graph that captures the
connectivity between different connected components.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Community Detection
19
2.3.2.2
Spectral Clustering Algorithms
We consider data consisting of n points x1, x2, ..., xn. A pairwise similarity of
these object points is measured by some similarity function which is symmetric
and non-negative and denoted by sij = s(xi, xj) ≥0. The corresponding similar-
ity matrix is denoted by S = (sij)i,j=1,...,n [10]. There exists three main spectral
clustering algorithms; unnormalized and two versions of normalized spectral clus-
tering. These two latter vary in which of the normalized graph Laplacians is em-
ployed. Common for all three spectral clustering algorithms is that they change
the representation of the data points xi to points yi ∈Rk, which enhances the
cluster properties in the data, making the clusters trivially detectable in this new
representation. We focus on one of the normalized symmetric spectral clustering
algorithms.
An introduction to and algorithmic explanation of the other two
algorithms can be found in appendix 5.
Algorithm 1 Normalized Spectral Clustering
Require: Similarity matrix S ∈Rn×n, Number of clusters k
1: Construct a similarity graph, letting W be its weighted adjacency matrix
2: Compute the normalized Laplacian Lsym
3: Compute the first k generalized eigenvectors u1, . . . , uk of Lsym
4: Let U ∈Rn×k be the matrix containing the k eigenvectors u1, . . . , uk as
columns
5: Form the matrix T ∈Rn×k from U by normalizing the rows to norm 1, i.e.,
set tij = uij/(P
k u2
ik)1/2
6: for i = 1 to n do
7:
Let yi ∈Rk be the vector corresponding to the i-th row of T
8: Cluster the points (yi)i=1,...,n in Rk with the k-means algorithm into clusters
C1, . . . , Ck
9: Output: Clusters A1, . . . , Ak with Ai = {j|yj ∈Ci}
When data is given in the form of a similarity graph, we can state the problem
of spectral clustering as finding a partition of the graph such that edges between
different groups have very low weight and the edges within a group have a high
weight [37].
2.3.3
Louvain
The Louvain algorithm is a popular and eﬀicient method for community detection.
At its core, it builds upon the idea of optimizing the modularity, which quantifies
the quality of a community structure. This is done by comparing the number of
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Methods
edges within communities to the expected number of edges if the network were
randomly connected. The Louvain algorithm seeks to maximize the modularity
score, indicating a strong community structure [38]. A simple pseudo-code for
the primary steps of the Louvain algorithm can be found in algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Louvain Algorithm
1: Input: Network G = (V, E)
2: Output: Final community structure C
3: Initialization: Each node is initially assigned to its own community.
4: repeat
5:
for each node v ∈V do
6:
for each neighboring community c of v do
7:
Calculate the modularity gain by moving v to c.
8:
Move v to the community that maximizes modularity gain.
9:
Aggregate nodes into their newly determined communities.
10: until no further improvement in modularity can be achieved.
11: Output: Final community structure C, where nodes within the same com-
munity are more densely connected.
2.3.4
Stochastic Block Models (SBM)
In recent years, rapid growth and developments in model-based clustering in
graphs, called block modeling, have taken place [39]. Stochastic Block Models,
or SBMs in short, are a class of models in statistical analysis of graphs or net-
works seeking to generate graphs in which community structures are taken into
account [28]. They are used to discover and understand the clustering and latent
structures of a network.
2.3.4.1
A Parametric Bayesian Stochastic Block Model
A mixture model is a simple and powerful approach to modeling structure in a
complex network. In such a model, it is assumed that each node belongs to one
of K blocks or clusters, where K < N. The link probability between node pairs
(i, j) is denoted ηzi,zj with zi, zj ∈{1, 2, ..., K} denoting the block assignments,
hence z = (z1, ..., zV )T ∈{1, ..., K}V is the node membership vector associated
to the generic node partition {Z1, ..., ZK}, such that zv = k if and only if v ∈Zk.
K are mutually exclusive and exhaustive groups for the nodes to be partitioned
into [8]. The link probabilities between two nodes are assumed to be independent
of each other and thus only depend on the block assignments of the two nodes.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Community Detection
21
The likelihood of the graph is given by
p(A|z, η) =
Y
(i,j)
p(aij|zi, zj, η) =
Y
(i,j)
p(aij|ηzi,zj),
(2.8)
where z = {zi}N
i=1 denotes the block assignments for each node and η denotes the
link probabilities and is the K × K symmetric matrix with elements ηhk ∈(0, 1)
denoting the probability of an edge between a node in cluster h and a node in
cluster k [13]. Conditioned on the community assignments of nodes zi and zj the
edges are formed independently following a Bernoulli distribution
p(aij|ηzi,zj) = Bernoulli(ηzi,zj)
= ηaij
zi,zj(1 −ηzi,zj)1−aij,
(2.9)
in which ηzi,zj = ηhk denotes the link probability between a node i in block h
and a node j in block k [40]. The Beta distribution is the conjugate prior to
the Bernoulli distribution [41]. This then yields the following link probability for
each cluster pair
p(ηhk) = Beta(α, β)
=
1
B(α, β)ηα−1
hk (1 −ηhk)β−1.
(2.10)
Settings the parameters α = β = 1 would yield the uniform distribution [41]. A
natural choice of prior on z is the K-categorical distribution
p(z|π) =
N
Y
i=1
p(zi = k|π) =
N
Y
i=1
πzi
(2.11)
A natural option for prior is the Dirichlet distribution of the block probabilities
π = {πk}K
k=1 given as
p(π) = Dirichlet(α)
=
1
B(α)
K
Y
k=1
παk−1
k
,
(2.12)
where α is a concentration parameter representing a prior belief of the number
of nodes in block k, denoted nk. B(α) is the multinomial beta function which
can be expressed using the gamma function
B(α) =
QK
k=1 Γ(αk)
Γ(PK
k=1 αk)
,
(2.13)
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Methods
where α1 = ... = αK = A/K for each component a priori to be equally likely to
occur [13]. The resulting prior on the cluster assignments z is hence given by the
joint distribution p(z, π) for a finite mixture model
p(z, π) = p(z|π)p(π)
=
 N
Y
i=1
πzi

1
B(α)
K
Y
k=1
παk−1
k

=
 K
Y
k=1
πNk
k

1
B(α)
K
Y
k=1
παk−1
k

=
1
B(α)
K
Y
k=1
πNk+(αk−1)
k
.
(2.14)
We here supply a brief explanation of how the expression in the first parenthesis of
the second line is obtained when moving from the term in the first parenthesis of
the first line in equation 2.14 above. The product QN
i=1 πzi is considered, in which
there are Nk occurrences of each cluster k because πzi selects the probability for
a cluster k for each data point i with zi = k, thus this can be rewritten as
QK
k=1 πNk
k . The expression of Nk is given as
Nk =
N
X
i=1
1k(zi),
(2.15)
where 1 denotes the indicator function
1k(zi) =
(
1
ifzi ∈k
0
otherwise.
The full likelihood and prior distributions have now been defined.
2.3.4.2
Nuisance Parameters
It is possible to reduce the parameter space and thus simplifying the model by
considering the cluster probabilities π and the link probabilities η as nuisance
parameters. The effective prior over z can be computed by marginalizing over
the mixture component probabilities π. This will have a closed form expression
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Community Detection
23
due to the conjugacy between the Dirichlet and Categorical distributions [13]
p(z) =
Z
p(z, π)dπ
=
Z
1
B(α)
K
Y
k=1
πNk+(αk−1)
k
dπ
=
1
B(α)
Z
K
Y
k=1
πNk+αk−1
k
dπ
(2.16)
The normalization constant of the Dirichlet distribution is the multivariate beta
function and can be used to reduce the probability function to a probability
density function with total probability of one. The integral on the right hand
side of the last line in equation 2.16 above represents the normalization factor of
the Dirichlet distribution with parameters Nk + αk for each component [41]
Z
K
Y
k=1
πNk+αk−1
k
dπ =
QK
k=1 Γ(Nk + αk)
Γ(PK
k=1(Nk + αk))
= B(N + α)
B(α)
.
(2.17)
The Dirichlet distribution’s normalization constant is related to the beta function
through the beta-gamma relationship [41]
B(a, b) = Γ(a)Γ(b)
Γ(a + b) .
(2.18)
Using the result in eq. 2.17 along with the expression of the beta function in eq.
2.13 leads to the effective prior over z can be written as
p(z) =
Z
p(z, π)dπ
= B(N + α)
B(α)
=
QK
k=1 Γ(Nk + αk)
Γ(PK
k=1 Nk + αk)
Γ(PK
k=1 αk)
QK
k=1 Γ(αk)
=
Γ(PK
k=1 αk)
Γ(PK
k=1(Nk + αk))
K
Y
k=1
Γ(Nk + αk)
Γ(αk)
=
Γ(A)
Γ(A + N)
K
Y
k=1
Γ(Nk + αk)
Γ(αk)
,
(2.19)
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Methods
where we have used PK
k=1 αk = A in the last step of eq. 2.19 above. This result-
ing effective prior distribution is known as the multivariate Pólya distribution
which is also known as the Dirichlet-multinomial distribution.
The link probabilities η are also to be considered nuisance parameters. These
can then be marginalized analytically using the conjugacy between the Beta and
the Bernoulli distributions.
p(A|z) =
Z
p(A|z, η)p(η)dη
=
Z Y
(i,j)
p(aij|ηzi,zj)B(α, β)dη
(2.20)
Here p(A|z, η) is the likelihood function dependent on the link probabilities η,
and p(η) is the prior distribution for η. The marginalization consists of integrat-
ing over all possible values of η, thus eliminating the dependence on η. When
integrating over all possible values of η, the product of beta distribution proper-
ties for each (i, j) term in the likelihood product will be obtained
p(A|z) =
Y
(h,k)
B(ch,k + α, ch,k + β)
B(α, β)
,
(2.21)
where ch,k denotes the number of links between nodes in component h and com-
ponent k, ch,k represents the number of non-links between nodes in component
h and component k, and α and β are parameters of the beta prior distribution.
This expression represents the likelihood of the data A given the categorical vari-
ables z. This is modeled as a product of conditional probabilities where each
term involves the beta distribution properties.
Bayes rule can be used to obtain a posterior distribution of the cluster labels
given the graph
p(z|A) = p(A|z)p(z)
p(A)
(2.22)
The posterior distribution of the parameters is inferred, often through the ap-
plication of some type of numerical approximation method such as Monte Carlo
sampling or Gibbs sampling [13].
2.3.5
The Infinite Relational Model (IRM)
The infinite relational model is a latent variable model in which each node is
assigned to some category, corresponding to a clustering of the nodes in a net-
work. The number of clusters is learned through statistical inference from data
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Community Detection
25
[13]. The previous section introduced the parametric Bayesian mixture model for
complex networks. In this case, the total number of possible groups in the whole
population of nodes, K, is fixed and finite. The non-parametric setting will now
be presented. When analyzing data with finite mixtures as above, the number of
latent clusters must be specified in advance. However, this is often an unknown
quantity and it is thus desirable to learn from data. Bayesian non-parametric
models address this problem by assuming an infinite number of latent clusters,
but where only a finite number of these are used to generate the observed data
[42].
The number of groups in criminal networks is usually unknown and thus has
to be inferred from data. If the number of components exceeds the number of
nodes in the network, then some components will be empty. An option is to use
a Dirichlet partition process corresponding to the infinite relational model with
K = ∞, indicating that infinitely many nodes would give rise to infinitely many
clusters. It is important to make a distinction between K, the total number of
possible clusters, and H, the number of occupied clusters [8]. It should further-
more be noted, that different configurations of labeling can give rise to the same
clustering of the network nodes.
The model presented above introduced K labeled mixture components, but it
is more desirable to specify the probability distribution directly over the equiv-
alence class of partitions of the network nodes. The Infinite Relational Model
(IRM) is the non-parametric version of the SBM allowing for an infinite number
of clusters. It uses the Chinese Restaurant Process (CRP) as prior which is de-
rived from the Dirichlet-multinomial prior. There are a total of K labels to choose
from, implying that there exist K possible labelings for the first component, K−1
possible labelings for the second component, and so on. This results in a total
number of label configurations leading to the same partitioning of network nodes
given by
K!
(K −K)!,
(2.23)
where K is the number of non-empty clusters. The derivation of the Dirichlet-
multinomial distribution over partitions to obtain the CRP distribution can be
carried out using the conditional probability of each term of the partition term
and then applying the product rule to reach the joint distribution. When as-
sessing the conditional probability contribution of incorporating a node i into
a cluster k, while taking into consideration the existing partition Z\i, the clus-
tering of each node i is evaluated in relation to other nodes. As a result, the
probabilities are distributed over clusters rather than node labels. In turn, we
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Methods
write
p(zi = k|Z\i) = nk + α/K
N −1 + α,
(2.24)
where α ∈R+ is a concentration parameter controlling the rate of generating new
clusters, nk is the number of nodes in cluster k, and N −1 is the total number of
nodes disregarding the current node i. We differentiate between the two scenarios
in which a node i can be added to a cluster; either i is assigned to a new and
unpopulated cluster or it is assigned to an existing and populated cluster.
The limiting stochastic process, limK→∞p(zi = k|Z\i), is known as the Chinese
Restaurant Process (CRP), so we have z = CRP(A). This means that the prior
over clusters is the CRP. We consider a network with an infinite number of
possible clusters. The first node in the network is assigned to the first cluster. The
second node is assigned to the first cluster with probability
1
1+α, and to the second
cluster with probability
α
1+α. The nth node is assigned to one of the occupied
clusters with a probability proportional to the number of nodes already belonging
to the cluster and the next unoccupied cluster with a probability proportional to
α. At any point, the assignment of nodes to clusters defines a random partition.
If we let zi denote the cluster assignment of the nth node, then the probability
of a node being assigned to a cluster k is
p(zi = k|Z\i) =
(
nk
N−1+α
if k is populated
α
N−1+α
if k is not populated
where nk is the number of nodes in cluster k [42]. It should be noticed that
the higher the value of the concentration parameter α, the more clusters are
generated, resulting in fewer nodes per cluster. The joint distribution can be
derived by computing the conditional probability using the product rule of eq.
2.3.5
p(Z) = p(z1) · p(z2|z1) · . . . · p(zN|z1, z2, . . . zN−1)
=
K
Y
k=1
α(nk −1)!
QN
i=1(i −1 + α)
(2.25)
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Community Detection
27
Using the definition of the gamma function Γ(n) = (n−1)! as well as the property
QN
i=1(i −1 + α) = Γ(N+α)
Γ(α) , we are able to rearrange and write
p(Z) =
K
Y
k=1
αΓ(nk)
QN
i=1(i −1 + α)
=
αK
QN
i=1(i −1 + α)
K
Y
k=1
Γ(nk)
=
αK
Γ(α+N)
Γ(α)
K
Y
k=1
Γ(nk)
= αKΓ(α)
Γ(α + N)
K
Y
k=1
Γ(nk).
(2.26)
Collectively, the nodes are partitioned into K clusters according to a Chinese
restaurant process. The probability of a link formation between two nodes i and
j in two different clusters follows a Beta distribution. Links in the network are
generated according to a Bernoulli distribution depending on which clusters the
pair of nodes belong to. To summarize, the generative process of the Infinite
Relational Model can be written as
Clustering : Z ∼CRP(A)
Cluster-link densities : ηh,k ∼Beta(a, b)
Links in network : Aij ∼Bernoulli(ηzi,zj)
(2.27)
2.3.6
The Extended Stochastic Block Model (ESBM)
The Extended Stochastic Block Model (ESBM) was recently introduced by Legra-
manti et al in 2022 in the paper Extended Stochastic Block Models with Applica-
tion to Criminal Networks [8]. The primary idea behind their work is to infer
groups of nodes having common connectivity patterns via Gibbs-type priors on
the partition process.
The ESBM class is not restricted to a fixed and finite
number of clusters of the network but allows for the number of groups in the
network to be inferred from the data. Different Gibbs-type priors are considered
to motivate the unified ESBM class.
The priors considered in [8] involve the
Dirichlet-multinomial, the Dirichlet process, the Pitman-Yor process, and the
Gnedin process.
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Methods
2.3.6.1
Prior Specification
In [8] the extended model is presented as a unifying framework characterized by
the choice of a Gibbs-type prior for z. Gibbs-type priors are defined on the space
of unlabeled group indicators z. A probability mass function p(z) is said to be
of Gibbs-type if and only if
p(z) = WV,H
H
Y
h=1
(1 −σ)nh−1,
(2.28)
in which nh is the number of nodes in cluster h, σ < 1 is a discount parameter,
and {WV,H : 1 ≤H ≤V } is a collection of non-negative weights satisfying the
recursion WV,H = (V −Hσ)WV +1,H + WV +1,H+1, with W1,1 = 1 [8].
The predictive distribution of Gibbs-type priors implies that membership indica-
tors z can be obtained in a sequential and interpretable manner according to
p(zV +1 = h|z) ∝
(
WV +1,H(nh −σ)
for h = 1, ..., H,
WV +1,H+1
for h = H + 1.
(2.29)
implying that the group assignment can be interpreted as a seating mechanism,
the Chinese Restaurant Process. The authors of the [8] propose the use of four
different Gibbs-type priors that can be obtained as special cases of eq. 2.29.
• Dirichlet-multinomial (DM): Let σ < 0 and consider the collection of
weights WV,H =

βH−1/(βH + 1)V −1
 QH−1
h=1 (H −h)1(H ≤H) for some
β = −σ and H ∈{1, 2, . . .}. Then eq. 2.29 coincides with the dm urn-
scheme: pr(zV +1 = H + 1|z) ∝β(H −H)1(H ≤H) [8].
• Dirichlet process (DP): Let σ = 0 and set WV,H = αH/(α)V for some
α > 0. Then eq. 2.29 leads to a CRP urn-scheme: pr(zV +1 = h|z) ∝nh for
h = 1, ..., H and pr(zV +1 = H + 1|z) ∝α. The CRP can also be obtained
as a limiting Dirichlet-multinomial with β = α/H [8].
• Pitman-Yor process (PY): Let σ ∈[0, 1) and set [QH−1
h=1 (α + hσ)]/(α +
1)V −1 for some α > −σ.
Then eq.
2.29 characterizes the PY process:
pr(zV +1 = H|z) ∝nh−σ for h = 1, ..., H and pr(zV +1 = H+1|z) ∝α+Hσ.
This reduces to a Dirichlet process when σ = 0 [8].
• Gnedin process (GN): Let σ = −1 and define WV,H = [(γ)V −H
QH−1
h=1 (h2−
γh)]/ QV −1
v=1 (v2 + γv) for some γ ∈(0, 1). Then eq. 2.29 identifies the GN
process: pr(zV +1 = H|z) ∝(nh + 1)(V −H + γ) for h = 1, ..., H and
pr(zV +1 = H + 1|z) ∝H2 −Hγ [8].
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Community Detection
29
These considered priors provide different realistic generative mechanisms for
grouping structures in criminal networks. According to [43] the Dirichlet process
and the Pitman-Yor process may prove useful when analyzing constructions of
relatively unstable and fragmented criminal networks. Such network types could
be characterized by multiple small cells and individualists, which e.g. could be
the case of the network from the Oversize Operation. This can be seen in figures
3.19d-3.19f. The Infinito network, on the other hand, has a more stable architec-
ture, thus priors, such as the Dirichlet-multinomial providing a finite number of
population clusters, would be suitable [8, 43].
2.3.6.2
Inference
After the formulation of the probabilistic model as a joint distribution over data
and parameters through the specification of likelihood and priors, the posterior
distribution of the parameters is inferred. The posterior distribution is given as
p(z|X) =
p(X|z)p(z)
P
z p(X|z)p(z),
(2.30)
where the denominator is given by
p(A) =
X
Z
p(A|Z)
(2.31)
The denominator specified in 2.31 involves the summation over all possible node
partitions, and consequently, some approximate inference is needed. Bayesian
inference, at its core, is the process of learning about the unobserved from the
observed.
The Bayesian paradigm consists of prior knowledge, modeled by a
probability distribution, and is updated each time a new observation is recorded.
The uncertainty of this new observation is modeled by another probability dis-
tribution. In Bayesian inference, prior beliefs or knowledge about a hypothesis
are combined with observed data to generate a posterior probability distribution
[44]. There exist two main approaches in approximate inference: Variational and
Monte Carlo inference [13]. This thesis will focus on Monte Carlo inference and
in particular the Gibbs sampler.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
The idea in Monte Carlo approximation is to generate several random samples
from the posterior distribution and approximate unmanageable integrals and sum-
mations by empirical averages based on the samples. Monte Carlo refers to the
sampling purpose while Markov Chain refers to how the samples are obtained. A
Markov Chain is constructed to produce samples. A Markov Chain is a stochastic
process given by a chain of samples.
==PAGE:40==
30
2 Methods
Gibbs Sampling
Samples, here cluster assignments zi, are iteratively sampled from their condi-
tional distribution, p(zi = d|A, Z\i), when considering Gibbs sampling.
This
process, when repeated, will then eventually approximate the posterior distribu-
tion. Gibbs sampling is a type of Markov Chain Monte Carlo method used to
approximate multivariate distributions. We let zi denote the community assign-
ments of any given node i and Z\i denote the partition matrix for all community
assignments except zi. To derive the Gibbs sampler, we apply Bayes’ theorem to
expand the expression of the conditional posterior probability
p(zi = d|A, Z\i) =
p(A, zi = d|Z\i)
P
d′ p(A, zi = d′, Z\i)
(2.32)
and the conditional joint probability can be expressed using the product rule of
probability
p(A, zi = d|Z\i) = p(A|zi = d, Z\i)
|
{z
}
conditional likelihood
p(zi = d|Z\i)
|
{z
}
conditional prior
(2.33)
In the context of Gibbs Sampling, we are aiming at deriving the conditional pos-
teriors from the conditional likelihood and conditional prior. This stems from
the fact, that in each iteration of the Gibbs Sampler, the full conditional distri-
butions of each parameter given the current values of the other parameters are
sequentially sampled. The general urn scheme in eq. 2.29 for the entire class of
Gibbs-type priors can guide the derivation of a general collapsed Gibbs sampler.
The group assignment of each node is sampled from its full conditional distribu-
tion given its adjacency matrix A and the vector of cluster assignments of all the
other nodes excluding i, denoted Z\i, at every iteration.
The last term in eq. 2.32 above can be simplified as follows
p(A, zi = d|Z\i)
P
d′ p(A, zi = d′, Z\i) =
H
Y
k=1
B(a + mhk + rik, b + mhk + rik)
B(a + mhk, b + mhk
,
(2.34)
where mhk and mhk denote the number of edges and non-edges between nodes
in cluster h and k, without counting node i, respectively. rik and rik denote the
number of edges and non-edges between node i and nodes in cluster k [13, 8].
The prior term is readily available from the unsupervised Gibbs-type priors in eq.
2.29:
p(A, zi = d|Z\i) = p(zi = d|Z\i) ∝
(
WV,H−(nh −σ)
for h ≤H−,
WV,H−+1
for h = H−+ 1,
(2.35)
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Community Detection
31
where nh is the cardinality of cluster h and H−is the total number of occupied
clusters after the removal of node i [8].
A reasonable point estimate on the link probabilities between communities ηhk
can be obtained using
(ηhk|A, z) ∼Beta(a + mhk, b + mhk)
(2.36)
resulting in
ˆηhk = E(ηhk|A, z = ˆz) =
a + ˆmhk
a + ˆmhk + b + ˆmhk
, ∀h = 1, ..., ˆH and ∀k = 1, ..., h
(2.37)
where ˆmhk and ˆmhk denote the number of edges and non-edges between nodes
in clusters h and k computed from the estimated ˆz [8].
2.3.6.3
Estimation and Uncertainty Quantification
The authors of the paper Extended Stochastic Block Models with Application to
Criminal Networks [8] propose a set of methods for comparing community detec-
tion algorithms. Bayesian nonparametric models, such as the ones utilized in this
thesis, provide a posterior over the entire space of partitions, thus allowing for
an assessment of statistical properties, such as uncertainty on the number of clus-
ters. The posterior of a real-valued parameter of interest is in Bayesian statistics
often summarized by a point estimate such as the posterior mean along with 95%
credible intervals to characterize uncertainty. In particular, we look into point
estimates and credible sets to summarize the posterior of the clustering struc-
ture based on decision and information-theoretic techniques to compare results
obtained from different clustering approaches. The SBM delivers the posterior
distribution over the space of node partitions. A decision-theoretic approach uti-
lizing summarizing posterior distributions on partitions leveraging the variation
of information, VI, metric for cluster comparison which quantifies the distance be-
tween two clusters by a comparison between their individual and joint entropies.
The variation of information metric measures the amount of information between
two clusters relative to their shared information, thus yielding a metric that tends
to 0 as the overlap between two clusters increases [45, 46]. A Bayesian point es-
timate for z is the partition with the lowest posterior averaged VI distance from
the other clusters
ˆz = arg min
z′ Ez[VI(z, z′)|A],
(2.38)
where the expected value is taken wrt. the posterior of z and the optimization is
often carried out using a greedy algorithm [8].
==PAGE:42==
32
2 Methods
It is possible to make credible sets around point estimates using the VI met-
ric [46]. By ordering the partitions according to their VI distance from ˆz and
defining a ball holding all partitions with a distance less than some threshold
from ˆz, it is possible to define a 1 −α, α ∈[0, 1], credible ball around ˆz reflecting
the uncertainty in the point estimate ˆz [46] [8].
The authors of [8] propose the use of the WAIC information criterion as a general-
use model selection strategy. The calculation of WAIC only necessitates posterior
samples of the log-likelihoods for the edges [47, 48]
log p(avu|z, η) = avu log ηzv,zu+(1−avu) log(1−ηzv,zu), v = 2, ..., V, u = 1, ..., 1−v.
(2.39)
The quantities used in eq.
2.39 can be obtained by combining the posterior
samples for z with those for the block probabilities in η. These can be simulated
from the conjugate full conditional distribution
(ηhk|A, z) ∼Beta(a + mhk, b + mhk), h = 1, ..., H, k = 1, ..., h.
(2.40)
The misclassification error when predicting aij with the estimated ˆθˆziˆzj from eq.
2.37 can be used as a global measure of goodness-of-fit [8].
Additionally, deviance is a commonly used measure in statistical modeling to
assess the goodness of fit of a model.
The deviance is useful in the context
of clustering, when no ground truth partition of block structures is known, to
compare different clustering methods. The deviance is given by
D = −2 log p(A|ˆz),
(2.41)
where p(A|ˆz) is the likelihood of the observed data A given the clustering assign-
ment ˆz. The lower the deviance, the better the obtained clustering assignment
explains the observed data, thus indicating a good indicator for model selection.
For a brief explanation of how the authors of [8] propose to perform prediction of
group memberships for new actors entering the network, we refer to the appendix
5.
2.3.7
Degree-Corrected SBM (DC-SBM)
The Degree-Corrected Stochastic Block Model (DC-SBM) is an extension of the
classical Stochastic Block Model (SBM) that encompasses node degrees into the
modeling process by allowing for heterogeneity of node degrees within blocks. The
classical SBM assumes nodes within a community have the same probability of
==PAGE:43==
2.3 Community Detection
33
forming connections, despite their individual degrees. Nonetheless, in real-world
networks, nodes with different degrees may exhibit variations in their connection
probabilities. The Bernoulli distribution of edges is replaced by a Poisson distri-
bution. Furthermore, the link probability between two nodes i and j depends on
an additional node parameter θ to introduce disparity between the nodes [49].
2.3.8
Stochastic Block Models on Multilayer Networks
The datasets considered in this thesis are the result of different investigative pro-
ceedings. As described in the data section, both the Montagna Operation and the
Oversize Operation have resulted in multiple network layers. The Montagna Op-
eration has two network layers; physical meetings and phonecalls, sharing 47 of
nodes. The Oversize Operation has three network layers; wiretap records, arrest
warrants, and judgment. In order to quantify the latent structure in such connec-
tivity networks, we are interested in partitioning the nodes into groups that share
similar connectivity patterns within the network. The previous section regarding
the regular stochastic block model considers only one network with a single layer
at a time. This section will explore the possibility of adding further information
to the partitioning process when multiple layers over a common set of nodes are
available. The joint modeling of different network link types, resulting from dif-
ferent investigative procedures, is thus to be imposed by shared and individual
segregated units of the different modalities.
We will explore two different approaches to extending the stochastic block model
to the multilayer setting; one in which the network layers share a common com-
munity structure and have shared link probabilities across layers and another
where the layers, likewise, share the community structure, but where each layer
has its own set of link probabilities between actors. The difference between these
two approaches fundamentally lies within the η parameter; either the link prob-
abilities are shared across the layers and we thus have the same η parameter or
the link probabilities vary across the layers and we have layer-specific probabil-
ities η(l). The likelihood should be evaluated as the product of the likelihood
for each observed network [13], due to the conditional independence assumptions
between network layers given the community assignments and the use of the beta
distribution to model the likelihood of link and non-link counts within each layer.
The likelihood term for each layer is calculated independently, and the product
over layers accounts for the assumption of a shared community structure.
When modeling binary networks, the following generative process can be defined
==PAGE:44==
34
2 Methods
in which l is used to index the layer
Links in network : Aij
∼Bernoulli(η(l)
zizj),
(2.42)
Cluster-link densities : η(l)
hk
∼Beta(β+, β−),
(2.43)
Clustering : zi
∼Categorical(π),
(2.44)
Cluster proportions : π
∼Dirichlet(α).
(2.45)
According to the above scheme, the nodes are partitioned into K clusters and the
cluster proportions follow a Dirichlet distribution when considering the classical
SBM [50]. When working with the extended model using different Gibbs-type
priors, these cluster proportions follow either a Dirichlet process, a Dirichlet-
multinomial process, a Pitman-Yor process, or a Gnedin process [8].
2.3.8.1
Shared Link Probabilities
We first introduce the case in which the network is assumed to have shared
community structures as well as link probabilities η across the network layers.
The model parameters are updated using the accumulated statistics across layers
after which new assignments are sampled. Using the above generative process as
well as eq. 2.21 for the regular SBM, we write the following expression for the
likelihood
P(A, z|β+, β−, α) = P(z|A)
L
Y
l=1
Y
k≤h
B(N +
hk + β+, N −
hk + β−)
B(β+, β−)
N +
hk =
X
1≤i≤j≤N
δzi,hδzj,k
L
X
l=1
A(l)
ij
N −
hk =
X
1≤i≤j≤N
δzi,hδzj,k
L
X
l=1
(1 −A(l)
ij )
(2.46)
where N +
hk = P
1≤i≤j≤N δzi,hδzj,kA(l)
ij and N −
hk = P
1≤i≤j≤N δzi,hδzj,k(1 −A(l)
ij )
denotes the number of links and non-links between nodes in cluster h and cluster k
according to the network A(l) respectively. We have here introduced the notation
δij, which is the Kronecker delta, to express conditions on the indices of the
network nodes. Generally, δij = 1 if i = j and δij = 0 if i ̸= j. Looking at eq.
2.46, δzi,h checks whether node i belongs to cluster h, and δzj,k checks whether
node j belongs to cluster k. Taking the product of these Kronecker deltas ensures
that both nodes i and j belong to the specified clusters.
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Community Detection
35
2.3.8.2
Layer-specific Link Probabilities
The second multilayer modeling approach of the SBM assumes a shared commu-
nity structure across the network layers, but the network has layer-specific link
probabilities η(l). Layer-specific parameters for link probabilities are introduced
and the model parameters for each layer are updated separately in the Gibbs
sampler using the layer-specific link probabilities and then new assignments are
sampled. The likelihood of the community assignments P(z|A) is updated within
each layer based on layer-specific link probabilities. Using the above generative
process as well as eq. 2.21 for the regular SBM, we write the following expression
for the likelihood
P(A, z|β+, β−, α) = P(z|A)
L
Y
l=1
Y
k≤h
B(N (l)+
hk
+ β+, N (l)−
hk
+ β−)
B(β+, β−)
N (l)+
hk
=
X
1≤i≤j≤N
δzi,hδzj,kA(l)
ij
N (l)−
hk
=
X
1≤i≤j≤N
δzi,hδzj,k(1 −A(l)
ij )
(2.47)
where N (l)+
hk
= P
1≤i≤j≤N δzi,hδzj,kA(l)
ij and N (l)−
hk
= P
1≤i≤j≤N δzi,hδzj,k(1 −
A(l)
ij ) denotes the number of links and non-links between nodes in cluster h and
cluster k according to the network A(l) respectively.
Alternatively, one can consider the Multinomial Stochastic Block Model (MSBM)
as an extension of the Stochastic Block Model (SBM). MSBM is an extension to
multiple layers by allowing for different block structures and connection proba-
bilities across layers [51]. The connection probabilities can vary between layers,
capturing the heterogeneity in relationships across different types. The goal of
the multinomial stochastic block model is to identify and characterize the dif-
ferences in community structure and edge probabilities across layers [52]. An
explanation and derivation of this model can be found in appendix 5.
2.3.9
Latent Space Models
Latent Space Models (LSM) are one of the most important and strong ways
to learn low-dimensional latent representations. Such methods employ general-
ized linear models for constructing latent node embeddings conveying important
network characteristics. In latent space models, the probability between actors
depends on the positions of individuals in an unobserved latent space. The prob-
ability of a link between two nodes can be modeled by determining the distance
==PAGE:46==
36
2 Methods
between their latent positions. Considering a network with N nodes, the latent
space model is given by
P(Y|Z, θ) =
N
Y
i̸=j
P(yij|zi, zj, θ),
(2.48)
where Y denotes the N ×N adjacency matrix containing the network information,
Z denotes the N × D matrix of latent positions where each row is composed by
zi = (zi1, ..., ziD) = (zi,d) ∈RN×D the D-dimensional vector indicating the posi-
tion of observation i in the D-dimensional latent space. θ denotes the parameters
[16]. The logistic regression model can be used for a convenient parameterization
of P(yij|zi, zj, θ), where the probability of a link is dependent on the Euclidean
distance between zi and zj
ηij = log odds(yij = 1|zi, zj, θ)
= θ −||zi −zj||,
(2.49)
where the distance metric ||zi −zj|| can be replaced by an arbitrary set of dis-
tances {dij} satisfying the triangle inequality dij ≤dik + dkj∀{i, j, k}.
Interestingly, the model provides an almost perfect fit for many social network
datasets with undirected relations, in a parameter space of much lower dimension
than that of the data. This can be seen by applying a parameterization of 2.49
log odds(yij = 1|dij, θ) = θ(1 −dij).
(2.50)
A set of distances {dij} are said to represent the network Y if
{dij > 1 ∀i, j : yij = 0} and
{dij < 1 ∀i, j : yij = 1}
(2.51)
The network is dk representable when the distances are being modeled as Eu-
clidean distances in some k-dimensional space and there exist points zi ∈Rk s.t.
the distances dij = ||zi −zj|| satisfy 2.51 [16].
The log-likelihood of a conditional independence model is given by
log P(Y |η) =
X
i̸=j
{ηijyij −log(1 + eηij)},
(2.52)
where η is a function of parameters. The estimation of posterior probabilities of
the η can be obtained by applying an MCMC approach.
==PAGE:47==
2.3 Community Detection
37
Specifically, the Latent Distance Model (LDM) uses the Euclidean norm to posi-
tion similar nodes in the network closer in the latent space as a direct consequence
of the triangle inequality. This naturally represents transitivity and homophily
properties [21]. The logistic regression model is an often-used parameterization
of eq. 2.49 for binary data. However, the Poisson regression model under a linear
model framework for the LSM can also be employed where the use of a Pois-
son likelihood for modeling binary relationships in a network does not decrease
the predictive performance nor the ability to detect the network structure [15].
The rate of an occurring edge depends on a distance metric between the latent
positions of two nodes. In this thesis, we consider the LDM Poisson rate with
node-specific biases, resulting in the following Poisson rate expression
λij = exp(βi + βj −|zi −zj|),
(2.53)
Since the variables {zi}i∈V can be considered latent characteristics, eq.
2.53
implies that similar nodes will be positioned closer in the latent space.
This
signals that there will be a high probability of an occurring edge when dealing
with similar nodes. The node-specific bias encoded in βi ∈R can account for
degree heterogeneity. The log-likelihood of the LDM is defined as
log P(Y |B) =
X
i<j

yij · log(βij) −βij

=
X
i<j: yij=1
log(βij) −
X
i<j
βij,
(2.54)
where the first term, P
i<j: yij=1 log(βij), is the link contribution which is respon-
sible for positioning similar nodes closer in the latent space, while the second
term, P
i<j βij, acts as a repelling force for dissimilar nodes. The Latent Dis-
tance Model (LDM) can be used to capture the latent community structure of
the networks by applying simple continuous optimization procedures based on
the log-likelihood of the network.
2.3.10
The Hybrid Membership Latent Distance Model
The paper in [17] presents a new unsupervised graph representation learning
method called the Hybrid-Membership Latent Distance Model (HM-LDM) incor-
porating critical network properties like homophily and transitivity, facilitating a
clear interpretation of network structures. The method utilizes a continuous op-
timization process based on network log-likelihood to capture latent community
structure.
The HM-LDM offers flexible control over community memberships
through the simplex volume defined by latent node representations.
==PAGE:48==
38
2 Methods
The main objective is to learn a representation, wi ∈RD, for each node i ∈V in a
lower dimensional space, D ≪N, such that similar nodes in the network should
have close embeddings. Specifically, nodes are mapped into the unit D-simplex
∆D ⊂RD+1
+
defined by
∆D =
(
(x0, ..., xD) ∈RD+1

D
X
d=0
xd = 1, xd ≥0, ∀d ∈{0, ..., D}
)
(2.55)
The inferred node representations thus carry information about latent community
memberships. Identifiable solutions can only be achieved up to a permutation
invariance [21].
Considering the unweighted and undirected network G = (V, E), random vari-
ables representing the links between a pair of nodes i and j are assumed to follow
a Poisson distribution when conditioned on the latent representations {W, γ}.
The log-likelihood function is then given as
log P(Y|W, γ) =
X
i<j,yij=1
log(λij(wi, wj, γi, γj))−
X
i<j
 λij(wi, wj, γi, γj)+log(yij!)

(2.56)
A Poisson regressions approach is then applied due to its successful generalization
to the modeling of binary networks. The representation of nodes in the latent
space is learned by utilizing the rate of the distributions by defining the Poisson
rate λij
log λij =
 γi + γj −δp · ||wi −wj||p
2

,
(2.57)
where wi ∈[0, 1]D+1 are the latent embeddings constrained to the D-simplex,
δ ∈R+ is the simplex side length, γi ∈R is a bias term of node i ∈V at-
tributing node-specific effects, and p is the power of the ℓ2 norm with p ∈{1, 2}.
To summarize, eq. 2.56 constrains the latent space to a D-simplex whose side
lengths are controlled by δ [17]. The relationships between data points maintain
interpretability in a lower-dimensional latent space, allowing for a clearer under-
standing of similarities or dissimilarities based on the homophily principle. The
node representations are learned in a D−simplex space, thus each entry of an
embedding vector indicates a latent community membership, so the node rep-
resentations also provide information regarding the community structure of the
network [21].
Identifiable node representations can be obtained if the corners of the simplex
include at least one node since it makes the rotation operation inapplicable and
such rotation would otherwise alter the community assignments. According to
||x||p
1/
√
Dp ≤||x||p
2 ≤||x||p
1 for p ∈{1, 2},
(2.58)
==PAGE:49==
2.4 Link Prediction
39
decreasing the value of δ, i.e. shrinking the simplex volume, will force nodes to
gather around simplex corners.
Equivalently, node embeddings move towards
the corners of the simplex to balance the change in the term δp||wi −wj||p
2 since
||wi|| = 1∀i ∈V.
Large values of the simplex volume δ will make the solu-
tion rotationally invariant. Smaller values of δ can provide identifiable solutions
and favor hard latent community assignments since nodes with similar features
achieve high values when they belong to the same latent community, implying
that nodes are exclusively assigned to the simplex corners. High values of δ are
beneficial for mixed-membership cluster assignments [17].
A node is called a champion if it is located in one of the corners of the sim-
plex. This implies, that its latent representation must be a binary unit vector in
a D-simplex space. The definition of a champion node is given by [17] as follows
Definition 1 A node for a latent community is called champion if it belongs to
the community (simplex corner) while forming a binary unit vector.
2.4
Link Prediction
The previous chapter on community detection poses a purely qualitative investi-
gation in this thesis since no ground-truth community structures of the considered
networks are available. However, the SBM’s and LDM’s ability to perform link
prediction can add quantitative elements to our analyses.
Link prediction is a widely used and highly interesting field within social network
analysis. Link prediction involves estimating which pair of nodes in the network
are likely to form new connections in the future based on the given existing net-
work structure. The link prediction problem asks to what extent the evolution
of a social network can be modeled using features intrinsic to the network itself
[22]. A simple visualization of the link prediction problem can be seen in figure
2.5.
Figure 2.5: The link prediction problem.
==PAGE:50==
40
2 Methods
Effective methods for link prediction have the potential to analyze social net-
works and suggest promising interactions or collaborations within the organiza-
tion. Consequentially, link prediction in criminal network data has promising
capabilities to assist law enforcement agencies in combatting organized crime
by identifying potential future collaborations. Alternatively, link prediction in
networks with missing data allows one to speculate that some individuals are
working together although their interaction is not directly observable.
The link prediction problem is defined by [22] as follows
Definition 2 Let G = ⟨N, E⟩be an undirected graph, and let G′ = ⟨N, E′⟩be a
subgraph of G which contains all nodes in G and a subset E′ ⊆E of its edges.
The link prediction problem consists of predicting a list of non-edges in G′ that
are edges in G.
Given this definition, the set E′ will be used as a training set while the set E −E′
will be used as a test set for algorithmic evaluation of performance in the link
prediction task. In simple link prediction methods, all pairs of non-edges ⟨i, j⟩in
the graph G are ranked in decreasing order of similarity and the non-edges with
the highest similarity scores are thus deemed most likely to exist [22, 27]. There
exists a wide variety of similarity scores suitable for computing the degree of sim-
ilarity between two nodes in the graph. One might also choose to simultaneously
use multiple scores for this evaluation.
Three main types of traditional link prediction methods exist; heuristic methods,
latent feature methods, and content-based methods [53]. The heuristics meth-
ods compute heuristic node similarity scores as the likelihood of links. Popular
choices of such similarity scores include common neighbors (CN) [54], Adamic-
Adar (AA) [55], preferential attachment (PA)[56], and Katz index [57]. In la-
tent feature methods, the matrix representations of a network are factorized to
learn a lower dimensional latent representation or embedding of the nodes in the
network. Popular network embedding methods include DeepWalk, LINE, and
node2vec [53]. Both heuristic methods and latent feature methods infer missing
links leveraging the existing network topology.
2.4.1
Baseline Heuristic Methods
Heuristic methods use simple node similarity scores as the likelihood of links. We
use the notation of Γ(i) to denote the set of neighbors of node i. Heuristic methods
only work well when the graph formation process aligns with the heuristic.
==PAGE:51==
2.4 Link Prediction
41
Local Heuristics
The following similarity measures are all local heuristics since they are computed
from a local subgraph around the link of interest without any need for the entire
network. The Common Neighbor (CN) simply counts the number of neighbors
that two nodes share and use this as a measure of their likelihood to have a link
between them
fCN(i, j) = |Γ(i) ∩Γ(j)|.
(2.59)
The common neighbor measurement given in eq. 2.59 assumes that the more
neighbors two nodes have in common, the more likely it is for the two nodes
to have a connection. An illustration of the CN heuristic can be seen in figure
2.6a. The Jaccard score is determined from the proportion of common neighbors
between two nodes
fJaccard(i, j) = |Γ(i) ∩Γ(j)|
|Γ(i) ∪Γ(j)|
(2.60)
The Preferential Attachment (PA) uses the product of the degrees of the
nodes as a measure of the likelihood of the link
fPA(i, j) = |Γ(i)| · |Γ(j)|
(2.61)
The similarity score of preferential attachment given in eq. 2.61 assumes that
node i is more likely to connect to node j if node j has a high degree. Networks
formed by the preferential attachment method are called scale-free networks [56].
An illustration of the PA heuristic is available in figure 2.6b. These three measures
(Common Neighbors, Jaccard score, and Preferential Attachment) are all called
first-order heuristics due to their involvement of only one-hop neighbors of the
two nodes of interest i and j [53].
The Adamic-Adar (AA) heuristic is an example of a second-order heuristic and
it considers the weight of common neighbors
fAA(i, j) =
X
z∈Γ(i)∩Γ(j)
1
log |Γ(z)|
(2.62)
The measure in eq. 2.62 assumes that a high-degree node connecting to both
node i and node j is less informative than a lower-degree node. The AA heuristic
is illustrated in figure 2.6c.
==PAGE:52==
42
2 Methods
(a)
Common Neighbors
(CN)
(b)
Preferential Attach-
ment (PA)
(c) Adamic-Adar (AA)
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the three local link prediction heuristics Common
Neighbors, Preferential Attachment, and Adamic-Adar
Global Heuristics
High-order heuristics require knowledge regarding the entire network. Examples
of such heuristics include the Katz index [57], the rooted PageRank (PPR), and
SimRank (SR) [53]. The Katz index uses a weighted sum of the entire ensemble
of walks connecting the nodes i and j and it assumes that each walk contributes
to the determination of the degree of similarity between nodes i and j [31]. Two
nodes are highly similar if they are connected by many short walks in the graph.
The expression for computing the Katz index is given as
fKatz(i, j) =
∞
X
l=1
αl|walks⟨l⟩(i, j)|,
(2.63)
where α is a discount factor. It is also possible to express the Katx index in term
of matrices. We let A be the adjacency matrix of the graph G and assume that
α is less than the reciprocal of the largest eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix, i.e.
α <
1
λ1 . The parameter λ1 is also called the spectral radius of A. The Katz index
between any pair of nodes (i, j) in G can then be seen as a matrix κα, which can
be computed as
κα = (I −αA)−1 −I,
(2.64)
where I is the identity matrix of the same size as the adjacency matrix A.
2.4.2
Stochastic Block Models
Link prediction in the context of SBMs aims to assess the likelihood of the exis-
tence of edges between nodes based on the learned block structures of the network.
As presented previously in its derivation, the SBM is characterized by a block
probability matrix whose entries represent the probability of an edge between
nodes belonging to different communities. The aim of performing link predic-
tion in conjunction with the SBM is to estimate the likelihood of the existence
==PAGE:53==
2.4 Link Prediction
43
of edges between nodes based on the learned community structure. After the
assignment of nodes to blocks, the estimated block probability matrix is used
to predict an adjacency matrix which represents the expected probabilities of
edges between nodes. The relative frequencies of edges between communities are
essentially computed. If the model successfully captures the underlying commu-
nity structure, the predicted adjacency matrix reflects the expected patterns of
connections between nodes belonging to different communities.
2.4.3
Latent Distance Models
Latent embedding methods compute latent properties or representations of nodes,
oftentimes obtained by matrix factorization of either the adjacency matrix or the
Laplacian matrix obtained from the network. Latent features of nodes are not
directly observable and must thus be computed from the network through some
optimization procedure. The probability of a link in latent feature models is de-
termined by the interactions among latent features. In the HM-LDM framework,
pairwise distances for missing edges are computed using the latent positions of
nodes, where each node is associated with a point in a latent space. The pairwise
distances between the latent positions of the corresponding nodes of missing links
are calculated using the Euclidean norm or the squared Euclidean norm. These
pairwise distances are then used to compute the logit values for the missing edges.
2.4.4
Our Link Prediction Method
To perform link prediction for the evaluation of the different method’s perfor-
mances, the graphs must be transformed into suitable structures. The main task
is to retrieve unconnected node pairs, which we will refer to as negative samples,
and also remove existing links from connected node pairs, which we will refer to
as positive samples.
To assess and validate our link prediction methods and compare their perfor-
mance and applicability across the different methods, we must split our data
into two parts; one for training the models and the other to test the models’
performances. A common approach is to make sure to keep the residual network
connected when performing link removal [17]. We start by determining the un-
connected node pairs in the different networks since a random subset of these
will act as negative samples during the training of the link prediction methods.
The edges to drop from the networks are chosen at random. However, randomly
removing edges may result in cutting off nodes that are loosely connected in the
networks, thus fragmenting the networks.
==PAGE:54==
44
2 Methods
The Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) is a tree that spans all the vertices of
a connected, undirected graph and has the minimum possible total edge weight.
The MST can be applied in the context of link prediction to identify a subset
of edges that, if removed, will disconnect the graph. Removable edges can be
identified as those edges that are not part of the MST since these are essentially
the edges that, if removed, will not disconnect the graph [58]. A subset of the
identified omissible edges can be removed to split the data for training and test-
ing purposes [59]. The six different networks considered in this work are not
connected. Only the Infinito Operation (the SN network) has resulted in a fully
connected graph. When dealing with networks of multiple components, each com-
ponent can be considered separately and then the omissible edges are identified
for each of the components after which, half of the removable edges are removed
from the network [58].
Algorithm 3 Preparation for link prediction using MST
1: Input: Graph G(V, E)
2: Compute Minimum Spanning Tree mst on G
3: Identify removable edges: removableEdges ←E \ mst
4: Choose a subset of removable edges
5: Remove selected edges from G: GremovedEdges ←G \ selectedEdges
The above algorithm is applied to the network and the figures displaying the
resulting graphs are available in the appendix 5. An example of the procedure
applied on the SN network is given in the following figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Illustration of the link removal process using the MST approach on
the Infinito network.
==PAGE:55==
2.4 Link Prediction
45
2.4.5
Evaluation of Performance
In link prediction, the evaluation metrics commonly employed closely resemble
those utilized in standard binary classification tasks.
Threshold curves, such
as the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and precision-recall (PR)
curves are often used in binary classification and are increasingly common in link
prediction evaluation [60]. The ROC curve shows the true positive rate against
the false positive rate at all classification thresholds. The area under the curve
(AUC) of the ROC curve (AUC-ROC) is equivalent to the likelihood that a ran-
domly chosen positive instance will have a higher probability than a randomly
chosen negative instance. We will use ROC curves to illustrate the performance.
The confusion matrix is also an evaluation metric used in binary classification
tasks and is related to the ROC curve. One can choose a threshold that corre-
sponds to a specific point on the ROC curve, and the confusion matrix at that
threshold reflects the performance of the classifier based on the chosen trade-off
between false positives and true positives.
The confusion matrix is shown in
figure 2.8. It consists of four different categories [61]:
• The True Positives (TP) are the number of observations that are in fact
positive and which the classifier correctly labels as positive.
• The False Positives (FP) are the number of observations that are in fact
negative, but which the classifier incorrectly labels as positive.
• The False Negatives (FN) are the number of observations that are in
fact positive, but which the classifier incorrectly labels as negative.
• The True Negatives (TN) are the number of observations that are in
fact negative and which the classifier correctly labels as negative.
Figure 2.8: The Confusion Matrix.
As previously mentioned, the ROC curve is plotted as the true positive rate (TPR)
against the false positive rate (FPR) at all classification thresholds. These rates
==PAGE:56==
46
2 Methods
are easily obtained using the confusion matrix and are computed by
TPR =
TP
TP + FN = number of links correctly determined as links
number of existing links in Lmiss
FPR =
FP
FP + TN = number of links wrongly determined as links
number of non-existing links in Lmiss
,
(2.65)
where Lmiss denotes the set of missing links in the graph.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 3
Results
The methods that form the basis of the experiments and analyses in this thesis
have now been introduced and we are ready to apply them to real-world datasets.
The structure of this result section consists of an initial review of the network met-
rics after which a brief explanation of the implementations can be found. Then
we will present the results of the different methods for each of the three police op-
erations datasets sequentially and the following discussion will eventually draw a
collective picture. A comparative study is carried out on the multilayer networks.
The sections for each operation will be introduced with some core network metrics
and guide through preliminary data analysis. This serves as an initial introduc-
tion and analysis of key graph theoretical metrics for studying network structures
laying the groundwork for the exploration of the subsequent findings and impli-
cations in the ensuing sections of this thesis. We remind of the following network
statistics in table 3.1:
Network
Edges
Nodes
Isolated Nodes
Components
Network MN
256
101
0
5
Network PC
124
100
0
5
Network SN
1229
118
0
1
Network WR
247
182
0
3
Network AW
189
182
36
38
Network JU
113
182
93
96
Table 3.1: Network Measures
We motivate the computation and presentation of core graph metrics before the
application of graph representation learning methodologies for community de-
tection and link prediction by its ability to leverage the inherent structural in-
formation present in the networks. Degree distribution, clustering, and density
measures capture essential properties of nodes and their relationships within the
graph. This initial structural network investigation is particularly useful when
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Results
looking into multiple networks with multiple layers potentially representing di-
verse aspects or modalities of the underlying complex system.
3.1
Implementation
Handling graph-structured network data has been made a much more manage-
able task through the R library igraph and the corresponding python package
networkx and both of these have been used extensively in the initial data analysis
and when changing between different representations of graph-structures.
Baseline Methods
The Louvain algorithm will be applied to the network data in R using the igraph
package. The function cluster_louvain implements the multi-level modularity
optimization algorithm in order to find community structures. Spectral clustering
is applied using the function reg.SP from the R package randnet. This, however,
necessitates the specification of the number of groups. To this aim, we follow [8]
and compute the median value of the number of clusters estimated under differ-
ent strategies (BHMC.estimate, LRBIC, NCV.select, ECV.block, and ECV.Rank).
Bayesian greedy clustering available in the Greed package enables model-based
clustering of networks with the Stochastic Block Model and the Degree Corrected
Stochastic Block Model [49]. We set the hyperparameter of the Dirichlet in greed
equal to 3.5/50 corresponding to the hyperparameter setting for the DM prior
under ESBM. Point estimate can be computed using the R package mcclust.ext.
However, an estimate of the co-clustering matrix, whose generic element c(v, u)
encodes the relative frequency of MCMC samples where nodes v and u are in the
same cluster, is required. An estimation of the co-clustering matrix can be ob-
tained from the posterior sample of clustering assignments. An implementation
of the WAIC function is available in the R package LaplacesDemon.
The baseline link prediction methods have been implemented from scratch for
feature extraction in python.
Then the logistic regression classifier from the
sklearn library is used to model the probability of a link between two nodes.
The Extended Stochastic Block Model
Applying the stochastic block modeling framework, a fixed set of hyperparam-
eters for the different priors have been used when running the model, and the
choice of these lies in the logic presented in [8] of hyperparameters inducing be-
tween 20 and 25 expected clusters a priori for the networks NM, PC and SN.
This number is deemed reasonable due to the sizes of the networks as well as
the number of connected components as stated in table 3.1. Due to the large
number of isolated nodes in the Oversize networks WR, AW, and JU, we choose
==PAGE:59==
3.1 Implementation
49
to let the other networks guide the choice of hyperparameters. Using the same
fixed set of hyperparameters also allows for a consistent modeling approach and
controlled experimental setup. The hyperparameters for the beta priors on block
probabilities are set to a = 1 and b = 1 to induce a uniform prior distribution.
The choice of parameter values is available in the following table 3.2:
Prior
α
β
σ
γ
H
Dirichlet Process (DP)
8
-
0
-
∞
Pitman-Yor (PY)
-0.35
-
0.7
-
∞
Dirichlet Multinomial (DM)
-
12/50
0
-
50
Gnedin Process (GN)
-
-
-
0.3
-
Table 3.2: Fixed parameters used in the ESBM framework
We perform 50000 iterations of the Gibbs sampler. Posterior inference relies on
40000 MCMC samples after a burn-in of 10000 to exclude the early, less accurate,
samples before convergence from the random initialization in the MCMC occurs.
For each of the networks, we have created trace plots. This enables us to inspect
sampling behavior and assess mixing across chains and convergence. The trace
plots for the likelihood given in eq. 2.21 for each network are available in the
appendix 5 and all show rapid convergence and effective mixing.
Hybrid Membership Latent Distance Model
The HM-LDM is implemented in python and uses the torch package along with
its implementation of the back-propagation algorithm applying gradient descent.
When training the HM-LDM, the Adam optimizer is used [63], minimizing the
models’ log-likelihood function given in eq. 2.56. The learning rate is set to 0.1.
The normalized symmetric spectral clustering algorithm is used for the initial-
ization of latent embeddings. Node-specific random effects vectors are randomly
initialized and then tuned separately by detaching the gradients from the latent
representations using 1000 iterations.
All code and datasets used in this thesis are available on the author’s GitHub
accessible in the following link:
https://github.com/amlhe/Thesis-GRL-to-Uncover-Crime-Networks.git
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Results
3.2
The Infinito Operation
The Infinito Operation, SN, was a large law enforcement operation against the
’Ndrangheta mafia clan. The network consists of nodes of suspected members
of the organization and the edges are summits or meetings. The attendance of
such summits was recorded by police authorities using wiretapping and physical
surveillance.
3.2.1
Network Metrics
Table 3.3 contains statistics of the SN network.
Metric
SN
Average degree
20.83
Max degree
65
Average clustering coeﬀicient
0.799
Density
0.178
Table 3.3: Table of graph metrics for the Infinito network
Amongst all the networks, the Infinito network, has by far the highest average
degree, suggesting a denser connectivity compared to the other networks whose
results are presented in the following with statistics captured in tables 3.7 and
3.11.
This high average degree might imply a more interconnected structure.
Looking at the network density, the SN network has a high density, which aligns
with the higher average degree. The SN network is also the network with the
highest average clustering coeﬀicient which is a measure providing insights into
the local clustering patterns within the network. It measures the degree to which
nodes in the network tend to cluster together, forming tightly interconnected
groups or communities.
==PAGE:61==
3.2 The Infinito Operation
51
(a) SN graph
(b) SN degree distribution histogram
Figure 3.1: Graph visualization of the Infinito Network, SN, with node sizes
scaled according to degree.
Degree distribution histogram with mean degree
represented by the dotted red vertical line.
Figure 3.1 shows a visual representation of the node degrees in the SN network.
Figure 3.1a on the left displays the network nodes in a graph with sizes corre-
sponding to their degrees. Here, the nodes are scaled proportionally based on
their degree values, allowing for an intuitive depiction of the network’s connec-
tivity patterns. The larger the nodes, the higher degrees, which can be used to
detect central elements in the graph and visually emphasize the heterogeneity
of node degrees and guide to uncover important structural features. The degree
histogram in figure 3.1b is a graphical representation illustrating the distribution
of node degrees within the SN graph.
3.2.2
Community Detection
Our attention now turns to the outcomes of community detection using represen-
tation learning methodologies. We first present the adjacency matrix of the SN
network before reordering the indices according to identified community member-
ships. We have applied a grid on all reordered adjacency matrices in the result
section indicating the transition between the identified communities.
==PAGE:62==
52
3 Results
Figure 3.2:
Original adjacency matrix of the SN network from the Infinito
Operation. Black cells represent edges while white cells indicate the absence of
edges.
Figure 3.2 depicts the original adjacency matrix of the SN network and comparing
this to the other network’s adjacency matrices we notice that this is by far the
densest network.
(a) Spec clust
(b) Louvain
(c) Greed SBM
(d) Greed DC-SBM
Figure 3.3: Reordered adjacency matrices according to community membership
identified through other state-of-the-art algorithms including Spectral Clustering,
Louvain, Bayesian greedy clustering, and the degree-corrected Bayesian greedy
clustering.
Identified community memberships using competitive state-of-the-art community
detection algorithms have been visually represented by reordering the adjacency
matrix according to the findings. These results are available in figure 3.3. The
following figure 3.4 shows the results of community identification using the 4
different priors DP, DM, PY, and GN in the SBM framework applied on the
SN network. In figure 3.5 we provide the reordered adjacency matrix of the SN
network with community assignments given by the HM-LDM. All these figures
show how the considered models successfully uncovers latent communities and
produces part-based network representations.
==PAGE:63==
3.2 The Infinito Operation
53
(a) DP prior
(b) DM prior
(c) PY prior
(d) GN prior
Figure 3.4: Reordered adjacency matrices according to community membership
identified through different priors in the ESBM.
(a) D = 5, p = 1
(b) D = 5, p = 2
(c) D = 7, p = 1
(d) D = 7, p = 2
Figure 3.5: Reordered adjacency matrices based on the memberships of a D = 5
and D = 7 dimensional HM-LDM using both p = 1 and p = 2 with a simplex
size δ resulting in identifiable solutions.
Looking at figure 3.3 we notice the change in network structures as the nodes are
grouped based on their detected community memberships. Compared to the orig-
inal, unordered adjacency matrix, we observe clear block structures. The number
of estimated clusters from these methods are available in table 3.4. We observe a
noticeable difference in the clustering assignment obtained through the Louvain
algorithm compared to the other methods, and this observation is further high-
lighted in table 3.4 where the expected number of clusters is significantly lower
than the other considered methods and also has the highest deviance. Figure
3.4 along with the reported results in both tables 3.4 and 3.5 indicate consistent
findings of community structures using different priors in the ESBM framework
with an expected number of clusters around 18-19. The observed discrepancies
between the Louvain algorithm and the other state-of-the-art alternatives along
with the ESBM results might indicate an over-collapsing of some subgroups in the
SN network, thus motivating the use of methodologies aimed at grouping nodes
based on shared connectivity patterns within the network, rather than solely re-
lying on the presence of community structures. Both spectral clustering (figure
3.3a), greed SBM (figure 3.3c and 3.3d) and ESBM (figure 3.4) along with the
findings in figures 3.4 and 3.5 imply core-periphery structures in the ’Ndrangheta
==PAGE:64==
54
3 Results
clan. The DP and GN priors both return 19 communities and they have the low-
est deviance and misclassification errors. We report the community allocations
from the HM-LDM while the identifiability of the solutions is ensured. This is
reached through the choice of appropriate simplex volumes guided by δ values.
Regarding soft assignments through mixed memberships, nodes of the network
are assigned to the cluster in which they express the maximum membership. The
results of a D = 5 and D = 7 dimensional latent representation show a horizontal
organization with varying sizes of identified community structures.
Method
ˆH
Deviance
ESBM
Dirichlet process
19
2797.7
Dirichlet multinomial
18
2825.5
Pitman-Yor
18
3031.6
Gnedin process
19
2797.7
State-of-the-art competitors
Spectral Clustering
15
4023.8
Louvain
5
4940.3
Greed SBM
17
2828.0
Greed DC-SBM
10
3874.2
Table 3.4: Comparison of the estimated number of clusters ( ˆH) and deviance
from the different priors in the ESBM and current state-of-the-art competitors.
Prior
ˆH
WAIC
Credible Ball
Error
DP
19 [18; 19]
2237.8
0.235
0.055
DM
18 [18; 18]
2286.9
0.158
0.059
PY
18 [17; 18]
2534.3
0.058
0.067
GN
19 [18; 19]
2225.9
0.152
0.055
Table 3.5: Summary of ESBM results for the SN network.
We present the
posterior median, along with the first and third quantiles of non-empty clusters.
Performance is assessed using the WAIC. The Credible Ball column indicates the
distance VI(ˆz, zb) around the estimated partition ˆz and the 95% credible bound.
The following figure 3.6 illustrates how the fraction of community champions
for HM-LDM evolves as a function of the simplex volume δ2 and for different
latent dimensions. Small values of the simplex mean that almost all nodes are
exclusively assigned to a simplex corner, thus yielding hard cluster assignments.
==PAGE:65==
3.2 The Infinito Operation
55
As the volume increases, the number of node champions decreases to zero and
more nodes are assigned with mixed memberships. The decrease in community
champions is more rapid and steep in figure 3.6b for p = 2 compared to figure
3.25a for p = 1.
(a) p = 1
(b) p = 2
Figure 3.6: Fraction of community champions as a function of the simplex size
δ2 across dimensions D ∈{5, 10, 25} for the HM-LDM on the SN network.
3.2.3
Link Prediction
We now turn our attention to the problem of performing link prediction on the
SN network. We report our findings of the ESBM and HM-LDM against baseline
methods in figure 3.7.
In figure 3.7 we benchmark the HM-LDM framework
for both p = 1 and p = 2 (figure 3.7c and 3.7d) and the ESBM (figure 3.7b)
framework for all considered priors against simple baseline methods (figure 3.7a).
We observe better link prediction performance in terms of ROC curves and AUC-
ROC scores for the baseline methods than the more complex latent space models
and stochastic block models. This tendency might be explained by the fact, that
baseline methods might generalize better when the available data is limited. More
complex models may be prone to overfitting. The HM-LDM and ESBM might
furthermore experience sensitivity to hyperparameter settings. The AUC-ROC
scores for all considered link prediction methods are reported in table 3.6.
==PAGE:66==
56
3 Results
(a) Simple link prediction
(b) ESBM all priors
(c) HM-LDM, p = 1, δ2 = 100
(d) HM-LDM, p = 2, δ2 = 100
Figure 3.7:
ROC curves and AUC-ROC scores for different link prediction
methods applied on the Infinito network.
Method
SN
Baseline methods
Common Neighbors
0.92
Adamic-Adar
0.92
Katz Index
0.76
Jaccard Similarity
0.92
ESBM
0.60
HM-LDM
p = 1
0.73
p = 2
0.73
Table 3.6: Link Prediction Results for SN Network.
==PAGE:67==
3.3 The Montagna Operation
57
Figure 3.8 shows AUC-ROC scores in terms of link prediction performance as a
function of the simplex volume δ2 for latent dimensions D ∈{5, 10, 25} for both
p = 1 and p = 2. There is a general tendency of increased δ yielding higher
performance. For small δ, the latent space is constrained. Oddly, we observe a
decrease in AUC-ROC scores for all considered latent dimensions as the simplex
volume exceeds 10 for p = 2.
(a) p = 1
(b) p = 2
Figure 3.8: AUC-ROC scores as a function of the simplex size δ2 across different
dimensions D ∈{5, 10, 25} for the SN network using the HM-LDM.
3.3
The Montagna Operation
The Montagna Operation resulted in two network layers; the meetings network
(MN) and the phonecalls network (PC). These two layers share 47 nodes.
3.3.1
Network Metrics
We report simple network statistics on MN and PC in table 3.7. Looking at the
network statistics of the two layers from the Montagna Operation, MN and PC,
we notice significantly different average degrees. The meetings network, MN, has
a substantially higher average degree (5.07) compared to the phonecalls network,
PC (2.48) indicating that nodes in MN have, on average, more connections than
those in PC. PC, on the other hand, has the highest maximum degree, indicating
the presence of nodes with a relatively higher number of connections compared
to other layers. The MN layer stands out with a significantly higher value of
average clustering coeﬀicient compared to PC, pointing towards a heightened
local clustering in the meetings layer, indicative of closely-knit groups of nodes.
==PAGE:68==
58
3 Results
Metric
MN
PC
Average degree
5.07
2.48
Max degree
24
25
Average clustering coeﬀicient
0.656
0.105
Density
0.051
0.025
Table 3.7: Table of graph metrics for the Montagna network.
(a) MN degree distribution histogram
(b) PC degree distribution histogram
(c) MN graph
(d) PC graph
Figure 3.9: Visualizations of the degree distribution as histograms and graph
plots of the two network layers MN and PC of the Montagna Operation network.
Top row: Degree distribution histograms of MN and PC. Bottom row: Network
graphs with nodes resized and scaled according to individual node degrees of MN
and PC.
==PAGE:69==
3.3 The Montagna Operation
59
Figure 3.9 shows the degree distributions for MN and PC as histograms. The
degree distribution pk provides the probability that a randomly selected node in
the network has degree k. Observing the layout of the degree distributions in the
histograms, we notice that the network layers related to the Montagna Operation
have similar degree distributions, where the majority of nodes have relatively
small degrees k typically between 0 and 3, while fewer nodes in the networks
have large degrees k. Below the histograms, we present graph visualizations in
which the nodes are scaled according to their degrees.
3.3.2
Community Detection
Before diving into the results of the application of a variety of community de-
tection algorithms, we first present the unstructured adjacency matrices of the
different network layers of the Montagna Operation as they have been supplied
in the original data.
The two figures in 3.10 illustrate the original adjacency
matrices of two network layers belonging to the same network.
Each matrix
captures the pairwise relationships between nodes in its respective layer, giving a
visual representation of the connectivity patterns within each layer of the network
before community detection algorithms have been applied.
(a) MN original adjacency matrix
(b) PC original adjacency matrix
Figure 3.10: Original adjacency matrices of the two Montagna Operation net-
work layers MN and PC. Black cells denote edges while white cells indicate non-
edges.
Results of identified community memberships using competitive state-of-the-art
algorithms in terms of reordered adjacency matrices are available in figure 3.11.
The subsequent figures 3.12 and 3.13 depict the reordered adjacency matrices of
==PAGE:70==
60
3 Results
the Montagna network layers according to identified communities from the ESBM
and HM-LDM frameworks respectively.
(a) Spec. clust.
(b) Louvain
(c) Greed SBM
(d) Greed DC-SBM
(e) Spec. clust.
(f) Louvain
(g) Greed SBM
(h) Greed DC-SBM
Figure 3.11: Reordered adjacency matrices according to community member-
ship identified through the spectral clustering algorithm, Louvain algorithm,
Greed SBM, and Greed DC-SBM on the Montagna network layers MN (top
row) and PC (bottom row).
(a) DP
(b) DM
(c) PY
(d) GN
(e) DP
(f) DM
(g) PY
(h) GN
Figure 3.12: Reordered adjacency matrices based on the memberships identified
using the four different priors DP, DM, PY, and GN in the ESBM on the two
Montagna network layers MN and PC. Top row: MN. Bottom row: PC.
==PAGE:71==
3.3 The Montagna Operation
61
The results shown in figures 3.11-3.13 imply that the applied methods success-
fully uncover intrinsic community structures in the Montagna network layers MN
and PC. Generally, the meetings layer, MN, has a more pronounced horizontal
structure with varying community sizes. The phonecalls layer, on the other hand,
exhibits a nested hierarchy of core-periphery, weak-community, and disassortative
patterns, which characterizes a vertical criminal organization. Our results from
the HM-LDM of D = 5 and D = 10 dimensional latent representations with
both p = 1 and p = 2 for identifiable solutions are available in figure 3.13. These
results compared to the SBM frameworks show significant differences in commu-
nity structures identified for the PC layer. This might be due to the sparsity of
this layer, where the HM-LDM provides flexibility with continuous node mem-
berships, making them robust in handling sparse data and having the ability to
capture nuanced relationships. Latent Space Models are less sensitive to prede-
fined block structures, offering better adaptability to the inherent heterogeneity
of nodes in sparse networks.
(a) MN, p = 1
(b) MN, p = 2
(c) PC, p = 1
(d) PC, p = 2
(e) MN, p = 1
(f) MN, p = 2
(g) PC, p = 1
(h) PC, p = 2
Figure 3.13:
Reordered adjacency matrices based on the memberships of a
D = 5 (top row) and D = 10 (bottom row) dimensional HM-LDM using both
p = 1 and p = 2 with a simplex size δ resulting in identifiable solutions on the
two Montagna network layers MN and PC.
==PAGE:72==
62
3 Results
Prior
ˆH
WAIC
Credible Ball
Error
MN
DP
8 [7; 8]
1358.8
1.141
0.042
DM
8 [7; 8]
1350.7
1.146
0.042
PY
8 [8; 9]
1360.4
0.564
0.036
GN
6 [6; 7]
1370.1
1.374
0.041
PC
DP
6 [5; 6]
886.2
0.734
0.023
DM
6 [5; 7]
884.2
1.010
0.023
PY
5 [4; 6]
897.3
0.491
0.024
GN
3 [3; 3]
907.2
0.580
0.025
Table 3.8: Summary of ESBM Results for MN and PC Networks
Method
MN
PC
ˆH
Deviance
ˆH
Deviance
ESBM
Dirichlet process
8
1375.1
6
1914.0
Dirichlet multinomial
8
1375.1
6
1762.4
Pitman-Yor
8
1404.0
5
1833.2
Gnedin process
6
1365.5
4
1902.3
State-of-the-art competitors
Spectral Clustering
6
1488.7
5
1049.5
Louvain
11
1668.5
11
1207.3
Greed
5
1442.7
2
915.2
Greed DC
3
1641.6
2
921.1
Table 3.9: Comparison of the estimated number of clusters ( ˆH) and deviance
from the different priors in the ESBM and current state-of-the-art competitors.
Tables 3.8 and 3.9 show the estimated number of clusters, ˆH of the SBM and
state-of-the-art alternatives along with deviance measures and other metrics. We
see that the algorithms mostly estimate a higher number of clusters for the MN
layer over the PC layer. The two greed algorithms give the lowest number of
identified communities for both network layers.
==PAGE:73==
3.3 The Montagna Operation
63
(a) MN η
(b) MN η(l)
(c) PC η
(d) PC η(l)
Figure 3.14: Reordered adjacency matrices of the two Montagna Operation
network layers MNsub and PCsub when a multilayer approach of the SBM with a
Dirichlet process prior has been applied using both shared link probabilities and
layer-specific link probabilities.
Figure 3.14 contains the sorted adjacency matrices of the two network layers of
the subgraphs where only the 47 common nodes are kept. The SBM framework
for a Dirichlet process prior used here assumes a shared community structure
across the network layers.
In 3.14a and 3.14c shared link probabilities η are
assumed, while layer-specific link probabilities are assumed in 3.14b and 3.14d.
We here observe one large community and two smaller ones. The corresponding
results from different priors are available in appendix 5.
(a) MN, p = 1
(b) PC, p = 1
(c) MN, p = 2
(d) PC, p = 2
Figure 3.15: Fraction of community champions as a function of the simplex size
δ2 across dimensions D ∈{5, 10, 25} for the HM-LDM on the Montagna network
on both MN and PC.
The fraction of community champions, i.e. nodes placed in the simplex corners,
as a function of the simplex volume δ2 for p ∈{1, 2} and latent dimensions
D ∈{5, 10, 25} for MN and PC can be seen in figure 3.15. Just as expected,
increasing the simplex volume leads to a decrease in the fraction of community
champions. The decrease is steeper for p = 2.
3.3.3
Link Prediction
Moving on to the assessment of applying different link prediction methods on the
two network layers, we first present the results of the considered baseline methods
==PAGE:74==
64
3 Results
in figure 3.16.
(a) Simple link prediction on MN
(b) Simple link prediction of PC
Figure 3.16: ROC curves along with AUC-ROC scores for simple baseline link
prediction methods on MN and PC.
The simple link prediction metrics generally perform better on the MN network
layer compared to the PC layer. The Adamic-Adar, which considers the unique-
ness of shared neighbors, giving more weight to less common connections, reaches
the best predictive performance for MN. The Katz score, capturing information
from paths of varying lengths, has the highest AUC-ROC on PC.
(a) MN: p = 1
(b) MN: p = 2
(c) PC: p = 1
(d) PC: p = 2
(e) MN: p = 1
(f) MN: p = 2
(g) PC: p = 1
(h) PC: p = 2
Figure 3.17: Link prediction performance for the HM-LDM applied on the MN
and PC layers of the Montagna network. Top row: ROC curves along with AUC-
ROC scores across different dimensions of the latent space D ∈{5, 10, 25} and
for both p ∈{1, 2} for a fixed simplex size of δ2 = 100. Bottom row: AUC-
ROC scores as a function of the simplex size δ2 across different latent dimensions
D ∈{5, 10, 25} and for both p ∈{1, 2}.
==PAGE:75==
3.3 The Montagna Operation
65
The top row in figure 3.17 presents the ROC curves and corresponding AUC-
ROC scores on the Montagna network for varying dimensions. The bottom row
shows the predictive performance in terms of the AUC-ROC score as the simplex
volume is increased, where performance saturation is reached quicker for MN
using p = 2.
(a) MN: Single-layer
(b) MN: Multilayer η
(c) MN: Multilayer η(l)
(d) PC: Single-layer
(e) PC: Multilayer η
(f) PC: Multilayer η(l)
Figure 3.18:
Link prediction performance in terms of ROC-curves and cor-
responding AUC-ROC using different priors in the ESBM on both single layer
modeling, multilayer modeling with shared link probabilities η, and multilayer
modeling with layer-specific link probabilities η(l).
Link prediction has also been performed using different priors in the stochastic
block model. We present the results of performing this task on both the network
layers separately, using the multilayer approach with shared link probabilities
and layer-specific link probabilities in figure 3.18. The predictive performance is
superior on MN when considering this layer individually. Contrarily, the results
on the PC layer indicate better performance when assuming shared link proba-
bilities.
The AUC-ROC scores obtained from the baseline methods, the HM-LDM and
the ESBM are collected in table 3.10. Overall, the baseline methods perform bet-
ter on MN, while the SBM with multiple layer collapsed perform well on PC. We
see approximately the same performance using the HM-LDM on both network
layers.
==PAGE:76==
66
3 Results
Method
MN
PC
Baseline methods
Common Neighbors
0.89
0.70
Adamic-Adar
0.91
0.70
Katz Index
0.80
0.89
Jaccard Similarity
0.81
0.30
ESBM
Single-layer
0.84
0.85
Multilayer η
0.53
0.90
Multilayer η(l)
0.62
0.79
HM-LDM
p = 1
0.81
0.86
p = 2
0.86
0.83
Table 3.10: Link Prediction Results for MN and PC Networks.
3.4
The Oversize Operation
The final Mafia network dataset to be considered is the Oversize Operation on
members of the Calabrian ’Ndrangheta. This network consists of three layers
whose creation stems from three different stages of the criminal proceedings;
wiretap records (WR), arrest warrant (AW), and judgment (JU).
3.4.1
Network Metrics
The properties of the Oversize network layers are given in table 3.11.
Metric
WR
AW
JU
Average degree
2.71
2.08
1.24
Max degree
32
29
13
Average clustering coeﬀicient
0.149
0.122
0.059
Density
0.015
0.011
0.007
Table 3.11: Table of graph metrics for the Oversize network.
Looking into the metrics for the networks from the Oversize operation (WR, AW,
and JU), distinctions emerge across several parameters.
WR has the highest
average degree, indicating varying levels of connectivity among the layers, while
==PAGE:77==
3.4 The Oversize Operation
67
JU holds the lowest average degree. Additionally, WR exhibits the highest max-
imum degree, signifying nodes with a greater number of connections compared
to AW and JU. Delving into the clustering properties, WR has a higher average
clustering coeﬀicient, implying a more clustered structure in comparison to AW
and JU. The density measure further emphasizes this trend, as WR demonstrates
the highest density among the layers.
(a) WR degree distribution
histogram
(b) AW degree distribution
histogram
(c) JU degree distribution
histogram
(d) WR graph
(e) AW graph
(f) JU graph
Figure 3.19: Visualizations of the degree distribution as histograms and graph
plots of the three network layers WR, AW, and JU of the Oversize Operation
network. Top row: Degree distribution histograms of WR, AW, and JU. Bottom
row: Network graphs with nodes resized and scaled according to individual node
degrees of WR, AW, and JU.
Figure 3.19 shows the degree distributions as histograms.
We observe that a
majority of nodes have relatively small degrees k, while fewer have large degrees.
Below the histograms, the network layers have been graphically represented with
node sizes proportional to the corresponding degrees. What makes this network
stand out from the others is the existence of isolated nodes.
==PAGE:78==
68
3 Results
3.4.2
Community Detection
Before delving into the results section concerning the application of various com-
munity detection algorithms, we first present the unstructured adjacency matrices
of different network layers in the Oversize network, as provided in the original
dataset.
(a) WR adjacency matrix
(b) AW adjacency matrix
(c) JU adjacency matrix
Figure 3.20: Original adjacency matrices of the three Oversize Operation net-
work layers WR, AW, and JU. Black cells denote edges while white cells indicate
non-edges.
The images in figure 3.20 depict the original adjacency matrices of the three
network layers of the Oversize Operation. Each matrix represents the pairwise
relationships among nodes in its respective layer, providing a visual depiction
of connectivity patterns within each layer before the application of community
detection algorithms.
The qualitative results of the alternative competing community detection algo-
rithms applied on the three Oversize network layers are presented in figure 3.21.
We first notice the very high number of identified communities in the AW and
JU layers from the Louvain algorithm. These two layers are highly sparse and
contain many isolated nodes, both examples of instances where the Louvain al-
gorithm may encounter challenges since it relies on edge density and modularity
optimization to detect communities. In sparse networks, the lack of dense con-
nections can make it diﬀicult for the algorithm to identify meaningful community
structures. The SBM and DC-SBM in greed seem to identify community member-
ships that correlate well with those identified in the ESBM framework in figure
3.22. Comparing these observations with the performance measures presented in
tables 3.12 and 3.13 we see the highest deviances on all three layers using the
Louvain algorithm. All four priors in the ESBM yield lower deviances for all
three network layers. The estimated number of clusters is also more consistent
under this model.
==PAGE:79==
3.4 The Oversize Operation
69
(a) Spec. clust.
(b) Louvain
(c) Greed SBM
(d) Greed DC-SBM
(e) Spec. clust.
(f) Louvain
(g) Greed SBM
(h) Greed DC-SBM
(i) Spec. clust.
(j) Louvain
(k) Greed SBM
(l) Greed DC-SBM
Figure 3.21: Reordered adjacency matrices according to community member-
ship identified through the spectral clustering algorithm, the Louvain algorithm,
greed SBM, and greed DC-SBM. Top row: WR. Middle row: AW. Bottom row:
JU.
==PAGE:80==
70
3 Results
(a) DP
(b) DM
(c) PY
(d) GN
(e) DP
(f) DM
(g) PY
(h) GN
(i) DP
(j) DM
(k) PY
(l) GN
Figure 3.22: Reordered adjacency matrices based on the memberships identified
using the four different priors DP, DM, PY, and GN in the ESBM on the three
Oversize network layers. Top row: WR. Middle row: AW. Bottom row: JU.
==PAGE:81==
3.4 The Oversize Operation
71
(a) D = 5, p = 1
(b) D = 5, p = 2
(c) D = 10, p = 1
(d) GD = 10, p = 2
(e) D = 5, p = 1
(f) D = 5, p = 2
(g) D = 10, p = 1
(h) D = 10, p = 2
(i) D = 5, p = 1
(j) D = 5, p = 2
(k) D = 10, p = 1
(l) D = 10, p = 2
Figure 3.23: Reordered adjacency matrices based on the memberships a D = 5
and D = 10 dimensional HM-LDM using both p = 1 and p = 2 with a simplex
size δ2 resulting in identifiable solutions on the three Oversize network layers.
Top row: WR. Middle row: AW. Bottom row: JU.
In figure 3.23 we present the resulting ordered adjacency matrices based on a
D = 5 and D = 10 dimensional HM-LDM with p ∈{1, 2} on the Oversize
network with a choice of simplex volume ensuring identifiable solutions. The case
D = 5 seems to uncover horizontal organizational structures while an increase to
D = 10 shows more of a weak community with core-periphery hierarchy. Bigger
communities emerge in WR compared to AW and JU. These results from the
HM-LDM shred new light on the organizational community structures in the
Oversize network compared to the baseline algorithms in figure 3.21 and the SBM
in figure 3.22, both of which points towards weak structures and core-periphery
hierarchies.
==PAGE:82==
72
3 Results
Network
Prior
ˆH
WAIC
Credible Ball
Error
WR
DP
6 [6; 7]
1852.5
1.057
0.014
DM
6 [6; 7]
1826.8
0.874
0.013
PY
5 [5; 6]
1843.5
0.746
0.014
GN
4 [4; 5]
1862.5
1.156
0.014
AW
DP
5 [5; 6]
1494.5
0.819
0.011
DM
6 [5; 6]
1486.1
0.824
0.010
PY
5 [5; 5]
1511.1
0.705
0.011
GN
4 [4; 4]
1485.1
0.448
0.011
JU
DP
4 [4; 5]
1016.1
0.531
0.006
DM
4 [4; 5]
1009.0
0.542
0.006
PY
3 [3; 4]
1038.9
0.489
0.006
GN
3 [3; 3]
1029.5
0.397
0.006
Table 3.12: Summary of ESBM Results for WR, AW, and JU Networks.
Method
WR
AW
JU
ˆH
Deviance
ˆH
Deviance
ˆH
Deviance
ESBM
DP
6
1914.0
5
1449.5
4
990.8
DM
6
1762.4
6
1451.3
4
990.8
PY
5
1833.2
5
1480.0
3
997.2
GN
4
1902.3
4
1461.8
3
997.2
Competitors
Spec. Clust.
8
2123.2
5
1732.4
2
1277.7
Louvain
9
2200.4
43
3941.8
101
10448.8
Greed
3
1966.6
3
1505.8
2
1033.0
Greed DC
2
2000.3
3
1566.3
1
1364.0
Table 3.13: Comparison of the estimated number of clusters ( ˆH) and deviance
from the different priors in the ESBM and current state-of-the-art competitors.
==PAGE:83==
3.4 The Oversize Operation
73
(a) WR η
(b) AW η
(c) JU η
(d) WR η(l)
(e) AW η(l)
(f) JU η(l)
Figure 3.24: Reordered adjacency matrices of the three Oversize Operation
network layers WR, AW, and JU when a multilayer approach of the SBM with a
Dirichlet process prior has been applied using both shared link probabilities and
layer-specific link probabilities.
The extensions of the SBM to multilayer networks where we consider the two
cases of shared link probabilities η and layer-specific link probabilities η(l) reveal
only small differences in uncovered community structures. One main block is
identified in both cases and the two approaches differ in the sizes of the smaller
communities; the other three communities in the shared case are almost the same
size, while the layer-specific case reveals two smaller hubs and two singularly
populated clusters.
Figure 3.24 shows the results on all three network layers
using the Dirichlet process prior. The corresponding results of the remaining
three priors considered in the ESMB are available in appendix 5.
==PAGE:84==
74
3 Results
(a) WR, p = 1
(b) AW, p = 1
(c) JU, p = 1
(d) WR, p = 2
(e) AW, p = 2
(f) JU, p = 2
Figure 3.25: Fraction of community champions as a function of the simplex size
δ2 across dimensions D ∈{5, 10, 25} for the HM-LDM on the Oversize network
on WR, AW, and JU. The top row contains the result for p = 1 and the bottom
row has p = 2.
Plots of the fraction of community champions in the HM-LDM from different
dimensions across varying simplex sizes δ can be found in figure 3.25.
Once
again, we are able to observe a decrease in the fraction of community champions
as the simplex volume is increased. This decrease is steepest for p = 2 compared
to p = 1.
3.4.3
Link Prediction
We first present our link prediction results obtained using baseline methods in-
cluding common neighbors, Adamic-Adar, Katz index, and the Jaccard similarity.
The performance in terms of ROC curves and AUC-ROC scores are given in fig-
ure 3.26. We observe that the Katz index yields the best performance for all three
network layers, while the remaining baseline methods perform equally well. This
correlates well with the theory behind these methods, where CN, AA, and Jac-
card focus on direct connections, while the Katz index considers both direct and
indirect paths, making it more robust in sparse networks where direct connections
are limited.
==PAGE:85==
3.4 The Oversize Operation
75
(a) WR
(b) AW
(c) JU
Figure 3.26: Link prediction performance in terms of ROC curves and corre-
sponding AUC-ROC using simple baseline link prediction methods on WR, AW,
and JU.
(a) WR, p = 1
(b) AW, p = 1
(c) JU, p = 1
(d) WR, p = 2
(e) AW, p = 2
(f) JU, p = 2
Figure 3.27: Link prediction performance for the HM-LDM in terms of ROC
curves along with corresponding AUC-ROC scores for a fixed simplex size δ2 =
100 across different dimensions of the latent embedding space D = {5, 10, 25}
and for both p = 1 (top row) and p = 2 (bottom row).
Figures 3.27 and 3.28 hold the results of link prediction performance in the HM-
LDM looking into various dimensions D ∈{5, 10, 25} and p ∈{1, 2}. Figure
3.27 shows the ROC curves and corresponding AUC-ROC scores for the three
network layers while figure 3.28 shows the AUC-ROC as a function of the simplex
volume. The results of the link prediction experiments show high performance
for all layers, but the highest is obtained for the JU network. We compare the
==PAGE:86==
76
3 Results
performance of link prediction using different methods and collect the results in
terms of AUC-ROC scores in table 3.14.
(a) WR, p = 1
(b) AW, p = 1
(c) JU, p = 1
(d) WR, p = 2
(e) AW, p = 2
(f) JU, p = 2
Figure 3.28: Link prediction performance for the HM-LDM in terms of AUC-
ROC scores as a function of the simplex size δ2 across different dimensions of the
latent embedding space D = {5, 10, 25} and for both p = 1 (top row) and p = 2
(bottom row).
The incorporation of multiple network layers in the ESBM framework applied
on the Oversize operation network yields interesting results. Looking at figure
3.29 and reported AUC-ROC scores in table 3.14 we notice high performance
in link prediction when considering both individual network layers and when
the additional network layers are considered. Collapsing the network layers and
assuming shared link probabilities across the network layers does decrease the
performance, but when layer-specific link probabilities η(l) are assumed the JU
layer has a small increase in link prediction performance.
==PAGE:87==
3.4 The Oversize Operation
77
(a) Single-layer
(b) Multilayer η
(c) Multilayer η(l)
(d) Single-layer
(e) Multilayer η
(f) Multilayer η(l)
(g) Single-layer
(h) Multilayer η
(i) Multilayer η(l)
Figure 3.29:
Link prediction performance in terms of ROC-curves and cor-
responding AUC-ROC using different priors in the ESBM on both single layer
modeling, multilayer modeling with shared link probabilities η and multilayer
modeling with layer-specific link probabilities η(l). Top row: WR. Middle row:
AW. Bottom row: JU.
==PAGE:88==
78
3 Results
Method
WR
AW
JU
Baseline methods
Common Neighbors
0.64
0.69
0.68
Adamic-Adar
0.64
0.69
0.68
Katz Index
0.83
0.86
0.84
Jaccard Similarity
0.63
0.69
0.68
ESBM
Single-layer
0.87
0.90
0.88
Multilayer η
0.80
0.82
0.88
Multilayer η(l)
0.87
0.89
0.89
HM-LDM
p = 1
0.89
0.96
0.99
p = 2
0.80
0.94
0.97
Table 3.14: Link prediction results for WR, AW, and JU network layers.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
This chapter will be three-fold. Firstly, a discussion on the findings and applied
methodology used to address the problem statement asserted in 0.1.1 and the
research questions stated in 0.1.1.1 is provided. Then limitations to the current
work are brought up. Lastly, a reflection on broader impacts for law enforcement
and possible pitfalls entailed follows.
4.0.1
The Infinito Operation
Comparing the community structures identified through the reordered adjacency
matrices of the SN network shows differences between the stochastic block model
and the latent distance model. Firstly, the grouping structures stand out stronger
in the LDM case with communities more visible along the diagonal of the adja-
cency matrix.
The SBM indicates some core-periphery and vertical structure
in the organization rather than the horizontal structure dominant in the LDM.
These findings correlate well with our understanding of Mafia organizational struc-
tures, where one would expect community patterns among the key persons in each
local community, and core-periphery structures between such groups [7]. The re-
ported deviance measures show that the SBM generally performs better than
state-of-the-art competitors on the SN network.
The GN prior results in the
lowest WAIC. The link prediction results for the SN network showed superior
performance using baseline methods compared to SBM and LDM. The baseline
methods are expected to work well on networks where community structures are
well-defined and local interactions play a prominent role. The better performance
for HM-LDM than SBM is consistent with our considerations of the uncovered
community structures from these methods. SBM assumes that nodes within the
same community share the same probability of forming connections, overlooking
potential heterogeneity within communities.
4.0.2
The Montagna Operation
The Montagna Operation dataset exhibits notable differences in degree distribu-
tions and densities between the MN and PC layers. In the MN network, consis-
==PAGE:90==
80
4 Discussion
tent findings in community structures reveal a nested hierarchy of core-periphery
structures, indicative of a vertical criminal organization with weak community
patterns. Conversely, the PC network displays a more pronounced vertical struc-
ture, with fewer blocks identified in the SBM framework compared to MN. This
aligns with the PC network containing phonecall interactions, where communica-
tion is expected to be more scattered between different groups. Different latent
dimensions in the LDM framework with δ values resulting in identifiable solu-
tions point to significantly distinct community structures in PC compared to
other methods. The SBM emphasizes homophily, where nodes within the same
community have similar connection probabilities while the LDM emphasizes spa-
tial proximity, where nodes close in the latent space have a higher probability
of forming connections. In the multilayer context, there is a noticeable drop in
link predictive performance for the MN layer, while the PC layer benefits from
assuming shared link probabilities. The PC layer’s diverse communication pat-
terns benefit from this assumption in SBM, capturing underlying structures for
improved link prediction. However, this approach is less effective for MN, where
distinct physical meetings may lead to nuanced community structures. A note-
worthy limitation is the restriction to nodes common across all layers, neglecting
layer-specific dynamics, underrepresenting heterogeneity, and introducing bias.
We find that shared link probabilities enhance link prediction performance in PC
by leveraging shared information, but may not generalize well for MN. When
favorable results are found assuming shared link probabilities, the potential use
of parameter sharing emerges. AUC score behavior as a function of simplex size
aligns with expectations for MN, but shows unexpected results for PC, possibly
due to the sparsity of the PC network. Further exploration, including extending
the LDM for phonecall data and considering additional covariates from frequency
and duration, could enhance the nuanced understanding of community structures
in these complex networks.
4.0.3
The Oversize Operation
The three network layers considered in the Oversize Operation dataset (WR, AW,
and JU) are very sparse and characterized by few nodes of high degree and many
nodes of either very low or zero degree (isolated nodes). Our results showed how
the competing methods had diﬀiculties with inferring reasonable group partitions.
These findings are visible both in the grid-covered and reordered adjacency ma-
trices and in the high values of deviances.
All priors considered in the SBM
framework gave consistent clustering results with one main community in each
layer and a few very small ones. These findings can be attributed to the struc-
tural nature of the network layers. Since the SBM assumes that nodes within the
same block have the same probability of forming connections, the isolated nodes
==PAGE:91==
4 Discussion
81
are clustered together.
Using the HM-LDM framework, significantly different
community structures emerge. The results of the D = 5 and D = 10 dimensional
latent representations show almost equally sized communities for the AW and JU
layers. The community sizes vary more for the WR layer, which is characterized
by more edges. The sparsity of the layers most likely explains the unexpected
behavior of link prediction performance in the HM-LDM for varying simplex sizes.
For all layers, the baseline link prediction methods yield the lowest performances,
while the SBM and LDM reach higher AUC-ROC scores. The sparsity of the
JU layer accounts for the very high performance values using the HM-LDM. Our
incorporation of multiple layers in the SBM shows a decrease for all layers when
assuming shared link probabilities, while the JU layer slightly merits using a
multilayer approach with layer-specific link probabilities.
4.0.4
Current Limitations
All datasets considered in this thesis are very small and sparse with high class
imbalance between the number of links and the number of non-links. This natu-
rally limits the direct applications of findings to other networks. Furthermore, the
datasets are the result of different investigative proceedings on organized crimi-
nal Mafia clans in Italy, thus particular structures are expected. The networks
do not have any node attributes, knowledge regarding ground truth community
structures, or other structural and topological information.
The predictive performance has only been reported using AUC-ROC scores, which
offer valuable insights into binary classification model performance but might not
be a suﬀicient metric in the presence of class imbalance which is an eminent prob-
lem considering our sparse networks. Consideration of additional metrics that
focus on the minority class is crucial for a more accurate assessment. Working
with imbalanced datasets, models tend to overfit the non-link class and challenges
tend to arise in training models to generalize well across both classes. Additional
metrics such as precision, recall, F1 score, and AUC-PR would be much more
suitable for assessment in this case. The overfitting of the non-edge class in the
context of crime data would lead to failure in identifying potential links between
criminals, thus resulting in highly reduced applications of the proposed methods.
Our implementation of the SBM follows the traditional approach of setting the
hyperparameters fixed during model initialization which has severe limitations.
Choosing hyperparameters requires knowledge or assumptions a priori. First and
foremost, the fixed hyperparameters might make the models sensitive to initial
conditions where different initializations of parameters could result in distinct
community structures, hence the quality of the inferred communities depends on
==PAGE:92==
82
4 Discussion
the chosen hyperparameters. Fixed values may also lead to suboptimal model
fits, as they might not be the most appropriate for describing the intricacies of
the observed network. Fixed hyperparameters might not effectively account for
this heterogeneity, which can lead to biased community assignments and inac-
curate predictions. A more flexible approach to combat these issues is to make
inferences through sampling e.g. using the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, thus
allowing the model to learn from data and use this to update its beliefs.
4.0.5
Broader Impacts for Law Enforcement
Community detection and link prediction are integral components of SNA and
advanced representation learning techniques such as SBM and LDM have been
shown to yield interpretable results in our analyses to uncover structures and in-
teractions. We have used a qualitative approach for community detection which
has the potential to provide a nuanced understanding of criminal organizations.
However, potential pitfalls lie in the subjective nature of such qualitative analysis,
where the risk of overinterpretation or misinterpretation of detected communities
may lead to erroneous conclusions. Subjectivity introduces biases, impacting the
reliability of the identified communities.
To assist the qualitative community
detection, we also worked with quantitative link prediction, which serves as a
tool with significant relevance in investigative scenarios. By identifying potential
relationships between actors, where they are not immediately expected based on
historical data, these models offer a systematic approach to unveil hidden pat-
terns. Nevertheless, limitations arise from biases in data collection. If data is
inconsistent or incomplete, the applied models may not generalize well to new,
unseen data. Decisions based on biased predictions could lead to misinformed
actions or reinforce existing biases. Data collection on convert networks is hence
a valid limitation when seeking to apply network analysis methods to such net-
works where data incompleteness and uncertainty is a valid concern.
These reflections regarding bias in data collection have broad consequences, in-
fluencing the results of subsequent analyses. Moreover, using network data for
community detection and link prediction raises data sensitivity concerns, where
unintended consequences, such as the profiling of individuals, could result from
the application of these models, calling for ethical considerations.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated the application and usability of novel representation
learning techniques for unsupervised community detection and link prediction in
covert networks where distinct operations against three prominent Italian Mafia
clans have been considered. We found that traditional algorithms, characterized
by their reliance on node and graph-level statistics, often lack the flexibility and
capacity to capture the intricate patterns present in highly structured networks.
The stochastic block model was utilized with four different Gibbs-type priors
and our results showed how this class of models offers a straightforward and inter-
pretable framework for assigning nodes to blocks, providing a clear representation
of community structures within the network. The most prominent limitation of
the SBM framework lies in the rigid block connectivity assumption, thus making
the model prone to limitations of capturing more nuanced latent structures often
present in real-world datasets. These restrictions have been leveraged by addi-
tionally considering latent space models. The hybrid membership latent distance
model was used, in which explicit control over both soft and hard community
membership through the volume of the induced simplex is obtained. Such soft
assignment models offer flexibility by allowing nodes to have partial membership
in multiple communities.
Using this model we were able to show that small
simplex volumes uncover distinct communities in social networks while ensuring
model identifiability. Both the SBM and LDM frameworks allowed for visual
inspections of community detection results through the ability to order the ad-
jacency matrices based on prominent latent communities making our findings
a qualitative task. Our findings were compared to alternative state-of-the-art
methods and showed how some organizational network structures uncovered in
the ESBM and HM-LDM frameworks could not be inferred from the competing
methods. Intricate crime network structures along with refined predictive strate-
gies were acquired.
The multilayer networks were analyzed comparatively, both in terms of uncov-
ered community structure and concerning link prediction. Additional network
layers were incorporated into the SBM framework assuming shared community
structures. We looked into the link predictive performance when distinguishing
between shared link probabilities among the network layers and layer-specific link
==PAGE:94==
84
5 Conclusion
probabilities. Our findings suggested that the multilayer networks exhibit very
strong community structuring. The risk of bias in the data collection process
conducted by law enforcement is inherent, considering crime networks, and care
must be taken when analyzing and interpreting obtained results. To draw mean-
ingful conclusions, a comprehension of the criminal environment as well as the
investigative procedures must be held.
Future Work
Numerous options for further investigations and improved applications are pos-
sible. It is very pertinent to extend the SBM framework with implementations
of sampling procedures on appropriate choices of hyperparameters e.g. using a
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. Specifically looking at our datasets, alternative
choices of handling multilayer data in the case of the Montagna Operation, where
only the subset of common nodes is currently considered, could also make up inter-
esting research areas. Extensions to weighted, directed, and signed networks are
interesting to consider when working on criminal network data. Accessibility to
data with known community structures to assess whether the models can success-
fully infer the ground-truth community labels would facilitate valuable insights
into their ability to capture and replicate underlying patterns in social network
structures. Continued explorations and improvements of the applied models and
the adoption of alternative inference techniques will undoubtedly contribute to
heightened eﬀicacy and usability in uncovering meaningful information in crime
datasets.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
Giulia Berlusconi et al. “Link Prediction in Criminal Networks: A Tool
for Criminal Intelligence Analysis.” eng. In: Plos One 11.4 (2016). Ed. by
Daniele Marinazzo, e0154244. issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0154244.
[2]
Diego D. Lopes et al. “Machine learning partners in criminal networks.”
eng. In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (2022), p. 15746. issn: 20452322. doi: 10.
1038/s41598-022-20025-w.
[3]
David Bright, Russell Brewer, and Carlo Morselli. “Using social network
analysis to study crime: Navigating the challenges of criminal justice records.”
eng. In: Social Networks 66 (2021), pp. 50–64. issn: 18792111, 03788733.
doi: 10.1016/j.socnet.2021.01.006.
[4]
Annamaria Ficara et al. “Criminal networks analysis in missing data sce-
narios through graph distances.” eng. In: Plos One (2021). issn: 19326203.
[5]
Jan William Johnsen and Katrin Franke. “Identifying Central Individuals
in Organised Criminal Groups and Underground Marketplaces.” eng. In:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 10862 (2018).
Ed. by Y et al Shi, pp. 379–386. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-93713-7_31.
[6]
Xu Jennifer and Hsinchun Chen. “CRIMINAL network analysis and visu-
alization.” eng. In: Communications of the Acm 48.6 (2005), pp. 100–107.
issn: 00010782, 15577317. doi: 10.1145/1064830.1064834.
[7]
Michele Battisti, Andrea Mario Lavezzi, and Roberto Musotto. “Organizing
Crime: an Empirical Analysis of the Sicilian Mafia.” und. In: (2022).
[8]
Sirio Legramanti et al. “Extended Stochastic Block Models with Applica-
tion to Criminal Networks.” und. In: (2022).
[9]
Vincent D. Blondel et al. “Fast unfolding of communities in large networks.”
eng. In: Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2008.10
(2008), P10008. issn: 17425468. doi: 10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[10]
Ulrike von Luxburg. “A Tutorial on Spectral Clustering.” und. In: (2007).
[11]
S WASSERMAN and C ANDERSON. “STOCHASTIC A POSTERIORI
BLOCKMODELS - CONSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT.” eng. In: So-
cial Networks 9.1 (1987), pp. 1–36. issn: 18792111, 03788733. doi: 10.1016/
0378-8733(87)90015-3.
[12]
Krzysztof Nowicki and Tom A.B. Snijders. “Estimation and prediction for
stochastic blockstructures.” eng. In: Journal of the American Statistical
Association 96.455 (2001), pp. 1077–1087. issn: 1537274x, 01621459. doi:
10.1198/016214501753208735.
[13]
Mikkel Nørgaard Schmidt and Morten Mørup. “Nonparametric Bayesian
Modeling of Complex Networks: An Introduction.” eng. In: I E E E - Signal
Processing Magazine 30.3 (2013), pp. 110–128. issn: 10535888, 15580792.
doi: 10.1109/MSP.2012.2235191.
[14]
Edoardo M Airoldi et al. “Mixed membership stochastic blockmodels.” In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 (2008), pp. 1981–2014.
[15]
Nikolaos Nakis et al. “A Hierarchical Block Distance Model for Ultra Low-
Dimensional Graph Representations.” eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Knowl-
edge and Data Engineering (2023), pp. 1–14. issn: 15582191, 10414347. doi:
10.1109/TKDE.2023.3304344.
[16]
Peter D. Hoff, Adrian E. Raftery, and Mark S. Handcock. “Latent space
approaches to social network analysis.” eng. In: Journal of the American
Statistical Association 97.460 (2002), pp. 1090–1098. issn: 01621459. doi:
10.1198/016214502388618906.
[17]
Nikolaos Nakis, Abdulkadir Çelikkanat, and Morten Mørup. “A Hybrid
Membership Latent Distance Model for Unsigned and Signed Integer Weighted
Networks.” und. In: (2023). doi: 10.1142/S0219525923400027.
[18]
et al. Cavallaro L. Criminal Network: The Sicilian Mafia. ”Montagna Op-
eration”. Data retrieved from zenodo on 14/09/2023, https://zenodo.org/
record/3938818. 2020.
[19]
Steve Borgatti. NDRANGHETA MAFIA 2. Data retrieved from UCINET
on 14/09/2023, https://sites.google.com/site/ucinetsoftware/datasets/
covert-networks/ndrangheta-mafia-2. 2016.
[20]
et al. Piccardi C. Oversize network. Data retrieved from Figshare on 14/09/2023,
https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Oversize_network/3156067. 2016.
[21]
Nikolaos Nakis, Abdulkadir Çelikkanat, and Morten Mørup. “A Hybrid
Membership Latent Distance Model for Unsigned and Signed Integer Weighted
Networks.” und. In: (2023). doi: 10.1142/S0219525923400027.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
87
[22]
David Liben-Nowell and Jon Kleinberg. “The link prediction problem for so-
cial networks.” eng. In: International Conference on Information and Knowl-
edge Management, Proceedings (2003), pp. 556–559. doi: 10.1145/956958.
956972.
[23]
Jean Marie McGloin and Holly Nguyen. “The importance of studying co-
offending networks for criminological theory and policy.” eng. In: Crime and
Networks (2013), pp. 13–27. doi: 10.4324/9781315885018-8.
[24]
Tribunale di Milano. “Ordinanza di applicazione di misura coercitiva con
mandato di cattura - art. 292 c.p.p. (Operazione Infinito).” it. In: Uﬀicio
del giudice per le indagini preliminari (2011).
[25]
Ordinanza di applicazione di misura coercitiva dell’operazione Infinito. Data
retrieved from Libera Verbano Cusio Ossola on 14/09/2023, https://liberavco.
liberapiemonte.it/wp- content/uploads/sites/13/2012/04/Operazione-
Infinito-Ordinanza-di-Custodia-Cautelare.pdf. 2012.
[26]
Lucia Cavallaro et al. “Disrupting resilient criminal networks through data
analysis: The case of sicilian mafia.” eng. In: Plos One 15.8 (2020). Ed. by
Leto Peel, e0236476. issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0236476.
[27]
Lucia Cavallaro. “Network Features in Complex Applications.” eng. In:
(2021).
[28]
William L. Hamilton. Graph Representation Learning. eng. Springer, 2020.
isbn: 3031000331, 3031004604, 3031015886, 9783031000331, 9783031004605,
9783031015885.
[29]
Annamaria et al. Ficara. Multilayer network analysis: the identification of
key actors in a Sicilian Mafia operation. [Online; accessed 4-November-
2023]. 2021. url: https://blog.eai-conferences.org/2021/05/19/annamaria-
ficara-on-multilayer-network-analysis-the-identification-of-key-actors-in-
a-sicilian-mafia-operation/.
[30]
Jing Lei and Kevin Z. Lin. “Bias-adjusted spectral clustering in multi-layer
stochastic block models.” und. In: (2022), p. 58.
[31]
Annamaria Ficara. “Social network analysis approaches to study crime.”
eng. In: (2022).
[32]
LC FREEMAN. “CENTRALITY IN SOCIAL NETWORKS CONCEP-
TUAL CLARIFICATION.” eng. In: Social Networks 1.3 (1979), pp. 215–
239. issn: 03788733, 18792111. doi: 10.1016/0378-8733(78)90021-7.
[33]
Yurun Wang et al. “Mesoscale Structure in Urban–Rural Mobility Networks
in the Pearl River Delta Area: A Weighted Stochastic Block Modeling Anal-
ysis.” eng. In: Isprs International Journal of Geo-information 12.5 (2023),
p. 183. issn: 22209964. doi: 10.3390/ijgi12050183.
==PAGE:98==
88
Bibliography
[34]
Albert-László Barabási and Márton Pósfai. Network science. eng. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2016, xviii, 456 Seiten (unknown). isbn: 1107076269,
9781107076266.
[35]
Santo Fortunato and Darko Hric. “Community detection in networks: A
user guide.” eng. In: Physics Reports 659 (2016), pp. 1–44. issn: 18736270,
03701573. doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2016.09.002.
[36]
Maurizio Catino. “How do mafias organize? Conflict and violence in three
mafia organizations.” eng. In: Archives Europeennes De Sociologie 55.2
(2014), pp. 177–220. issn: 14740583, 00039756. doi: 10.1017/S0003975614000095.
[37]
Andrew Y. Ng, Michael I. Jordan, and Yair Weiss. “On spectral cluster-
ing: Analysis and an algorithm.” eng. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 14 (2002), pp. 849–856. issn: 10495258.
[38]
Shyam Sundar Meena. COMMUNITY DETECTION USING LOUVAIN.
[Online; accessed 28-December-2023]. 2023. url: https://medium.com/
@ssmeena7/community-detection-using-louvain-61b460fd80b3.
[39]
Clement Lee and Darren J. Wilkinson. “A review of stochastic block models
and extensions for graph clustering.” eng. In: Applied Network Science 4.1
(2019), p. 122. issn: 23648228. doi: 10.1007/s41109-019-0232-2.
[40]
Subhadeep Paul and Yuguo Chen. “Consistent community detection in
multi-relational data through restricted multi-layer stochastic blockmodel.”
eng. In: Electronic Journal of Statistics 10.2 (2016), pp. 3807–3870. issn:
19357524. doi: 10.1214/16-EJS1211.
[41]
Carlo Tomasi. Conjugacy for Categorical Distributions. [Online; accessed
05-January-2024]. 2014. url: https://courses.cs.duke.edu/cps274/fall14/
notes/Dirichlet.pdf.
[42]
Samuel J. Gershman and David M. Blei. “A Tutorial on Bayesian Nonpara-
metric Models.” und. In: (2011), p. 28.
[43]
Charles Kemp et al. “Learning systems of concepts with an infinite rela-
tional model.” In: Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence - Volume 1. 2006, pp. 381–388.
[44]
Joseph Rocca. Bayesian inference problem, MCMC and variational infer-
ence - Overview of the Bayesian inference problem in statistics. [Online;
accessed 23-October-2023]. 2019. url: https://towardsdatascience.com/
bayesian-inference-problem-mcmc-and-variational-inference-25a8aa9bce29.
[45]
Marina Meilǎ. “Comparing clusterings-an information based distance.” eng.
In: Journal of Multivariate Analysis 98.5 (2007), pp. 873–895. issn: 10957243,
0047259x. doi: 10.1016/j.jmva.2006.11.013.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
89
[46]
Stephen Wade and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Bayesian cluster analysis: Point
estimation and credible balls.” In: Bayesian Analysis 13 (2018), pp. 559–
626.
[47]
Sumio Watanabe. “Asymptotic equivalence of Bayes cross validation and
widely applicable information criterion in singular learning theory.” In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 11 (2010), pp. 3571–3594.
[48]
Sumio Watanabe. “A widely applicable Bayesian information criterion.” In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 14 (2013), pp. 867–897.
[49]
Etienne Côme et al. “Hierarchical clustering with discrete latent variable
models and the integrated classification likelihood.” eng. In: Advances in
Data Analysis and Classification 15.4 (2021), pp. 957–986. issn: 18625355,
18625347. doi: 10.1007/s11634-021-00440-z.
[50]
Kristoffer Jon Albers et al. “Uncovering Cortical Units of Processing From
Multi-Layered Connectomes.” eng. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience 16 (2022),
p. 836259. issn: 1662453x. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.836259.
[51]
Brian Karrer and M. E. J. Newman. “Stochastic blockmodels and commu-
nity structure in networks.” In: Physical Review E 83.1 (2011), p. 016107.
[52]
Christopher Aicher, Abigail Z. Jacobs, and Aaron Clauset. “Learning stochas-
tic blockmodels.” In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 15.1 (2014),
pp. 3221–3245.
[53]
Muhan Zhang. “Graph Neural Networks: Link Prediction.” eng. In: Graph
Neural Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications (2022), pp. 195–
223. doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-6054-2_10.
[54]
Kleinberg J Liben-Nowell D. “The link-prediction problem for social net-
works.” eng. In: Journal of the American society for information science
and technology (2007), pp. 1019–1031.
[55]
Lada A. Adamic and Eytan Adar. “Friends and neighbors on the Web.” eng.
In: Social Networks 25.3 (2003), pp. 211–230. issn: 18792111, 03788733. doi:
10.1016/S0378-8733(03)00009-1.
[56]
Albert R Barabási AL. “Emergence of scaling in random networks.” eng.
In: Science (1999), pp. 509–512.
[57]
Leo Katz. “A new status index derived from sociometric analysis.” eng.
In: Psychometrika 18.1 (1953), pp. 39–43. issn: 18600980, 00333123. doi:
10.1007/BF02289026.
[58]
Winfried Hochstättler and Alexander Schliep. “Minimum Spanning Trees.”
eng. In: Catbox (2010), pp. 19–32. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-03822-8_3.
==PAGE:100==
90
Bibliography
[59]
Yinzhe Li, Dan He, and Zhijie Ban. “Learning node embedding for inductive
link prediction in sparse observation network.” eng. In: Proceedings of the
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks 2022- (2022), 7 pp. issn:
21614407, 21614393. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN55064.2022.9892469.
[60]
Ryan Lichtenwalter and Nitesh V. Chawla. “Link prediction: Fair and ef-
fective evaluation.” eng. In: Proceedings of the 2012 Ieee/acm International
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, Asonam
2012 (2012), pp. 376–383. doi: 10.1109/ASONAM.2012.68.
[61]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Ma-
chine Learning and Data Mining. Fall 2020, version 1.0. Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark, Aug. 2020.
[62]
ChatGPT: A Language Model by OpenAI. https://www.openai.com/gpt-
3. Used ChatGPT primarily for code-related tasks, debugging and idea
generation.
[63]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic opti-
mization.” In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
2015.
==PAGE:101==
Appendix
Spectral Clustering Algorithms
Unnormalized Spectral Clustering
The unnormalized spectral clustering algorithm utilizes the concept of the Lapla-
cian matrix and its associated eigenvectors to perform clustering of data points.
The following steps are completed by the algorithm.
Algorithm 4 Unnormalized Spectral Clustering
Require: Similarity matrix S ∈Rn×n, Number of clusters k
1: Construct a similarity graph, letting W be its weighted adjacency matrix
2: Compute the unnormalized Laplacian L
3: Compute the first k eigenvectors u1, . . . , uk of L
4: Let U ∈Rn×k be the matrix containing the k eigenvectors u1, . . . , uk as
columns
5: for i = 1 to n do
6:
Let yi ∈Rk be the vector corresponding to the i-th row of U
7: Cluster the points (yi)i=1,...,n in Rk with the k-means algorithm into clusters
C1, . . . , Ck
8: Output: Clusters A1, . . . , Ak with Ai = {j|yj ∈Ci}
Normalized spectral clustering according to Shi and Malik (2000)
The input to the algorithm is the similarity matrix S ∈Rn×n, as well as the
number of cluster to construct k.
==PAGE:102==
92
Appendix
Algorithm 5 Normalized Spectral Clustering
Require: Similarity matrix S ∈Rn×n, Number of clusters k
1: Construct a similarity graph, letting W be its weighted adjacency matrix
2: Compute the unnormalized Laplacian L
3: Compute the first k generalized eigenvectors u1, . . . , uk of the generalized
eigenproblem Lu = λDu
4: Let U ∈Rn×k be the matrix containing the k eigenvectors u1, . . . , uk as
columns
5: for i = 1 to n do
6:
Let yi ∈Rk be the vector corresponding to the i-th row of U
7: Cluster the points (yi)i=1,...,n in Rk with the k-means algorithm into clusters
C1, . . . , Ck
8: Output: Clusters A1, . . . , Ak with Ai = {j|yj ∈Ci}
It should be noted, that the algorithm uses the generalized eigenvectors of L,
corresponding to the eigenvectors of the normalized Laplacian Lrw.
The Multinomial Stochastic Block Model
The data sets to be considered in this thesis are the result of different investigative
proceedings. As described in the data section, both the Montagna Operation and
the Oversize Operation have resulted in multiple networks covering the same set
of nodes or actors across these networks from the same operation. The Montagna
Operation has two networks; physical meetings and phone calls. The Oversize
Operations has three networks; wiretap records, arrest warrant, and judgment.
These different networks within the same operation contain the same nodes or
actors and we will thus consider these as multi-layer graphs.
Multinomial stochastic block models (MSBMs) are an extension of the tradi-
tional stochastic block models presented above, designed to handle networks with
multiple types of interactions or relationships between the nodes. MSBMs can
potentially offer valuable insights of the structures and dynamics of criminal
networks in which the links represents different forms of criminal activities or re-
lationships among the actors which are the same. It is possible to apply different
community detection algorithms and methodologies to multilayer networks e.g.
using MSBMs for the detection of communities or clusters of actors that share
similar patterns of involvement across different types of criminal activities or rela-
tionships. This can help in identifying subgroups within the network that exhibit
similar behavioral patterns or play similar roles across different criminal contexts.
==PAGE:103==
The Multinomial Stochastic Block Model
93
Often, one makes a distinction between two different types of multinomial stochas-
tic block models due to the prior distribution on the clustering; the parametric
and the non-parametric one. In the parametric model, the prior is given by the
Dirichlet-Multinomial distribution and the prior in the non-parametric model
is given by the Chinese Restaurant Process (CRP). The Dirichlet prior on the
cluster-link probabilities and the multinomial likelihood of node-links should be
specified and these are the same for both the parametric and the non-parametric
models. We seek to discover clustering patterns among the individuals based
on connectivity-patterns at the multi-layer level. In order to capture multi-layer
differences, the likelihood of the links and prior on link probabilities across each
level must be captured. Each layer in the network has an adjacency matrix, and
when considering the multiu-layer setting, these can be view as stacked, thus re-
sulting in 3-dimensional arrrays A and η and 3-dimensional vectors aij and ηh,k.
The Dirichlet prior on link probability between cluster h and cluster k across
all layers l is
p(ηh,k) = Dir(η0) =
1
B(η0)
L
Y
l=1
ηη0,l−1
h,k,l ,
(5.1)
where ηh,k is a vector of cluster link probabilities across layers for cluster pairs
(h, k) and η0 denotes the concentration parameter vector across layers. As pre-
viously presented, there is a relationship between the Gamma function Γ(·) and
the Beta function B(·). This relation allows us to write
1
B(η0) = Γ(PL
l=1 η0,l)
QL
l=0 Γ(η0,l)
(5.2)
The Dirichlet prior is the conjugate prior to the multinomial distribution. The
multinomial likelihood of the link between nodes i and j across all layers L is
then given by
p(aij|ηzi,zj) = Mult(ηzi,zj) = Γ(PL
l=1 ai,j,l + 1)
QL
l=0 Γ(ai, j, l + 1)
L
Y
l=1
ηai,j,l
zi,zj,l,
(5.3)
where aij is the link vector across the different layers for the node pair (i, j). In
summary, we have the following generative story of the non-parametric multino-
mial SBM
Z ∼CRP(α)
ηh,k ∼Dir(η)
aij ∼Mult(ηzi,zj).
(5.4)
==PAGE:104==
94
Appendix
The joint distribution of the non-parametric generative model presented in eq.
5.4 above can be expressed as a product of conditional distributions and prior
distributions
p(A, Z, η|η0, α) = p(A|Z, η, α, η0)p(Z|α)p(α)p(η|η0)p(η0),
(5.5)
where p(A|Z, η, α, η0) denotes the likelihood function of the observations A given
the latent variables Z, parameters η, hyperparameters α, and given parameters
η0. The term p(Z|α) is the prior distribution of the latent variables Z given
the hyperparameters α. p(α) is the prior distribution of the hyperparameters α.
p(η|η0) is the prior distribution of the parameters η given the given parameters
η0. p(η0) denotes the prior distribution of the given parameters η0. As previously
mentioned, the Dirichlet distribution is conjugate to the Multinomial distribution,
so the nuisance parameter η can be marginalized out. If the terms p(α) and p(η0)
are considered constant during inference, the joint distribution presented in eq.5.5
above can be simplified to
p(A, Z) = p(A|Z)p(Z)
(5.6)
Just as in the regular stochastic block model setting for marginalizing out nui-
sance parameters, we here obtain this marginalization by integrating out over the
nuisance parameter η.
p(A, Z) =
Z
p(A|Z, η)p(η)dη
=
Z
p(A|ηzi,zj)p(η)dη
=
Z Y
(i,j)
Mult(ηzi,zj)
Y
h,k
Dir(η0)dη
(5.7)
Using the expressions for the Dirichlet prior distribution and the Multinomial
likelihood given in equations 5.1 and 5.2 above, we arrive at
p(A, Z) =
Z Y
(i,j)
Γ(PL
l=1 ai,j,l + 1)
QL
l=0 Γ(ai, j, l + 1)
L
Y
l=1
ηai,j,l
zi,zj,l
Y
h,k
1
B(η0)
L
Y
l=1
ηη0,l−1
h,k,l dη
(5.8)
From this we notice that the term
Y
(i,j)
Γ(PL
l=1 ai,j,l + 1)
QL
l=0 Γ(ai, j, l + 1)
(5.9)
is constant with regard to the parameter η which we are integrating over. Using
an arbitrary constant C to denote the terms constant with regards to η,this then
==PAGE:105==
The Multinomial Stochastic Block Model
95
allows us to write
p(A, Z) = C
Z
L
Y
l=1
ηai,j,l
zi,zj,l
Y
h,k
1
B(η0)
L
Y
l=1
ηη0,l−1
h,k,l dη
(5.10)
Since zi and zj are community/block assignments for nodes i and j, we have
zi, zjinh, k. Using the product rule of exponents, we can write the expression in
eq. 5.10 more compactly as
p(A, Z) = C
Z
K
Y
h,k
1
B(η0)
L
Y
l=1
η
P
zi∈h,zj ∈k ai,j,l+η0,l−1
h,k,l
dη
(5.11)
Remembering that ai,j,l denotes the link between node pair (i, j) for layer l, the
sum P
zi∈h,zj∈k ai,j,l in eq. 5.11 denotes the number of links between blocks h
and k for each layer l. Defining the parameter νh,k,l = P
zi∈h,zj∈k ai,j,l and the
vector νzi,zj = νh,k, the term inside the integral in eq. 5.11 can be recognised as
the Dirichlet distribution with concentration parameter νh,k + η0
Dir(νh,k + η0) =
1
B(νh,k + η0)
L
Y
l=1
ηνh,k+η0,l−1
h,k,l
.
(5.12)
Collectively, we have
L
Y
l=1
η
P
zi∈h,zj ∈k ai,j,l+η0,l−1
h,k,l
=
L
Y
l=1
ηνh,k+η0,l−1
h,k,l
= Dir(νh,k + η0)B(νh,k + η0)
(5.13)
Since probability distributions must integrate to one, we can write
Z
L
Y
l=1
ηνh,k+η0,l−1
h,k,l
dη =
Z
B(νh,k + η0)
|
{z
}
constant wrt. η
Dir(νh,k + η0)dη
= B(νh,k + η0)
(5.14)
Using the result from eq.
5.14 and inserting this into eq.
5.11 we have the
following expression for the marginalized likelihood
p(A, Z) = C
K
Y
h,k
B(νh,k + η0)
B(η0)
= DirMult(η0)
(5.15)
==PAGE:106==
96
Appendix
This result is the Dirichlet-Multinomial distribution, which agrees with the ob-
tained expression in eq. 2.19.
Inference
The conditional posterior for the non-parametric multinomial stochastic block
model is to be considered in the following. Firstly, the non-parametric condi-
tional likelihood is to be derived using 5.15
p(A|zi = d, Z\i) =
QK
h B(νh,d + η0)
QK
h B(ν\i
h,d + η0)
(5.16)
When a node i is assigned to a new community, the new community is empty
without the node i. This implies that ν\i
h,d = 0 and hence
p(A|zi = d, Z\i) =
QK
h B(νh,d + η0)
QK
h B(η0)
∝
K
Y
h
B(νh,d + η0),
(5.17)
since we only consider terms dependent on the community assignments. Con-
clusively, we get the conditional distribution when considering the terms in the
likelihood and prior that will change when node i is assigned to a different com-
munity
p(A|zi = d, Z\i) ∝



QK
h B(νh,d+η0)
QK
h B(ν\i
h,d+η0)
if d is an existing partition
QK
h B(νh,d + η0)
if d is a new partition
(5.18)
We are now ready to tackle the non-parametric conditional prior. Taking the
non-parametric prior given in eq. 2.26 into account and only focusing on the
terms that will change with regards to the community assignment, we consider
the two cases of the node i being assigned to an existing partition and the node
i being assigned to a new partition
p(xi = d|Z\i) ∝
(
n\i
d
if d is an existing partition
α
if d is a new partition
(5.19)
in which n∝i
d
is the number of nodes associated with community d not counting
node i. Adding node i to an existing community, increases the argument of the
corresponding Gamma function Γ(nd) from 2.26 by one, effectively multiplying
the prior by the term n\i
d . If the node i, however, is added to a new community,
==PAGE:107==
Prediction in ESBM
97
K will be incremented by one, effectively multiplying the prior by α [13].
The joint conditional probability can be derived by substituting equations 5.18
and 5.19 into eq. 2.33
p(A, zi = d|Z\i) = p(A|zi = d, Z\i)p(zi = d, Z\i)
∝



QK
h B(νh,d+η0)
QK
h B(ν\i
h,d+η0)n\i
d
if d is an existing partition
QK
h B(νh,d + η0)α
if d is a new partition
(5.20)
The resulting expression in eq. 5.20 governs the posterior conditions required for
performing Gibbs sampling of community assignments zi to attain the partition-
ing matrix Z.
Prediction in ESBM
The prediction of group memberships for new nodes zV +1 for a newly observed
individual V + 1 can be conducted using the urn scheme representation from eq.
2.29 of the Gibbs-type priors to obtain formal estimates of group probabilities
for incoming actors without conditioning on external attributes. By combining
equations ?? and 2.34 with the urn scheme representation from eq.
2.29 an
estimate for the predictive probabilities of the cluster allocations for a new node
V + 1 is
pr(zV +1 = h|Y, yV +1, ˆz) ∝pr(zV +1 = h|ˆz)
ˆ
H
Y
k=1
B(a + ˆmhk + ˆrV +1,k, b + ˆmhk + ˆmV +1,k)
B(a + ˆmhk, b + ˆmhk)
,
(5.21)
where the vector yV +1 = (yV +1,1, ..., yV +1,V )T contains the newly observed edges
between the new node V + 1 and the already existing nodes in the network. ˆmhk
and ˆmhk are frequencies of the number of edges and non-edges between the exist-
ing nodes in clusters h and k computed from the estimated cluster assignments
in ˆz. ˆrV +1,k and ˆrV +1,k denote the number of edges and non-edges between the
new node V + 1 and the existing nodes in cluster k. Priors on H quantify the
uncertainty on the number of groups for V →∞, but the number of non-empty
groups H occupied by the V nodes is of more direct interest and can be used to
guide the choice of prior hyperparameters. Considering Gibbs-type priors, this
can a closed form probability mass function
pr(H = h) = WV,hC(V, h; σ)σ−h,
(5.22)
where C(V, h; σ) denotes the generalized factorial coeﬀicient.
==PAGE:108==
98
Appendix
Data Preparation for link prediction using MST
Figure 1: Illustration of the link removal process using the MST approach on
the Montagna meetings network
Figure 2: Illustration of the link removal process using the MST approach on
the Montagna phonecalls network
==PAGE:109==
Data Preparation for link prediction using MST
99
Figure 3: Illustration of the link removal process using the MST approach on
the Oversize wiretap records network
Figure 4: Illustration of the link removal process using the MST approach on
the Oversize arrest warrants network
==PAGE:110==
100
Appendix
Figure 5: Illustration of the link removal process using the MST approach on
the Oversize judgment network
Eigenvalues of the Graph Laplacians
Figure 6: 10 smallest eigenvalues of different Laplacians of the MN graph
==PAGE:111==
Eigenvalues of the Graph Laplacians
101
Figure 7: 10 smallest eigenvalues of different Laplacians of the PC graph
Figure 8: 10 smallest eigenvalues of different Laplacians of the SN graph
Figure 9: 10 smallest eigenvalues of different Laplacians of the WR graph
==PAGE:112==
102
Appendix
Figure 10: 10 smallest eigenvalues of different Laplacians of the AW graph
Figure 11: 10 smallest eigenvalues of different Laplacians of the JU graph
==PAGE:113==
Trace Plots
103
Trace Plots
(a) Traceplot using DP
(b) Traceplot using DM
(c) Traceplot using PY
(d) Traceplot using GN
Figure 12: Traceplots with different priors of the MN network
==PAGE:114==
104
Appendix
(a) Traceplot using DP
(b) Traceplot using DM
(c) Traceplot using PY
(d) Traceplot using GN
Figure 13: Traceplots with different priors of the PC network
==PAGE:115==
Trace Plots
105
(a) Traceplot using DP
(b) Traceplot using DM
(c) Traceplot using PY
(d) Traceplot using GN
Figure 14: Traceplots with different priors of the SN network
==PAGE:116==
106
Appendix
(a) Traceplot using DP
(b) Traceplot using DM
(c) Traceplot using PY
(d) Traceplot using GN
Figure 15: Traceplots with different priors of the WR network
==PAGE:117==
Trace Plots
107
(a) Traceplot using DP
(b) Traceplot using DM
(c) Traceplot using PY
(d) Traceplot using GN
Figure 16: Traceplots with different priors of the AW network
==PAGE:118==
108
Appendix
(a) Traceplot using DP
(b) Traceplot using DM
(c) Traceplot using PY
(d) Traceplot using GN
Figure 17: Traceplots with different priors of the JU network
Multilayer ESBM
(a) MN η
(b) MN η(l)
(c) PC η
(d) PC η(l)
Figure 18: Reordered adjacency matrices of the two Montagna Operation net-
work layers MN and PC when a multilayer approach of the SBM with a Dirichlet
multinomial process prior has been applied using both shared link probabilities
and layer-specific link probabilities.
==PAGE:119==
Multilayer ESBM
109
(a) MN η
(b) MN η(l)
(c) PC η
(d) PC η(l)
Figure 19: Reordered adjacency matrices of the two Montagna Operation net-
work layers MN and PC when a multilayer approach of the SBM with a Pitman-
Yor process prior has been applied using both shared link probabilities and layer-
specific link probabilities.
(a) MN η
(b) MN η(l)
(c) PC η
(d) PC η(l)
Figure 20: Reordered adjacency matrices of the two Montagna Operation net-
work layers MN and PC when a multilayer approach of the SBM with a Gnedin
process prior has been applied using both shared link probabilities and layer-
specific link probabilities.
==PAGE:120==
110
Appendix
(a) WR η
(b) AW η
(c) JU η
(d) WR η(l)
(e) AW η(l)
(f) JU η(l)
Figure 21: Reordered adjacency matrices of the three Oversize Operation net-
work layers WR, AW, and JU when a multilayer approach of the SBM with a
Dirichlet multinomial prior has been applied using both shared link probabilities
and layer-specific link probabilities.
==PAGE:121==
Multilayer ESBM
111
(a) WR η
(b) AW η
(c) JU η
(d) WR η(l)
(e) AW η(l)
(f) JU η(l)
Figure 22: Reordered adjacency matrices of the three Oversize Operation net-
work layers WR, AW, and JU when a multilayer approach of the SBM with a
Pitman-Yor prior has been applied using both shared link probabilities and layer-
specific link probabilities.
==PAGE:122==
112
Appendix
(a) WR η
(b) AW η
(c) JU η
(d) WR η(l)
(e) AW η(l)
(f) JU η(l)
Figure 23: Reordered adjacency matrices of the three Oversize Operation net-
work layers WR, AW, and JU when a multilayer approach of the SBM with a
Gnedin process prior has been applied using both shared link probabilities and
layer-specific link probabilities.
==PAGE:123==
==PAGE:124==
