==PAGE:1==
 
 
Reinforcement Learning Methods in 
Multi-Agent Fleet Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authors: 
Joachim Pors Andreasen s184289 
Frederik Møller Sørensen s184306 
Asger Sturis Tang s184305 
 
Supervisors: 
Francisco Camara Pereira 
Filipe Rodrigues 
Carolin Samanta Schmidt 
 
M.Sc. Thesis - 2024 
Master of Science in Engineering 
 
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 9351 0838
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
b
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Autonomous Vehicle on Demand (AMoD) systems represent a type of transportation
networks that utilises fleets of autonomous vehicles. Given a graph-representation of
a city, where nodes represent regions of a city and edges represent the connectivity be-
tween them, single-agent Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods have yielded notable
success in managing such fleets. This thesis introduces an architectural framework
aimed at extending these methodologies to address the complexities of multi-agent
fleet management. When expanding such an environment, non-stationarity and in-
creased variance is an inherent issue.
We propose to combat these challenges using modern RL methods. Specifically,
we examine the implementation of two algorithms: the Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C)
algorithm and the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm.
We propose, SAC as the
favourable algorithm due to sampling eﬀiciency which allows for faster training, and
robustness which is introduced by an entropy regularisation term.
Furthermore, we propose a way to incorporate a dynamic pricing element to the
environment using a Graph Neural Network (GNN), allowing the multi-agent setup
to set prices on a trip-by-trip basis allowing for optimised profits.
Empirical evaluations demonstrate that the proposed model architecture delivers
promising results, outperforming results achieved by training on pre-existent prices
given from historical taxi data. Additionally, we show that the performance of the
multi-agent model behaves in accordance with contemporary economic theories, par-
ticularly in examining the interplay between varying fleet sizes and their influence on
the dynamic pricing strategy.
==PAGE:5==
ii
==PAGE:6==
Preface
This master’s thesis has been written by Asger Sturis Tang (s184305), Frederik Møller
Sørensen (s184306) and Joachim Pors Andreasen (s184289) in the autumn of 2023
and the beginning of 2024. The thesis is written as part of a master’s degree at the
Technical University of Denmark.
The thesis is supervised by Francisco Camara Pereira - Professor, Filipe Rodrigues -
Associate Professor and Carolin Samanta Schmidt - PhD Student, from the depart-
ment of Technology, Management and Economics at DTU.
Kongens Lyngby, January 26, 2024
Joachim Pors Andreasen (s184289)
Asger Sturis Tang (s184305)
Frederik Møller Sørensen (s184306)
==PAGE:7==
iv
==PAGE:8==
Acknowledgements
We would like to sincerely thank Francisco Pereira Camara, Filipe Rodrigues and
Carolin Samanta Schmidt, for your excellent guidance through the process of this
thesis.
We thank you for allocating time to help us and to show your continuing enthusiasm
towards the subject with many fruitful discussions. Furthermore, we would like to
thank Carolin for her patience when it came to helping us adapt the existing code to
allow us to even get started properly with the thesis.
This thesis has been a tough and exciting task, and we would like to thank you for
making such an interesting subject available to us.
==PAGE:9==
vi
==PAGE:10==
Acronyms
Abbreviation
Definition
A2C
Advantage Actor-Critic
ACE
Associate Critic Element
AMoD
Autonomous Mobility on Demand
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
ASE
Associate Search Element
DQN
Deep-Q-Learning
GCN
Graph Convolutional Network
GNN
Graph Neural Network
MC
Monte Carlo
MDP
Markov Decision Process
OD
Origin-Destination
PG
Policy Gradient
RL
Reinforcement Learning
SAC
Soft Actor-Critic
TD
Temporal Difference
VOR
Value-Of-Ride
VOT
Value-Of-Time
Table 1: List of acronyms and their definitions in alphabetical order
==PAGE:11==
viii
==PAGE:12==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Definition
A
Set of possible actions
S
Set of possible states
R
Reward
R(s, a)
reward function
i,j
Nodes in graph
c
Company subscript
t
timestep t
τ
Travel-time
G
Graph
V
Verticies in graph
E
Edges in graph
π
Policy
st ∈S
State of system at time t
st+1
Neighbouring state
γ
Scalar discount factor for future rewards
f(xt)
Actor function
V (t)
Value evaluation of graph at time t
p
Price of trip
ψ
Capacity
d
Demand
Table 2: List of nomenclature and their definitions
==PAGE:13==
x
==PAGE:14==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Acronyms
vii
Nomenclature
ix
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Theory
9
3.1
Markov Decision Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
The AMoD Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Actor-Critic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
The Advantage Actor-Critic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
The Soft Actor-Critic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Graph Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.7
Pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Data
29
4.1
Source and Structure of the Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Data Statistics and Insights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Results
37
5.1
Introduction and Model Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
From One Actor to Two Actors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Baselines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
The Price Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Market Dynamics Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Discussion
63
==PAGE:15==
xii
Contents
7
Conclusion
71
Bibliography
74
A
Appendices for models
79
A.1 Model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the rapidly growing and urbanising world, new opportunities arise in the field of
transportation. Up to 68% of the worlds population are expected to live in urban areas
by 2050 Nations (2019), and already now traﬀic congestion is a major issue and cause
of concern in many large cities Mohammed Almatar (2023). This has laid ground
for extensive research of possible solutions. The most popular means of transporta-
tion remains the private automobile, and with the increasing population in cities,
this is becoming a less sustainable means of transportation. Within this problem,
Autonomous Mobility-on-Demand (AMoD) has the potential to play a huge role in
modernising and revolutionising the modern transportation problem. It is projected,
that in 2025, the global rideshare industry will have grown to a total market value
of $218 billion Qin et al. (2022). This thesis implements an AMoD system, where a
customer can request a trip from his or her origin and be assigned an autonomous
vehicle to transport them to a destination. This single vehicle is part of a larger fleet
that is controlled either by a central panel or hub that allows for extremely eﬀicient
services or as an independent agent in the system. This thesis focuses on a centralised
approach as the fleet of cars can be optimised as part of one large network. However,
solving this problem as a network optimisation problem can prove costly and diﬀicult
to solve. This is where Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made huge strides in recent
years, adopting the problem to an agent-based approach that allows learning in real
time by interacting with a complex environment that seeks to accurately represent
the real world.
This thesis is a natural extension of the work carried out by Gammelli et al.
(2021) and Schmidt et al. (2023). Where these two papers utilises various methods
for solving the AMoD problem in a single-agent setup by utilising graphs, this thesis
is emphasising the addition of another agent, thus making it a multi-agent problem.
This provides interesting challenges that we will address throughout the thesis. Fur-
thermore, the addition of an intelligent dynamic pricing element is introduced. In
this way, the system becomes more complex and dynamic and is also more adaptable
to a real world scenario. Here, prices are not constant and there are often multiple
competitors at any given time. We introduce an environment designed to emulate
real-world conditions as closely as possible under certain assumptions.
The layout of this thesis consists of three main parts. Initially, the results from
Gammelli et al. (2021) and Schmidt et al. (2023) are reproduced to initialise our fur-
ther analysis. The second part consists of taking the existing setup and expanding it
to two agents. We explore state-of-the-art methods for this implementation. Through-
==PAGE:17==
2
1 Introduction
out this process, we remain critical towards the implementation of going from one
agent to two agents, and remain aware of any pitfalls. Additionally, we introduce a
cancellation option for the customers. The cancellation option is introduced to better
reflect reality by giving customers the option of declining a trip based on a price.
What’s more, cancellation is pivotal to the third part of the thesis. Additionally, we
analyse and discuss some key differences between the two used algorithms, Advantage
Actor-Critic (A2C) and the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC). We argue, that choosing SAC
has certain advantages over A2C for our advanced analyses due to several reasons
which will be touched upon in detail in later sections. The third part of this project
is the expansion of the model architecture to include a dynamic pricing element. We
gather interesting insights and relate them to real world situations and propose a
multi-agent SAC model with a dynamic pricing element which shows very promising
results, for modelling the AMoD problem setting.
This thesis, to the extent of our knowledge, advances research in the field by intro-
ducing a new approach to the modelling of a dynamic pricing element. Consequently,
we have formulated the following mission statement:
Can we expand a current single-actor setup to a multi-agent setup within
the AMoD modelling problem, while closely resembling the real-life
dynamics of a rideshare transportation problem in a city? In addition,
what are the implications of introducing a dynamic pricing mechanism
into the models architecture on both individual agent behaviour and the
overall system dynamics?
Overall, the contribution of this thesis is two-fold. First and foremost, we show
that expanding a current single-agent setup to a multi-agent setup in the AMoD
setting is doable and suitable for simulating real-life experiments in a competitive
setting. Finally, we propose a model with an integrated dynamic pricing element.
The process starts by re-iterating on current relevant literature in chapter 2 followed
by a thorough explanation of relevant theoretical concepts in chapter 3. We present
various datasets relevant to our implementations and provide the reader with the
necessary insights regarding this in chapter 4. Following this, an extensive analysis
of all our experiments and a discussion of results as well as future possible work are
presented in chapters 5 and 6 respectively. The whole thesis is then tied together in
chapter 7.
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The aim of this chapter is to provide the reader with the relevant literature. We
emphasise why this thesis is relevant based on what is currently available in state-of-
the-art research. This literature review is divided into thematic sections, highlighting
each of the most prominent and important methods that we will use throughout the
report. The purpose is to provide the reader with the necessary insights to understand
the thesis. However, it is not the aim of this chapter to be an exhaustive presentation
of all relevant topics. For this we recommend to read the pertinent literature listed
in the reference section.
Autonomous Mobility on Demand
With the increased interest in the rideshare domain, we are witnessing a trend where
the use of advanced reinforcement learning algorithms is increasing. This is mainly
due to the increasingly complex and stochastic environments that the AMoD typi-
cally represents. Previously, companies have relied on simpler greedy heuristics that
optimises for immediate returns Qin et al. (2022). These have generally resulted in
short-sighted reactive policies which do not align with the cumulative return which
is the modern measuring stick. The newer multi-step nature of the decision-making,
which involves pricing, matching and rebalancing flows, pose challenges for these sim-
pler systems and implores the use of RL. Qin et al. (2022) offers a comprehensive
introduction to previous as well as recent advances on this topic.
The previously described AMoD environment is an important problem setting and
not a trivial problem to solve. Mao et al. (2020) utilises a centralised approach, which
devises a policy that specifies the aggregated number of vehicles to be rebalanced, thus
obtaining an action space which is independent of the number of vehicles. This paper
does not consider neural network architectures that exploit the graph structure of
road networks however, which will be important in this thesis later on. Gammelli
et al. (2021) developed a deep RL approach based on graph neural networks that
allow us to exploit the graph-structure of the real world transportation. This allows
us to learn a near-optimal policy and make it scalable. In Gammelli et al. (2022) the
emphasis is on solving the impractical solution that is retraining an RL algorithm
to a new city.
Gammelli et al.
propose an actor-critic algorithm also based on
recurrent graph neural networks. In this approach, the central controllers of a fleet of
vehicles within the AMoD setting are trained such that they require small amounts
of experience to produce a good performance. This is further developed in Schmidt
==PAGE:19==
4
2 Literature Review
et al. (2023), where the focus is to produce a model that is not only accurate, but
also very sample eﬀicient and eliminate the need for complex simulated environments
due to the emphasis on offline learning.
The approach used here is an variation
of the Actor-Critic algorithm, namely SAC which, as an off-policy algorithm, can
make better use of observations by storing earlier observations in a replay buffer thus
allowing for faster training.
Graphs
Graphs can be utilised in many different domains, and has been used to model city
planning to some extend since 1736, where it was first introduced by Leonhard Euler
when he used graphs to solve the Königsberg problem Shields (2012).
In recent
years, the use of graph neural networks has been prominent in the traﬀic domain.
Ye et al. (2022) provides a thorough survey of recent methodologies and applications
within the traﬀic domain and intelligent transportation systems. Especially relevant
is methodology of dividing traﬀic data into nodes and representing connected areas
through vertices, thus constructing a directional graph.
Figure 2.1: Example of fully connected directional graph
As an example of such a graph, figure 2.1 could represent the connection of regions
in the city and the various ways of traversing between the nodes i, j and k. The use
of Graph Neural Networks (GNN) in this project is heavily inspired by the work of
Gammelli et al. (2021), which is the first to do so in an AMoD setting.
A main
finding of the paper is that GNN enables RL to learn policies that are more easily
generalised and transferable, which is something to strive after in the AMoD setting.
Furthermore, Schmidt et al. (2023) also uses GNNs to model the architecture of
various cities leveraging the features of graph networks. To the best of our knowledge
this is the extend of current research on the subject.
Therefore, there exists no
contradicting theories or diverging results. As such this implementation comes with
some inherit uncertainty as it is still relatively new and unchallenged.
The specific use of GNNs in this thesis is limited to the use of Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) as they are implemented in Kipf and Welling (2016). They define a
convolution where instead of relying on Chebychev polynomials, a layer-wise convolu-
==PAGE:20==
2 Literature Review
5
tion is defined as a linear function on the graph Laplacian spectrum. This produces a
setup where the network convolves over the K-order neighbourhood for a given node
where K is the number of GCN layers in the neural network.
For a more comprehensive and exhaustive introduction to graph theory and GCNs,
we refer to Hamilton (2020) and Kipf and Welling (2016).
Markov Decision Processes
A Markov Decision Process (MDP), is a general framework for modelling decision
making. MDP’s exists in various shapes and forms and for an extensive overview we
refer to Puterman (1990). In this thesis we will focus on the MDP in the context of
the AMoD problem setting.
There currently exists two major approaches to the MDP setup within AMoD - a
centralised and a decentralised approach. In the papers Lin et al. (2019), Liu et al.
(2022) and Zhang et al. (2020) various decentralised modelling approaches are utilised.
To some extent they all model each vehicle in a fleet as an agent. Conversely the
articles Gammelli et al. (2022), Gammelli et al. (2021), Schmidt et al. (2023) and
Mao et al. (2020) opts for a centralised approach where each agent controls a fleet of
vehicles. This distinction greatly impacts the action space of the agents and thus the
MDP setup. By utilising a centralised setup in the MDP the action space becomes
fleet-size agnostic as each action redistributes a fraction of the fleet to each region. In
the decentralised setup an action is taken for every vehicle in the fleet to define the
movement from i to j for that vehicle. Where Mao et al. (2020) differs in the MDP
setup is that the action space consists of all origin-destination (OD) pairs, whereas
the action space in Gammelli et al. (2022), Gammelli et al. (2021) and Schmidt et al.
(2023), consists of one distribution that describes all regions. These show promising
results with the MDP setup, and for these reasons, a similar implementation will be
proposed in this thesis. All papers differ in the inputs to the MDP, however these are
mostly problem specific inputs that are not shared.
Actor-Critic Algorithms
Policy gradient based methods have long been a staple in RL applications. As Grond-
man et al. (2012) mentions, natural drawback to these methods are that estimated
gradients may have large variance, and are calculated without using any past esti-
mates. Actor-Critic methods seeks to combat this by adding a critic, whose role is
to evaluate policies found by the actor. The fundamental ideas behind Actor-Critic
algorithms was first proposed in 1983 by Barto et al. (1983) and are also discussed in
depth in N. Tsitsiklis. et al. (2002). They introduced the idea of having an actor who
takes actions in an environment and a critic who evaluates these actions. The idea of
having a critic instead of having the actor learn directly from the reward is, that the
actor can optimise for each time step in an episode using Temporal Difference (TD)
==PAGE:21==
6
2 Literature Review
learning. For an exhaustive source on TD, we refer to Sutton (1988) or Sutton and
Barto (2018). Furthermore, the critic helps to reduce variance since it estimates the
value function instead of using it directly. Mao et al. (2020) proposes an Actor-Critic
method that utilises deep neural networks to approximate both the critic and the
actor to solve the taxi dispatch problem. They also use the advantage function, that
approximates the improvement of the current action compared to the average value
of the current state, thus effectively making it into an Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C)
algorithm. As used in both Gammelli et al. (2021) and Gammelli et al. (2022) the
A2C is a suitable method for a single-agent AMoD system. When the number of
agents are increased there are a number of challenges to consider with A2C. As Lowe
et al. (2017) analyses, the traditional policy gradient method of the A2C suffers from
a variance that increases as the number of agents grows. Mnih et al. (2016) proposes
an adaptation that combats this, introducing an entropy regularisation term. An-
other way to combat this increasing variance is to utilise a more stable Actor-Critic
algorithm than A2C.
The Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm is relatively new compared to most RL al-
gorithms and methods. It was first formalised in 2018 in Haarnoja et al. (2018). The
article shows promising results with faster training, compared to other Actor-Critic
algorithms, while having the benefit of entropy maximisation and stability. The en-
tropy term in SAC is an incentive for more exploration. Enders et al. (2023) and
Lu et al. (2022), utilises SAC as described in Haarnoja et al. (2018). This thesis
implements an extension of SAC by utilising a multi-agent setup.
Multi-agent reinforcement learning is challenging for a number of reasons. Wong
et al. (2021) provides a comprehensive overview of the challenges and directions of
the current literature in multi-agent RL.
The multi-agent setting differs from single-agent systems most prominently in that
the environment’s dynamics are determined by joint actions of multiple agents in the
environment. The environment also becomes increasingly non-stationary with the ad-
dition of more agents. Multi-agent RL in the AMoD setting comes in various shapes
and forms, amongst others having each car as a separate agent as discussed in Wang
and Chang (2021). A challenge with such an implementation is the aforementioned
increasing complexity of the environment. With each increasing number of agent the
best policy of each agent is affected by changes of the other agents, resulting in a
non-stationary environment. Such approaches have been popular in recent literature
as also seen in Zhang et al. (2020) and Liu et al. (2022). We expand upon the cen-
tralised architecture to multiple agents controlling a fleet of vehicles.
The main benefit of using SAC in the multi-agent setting is its ability to handle
the increase in variance that occurs from having multiple agents. As pointed out in
both Haarnoja et al. (2018), Schmidt et al. (2023) and Enders et al. (2023) the use of
the off-policy algorithm in SAC is very sample eﬀicient allowing us to train for more
episodes without drastically increasing training times. The entropy term in SAC is
==PAGE:22==
2 Literature Review
7
an incentive for more exploration thus handling the increasing variance happening
when introducing several agents as explained in Enders et al. (2023).
Dynamic Pricing
The estimation of optimal prices has been of great interest in many different fields
across many different areas of research. To the best of our knowledge the implemen-
tation adopted in this paper is quite unique. However, we seek to provide the reader
with an insight as to how previous work influenced the strategy which this thesis
implements.
In the paper Turan et al. (2020), it assumes a one-sided market where the agent has
full control over all vehicles in the system. Moreover, they assume perfect knowledge
of the system. This works well in a one-sided market with one actor, but does not
translate well to a competitive multi-agent setup. However, a more realistic scenario
and the approach employed by this thesis is a two-sided market in which the actors are
self-interested agents with control of their own fleets as in Wollenstein-Betech et al.
(2020). This paper assumes that there exists a price pmax
i,j
for which the demand from
i to j is 0. Furthermore, they assume that the demand from i to j is monotonically
decreasing with price. This ties well into the approach of Turan et al. (2020) where
they assume the willingness-to-pay for each customer to be heterogeneous across the
customers. The assumptions from both papers provide a good basis for defining the
structure of the customers relation to the price. Regarding the training of such a
system, the work of Wollenstein-Betech et al. (2020) shows that by jointly optimising
for the price and the rebalancing of the vehicles they achieve a reward which is 15%
higher than by optimising for the strategies sequentially. These findings provide the
basis for the training strategies employed in this thesis.
There have also been many approaches to how an actor should set prices, in the
work of Turan et al. (2020) the actor sets a price directly given that it has perfect
knowledge of the system and the one-sided market thus proves to work well. They
define the customers willingness-to-pay as being uniformly distributed on [0, pmax]
meaning that the willingness-to-pay is defined by equation 2.1.
F(pi,j) = pi,j
pmax
(2.1)
Equation 2.1 implies that the price-action has support [0, pmax], meaning that the
agent sets a price directly with no notion of a baseline price. Furthermore, it defines
a linear relationship between price and demand.
In the work of Wollenstein-Betech et al. (2020) a linear relationship between price
and demand exists and, as a result of that, a linear relationship between price and
willingness-to-pay also exists.
The relationship is then defined to get a traceable
Quadratic Program with linear constraints.
But as stated in the paper this does
not give the most accurate representation of the world for realistic implementation.
==PAGE:23==
8
2 Literature Review
Therefore, this is taken into consideration when defining the relationship between
price and willingness-to-pay for this thesis.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
In this chapter we intend to explain the most important theoretical concepts and
theories necessary for an in-depth understanding of the problem addressed in this
thesis. First, we introduce the concept of Markov Decision Processes (MDP) in section
3.1 which is a fundamental concept in order to understand the work conducted in this
thesis. Then we emphasise the use of Reinforcement Learning and various techniques
and methods that are relevant to this thesis - particularly the Bellman equations
in section 3.1.2 are of great importance. We explore the specific implementation of
our setup in section 3.2. Information about the specific algorithms that we chose to
implement is outlined in section 3.3. The specific algorithms, the Advantage Actor-
Critic (A2C) and the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC), are subsequently explained in sections
3.4 and 3.5 respectively. These algorithms are closely related in our implementation
to Graph Neural Networks (GNN) which are covered in section 3.6. Finally, we cap
off this chapter with a thorough clarification on the implementation of the dynamic
price element in section 3.7.
3.1
Markov Decision Processes
An essential part of the theoretical basis of this thesis is the MDP. MDPs are a
class of stochastic sequential decision processes. These processes typically rely on a
set number of parameters, of which can vary in various problem formulations. We
introduce a general MDP as:
(MDP) = (S, A, P, d0, R, γ)
(3.1)
where
• S: Possible set of states
• A: Possible set of actions
• P: Conditional probability distribution (transition probability)
• R: The reward from transitioning to the next state
• d0: Initial state distribution
• γ: Scalar discount factor
==PAGE:25==
10
3 Theory
Think of an MDP as a model for a dynamic system under the control of a decision
maker. For the sake of maintaining a theme, think of this decision maker as a company
that controls a fleet of autonomous taxis from a centralised command hub.
We
introduce a company, c. At each point in time, c will observe the environment and
make a decision based on the information available.
When making a decision, c
receives a reward, R from transitioning to the next state, as well as a probability
distribution, P, on the subsequent environment state. The objective of c is to choose a
sequence of actions, called a policy, that will optimise performance of the environment
Puterman (1990). In other words, c is tasked with finding a policy that will maximise
the expected sum of cumulative rewards. The environment starts with an initial state,
d0, and in the problem setting of an AMoD environment the scalar discount factor,
γ, represents the policys tendency to favour immediate rewards or future rewards.
3.1.1
Finite and infinite time horizon
In MDPs it is important to distinguish between the finite and infinite time horizon.
In the finite time horizon the environment has a set time frame. This could be a
game of chess, where the game has certain termination states, i.e. the game and the
environment has ended. In the infinite time horizon there is no natural termination
state, and the environment can in theory go on forever. In an infinite time horizon
problem, finding the optimal policy is generally robust for any given initial state, d0
Puterman (1990). This transfers well to the AMoD problem, where for any given
distribution of vehicles, we want to find an optimal policy. Often a scalar discount
factor is also introduced, as with our problem setup.
The property of γ ∈(0, 1]
is to discount the relationship between immediate and future rewards as to make a
policy that optimises the long term expected returns and not a policy that maximises
immediate rewards.
When γ is close to one, future rewards are given nearly as
much importance as immediate rewards and conversely, when γ is close to zero, the
importance of future rewards is considered less important.
This relationship will
become apparent in the next section.
3.1.2
The Bellman Equations
The Bellman equations are fundamental in the theory of MDPs. They are the prin-
ciple equations when it comes to dynamic programming and RL. Taking inspiration
from the notation of Puterman (1990), we introduce the Bellman equation for the
value of a state as
V (s) =
E
a∈As
"
R(s, a) +
X
s′∈S
γP(st+1|s, a)V (st+1)
#
(3.2)
where
==PAGE:26==
3.1 Markov Decision Processes
11
• V (s) is the value of state s.
• P(st+1|s, a) is the probability of transitioning to state st+1 from state s under
policy π.
• R(s, a) is the immediate reward the agent receives when transitioning from state
s to state st+1 under policy π.
• γ is the discount factor, which discounts future rewards to account for time
preference.
• V (st+1) is the value of the next state st+1.
This is often called the Bellman expectation equation, and represents the expected
value of the immediate reward as well as the expected value of the value function of
the next state, st+1. This is with the assumption that the agent follows a particular
policy.
Furthermore, we introduce the Bellman equation for the state-action value func-
tion, Qπ(s, a), as
Qπ(s, a) =
E
st+1∼P [R(s, a, st+1) + γQπ(st+1, π(st+1))]
(3.3)
where
• Qπ(s, a) is the optimal value of the state-action pair (s, a).
• γ is the discount factor, which discounts future rewards to account for time
preference.
• R(s, a, st+1) is the immediate reward the agent receives when transitioning from
state s to state st+1 under policy π.
This represents the expected value of the immediate reward as well as the expected
value of the state-action value pair of the next state, st+1. The Bellman equations
appear in various shapes and forms throughout literature, and this thesis will use the
above structure - with slight variations depending on the specific implementation or
algorithm that is used. It will be a pivotal subject as we explore the specific setup to
this thesis.
3.1.3
Value-based versus Policy-Based Reinforcement Learning
Value-based RL methods are used to find an acceptable estimate of the state-action
value function, which we call the Q-function. The Q-function is formalised in equation
3.3.
The optimal policy will then be approximated by taking the greedy action with
respect to the Q-function estimate. One of the most popular methods that utilise the
==PAGE:27==
12
3 Theory
Q-function is called Q-learning Zhang et al. (2019). The agent keeps an estimate of
the Q-value function and when it transitions from state-action pair to the next state,
the agent receives a reward, R, and updates the function accordingly:
ˆQ(s, a) ←(1 −α) ˆQ(s, a) + α
h
r + γ max
a′
ˆQ(s′, a′)
i
,
(3.4)
where α > 0 is the learning rate. Q-learning very often converges to the optimal
Q-value with finite state and action spaces, under conditions set on α. Furthermore,
when combined with neural networks, deep Q-learning (DQN) has achieved great em-
pirical breakthroughs in human-level control applications, such as the AMoD problem
setting. One of the main drawbacks of Q-learning is that when dimensions of the state
and action space increases, the Q-functions dimension expands drastically. Therefore,
Q-learning is only feasible in a discrete setting Zhang et al. (2019).
The other type of RL algorithms we will discuss in this section are the policy-based
methods. These are usually estimated by parameterised function approximates such
as neural networks. The idea is to update the parameters along the gradient direction
of the long term reward, for example using the policy gradient (PG) method. As per
the notation of Zhang et al. (2019) the closed form of PG is given as:
∇J(θ) = Ea∼πθ(·|s),s∼ηπθ (·) [Qπθ(s, a)∇log πθ(a|s)] ,
(3.5)
where J(θ) and Qπθ are the expected return and Q-function under policy πθ. ∇log πθ(a|s)
is the score function of the policy and ηπθ is the state occupancy measure discounted
under policy πθ.
There are various policy gradient methods, amongst others the
Actor-Critic which we will discuss in section 3.3. Policy-based reinforcement algo-
rithms often experience better convergence guarantees than value-based ones Zhang
et al. (2019). This is largely contributed to the fact, that the policy-based reinforce-
ment algorithms can better handle continuous action spaces. It is worth noting that
these are general equations for policy/value-based reinforcement learning. Specific
algorithms might have altered these equations based on the aim of the algorithm.
3.2
The AMoD Environment
Our environment consists of N companies which coordinates M autonomous vehicles
which can transport one and only one passenger. These N × M autonomous vehicles
operate within a fully connected graph G = (V, E) where V = {vi}{i=1:Nv} and E =
{ej}{j=1:Ne} represents the vertices and edges of G respectively. For this thesis we will
solely be focusing on N ∈{1, 2}. We assume a discrete time horizon I = 1, 2, . . . , T.
At each time step t, customers request a ride from i to j, with a price pc,t
i,j and a
travel-time τ t
i,j characterised by demand dc,t
i,j, where c denotes the company. Due to
the fact that we have N companies the demand dt
i,j should be distributed between
the companies to obtain dc,t
i,j. This is done in multiple steps, as will be presented in
==PAGE:28==
3.2 The AMoD Environment
13
section 3.2.3. Furthermore we distribute the cars among companies using value-of-
time (VOT) and value-of-ride (VOR). Where VOR is defined as
V OR =
pc,t
i,j
τ t
i,j
(3.6)
and where VOT is estimated from the underlying dataset as
V OT = f
 
pt
i,j
τ t
i,j
!
(3.7)
Where VOT represents a value-of-time for the entire population, meaning how
much does each individual value one time step in dollars. And f denotes some function
which takes all prices and travel-times as input and maps them to a VOT. This specific
selection of the function f will be defined chapter 4. In this thesis the unit for VOT
will be dollars per minute. VOR then represents the value of a given ride, i.e. how
much does it cost to ride per unit of time, where time is again measured in minutes.
These two variables will be crucial in the cancellation and redistribution steps of the
environment which we will now introduce.
3.2.1
Distribution among companies
The customers are distributed among the N companies using a Dirichlet distribution,
as will be covered in depth in section 3.2.5.1, with:
α =


1
V ORc1
1
V ORc2
...
1
V ORcN


(3.8)
We then obtain a probability for each company that represents the chance of a
customer choosing company c. This probability is sampled using equation 3.13 with
the α-parameter specified in equation 3.8. Given these samples we obtain a number
of customers for each company.
A pivotal part of this thesis is adding a dynamic pricing element, and given that
we have distributed customers to each company, we need to give the customers a way
to decline a trip. Without this constraint, our model would be able to set infinitely
high prices because the customers are already distributed. We therefore introduce
the concept of cancellation, which allows the customer to decline a trip given a VOR.
==PAGE:29==
14
3 Theory
3.2.2
Cancellation
By defining VOT and VOR we introduce the probability of cancellation using the
Hill equation Gesztelyi et al. (2012) defined as
f(x) =
xα
kα + xα
(3.9)
Where α is the Hill coeﬀicient and k defines the midpoint of the curve. We then
use the VOT from the underlying data as k and VOR as the input of the function, x,
and α being a tuneable hyper-parameter. This function maps f : R →[0, 1]. We use
this mapping as the probability for cancellation. Although this equation is primarily
used in biochemistry, it is introduced here because of several nice properties. It has its
origin in (0, 0) which means that a free ride maps to a zero probability of cancellation,
furthermore the k-parameter gives great control of the location of the function. The
impact of the k parameter can be seen in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Hill-function evaluated a different k
Having introduced a way to distribute customers to the vehicles of the companies,
as well as a way to give the customers a way of cancelling a trip given that it is too
expensive, we can now introduce a key aspect of this thesis.
3.2.3
Three Step Framework
As with Gammelli et al. (2022) and Schmidt et al. (2023) this project adopts a three-
step framework to address the AMoD control problem. The first stage of the frame-
work is solving the problem of matching passengers to vehicles. The second stage
==PAGE:30==
3.2 The AMoD Environment
15
is the redistributing of vehicles. Third stage is solving the problem of rebalancing
vehicles given the desired distribution.
3.2.4
Step one - Matching
First and foremost vehicles are assigned to passengers given a specific passenger flow.
This can be set up as a maximisation problem to ensure the most profitable outcome.
The goal is to maximise revenue given the current distribution of vehicles and demand,
and the problem can be formulated as seen in equation 3.10:
max
{xt
ij}i,j∈V
X
i,j∈V
xt
ij(ρt
ij −κt
ij)
(3.10)
s.t.
0 ≤xt
ij ≤dt
ij,
i, j ∈V
(3.11)
X
j∈V
xt
ij ≤M t
i ,
i ∈V
(3.12)
Where xt
ij is the passenger flow, ρt
ij and κt
ij is the profit and cost of a trip respectively,
and dt
ij is the demand - all from node i to j at time t. Last but not least M t
i is the
amount of available vehicles in note i at time t.
The first constraint 3.11 ensures that the passenger flow is between 0 and the
actual demand. The lower bound is self explanatory, but the upper bound is there to
ensure that vehicles are not moved unnecessarily. The second constraint 3.12 ensures
that the amount of vehicles from node i is less than or equal to the total amount of
available vehicles in the node.
This maximisation problem is then solved using the simplex algorithm, imple-
mented in the optimisation program CPLEX IBM. Resulting in the optimal passenger
flow given the distribution of vehicles and demand.
3.2.5
Step Two - Distribution
The second step consists of finding the desired distribution for the idle vehicles. This
is performed by the chosen Actor-Critic algorithm. For this, the Dirichlet distribution
plays a large part. In section 3.6 we will cover how the specific algorithms output
the α parameter which is used in the Dirichlet distribution to get the vehicle desired
distribution.
3.2.5.1
The Dirichlet Distribution
The Dirichlet distribution is utilised at multiple locations throughout this thesis. One
of the advantages of the Dirichlet distribution is that it effectively models proportions
that sums to 1. This makes it ideal for our AMoD setup as we wish to model which
==PAGE:31==
16
3 Theory
proportion of cars go to which node in the graph. The Dirichlet distribution has the
probability density function as seen in equation 3.13
f(x, α) =
1
B(α)
Nv
Y
i=1
xαi−1
i
(3.13)
where
x = (x1, x2, . . . , xNv)
(3.14)
α = (α1, α2, . . . , αNv)
(3.15)
and Nv is the number of nodes in our graph. Furthermore the normalising constant
in 3.13 is the multivariate Beta distribution.
Due to the fact that an action is defined as the proportion of vehicles in all
regions, equation 3.13 provides a distribution over the action space. Sampling from
this distribution directly provides a distribution of cars. By utilising the stochastic
nature of sampling from a distribution, we argue that we alleviate the diﬀiculties in
the exploration/exploitation trade-off often associated with RL which we will discuss
in section 3.5. The intuition being that the agent (the GNN) becomes more certain
of the underlying distribution as training progresses, making exploration less likely.
3.2.6
Step Three - Rebalancing
The third step is the rebalancing step and is the final step of the Three-step Frame-
work. The overall objective of this step is to use the vehicle distribution from the
Dirichlet distribution, from step two 3.2.5, as a target location to rebalance the idle
vehicles in the system. As in step one 3.2.4 this can be achieved by solving a minimi-
sation problem of the form depicted in equation 3.16:
min
{yt
ij}i̸=j∈V∈N|V|×(|V|−1)
X
i̸=j∈V
κt
ijyt
ij
(3.16)
s.t.
X
j̸=i
(yt
ij −yt
ji) + mt
i ≥ˆmt
i, i ∈V
(3.17)
X
j̸=i
yt
ij ≤mt
i, i ∈V
(3.18)
where κt
ij is the cost of moving a vehicle, and yt
ij is the rebalancing flows - all from
node i to j at time t. Furthermore, mt
i and ˆmt
i are the idle vehicles and desired idle
vehicles in node i at time t.
The objective function 3.16 seeks to minimise the cost of rebalancing vehicles to
their destination predetermined by the GNN from step two 3.2.5. The amount of
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Actor-Critic Algorithms
17
rebalanced vehicles plus the idle vehicles at node i must be larger than or equal to
the desired number of vehicles at that node as can be seen in constraint 3.17. In
the final constraint 3.18, the amount of rebalanced vehicles from a node must be less
than or equal to the number of idle vehicles at that node. Notice that vehicles are
considered idle one time step after they have delivered a passenger, therefore they
can not be re-balanced in the same time step as they deliver a passenger.
As with step one 3.2.4, the problem is then solved using the simplex algorithm,
using the optimisation program CPLEX IBM. Resulting in the optimal re-balancing
flow given the desired distribution of vehicles given by the Dirichlet distribution.
3.3
Actor-Critic Algorithms
The first time any variety of the Actor-Critic algorithm was introduced, was in 1983
by Barto et al. (1983). The algorithm consists of two parts, namely the actor and
the critic. These were first introduced as an Associate Search Element (ASE) and
an Associate Critic Element (ACE). The original approach in Barto et al. (1983)
emphasises the adaptation of neuron-like elements to perform problem-solving. The
algorithm was introduced in an attempt to combat the drawbacks of policy-based
and value-based methods which translates into actor-only and critic-only methods
respectively, as discussed in section 3.1.3. In broad terms, it is the role of the actor to
decide which action to take, and the role of the critic is to evaluate the resulting state
based on the actors action, and how it should adjust Sutton and Barto (2018). In
the following section 3.3.1, the general terminology used in the Actor-Critic is briefly
explained, followed by a detailed explanation of the two specific approaches used in
this thesis.
3.3.1
The Actor and the Critic
The role of the actor is to make decisions. That is, the actor selects an action, a,
given the current state, s according to the current policy π. The actor is typically
parameterised by a neural network with the output being the distribution of prob-
abilities over the various actions as seen in e.g. Gammelli et al. (2021). In general
terms, the role of the actor is to update the policy using policy gradient methods to
find the maximum expected cumulative rewards. The role of the critic is to evaluate
the resulting states based on these actions. This process can be roughly described
following the outline of figure 3.2.
First the actor, represented by the policy π(s), performs an action in the envi-
ronment. Then, the critic evaluates the current state based on the current policy.
The critic has the role of providing feedback to the chosen actions of the actor. The
critic uses an action-value function or a value function, which can differ depending
on the specific implementation, to estimate the expected cumulative reward from a
==PAGE:33==
18
3 Theory
Figure 3.2: A rough outline of the dynamics of the general Actor-Critic algorithm
given state. This can be extended to estimate the reward from a given state and
action, which is thoroughly covered in N. Tsitsiklis. et al. (2002). The evaluation
is often denoted V (s) as seen in section 3.1.2. Subsequently, the actor updates the
policy with respect to the evaluation received by the critic. The critic is then most
commonly updated based on the Temporal Difference (TD) error which we cover in
section 3.3.2. Lastly, the whole process is repeated for a number of given episodes.
For a comprehensive explanation on the general Actor-Critic algorithm, we refer to
N. Tsitsiklis. et al. (2002).
3.3.2
Temporal Difference Learning
A pivotal concept in RL is the temporal-difference (TD) learning. In this section, we
will focus on the policy evaluation, that is the process of estimating a value function
for a given policy π, in which TD learning is often used. For an exhaustive study on
TD learning, we refer to Sutton (1988).
A benefit of TD methods is, that they only need to wait until the next time
step, t + 1, to perform a useful update to the policy. They use the reward, Rt+1 to
estimate the value of the next state, V (st+1). Using the most common notation, the
==PAGE:34==
3.4 The Advantage Actor-Critic
19
TD method performs the update
V (st) ←V (st) + α [Rt+1 + γV (st+1) −V (st)]
(3.19)
in the transition to the next state, st+1. This specific TD method is called TD(0)
or a one-step TD because the updates are based on only the next step, t + 1. Since
TD(0) updates uses parts of its current estimate, it is defined as a bootstrapping
method, Sutton and Barto (2018). A part of TD learning is also the TD error, which
is defined in various forms, but most often as
δt ˙=Rt+1 + γV (st+1) −V (st)
(3.20)
Recall the last term in equation 3.2 that represents the value of a state under a certain
policy, which is equal to the immediate reward received from the current state plus
the discounted value of the next state. The TD error is this term minus the estimated
value of the current state. The TD error is thus the estimate made at the current
time. Since it depends on the next step it is only available at time step t + 1. This
implies, that δt is the error in V (st) at the time t + 1. This is a clever trick since
we update the current value based on not just the current information but also the
current best estimate of future rewards. The optimality of TD(0) is derived in full
detail in Sutton and Barto (2018).
Another option is the TD(1) method, which uses all future states to update the
current values. In practice, this means that the update would be performed only once
after each episode, instead of after each step. TD(1) is a another way of implementing
Monte Carlo (MC) algorithms. Both MC methods and TD(1) has its advantages and
disadvantages. Both TD(1) and MC methods use the full episode return for updates,
TD(1) does so incrementally and with bootstrapping, whereas MC methods wait
until the end of the episode and use actual returns without bootstrapping. For a full
overview of the two methods, see Sutton and Barto (2018). We introduce the MC
update as:
V π(st) = E
" T
X
i=t
γi−tr(si, ai)
#
(3.21)
This update effectively uses elements from both MC and TD(1), and properties are
often utilised from both to meet the demand of a specific task. The above update can
thus be interpreted as an intermediate between the two extremes Sutton and Barto
(2018). In this thesis, we implore the use of the update 3.21 in the implementation
of A2C in section 3.4 and the use of the update 3.19 in the implementation of SAC
in section 3.5.
3.4
The Advantage Actor-Critic
The Advantage Actor-Critic is a model-free RL algorithm, and is a specific imple-
mentation of the general framework of Actor-Critic. The unique thing introduced in
==PAGE:35==
20
3 Theory
A2C is the utilisation of the advantage function first formalised in Mnih et al. (2016),
which can be estimated using either the TD error from equation 3.20, or MC simula-
tion using equation 3.21. The standard advantage function can be seen in equation
3.22 as formulated in Mnih et al. (2016).
A(st, at) =
k−1
X
i=0
γirt+1 + γkV (st+k; θv) −V (st; θv)
(3.22)
As stated in section 3.3.2 we opted to estimate this with MC simulation, therefore
the updated advantage function can be seen below.
A(st, at) =
T
X
i=t
γi−tr(si, ai) −V (st; θv)
(3.23)
The critic evaluates the current policy by providing a baseline for assessing the
advantage of taking a specific action in a particular state. This advantage is computed
as the difference between the observed reward and the critic’s value estimate, helping
to guide the actor in the right direction. This function is also used as the update
function for the critic. The update of the actor’s policy can then be formalised as
θπ ←log π(at|st; θ′)A(st, at; θ, θv)
(3.24)
Where the multiple θ’s are parameters of the given policy Mnih et al. (2016). One
of the main roles of the critic is to reduce variance in the PG estimates, thereby
contributing to a more stable and eﬀicient learning process. Last but not least the
gradient of the objective function thus becomes as seen in equation 3.25.
θ′ ←log π(at|st; θ′)Rt −V (st; θv)
(3.25)
This is in principle the essence of A2C. The original A2C algorithm consists of one
actor and one critic, and operates as described in section 3.3. However, this thesis
will also employ an A2C multi-agent setup thereby having two actors and two critics.
This setup yields essentially two separate A2C algorithms which interacts with the
same environment and optimises their own separate rewards. As in Gammelli et al.
(2022) the actors and critics are parameterised by separate but symmetrical architec-
tures, resulting in four distinct neural networks in the multi-agent setup.
One of the benefits of using the advantage function is the reduction in variance
in the policy gradient when performing updates. This reduction is attributed to the
fact that the cumulative reward is subtracted from the policy gradient, effectually re-
ducing the magnitude of the gradients, thus yielding better convergence than regular
Q-values Paczolay and Harmati (2020).
A2C has its challenges when expanded into a multi-agent setup Lowe et al. (2017).
Each agents policy will change when training and if the environment becomes too
==PAGE:36==
3.5 The Soft Actor-Critic
21
non-stationary, the performance of the algorithm might be poor, and it will be diﬀi-
cult to learn an optimal policy. One reason is the fact, that A2C only uses current
observations and is not able to learn from previous experiences since it is an on-policy
algorithm, which proves problematic as discussed in Lowe et al. (2017). In A2C, the
actors are represented as a company, each controlling a fleet of autonomous taxis
from a centralised hub. The critics function as evaluators, as touched upon in section
3.3.1. Introducing several agents makes the environment more complex and stochas-
tic, which is why it can be very lucrative to introduce methods that makes sure the
policy does not get stuck in local minima. The A2C algorithm - even though it re-
duces variance in the policy gradient - might not perform to satisfaction when the
environment gets increasingly complex in the multi-agent setting. Emphasising the
exploration more than the exploitation might therefore be a natural next step. This
leads us to another variation of the Actor-Critic.
3.5
The Soft Actor-Critic
Using the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm has a couple of theoretical advantages.
SAC is an an off-policy algorithm, which means that the updates to the policy can
be based on past transitions, that are often stored in a replay buffer, D. Off-policy
methods have been shown to be more sample eﬀicient because the data is not dis-
carded after each episode Schmidt et al. (2023). This thesis implements SAC in an
online learning setting, meaning that the agent can continuously interact with the
environment to get real-time updates. This is in contrast to offline learning methods,
where the agent does not interact with an environment at all, but rather a batch of
previously collected data points or experiences, as they are often denoted.
The SAC algorithm is based on soft policy iteration which means it alternates
between policy evaluation and policy improvement steps.
In the evaluation step,
the critic approximates Q(a, s) under the current policy π(s) using the TD(0) rule
explained in section 3.3.2. Moreover, using the notation of Schmidt et al. (2023), we
apply the soft Bellman back operator, Bπ, to update the Q-values iteratively:
BπQ(st, at) = r(st, at) + γEst+1∼P [Eat+1∼π[Q(st+1, at+1) −α log(π∅(at+1|st+1))]]
(3.26)
where (st, at) is sampled from D which is the replay buffer from the past transitions
that the policy is updated on. We then optimise the Q-function, to minimise the
Bellman residual, as done in Haarnoja et al. (2018), using:
JQ(θ) = E(st,at,st+1)∼D
1
2(Qθ(st, at) −(r(st, at)+
γEat+1∼π[Qθ(st+1, at+1) −α log(π∅(at+1|st+1))]))2
(3.27)
==PAGE:37==
22
3 Theory
In the policy improvement step, we update the policy to maximise the expected
return, which is represented by the Q-values alongside the entropy of the policy,
denoted as:
Jπ(∅) = Est∼D

Eat∼π∅[α log (π∅(at, |st)) −Q∅(st, at)]

(3.28)
Entropy is included to tackle one of the major issues in RL, namely the exploration-
exploitation trade-off.
We seek to introduce a method that will find an optimal
balance between these two, keeping in mind our complex problem setting which might
require an emphasis on exploration rather than exploitation.
The Exploration-Exploitation Trade-Off
The exploration-exploitation trade-off is unique to RL and is not found in supervised
or unsupervised learning. Exploration is the process of the agent gaining new knowl-
edge from interacting with the environment while exploitation is the agent capitalising
on knowledge it has already gained from previous interactions. The challenge is to
find the optimal trade off between these two. Having a high amount of exploration
might cause the agent to spiral out of control, never to converge towards an optimal
policy, while too much exploitation might cause the agent to get stuck in local min-
ima, thus finding a sub-optimal policy. Another way to look at this is to try to find
an optimal policy while maximising exploration. This is exactly the core aspect of
the SAC algorithm, which itself controls the exploration vs exploitation by utilising
the entropy. The entropy of a random variable is calculated as:
H(X) = E[−log(p(X))] = −
Z
p(x)log(p(x))
(3.29)
For a single random variable X, H(X) favours the outcome with the lowest probability.
However, for multiple random variables it becomes a measure of how stochastic a
random variable is. Thereby, favouring the variable which is most stochastic. Likewise
the entropy of an action distribution is given by Eysenbach and Levine (2022) as in
equation 3.30:
H(st, at) =
Z
π(st|at) log
1
π(st|at)
(3.30)
As a final note the entropy can be visualised as in figure 3.3. We see two Dirichlet
distributions where the relationship of the entries in α remain constant however the
magnitude changes. Effectively creating two distributions which is centred around
the same middle point of the simplex but with different certainties. This difference
in certainty is, as we expect, reflected in the entropy H.
By introducing the entropy term we update the definition of the state-action value
function, in equation 3.3, to include H(π(·|st))
Qπ(s, a) =
E
st+1∼P [R(s, a, st+1) + γQπ(st+1, π(st+1)) + αH(π(·|st))]
(3.31)
==PAGE:38==
3.5 The Soft Actor-Critic
23
(a) Low Entropy Dirichlet
(b) High Entropy Dirichlet
Figure 3.3: Comparison of Dirichlet entropy with different α
Utilising the new Q(s, a) including the entropy term we thus obtain the objective
function for SAC:
J(π) =
T
X
t=0
Est,at ∼pπ[r(st, at)
|
{z
}
Reward
+α H(π(·|st))
|
{z
}
Entropy
]
(3.32)
==PAGE:39==
24
3 Theory
3.6
Graph Neural Networks
A key part of our RL algorithm is a GNN, which consists of a Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) layer Kipf and Welling (2016), and a classic Artificial Neural Net-
work (ANN). This structure is depicted in figure 3.4. The general idea is to utilise
the graph structure of the AMoD environment and use a GCN layer to convolve over
this. Thereby, having a layer in the neural network which describes both the local
graph structure meaning the local interdependence between nodes of the graph Kipf
and Welling (2016).
Like in Gammelli et al. (2021), this thesis argues that permutation-invariant mod-
els, which operates on irregular graphs, pairs naturally with the AMoD environment.
This model is enabled through the use of GNNs. These GNNS describes a propaga-
tion rule which updates features on the node-level by aggregating the information in
the neighbourhood surrounding the node. The convolution over node vi applying the
filter gθ′ is defined as in equation 3.33.
gθ′ ⋆vi ≈θ′
0vi + θ′
1(L −IN)vi = θ′
0vi −θ′
1D−1
2 AD−1
2 vi
(3.33)
Where ⋆is the convolution operator, θ′
0 and θ′
1 are free parameters. D is the number
of neighbouring nodes each node in the graph has. IN is an identity matrix where
Nv is the number of nodes. L is the normalised graph Laplacian. Last but not least
A is the adjacency matrix. Due to this linear formulation the convolution convolves
over kth-order neighbours where k is the number of GCN layers in the network Kipf
and Welling (2016). The output of our graph is a vector α which is of size Nv where
Nv is the number of nodes in our graph. This vector α is used as the concentration
for the Dirichlet distribution.
Figure 3.4: Our GNN setup
Notice that we in our implementation include a skip connection between the input
and the ANN. This is done to make sure that the original unaltered features enter
the ANN. When passing information through the GCN, information may be lost due
==PAGE:40==
3.7 Pricing
25
to neighbourhood-level aggregation. Therefore the skip connection is added. In sum-
mary, it is added to provide both the aggregated representation of the GCN along
with the unaltered data from the environment to the final layers of the model.
3.7
Pricing
This section of the thesis will focus on implementing a dynamic pricing strategy for
our system. In an ideal scenario one would be able to set specific prices for every
OD-pair combinations for every time step.
Such that a pricing matrix would be
constructed on the form seen in equation 3.34.
P =


p0,0
p0,1
. . .
p0,Nv
p1,0
p1,1
. . .
p1,Nv
...
...
...
...
pNv,0
pNv,1
. . .
pNv,Nv


(3.34)
Where Nv is the number of nodes in the graph, and pi,i = 0, i ∈[0, Nv]. As Nv in-
creases, the dimensions of P increases with a factor N 2
v . As such, if a neural network
were to estimate the entirety of P the amount of parameters would quickly increase
to infeasible proportions. A way to combat this is to first and foremost reduce P to
a triangular matrix, effectively reducing parameters by N2
v
2 −Nv. This could proba-
bly work for some small cases of Nv, but it does introduce a limitation in the model.
Namely that the price from node i to j would be the same as from node j to i. Another
solution could be to group nodes by i.e. K-means algorithm into K different groups
and then set a price for travelling from one group of nodes to another. Again this
would reduce the dimensions of P to K2. P would then perhaps be feasible to esti-
mate. However, travel within a group would be undefined and therefore free of charge.
If there exists an underlying structure of P, a matrix on the form shown in equa-
tion 3.34 could be constructed in a parameter-effective manner. With this in mind
this thesis will experiment with three different pricing setups. The first setup, which
will be covered in more detail in chapter 5 does not use any concepts that require
a theoretical explanation. It simply uses a mean, and therefore the next two sec-
tions are devoted to explaining the two latter pricing strategies, which require some
introduction.
3.7.1
Price as a difference
In the second strategy we seek to model price by utilising the already existing prices
in the data as a baseline. What we wish for the model to learn by using this pricing
strategy is a state dependent price-difference for the entire system. Let us first define
==PAGE:41==
26
3 Theory
what is meant by a price-difference. We first define a base price from which we will
predict a difference to get the final price. The base price is defined as follows. Given
pt
i,j, the price for the OD-pair (i,j), at time t, which is used from the data, we define
a new variable as
¯pi,j = 1
T
T
X
t=0
pi,j,t
(3.35)
Meaning the average price over all time steps for each OD pair - as utilised in the
first pricing strategy. By using this we then define a price difference for the actor
as ˆpc
s. The question then becomes how we obtain ˆpc
s. By outputting two parameters
µ and σ from the network as a separate action we can define a normal distribution
N(µ, σ) that we sample from to get the actor specific price difference. In practice,
this distribution needs to be bounded and so - like in the original paper covering the
SAC algorithm Haarnoja et al. (2018) - we employ an invertible squashing function
in the form of tanh to the Gaussian samples from the network. We then invert these
samples with the function
p = a −b
2
x + a −b
2
(3.36)
In function 3.36 a and b denotes the upper and lower bound of the output re-
spectively. However, by employing tanh on the output we must also scale the log
likelihood accordingly. Haarnoja et al. (2018) shows that this log likelihood is as seen
in
log π(a|s) = log µ(u|s)
D
X
i=1
log(1 −tanh2(ui))
(3.37)
We then define a final price as
pi,j,s = ¯pi,j + ˆpc
s
,
ˆpc
s ∈[a, b]
(3.38)
By doing this, we make a modification to the model setup presented in figure 3.4,
where we instead of one output we now have three. The alpha still depends directly
on the last hidden layer, whereas the new outputs µ and σ takes a global mean pool
over the last layer.
Advantages and limitations
The advantage of this approach is that we obtain OD-specific prices at time t by only
setting a system wide price difference. We thus take the distance between the OD
pairs into account without adding complexity to the model.
The limitation is however two-fold. First of all it relies on the assumption that
the real life prices are well set. Therefore, for real world use cases, this approach
relies entirely on the fact that such prices exist. Furthermore this approach has the
limitation that only a single ˆpc
s is set for each state for each company, effectively
relying solely on the mean prices for differences between nodes.
==PAGE:42==
3.7 Pricing
27
3.7.2
Price as a regression
The third and final strategy removes the dependency for preexisting data on price
by modelling the price as linearly dependent on the travel time. This assumption is
explored in detail in section 4.2.1. Moreover, exploiting this linear relationship allows
the model to set prices unique to each travel-time rather than setting a price-difference
for each state. In this section we define a price as
ˆp = βτi,j
,
β ∈[0, b]
(3.39)
where τi,j is the travel time from i to j. The question then becomes how do we
obtain β. β will be an action taken by the actor. This beta is found as described in
section 3.7.1. The difference being that instead of inverting the tanh function in the
range [a, b] we invert to the range [0, b] under the assumption that customers do not
get paid to ride.
Furthermore we will extend this pricing strategy to include a minimum price, α.
This leaves us with two models of which we need to choose based on further analysis.
These can be seen in equation 3.40 and equation 3.41.
ˆp = max(βτi,j, α)
(3.40)
ˆp = α + βτi,j
(3.41)
In section 4.2.1 we argue on how to choose from the above equations.
Advantages and limitations
The advantage of this approach is that it does not rely on already existing data, while
retaining minimum complexity as only two parameters are estimated. It does however
come with some limitations, first and foremost it assumes a linear relationship between
travel-time and price. Moreover, it assumes this to be the only defining relationship
for the price, i.e. that no OD-specific interactions exists. These assumptions will
be investigated in the data section of this thesis. If these assumptions hold, it will
be possible to construct the complete P matrix from equation 3.34 with only two
parameters.
==PAGE:43==
28
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4
Data
In this chapter we aim to provide the reader with some crucial insights into the data
being used for this thesis. If the reader wishes a more in-depth explanation than
provided in this chapter, we refer to our GitHub; Andreasen, Sørensen, and Tang
(2023) where all the data is readily available for own use and analysis. Furthermore,
it contains a guide on how to reproduce results. In this chapter we will discuss the
nature of the data and the structure as well as which features the data contains.
Furthermore, we will provide some interesting insights that will prove beneficial as
we move towards the analysis.
4.1
Source and Structure of the Data
The source of the data are three different cities in The United States as well as one
city from China. The datasets are structured as a grid of each city. So going from i
to j corresponds to going from one region to another region with a taxi. Each trip
with a taxi is associated with an origin, a destination, a price, a travel time and a
demand. Furthermore, the total number of cars in the system is available as well as
the rebalancing time for each of the taxis going from region i to region j. Let us take
an example looking at figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: In this example, we have a car going from region 1 to region 15, as well
as a car being rebalanced from region 16 to region 3. The figure of regions can be
interpreted as a fully connected graph.
The four cities in question are San Francisco, Brooklyn New York, Washing-
ton DC and Shenzhen Downtown West in China. They all have different grid
sizes depending on the graph-layout of each city. Table 4.1 shows some summarising
==PAGE:45==
30
4 Data
statistics on each city. In the following sections we will discuss the various structures
City
No. Nodes
Max. Trip Time
(Min)
Avg. Trip Time
(Min)
Avg. Demand
(Demand/hr)
No. Vehicles
San Francisco
10
55
11
1380
374
Brooklyn, New York
14
68
18
3162
1500
Washington, D.C.
18
68
14
1000
1097
Shenzhen Downtown West
17
66
15
4637
1777
Table 4.1: Table of various metrics of the four chosen cities. Notice, that the number
of nodes correspond to the number of regions in a given city.
of each dataset emphasising on some key elements such as the complexity of the data
and the distribution of trips. Furthermore, we discuss why in particular we have
selected to train with some datasets rather than others.
4.2
Data Statistics and Insights
In the next chapter, 5, where we will discuss our analyses and results, we only use
one dataset - namely San Francisco. In this section we want to shed some light on the
various quirks of each dataset in an objective way. We will then explain the reasoning
behind choosing one dataset over another. To begin with let us consider the density of
the distribution of trips for various regions. From figure 4.2 we see that each city has
some very distinct features. The Brooklyn dataset has some very scattered patterns,
with many origin-destination pairs that have 0 trips. It is also clear that for certain
origin regions, there are trips to all other regions. This can notably be seen in origin
regions 5,6,11 and 12. For certain other regions there are virtually no trips, such as
origin region 1,2 and 13. This might not be an ideal dataset for our experiments,
since the distribution of demand is highly skewed, and limited to very few regions.
The San Francisco and Washington DC datasets are similar in the sense that they
each have a rather high demand in a given section of the city. For San Francisco,
this can be seen in the upper-right corner. For Washington DC, this can be seen in
the bottom-left corner, where there is an increased density of trips compared to the
rest of the regions. Both these datasets could be interesting to model on, given that
there is a decent distribution of trips as well as some specific patterns, that the model
might learn from.
Finally, in the Shenzhen dataset the trips are distributed closer to a uniform dis-
tribution than any of the other datasets. However, it is worth noting that Shenzhen
(and to an extent Washington DC) has many regions - both above 17 - and the uni-
form pattern of distribution might not lead to interesting behaviour from the agents.
It might instead turn to an optimisation where rebalancing the vehicles might become
too much of an important factor, compared to the objective of this thesis.
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Data Statistics and Insights
31
Figure 4.2: The distribution of trips to and from nodes for the four cities. The title
of the plot represents each city.
Next, we look at the distribution of prices for the various cities. The four cities
are very different in their layout and traﬀic culture, which might have an influence on
this. Interestingly and perhaps expectedly, figure 4.3 does not show equal behaviour
for each city. Brooklyn appears to be the only city that somewhat deviates from the
log-normal distribution. There could be many factors that causes this, such as traﬀic
congestion and the time of the day that the data was gathered (rush hours). The
width of the distribution is also larger for Brooklyn than any of the other cities. As
City
Avg. Price
Std. Price
Median Price
Total number of trips
San Francisco
$18.69
$15.70
$8.27
5370
Brooklyn, New York
$29.62
$27.00
$15.16
4830
Washington, D.C.
$11.72
$11.00
$3.82
24780
Shenzhen Downtown West
$26.19
$21.20
$16.36
24375
Table 4.2: Further information on prices and number of trips for the four cities.
depicted in table 4.2, each dataset has quite varying price structures. For all datasets
the median price is quite a bit lower than the average which the shapes of figure
4.3 confirms - they are heavily right-skewed. There also seems to be a correlation
==PAGE:47==
32
4 Data
Figure 4.3: The distribution of prices for each trip for each of the four cities. Each
distribution is fitted with a line of the log-normal distribution.
between the magnitude of the average prices and the standard deviation of the prices
with San Francisco and Washington DC having a lower average price as well as a
lower standard deviation. One reason for this might be the overall level of traﬀic
in the given cities. All other things being equal, one might expect New York and
Shenzhen to have more congestion in general compared to the other two cities. The
two cities, Washington DC and Shenzhen, has more trips in the data, which could
prolong training.
Finally we take a look into the patterns of the travel times for each city.
We should expect the plots from figure 4.4 to correlate heavily with figure 4.3 since
the travel time and the price are heavily correlated when driving with a taxi. This
is something we will discuss further in section 4.2.1. We also see similar patterns to
before, with Brooklyn showing odd behaviour with more occurrences of longer travel
times. The average travel time for each city, which is also showed in table 4.1, mirrors
this behaviour where Brooklyn has a wider distribution than the other cities - just as
with the prices.
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Data Statistics and Insights
33
Figure 4.4: The distribution of travel time for each trip for each of the four cities.
Each distribution is fitted with a line of the log-normal distribution.
All of these observations and statistics of the various datasets are helpful in select-
ing a dataset that will provide the model with a complex modelling task as well as
not requiring too much computational power to run the models. This is why we select
the San Francisco dataset, having a nice distribution of trips with some patterns that
the model could find diﬀicult to learn, a good price distribution as well as a lower
total number of trips than the two large datasets, Washington D.C. and Shenzhen.
4.2.1
The relationship between price and travel time
As mentioned earlier the relationship between price and travel time is of interest to
this thesis, and in this section we will now dig a bit deeper into the relationship
between price and travel time. We will use the data from San Francisco for this part
of the data exploration. First of all we fit a univariate OLS regression to model the
relationship between price and travel time. We will first define a model as:
p = βτ + ϵ
(4.1)
==PAGE:49==
34
4 Data
Where p is the price and τ is the travel time. Fitting this model we get the results
in table 4.3. We will call this model f(τ).
coeﬀicient
std. err
z
P>|z|
[0.025
0.975]
Travel Time
1.5429
0.003
535.108
0.000
1.537
1.549
Table 4.3: OLS results
Figure 4.5: Price vs. travel time - f(τ)
Figure 4.6: Residuals of f(τ)
Using this we obtain the fit seen in figure 4.5, and the residuals in figure 4.6. These
plots, combined with the results in table 4.3, shows a good fit. However it is clear
from 4.5, that the model does not fit well at low travel times, we therefore define a
new model
f2(τ) = max(f(τ), p)
(4.2)
Where p is a fixed base price. To find p we examine the minimum value of the
price in San Francisco which is 10. Therefore our final model for f2 becomes
f2(τ) = max(f(τ), 10)
(4.3)
Furthermore we introduce, as mentioned in section 3.7.2, a model f3 which is
defined as
f3(τ) = a + f(τ)
(4.4)
Using f2 we get the fit seen in figure 4.7, and the residuals in 4.8. As can be seen
this provides a much better fit. Furthermore, it is not totally unreasonable to have a
start fee when taking a taxi. As this is a rather normal industry standard. On the
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Data Statistics and Insights
35
Figure 4.7: Price vs. travel time - f2(τ)
Figure 4.8: Residuals of f2(τ)
Figure 4.9: Price vs. travel time - f3(τ)
Figure 4.10: Residuals of f3(τ)
contrary when examining the fit from f3 in figure 4.9, and the residuals in 4.10, we
see that this formulation does not improve the fit significantly.
We therefore settle on f2 as our final price model, and we are now ready to
implement the final pricing strategy.
Challenges and limitations
As mentioned earlier the choice of data should in theory not matter since we propose
a general model that should find optimal policies no matter the data. However, in
the interest of interpretation of results conjoined with the desired complexity of the
data, San Francisco is highly favourable. This also ties together with training time
==PAGE:51==
36
4 Data
for each of the data sets. The more complex the data, the longer training is needed.
Therefore, for the sake of time the ideal data should be complex enough, such that
the agent can learn complex general behaviours, but not so complex that it becomes
infeasible to train within a manageable amount of time.
4.2.2
Analysis of the k-parameter in Hills equation
In the implementation of cancellation we rely heavily on Hills equation. However, a
key part of the equation is the k-parameter as seen in figure 3.1. As stated in section
3.2.2, we define the k-parameter from VOT. However, f in equation 3.7 is yet to be
defined. We decide to analyse three different options for f, namely min, mean and
max. From figure 4.11 we argue that max is the best option. We do so because a
cancellation setup which cancels almost 50% of the trips in the original data is too
harsh a setup. The cancellation rate of 6% provided by the max-function is in line
with what we would expect. Our final definition of VOT therefore becomes
V OT = max
 
pt
i,j
τ t
i,j
!
= 3.33
$
minute
(4.5)
Figure 4.11: The probability of cancellation at different function definitions in the
original data
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Introduction and Model Setup
In this chapter we aim to provide the reader with a common thread through the
evolution of the models presented. First and foremost we present the baseline results,
which serves as a starting point in which we aim to improve upon. These include the
A2C models and the SAC models with the original prices from the dataset. Imple-
menting our own dynamic pricing element in the model is done with the hope, that
our model will set a more intelligent price for each origin-destination (OD) pair in
the dataset. For a comprehensive table of all models performances see Appendix A.1.
Specific setup information
All A2C models are trained for 48,000 episodes with 20 time steps per episode, where
each episode represents 3 minutes, resulting in 960,000 interactions, which is equiva-
lent to 5.5 years of training time. All SAC models are trained for 5000 episodes with
the same time frame as A2C resulting in 100,000 interactions, which is equivalent to
0.57 years of training. This reduction in training time is explained in section 3.5. In
the single-agent setup we train models with 374 vehicles in total and in the multi-
agent setup we split this equally between the actors, resulting in 187 vehicles each,
unless other is specified. As touched upon in section 3.2.1, when transferring to a
multi-agent setup a need to distribute demand arises. There are multiple different
ways of distributing this demand. We chose to utilise the Dirichlet distribution, cov-
ered in detail in section 3.2.5.1. The α parameter for the Dirichlet distribution is as
defined in equation 3.8. When the given demand has been divided between the two
actors, next comes the cancellation option. As explained in section 3.2.2, we chose
to incorporate cancellation as a function of VOT and VOR. A VOT is calculated
from data or alternatively found for a given area online, to serve as a 50% probability.
Meaning that if VOR = VOT there is an equal change of picking the assigned actor or
cancel the ride. This probability is then used to sample from a binomial distribution
in order to get the amount of costumers accepting the ride and the amount cancelling.
The resulting amount of costumers after cancellation is then held up against the num-
ber of vehicles the actor has in the specific region the customers is travelling from.
Since we do not have waiting times in the system, if the actor does not have enough
vehicles in the region, the excess demand is lost and cannot be regained by any of
the actors. This happens for each OD-pair and in each time step. An example of this
can be seen in figure 5.1.
==PAGE:53==
38
5 Results
Figure 5.1: Example of demand distribution: The sampled demand from i to j at
time t is divided between the actors. Then the costumers decide whether to accept
the ride or cancel based on Hills equation along with a sampling from a Binomial
distribution. Lastly if there are more costumers accepting than the actor has capacity
for, there is overflow, and the minimum between available vehicles and accepting
costumers is assigned as the specific actors demand
It is worth noting that all tables of model performance presented in this thesis is
based on evaluating each model across 10 episodes. Performance is then presented
as a mean of the parameter ± standard deviation of the parameter, across those 10
episodes. This is done to accurately and fairly validate each model presented in this
thesis.
==PAGE:54==
5.2 From One Actor to Two Actors
39
5.2
From One Actor to Two Actors
A substantial segment of this thesis is the move from one actor to two actors. When
going from a single to multi-setup everything changes. If we pull this back to the real
world, there is a clear reason to expand to a multi-agent setup. As mentioned in the
introduction in section 1 to this thesis, the world is rarely monopolistic, especially
not in the ridesharing industry. More often that not, multiple companies compete
for the same costumers. Being at the right place at the right time is therefore a huge
cost-saving, and potentially profit-gaining strategy. One can easily recognise utilis-
ing a specific form of transportation simply because of the convenience of it being
there when you need it. This competition element of the real world is the corner-
stone of why we do multi-agent RL. As the famous ’law’ in economics dictates, it
is about Supply and demand. Or as the original saying by John Locke goes: ”The
price of any Commodity rises or falls, by the proportion of the number of Buyers
and Sellers” Investopedia (27/09/2023). If supply is limited to one agent/company,
the price of a given product is simply the highest price a costumer is willing to pay
for it. However, when multiple agents/companies are part of the supply they are
forced to consider the price of the counterpart. This is perhaps the most important
dynamic that multi-agent reinforcement learning seeks to mimic. Whether it be price,
accessibility, quality or something else. In order to profit, an agent/company must
distinguish themselves in some way. This is at least true in the non-monopolistic
setting that we try to mimic. Therefore, a multi-agent setup is in simple terms a
requirement in order to model the world that we live in.
As stated earlier in chapter 2, a configuration that enables the use of multiple
agents has not been investigated in the scenario where GNNs and actor-critic meth-
ods are integrated to address the AMoD challenge.
For simplicity’s sake we have in this thesis chosen to keep the different actors
and critics completely similar. That means the architectures of the different neural
networks are exactly the same for both actors and critics. The beauty of this is that
if/when the two actors learn different policies, it is not due to different architectures.
In practice, this means that no information is shared between the two agents. The
difference in policies will be attributed to the experience each actor gains through
interacting with the environment, and how it chooses to react.
The performance of the single-agent and multi-agent setup can be seen in table
5.1. From table 5.1, we can see that the reward of the multi-agent setups decreases
slightly compared to the single-agent setup. This is interesting and the drop in re-
ward indicates, that the shift from a monopolistic market to a competitive market has
an effect. This could also be due to the increase in stochasticity of the environment,
thus making it more unpredictable. The increased stochasticity of the environment in-
creases the complexity for the agents operating within it, thus increasing the diﬀiculty
of learning an optimal policy. When interacting in a multi-agent environment each
==PAGE:55==
40
5 Results
Model
Episodes
Reward
Served demand
Single-agent A2C
48000
14667 ± 325
1033 ± 16
Single-agent SAC
5000
14471 ± 317
1020 ± 20
Multi-agent A2C
48000
14231 ± 373
999 ± 24
Multi-agent SAC
5000
14184 ± 298
985 ± 26
Table 5.1: The total reward of training both A2C and SAC in single-agent and
multi-agent setup
agent is tasked with not only factoring its own actions impact on the environment
but also the impact of the unknown actions of the competition.
In spite of all this, table 5.1 shows that the reward only decreases very little com-
pared to what one might expect. Looking at the standard deviations, A2C has an
increase of ∼15% while SAC actually has a decrease of ∼6%. This decrease, while
not expected, is not a surprise given the properties of SAC discussed in section 3.5
and is a further indication that SAC is the superior choice when modelling the multi-
agent AMoD setting in this thesis.
More interesting than the best reward and served demand are the actual steps it
took to get there. Currently, the actors can only influence the system by rebalancing
vehicles, therefore we will take at look at the rebalancing cost for the two actors during
training. A visualisation of this for the two-actor SAC can be seen in figure 5.2. From
figure 5.2 it is clear that the two agents learn very different things. Actor two rather
quickly has a rebalancing cost around the 400 mark after 1000 episodes. Whereas,
for actor one to be in the same range consistently it takes around 2500 episodes.
Moreover, the rebalancing cost of both actors decreases across the entire training,
except for the bump in the beginning. Therefore, it might seem contradictory when
the optimal global policy is reached around 3000 episodes.
As can bee seen from figure 5.2, this is not due solely because a low rebalancing
cost for the actors. In this figure it is not clear to see why the optimal policy is reached
where it is. Therefore we provide a snapshot of this point in training in figure 5.3,
where it is clear to see what is the cause of the optimal point.
In figure 5.3 it is clear that neither rebalancing cost or served demand for actor
one is at their lowest/highest. But for the second actor we actually observe the high-
est demand served across all training, combined with a remarkably low rebalancing
cost. Whereas, actor one is significantly better than the median, but not towards the
outer end of the distribution. Put together the overall served demand and rebalancing
cost of the two actors in this episode, make for the highest reward in this training run.
We argue, that the multi-agent setup have been integrated successfully, with an
expected performance drop due to a competitive environment. It is noteworthy, that
all models from now on forth are run with the multi-agent setup, unless specified
==PAGE:56==
5.3 Baselines
41
(a) The rebalancing cost for each actor
(b) The served demand for each actor
(c) The reward for each actor
Figure 5.2: Rebalancing cost for each actor for the multi-agent SAC as well as the
served demand for each actor with reward for each actor
otherwise.
5.3
Baselines
As this thesis is largely inspired by the work of Gammelli et al. (2021), Gammelli
et al. (2022) and Schmidt et al. (2023), one can imagine a plethora of insightful and
interesting experiments to perform. Unfortunately not everything is possible, due to
time constraints. In this thesis, we have chosen to focus on expanding the previously
mentioned work to a multi-agent setup as well as including a pricing element. In
order to evaluate our future implementations, we need a standard to hold the different
experiments up against. This is where baseline models come in. The baselines consists
of several setups. This is mainly due to the multi-faceted nature of the different models
implemented in this thesis. Therefore, we introduce four different baselines, which
are as follows.
==PAGE:57==
42
5 Results
Figure 5.3: Boxplot of the rebalancing cost and served demand for each actor for
the multi-agent SAC. In the plot there is also denoted the best episode for each actor.
• Original prices from the data - All demand sampled is distributed to the actors.
• Original prices from the data - possibility of cancellation is introduced.
These baselines are then conducted for both A2C and SAC, resulting in the four
different baselines. A benefit of starting with a baseline is the sequential nature of
which we can further build upon the baseline, iterating through various additions,
while always have a consistent reference point to compare with. For an overview of
the performance of each of the baselines, see table 5.2. One might notice that the
multi-agent setup shown in table 5.1 are the same as the baselines without cancella-
tion in table 5.2. As can be seen from 5.2, there are some performance differences
between A2C and SAC. In these baselines we see that A2C outperforms SAC in the
non-cancellation case, but SAC outperforms A2C in the other. However, not by a
magnitude that can conclude whether or not one algorithm is performing better than
the other. As expected, both algorithms show a similar drop in reward when cancel-
lation is introduced. This is rather strange since all models serves approximately the
same amount of demand. One explanation for this could be that the models with
cancellation are in a higher degree forced to take trips at lower prices than the models
==PAGE:58==
5.3 Baselines
43
Reward
Served demand
Lost demand to cancellation
A2C without cancellation
14231 ± 373
999 ± 24
0
SAC without cancellation
14184 ± 298
985 ± 26
0
A2C with cancellation
11687 ± 347
914 ± 23
157 ± 8
SAC with cancellation
12483 ± 406
978 ± 27
157 ± 8
Table 5.2: Performance of baseline models
without cancellation.
Another interesting insight is model performance across training with and without
cancellation. This can be seen in figure 5.4. First of all it is important to mention
Figure 5.4: Reward per actor for the two SAC models from table 5.2
that the rewards seen in figure 5.4 are from training, where as the rewards seen in
table 5.2 are from evaluating the models. That being said it is interesting to see
that overall, the models show the same performance patterns with and without can-
cellation. However, from this one example it seems that when there is cancellation,
the actor that is ”under-performing” has a much easier time catching up to a similar
reward, compared to the model without cancellation. Furthermore, it is evident from
==PAGE:59==
44
5 Results
figure 5.4 that the actors in the model with cancellation learn at a more similar rate
than the model without cancellation. Last but not least, we see that the model with
no cancellation reaches its best performing policy roughly 1500 episodes earlier than
the one with cancellation. At this point we can not say if this is a general tendency
or a single occurrence.
As all future models will be with cancellation, these will be the baselines to com-
pare with. From these results the convergence of SAC is both faster and better than
A2C which aligns well with the theoretical properties of SAC, which propose just that.
From this point on, the thesis will only consider SAC in its experiments.
It is important to note that despite calling these multi-agent models for baselines,
they represent a key finding in this thesis. This is in and of itself an interesting finding
in the domain of multi-agent reinforcement learning in the AMoD setup. However,
as this thesis still have plenty to explore, we will still use these models as baselines
for any future experiments.
The baselines without cancellation will function as something to strive for, but not
something that we expect to reach. It stands to reason that when some of the demand
is removed from the system via cancellations the possible reward will inevitably be
lower than otherwise. The only way for the actor to achieve rewards close to these
are by setting more optimal prices.
5.4
The Price Implementation
In this section we seek to elaborate on the challenge of adding a dynamic price to
the model. As explained in detail in section 5.3 we already have a working system
with the original prices of the dataset. The main drawback of this implementation
is that, in applying our model to the real world, one would very rarely have access
to such data, and prices from taxi companies might be far from the ideal price in an
AMoD setting. In this section we introduce 3 different approaches to how you might
include a dynamic pricing element in a model such as ours. We look at a way to
make the setting of the price entirely free from the use of historical data, allowing for
a more transferable model. That is, only requiring some historical data to make an
estimation of a dynamic system. We then introduce a tweak to this implementation
where we introduce a price difference introduced by our GNN. Recall section 3.7.1
to see how we calculate the price difference, ˆpc
s which denotes the price difference of
state s for actor c. Finally, we introduce the price as a linear regression as explained
in section 3.7.2 to have an (almost) fully flexible pricing strategy. This strategy does
not rely on historical data to set a price, but does contain some assumptions based
on historical data.
==PAGE:60==
5.4 The Price Implementation
45
5.4.1
Calculating the mean price of the OD-pairs
The first implementation is through the usage of historical data for a given city - San
Francisco in our case. We calculate the mean price of every OD-pair using equation
3.35 as explained in section 3.7. Even though this model reduces flexibility compared
to the baseline model it will serve as a base for further price modelling. This first
implementation squishes the complexity of the original prices and thus might sacrifice
on performance, but the advantage is that we obtain average prices specific to an OD-
pair at the cost of no increased complexity. The results of running this model with
two actors with 187 cars each for 5000 episodes yields the following table 5.3 where
the baseline for SAC with cancellation is also included. Being a fairly rigid pricing
Model
Number of cars
Episodes
Best reward
SAC baseline w. cancellation
374
5000
12483 ± 406
OD-mean Price Strategy
374
5000
12158 ± 373
Table 5.3: Table of the OD-mean price strategy and the baseline with 5000 episodes
and 187 cars for each actor.
strategy, it is interesting to see that most of the features that the model can improve
remain fairly constant with actor one very slightly outperforming actor two. This is
clearly seen in figure 5.5 where the amount of demand lost to cancellation due to non-
optimal prices is constant over all time, since the prices do not vary across episodes.
This behaviour is also consistent with the baseline. The amount of cancellations is
quite low and this is due to the fact, that the average price sets quite a conservative
price in regards to the customers VOT. In the baseline it is low because the prices are
from real life, which all other things being equal, is an accurate representation of the
customers willingness to travel with a taxi. The reward of the OD-mean price strategy
is expectedly a bit lower than the baseline as seen in table 5.3. For the OD-mean
price strategy, it effectively becomes a question of whether or not the model is able to
find an optimal rebalancing policy, which the model approaches relatively fast as seen
in figure 5.5. As can be seen in figure 5.6 the model has a vast improvement in the
beginning and then smaller incremental improvements throughout training. It seems
that the pivotal reason for actor one outperforming actor two is that is has slightly
more served demand, although this difference in reward is small.
All this, in addition to the more conservative and lower prices the model sets,
results in a reward that is lower than the baseline. The baseline has more intricate
prices, so this does not come as a surprise. To improve our pricing strategy, it is
important to allow more flexibility in the model. This approach would enable the
adjustment of prices for each trip, potentially leading to increased profits. By fine-
tuning prices based on specific trip details, the model could more accurately reflect
the true value of a trip and enhance revenue. This cannot be achieved with an average
price of each OD-pair, and leads us naturally to the next section of this analysis.
==PAGE:61==
46
5 Results
(a) Reward for each actor
(b) Rebalancing cost for each actor
(c) Unmet demand due to cancellation for
each actor
(d) Served demand for each actor
Figure 5.5: Summary plots during training for the mean prices over the OD-pairs.
The dotted line represents the index, where the best policy was found during training.
5.4.2
Introducing a price difference output
In this section we introduce a price difference as explained in detail in section 3.7.1. By
modifying our GNN to output two new parameters, namely a mean, µ, and a standard
deviation, σ, we can then sample from a normal distribution, to gain a price difference.
In general terms this means that the model, given the average price of each OD-pair,
can tweak the price up or down. The price displayed is thus a representation of the
change in price from the OD-mean price strategy. A main benefit of this approach is
that the model has a starting guess which accurately represents a realistic price as
we just saw in section 5.4.1. This model is still reliant on historical data, but has
increased complexity and a more dynamic nature. This is also visible when running
the with the same fleet size and training time.
As depicted in table 5.4 the model now achieves a higher reward than the OD-
mean price strategy and the baseline. The flexibility of being able to set the price up
==PAGE:62==
5.4 The Price Implementation
47
Figure 5.6: The evolution of the best reward of pricing strategy 1
Model
Number of cars
Episodes
Best reward
SAC baseline w. cancellation
374
5000
12483 ± 406
OD-mean Price Strategy
374
5000
12158 ± 373
Price Difference Strategy
374
5000
12920 ± 440
Table 5.4: Table of the OD-mean price strategy and the price difference strategy as
well as the baseline with 5000 episodes and 187 cars for each actor
or down in each state proves the deciding factor. In figure 5.7, we look at the evolu-
tion of the average price per actor during training, we see that the best policy finds a
price that, on average, is higher than the original prices for the dataset averaged over
each OD-pair. This is positive since it means the model is able to exploit customer
behaviour and price sensitivity towards cancelling a ride if it is too expensive. Now
that the price is dynamic, it is particularly interesting to note the relationship be-
tween the price and the cancellation rates. Figure 5.8 shows the relationship between
the cancellation rate and the evolution of the price for each actor. From figure 5.8
there appears to be a large correlation between the two features, which also makes
sense since the cancellation is a direct consequence of the price. The challenge of
==PAGE:63==
48
5 Results
Figure 5.7: Evolution of the average price difference per actor during training along
with the index of the optimally found policy
(a) Unmet demand due to cancellation
(b) The mean price difference of each actor
Figure 5.8: The cancellation rate and evolution of the mean price difference for each
actor over 5000 episodes
the agent is now to find the optimal balance between not losing too much demand
==PAGE:64==
5.4 The Price Implementation
49
because of cancellation due to high prices, while setting the price as high as possible
to optimise profits (reward). And it seems this model, with its increased complexity,
is able to find the correct balance needed to beat the baseline. This model seems to
be particularly sensitive to the starting guess which it spends some time deviating
from, until it converges towards a price.
Another very interesting thing to investigate is whether or not the price moves
with the market. That is to say, are there any price increases or decreases during
an episode, which represents one hour of a day. We should expect the model to be
able to increase the prices in periods of high demand, and conversely decrease the
prices in periods of low demand. It is a bit far fetched to conclude this on one hour
of data though, but still an interesting insight to gain - and a measurement of the
models flexibility towards the market. In figure 5.9 we see that the prices do vary
Figure 5.9: Evolution of the average price per minute per actor during an entire
episode. The time goes from 0 to 20 and represents an entire episode, translated into
the hours from 08 to 09 in the morning. The top represents actor one, while the
bottom represents actor two.
quite a bit during just one hour. This is positive since it indicates whether or not the
model is able to set flexible prices. Moreover, the behaviour is unique to each actor
==PAGE:65==
50
5 Results
signifying the two different policies the actors converged upon. One could hope that,
given training during an entire day, the model would be able to set beneficial prices
during rush hours. Actor two seems to have found a more aggressive pricing strategy
with the change in prices being almost one more than actor one at every time step.
Figure 5.10: The true distribution of prices during training and the prices the model
sets for the two actors. The top plot represents actor one, while the bottom represents
actor two.
Figure 5.10 shows the distribution of the true prices of the dataset for San Fran-
cisco as well as the price-distribution that the price difference strategy sets. Actor one
is impressively close to the true prices of the dataset, and matches the distribution
very well. This might be predictable as the price is set based on the original mean
prices. It sets a larger amount of prices below 20 and a bit less of the prices above
20. Actor two has a more aggressive pricing strategy and has a high concentration
of more expensive prices with a mean price of about 21 in terms of actual prices.
Interestingly, there are a few outliers with very high prices. This is most likely due to
a customer choosing to take the taxi even though they have a very high probability
of cancellation. As this is modelled as a probability, that is always an option.
With this model we achieve a higher flexibility and complexity than the first
==PAGE:66==
5.4 The Price Implementation
51
implementation of price. However, the model still has the disadvantage, that it relies
on historical data to quite an extent.
We wish to be even more independent of
historical data, and we do that by trying to eliminate the need of historical data
almost completely in the next section while introducing even more flexibility in the
price setting dynamic. For this to work, we require some key assumptions to hold -
namely the relationship between price and travel time. This is discussed in detail in
section 4.2.1.
5.4.3
Introducing a dynamic pricing element as a regression
In this final section of the price implementation process we look into creating an even
more dynamic price setting strategy.
This implementation has the two following
major advantages, which have already been discussed. One being that the model is
the most flexible of the three implementations. And second being that the model is
almost entirely independent of historical data. Let us discuss the latter first.
In the former two implementations, price has been set calculating the mean of
the OD-pair prices using equation 3.35. This calculation requires historical data on
trips in a given city from region i to j. While this calculation provides a historically
accurate representation of a price for a given trip, it remains inflexible to changes
in the underlying system. Instead of using these prices, we introduce a regression as
described in section 3.7.2. Having two outputs from the GNN that we can use for
sampling, provides the model with suﬀicient flexibility to set its own prices entirely.
The only need for historical data is consequently used in the assumptions described in
section 4.2.1. Even so, it is debatable that historical data is even required to confirm
these assumption. We maintain that these are generally applicable in most major
cities without substantially deviating from the ground truth.
We present the results of running with the same fleet size and training time for
each actor in table 5.5. From table 5.5 we see a substantial improvement in reward
Model
Number of cars
Episodes
Best reward
SAC baseline w. cancellation
374
5000
12483 ± 406
OD-mean Price Strategy
374
5000
12158 ± 373
Price Difference Strategy
374
5000
12920 ± 440
Price Regression Strategy
374
5000
17445 ± 319
Table 5.5: Table of the first, second an third pricing strategy as well as the baseline
with 5000 episodes and 187 cars for each actor
for the model. There is an improvement of ≈%40 compared to the baseline and
≈44% and ≈35% from the OD-mean price strategy and the price difference strategy
respectively. Clearly, the increased complexity of the decision making of the model
==PAGE:67==
52
5 Results
proves pivotal. The development of the price throughout training shows that the
model converges on a range of prices quite quickly when held up to where the best
reward was found, as depicted in figure 5.11. Reading into the figure 5.11, it is notable
Figure 5.11: The development of the price of the two actors during training with
the time step of the optimal policy
that the best pair of prices is found after roughly 4000 episodes. After this point, the
model tries to set prices with very little exploration and other metrics of the model
such as the rebalancing and demand lost to cancellation fluctuates very little as well.
This can be seen in figure 5.13. The mean prices per minute of actor one and actor
one are $2.49 and $2.03 respectively. Both prices are above the price per minute from
the data which was calculated in section 4.2.1 as $1.54. Given the more flexible price,
it is interesting to see if the prices fluctuate more than price strategy 2 during an
episode.
In figure 5.12 we see that the two actors set quite a similar price pattern during
the time steps. The prices are still different, but the behaviour is significantly more
similar compared to the price difference strategy.
So what makes the two actors
different?
Figure 5.13 illustrates that the distinct pricing strategies employed by the two
actors are crucial to their respective behaviours within the system. In general we see,
==PAGE:68==
5.4 The Price Implementation
53
Figure 5.12: The development of the price of the two actors during an entire episode.
Remember, that prices in this case is prices per minute.
that one actor has a strategy with a lower price than the other actor, thus achieving
more served demand, and less demand lost to cancellation. It is notable that this
model is vastly more volatile than the other implementations. The rebalancing cost
is fluctuating more than normal, but converges towards a value between 400 and 500
just as the rest of the models. The most interesting take-away is the fact that two
very different strategies can lead to the same reward for the two actors.
From 5.14 we can see the two different pricing strategies. First thing to notice is
the similar shapes of the distributions. The two distributions are very similar, but
actor one has a more expensive strategy with a mean hovering around 25 while the
other has a mean just above 20. Since this model achieves the highest reward seen
so far, one could hope that it represents the models ability to exploit the customers
willingness to ride with a taxi. The optimal price will be the highest price that does
not lead to too high of a probability of cancelling the ride. Interestingly, the model
serves less demand on average with 856 compared to the original prices with 978 on
average. The actors sets a price per minute of $2.49 and $2.03 respectively whereas
the real data sets the price per minute as $1.54. Ideally the model would be able to
serve as many customers as the baseline and set a slightly higher price on average,
==PAGE:69==
54
5 Results
(a) Reward per actor
(b) Rebalancing cost for each actor
(c) Unmet demand due to cancellation for
each actor
(d) Served demand for each actor
Figure 5.13: Summary plots during training for the price regression strategy. The
dotted line represents the index, where the best policy was found during training.
such that the companies benefit from a more intelligent model.
With the price regression strategy, we are confident that we have a model that
will accurately set dynamic prices in a multi-agent environment, and we now wish to
investigate the models sensitivity to various fleet sizes to see if the model is robust
and its behaviour predictable. This will also lead to some interesting insights as to
how the model might perform in a real market.
5.5
Market Dynamics Analysis
In the preceding sections we have explored the implementation details of the SAC
algorithm and pricing in an AMoD context. During this part of the analysis we wish
to delve into the effect of the fleet size on the pricing. We begin by discussing the
==PAGE:70==
5.5 Market Dynamics Analysis
55
Figure 5.14: The distribution of prices for each of the two actors. The prices are
converted to the original prices. The top plot represents actor one, while the bottom
represents actor two.
rationale behind conducting this analysis, and by outlining the metrics on which we
will evaluate our results. We will then present our findings and the insights they
bring.
5.5.1
Rationale behind the analysis
By conducting this analysis we aim to show that we have created a robust system
which finds a good and explainable solution to different configurations of supply and
demand. As the fleet size is equal to the overall supply of taxis in the system we
suspect that the change in supply, given a constant demand, will have an effect on
the price. Furthermore we will investigate how the introduction of a new actor in a
monopolistic market affect the overall behaviour of the existing actors in the system.
We will investigate if the change in fleet size affect the dynamics of the entire action
space of the actor, not just the price. A similar approach will be taken in the setting
of introducing a new actor to the system. We will subdivide this analysis in to three
parts, with one part focusing on the single-agent setup. In the second part we will,
==PAGE:71==
56
5 Results
as previously, extent to a multi-agent environment and last but not least look at the
introduction of a new actor in a monopolistic market.
5.5.2
Varying fleet sizes in a single-agent setup
From the experiments with a single actor seen in table 5.6 we see that as the number
of cars for the actor decrease we see an increase in price. This behaviour makes sense
as the actor, by increasing prices, converts some of the lost demand due to lack of
capacity to demand lost due to cancellation. The model is indifferent as to how it
loses demand, it only seeks to maximise the reward. By employing a higher price it
thus generates the same amount of trips that it would have anyway. This leads to
a reward which is ∼74% of the reward of the model with twice the number of cars.
This “over-performance” is mainly driven by the higher price although some of the
reward could also be attributed to lower rebalancing cost.
Number of cars
Price
Best reward
100
3.99 ± 0.06
10249 ± 579
187
3.78 ± 0.09
14062 ± 651
200
3.14 ± 0.07
14730 ± 563
300
2.99 ± 0.04
15627 ± 579
374
2.40 ± 0.02
18926 ± 866
400
2.19 ± 0.02
17737 ± 660
Table 5.6: Experiments with single agent setup
By evaluating the models we get the data in table 5.6, which can also be seen in
figure 5.15. This show an interesting behaviour where the price flattens out after 374
cars. This could be attributed to the served demand stagnating at this point as can
be seen from figure 5.16. It is however interesting to see that the demand peaks at
around ∼75% of the average total demand of the system, indicating that the last
∼25% is not worth going for, due to the added rebalancing costs.
5.5.3
Varying fleet sizes in a multi-agent setup
Interestingly the trend continues for the multi-agent setup. Here we see the same
dynamics of the price falling when the fleet size increase. It is noteworthy that the
prices on which the actors converge are generally lower than the prices from table 5.6.
This again is due to the fact that there now exists several agents and the competitive
dynamics naturally leads to lower prices. As with the single-agent setup we see that
the reward starts do decline when we go above 374 cars. As we can see from figure
5.18 the same story is present for two actors as for one where the demand reaches a
peak around 374 cars and thus extra cars merely introduce higher rebalancing cost.
Furthermore, the near linear dependency between price and number of cars does not
==PAGE:72==
5.5 Market Dynamics Analysis
57
Figure 5.15: Price at best reward for different fleet sizes
Figure 5.16: Served demand at best reward for different fleet sizes
seem to hold in the multi-agent setup as can be seen in figure 5.17. We argue that
the reason the signal is not as strong in the multi-agent case is due to the increased
complexity in this setup, which is further discussed in section 6.
5.5.4
Comparison of multi-agent and single-agent setup
When comparing the multi-agent and the single-agent setup, we observe notable
trends in the market dynamics. In both scenarios we see a negative correlation be-
tween number of cars and prices. Moreover, a key insight in the relation between
the two is the lower prices on which the multi-agent setup converge. Even though
one actor in the multi-agent setup sometimes sets a price which is comparable to the
==PAGE:73==
58
5 Results
Number of cars
Actor one price
Actor two price
Best reward
100
3.3452 ±0.0406
3.8928 ±0.0137
9408 ± 536
187
2.9118 ±0.0527
1.9239 ±0.0054
10756 ± 483
200
2.3317 ±0.0460
2.4960 ±0.0645
13691 ± 371
300
2.3071 ±0.0508
2.5242 ±0.0677
16621 ± 415
374
2.4921 ±0.0550
2.0306 ±0.0131
17445 ± 319
400
1.9691 ±0.0659
1.6678 ±0.0211
15014 ± 511
Table 5.7: Development of mean prices - Multi-agent
single actor, we always see a lower price for the other actor. This creates a system
where the mean price of trips is lower than in the single agent setup. Thereby creating
a cheaper experience for the customers on average. This highlights the competitive
nature of the multi-agent scenario where each actor drives the prices lower than in
the monopolistic setting to gain market share. The lower prices combined with the
lower rewards obtained by the multi-agent setup shows the effects of a monopolistic
versus a competitive market in full effect. In the monopolistic setting it appears to be
the fact that only supply and demand drive the prices, thus creating a supply-centric
model. On the contrary the multi-agent setup provides a more complex setting where
the actors do not only have to take supply and demand into account, but also the
competitive nature of the system. This pushes not only prices but reward further
down. Furthermore, in the single-agent setup we saw a saturation point at 374 vehi-
cles for reward, indicating that this fleet size suﬀiciently saturates the market. This
saturation points seems to hold in the multi-agent setup, suggesting that the fleet size
of 374 indeed is close to a true saturation point of the environment we have created.
By looking at the entry of the saturation point of 374 cars in both table 5.6 and table
5.7 we see that mean reward is 4218 higher for the single actor, translating to an
increase of roughly 24% in the monopolistic setting as compared to the multi-agent
setup.
5.5.5
Analysis of new competitors in an established, monopolistic
market
The last analysis with respect to market dynamics that we wish to conduct is to
investigate how an already established monopolistic agent reacts to the introduction
of a new competitor in the market. The starting point will be the model from table 5.6
with 187 cars as it is half of the fleet size as when we saw the highest reward in both
the single and multi-agent setting. Recall that the price set for the pre-trained actor
was 3.36 ± 0.54. We take this actor which has already been trained for 5000 episodes
and further train it for 5000 episodes, but with the introduction of an identical, yet
untrained, actor in the market. By doing so we obtain the price curves from figure
5.19 and the reward from figure 5.20 over the training period.
==PAGE:74==
5.5 Market Dynamics Analysis
59
Figure 5.17: Price at best reward for different fleet sizes
Figure 5.18: Served demand at best reward for different fleet sizes
It is interesting to see that even though the reward of the pre-trained actor is obvi-
ously better at the start, the untrained quickly learns a behaviour which outperforms
the already established actor. When looking at the served demand in figure 5.21 and
comparing it to the price in figure 5.19 it becomes evident that the new actor wins
by setting lower prices than the competition thus gaining more demand.
Interestingly, it sets prices for the majority of the training period at around 1.5
which is very close to the prices seen in the real world data, and much lower than
seen in 5.7 for 374 cars. This leads us to believe that the strategy from the new actor
is to undercut the already existing actor to gain demand.
As training progresses
the pre-trained actor starts to lower its prices, while the new actor increases its
prices.
Both of these behaviours make sense in a real world setting, as the pre-
==PAGE:75==
60
5 Results
Figure 5.19: The development of price over the training period. Notice how the pre-
trained actor is very slow to change its price. Furthermore the new actor consistently
undercuts the pre-trained.
Figure 5.20: The development of reward over the training period. Reward quickly
becomes large however, it does not seem to converge in the 5000 episodes.
==PAGE:76==
5.5 Market Dynamics Analysis
61
Figure 5.21: The development of served demand over the training period. Served
demand closely resembles the inverse of the overall structure of figure 5.19, however
at a different scale, with much more noise.
trained actor is loosing a lot of demand due to overly inflated prices learned during
the monopolistic period. Furthermore, the new actor is free to set much higher prices
without sacrificing demand to the pre-trained actor as its prices are overly inflated,
thus cancellation is the only real problem for the new actor. Looking at table 5.8 we
see that the pre-trained actor significantly decreases the price which it obtains in the
monopolistic period, however when comparing to the results in table 5.7, it does not
go down to the level of the two actors trained in parallel.
Model
Price
Pre-trained old price
3.36 ± 0.54
Pre-trained new price
2.838 ± 0.02
New actor price
2.143 ± 0.0
Table 5.8: Prices from competitor analysis
Similarly it is interesting that the new actor falls below the expected price from
table 5.7, further supporting the undercutting hypothesis presented in this analysis.
Furthermore, from the reward curves it looks like this run has not fully converged in
the allotted 5000 time steps indicating that it should run for more episodes. Figure
5.20 shows two very interesting insights; first of all we assume that a trained actor
acts more predictable than a fully untrained one. This tells us that the new actor
==PAGE:77==
62
5 Results
learns very quickly in an environment where the other actor is more stable. However
even though the new actor quickly learns a reasonable policy it appears as if this
environment is becoming too non-stationary, due to the fact that the pre-trained actor
reacts very slowly to the new environment. This could maybe have been mitigated
with tuning of the hyper-parameters, specifically α which controls the entropy.
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
Throughout this thesis many different and complex challenges have been touched
upon, and we now wish to shed some light on all the key aspects in a coherent
manner. First, we remind the reader of our mission statement:
Can we expand a current single-actor setup to a multi-agent setup within
the AMoD modelling problem, while closely resembling the real-life
dynamics of a rideshare transportation problem in a city? In addition,
what are the implications of introducing a dynamic pricing mechanism
into the models architecture on both individual agent behaviour and the
overall system dynamics?
Building upon the outcomes highlighted in section 5, we now aim to present our
findings in a coherent and summarised fashion, evaluating the extent to which we have
successfully fulfilled the objectives outlined in our mission statement. This chapter
will encompass a comprehensive review of our achievements and challenges, hopefully
providing a clear perspective on the areas covered in this thesis.
As touched upon in sections 5.2 and 5.3, in order to quantify the performance
of any experiments we need baselines to compare with. The initial baselines can be
compared directly with the models in the single-agent setup, to see if introducing
another agent is a success or a failure. As seen in section 5.2, this first step seems
to have been a success with only a small negative impact on the overall reward. The
only thing changed in the environment when going from one to two agents is the
distribution of demand. However, when introducing price to a system, an environ-
ment without cancellation quickly proves to be problematic. It is then natural to ask
ourselves: Why have we introduced this model as a baseline? The answer for this lies
partly in the fact that this is a closer approximation to the real world scenario. The
approach which we opted for in thesis was the introduction of cancellation, this was
done for several reasons. First and foremost it limits the models ability to raise prices
indefinitely. Secondly we argue that the implementation of cancellation mirrors the
real world more closely than limiting the price element of the model in any other way.
One could then argue if this is the correct baseline for what we try to achieve.
This is diﬀicult to answer because on one hand it is the exact same model as later
iterations that predict price. On the other hand it just contains static prices, that
might include human errors and even agreements to drive to a certain place for a
==PAGE:79==
64
6 Discussion
certain price. Therefore, the model we compare against might actually not be as
optimal as we think. Another alternative to this is to filter out data manually, thus
imposing our own opinions and biases to the data, which is not desirable.
The challenge of building a model that can intelligently set a price based on vari-
ous inputs is an intricate problem. First and foremost, we point out the nature of the
implementation. Prior to the analysis we had not been able to find any literature that
implements a dynamic price the same way we propose. This leads to various ques-
tions, amongst others; How do create this complex dynamic, and furthermore, how
do we validate the results from it? In this thesis, we argue that our implementation
is sound due to various topics already touched upon in section 5.4. In this particular
section, we wish to discuss some possible pitfalls and considerations we had during
the implementation period.
As discussed, with the first pricing strategy, which is the OD-mean price strategy,
we do not achieve a higher reward than the baseline. We argue that this is due to
averaging prices effectively having a more rigid model than the baseline. This model
does raise an interesting question though, which is the trade-off between flexibility
and robustness. This is the balance we seek to optimise when implementing a pricing
strategy. From literature we have seen that certain existing strategies do not align
with our assumptions for a competitive environment, and we thus need to introduce
flexibility into the system. The price difference strategy handles this trade-off well,
but falls short due to its dependence on historical data. One of the key differences
in this step is that the model is now able to set a price differently for every trip,
whereas the first implementation had stationary prices. We argue that a model with-
out dependency on data is desirable in our setup. However, taxi traﬀic data is not
hard to get a hold of, and therefore models with an offset in a ground truth might
be favourable if robustness is a demand. The introduction of price to the GNN adds
complexity to the model and makes training a bit more complex, but the difference
is negligible. The overall convergence of the model is not affected much either, and
it converges nicely within the 5000 episodes.
The third pricing strategy, where the outputs from the GNN is used as a linear
regression that we sample from is the most flexible and complex of the three imple-
mentations. This method weighs towards the complexity side of the aforementioned
trade-off. It is apparent, when interpreting the trends in the diagnostic plots in sec-
tion 5.4.3 that the training may have been terminated before convergence - this is
a concern we will discuss in more detail later in this chapter. We argue that the
realistic nature of the environment truly shines when implementing this model. With
completely flexible prices and the cancellation feature, the model will be able to find
an optimal policy and set demand-responsive pricing strategies. This is in line with
what most companies of ridesharing applications apply to some degree. Another main
benefit is the transferability that the model has. In theory, given some research on
customers VOT, any city with the modern infrastructure would be able to utilise our
==PAGE:80==
6 Discussion
65
model. Of course, whether the model is generalizable is not something that is tested.
We cannot ensure, that the best policy for San Francisco can be said to converge
quickly for other cities - this is yet to be explored. But in making the model less data-
dependant, the model might more easily be used in transfer-learning. A drawback of
this pricing strategy is that it is set from a neural network, which has an impact on the
complexity of understanding how exactly the prices are set. Furthermore, the model
sets the prices without knowing what the other competitor does. We argue that this
is something that can be approximated quite eﬀiciently in the real world, since compa-
nies often has insights into their competitors strategies, even though they do not know
the prices of the competitors in real time. This is a feature not explored in this thesis.
In section 5.5 the sensitivity of the model in relation to varying fleet sizes was
analysed.
In concordance with what one might expect in the real world, we saw
a increase in price when the fleet size decreased, and conversely an increase when
the fleet size grew in size. This is what is to be expected in a real world market
as discussed in section 5.2. An interesting insight gained from this chapter was the
absence of linear dependence between fleet size and price in the multi-agent case. We
argue that the complexity of the setup plays a key part in the breakdown of the
linear dependence in the multi-agent case. As the complexity increases the price in
regards to the environment is not the only important aspect of the dynamic pricing
element. The relationship of the prices between the agents is likewise of great impor-
tance. Therefore, we argue that it is not unexpected that the linearity does not hold
in the multi-agent setup. The conclusion is not as straight forward, of course. We
must discuss some limitations of our model setup and also explain why the results
are promising.
When simulating a real world scenario, one can rarely expect to represent the real
world in a one-to-one manner. We argue, that even with certain limitations, we have
created an accurate environment in which to test our implementations. One limita-
tion is that our environment is in a stable state. By this we are not referring to the
stochasticity of the environment when agents are interacting with the environment,
but the environments flexibility in relation to real world events. One such is example
are special events. With our current setup all of our models would be very sensitive to
a sudden increase in traﬀic due to an event such as a concert or a sports match. The
model uses the travel time to set a price, so given an accurate travel time prediction
in times of heavy traﬀic, the model might still perform well.
While the environment is configured such that it can take N agents we have only
run experiments with two agents. This is first and foremost due to the scope of the
thesis and secondly due to the complexity and theoretical increase in computational
times for such experiments. The real world is very complex, and often much more
so than one gives it credit for, and therefore detailed experiments with varying fleet
sizes and agents are something to strive for in the future. We argue, that the whole
setup is very configurable in this sense, meaning that such experiments would be
==PAGE:81==
66
6 Discussion
manageable without altering the setup substantially. We therefore leave this up to
interested readers who might have the computational powers and time to run such
experiments.
When looking at visualisations of progress through the training phase such as as
depicted in chapter 5, it is only natural to think ”Those models have not reached
convergence yet and needs to train for longer”. That is, at least to some extent, true.
Some models show signs of having trained for too few episodes. On the other hand it
is important to remember that if we are to have fair comparisons between the differ-
ent models, we cannot train some models longer than others. Furthermore, the object
of this thesis was never to create the best possible model, but to provide a solid and
sound proof of concept. Five thousand episodes was chosen since the baseline models
seemed to have reached convergence at this point. This amount of episodes was also
partly chosen for the sake of computing time, as SAC models with price and 5000
episodes of training roughly took 8 hours to finish training.
Evaluating the different experiments and models fairly is naturally an important
part if we are argue that one model is better than the other. Therefore we evaluate
all models over 10 episodes, as explained in section 5.1, calculating average statistics
as well as standard deviations. This ensures that the results we report are believable
and can be trusted. Of course we could always have tested models over more episodes,
but it was concluded that 10 was enough to give a fair estimate on how the models
performed. As mentioned earlier some of the models are more sensitive to a starting
guess than others. To eliminate any remaining doubts about model performance it is
always possible to train models multiple times with different seeds and then taking
the overall evaluation average across each trained model. However, due to the com-
pute time mentioned earlier, this was not feasible for every model.
One of the key components of our thesis is the definition of the environment. This
is key as it provides the foundation for everything that the algorithms experience dur-
ing training, and therefore directly impacts the results and findings we achieve. What
we seek to discuss in this section is whether or not the environment described in 3.2
is a good representation of the real world.
However, lets first highlight why real
world resemblance is a feature that we desire in the first place. The major reason for
pursuing realism is due to the fact that by constructing an environment which is as
close as possible to the real world. We hope to ensure that the solutions and methods
explored in this thesis will find use - or at the very least, lay ground to use in the real
world. However, we have not obtained an environment which translates one to one
with the real world. Lets first explore the concept of cancellation. First of all why
even introduce this term? As our work builds directly upon Schmidt et al. (2023)
and Gammelli et al. (2021), which do not contain a cancellation term, this begs the
question: why is it important in our setup? It has great importance in the environ-
ment when the agents seeks to set optimal prices. If we do not include a cancellation
term, the prices would simply rise without any environment-specified upper bound,
and thus all ties to reality with regards to price is cut. Therefore, some notion of lim-
==PAGE:82==
6 Discussion
67
itation of the prices and customer behaviour is needed, but is the form that we have
chosen the right one? In this thesis, cancellation is modelled by two variables and a
single function with two parameters. As described in 3.2.2 we utilise Hills equation
and the introduction of VOT and VOR to model this relationship. This has many
advantages but also poses some serious drawbacks.
The advantages, as described in 3.2.2, are of a purely technical nature.
The
described function starts in (0,0) giving a zero cost trip a zero percent probability
of cancellation. The function has the right support and furthermore it has a shape
which we believe models cancellation pretty well, namely a shape closely resembling
a sigmoid function. When prices are low, cancellation probability is likewise low. As
is the slope, meaning that changes in price does not matter as long as prices are
small. Similarly high prices also have a shallow slope, meaning that if a trip is too
expensive it does not matter much for the probability if it is $10 or $50 too expensive.
The change happens near the midpoint where a large slope is introduced, here it
becomes evident that the value of time is a sort of breaking point. We have opted
for this stochastic approach due to several factors. First of all we assume the same
VOT for the entire population. This is of course not true in the real world, however
over a population just estimating a single number is probably realistic in regards to
the optimal policy. Unless of course the model gains customer specific information.
Second of all it is done to prevent the actors from learning a hard cutoff. We suspect
that if we had introduced a deterministic cancellation policy that the actors would
have been able to learn, and exploit this policy. We hoped to avoid this by sampling,
thus introducing stochasticity, which appears to have a positive effect.
However the approach of using the Hill equation poses some challenges. First of
all, the specific slopes and shape of the Hill equation is controlled by the parameter α.
This is a hyper-parameter which we have not tested thoroughly. Therefore, how well
this shape actually represents reality is an interesting point of research. Furthermore,
when an α is chosen a k-parameter remains, as seen in equation 3.9. This controls the
midpoint of the curve, the point at which the probability of cancellation is roughly
50%, how do we choose this point? In chapter 4 we argue that the correct way to
choose this parameter is by applying the cancellation method to the existing data with
different parameters of k. We end up by choosing a k based on the max-function,
which is k = 3.33, which translates to a cancellation rate in the original data of
around 6%. One could argue that none of the trips in the original data should be
cancelled as they all happened, giving room for an even more lenient cancellation
policy. However, we argue that a small amount of cancellation in the original data is
realistic due the data simply having some outliers.
Next we will discuss the realism of the distribution flow. Our distribution flow is
quite simple after the step of cancellation, here we distribute cars using the Dirichlet
distribution from equation 3.13. This ensures that all passengers are distributed pro-
portionally to the price of the trip, with lower cost trips being more probable. This
is seen in effect by comparing figure 5.19 and 5.21. Where the agent which follows
a policy that sets lower prices, clearly serves more demand than the more expensive
==PAGE:83==
68
6 Discussion
agent. This relationship that the cheaper rides get more demand is in line with what
we would expect in the real world.
However the use of the Dirichlet distribution
was chosen as much for convenience as for realism, therefore the specific distribution
choice might not be totally in line with the real world.
Another important aspect of modelling with respect to real-world similarity is the
time frame in which we operate in. When simulating an environment, it cannot be
expected that a model can accurately simulate every intricate detail of interactions. In
other words, we cannot simulate every second of an event. Therefore, we introduce a
time frame which we argue has a suitable trade-off between modelling complexity and
real-world similarity. The time frame chosen for this thesis is 20 time steps for each
episode. As each episode is an hour long this translates to time-steps of 3 minutes.
We argue for this time frame based on multiple factors. First and foremost a lower
time frame would increase training time significantly. On the other hand the time
frame is short enough that the model has an opportunity to react to changes in the
environment throughout the training period. In a real-life scenario more frequent time
steps may be beneficial, both due to changing states in the underlying system, but
mainly because a time step of 3 minutes could increase waiting times for customers
in a high demand system.
Future work
Throughout this thesis we have thoroughly covered our findings. When experiment-
ing with various settings and models, many question arises.
Naturally, there are
bound to be limitations in terms of the scope of the thesis. Therefore, we dedicate
this section to mentioning the natural next steps in this line of work.
A logical next step for testing the capabilities of the models would be to allow for
perfect information. What we mean by that is, that it would be interesting to see what
happens when the agents knows the actions of the other agent from the previous time
step. This is also rather likely to happen in the real world, since usually competitors
knows what each other have done previously, although not with perfect information.
In this setup it would be interesting to see if the agents start to actively combat each
other and set prices just a little lower than the other, in order to gain a bit more
demand. Furthermore, it would be fascinating to see if the agents change behaviour
in terms of distribution of vehicles based on the information from the other agent.
Another result might be that the agents actively start working together to achieve
a higher aggregate reward. It is uncertain whether this would happen simply from
sharing information. However, with a few tweaks to the environment to incentivize
cooperation this is also an intriguing expansion of this work. This cooperative nature
is perhaps not as prevalent in the real world, but with good enough results for all
agents it could be more desired.
==PAGE:84==
6 Discussion
69
Another very natural extension is to expand the analysis of this thesis to N > 2
agents. The reason being that usually there are not just two companies competing
for the same demand, but many more. This extension would better approximate the
real world than two agents. It is however worth mentioning that from the implemen-
tation of SAC, the computational time and overall randomness in the environment is
proportional to the number of agents. Therefore, the algorithm would probably have
to train for a lot longer than we did in this thesis. Otherwise, something would have
to be done about the induced randomness by the extra agents. This could possibly
be alleviated by training the agents sequentially such as in section 5.5.5, even if this
is shown to lead to lower overall rewards.
A key assumption in our regression pricing model is the assumption that travel
time is the only predictor necessary for the modelling of price. A natural extension
of the OLS approach would be to model price such that the OLS is excluded entirely.
We propose that further work could be done in decoupling price from the linear as-
sumptions presented in this thesis.
As mentioned many times throughout this thesis, we expand on the works of
Gammelli et al. (2021) and Schmidt et al. (2023). As such, Schmidt et al. (2023)
takes the work of Gammelli et al. (2021) and expands it to offline learning. This is
naturally also a way to expand upon the work done in this thesis.
Another extension that we would recommend is to allow for group rides. This is a
rather simple extension in terms of complexity, as there probably will not be a need
to change the architecture of the models. It would however be a closer resemblance to
reality as this is a rather standard feature in this day and age. It would be interesting
to see what happens with the system dynamics when two people suddenly can accept
a ride for the price of one. If the overall reward would decline, if prices would increase
or something else all together.
Last but not least we would recommend to make the extension of making the
model almost data independent. That being said one would always need to know the
specific demand distribution of a given city. Incorporating a travel time estimation
similar to those used in contemporary applications like Uber or Lyft would be a fasci-
nating addition. Employing a real-time calculation through an API could potentially
enhance the models independence from historical data and increase its adaptability.
Exploring this aspect further would be interesting in future research. This is not
something that we have tested however, and is thus an uncertainty that we have not
yet handled. One major benefit of this would be that since the pricing element is only
dependent on travel time. The model would be completely flexible in regards to new
OD combinations, since a travel time could be set with the API and a price could be
calculated from this. A model of this kind would only have to be retrained on newly
gathered data, in the case when a new region appears, since the redistribution of the
agent would need to learn this new location. However, with the API this could be a
trivial task.
==PAGE:85==
70
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, we have presented theoretical concepts of RL with emphasis on Actor-
Critic algorithms. We introduce results from the A2C and SAC algorithms in an
AMoD environment with one agent and expand this to a multi-agent setup, where
experiments have been run for two agents. We show how it is an advantage to exploit
the off-policy sampling eﬀiciency of SAC compared to A2C and vastly improve train-
ing time in this manner. Furthermore, we show that our final model outperforms the
baseline and all other models introduced with a large margin. This proves that the
model is able to find a better pricing strategy than the original data under certain
assumptions of the analysed market. We cover various datasets that are relevant for
this implementation of models and choose San Francisco as an optimal dataset to test
our implementations on. In this way, we have shown that it is possible to expand a
one-agent setup to a multi-agent setup while avoiding that the environment becomes
too non-stationary utilising concepts from particularly the SAC algorithm.
We have successfully adopted an MDP setup to our AMoD environment, setting
up a unique architecture that allows us to conduct experiments to simulate an ad-
vanced problem setting successfully. We argue that MDPs are ideal in this setup
due to their robust mathematical framework that allows us to model decision-making
in a vastly stochastic environment. Through conducting a thorough search of pre-
vious literature and state-of-the-art methods in RL we have been able to create an
environment that, given certain assumptions, can train an algorithm to redistribute
autonomous taxis while setting a trip-specific price.
We introduce the reader to the realm of Actor-Critic algorithms and argue, that
these are suitable for a problem setting such as this. Furthermore, in joining relevant
methods from RL with GNNs we were able to apply our own implementation of a
dynamic price to a complex system.
We argue that for the multi-agent AMoD environment, the SAC algorithm is
favourable compared to the A2C algorithm due to several reasons. First, SAC is a
sample eﬀicient algorithm as it is an off-policy algorithm that allows for use of previ-
ous observed states. This allows for faster training and convergence, thus allowing for
more experiments and less time spent waiting for insights. Secondly, SAC introduces
an entropy term which allows for more exploration in an environment that becomes
increasingly non-stationary with the addition of more agents. We show that SAC
performs similarly compared with A2C in our setup, albeit with faster convergence,
and performs admirably in the most complex model we introduce. However, this
==PAGE:87==
72
7 Conclusion
experiment is diﬀicult to compare against other state-of-the-art models due to it not
having been made before.
We show that utilising GNNs is an eﬀicient way to model a modern city and use
them as a stepping stone in the whole setup. Transportation networks have an inher-
ent graph-based layout and is thus optimal in needing to capture spatial patterns such
as the rebalancing of vehicles and picking-up of customers. As we argue in section 6
it also allows for scalability and transferability allowing us, at least in theory, to take
our setup and apply it to any city if structured as a graph.
Throughout this thesis, we have exclusively shown results of models trained on
data from San Francisco. As documented in section 4, we initially had four different
data sets to choose from. All sets of data included the same attributes but vastly
different characteristics. Explained in section 4, the data from San Francisco was se-
lected for its preferable characteristics within especially price distribution and travel
time distribution. Furthermore, the data showed complexity in its demand distribu-
tion without being almost uniformly distributed such as Shenzhen. Last but not least
the data set had much more attractive computational requirements in order to reach
convergence for the models, compared with the other datasets. For these reasons
data from San Francisco was chosen as the data to move forward with. It should be
mentioned that the overall model performance and ability to converge should not be
affected by the choice of data. This is merely a choice of limiting training times while
having data that is easy to validate.
The starting point of our thesis was to reproduce the online RL results of Schmidt
et al. (2023). This proved to be a success as is seen in section 5.3. Building on this
work we proved that the setup, which is explored in Schmidt et al. (2023), provided
a good basis for doing multi-agent RL. We saw that reward in general fell when ex-
panding to the multi-agent setup as can be seen from section 5.2. The next goal of
our thesis was to expand our model to give a price estimate for the actors. In prepa-
ration for this we included cancellation as described in section 3.2.2. The inclusion of
cancellation enables the customers in the system to decline trips based on the price
per minute of a trip. This cancellation process proved to work as intended. As is
evident from section 5.3, the introduction of cancellation lowered reward significantly
as expected. This provided a basis for exploring pricing models. The first extension
of the prices was the price difference model as described in section 3.7.1. This model
worked - however, it had shortcomings. Aside from lacklustre reward, it relied heavily
on pre-existing pricing data, which we believe to be sub-optimal if this approach was
to be used in the real world. The pricing strategy was therefore expanded to model
the parameter of an OLS-regression instead, as described in section 3.7.2. This ap-
proach proved to be extremely fruitful on many parameters, first of all it has close to
zero dependency on pre-existing data, and secondly it showed great promise in terms
of reward. When analysing the market dynamics of this pricing implementation we
saw that they behaved as expected, when supply in the system dropped the model
==PAGE:88==
7 Conclusion
73
estimated higher prices and conversely higher supply yielded lower prices. Further-
more, we saw that monopolistic markets yielded not only greater reward due to more
information about the system, but also due to higher prices. This once again shows
that monopolies does not favour the customer. Last but not least we saw that the
transition from a monopolistic market to a competitive one favoured the new agent
as the pre-trained agent had a pricing strategy which was too sticky to accommodate
the new environment, and therefore setting prices to high. We did however see a
change during training and that the pre-trained agent lowered the prices which were
optimised in the monopolistic setting. Further supporting that competitive markets
favour the customer. All in all we have showed that the approach suggested by this
thesis provides a good basis for modelling multi-agent AMoD systems, and that the
pricing strategy for which we opted proves to follow expected market trends under
certain conditions.
This thesis provides a large step forward for modelling the AMoD problem. As
thoroughly researched and documented in chapter 2 the AMoD problem is heavily
researched in recent years. Almost all major breakthroughs have happened in the
previous 8 years. This thesis focuses its efforts towards expanding the centralised
single-agent setup from Gammelli et al. (2021), Gammelli et al. (2022) and Schmidt
et al. (2023), to a centralised multi-agent setup along with a dynamic pricing element.
The multi-agent setup is not anything new in RL. To the best of our knowledge this
is the first work which incorporates the pricing element directly into the GCN of the
agent in a multi-agent SAC setup, resulting in a dual output from this GCN. Thereby,
exploring new possibilities in the AMoD setting. Simultaneously, the results of this
thesis shows that this pricing element not only has preferable convergence perfor-
mance but also result in much more profitable policies.
These additions contribute to the ongoing development in AMoD modelling. Con-
sequently, there are numerous opportunities for future work, as outlined in our rec-
ommendations in section 6. The dynamic pricing element opens up a whole new set
of possibilities.
The field of Autonomous Mobility on Demand experiences massive research in
these years. Therefore, so does the machine learning and especially the reinforcement
learning algorithms supporting and advancing this research. This thesis presents a
complex multi-agent SAC model with a dynamic pricing element, which smoothly
incorporates the multi-agent setup and outperforms previous models introduced in
this thesis. The objective of this thesis was never to chase best performances, but to
expand the knowledge and possibilities within the AMoD modelling field. As such, we
will leave the reader with a complex multi-agent SAC model with a dynamic pricing
element, along with possibilities for improvements and expansions.
==PAGE:89==
74
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
J. P. Andreasen, F. M. Sørensen, and A. S. Tang. Multi Agent Reinforcement Learn-
ing Methods, Aug. 2023. URL https://github.com/Jungar111/reinforcement_
learning_methods_in_multi_agent_fleet_management.
A. G. Barto, R. S. Sutton, and C. W. Anderson. Neuronlike adaptive elements that
can solve diﬀicult learning control problems. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, SMC-13(5):834–846, 1983. doi: 10.1109/TSMC.1983.6313077.
T. Enders, J. Harrison, M. Pavone, and M. Schiffer. Hybrid multi-agent deep rein-
forcement learning for autonomous mobility on demand systems.
In N. Matni,
M. Morari, and G. J. Pappas, editors, Proceedings of The 5th Annual Learn-
ing for Dynamics and Control Conference, volume 211 of Proceedings of Ma-
chine Learning Research, pages 1284–1296. PMLR, 15–16 Jun 2023. URL https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v211/enders23a.html.
B. Eysenbach and S. Levine. Maximum entropy rl (provably) solves some robust rl
problems, 2022.
D. Gammelli, K. Yang, J. Harrison, F. Rodrigues, F. C. Pereira, and M. Pavone.
Graph neural network reinforcement learning for autonomous mobility-on-demand
systems, 2021.
D. Gammelli, K. Yang, J. Harrison, F. Rodrigues, F. C. Pereira, and M. Pavone.
Graph meta-reinforcement learning for transferable autonomous mobility-on-
demand, 2022.
R. Gesztelyi, J. Zsuga, B. Varga, B. Juhasz, and A. Tosaki. The hill equation and
the origin of quantitative pharmacology. Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 66,
07 2012. doi: 10.1007/s00407-012-0098-5.
I. Grondman, L. Busoniu, G. A. D. Lopes, and R. Babuska. A survey of actor-critic
reinforcement learning: Standard and natural policy gradients. IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), 42(6):
1291–1307, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TSMCC.2012.2218595.
T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maxi-
mum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor, 2018.
W. L. Hamilton.
Graph representation learning.
Synthesis Lectures on Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning, 14(3):1–159, 2020.
==PAGE:91==
76
Bibliography
IBM.
User’s manual for cplex.
https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/icos/20.1.0?
topic=cplex-users-manual, 25/11/2021. Accessed: 12/09/2023.
T. Investopedia.
The origins of the law of supply and demand.
https:
//www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/030415/who-discovered-law-supply-
and-demand.asp, 27/09/2023. Accessed: 19/01/2024.
T. N. Kipf and M. Welling.
Semi-supervised classification with graph convolu-
tional networks. CoRR, abs/1609.02907, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.
02907.
K. Lin, R. Zhao, Z. Xu, and J. Zhou. Eﬀicient collaborative multi-agent deep rein-
forcement learning for large-scale fleet management, 2019.
S. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Fu, and X. Di.
Smart-eflo: An integrated sumo-
gym framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning in electric fleet management
problem. In 2022 IEEE 25th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), pages 3026–3031, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ITSC55140.2022.9922047.
R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments.
CoRR, abs/1706.02275,
2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.02275.
Y. Lu, Y. Liang, Z. Ding, Q. Wu, T. Ding, and W.-J. Lee. Deep reinforcement learning-
based charging pricing for autonomous mobility-on-demand system. IEEE Trans-
actions on Smart Grid, 13(2):1412–1426, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2021.3131804.
C. Mao, Y. Liu, and Z.-J. M. Shen. Dispatch of autonomous vehicles for taxi services:
A deep reinforcement learning approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 115:102626, 2020. ISSN 0968-090X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trc.2020.102626. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0968090X19312227.
V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. P. Lillicrap, T. Harley, D. Silver, and
K. Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning, 2016.
K. Mohammed Almatar.
Traﬀic congestion patterns in the urban road network:
(dammam metropolitan area).
Ain Shams Engineering Journal, 14(3):101886,
2023.
ISSN 2090-4479.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2022.101886.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2090447922001976.
J. N. Tsitsiklis., M. I. of Technology. Dept. of Electrical Engineering, M. I. of Tech-
nology. Dept. of Electrical Engineering, and V. Konda.
Actor-critic algorithms,
2002.
U. Nations. World urbanization prospects : the 2018 revision. Department of Eco-
nomic and Social Affairs, Population Division, pages xix, 103 p. :, 2019. URL
http://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3833745. Includes bibliographical ref-
erences (p. 101-103).
==PAGE:92==
Bibliography
77
G. Paczolay and I. Harmati. A new advantage actor-critic algorithm for multi-agent
environments. In 2020 23rd International Symposium on Measurement and Control
in Robotics (ISMCR), pages 1–6, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ISMCR51255.2020.9263738.
M. L. Puterman. Markov decision processes. Handbooks in operations research and
management science, 2:331–434, 1990.
Z. T. Qin, H. Zhu, and J. Ye. Reinforcement learning for ridesharing: An extended
survey. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 144:103852, 2022.
ISSN 0968-090X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2022.103852. URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968090X22002716.
C. Schmidt, D. Gammelli, F. C. Pereira, and F. Rodrigues.
Learning to control
autonomous fleets from observation via offline reinforcement learning, 2023.
R. Shields. Cultural topology: The seven bridges of königsburg, 1736. Theory, Culture
& Society, 29(4-5):43–57, 2012.
doi: 10.1177/0263276412451161.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0263276412451161.
R. Sutton.
Learning to predict by the method of temporal differences.
Machine
Learning, 3:9–44, 08 1988. doi: 10.1007/BF00115009.
R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT
Press, second edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-
2nd.html.
B. Turan, R. Pedarsani, and M. Alizadeh. Dynamic pricing and fleet management for
electric autonomous mobility on demand systems. Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies, 121:102829, 2020. ISSN 0968-090X. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.trc.2020.102829. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0968090X20307336.
S. Wang and s. Chang. Autonomous bus fleet control using multiagent reinforcement
learning. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 2021:1–14, 07 2021. doi: 10.1155/
2021/6654254.
S. Wollenstein-Betech, I. C. Paschalidis, and C. G. Cassandras. Joint pricing and
rebalancing of autonomous mobility-on-demand systems. In 2020 59th IEEE Con-
ference on Decision and Control (CDC), pages 2573–2578, 2020. doi: 10.1109/
CDC42340.2020.9304517.
A. Wong, T. Bäck, A. V. Kononova, and A. Plaat.
Multiagent deep reinforce-
ment learning: Challenges and directions towards human-like approaches. CoRR,
abs/2106.15691, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.15691.
J. Ye, J. Zhao, K. Ye, and C. Xu. How to build a graph-based deep learning architec-
ture in traﬀic domain: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 23(5):3904–3924, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TITS.2020.3043250.
==PAGE:93==
78
Bibliography
K. Zhang, Z. Yang, and T. Basar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
overview of theories and algorithms. CoRR, abs/1911.10635, 2019. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1911.10635.
K. Zhang, T. SUN, Y. Tao, S. Genc, S. Mallya, and T. Basar.
Robust multi-
agent reinforcement learning with model uncertainty. In H. Larochelle, M. Ran-
zato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 10571–10583. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/
774412967f19ea61d448977ad9749078-Paper.pdf.
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX A
Appendices for models
A.1
Model performance
Models
Reward
Episodes
A2C without cancellation
14231 ± 373
48000
SAC without cancellation
14184 ± 298
5000
A2C with cancellation
11687 ± 347
48000
SAC with cancellation
12483 ± 406
5000
OD-mean Price Strategy
12158 ± 373
5000
Price Difference Strategy
12920 ± 440
5000
Price Regression Strategy
17445 ± 319
5000
One Actor 100 Cars
10249 ± 579
5000
One Actor 187 Cars
14062 ± 651
5000
One Actor 200 Cars
14730 ± 563
5000
One Actor 300 Cars
15627 ± 579
5000
One Actor 374 Cars
18926 ± 866
5000
One Actor 400 Cars
17737 ± 660
5000
Two Actor 100 Cars
9408 ± 536
5000
Two Actor 187 Cars
10756 ± 483
5000
Two Actor 200 Cars
13691 ± 371
5000
Two Actor 300 Cars
16621 ± 415
5000
Two Actor 374 Cars
17445 ± 319
5000
Two Actor 400 Cars
15014 ± 511
5000
One Pretrained one New Actor
16159 ± 696
Actor 1: 10000 - Actor 2: 5000
Table A.1: Performance parameters of all models and the amount of episodes they
have been trained on.
==PAGE:95==
80
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
