==PAGE:1==
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music
Ranking Dynamics
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Marta Aleksandra Niewiadomska
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Image generated by DALL∙E
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering,
MSc Eng. The project period was from 28th August 2023 to 28th January 2024 and the
thesis corresponds to 30 ECTS. The supervisors were Laura Alessandretti, Jonas Lybker
Juul and Sune Lehmann Jørgensen.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Marta Aleksandra Niewiadomska ­ s213040
Signature
Date
ii
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
28.01.2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Pop music is a ubiquitous cultural phenomenon. This thesis presents an in­depth analysis
of the evolving dynamics in global pop music rankings, with a focus on understanding how
these trends travel around the world, and transcend geographical and cultural boundaries.
Using a comprehensive dataset compiled from the top hits featured on top40-chart.com
over two decades, this study conducts an extensive comparative analysis of ranking dy­
namics in diverse national contexts.
The preliminary analysis uncovers distinct behaviors among countries. A significant ob­
servation is the tendency to categorize countries into two primary groups: one mainly
comprising Western nations, and the other consisting of non­Western countries.
The investigation of how popularity spreads between countries, using symbolic transfer
entropy, indicates a general trend of pop music popularity flowing from Western nations
such as the USA and Canada to countries outside Europe, like India and Taiwan.
Further investigation suggests that the USA could be categorized as a potential trendsetter
in the popularity of pop songs, among countries in the study.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to Laura Alessandretti and Jonas Lybker
Juul for the opportunity of working with them on this thesis. Their invaluable guidance,
consistent support, and encouragement over the past five months have played a crucial
role in shaping the success of my research.
I especially appreciate the weekly meetings, clarifications, and constructive criticism. I
extend my thanks to both of you for the time dedicated to our meetings, the additional
emails, and the insightful feedback. Your many interesting questions have sparked my
curiosity and led to numerous fascinating discoveries.
A special acknowledgment goes to Tomasz, as well as my friends and family, for the warm
words of encouragement and unwavering support throughout the last five months.
iv
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature overview
3
2.1
Globalization of creative industries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Music industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Ranking dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Information diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Entropy transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Leader identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Dataset
9
4
Theoretical introduction
13
4.1
Statistical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Entropy transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Methodology
23
5.1
Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Scraping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3
Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Results
29
6.1
How do rankings change? Analysis of patterns in chart ranking . . . . . . . 29
6.2
How pop songs diffuse between countries? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.3
Who is the trendsetter?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Discussion
59
7.1
Patterns in song dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.2
Popularity of songs starts in the Western countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.3
USA as a trendsetter country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.4
Limitations of the study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7.5
Future directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
8
Conclusion
63
Bibliography
65
A Appendix
71
A.1 Pattern analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.2 Trendsetter analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In the summer of 2012, PSY’s (Park Jae­Sang) music video ”Gangnam Style” went viral,
becoming the most viewed video on YouTube at the time, today it has 5 billion views on
YouTube [1] [2]. In 2017, ”Despacito” by Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee, especially its
remix featuring Justin Bieber, gained global recognition. It topped the Billboard Hot 100
in the U.S. and several European charts. Bello and Garcia observed a trend towards
greater diversity in music consumption since 2017, as seen in the Spotify and iTunes
charts across 39 countries [3]. This suggests a more diverse global music landscape,
influenced by the rise of streaming platforms, which facilitate easier global recognition.
The phenomenon of ”Gangnam Style” prompted research into the diffusion of popularity
across countries, with particular focus on K­pop. Studies have explored K­pop’s global
appeal, YouTube’s role in its popularity, and its cultural influence.
Lech’s study [4], conducted in the previous semester as a master thesis, analyzed the
evolving nature of hit creation in the digital era, using the Billboard Hot 100 charts. She
examined song’s lifetime, chart movements, and the emergence of new artists versus
established hitmakers [4]. She used many statistical methods, alongside the specified
methods for analyzing chart dynamics.
However, much of the existing research is limited to specific countries or regions, mainly
the U.S. or Europe. This leaves a gap in understanding the global influence of music
charts. Moreover, the effect of digital streaming platforms like Spotify, Apple Music, and
YouTube on traditional chart dynamics remains relatively unexplored. This includes the
integration of streaming data into chart calculations and its impact on song popularity.
My research aims to bridge these gaps by building upon Lech’s work and analyzing a
more extensive dataset covering more countries. The focus is on the dynamics of pop
music chart rankings in various countries, identifying patterns and studying the diffusion
of popularity between nations. Utilizing data from top40-chart.com, I investigated trends
within individual countries and correlations in popularity trends between them. By applying
statistical methods and machine learning algorithms, such as symbolic transfer entropy,
I aim to quantify the diffusion of popularity and identify potential trendsetters among the
countries studied. The subject of this thesis is closely related to the work of Lech [4],
therefore I will refer extensively to her work.
This research could benefit artists in advancing their careers by identifying potential collab­
orations with artists from influential countries. For record companies, it suggests market
strategies for wider exposure. Additionally, trends in music charts can reflect economic
conditions, linking entertainment consumption to economic shifts. Therefore, chart be­
haviors can be indicative of changes in a country’s or the global economy.
1.1
Research questions
I have identified three key research questions that I aim to address in my thesis. These
questions are as follows:
• What are the dynamics of ranking changes?
• How do popular songs disseminate across various countries?
• Who plays the role of the trendsetter?
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Thesis structure
The thesis is structured as follows:
1. Introduction This section introduces the problem and outlines the project’s scope.
2. Literature overview Here, I delve into the existing research and literature relevant
to the thesis, with a particular focus on the effects of globalization on the music
market and recent studies in the field of music.
3. Dataset This part describes the dataset that has been compiled.
4. Theoretical introduction This chapter defines all the key concepts used in the
analysis, including the statistical methods and metrics used to measure entropy
transfer.
5. Methodology An overview of the analytical tools employed, such as the Python
environment, along with methods for scraping and preprocessing data.
6. Results A detailed examination of the findings from the exploratory analysis, in­
cluding patterns in chart rankings, the spread of popularity, and the identification of
trendsetters.
7. Discussion This section concludes the findings and discusses their implications,
followed by suggestions for future research that could build upon this study.
8. Conclusion This section quickly summarized the findings of this thesis.
9. Appendicies Contains additional diagrams and references that support the main
thesis where relevant.
2
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature overview
The creative industry has been extensively researched in recent years, with a focus on
identifying the key factors that influence it. Vast part of the research focuses on the impact
of globalization [5], and new technologies [6] on the production process and distribution
in the field of creative industries.
In this chapter, I will present some of the most significant research relevant to my project.
I intend to explore the impact of globalization on creative industries, analyze the dynamics
of ranking, and discuss work related to entropy measures
2.1
Globalization of creative industries
After the Second World War, many countries saw a significant recovery in their economies.
Furthermore, various international efforts aimed at safeguarding the global economy were
initiated, concurrently strengthening the connections among nations. This was achieved
through the establishment of several free trade agreements among the world’s major trad­
ing countries. Subsequently, these actions expanded to include developing countries,
marking the beginning of an era of extensive globalization. This period had a profound
impact, influencing not just the economic and political aspects but also extended its impact
to the artistic sphere [7].
Globalization has significantly influenced various domains, including music, film, and liter­
ature industries [5], [8], [9], [10]. Recent years have shown even stronger exchanges be­
tween countries due to the invention of the internet, followed by the emergence of stream­
ing platforms such as Youtube and Spotify. This worldwide interconection broke down the
barriers imposed by geographical distances, leading to significant cultural exchanges.
This phenomenon has also facilitated the spread of diverse art forms from different corners
of the globe. In literature, for instance, this trend has given rise to the concept of ”World
Literature”. This term is used to refer to the total of the world’s national literature and the
circulation of works into the wider world beyond their country of origin [11].
Additionally, the music industry has been deeply affected by globalization. Studies by
Achterberg et al. [12] indicate that up until the late 1980s, there was a noticeable de­
crease in the popularity of domestic music across many European nations. The majority
of the charts were dominated by songs in English. Further studies [13] build upon these
observations, concluding that artists performing in languages besides English typically
receive less marketing support and media coverage, resulting in limited international suc­
cess.
The film industry is another sector significantly impacted by globalization. Research on
theatrical films [14] indicates that a country’s imports of foreign films correlate with the
scale and prosperity of its film industry, as measured by audience size and general wealth.
This phenomenon results in the considerable presence of American films in many coun­
tries, owing to the United States’ position as one of the largest movie markets globally.
Furthermore, the level of film importation is connected to the economic flow between na­
tions, suggesting that economic well­being can increase the demand for international film
content. Additionally, linguistic connections between countries also play a significant role
in this dynamic [14].
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
3
==PAGE:12==
The study on globalization in journalism [15] reveals a significant shift towards interna­
tional content. In 2005, there was a 50% increase in international coverage in French,
Dutch, and German newspapers compared to 1955. European newspapers showed a
growing interest in foreign culture, films, and actors. However, this trend was not mir­
rored in the New York Times, which consistently allocated only one­fourth of its content
to foreign actors [15].
In conclusion, globalization is evident across different sectors of the creative industries.
The rise of the internet and the expansion of the computer industry have resulted in more
accessible and affordable distribution of global culture. The digital revolution has led to a
hybridization of cultures, presenting challenges in preserving national identities [16]. Most
of the studies focus on investigating impact of globalization in Western countries, leaving
a research gap for studies of Western and Asia, or African countries.
2.2
Music industry
In the context of the music industry, I noticed that the research extends beyond the impact
of globalization, encompassing a variety of other compelling factors that influence this
sector. Researchers investigate the impact of one artist on another [17], the relationships
between different music genres [18], and the various factors that affect music charts and
the industry as a whole.
The comparison between the rise in popularity of various trends during the analog era
and the way popularity spreads in the internet era presents a fascinating case study.
Current research [5] indicates a notable shift in pop music charts towards a more global
orientation since the 1960s. Increasingly, these charts are dominated by Anglo­American
pop music. The music market is now predominantly centered around key regions like the
United States and the United Kingdom, serving as the primary sources from which songs
disseminate to other Western countries [5].
In the analysis of the European music market conducted by Buda and Jarynkowski [19],
an intriguing pattern is observed: a significant number of hit singles originate in the UK. He
also made another interesting discovery: the time lag between a single’s release and its
peak popularity has reduced, as a result of the influence of technological advancements.
The study also indicates that in both the analog (1966­1987) and internet (2004­2015)
eras, a song’s popularity is influenced by geographical proximity. They identify influential
countries such as Belgium, the Netherlands, and the UK, but their research is constrained
to Western Europe, lacking a broader dataset linking non­European regions.
Recently, an increasing number of Asian songs have climbed to the top of European music
charts. This rise in the popularity of K­pop within the music industry has triggered exten­
sive research into the comparative dynamics of music industries in Europe and Asia, and
the mechanisms behind the spread of popularity. Research indicates [20] that the inter­
net has bridged the cultural gap between different world regions. According to Kist and
Verbood [21], platforms like YouTube have played a significant role in internationalizing
national music markets. Currently, there’s a noticeable uptick in songs from the Asian
market featuring in global charts. Similarly, charts in Southeast Asia show a significant
presence of US songs, reflecting a mutual influence between these regions [21]. How­
ever, this research field has a gap, with studies primarily focusing on K­pop’s impact in
the UK, USA, Thailand [22], but not offering a comprehensive comparison with Korea and
the rest of the world.
An interesting study was conducted by Lech [4] where she examined Billboard Hot 100
charts, and based on the song’s lifetime, position shifts, and trajectories she determines if
4
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:13==
it has become harder to make a hit. She focuses on the analytical examination of charts,
she pinpoint the trends in the data, and suggests which changes indicate that it has gotten
harder to make a hit. Her work is one of the very few researches that focus on statistical
features of charts, examining the changes over time, still, her research is limited to the
American database and could benefit from expansion to other countries.
Percino et al. [23] explore music genres, constructing a similarity network based on in­
strumentation. This study, along with Ordanini et al.’s research [24], which examines the
impact of cross­genre artist collaborations on song popularity, underscores the intercon­
nected nature of music genres and the advantages of such collaborations.
To sum up, I presented various research studies in the music industry, emphasizing the
global shift in music trends and the impact of technology on music popularity. However, a
significant gap in the research is evident, particularly in the lack of extensive, multi­regional
studies that include non­Western countries. There is a notable absence of comprehensive
quantitative studies utilizing empirical data to compare music industry dynamics across
different global regions. Such research could help better understand the impact of glob­
alization on the music industry.
2.3
Ranking dynamics
My study focuses on understanding the changes and differences between dynamics of
different rankings. To achieve this, I conducted an investigation into the current state of
research on ranking dynamics.
Nowadays, anything can be ranked, there are rankings of the most developed countries,
top­tier schools, the most popular music songs and leading football teams. The purpose
behind these rankings is to simplify complex systems by collating data and presenting it
in an orderly fashion based on a selected criterion.
Various methods exist for examining the dynamics of rankings. In their work, Iñiguez et
al. [25] introduced several metrics, such as rank turnover, displacement probability, re­
placement probability, and rank­dependent probability. Additionally, Iñiguez introduced
the concept of the “open” and “closed” ranking. A “closed” ranking is characterized by a
static list of entities (e.g., the same songs) that shuffle positions over time without intro­
ducing new entries. On the other hand, an “open” ranking is more dynamic, allowing both
movement of the position within the ranks and the introduction of new entries.
Buda’s and Jarynkowski’s research [19] focus on analyzing the time delay between the
single premiere and the peak of popularity. They studied the peak dates and associated
time delays in song rankings, noting a trend of shorter delays over time, likely due to rapid
technological advancements.
Further contributions to this field include the work of Criado [26] who proposed a novel
measure using a competitiveness graph and Spearman’s footrule to assess differences
between rankings. This approach was later adapted by Garcia­Zorita et al. [27] for analyz­
ing football team rankings. Another interesting study [28] explored the lifespan and trajec­
tory of songs in charts, concluding that external factors like effective marketing strategies
or a strong fanbase can significantly influence a song’s early peak in popularity.
2.4
Information diffusion
To better understand global trends in pop charts, I decided to measure possible diffusion
of popularity. Below, I have examined some of the most important research in this area.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
5
==PAGE:14==
When talking about the diffusion of popularity or information, several measurement meth­
ods exist, tailored to the available data. In [29] Lee et al. examined the spread of music
popularity across cities using a listening frequency algorithm detailed in [30]. This algo­
rithm based on listening frequencies calculates the velocities and then finds the lagged
correlations between cities. This algorithm, initially employed by Nagy et al. [30] for
identifying leadership networks in bird flocks, calculates velocity and uncovers lagged
correlations between cities.
Social networks offer another fascinating perspective for studying information diffusion.
Maji et al. in [31] used social network analysis to uncover underlying structures within
networks, aiding in the identification of trending topics.
In 2000 Schreiber [32] introduced a more comprehensive approach to calculating entropy
between systems. This method considered the dynamics of information transfer, marking
an advancement over previous methodologies by enabling the determination of informa­
tion flow direction. This entropy measure is now widely used in various areas such as
neuroscience [33], microbiology [34], analysis of cryptocurrency market [35], among oth­
ers.
In the area of information transfer, Liang and Kleeman [36] made a particularly intriguing
discovery. They developed a theory of the rate of information transfer between specific
variables, grounded in fundamental dynamical equations that describe the evolution of
Shannon entropy [37].
In [37] Pires, Docquier and Vannitsem mention the Causal Sensitivity Method, another
method for measuring information flow. This method estimates system forcings and their
derivatives’ conditional expectations from data, using nonlinear differentiable regressions
for approximation.
2.5
Entropy transfer
In my research, I have decided to measure the transfer of popularity based on methods
that quantify the transfer of entropy. In this section, I shed light on the early research that
defined the transfer entropy measures as well as the current research.
James, Barnett, and Crutchfield highlight in the study [38] that over the past fifteen years,
the study of information diffusion has predominantly concentrated on the transfer entropy
measure.
C. E. Shannon was among the pioneers to define this concept, having done so in 1948
[39]. He introduced the notion of information entropy as part of a comprehensive commu­
nication system. This system defines methods for encoding, compressing, and transmit­
ting messages to prevent data loss during transmission. Shannon’s method of quantifying
information’s value was based on the surprise element in the message, setting a founda­
tion for many subsequent theories.
In [40] Gençaga builds upon Shannon’s theory to define the transfer entropy measure.
Bandt and Pompe in [41] propose the permutation entropy, a derivative measure offering
a simpler, more efficient approach to entropy calculation. This method is particularly useful
for complex systems data, such as those from the heart or brain.
In [42] Staniek and Lehnertz introduce another variant of Shannon’s theory, incorporating
a technique of symbolization. This method was later applied by Borge­Holthoefer et al. in
[43] to analyze and compare information diffusion across three different datasets. These
6
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:15==
datasets included tweets about a political protest in Brazil, tweets regarding the discovery
of the Higgs boson, and data about the Spanish 15M movement.
2.6
Leader identification
As part of my research, I aimed to identify possible trendsetters among countries. A
trendsetter is defined as a leader who initiates or significantly contributes to popularizing
new fashions or styles. In the following, I explore various methods, as documented in
existing literature, to identify a leader.
The notion of entropy transfer has been intriguingly applied to the problem of identifying
leaders, particularly in studies of animal behavior. Such studies reveal how leaders can
significantly influence entire groups, guiding them away from potential predator attacks
[44] or towards food sources [45].
Mwaffo, Butail and Porfiri touch upon the problem of classification of leader­follower rela­
tionship in their works [46] and [47]. Specifically, in [47] they explore leadership patterns
in zebrafish using net transfer entropy, establishing a link between leadership and cou­
pling strength. Additionally, in [46] they investigate animal interactions, proposing that a
leader is someone who exerts a strong unidirectional influence on other group members
while remaining relatively uninfluenced by them.
Similarly, Orange and Abaid conducted a study [48], focusing on leader­follower dynamics
among bats. They analyzed the flight paths of bats, calculating the entropy between these
trajectories to determine the role of spatial positioning in the coupling of bats.
The leader­follower dynamic is also a subject of interest in human groups, aimed at dis­
tinguishing leaders and followers [49]. Nakayama and collegues, in [50] emphasize that
the emergence of leaders and followers is a key to group performance. They analyze
the plasticity in leadership and followership in task cooperation, by measuring the entropy
of responses to partner movements. This approach underscores the broader application
of entropy transfer concepts in understanding social dynamics, extending beyond animal
behavior to include human interactions.
2.7
Summary
The process of globalization has led to the United States dominating other markets with
its films, books, and music. Thanks to the invention of YouTube and other streaming plat­
forms, artists can publish their work more easily, reducing the significant costs traditionally
associated with music recording. However, it has been observed that, despite these ad­
vancements, it is now more challenging for lesser­known artists to climb to the top of the
charts [4].
The scope of research in the music industry, while extensive, tends to be somewhat nar­
row. Much of the focus is on analytical aspects, connections between genres, and the
impacts of globalization. However, these studies often lack a comprehensive view, usu­
ally concentrating on specific regions or phenomena. This includes the influence of the
internet era on music popularity, the predominance of Anglo­American music, and the
increasing presence of Asian tracks in European charts.
This gap is particularly evident in the analysis of non­Western music trends and their global
impact, such as the detailed examination of K­pop’s influence beyond a few selected
countries, as the UK and US.
In summary, while the research on the music industry is indeed extensive and covers a
range of important aspects, it tends to lack a wider, more inclusive perspective. There
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
7
==PAGE:16==
is a clear need for more comprehensive quantitative studies that include empirical data,
especially to better understand the global dynamics of the music industry.
In my thesis, I will try to bridge the gap and build upon the research initiated by Lech [4].
My focus will be on examining the transfer of song popularity across 27 different countries.
Furthermore, I intend to use the results to identify which countries are trendsetters in pop
music. This study aims to deepen our understanding of global trends in the dynamics of
pop music rankings.
8
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:17==
3
Dataset
In this chapter, I describe the dataset specifically compiled for this research project. This
includes an overview of the dataset’s origin, alongside key statistics that characterize its
composition and relevance.
The chosen dataset for this study is sourced from the esteemed and widely recognized
website top40-charts.com [51]. This dataset encompasses historical rankings, featuring
the top 20 or 40 music positions across 27 different countries over a span of 22 years.
Updated weekly, predominantly on Saturdays for the majority of countries, the charts pro­
vide detailed information about the ranking position, artist, song title, and a corresponding
YouTube video link. The example chart is presented in the Figure 3.1.
Founded in 2001, top40-charts.com originated from a deep passion for music and the
emerging opportunities arising from the online music sector [51]. Over time, the website
has cultivated a significant user base and has become a leading worldwide resource for
music chart data. Nowadays, its renowned music charts are a key resource for insights
into music trends and advancements, catering to a diverse audience including music en­
thusiasts, artists, industry leaders, concert promoters, publishers, radio broadcasters, le­
gal professionals, retailers, and digital innovators.
The choice of top40-charts.com as the primary data source was caused by its exten­
sive popularity, the large and diverse dataset it offers, and its comprehensive historical
coverage, dating back to 1997. The data is published consistently, maintaining uniform
intervals between releases. The rankings are calculated using a custom­made algorithm,
which integrates various aspects of music fan engagement. These aspects include album
and track sales, radio airplay, video views, touring, and streaming, along with social me­
dia interactions on platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, VEVO, YouTube, TIDAL, Spotify,
Rdio, and other prominent online music destinations [51]. The exact methodology of the
ranking algorithm, however, remains confidential.
I also considered alternative music charts, including those from Spotify, YouTube, and
various global sources. Nonetheless, none provided the extensive historical data and
country­specific detail available through top40-charts.com.
After a thorough examination of potential sources and settling on top40-charts.com, I
developed an automated system, to aggregate the historical data from each country fea­
tured on the site. This system was written in Python, using the BeautifulSoup library,
operating under a Research License. The specifics of this data collection method are
detailed in the following chapter 5.2.
The dataset contains the following columns:
• Country ­ The country of the chart
• Position ­ The song’s position on the chart
• Date ­ The date of the chart’s publication
• Song Title
• Song Author
• Artist Country ­ The originating country of the artist
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Screenshot of the chart for Denmark from the 29th of December 2023.
Picture shows part of the Top 20 chart for Denmark. At the top of the chart is its title,
followed by a dropdown menu listing all historical ranking dates. Each row in the table
displays the current position, accompanied by a symbol showing its movement compared
to the previous week. Adjacent to this is a column indicating last week’s position. The
central column features a thumbnail of the YouTube video linked to the song, succeeded
by a thumbnail of the album’s cover photo. This is followed by the song’s title and below
it, the artist’s name. On the extreme right of this column, there’s a link to the song on
Amazon Music. Finally, three columns are present, detailing the peak position, the number
of weeks on the chart to date, and the total weeks the song has been on the chart.
• Genre ­ The genre of the song
The length of the charts varies by country. For the USA, UK, and Germany, the charts
consist of the top 40 songs, while for Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Finland,
France, Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and Taiwan, the charts
cover the top 20 positions. Special editions of the charts, such as year­end summaries,
occasionally extend beyond these limits, featuring up to 77 positions, as was the case for
Canada at the end of 2011.
I calculated basic statistics of the dataset, to gain an overview of its size and scope. The
results for the raw dataset, are presented in Table 3.1. The dataset is extensive, covering
27 countries, almost 150 000 unique songs, and 591 unique genres. The data for the
USA dates back to 1997, while for most of the other countries, it starts in the early 2000s.
Further investigation of the dataset, including missing values and the addition of new
columns to streamline calculations, facilitate aggregation, and simplify plotting is pre­
10
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:19==
metrics
amount
rows
710 942
countries
27
unique songs
149 687
unique artists
73 116
unique genres
591
Table 3.1: Basic statistics for top40-charts.com dataset.
The table presents an
overview of the main features of the dataset, including the total number of entries (rows),
the diversity of music origins (countries), and the variety of content in terms of songs,
artists, and genres.
sented in Section 5.3.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:21==
4
Theoretical introduction
This chapter provides a comprehensive overview of the statistical and machine learn­
ing techniques applied in the dataset analysis. Initially, I outline the statistical concepts
employed in this project, followed by a thorough explanation of the information diffusion
metrics.
4.1
Statistical methods
I employed a range of statistical techniques in my data analysis. In this section, I provide
explanations of the key methods to enhance the understanding of the project.
4.1.1
Probability distribution
A probability distribution is an essential idea in statistics. It shows how likely different
outcomes are for a random variable. This is done using a mathematical function that
calculates the probabilities of occurrence of different possible outcomes in an experiment
[52]. Simply put, it predicts the likelihood of different results in a random event.
For situations with specific, countable outcomes like a coin flip or a dice roll, a discrete
probability distribution is used. The probability mass function (PMF) is a tool for this type of
distribution. It assigns probabilities to each possible outcome. In contrast, for continuous
outcomes, the probability density function (PDF) is used. This function helps understand
how likely it is for the variable to take a particular value.
Percentiles are used to describe positions within a distribution. For example, the 50th
percentile (median) is the middle value, where half of the data falls below it. Important
percentiles like the 97.5th show where 97.5% of the data falls below. Similarly, the 2.5th
percentile indicates a value under which only 2.5% of the data falls. These indicators
are crucial for understanding data in statistics, especially for confidence intervals and
hypothesis testing.
Percentiles help create confidence intervals.
For instance, the 2.5th and 97.5th per­
centiles are used to establish a 95% confidence interval. This helps understand how
data is spread in the dataset. In areas like finance or environmental studies, knowing
extreme values (like the 97.5th and 2.5th percentiles) is important for risk analysis.
In summary, probability distributions are vital in statistics. They are used in data analysis,
testing theories, and making models in various fields such as economics, engineering,
and biology. The 97.5th and 2.5th percentiles are especially important for understanding
the extremes in a dataset and are widely used in statistical analysis and making decisions.
Throughout my research, I have computed many histograms and calculated correspond­
ing probability distributions. Grasping the significance of the shapes of these probability
distributions has been instrumental in interpreting results and formulating relevant con­
clusions. I used 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles multiple times to determine the importance
of the computed results. This approach I used in various contexts, such as analyzing po­
sition shifts, as shown in the histogram in Figure 6.3, and also in establishing confidence
intervals for permutation tests.
4.1.2
Measure of difference between probability distributions
In my project, which encompassed 27 different countries, I aimed to address the initial the­
sis question: ”Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics.” To achieve
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
13
==PAGE:22==
this, it was necessary to compare the probability distribution diagrams. For this purpose,
I used two distinct measures:
Kullback­Leibler
The Kullback­Leibler (KL) Divergence, a cornerstone in the fields of statistics and infor­
mation theory, was initially developed by Solomon Kullback and Richard Leibler [53]. This
measure quantifies the extent to which one probability distribution deviates from a second,
anticipated probability distribution [54]. Essentially, KL Divergence evaluates the differ­
ence between two probability distributions. The formula for computing KL Divergence is
given by
DKL(P∥Q) =
∑
i
P(i)log P(i)
Q(i)
In this expression, P and Q represent the probability distributions that is being compared.
This formulation applies to discrete distributions; for continuous distributions, the summa­
tion is replaced by an integral [54].
One of the key characteristics of KL Divergence is its asymmetry. This implies that the
divergence of P from Q differs from that of Q from P. Furthermore, KL Divergence is in­
variably non­negative, positive values indicate similarity between measured distributions,
the KL Divergence close to zero, signifies no divergence.
KL Divergence finds widespread application in various scenarios, such as anomaly de­
tection, where it is used to contrast an observed distribution (P) with a known or reference
distribution (Q). In information theory, it serves as a tool to measure the information loss
when Q is employed to approximate P. Furthermore, KL Divergence assists in compar­
ing an observed data distribution with a theoretical model, thereby facilitating hypothesis
testing and model selection.
Population Stability Index (PSI)
The Population Stability Index (PSI) is a statistical tool used to measure the variation in the
distribution of a variable, commonly a score or probability, over time or between distinct
datasets. To calculate PSI, the data is typically segregated into bins or categories, either
based on score ranges or quantiles. It is crucial to employ the same method of binning
for both datasets under comparison.
The PSI is computed using the formula:
PSI(X, Y ) =
n
∑
i=1
(xi −yi) ln
(xi
yi
)
In this formula, X and Y represent sequences of proportions in respective datasets, with
xi and yi denoting the proportion in the i­th bin. Here, n is the total number of bins. A lower
PSI value suggests minimal change in the distribution of scores, indicating model stabil­
ity. Conversely, a higher PSI implies significant alterations in the distribution, potentially
indicating a population shift or model performance degradation.
PSI is frequently used in credit scoring and financial sectors to monitor scoring model
stability. Distinguished from the Kullback­Leibler divergence by its symmetry, PSI can
be considered a specialized form of Kullback­Leibler divergence. However, as Yurdakul
[55] suggests, its application extends beyond the banking industry. The use of PSI is
14
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:23==
not limited to credit scores or ratings alone. This metric can be applied to any variable,
provided that the variable is present in both the baseline and target datasets.
I opted for this metric due to its symmetric nature and ability to detect subtle changes
between distributions. Furthermore, the distributions I am comparing adhere to the pre­
requisites outlined by Yurdakul.
4.1.3
Clustering
Working with a dataset that includes 27 countries, I found that some of the diagrams
were cluttered and difficult to interpret. To address this, I applied clustering techniques
to organize the countries, aiming to create clearer and more comprehensible diagrams.
Below, I define the clustering method, followed by a detailed description of the hierarchical
clustering approach.
Clustering is a method of unsupervised learning, a branch of machine learning that deals
with patterns and structures in unlabeled data. Unlike supervised learning, where data is
trained on a known output, clustering groups data points into subsets or clusters without
prior knowledge of the group definitions.
One of the definitions suggested by Estivill­Castro defines clustering as finding groups in
a data set ”by some natural criterion of similarity” [56]. The similarity is often calculated
based on distance metrics like Euclidean, Manhattan, or cosine similarity. The main pur­
pose of clustering is to identify inherent structures or patterns in data, which can be pivotal
in various analytical tasks.
Clustering is widely used in many fields, from machine learning and data mining to biol­
ogy and marketing, to group similar entities together and draw insights from the natural
groupings in the data.
Hierarchical clustering
Clustering techniques are primarily categorized into two groups: hierarchical and non­
hierarchical methods.
Hierarchical clustering creates a multi­level hierarchy of clusters. Unlike non­hierarchical
methods, it doesn’t result in a singular partition with a predefined number of clusters.
Instead, it generates a sequence of partitions at various stages. This approach encom­
passes two primary strategies: agglomerative (bottom­up) and divisive (top­down).
Agglomerative clustering begins with each data point as an individual cluster. Gradu­
ally, the two nearest clusters are merged in each step, continuing until a single cluster
encompasses all data points. The key aspect of agglomerative clustering is the crite­
rion used to compute distances between newly merged clusters and the remaining ones.
Different computational methods can yield diverse results as cited in Giordani’s work on
Hierarchical Clustering [57]. An illustrative example is provided in Figure 4.1, showing the
step­by­step merging of six initial nodes, labeled a to f.
Conversely, divisive clustering starts with all observations in one cluster and progressively
splits them. It is essentially the reverse process of agglomerative clustering, where the
progression is from a single, all­encompassing cluster to individual, singleton clusters.
Despite being less common, divisive methods are significant, particularly when computa­
tional challenges are addressed. The complexity lies in determining the most optimal way
to split clusters at each step, as finding the best split can be computationally intensive.
For instance, in the first step alone, there are 2(n−1)−1 possible split configurations. A
simplified representation of this process, using the same initial nodes a to f, is shown in
the Figure 4.2.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
15
==PAGE:24==
a
b
c
d
e
f
bc
de
def
bcdef
abcdef
Figure 4.1: Illustration of Agglomerative Clustering. The six starting nodes are at the top.
At each step two nodes are merged together; each step is presented as a level on the
diagram. The final node (cluster) contains all initial nodes.
Hierarchical clustering results are often depicted using a dendrogram, a tree­like diagram
that displays the clusters and their respective merging or splitting distances. This visual
tool is crucial for analyzing the output of any hierarchical clustering method. The figure
provided below 4.3, serves as a simplified example of such dendrograms.
In my thesis, I used hierarchical clustering to better organize the countries on the heatmaps.
I used the indexes of the clusters to sort countries so that similar countries would appear
next to each other.
K­Means clustering
K­Means is another example of hierarchical clustering, it groups data into a specified
number (k) of distinct clusters. It measures the distance between the data points and
potential clusters, and based on the result assigns a cluster to a point. The main steps of
the algorithm include:
1. Select random k points from the data as the initial centroids, they will be the central
points of the clusters.
2. Based on the measured distance (usually Euclidean distance), assign each data
point in the dataset to the nearest centroid.
3. Recalculate the position of each centroid by averaging the coordinates of all points
in the cluster.
4. Repeat steps 2­3, until the centroids no longer change significantly, indicating that
16
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:25==
a
b
c
d
e
f
bc
de
def
bcdef
abcdef
Figure 4.2: Illustration of Divisive Clustering. On the top algorithm starts with one cluster
containing all nodes. At each step of algorithm, initial node splits into 2 child nodes.
the clusters are as compact and distinct from each other as possible.
K­means is easy to implement and computationally efficient, making it suitable for large
datasets.
In my thesis, I used it to cluster countries based on the typical peak time.
4.1.4
Statistical test
In the process of developing a customized version of the algorithm for transfer entropy, I
recognized the necessity of assessing the significance of computed results. To achieve
this, I used a statistical test.
Statistical hypothesis testing is a key method in statistics used for determining if sample
data provides sufficient evidence to conclude that a specific condition holds true for an en­
tire population [58]. Here are the main steps typically involved in conducting a frequentist
hypothesis test:
1. Formulating Hypotheses: This initial step involves defining two contrasting hy­
potheses: the null hypothesis (H0) and the alternative hypothesis (H1 or Ha). The
null hypothesis posits no effect or difference, serving as a baseline assumption,
while the alternative hypothesis represents the proposition or effect that is being
tested.
2. Choosing an Appropriate Statistical Test and Test Statistic T: Depending on the
nature of the data and the hypothesis, a relevant statistical test is selected. The test
statistic, a standardized value derived from the sample data, is crucial for deciding
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
17
==PAGE:26==
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 4.3: Illustration of dendrogram
whether to reject H0. For instance, a t­test is used for comparing means, whereas
a chi­squared test is suitable for comparing proportions.
3. Determining the Distribution of the Test Statistic Under H0: Typically, this in­
volves using a known result based on the assumptions made. The test statistic
might follow a specific distribution, like the Student’s t distribution with set degrees
of freedom, or a normal distribution with a known mean and variance.
4. Setting a Significance Level (α): This step involves selecting a threshold for the
false positive rate, which is the probability of incorrectly rejecting H0 when it is true.
Commonly used thresholds are 5% and 1%.
5. Calculating the Observed Value (tobs) of the Test Statistic T from the Data.
6. Making a Decision: Based on the Neyman­Pearson decision rule, H0 is rejected if
the observed value tobs falls within the critical region, otherwise, H0 is not rejected.
It is critical to understand that rejecting H0 doesn’t confirm the truth of H1; it merely indi­
cates that H1 is more plausible given the evidence. Conversely, not rejecting H0 doesn’t
prove its validity but suggests insufficient evidence to support H1.[58].
Permutation test
The permutation test, also known as the randomization or re­randomization test, is a
non­parametric method used for hypothesis testing. It is a kind of statistical significance
test where the distribution of the test statistic under the null hypothesis is determined by
computing all potential values of the test statistic under different rearrangements of the
labels on the observed data points. The null hypothesis assumes that each outcome is
equally probable under any permutation of the treatment labels.
In the book ”Permutation, Parametric, and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses” by Phillip Good
[59], the permutation test is outlined in four main steps:
1. Selection of a test statistic, typically one that effectively discriminates between the
primary hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis based on pre­established criteria.
2. Calculation of the test statistic for the original, unaltered observation set.
3. Generation of a rearrangement distribution by computing the test statistic for each
possible rearrangement Π ∈R.
4. Comparison of the test statistic’s original value (from step 2) against the range of
values from step 3. If this value lies in the distribution’s tail(s) that support the alter­
native hypothesis, the primary hypothesis is rejected.
The permutation test is widely applied, ranging from evaluating treatment efficacy in clin­
ical trials to analyzing correlation coefficients. However, it has limitations, such as com­
putational intensity, particularly with large datasets where the number of permutations
18
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:27==
can be vast. In specific scenarios, like mine with long sequences but high repetition of
elements, the number of possible permutations may not be excessively large.
4.2
Entropy transfer
In this section, I will introduce and explain the concepts related to entropy transfer calcula­
tions. This will include a detailed explanation of the term ’entropy’, as well as an overview
of various measures used in entropy transfer analysis. I used the Symbolic Transfer En­
tropy described in this section, as a measure of popularity diffusion between countries.
4.2.1
Entropy
In the field of mathematics and computer science, particularly within information theory,
entropy is understood as a measure of unpredictability or randomness in the content of
information. According to Stone [60], entropy symbolizes a measure of uncertainty. This
suggests that gaining information is similar to reducing uncertainty, thereby portraying
information and entropy as two facets of the same concept. However, the interpretation
of information is somewhat nuanced and can be confusing.
The concept of average information is identical to that of entropy. The terminology used,
whether it is ’information’ or ’entropy’, hinges on the context ­ whether it is being received
or given away. For instance, a variable with high entropy indicates significant initial un­
certainty about its value, which is precisely its entropy by definition. Learning the value of
this variable is similar to acquiring information equivalent to the prior uncertainty (entropy)
about its value. Hence, the act of receiving information is analogous to the corresponding
amount of entropy (uncertainty) being eliminated [60].
Entropy also plays a crucial role in evaluating the efficiency of data compression algo­
rithms. A higher entropy signifies less predictability in the information, making it more
challenging to compress. This principle was first introduced by Claude Shannon in his
seminal 1948 paper, ”A Mathematical Theory of Communication.” [39].
4.2.2
Transfer Entropy (TE)
Transfer Entropy is an extension of the concept of entropy. It is used to quantify the amount
of directed (time­asymmetric) information transfer between two systems. Developed by
Thomas Schreiber in 2000 [32], it is particularly useful in analyzing time series data where
traditional methods like correlation do not adequately capture the directional nature of
information flow. The Schreiber transfer entropy formula is expressed as:
TJ→I =
∑
p(in+1, in, jn) log p(in+1|in, jn)
p(in+1|in)
This formula represents the sum over all probabilities of a future state in+1 of system I,
given its own past states in and the past states of another system J (jn). It quantifies
how much the past state of system J contributes to predicting the future state of system I
beyond what is predictable from the past of I alone.
Transfer entropy is deeply rooted in Shannon entropy, a measure of the uncertainty or
randomness in a system [39]. The Shannon entropy formula is given by:
H(X) = −
∑
x∈X
p(x) log2 p(x)
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
19
==PAGE:28==
In this formula, H(X) represents the Shannon entropy for a system X. It sums over all
possible states x in X, where p(x) is the probability of state x. The term −log2p(x) quan­
tifies the amount of uncertainty or surprise associated with each state. The overall sum
gives the average uncertainty or information content of the system X.
While Shannon entropy deals with the uncertainty of a single system, TE extends this
idea to measure the reduction in uncertainty in one system (target) given knowledge of
another system (source) [40].
Mathematically, TE is defined as the difference between the conditional entropies of the
future state of the target system given its past states, with and without additional knowl­
edge of the past states of the source system. In simpler terms, it measures how much
knowledge of the source system improves the predictability of the target system.
One key feature of TE is its ability to detect causal interactions that are not merely correla­
tions. Since it is based on time series data, TE can infer if changes in one system precede
and therefore potentially cause changes in another, which is a stronger claim than simple
correlation [61].
4.2.3
Symbolic encoding
Symbolic encoding is a process widely used in various fields, including computing and
communication, to represent information through symbols or codes. This technique in­
volves converting complex information into a series of discrete, well­defined symbols for
more straightforward processing, transmission, or storage. These symbols range from
numbers and letters to special characters or binary code.
This method simplifies the representation of data, making it easier to analyze patterns,
trends, or relationships in the data. Symbolic encoding ensures a faithful reconstruc­
tion of dynamic properties, making data processing and transmission more efficient [62].
For instance, binary code aligns perfectly with the electronic architecture of computers,
providing a standardized method for representing diverse information forms. This stan­
dardization is crucial for compatibility and interoperability across different systems and
technologies. Additionally, encoded data can incorporate error detection and correction
features, thus enhancing data storage and transmission reliability.
In time series analysis, symbolic encoding is often applied, where raw data is transformed
into sequences of discrete symbols. Examples of encoding in computing include binary
and ASCII encoding, while real­life examples include Morse code.
Beyond computing and telecommunications, symbolic encoding finds applications in data
compression (reducing data size for storage efficiency), cryptography (securing informa­
tion), and even in representing genetic information in biological systems.
4.2.4
False Nearest Neighbours
The false nearest neighbors (FNN) algorithm was originally developed for determining the
smallest dimension regression vector needed to recreate the dynamics of autonomous
chaotic systems [63]. In other words, it is used to estimate the appropriate embedding
dimension. The correct embedding dimension is pivotal because it ensures that the recon­
structed sequence retains the essential topological properties of the original data, thereby
allowing for accurate analysis and prediction.
Embedding refers to the process of reconstructing the phase space of a dynamical system
from a single observational time series. This is achieved by delaying the time series by a
certain amount and reconstructing vectors in a higher­dimensional space.
20
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:29==
The main steps of FNN include:
1. Embedding the Time Series. The time series is initially embedded in a phase space
of low dimension, and the embedding dimension is incrementally increased.
2. Identifying Nearest Neighbors. In each dimension, the nearest neighbors for each
point are identified.
3. Detecting False Neighbors. A neighbor is considered ’false’ if it appears close in a
lower dimension but is distant in the true, higher­dimensional space. The algorithm
assesses whether a neighbor is false by checking if the distance between neighbors
significantly increases as the dimensionality is increased.
4. Determining the Minimum Embedding Dimension. The process continues until the
percentage of false nearest neighbors falls below a certain threshold.
In signal processing, it is used to separate signal from noise, while analyzing complex
systems. It can be also used to predictions, using economic or meteorological time series.
4.2.5
Symbolic Transfer Entropy (STE)
In this chapter, I discuss the symbolic transfer entropy method, which I used in my re­
search to assess the spread of popularity across countries.
Symbolic Transfer Entropy (STE) is a method in information theory and nonlinear dynam­
ics that measures the directional influence of one time series on another. This idea builds
on transfer entropy, enhancing mutual information’s ability to identify directional interac­
tions.
STE combines symbolic encoding and entropy transfer calculations. It starts by convert­
ing time series data into symbolic sequences and then calculates the transfer entropy
between these symbolic representations [42]. The entropy is calculated using the for­
mula:
TY,X =
∑
p(ˆxt+i, ˆxi, ˆyi) log2
p(ˆxt+i|ˆxi, ˆyi)
p(ˆxt+i|ˆxi)
In this formula, Y, X represent the two symbolic sequences, with ˆxi, ˆyi indicating the i­th
symbol in the X and Y sequences respectively, and t denotes a time step.
To determine the direction of the entropy, a directionality index is introduced:
T S
Y,X = TY,X −TX,Y
This index helps quantify the dominant direction of information flow. Positive values sug­
gest the flow of information from X to Y , and negative values indicate that Y is influencing
X. For the symmetric bidirectional flow T S
Y,X expects to be null [43]. For the purpose of
this thesis, as a result of symbolic transfer entropy value, I understand T S
Y,X.
STE is utilized in various fields such as neuroscience for understanding brain connectivity
[64], [65]), finance for analyzing market dynamics [66] [67], and climate studies for ex­
ploring interdependencies between climate variables [68]. It is effective in these areas for
understanding directional relationships between time series.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
21
==PAGE:30==
Compared to traditional linear methods, STE is less sensitive to noise and can capture
complex, non­linear, or non­Gaussian relationships in data. However, it requires a sub­
stantial amount of data for accurate estimation. The choice of method for discretizing data
into symbols also affects the results, and there may not be a universally superior method.
In conclusion, I have chosen to use Symbolic Transfer Entropy in my thesis to analyze the
directional interactions between time series. I believe it is a powerful tool for investigating
complex dynamics, such as the diffusion of song popularity.
The definitions of the methods outlined in this section provide a foundational understand­
ing of the algorithms and techniques used in this research. These will be further discussed
in Chapter 6.
22
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:31==
5
Methodology
The primary objective of this project is to identify worldwide trends in popular music charts.
For this purpose, I have created and examined the extensive dataset mentioned earlier. To
employ the statistical and machine learning techniques outlined in the preceding chapter,
I chose Python, a widely used programming language.
In the current chapter, I outline the overall environment created to analyze the dataset,
along with the key steps involved in collecting and preprocessing the data.
5.1
Environment
The developed solution uses Python programming language. My decision to use Python
was based on by my prior experience with it, along with its extensive application and flexi­
bility in various fields such as data science, artificial intelligence, and scientific computing.
Python is particularly well­known for machine learning due to its extensive range of pack­
ages for data handling, analysis, and visualization. In structuring the project, I adopted a
traditional method by creating functions and classes. Additionally, I selected GitHub for
version control, making all project files openly accessible in my GitHub repository.
To ensure easy maintenance of the project and its dependencies, independent of other
projects, I created a virtual environment using the venv package [69]. This approach
facilitates the creation of an isolated Python setup, effectively segregating it from others.
Distinct virtual environments help avoid conflicts between different projects. This isolation
is advantageous as it allows for the safe installation of packages [70].
Here is a list of all the packages used in my project:
1. numpy ­ Short for Numerical Python, NumPy is a fundamental package for scientific
computing in Python. It provides support for large, multi­dimensional arrays and ma­
trices, along with a large collection of high­level mathematical functions to operate
on these arrays [71]. I especially benefited from the fast and efficient computations,
a result of the highly optimized core written in C.
2. pandas ­ A powerful data analysis and manipulation library for Python. Pandas
provide data structures like DataFrames and Series, which are ideal for cleaning,
analyzing, and visualizing data [72]. Thanks to its high­performance features for
merging, joining, grouping, and other analytical methods, I was able to effectively
analyze my extensive dataset.
3. scipy ­ Short for Scientific Python, SciPy is built on NumPy and provides additional
functionality for optimization, linear algebra, integration, interpolation, special func­
tions, signal and image processing, and other tasks related to scientific and techni­
cal computing [73]. In my project, I primarily used machine learning algorithms for
classification and clustering, along with some highly optimized statistical methods.
4. asyncio ­ A library designed for writing concurrent code using the async/await syn­
tax, asyncio serves as the basis for various Python asynchronous frameworks.
These frameworks offer high­performance capabilities for network and web servers,
database connection libraries, distributed task queues, and more [74]. I particularly
benefited from its features, as they accelerated the loops that repeated calls to the
same asynchronous function for each song in my dataset.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
23
==PAGE:32==
5. concurrent ­ A Python module offers an interface for parallel loops, allowing exe­
cution on separate threads or as individual processes [75]. In my project, I opted
for parallel threads due to their quicker initiation and execution speeds. They signif­
icantly speed up my calculations.
6. matplotlib ­ A widely used library for creating static, interactive, and animated vi­
sualizations in Python [76]. In my project, I implemented matplotlib to produce all
the charts, it provides high­quality plots with extensive customization options.
7. seaborn ­ A Python data visualization library based on matplotlib. It provides a
high­level interface for drawing attractive and informative statistical graphics [77].
Seaborn is particularly suited for visualizing complex datasets and creating more
sophisticated plots with less code. I used it in my project to create some of the more
complex plots, such as heatmaps.
8. tqdm ­ A Python package, used for displaying a progress bar that indicates the
progression of performance. It also estimates the remaining time [78]. In my project,
I employed this library to present a progress bar for computations that are more time­
consuming.
5.2
Scraping
To gather the necessary information, I employed the concept of web scraping. This tech­
nique is widely used for extracting data from online websites. Web scraping tools access
the internet through protocols (i.e., http/https) or through the web browsers that we com­
monly use. Essentially, web scraping involves copying data, but the outcome is formatted
according to specific requirements.[79]
In my project, I used the Python programming language along with the BeautifulSoup
package. This package is effective for parsing web page content into XML, enabling
easy navigation, search, and modification of the parsed structure [80]. BeautifulSoup
downloads the HTML content of a webpage and transforms it using a specified parser;
in my case, I used an XML parser. From this, specific HTML elements can be retrieved
based on unique identifiers, object types, and other characteristics.
Prior to implementing the scraping algorithm, I conducted a thorough analysis of the
top40-charts.com website. My focus was on understanding how to easily switch be­
tween charts of different countries. I observed an additional path parameter (cid) in the
URL and documented the corresponding country IDs.
The website appeared to employ older versions of CSS and HTML. Therefore, I carefully
examined the HTML structure of the page, particularly the chart table, as illustrated in
Figure 5.1. The chart was organized using a <table> tag, yet without a distinct identifier.
Consequently, I resorted to using styling parameters to locate the correct table in the
HTML. I admit that this method was not foolproof, as there was a potential for styling
variations across different weeks or countries, but it was the only viable solution. For row
information extraction, I employed a similar approach, searching for elements with specific
styling within the <tr> tags. This task was challenging, given the website’s design, which
used row (<tr>) tags to delineate ranking positions. After several attempts, I successfully
developed a scraper. The scraper’s functionality has been outlined in the pseudocode
Algorithm 1.
The program archived the following information:
1. Country
24
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 1 Web Scraping Algorithm for Extracting Music Chart Data
1: for each country do
2:
Access the website with country’s chart
3:
Extract potential chart dates from a select list on the website
4:
for each extracted date do
5:
Construct URL with country ID and date
6:
Fetch the website
7:
Identify the chart’s country
8:
Locate the chart table, tag <table>, with style "cellpadding": "2"
9:
for each row in table with tag <tr> and class latc_song do
10:
Extract from columns song position, title, and artist name
11:
end for
12:
end for
13: end for
2. Date of the ranking
3. Position of the song
4. Song title
5. Artist’s name
The scraping process took approximately 20 hours, with the data being continuously
saved to a CSV file. Subsequently, I enriched the dataset with additional information,
such as song genre and artist’s country of origin, using the Shazam API [81] and Mu­
sicBrainz API [82]. To optimize API calls, I identified unique songs and artists as well as
asynchronous loops.
For genre information, I utilized the Shazam API. I queried songs by title and then filtered
by artist name to obtain the exact track ID. This enabled me to retrieve metadata, including
the genre. Shazam API is exposing only asynchronous endpoints, therefore I used the
asyncio package to create a loop that would efficiently fetch genre for songs.
Similarly, I used the MusicBrainz API to collect the artist’s origin. I fetched metadata for
artists and looked for their country of origin.
The task of gathering extra information was time­consuming, partly because of the nu­
merous calls the program had to make, and also due to discrepancies between the doc­
umentation and the actual responses obtained.
The resulting data was then merged with the scraped rankings, and saved to a CSV file
using the pandas package, with data fields separated by commas.
5.3
Preprocessing
Creating a custom dataset, as in this project, often leads to data inconsistencies and
contamination from high­level industrial noise. Such datasets frequently have missing el­
ements and outliers, caused by malfunctions in real­time databases, poor data manage­
ment, and input mistakes [83]. To mitigate the impact of this tainted data on the results, I
employed preprocessing techniques to clean the dataset and substitute the missing val­
ues.
Data cleaning plays a pivotal role in resolving noise and discrepancies inherent in raw in­
dustrial data [83]. In this project, this process involved converting various data types into
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.1: Screenshot of the HTML content of chart. Picture shows part of the html
content of a ranking table, data was collected using Chrome developer’s tools for inves­
tigating website content. The ranking is created based on a html table tag, and each row
is a <tr> element.
26
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:35==
numerical or datetime formats. The ”Date” column was converted to pandas.DateTime,
and the ”Year” and ”Week_Number” columns were separated, addressing the inconsis­
tency in ranking publications across different countries. By grouping the data based on
the Year and Week_Number, comparisons of charts from various countries published in
the same week became feasible. Additionally, a new column ”Season” was derived from
the ”Date” column, categorizing data into seasons: spring, summer, autumn, and winter.
To facilitate subsequent data aggregations, an additional column ”Weeks_In_Chart” was
introduced, indicating the number of weeks a song had been on the chart. For aggregat­
ing data effectively, a categorization of countries based on their chart’s top position was
implemented. This involved adding a ”Top_Position” column, which was also beneficial
in other aspects of the analysis. The introduced grouping categorized songs into four
groups based on their best chart position:
1. Very High Positions ­ positions between 1 and 3
2. High Positions ­ positions between 4 and 6
3. Medium Positions ­ positions between 7 and 10
4. Low Positions ­ positions below 10
The results of this grouping were stored in the ”Transformed_Position” column.
Anomalies were observed in the “Genre” column, likely due to a non­standard encoding
of responses from an API. To address this, anomalous values were replaced with “NaN”
(not a number). Additionally, the “Artist_Country” and “Country” columns were standard­
ized. The ”Artist_Country” column, which previously included various types of geograph­
ical designations, was standardized using an external API for consistency.
During the initial analysis, I found that the chart data for Germany in the initial months
was identical each week. Investigation revealed this as incorrect data published on the
website. To correct this, I searched and identified the actual start date for the German
charts and removed all prior values.
Another step was detecting columns with missing values and filling out those gaps. There
are two common approaches to this problem one is to remove rows with missing values
and another is to fill them with mean or average values. After assessing the extent of
missing data in the “Genre” and “Artist_Country” columns, I decided not to remove those
rows, as they constituted about 45% of the dataset for the artist’s country. Instead, I filled
these gaps with “None” values to enable later processing without introducing additional
errors. In my case, it was impossible to fill it out with the mean values, as they do not exist
for such data.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:37==
6
Results
The primary objective of the project was to carry out a comprehensive comparative anal­
ysis aimed at explaining the spread of trends in popularity across different countries. To
measure popularity, I will employ the song’s ranking position metrics, where a higher posi­
tion indicates greater popularity. In the subsequent sections of this chapter, I will present
answers three main questions of this project:
1. What are the dynamics of ranking changes?
2. How do popular songs disseminate across various countries?
3. Who plays the role of the trendsetter?
Below, I will introduce all the discovered insights and details regarding the intricate dy­
namics influencing current cultural preferences
6.1
How do rankings change? Analysis of patterns in chart
ranking
This chapter tries to answer one of the questions of the project: “How do rankings change?”.
It focuses on examining the lifespan, position shifts and trajectory of songs. It identifies
patterns within the data and proposes potential groupings of countries based on the in­
sights derived from the analysis.
6.1.1
Lifespan analysis
When discussing the dynamics of rankings, an essential aspect to consider is the duration
a song remains on the chart. By ”lifetime,” I refer to the number of weeks a song spends
on the chart. My primary focus was to identify key patterns in the lifespan of songs across
different countries.
Figure 6.1 illustrates the average and median duration of a song on a chart, for selected
countries, over the years; a summary of all countries can be found in the appendix section
A.1. The overall analysis reveals diverse trends among different country groups.
In most countries, the median song lifetime tends to be shorter than the average, a sit­
uation likely influenced by outliers – tracks with exceptionally prolonged lifetimes. Chile
currently has the longest average song lifetime, approximately 30 weeks. Other countries
with notably long average song lifetimes include New Zealand, Greece, Denmark, Brazil,
Switzerland, and Australia. In contrast, the shortest song lifetimes are observed in China,
Belgium, Finland, Japan, and the UK.
Moreover, I noticed that the gap between the median and average song lifespans has
been widening, particularly after 2010. This trend is evident in the charts from the USA,
UK, and Austria, where noticeable disparities between the median and average durations
are apparent.
Countries such as Australia and the UK show a general upward trajectory. The average
song lifetime in the UK increased from about 4 weeks in 2002 to 10 weeks in 2022. In
Australia, the average rose from 8 weeks in 2001 to 16 weeks in 2023. Conversely,
nations like the USA, Ireland, and Austria have exhibited relatively stable average and
median song lifetimes with minor fluctuations. For example, the average song lifetime in
the US is 10 weeks, compared to approximately 6­7 weeks in Ireland and Austria. Ireland
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
29
==PAGE:38==
2
4
6
8
10
12
Weeks on the chart
UK
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Weeks on the chart
USA
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Weeks on the chart
Italy
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Weeks on the chart
Brazil
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
Week
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Weeks on the chart
Germany
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
Week
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Weeks on the chart
Sweden
Figure 6.1: Average and median song’s duration in the chart for various countries
The figure illustrates the average (blue) and median (orange) lifespan of songs across
various countries. The shaded areas surrounding the average line represent the standard
error of the mean. The orange­shaded area represents the standard error of the median.
experienced a significant increase in 2018, where the average song lifetime jumped from
7 weeks to approximately 12 weeks. A similar pattern can be observed in the Netherlands
and Brazil. Additionally, countries like Italy, Finland, and Spain experienced an increase
in song lifetimes around 2010­2017, followed by a slight dip and then steady growth.
Canada presents an interesting case where the average and median song lifetimes were
considerably high between 2002­2008, followed by a sharp decline in 2008, failing to
reach its peak of average lifetime of about 30 weeks, which was observed in 2005.
I observed varied behaviors across countries. In recent years, there has been a greater
tendency for fluctuations in countries like Norway, Sweden, Brazil, and Bulgaria. These
fluctuations might be due to the impact of pandemics, shifts in music consumption trends,
and uncertainties in the music industry. In countries such as New Zealand, the US, Spain,
and Australia, both the average and median lifetimes of songs have shown a decreasing
trend in the last year.
In conclusion, this analysis reveals that the lifetime of songs on charts varies considerably
across different countries and over time. Moreover, there is a noticeable variation in the
range of average and median lifetimes of songs among countries.
6.1.2
Position analysis
Another intriguing aspect to consider when examining the pop songs chart dynamics is
position changes. Whereas previously, I discussed trends in overall behavior, my current
focus is on analyzing position changes across different countries and identifying patterns
in these behaviors.
To begin with, I analyzed both the initial and final positions of the songs. Figure 6.2 illus­
trates two distinct patterns among selected countries, when examining the initial position
30
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:39==
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Position
0
200
400
600
Count
Brazil
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Position
Count
Netherlands
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Position
0
200
400
600
Count
Bulgaria
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Position
Count
Canada
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Position
0
200
400
600
Count
Germany
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Position
Count
Ireland
Figure 6.2: Histograms of the initial and final position of songs in the chart for se­
lected countries. Each bin corresponds to a position on the chart. The blue bars indicate
the number of songs that started at that position, whereas the orange bars depict the count
of songs that exited the chart from that position.
of songs. The summary of all countries can be found in the appendix A.2. The first group,
represented by countries like Brazil, Netherlands or Bulgaria, exhibits a rising trend in the
number of songs entering the chart with lower positions. In other words, a significant por­
tion of songs start at very low positions, while only a few start at the top positions. On the
contrary, the second group is characterized by a more balanced distribution of initial posi­
tions of songs. Countries such as Canada, Germany, and Ireland have an equal number
of songs entering the chart with top positions and those starting at the bottom positions.
This may suggest that in countries with a more even distribution, a dynamic mix of songs
enters the chart simultaneously.
Examining the final position distribution for countries reveals a common trend—irrespective
of the country, a higher final position corresponds to a greater number of songs exiting
the chart at that position. The exponential increase in the number of songs with higher
positions suggests that a majority of songs exit the charts when their trendiness dimin­
ishes.
To better understand the dynamics within the rankings, I analyzed the shifts in posi­
tions across various countries. Figure 6.3 presents the histogram with relative position
changes, week to week, for selected countries, the summary of all countries can be found
in the appendix A.3. I noticed that the median values for all countries are very close to the
0. For most countries, except for France, Germany, the UK, and Australia, the median
value lies within the limits of the highest bin. For the four mentioned countries median is
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
31
==PAGE:40==
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Position differenece
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
USA
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
UK
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Position differenece
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Ireland
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Australia
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Position differenece
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Spain
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Norway
Figure 6.3: Position change distribution chart for selected countries The histograms
provide a summary of position changes on the chart. The changes are measured week
by week, measuring a relative change in positions. Relative position changes are rep­
resented by the blue bins, with the median of the distribution marked by a vertical red
dashed line. Additionally, two gray dashed lines indicate the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles
of the samples. The shaded area corresponds to data falling below 2.5% or above 97.5%
of the distribution.
smaller than the highest bin, which would indicate that the distribution is skewed to the
right. It is visible that for those countries, the left tail is much longer than the right tail, in­
dicating a substantial number of songs’ jumps are related to moving down on the charts,
but there are enough positive jumps of songs’ to create a tail extending to the right.
The majority of histograms exhibit a Gaussian distribution, with a prominent peak in the
0, suggesting that the majority of songs remain relatively stable in their positions. Most
diagrams have smooth slopes, indicating a gradual movement of songs within the charts.
Each diagram has lines indicating the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles. Looking at the sum­
mary of all of the diagrams A.3, I noticed that some diagrams have a broader range of the
main mass, like the UK, Canada, or New Zealand, that would indicate a more substantial
movement of songs, implying a higher likelihood for a song to make a jump from a lower
position to the top and vice versa. There is also a group of countries with relatively smaller
limits of the main mass, that would be among others Brazil, Portugal, Norway, or Spain.
Smaller limits mean that 95% of songs make little jumps on the chart comparing week to
week.
32
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:41==
New Zealand
Australia
Austria
USA
Sweden
Germany
Netherlands
France
Canada
UK
Switzerland
Bulgaria
Denmark
Brazil
Ireland
Finland
Portugal
Italy
Belgium
Norway
Greece
Spain
New Zealand
Australia
Austria
USA
Sweden
Germany
Netherlands
France
Canada
UK
Switzerland
Bulgaria
Denmark
Brazil
Ireland
Finland
Portugal
Italy
Belgium
Norway
Greece
Spain
0
10
20
30
40
PSI distance
Figure 6.4: Heatmap of PSI distance between position change distribution chart for
various countries
To be able to quantify the difference between charts, I computed the distance between
distributions of various countries. I used Population Stability Index (explained in subsec­
tion 4.1.2) to measure the variance in distributions across countries. The findings are
presented in figure 6.4, where a more intense blue color signifies stronger connections
between countries. A smaller PSI value indicates closer and more similar distributions.
The heatmap reveals two distinct groups of countries. The first group, which includes New
Zealand, Australia, Austria, the USA, Sweden, Germany, Netherlands, France, Canada,
and the UK, shows a common trait, the broad limits of the main mass of the distributions.
The second group is composed of Switzerland, Bulgaria, Denmark, Brazil, Ireland, Fin­
land, Portugal, Italy, Belgium, Norway, Greece, and Spain. Based on the observations
made before, possibly those countries were grouped together due to a narrow range of
the limits of the main mass.
6.1.3
Trajectory analysis
The examination of position shifts revealed intriguing findings, which encouraged me to
delve deeper into the dynamics of position changes. I decided to examine the trajectories
of the songs in each country.
To calculate the trajectory of a song, I employed the methodology outlined in Lech’s project
[4]. I defined the trajectory as an ordered sequence, denoted as x = [x1, x2, x3, ..., xn],
where n represents the number of weeks a song is on the chart, and xi signifies the
song’s position in week i. To ensure comparability across countries, I standardized the
data length to 100. If the initial sequence was shorter than 100, I filled it with values of 41,
indicating the first position outside the chart.
I generated average (normalized) curves. I categorized songs into four groups based on
their best positions:
1. Songs with the best position between 1­3.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
33
==PAGE:42==
2. Songs with the best position between 4­6.
3. Songs with the best position between 7­10.
4. Songs with the best position greater than 10.
In order to generate the normalized trajectory I follow below steps:
1. For each country, for each group of the songs, select all song’s positions
2. For each song create a trajectory sequence as described above
3. For each group select all songs’ positions from the first week
4. For each group calculate the mean from the values in 3.
5. Repeat steps 3. and 4. for all of the remaining weeks in the sequence.
The resulting curves, for six selected countries, are presented in figure 6.5. Examining
the summary plot from Appendix A.4, the majority of the graphs display gradual slopes,
maintaining distinct intervals between each group until all songs vanish from the chart.
In most cases, all of the groups plateau around 20­40 weeks, and after week 40, they
typically reach their lowest position.
When looking at each of the song groups ­ those with best positions 1­3, 4­6, 7­10, and
above 10 ­ it is noticeable that they behave differently. The first group of songs, those with
the best position between 1 and 3, has different patterns in various countries; in some, the
slope gradually declines, peaking in the very first week, like in Finland, France, or Japan,
while in others, as example USA, Australia, or Chile, trajectory values accelerate, reach­
ing their peak weeks after entering the chart. That would suggest that the song climbs
the chart, and makes its journey before reaching peak position. Moreover, comparing
the average initial position with the peak for songs in the first group, positions 1 to 3, I
noticed that for some country pairs, the initial position depends on a trend that the country
represents. For countries that present an accereative trend in the first group of songs,
the average initial position is lower than in the countries, where the maximum trajectory
occurs in the first week, as an example the UK and USA, Netherlands and Spain, from
Figure 6.5.
For most countries, the second group of songs (positions 4­6), behaves similarly to the
first, either following the pattern of smooth decrease or rising together with the first group
and after reaching peak decreases over time.
The third group (positions 7­10) typically follows a distinct pattern. In most countries, the
curve sharply descends, peaking in the first week, and these songs quickly exit the chart,
reaching position 41. Songs from this group disappear from charts after a maximum of
15­20 weeks. A similar pattern is observed with the last group of songs, those which have
the best position greater than 10.
Looking at the lifespan of trajectories of presented groups, songs in the top 3 have a much
longer duration, a maximum of 40 weeks, compared to the rest of the groups that usually
exit the charts before week 20.
Each diagram includes a vertical line marking the week when songs, on average, reached
their peak position. I noticed two main tendencies, one where songs take a few weeks to
reach their best position and a second where songs enter the chart at the best position.
I plotted a histogram of the typical time of peak position for all of the countries results
are presented in Figure 6.6. The majority of countries, one­third, typically have a peak
34
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:43==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
UK
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
USA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Netherlands
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Spain
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Finland
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Japan
1-3
4-6
7-10
10+
Figure 6.5: Trajectory of selected songs for various countries. Songs are categorized
into four groups based on their highest positions: those ranking between 1 to 4 are repre­
sented by the color blue, positions 5­9 are denoted by red, positions 10­14 are indicated
by yellow, and positions exceeding 15 are assigned the color green. The red vertical line
marks the average week when songs typically reach their peak positions.
position very early, and only two countries tend to reach a peak position after 7 weeks.
The majority of countries, 25 out of 27, typically reach peak position during the first five
weeks. Additionally, I prepared a scatterplot, to identify the two outstanding countries. I
decided to group countries into 4 groups using the K­Means algorithm, I used 4 clusters,
as after examination of the histogram 6.6, I noticed a possible breakdown of the data into
four groups. Results are presented in Figure 6.7. The two outstanding countries are Chile
and the USA. Both of them show an accelerating trend, that is not as significant for other
countries.
The analysis of chart plots reveals distinct patterns among song groups, with varying
trajectories and lifespans. Notably, songs in the top 3 positions demonstrate on average,
a longer chart presence, compared to other groups that tend to exit before week 20.
To conclude, there are numerous different behaviors among the countries studied. How­
ever, after analyzing various factors such as lifespan, position shifts, and trajectory of
songs, I spotted a possible grouping of the countries. Based on the position shifts of
songs in countries, I identified two separate groups: the first one gathers countries where
songs typically show more frequent movements within the chart; while the second group
is characterized by less dynamic movements in the chart. Looking at the trajectories of
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
35
==PAGE:44==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Number of weeks to a typical time of peak
0
2
4
6
8
Count of countries
Figure 6.6: Histogram with typical time of peak for countries. Histogram counting
typical time of a peak position for all countries.
Figure 6.7: Scatterplot of countries based on their typical time of a peak position.
Scatterplot presents all countries and their typical time of peak position. Countries were
clustered using KMeans algorithm, and the resulting clusters are the colors of the dots
that represent countries.
36
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:45==
countries, there are a couple of possible groupings. However, two groups emerge at first
glance, one group with the outliers countries that have significantly later typical peak of
songs position than other countries. Another big group is countries with a typical peak
position within the first week, this group constitutes one­third of all countries.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:47==
6.2
How pop songs diffuse between countries?
In the previous sections, I analyzed the dynamics of charts, focusing on the lifespan of
songs, their trajectories, and shifts in positions. This section will concentrate on the diffu­
sion of popularity across countries. To measure this diffusion, I will employ the symbolic
transfer entropy algorithm, as described in Section 4.2.5.
6.2.1
Common songs
As a first step, I decided to measure the amount of common songs between countries,
as this gave me a good overview of possible directions for further research. Figure 6.8
illustrates the number of songs shared among all countries, I also separated the possi­
ble groups of countries based on the number of common songs, which are presented in
Figures 6.9, 6.10 and 6.11. Using hierarchical clustering described in section 4.1.3, I or­
ganized countries in the heatmap, to make it easier to read. Based on the coloring of the
diagram, I noticed four distinct groups of countries. The first group, includes China, India,
and Japan, where each country in the group shares on average, fewer than 300 common
songs with any other nation. After excluding the first group, looking at Figure 6.9 I spot­
ted the second group, which includes Bulgaria, Chile, Brazil, Greece, and Taiwan. They
share on average up to 700 songs with each other. However, the number of common
songs between countries from that group and other countries tends to be bigger.
The third group, as shown in Figure 6.10, consisting of Spain, Portugal, Italy, Norway, Fin­
land, France, Belgium, and Denmark, shares approximately 700 to 1000 songs between
countries of this group.
The final group pictured in Figure 6.11, including the UK, USA, Ireland, New Zealand,
Switzerland, Canada, Netherlands, Sweden, Australia, Germany, and Austria, has the
highest average number of songs shared between countries in this group, with some
countries exceeding 1500 common songs. Notably, the UK, USA, Australia, New Zealand,
and Ireland, sharing English as a common language, exhibit a high degree of musical
overlap. This group mainly consists of rapidly developing and leading nations from Central
Europe and the USA.
An interesting pattern emerges when examining the relationship between Germany, Aus­
tria, and Switzerland. These countries share a substantial number of common songs,
over a thousand, which could be attributed to their shared German language.
In summary, the analysis of common songs shared among countries reveals significant
patterns possibly related to geographical proximity, cultural ties, and shared languages.
6.2.2
Measure of diffusion of popularity
To analyze the spread of song popularity, I decided to measure the transfer of entropy
between countries. I used Symbolic Transfer Entropy (STE), explained in section 4.2.5,
to measure the diffusion of popularity among countries to understand how countries influ­
ence each other.
STE measures the directional influence of one time series to another. This method first
transforms the time series into an encoded sequence of symbols and then calculates an
entropy transfer. Borge­Holthoefer et al. in their work [43] describe a more customized
version of the algorithm for calculating symbolic transfer entropy. They identified three
primary steps of the algorithm:
1. Creating subsamples of size m
2. Encoding these subsamples.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
39
==PAGE:48==
China
India
Japan
Bulgaria
Chile
Brazil
Spain
Greece
Taiwan
Portugal
Italy
Germany
Norway
Finland
France
Belgium
Denmark
UK
USA
Ireland
New Zealand
Switzerland
Canada
Netherlands
Sweden
Australia
Austria
China
India
Japan
Bulgaria
Chile
Brazil
Spain
Greece
Taiwan
Portugal
Italy
Germany
Norway
Finland
France
Belgium
Denmark
UK
USA
Ireland
New Zealand
Switzerland
Canada
Netherlands
Sweden
Australia
Austria
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Number of the same songs
Figure 6.8: Matrix illustrating the number of common songs between all countries.
UK
USA
Ireland
New Zealand
Switzerland
Canada
Netherlands
Sweden
Australia
Austria
Chile
Brazil
Spain
Greece
Bulgaria
Taiwan
Germany
Portugal
Italy
Finland
France
Norway
Belgium
Denmark
UK
USA
Ireland
New Zealand
Switzerland
Canada
Netherlands
Sweden
Australia
Austria
Chile
Brazil
Spain
Greece
Bulgaria
Taiwan
Germany
Portugal
Italy
Finland
France
Norway
Belgium
Denmark
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Number of the same songs
Figure 6.9: Matrix illustrating the number of common songs between selected coun­
tries. Included countries share at least 300 common songs.
40
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:49==
Spain
Portugal
Italy
Norway
Finland
France
Belgium
Denmark
New Zealand
Ireland
USA
Germany
Switzerland
Canada
Netherlands
Sweden
UK
Australia
Austria
Spain
Portugal
Italy
Norway
Finland
France
Belgium
Denmark
New Zealand
Ireland
USA
Germany
Switzerland
Canada
Netherlands
Sweden
UK
Australia
Austria
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Number of the same songs
Figure 6.10: Matrix illustrating the number of common songs between selected
countries.Included countries share at least 700 common songs.
New Zealand
Ireland
USA
Switzerland
Germany
Sweden
Canada
Netherlands
UK
Australia
Austria
New Zealand
Ireland
USA
Switzerland
Germany
Sweden
Canada
Netherlands
UK
Australia
Austria
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Number of the same songs
Figure 6.11:
Matrix illustrating the number of common songs between coun­
tries.Included countries share at least 1000 common songs.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
41
==PAGE:50==
sequence
encoded result
[X, X, Y ];
X > Y
[1, 1, 0]
[X, X, Y ];
X < Y
[1, 1, 2]
[X, Y, X];
X > Y
[1, 0, 1]
[X, Y, X];
X < Y
[1, 2, 1]
[Y, X, X];
X > Y
[0, 1, 1]
[Y, X, X];
X < Y
[2, 1, 1]
Table 6.1: Symbolic encoding of the subsampled time series. Encoding is proposed for
the subsample of size 3, when two elements of the subsample are equal.
3. Calculating the entropy of the created subsamples.
For my research, I focused on the entropy between songs popular in pairs of countries.
Initially, I identified common songs for each country pair in my dataset. Then, I used the
mentioned algorithm to calculate the entropy diffusion. The input for my algorithm was the
chronological sequence of a song’s chart position. To address instances where a song
appeared or disappeared earlier in one country, I standardized the sequence lengths by
assigning a value of 41 (indicating a position just outside the chart) to missing dates.
In my project, I modified the original algorithm by adding a preliminary step of transforming
the time series. This first step involves categorizing song positions into four groups:
1. very high positions ­ between 1 and 3
2. high positions ­ between 4 and 6
3. medium positions ­ between 7 and 10
4. low positions ­ below 10
This transformation simplifies the sequences, highlighting overall trends rather than local
fluctuations.
Subsequently, I generated subsamples, as recommended by Kennel et al. in [84]. I
decided to use size 3 as my embedding dimension, to determine the correctness of my
decision I employed the false nearest neighbor method that is explained in section 4.2.4.
The next phase involved devising a unique encoding for the time series. Unlike Borge­
Holthoefer et al. [43], who based their encoding on the order of elements in a subsample,
I introduced a customized approach due to the repetitive nature of the values in my se­
quence. My encoding method aimed to capture the relationship between elements in a
subsample, leading to three main scenarios:
1. All elements are identical: For this, I used a constant array of ones [1, 1, 1], indi­
cating no movement.
2. Two elements are identical: I divided this into six subcases, detailed in Table 6.1,
each with a specific encoded array.
3. All elements are different: Here, I followed Borge­Holthoefer et al. [43] by using
the order of indices for the sorted sequence.
This approach allowed for a more nuanced understanding of the diffusion of song popu­
larity across different countries. The process of symbolization and discretization of data,
is crucial, as it reduces the impact of small fluctuations that might be due to noise. Also,
42
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:51==
STE is based on the order patterns, hence I detected the need for a custom encoding, as
the one proposed by Borge­Holthoefer et al. [43] could not capture all of the patterns that
emerged in my sequences.
To summarize, my modified algorithm involves:
Algorithm 2 Analysis of common songs between country pairs
1: for each pair of countries do
2:
identify common songs between countries
3:
for each song common do
4:
Standardize the sequence of song’s position, filling missing values with 41
5:
Transform the sequence based on four groups
6:
Create subsamples of size 3
7:
for each subsample do
8:
Apply custom encoding
9:
end for
10:
Calculate entropy following Borge­Holthoefer et al. method [43]
11:
end for
12: end for
Figure 6.12 illustrates the application of the algorithm applied to the example song ”Scream
& Shout” by Will.i.am and Britney Spears, which charted in both the Netherlands and
Brazil. The first set of diagrams shows the chart positions in the Netherlands (left) and
Brazil (right), including the standardized positions of 41 in Brazil’s chart. Different back­
ground colors indicate the groupings. The second row displays the transformed posi­
tions, and the final diagrams show the results of encoded subsamples, where constant
transformed positions correspond to constant symbolic encodings, and variations in the
sequence are similarly reflected in the subsamples.
After completing the entropy calculations for the entire dataset according to the steps de­
scribed before, I examined the data. The entropy diffusion method yielded values ranging
from ⟨−1, 1⟩. Here, values near −1 suggest an inverse information flow, implying that for
a country pair C1­C2, the information flow was from C2 to C1, meaning that country C2
is influencing the positions of the songs on country C1’s chart, contrary to what was ex­
pected. Values around 0 indicate a lack of information diffusion, or that countries C1 and
C2 interact with the same number of songs in their respective charts. Values close to 1
point to diffusion from C1 to C2 in the pair C1­C2, meaning that country C1 influences the
positions of songs on C2’s chart.
In order to quantify the importance of the calculated entropies, I needed to define a thresh­
old value that would categorize the results as meaningful, or non­influential. This would
be a boundary where the entropy value should be accepted, meaning that the diffusion
of information between countries is big enough and should be interpreted as influential;
or declined when the entropy value is small, suggesting no influence between countries.
Threshold values are typically determined empirically, guided by expert knowledge. How­
ever, as my study is the first to apply this method to the diffusion of song popularity, I em­
ployed Fisher’s test, detailed in section 4.1.4, to establish the threshold. For each song
and its corresponding entropy value, I randomized the original sequences with encoded
positions and recalculated the entropy values for those random sequences. This process
was repeated 100 times. I generated a histogram showing the distribution of those 100
entropies of random shuffles of data. The distribution resembled a Gaussian curve. I also
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
43
==PAGE:52==
49_2012
50_2012
51_2012
52_2012
0_2013
1_2013
2_2013
3_2013
4_2013
5_2013
6_2013
7_2013
8_2013
9_2013
10_2013
11_2013
12_2013
13_2013
14_2013
15_2013
16_2013
17_2013
18_2013
0
10
20
30
40
Position
very high
high
medium
low
Position in Netherlands
49_2012
50_2012
51_2012
52_2012
0_2013
1_2013
2_2013
3_2013
4_2013
5_2013
6_2013
7_2013
8_2013
9_2013
10_2013
11_2013
12_2013
13_2013
14_2013
15_2013
16_2013
17_2013
18_2013
0
10
20
30
40
Position
very high
high
medium
low
Position in Brazil
49_2012
50_2012
51_2012
52_2012
0_2013
1_2013
2_2013
3_2013
4_2013
5_2013
6_2013
7_2013
8_2013
9_2013
10_2013
11_2013
12_2013
13_2013
14_2013
15_2013
16_2013
17_2013
18_2013
0
1
2
3
4
5
Transformed position
Transformed positions
49_2012
50_2012
51_2012
52_2012
0_2013
1_2013
2_2013
3_2013
4_2013
5_2013
6_2013
7_2013
8_2013
9_2013
10_2013
11_2013
12_2013
13_2013
14_2013
15_2013
16_2013
17_2013
18_2013
0
1
2
3
4
5
Transformed position
Transformed positions
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
1
2
Encoded value
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
1
2
Encoded value
Figure 6.12: A detailed visualization illustrates the two­step algorithm that converts
a series of positions into an encoded time series for entropy calculation The plot
showcases two countries: the Netherlands on the left, and Brazil on the right. Initially,
it displays the starting position of the song ”Scream & Shout” by Will.i.am and Britney
Spears. This is followed by a background segmented into four colors, each representing
a different classification. Blue signifies the ”very high” positions 1 to 3, green indicates
”high” positions 4 to 6, yellow represents positions 7 to 10, and gray corresponds to “low”
positions, those below 10. Subsequent diagrams show the process of encoding these
initial positions according to the described grouping, shown as colors on the diagram
above. Finally, the last set of diagrams visualizes the encoding of 3­length subsamples,
as outlined in section 6.2.2 of the documentation.
44
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:53==
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Entropy values
0
5
10
15
20
Count
actual entropy:  0.542 
2.5th
97.5th
Figure 6.13: Histogram of the results of Fisher’s permutation test performed for
the song ”Will.i.am & Britney Spears ­ Scream & Shout”, present in the Dutch and
Brazilian charts. Histogram presents entropy values calculated for 100 random permu­
tations of the position sequences of the ”Will.i.am & Britney Spears ­ Scream & Shout”
song from the Dutch and Brazilian charts. Two gray lines indicate the 2.5th quantile and
97.5th quantile. The red line shows the true value of the entropy, calculated for the original
data.
identified the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles on this distribution. The resulting distribution
with highlighted the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles alongside the original entropy value, is
presented in Figure 6.13.
Given the Gaussian­like distribution of the results of permutation test (Figure 6.13), I opted
for standard statistical benchmarks to categorize the values of the entropy of the song,
assigned categories were saved in new column. I set one threshold value in the 2.5th
percentile, if the real entropy value was smaller than this, the song was categorized as
inversely influential, and I marked it in the new column as −1. If the song’s real entropy
value was bigger than 97.5th percentile, it was categorized as influential and marked as
1. When a song’s real entropy value fell within the limits of 95% of all permutation test
results, it was classified as non­influential and marked as 0.
I performed the described permutation test with 100 permutations on all country pairs and
songs. For each test, I determined custom threshold values according to the method
described above. This operation categorized each song in a country pair, as influential
(1), inversely influential (−1), or non­influential(0).
To analyze the results, I calculated the proportion of non­influential songs (labeled as 0)
and influential songs (labeled as 1) to all songs, for each country pair. These results are
presented in diagrams 6.14 and 6.15. For the diagram showing the proportion of influential
songs, I excluded values of countries where the proportion of influential songs was smaller
than 2.5% of all songs. I also chose not to create a separate diagram for songs marked as
reversely influential (−1), as this information is implicitly included in the influential songs
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
45
==PAGE:54==
India
Bulgaria
Japan
Chile
China
Netherlands
Brazil
Canada
Italy
France
Greece
Australia
Norway
Spain
Taiwan
Ireland
Portugal
USA
Germany
Austria
Switzerland
Denmark
UK
Belgium
New Zealand
Finland
Sweden
Follower country
India
Bulgaria
Japan
Chile
China
Netherlands
Brazil
Canada
Italy
France
Greece
Australia
Norway
Spain
Taiwan
Ireland
Portugal
USA
Germany
Austria
Switzerland
Denmark
UK
Belgium
New Zealand
Finland
Sweden
Trendsetter country
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
Fraction of zeros
Figure 6.14: Matrix with the proportion of songs with no influence relative to the
total number of songs exchanged between each pair of countries. Non influencial
songs were categorized based on the results from the STE algorithm, where for each
song in the country pair, a permutation test was performed to define custom threshold
values. Threshold values were set in the 2.5th percentile and 97.5th percentile. Songs
categorized as non­influential had the real entropy value within the boundaries of 2.5th
and 97.5th percentiles. The scale of the chart starts at 0.9.
diagram. This is because if country A influences country B with a strength of 0.05, the
reverse influence from B to A would also be 0.05, as already represented in the diagram.
Diagram 6.14 shows that for most country pairs, a majority of the songs do not demon­
strate significant information diffusion, with over 90% of songs being non­influential. This
could be due to the stringent threshold set in my methodology, where only 5% of ran­
domly permuted songs are classified as influential. Given the short input sequences of
around 20­30 observations, this leaves little room for data noise, possibly causing some
influential songs to be misclassified.
On the other hand, Diagram 6.15, which represents the proportion of influential songs,
shows no specific pattern among countries.
However, certain countries like Finland,
Canada, the USA, and Greece emerge as more influential, having information diffusion
with a bigger amount of countries. A high entropy value may also indicate that these coun­
tries are faster at adapting songs. Other countries, like Chile and Brazil, show minimal
influence, potentially due to smaller data samples and more missing values.
Moreover, while there are notable strong connections, such as between Spain and India,
or Japan and India, the actual diffusion of songs between these countries is relatively
small, under 5%. A revisit to the matrix that maps the number of common songs between
countries (Figure A.4) highlights an intriguing trend: the strongest connections, as per
46
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:55==
Finland
Greece
Portugal
Canada
USA
India
Belgium
China
Ireland
Sweden
France
Brazil
Chile
Bulgaria
Denmark
UK
New Zealand
Australia
Netherlands
Switzerland
Norway
Spain
Japan
Italy
Taiwan
Austria
Germany
Follower country
Finland
Greece
Portugal
Canada
USA
India
Belgium
China
Ireland
Sweden
France
Brazil
Chile
Bulgaria
Denmark
UK
New Zealand
Australia
Netherlands
Switzerland
Norway
Spain
Japan
Italy
Taiwan
Austria
Germany
Trendsetter country
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Fraction of ones
Figure 6.15: Matrix with the strength of connections between countries based on
the proportion of influential songs. The matrix represents the fraction of influential
songs relative to the total songs shared between nations. Only relationships where the
fraction exceeds 2.5% of all song exchanges between a pair of countries are included in
the diagram. On the Y­axis, we identify the ”trendsetter” countries, those who have a high
number of songs that they influenced in other countries’ charts, while the X­axis shows
the ”follower” countries. These countries have a high number of inversely influenced
songs, which means that most of the time, the song’s position on the chart is influenced
by other country’s position on the chart. The color intensity in the matrix corresponds to
the fraction’s magnitude: the darker the color, the stronger the connection.
the entropy diffusion algorithm, are found between countries with fewer common songs.
This is especially true for countries that are usually influenced by others, such as China,
India, Taiwan, or Brazil. These countries have fewer shared songs but show a notable
fraction of songs that are inversely influenced, around 5% between Spain and Taiwan
and approximately 4% between the USA and India. Interestingly, Finland and Greece
rank among the most influential, while the UK, despite having a large number of shared
songs with other countries, is not included in this group. This may indicate that measured
entropy indicates how fast countries are adopting songs, compared to one another, rather
than the influence on the song’s position on the chart between countries.
To summarize, a significant group of countries, notably Canada and the United States,
have a substantial impact on the global music industry. In contrast, many other nations
have minimal or no influence in this world. Interestingly, entropy calculations reveal that
countries like Finland, Greece, and Portugal are among the most influential, which in their
case may be rather a group of the fastest countries in adapting songs. Following that
thinking, among the slowest­adopting countries are China, India, and Taiwan. Generally,
music tends to disseminate from the Western countries with larger music markets, such
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
47
==PAGE:56==
as those in Europe and the US, to nations outside of Europe, including India and Taiwan.
48
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:57==
6.3
Who is the trendsetter?
So far I have presented the general trends observed in music charts and provided detailed
insights into how song popularity spreads across different countries. In this chapter, I will
focus on using all the data collected to identify which country acts as a trendsetter in the
music industry. By ”trendsetter,” I refer to a country that plays a crucial role in driving
song popularity. To achieve this, I will concentrate on analyzing the initial and final chart
positions of songs, the diffusion of entropy, and the peak times of songs in each respective
country.
6.3.1
Initial position analysis
Trendsetter countries should enable songs to gradually gain popularity over time, reaching
their peak later. For trendsetters, one might argue that they should have a relatively small
number of songs that debut at very high chart positions, as they should allow songs to
gain popularity in the country before diffusing to other countries. However, this may not be
always the case, as the research shows that the time difference between the release date
of a song and its peak position became smaller with time due to the invention of stream­
ing services [19]. This section will explore the initial and final position dependencies, to
determine if described trends can be observed in some of the countries.
Figure 6.16 presents the correlation between initial and final positions for selected coun­
tries. A more intense color indicates a higher frequency of songs sharing specific initial
and final positions. In these countries, a consistent trend is observed: a linear relationship
between a song’s initial and final chart positions. This may suggest that there is a large
number of songs that are on the chart for only one week. Notably, there is a concentra­
tion of intense color in the top right corner of these diagrams, suggesting a high number
of songs that enter and leave the chart at low positions, such as 19 or 20.
The diagram for the UK, however, shows a different pattern. Starting from around the 20th
position, the number of songs with identical initial and final positions is significantly higher
than in the US. Combining these findings with the histogram of initial and final positions
for these countries (Figure 6.2), I noticed that songs entering the UK charts typically start
at higher positions compared to the US.
Additionally, Figure 6.16 presents that in most countries, there is a light­colored strip at
the top of the diagram, indicating a considerable number of songs entering at various
positions but all ending at lower positions, ranging from 17 to 20. In contrast, the US
shows a concentration in the top right corner, indicating a large number of songs entering
and exiting the chart at low positions. This could be due to songs climbing slowly to their
peak positions or a trend of songs entering at low positions and quickly disappearing.
In summary, the analysis of initial and final chart positions across different countries re­
veals distinct patterns in how songs gain and lose popularity. While a linear relationship
between these positions is a common trend, variations such as the higher starting posi­
tions in the UK charts and the concentration of lower position entries and exits in the US
highlight diverse approaches to music popularity in these regions. These patterns provide
valuable insights into the dynamics of music charts, although they do not conclusively de­
fine a single trendsetting country.
6.3.2
Time difference in peak
Because trendsetters are said to be the ones setting the trend, one might expect songs to
reach peak positions earlier in such countries than in others. This means that probably,
songs gain popularity in these countries first before spreading elsewhere. In this section,
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.16: Diagram showing the number of songs with the given initial position
and their final position for selected countries. The diagram shows how the final posi­
tion is dependent on the initial positions for the selected countries. The more intense color
indicates a larger number of songs that entered and exited the chart at given positions.
50
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:59==
I will explore the timing of song peaks in various countries, as well as the duration from a
song’s first appearance in the dataset to its peak position in each country.
I began by calculating the differences in days between the peak dates of songs across
different countries. The results for selected countries are presented in Figure 6.17. This
diagram summarizes the time differences in peak dates for songs between pairs of coun­
tries, measured in days. Considering that charts are released weekly, but possibly on
different days, I chose a bin size of 7 days. This approach allows for a comparison of
charts from equivalent time periods, given the weekly cycle.
To facilitate comparisons between countries, I normalized the results. Furthermore, I ap­
plied color coding to the histograms: gray indicates a median time difference of zero, blue
signifies a negative time difference (indicating one country is ahead), and red denotes a
positive time difference (suggesting the country is behind in trends). This color scheme
helps to visually distinguish whether countries show similar trends (gray), one is typically
ahead (blue), or lagging (red). Based on findings from previous sections, I focused on
seven countries: the USA, UK, Ireland, Netherlands, Finland, Spain, and Austria. The
summary of all countries can be found in the Appendix A.5.
Analyzing Figure 6.17 reveals that the USA is generally the first country where songs
reach their peak compared to others. Notably, the Netherlands often shares the same
peak date as the USA, a result of a relatively even distribution of songs peaking first in
both countries, with no pronounced peak in the zero­value bin. However, the UK and
Ireland pair shows a significantly higher number of songs peaking within a week, the
highest among all country pairs. This suggests a similar dynamic and rapid information
diffusion between these countries, a trend not confirmed in the entropy diffusion analysis
(Figure 6.15). Intriguingly, Ireland consistently appears as the last country to reach peak
popularity in songs, indicating its position as one of the follower countries.
The analysis of the difference in the peak timing revealed discrepancies compared to the
entropy analysis predictions. To delve deeper, I examined the time difference between
a song’s first appearance and its peak date in each country. For each country pair, I
identified common songs, noting their initial appearance and peak dates. By calculating
the difference between the peak date and initial appearance date for countries, and then
subtracting these differences between countries, I derived the difference in days, that it
takes each song to reach peak position in each country. The histograms were color­coded
based on each country pair’s median value. Blue histograms indicated countries where
songs gained popularity more quickly, red histograms represented countries where it took
longer on average for songs to reach their peak, and gray indicated equal average times
for reaching peak popularity.
The results for selected countries are presented in Figure 6.18, the summary for all coun­
tries could be found in the Appendix A.6. Analyzing the summary diagram, the United
States consistently emerges as the lead country. For the majority of country pairs, the
median is zero, suggesting an equal number of songs reaching peak popularity faster
in either country. However, the UK and Ireland histogram, while similar in shape to the
peak differences diagram (Figure 6.17), shows a median of zero. This implies that despite
earlier peak dates in the UK, it takes, on average, the same amount of time for songs to
peak in both the UK and Ireland. This discrepancy could be caused by different chart
publication days.
Since the presented figure 6.18 only includes selected countries, I compiled a comprehen­
sive summary in Table 6.2. This table summarizes the number of color­coded histograms
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
51
==PAGE:60==
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
UK - USA
Count
Ireland - USA
Count
Austria - USA
Count
Netherlands - USA
Count
Spain - USA
Count
Finland - USA
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - UK
Count
Ireland - UK
Count
Austria - UK
Count
Netherlands - UK
Count
Spain - UK
Count
Finland - UK
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Ireland
Count
UK - Ireland
Count
Austria - Ireland
Count
Netherlands - Ireland
Count
Spain - Ireland
Count
Finland - Ireland
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Austria
Count
UK - Austria
Count
Ireland - Austria
Count
Netherlands - Austria
Count
Spain - Austria
Count
Finland - Austria
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Netherlands
Count
UK - Netherlands
Count
Ireland - Netherlands
Count
Austria - Netherlands
Count
Spain - Netherlands
Count
Finland - Netherlands
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Spain
Count
UK - Spain
Count
Ireland - Spain
Count
Austria - Spain
Count
Netherlands - Spain
Count
Finland - Spain
50
0
50
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Finland
50
0
50
Count
UK - Finland
50
0
50
Count
Ireland - Finland
50
0
50
Count
Austria - Finland
50
0
50
Count
Netherlands - Finland
50
0
50
Count
Spain - Finland
50
0
50
Figure 6.17: Diagram showing the normalized distribution of differences in the num­
ber of days between the peak popularity of songs across different countries. It fea­
tures a histogram that represents the day difference for peak times of a song in paired
countries. The histogram’s bin size is set at 7 days. The color coding of the diagrams is
based on their median values: gray indicates a median of 0, red signifies a median less
than 0, and blue is used when the median is greater than 0.
52
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:61==
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
UK - USA
Count
Ireland - USA
Count
Austria - USA
Count
Netherlands - USA
Count
Spain - USA
Count
Finland - USA
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - UK
Count
Ireland - UK
Count
Austria - UK
Count
Netherlands - UK
Count
Spain - UK
Count
Finland - UK
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Ireland
Count
UK - Ireland
Count
Austria - Ireland
Count
Netherlands - Ireland
Count
Spain - Ireland
Count
Finland - Ireland
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Austria
Count
UK - Austria
Count
Ireland - Austria
Count
Netherlands - Austria
Count
Spain - Austria
Count
Finland - Austria
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Netherlands
Count
UK - Netherlands
Count
Ireland - Netherlands
Count
Austria - Netherlands
Count
Spain - Netherlands
Count
Finland - Netherlands
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Spain
Count
UK - Spain
Count
Ireland - Spain
Count
Austria - Spain
Count
Netherlands - Spain
Count
Finland - Spain
50
0
50
0.00
0.02
0.04
Count
USA - Finland
50
0
50
Count
UK - Finland
50
0
50
Count
Ireland - Finland
50
0
50
Count
Austria - Finland
50
0
50
Count
Netherlands - Finland
50
0
50
Count
Spain - Finland
50
0
50
Figure 6.18: Diagram showing the normalized distribution of differences in the num­
ber of days it takes for songs to reach peak popularity from their first appearance
in the country, across various countries. It includes a histogram displaying the day
differences between the debut of a song and its peak position in paired countries. The
histogram’s bin size is set at 7 days. The color coding of the diagrams is based on their
median values: gray indicates a median of 0, red signifies a median greater than 0, and
blue is used when the median is less than 0.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
53
==PAGE:62==
amount of blue histograms
amount of red histograms
amount of gray hstograms
USA
19
0
2
Brazil
19
1
1
Bulgaria
12
2
7
New Zealand
10
1
10
Greece
9
3
9
Netherlands
9
2
10
Portugal
7
2
12
Austria
5
3
13
Belgium
3
2
16
Switzerland
1
3
17
UK
0
9
12
Sweden
0
5
16
Spain
0
7
14
Norway
0
6
15
Australia
0
2
19
Italy
0
8
13
Germany
0
4
17
France
0
6
15
Finland
0
10
11
Denmark
0
8
13
Canada
0
2
19
Ireland
0
8
13
Table 6.2: Table presents the number of histograms (from A.6 where the song in the
country gained popularity faster (blue histograms), slower (red histogram) or the
average time of reaching popularity was equal (gray histogram) compared to other
countries.
for each country. The countries are arranged with those having the most blue histograms
first (countries in which songs gained popularity faster than in others). The table confirms
that the US generally leads, with songs reaching their peak earlier than in other countries.
Surprisingly, Brazil and Bulgaria also appear as leading countries, this may be caused
by a significant number of songs that appear on the chart at relatively high positions and
quickly exit the charts.
Only about half of the countries typically observe songs peaking earlier than others, with
the US uniquely never lagging in peak song popularity. The dominance of gray histograms
suggests that either the countries are closely matched in terms of peak popularity dynam­
ics, the measurement method may lack precision, or the dataset is too narrow, lacking a
sufficient range of common songs between countries.
In conclusion, this analysis underscores the varying dynamics of song popularity across
different countries. The United States consistently leads in rapid song popularity growth.
The high number of gray histograms points to a need for a broader dataset or a more
nuanced analytical approach to fully understand these global music trends. The phe­
nomenon with Brazil and Bulgaria peaking earlier than the majority of countries, suggests
that provided metrics should not be interpreted alone, as this may lead to a misinterpreta­
tion of results, where the hypothesis suggests a leading tendency, but where in fact that
may be untrue, as suggested before.
54
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:63==
6.3.3
Entropy diffusion
The entropy calculations from Section 6.2.2 have yielded intriguing insights into how songs
spread across countries. I decided to extend that research and based on the provided
results determine if there is a trendsetter among countries.
I used findings from the previous section 6.2.2, to create a network visualization. Specif­
ically, I constructed a directed graph with weighted edges to more accurately represent
the strength of connections between countries. This was based on the previously com­
puted proportions of meaningful songs exchanged between countries. I established an
edge when this proportion exceeded 2.5% of all songs shared by a pair of countries. The
edge’s weight was determined by multiplying the proportion by a constant value of 100,
and its direction reflected the flow of information.
The resulting graph was very complex, featuring numerous connections. To determine
the most influential country, I counted the incoming and outgoing edges. As presented in
Table 6.3, the USA and Canada emerged as the most connected countries, influencing
16 different countries each, with only one country influencing them in return. Despite
earlier research suggesting the UK’s prominence in setting trends, it ranked sixth based on
entropy calculations, influencing just 8 countries — half as many as the USA. Notably, the
Netherlands, previously grouped with the USA, UK, and Canada as trendsetting nations,
ranked 17th.
I also decided to identify the sinks and the sources in my graph. As sink, I understand the
node that has only incoming edges, and as the source, I understand the node that has
only outcoming edges. Sources could be potential trendsetters’ countries as they are not
influenced by others. On the other hand, sinks are countries that are only being influenced,
resulting table 6.4 shows four potential sources and one sink. The Netherlands, Australia,
China, and Ireland could be categorized as trendsetters because, they do not have any
external influences, but it could also be potentially, due to the strict criteria used in song
categorization. Additionally, Chile is a country completely influenced by others.
In Figure 6.19, I generated a simplified network focusing on the two primary influencers
that have the most outgoing edges, the USA and Canada and the countries they influence.
I colored the edges to distinguish those going out of the US and Canada.
The graph places Canada and the US at the center, highlighting their influential status.
Two notable pathways are Canada to Italy to the USA, and the USA to Portugal to Canada.
This indicates the USA’s indirect influence on Italy via Canada and a similar pattern for
Canada’s influence on Portugal via the USA. Interestingly, there’s no direct link between
Canada and the USA, suggesting equal popularity. The diagram also shows the UK, ini­
tially considered a potential trendsetter, being influenced by Canada, while most countries
are influenced by both Canada and the USA.
Examining the edge widths, most connections exhibit similar strength, except for notably
strong links from Canada to France and Belgium, likely due to shared language. Similarly,
there is a pronounced connection from the USA to Denmark. This could be due to the
widespread use of the English language in Denmark, a factor influenced by the foreigners
who come to work and study in the country.
In summary, based on song popularity’s entropy diffusion and time taken to peak, the
USA could be described as a trendsetting country. It influences the largest number of
countries, which could be attributed to a trendsetter. The US also has the earliest peak
times compared to other countries, which again would indicate that it can be a good candi­
date for a trendsetter, as the song tends to peak faster in the USA than in other countries.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
55
==PAGE:64==
Country node
In­Degree
Out­Degree
USA
1
16
Canada
1
16
Finland
1
13
Greece
3
11
Switzerland
3
9
UK
1
8
Portugal
6
8
Australia
0
7
New Zealand
2
7
Belgium
4
7
Norway
7
7
Sweden
2
6
Denmark
5
6
Japan
3
5
Italy
7
5
Bulgaria
8
5
Netherlands
0
4
Spain
7
4
Germany
4
3
China
0
3
Ireland
0
3
India
6
3
Austria
6
2
France
8
2
Taiwan
8
2
Brazil
7
1
Chile
3
0
Table 6.3: Table summarizing the outgoing and incoming edges for all countries
within the network. The number of outgoing edges represents how many countries are
influenced by the node country. The number of incoming edges reflects the count of
countries influencing the node country.
Country node
In­Degree
Out­Degree
Australia
0
7
Netherlands
0
4
China
0
3
Ireland
0
3
Chile
3
0
Table 6.4: Table summarizing the sink and sources within the network. Sinks are
countries with no outgoing edges, and sources are countries that have no incoming edges.
56
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.19: Connection network for the two most influential countries, Canada and
the US. The simplified network is based on the two most influential countries ­ the USA
and Canada. The network is built upon all of the countries that follow the US and Canada
and all of the connections between them. The weights of the edges are proportional to
the fraction of the songs that have been influenced by the fraction of all common songs
between countries. Edges coming out of the US are blue, those coming out of Canada
are orange. This representation should increase readability.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
57
==PAGE:66==
Presented arguments are strong indicators that the US can indeed be a trendsetter in the
popularity of songs among countries.
58
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:67==
7
Discussion
This chapter is dedicated to summarizing the findings detailed in Section 6. It will address
the three central questions that were the subject of this thesis. Initially, I will analyze the
patterns observed in charts across various countries. Subsequently, the discussion will
focus on how popularity diffused among these nations. Finally, I will identify the trendset­
ter country and provide reasoning for my selection. Following this, the limitations of the
current study will be discussed, along with suggestions for potential future directions this
research could take.
7.1
Patterns in song dynamics
The primary focus of the thesis is ”Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking
Dynamics.” Initially, the study involved analyzing patterns in song charts, emphasizing the
lifespan, position shifts, and trajectory of songs.
The research revealed a significant impact of popular streaming services like Spotify and
YouTube, particularly around 2011, which confirms Lech’s findings [4]. This impact was
evident in a group of countries where the average lifespan of songs increased after 2011.
In contrast, another group of countries showed a consistently stable average song lifes­
pan, unaffected by these streaming platforms.
The investigation into the song’s movements allowed for the categorization of countries
into two distinct groups. The first group exhibited minor chart movements, where 95% of
songs fluctuated by up to 10 positions. The second group displayed more considerable
chart movements, with songs shifting by up to 20 positions. The second group contains
mostly Western countries, simmialr grouping was observed by Buda and Jarynkowski in
[19]. This categorization suggests that possibly, the size of a country’s music market,
presented in Figure 7.1, is tightly connected with chart movements. A similar relation is
observed in the film industry [14].
Likewise, two main patterns emerged in the trajectory analysis of songs. The first pattern
involved songs taking some time before reaching their peak chart positions, while the
second showed songs peaking almost immediately upon entering the chart. Additionally,
within those groups, there are more nuanced trends depending on the top position of the
song, some songs gradually reach their peak position, while others show a decreasing
trend after peaking.
It is noteworthy that the countries following similar patterns often share linguistic connec­
tions. A similar suggestion was made by Verboord and Brandellero in [5]. However, the
specific grouping of countries varies depending on the factor under investigation.
In summary, the dynamics of pop music ranking is very complex, with multiple factors
influencing it, such as the influence of streaming services or music market size. It is gen­
erally observed that countries fall into two primary categories. This classification inspired
the subsequent phase of my research, where I explored how song popularity spreads
across different nations.
7.2
Popularity of songs starts in the Western countries
While measuring the popularity diffusion between countries, my primary focus was on
employing the algorithm for symbolic transfer entropy 4.2.5. The customized version of
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 7.1: The proportion of the markets that contributed to 95% of the total rev­
enue of music in 2003. Photo sourced from [85]
algorithm developed by BorgeHolthoefer et al. in [43], enabled a more efficient transfer of
trends observed in the data into symbolic encoding sequences. The use of a permutation
test to establish the importance threshold was particularly beneficial, given the lack of
specific expertise in this area.
The resulting matrix, indicating the diffusion of information between countries (Figure
6.15), in conjunction with the matrix showing the number of common songs shared be­
tween countries (Figure 6.8), reveals a significant diffusion of information from Western
countries like the U.S., UK, and Canada to Asian countries, notably India and Taiwan.
These similar groupings were observed in [13], [5], and [19], which suggests that West­
ern countries, mainly the UK and the US play a significant role in spreading the popularity
of music. Despite this, the findings from the entropy calculations might be considered
marginal. This is because over 90% of the songs in all countries were categorized as
non­influential, highlighting a potential limitation in the current approach.
Moreover, while some countries demonstrate strong connections, the significance of these
connections becomes debatable when considering the number of songs shared between
countries. A less stringent threshold rule might have produced more telling results; how­
ever, due to the extensive computation time required, this hypothesis remains untested.
In summary, I employed a customized algorithm to analyze the spread of musical popu­
larity across different countries. The results indicate a prominent flow of musical influence
from Western to Asian countries, though the significance of these findings is tempered by
the high proportion of songs deemed non­influential. Future studies might benefit from a
revised threshold rule.
7.3
USA as a trendsetter country
In my research, I encountered an interesting question while examining results on popu­
larity diffusion: Which country is the trendsetter? To answer this, I focused on analyzing
the trends in initial position diagrams, time differences in reaching peak popularity, and
previously calculated entropy diffusion.
The analysis of initial positions indicated that for most countries, their final position is
60
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:69==
linearly related to their starting position. However, this did not point to any specific country
as a trendsetter. Consequently, I examined the time differences in peak dates and the
time taken to reach peak positions among countries. Keeping in mind Ballerini et al.
[44] suggestion that a leader is influencing a group, I identified the United States as a
possible trendsetter, as it is the country with the fastest peaking songs. However, this
metric identified also a group of countries exhibiting similar tendencies as the US, they
are possibly fast­adapting countries, not trendsetters.
It should be noted that for most of the countries, the ranking position of the country based
on entropy diffusion was different from the one based on peak position analysis. Following
Mwaffo, Butail and Porfiri [46], I define a leader as a relatively uninfluenced source, with
that definition the results of entropy diffusion suggest that the US, again, is probably an
influencer, as it influences the vast majority of countries, at the same it is being influenced
by only one country.
In summary, while initial and peak position analyses provide some insights, the entropy dif­
fusion method offers a more consistent and reliable measure of influence in global trends,
suggesting that the United States has a leading role in spreading the popularity of pop
songs. The discrepancies in results highlight the complexity of determining trendsetting
nations.
7.4
Limitations of the study
The music industry is intricate, involving various factors that influence chart rankings.
Numerous studies aim to understand the processes shaping the music industry [86], [87],
yet still little is known about indicators of success. The conclusions of this thesis should
be approached with caution. They are derived from a single dataset gathering only a
handful of countries. Consequently, the observed patterns in ranking dynamics are related
to the time span of the dataset. Furthermore, the measurement of popularity diffusion is
restricted to a brief period, and the dataset includes occasional gaps in weekly data, which
were filled with a constant value 41, that would indicate songs out of ranking. There are
also inconsistencies in chart listings, as an example, Canada’s chart on December 28,
2011, featured 77 positions. I decided to remove those positions that were outside of the
normal limit, as they were outliers in my research.
This study uses a dataset sourced from top40charts.com. The algorithm used for ranking
calculations is not publicly disclosed, leading to potential discrepancies when compared
with other chart providers. To validate this research’s accuracy, it would be beneficial to
replicate the methods using diverse datasets from various sources.
Additionally, although data on the genres of songs and the nationalities of the artists were
collected, they were not used in the thesis. The high proportion of unknown or missing
nationalities (about 42% of the data) could lead to ambiguous results, given that nearly
half of the information is absent. The genre data was also challenging due to its diversity
and the extensive expertise required to categorize it effectively, there are over 100 genres
in the dataset.
Moreover, certain calculations, such as entropy measurement and categorization based
on permutation tests, were time­consuming. Despite implementing parallel processing,
these computations took approximately 15 hours to complete. This time constraint limited
the extent to which these results could be incorporated into the thesis.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
61
==PAGE:70==
7.5
Future directions
The investigation into the diffusion of songs’ popularity across different countries has un­
covered intriguing insights into the dynamics of cultural exchange and the global music
landscape. Nevertheless, there’s still considerable scope for future research in this field.
Here, I propose potential directions for further study, aiming to delve deeper into the nu­
ances of music popularity and its wider implications.
One potential area of focus could be a genre­centric analysis. This approach would ex­
plore how different musical genres, such as pop, hip­hop, or classical, traverse interna­
tional borders. Such an investigation could shed light on genre­specific trends in global
music.
Another promising direction involves examining the impact of digital platforms on the mu­
sic industry. Preliminary studies have analyzed song diffusion between Central Europe
and Asia through YouTube views. This research could be expanded to include more data
from various streaming platforms and additional countries. It would be particularly inter­
esting to explore how algorithms and user interactions on platforms like Spotify or Apple
Music shape global musical tastes.
The music market’s vastness also offers an interesting investigation into the economic
factors influencing song popularity. Research focusing on how music popularity affects
market revenues, concert tours, and merchandise sales could provide a comprehensive
view of the music industry’s economic impact.
In conclusion, while existing research has laid the groundwork for understanding song
popularity’s cross­country diffusion, these proposed research directions offer opportuni­
ties to broaden and deepen our comprehension of the global music landscape. These
areas of study could enrich our understanding of music’s role in cultural globalization and
its intersections with fields like sociology, economics, and media studies.
62
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:71==
8
Conclusion
This project aims to fill the gap in the research area and provide a more comprehensive
quantitive study on empirical data to better understand how pop songs diffuse among
countries.
This research confirms that song dynamics vary from one country to another, influenced
by distinct factors. It reveals that various economic or global events can affect a song’s
lifespan on the charts. The study observes shifts in song positions and their trajectories,
leading to a key finding: countries can be categorized into two groups. One group exhibits
frequent movement of songs on the charts and a delayed peak position, while the other
shows minimal movement with songs often peaking upon entry.
The methodology includes a customized symbolic transfer entropy algorithm to analyze
how song popularity spreads. Results indicate that most songs tend to originate from
Western countries, particularly the United States, which often sets musical trends. This
diffusion pattern might be linked to the size of the music market and historical ties between
countries, as evidenced by a common administrative language. However, determining the
exact impact of these factors on song dynamics is beyond the scope of this study.
In summary, Lech’s research sheds light on the complex nature of pop music’s global
diffusion. This study is instrumental in understanding the evolving dynamics of global
music trends and their implications for the music industry.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Weiai Wayne Xu, JungYun Park, and Han Woo Park. “The networked cultural diffu­
sion of Korean wave”. In: Online Information Review 39.1 (2015), pp. 43–60. DOI:
10.1108/OIR-07-2014-0160. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1108/OIR-
07-2014-0160.
[2]
Young Min Baek. “Relationship Between Cultural Distance and Cross­Cultural Mu­
sic Video Consumption on YouTube”. In: Social Science Computer Review 33.6
(2015), pp. 730–748. DOI: 10.1177/0894439314562184.
[3]
Pablo Bello and David Garcia. “Cultural Divergence in popular music: the increasing
diversity of music consumption on Spotify across countries”. In: Humanities and
Social Sciences Communications 8.1 (2021), p. 182. DOI: 10.1057/s41599- 021-
00855-1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-021-00855-1.
[4]
Marta Ewa Lech. “The dynamics of pop music charts: Is it getting harder to make a
hit?” In: (2023).
[5]
Marc Verboord and Amanda Brandellero. “The Globalization of Popular Music, 1960­
2010: A Multilevel Analysis of Music Flows”. In: Communication Research 45.4
(2018), pp. 603–627. DOI: 10.1177/0093650215623834.
[6]
Helena Majduchova and Maria Kmety Bartekova. “Innovations in the Creative In­
dustry Entities”. In: 19TH INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE GLOB­
ALIZATION AND ITS SOCIO­ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES 2019 ­ SUSTAIN­
ABILITY IN THE GLOBAL­KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY. Ed. by T Kliestik. Vol. 74.
SHS Web of Conferences. 2020. DOI: 10.1051/shsconf/20207402009.
[7]
Shale Horowitz. “Restarting Globalization after World War II: Structure, Coalitions,
and the Cold War”. In: Comparative Political Studies 37.2 (2004), pp. 127–151. DOI:
10.1177/0010414003260980.
[8]
J. Hillis Miller. “Globalization and World Literature”. In: Neohelicon 38.2 (2011),
pp. 251–265. DOI: 10.1007/s11059-011-0114-9. URL: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2- s2.0- 81355148770&doi=10.1007%2fs11059- 011- 0114-
9&partnerID=40&md5=ac639021b971a694a1f595fb24656a62.
[9]
Kim Jae­yong. “From Eurocentric World Literature to Global World Literature”. In:
Journal of World Literature 1.1 (2020), pp. 63–67. DOI: 10.1163/24056480-00101007.
[10]
W. Wayne Fu. “Concentration and Homogenization of International Movie Sources:
Examining Foreign Film Import Profiles”. In: Journal of Communication 56.4 (Nov.
2006), pp. 813–835. DOI: 10.1111/j.1460- 2466.2006.00321.x. eprint: https://
academic.oup.com/joc/article- pdf/56/4/813/22325960/jjnlcom0813.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.2006.00321.x.
[11]
Emily Apter. “Philosophizing World Literature”. In: Contemporary French and Fran­
cophone Studies 16.2 (2012), pp. 171–186. DOI: 10.1080/17409292.2012.668809.
[12]
Peter Achterberg et al. “A Cultural Globalization of Popular Music? American, Dutch,
French, and German Popular Music Charts (1965 to 2006)”. In: American Behav­
ioral Scientist 55.5 (2011), pp. 589–608. DOI: 10.1177/0002764211398081.
[13]
Erik Hitters and Miriam van de Kamp. “Tune in, fade out: Music companies and
the classification of domestic music products in the Netherlands”. In: Poetics 38.5
(2010), pp. 461–480. ISSN: 0304­422X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2010.
07.004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304422X10000471.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
65
==PAGE:74==
[14]
W. Wayne Fu and Clarice Sim. “Examining International Country­to­Country Flow
of Theatrical Films”. In: Journal of Communication 60.1 (Feb. 2010), pp. 120–143.
ISSN: 0021­9916. DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2009.01455.x. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/joc/article-pdf/60/1/120/22324424/jjnlcom0120.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1460-2466.2009.01455.x.
[15]
Susanne Janssen, Giselinde Kuipers, and Marc Verboord. “Cultural Globalization
and Arts Journalism: The International Orientation of Arts and Culture Coverage in
Dutch, French, German, and U.S. Newspapers, 1955 to 2005”. In: American Socio­
logical Review 73.5 (2008), pp. 719–740. ISSN: 00031224. URL: http://www.jstor.
org/stable/25472555 (visited on 01/12/2024).
[16]
Nobuko Kawashima Diana Crane and Ken’ichi Kawasaki. “Culture and Globaliza­
tion”. In: Global Culture: Media, Arts, Policy, and Globalization. Psychology Press,
2002. Chap. 1, pp. 1–22.
[17]
Òscar Celma and Pedro Cano. “From Hits to Niches? Or How Popular Artists Can
Bias Music Recommendation and Discovery”. In: (2008). DOI: 10.1145/1722149.
1722154.
[18]
R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos. “On the genre­fication of music: a percolation ap­
proach”. In: The European Physical Journal B ­ Condensed Matter and Complex
Systems 50.1–2 (Mar. 2006), pp. 183–188. ISSN: 1434­6036. DOI: 10.1140/epjb/
e2006-00115-0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjb/e2006-00115-0.
[19]
Andrzej Buda and Andrzej Jarynowski. “Exploring Patterns in European Singles
Charts”. In: 2015 Second European Network Intelligence Conference (2015), pp. 135–
139. DOI: 10.1109/ENIC.2015.27.
[20]
Young Min Baek. “Relationship Between Cultural Distance and Cross­Cultural Mu­
sic Video Consumption on YouTube”. In: Social Science Computer Review 33.6
(2015), pp. 730–748. DOI: 10.1177/0894439314562184.
[21]
Just Kist and Marc Verboord. “The Diffusion of Music Via YouTube: Comparing
Asian and European Music Video Charts”. In: Asian Cultural Flows. Springer Sin­
gapore, 2018. Chap. 12, pp. 197–214.
[22]
Ubonrat Siriyuvasak and Shin Hyunjoon. “Asianizing K­pop: Production, consump­
tion and identification patterns among Thai youth”. In: Inter­Asia Cultural Studies 8.1
(2007), pp. 109–136. DOI: 10.1080/14649370601119113. URL: https://www.scopus.
com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-33847718589&doi=10.1080%2f14649370601119113&
partnerID=40&md5=2be2f265c31cf98f768cfce043274ec6.
[23]
Gamaliel Percino, Peter Klimek, and Stefan Thurner. “Instrumentational Complexity
of Music Genres and Why Simplicity Sells”. In: PLoS ONE 9.12 (Dec. 2014). Ed. by
Dante R. Chialvo, e115255. ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115255.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115255.
[24]
Andrea Ordanini, Joseph C. Nunes, and Anastasia Nanni. “The featuring phenomenon
in music: how combining artists of different genres increases a song’s popularity”.
In: Marketing Letters 29.4 (Dec. 1, 2018), pp. 485–499. ISSN: 1573­059X. DOI:
10.1007/s11002-018-9476-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11002-018-9476-3.
[25]
C. Gershenson et al. G. Iñiguez C. Pineda. “Dynamics of ranking”. In: Journal of
Informetrics 13.1646 (2022). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-29256-x.
[26]
Regino Criado et al. “A new method for comparing rankings through complex net­
works: Model and analysis of competitiveness of major European soccer leagues”.
In: Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 23.4 (Oct. 2013). ISSN:
1089­7682. DOI: 10.1063/1.4826446. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4826446.
[27]
Carlos Garcia­Zorita et al. “Ranking dynamics and volatility”. In: Journal of Infor­
metrics 12.3 (2018), pp. 567–578. ISSN: 1751­1577. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
66
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:75==
1016/j.joi.2018.04.005. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1751157717303553.
[28]
SEUNGKYU SHIN and JUYONG PARK. “ON­CHART SUCCESS DYNAMICS OF
POPULAR SONGS”. In: Advances in Complex Systems 21.03n04 (May 2018),
p. 1850008. ISSN: 1793­6802. DOI: 10.1142/s021952591850008x. URL: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1142/S021952591850008X.
[29]
Conrad Lee and Pádraig Cunningham. “The geographic flow of music”. In: 2012
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and
Mining (2012), pp. 691–695. DOI: 10.1109/ASONAM.2012.237.
[30]
D. Biro et al. M. Nagy Z. Ákos. “Hierarchical group dynamics in pigeon flocks.” In:
Nature 464 (2010), pp. 890–893. DOI: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1038/
nature08891.
[31]
et al. Bani Maji Indra Bhattacharya. “Study of Information Diffusion and Content
Popularity in Memes”. In: Communications in Computer and Information Science
1031 (2019), pp. 462–478. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-8581-0_37.
[32]
T. Schreiber. “Measuring information transfer”. In: PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS
85.2 (2000). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.85.461.
[33]
Farzad V Farahani, Waldemar Karwowski, and Nichole R Lighthall. “Application of
graph theory for identifying connectivity patterns in human brain networks: a sys­
tematic review”. In: frontiers in Neuroscience 13 (2019), p. 585.
[34]
Chad M Cullen et al. “Emerging priorities for microbiome research”. In: Frontiers in
microbiology 11 (2020), p. 136.
[35]
Alexey Mikhaylov. “Cryptocurrency market analysis from the open innovation per­
spective”. In: Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity 6.4
(2020), p. 197.
[36]
X. San Liang and Richard Kleeman. “Information Transfer between Dynamical Sys­
tem Components”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (24 2005), p. 244101. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.95.244101. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.
244101.
[37]
Carlos A. Pires, David Docquier, and Stéphane Vannitsem. “A general theory to
estimate Information transfer in nonlinear systems”. In: Physica D: Nonlinear Phe­
nomena 458 (2024). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physd.2023.133988.
[38]
James P. Crutchfield Ryan G. James Nix Barnett. “Information Flows? A Critique of
Transfer Entropies”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (23 2016). DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.116.238701.
[39]
C. E. Shannon. “A mathematical theory of communication”. In: The Bell System
Technical Journal 27.4 (1948), pp. 623–656. DOI: 10 . 1002 / j . 1538 - 7305 . 1948 .
tb00917.x.
[40]
D. Gençaga. “Transfer Entropy”. In: Entropy 20.4 (2018). DOI: https://doi.org/10.
3390/e20040288.
[41]
B. Pompe C. Bandt. “Permutation entropy: A natural complexity measure for time
series.” In: PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 88.17 (2002). DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevLett.88.174102.
[42]
K. Lehnertz M. Staniek. “Symbolic Transfer Entropy”. In: PHYSICAL REVIEW LET­
TERS 100.15 (2008). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.158101.
[43]
B. Gonçalves et al. J. Borge­Holthoefer N. Perra. “The dynamics of information­
driven coordination phenomena: A transfer entropy analysis”. In: SCIENCE AD­
VANCES 2.4 (2016). DOI: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.1501158.
[44]
M. Ballerini et al. “Interaction ruling animal collective behavior depends on topolog­
ical rather than metric distance: Evidence from a field study”. In: Proceedings of
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
67
==PAGE:76==
the National Academy of Sciences 105.4 (Jan. 2008), pp. 1232–1237. ISSN: 1091­
6490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0711437105. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
0711437105.
[45]
Irene Giardina. “Collective behavior in animal groups: Theoretical models and em­
pirical studies”. In: HFSP Journal 2.4 (2008), pp. 205–219. DOI: 10.2976/1.2961038.
[46]
Butail S Mwaffo V and Porfiri M. “Analysis of Pairwise Interactions in a Maximum
Likelihood Sense to Identify Leaders in a Group.” In: Front. Robot. AI (2017). DOI:
10.3389/frobt.2017.00035.
[47]
Sachit Butail, Violet Mwaffo, and Maurizio Porfiri. “Model­free information­theoretic
approach to infer leadership in pairs of zebrafish”. In: Phys. Rev. E 93 (4 2016).
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.93.042411.
[48]
N. Abaid N. Orange. “A transfer entropy analysis of leader­follower interactions in
flying bats.” In: Physics of Social Interactions 224 (2015). DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1140/epjst/e2015-50235-9.
[49]
M. Kawasaki K. Takamizawa. “Transfer entropy for synchronized behavior estima­
tion of interpersonal relationships in human communication: identifying leaders or
followers.” In: Scientific Reports 9 (2019). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-
47525-6.
[50]
M. Camacho et al. S. Nakayama M. Ruiz Marín. “Plasticity in leader–follower roles in
human teams.” In: Scientific Reports 7 (2017). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
017-14851-6.
[51]
T4C Top40­Charts.com. https://top40-charts.com/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[52]
Matthew Pincus Amir Momeni and Jenny Libien. “Probability and Probability Distri­
bution”. In: Introduction To Statistical Methods in Pathology. Springer International
Publishing, 2017. Chap. 3, pp. 39–73.
[53]
S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler. “On Information and Sufficiency”. In: The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics 22.1 (1951), pp. 79–86.
[54]
Shuyi Ji et al. “Kullback–Leibler Divergence Metric Learning”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Cybernetics 52.4 (2022), pp. 2047–2058. DOI: 10.1109/TCYB.2020.3008248.
[55]
Bilal Yurdakul and Joshua Naranjo. “Statistical properties of the population sta­
bility index”. In: Journal of Risk Model Validation 14.4 (2020), pp. 89–100. DOI:
10.21314/JRMV.2020.227. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=
2- s2.0- 85102393935&doi=10.21314%2fJRMV.2020.227&partnerID=40&md5=
10da8bb9de72182b1855486c1efb8267.
[56]
Vladimir Estivill­Castro. “Why so many clustering algorithms: a position paper”. In:
SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. 4.1 (2002), pp. 65–75. ISSN: 1931­0145. DOI: 10.1145/
568574.568575. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/568574.568575.
[57]
Paolo Giordani, Maria Brigida Ferraro, and Francesca Martella. “An Introduction
To Clustering With R”. English. In: Springer Singapore, 2020. Chap. Hierarchical
Clustering, pp. 9–73. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-13-0553-5_2.
[58]
Mauro Naghettini. Statistical hypothesis testing. Cited by: 3. 2016, pp. 251–309.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-43561-9_7. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
uri?eid=2-s2.0-85075066883&doi=10.1007%2f978-3-319-43561-9_7&partnerID=40&
md5=485d945f01313a9386e1b2a508fb7e4c.
[59]
Phillip Good. Permutation, Parametric, and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses. 3rd ed.
Springer Series in Statistics. eBook ISBN: 978­0­387­27158­3. New York, NY: Springer­
Verlag New York, 2005, pp. XX, 316. ISBN: 978­0­387­20279­2. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1007/b138696.
[60]
James V Stone. Information Theory: A Tutorial Introduction. 2019. arXiv: 1802.05968
[cs.IT].
68
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:77==
[61]
Terry Bossomaier et al. An Introduction to Transfer Entropy: Information Flow in
Complex Systems. Springer, 2016.
[62]
Antonio Politi. “Symbolic Encoding in Dynamical Systems”. In: From Statistical Physics
to Statistical Inference and Back. Ed. by Peter Grassberger and Jean­Pierre Nadal.
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 1994, pp. 293–309. ISBN: 978­94­011­1068­6.
DOI: 10.1007/978-94-011-1068-6_19. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-
1068-6_19.
[63]
Carl Rhodes and Manfred Morari. “The false nearest neighbors algorithm: An overview”.
In: Computers & Chemical Engineering 21 (1997). Supplement to Computers and
Chemical Engineering, S1149–S1154. ISSN: 0098­1354. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0098-1354(97)87657-0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0098135497876570.
[64]
Zhaohui Li et al. “Measuring the Coupling Direction between Neural Oscillations with
Weighted Symbolic Transfer Entropy”. In: Entropy 22.12 (2020). ISSN: 1099­4300.
DOI: 10.3390/e22121442. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/22/12/1442.
[65]
Nuria Tort­Colet et al. “Transfer entropy, symbolic transfer entropy and transcript
mutual information indicators reveal a leading role of infragranular layers during
slow oscillations”. In: Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience. Conference Abstract:
B∙DEBATE | A Dialogue with the Cerebral Cortex: Cortical Function and Interfacing
(Workshop). 2015. DOI: 10.3389/conf.fnsys.2015.06.00013.
[66]
Sung Min Jang et al. “Information Flow between Bitcoin and Other Investment As­
sets”. In: Entropy 21.11 (2019). ISSN: 1099­4300. DOI: 10.3390/e21111116. URL:
https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/21/11/1116.
[67]
Gabjin Oh et al. “An information flow among industry sectors in the Korean stock
market”. In: Journal of the Korean Physical Society 65.12 (Dec. 1, 2014), pp. 2140–
2146. ISSN: 1976­8524. DOI: 10.3938/jkps.65.2140. URL: https://doi.org/10.3938/
jkps.65.2140.
[68]
Mingi Oh et al. “Time series analysis of the Antarctic Circumpolar Wave via sym­
bolic transfer entropy”. In: Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 499
(2018), pp. 233–240. ISSN: 0378­4371. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2017.
12.019. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378437117312657.
[69]
venv — Creation of virtual environments. https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.
html. Accessed: 2024­01­10.
[70]
Install packages in a virtual environment using pip and venv. https://packaging.
python.org/en/latest/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#creating-
a-virtual-environment. Accessed: 2024­01­10.
[71]
NumPy reference. https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/index.html#reference.
Accessed: 2024­01­10.
[72]
pandas documentation. https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/. Accessed: 2024­01­10.
[73]
SciPy. https://scipy.org/. Accessed: 2024­01­10.
[74]
asyncio­Asynchronous I/O. https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html. Ac­
cessed: 2024­01­10.
[75]
concurrent.futures — Launching parallel tasks. https://docs.python.org/3/library/
concurrent.futures.html. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[76]
Matplotlib 3.8.2 documentation. https://matplotlib.org/stable/index.html. Accessed:
2024­01­10.
[77]
seaborn: statistical data visualization. https://seaborn.pydata.org/. Accessed: 2024­
01­10.
[78]
tqdm. https://tqdm.github.io/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
69
==PAGE:78==
[79]
G. Naga Chandrika et al. “Web Scraping for Unstructured Data Over Web”. In: Em­
bedded Systems and Artificial Intelligence. Ed. by Vikrant Bhateja, Suresh Chandra
Satapathy, and Hassan Satori. Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2020, pp. 853–859.
[80]
beautifulsoup4 4.12.2. https://pypi.org/project/beautifulsoup4/. Accessed: 2024­
01­10.
[81]
shazamio 0.4.0.1. https://pypi.org/project/shazamio/. Accessed: 2023­09­05.
[82]
python­musicbrainz3. https://musicbrainz.org/doc/python-musicbrainz3. Accessed:
2023­09­05.
[83]
C. Sheng J. Zhao W. Wang. “Preprocessing”. In: Data­driven Prediction for Industrial
Processes and Their Applications. Springer International Publishing, 2018. Chap. 2,
pp. 13–52.
[84]
MB KENNEL, R BROWN, and HDI ABARBANEL. “DETERMINING EMBEDDING
DIMENSION FOR PHASE­SPACE RECONSTRUCTION USING A GEOMETRI­
CAL CONSTRUCTION”. In: PHYSICAL REVIEW A 45.6 (1992), pp. 3403–3411.
ISSN: 1050­2947. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.45.3403.
[85]
A. Buda and A. Jarynowski. “Network Structure of Phonographic Market with Char­
acteristic Similarities between Artists”. In: Acta Physica Polonica A 123.3 (Mar.
2013), pp. 547–552. ISSN: 1898­794X. DOI: 10.12693/aphyspola.123.547. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.12693/APhysPolA.123.547.
[86]
Justin M. Berg. “One­Hit Wonders versus Hit Makers: Sustaining Success in Cre­
ative Industries”. In: Administrative Science Quarterly 67.3 (2022), pp. 630–673.
DOI: 10.1177/00018392221083650. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
uri?eid=2-s2.0-85127280382&doi=10.1177%2f00018392221083650&partnerID=40&
md5=2cd1ed0ba4112f8c5188ed4374094296.
[87]
Lu Liu et al. “Hot streaks in artistic, cultural, and scientific careers”. In: Nature
559.7714 (2018), pp. 396–399. DOI: 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0315 - 8. URL: https :
//www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85050303782&doi=10.1038%
2fs41586-018-0315-8&partnerID=40&md5=98967d992b146e09ad25d9f75a5c1050.
70
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:79==
A
Appendix
A.1
Pattern analysis
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
71
==PAGE:80==
5
10
Weeks on the chart
UK
5
10
Weeks on the chart
Japan
0
20
Weeks on the chart
New Zealand
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Germany
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Netherlands
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
USA
0
20
Weeks on the chart
Canada
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Norway
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Spain
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Sweden
10
20
Weeks on the chart
Switzerland
0
20
Weeks on the chart
Greece
0
20
Weeks on the chart
Australia
10
20
Weeks on the chart
Brazil
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Austria
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
France
5
10
Weeks on the chart
Bulgaria
5
10
Weeks on the chart
Belgium
5
10
Weeks on the chart
Finland
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Ireland
0
10
Weeks on the chart
Taiwan
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Italy
10
20
Weeks on the chart
Denmark
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
Portugal
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
Week
5
10
Weeks on the chart
China
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
Week
0
20
Weeks on the chart
Chile
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
2024
Week
5
10
15
Weeks on the chart
India
Figure A.1: Average and median song’s duration in the chart for various countries The figure illustrates average (blue) and median (orange)
lifespan of songs across various countries. The shaded areas surrounding the average line represent the standard error of mean. The orange
shaded area around median represent the standard error of median.
72
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:81==
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
73
==PAGE:82==
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
Brazil
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
USA
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Australia
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
Greece
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
New Zealand
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Bulgaria
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
Portugal
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Switzerland
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Spain
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
Canada
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
UK
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
India
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
Netherlands
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Germany
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Ireland
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
Belgium
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Norway
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Austria
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
Finland
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Sweden
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Chile
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
France
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Italy
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Taiwan
10
20
30
40
Position
0
250
500
Count
Denmark
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
China
10
20
30
40
Position
Count
Japan
Figure A.2: Histograms of the initial and final position of songs in the chart for
various countries Each bin corresponds to a position on the chart. The blue bars indicate
the number of songs that started at that position, whereas the orange bars depict the count
of songs that exited the chart from that position.
74
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:83==
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Brazil
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
USA
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Australia
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Greece
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
New Zealand
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Bulgaria
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Portugal
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Switzerland
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Spain
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Canada
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
UK
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
India
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Netherlands
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Germany
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Ireland
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Belgium
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Norway
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Austria
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Finland
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Sweden
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Chile
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
France
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Italy
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Taiwan
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
0
10000
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Denmark
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
China
40
20
0
20
40
Position differenece
Count
2.5th
97.5th
Median
Japan
Figure A.3: Position change distribution chart for various countries The histograms
provide a summary of position changes on the chart. Relative position changes are rep­
resented by the blue bins, with the median of the distribution marked by a vertical red
dashed line. Additionally, two gray dashed lines indicate the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles
of the samples. The shaded area corresponds to data falling below 2.5% or above 97.5%
of the distribution.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
75
==PAGE:84==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Brazil
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
USA
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Australia
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Greece
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
New Zealand
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Bulgaria
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Portugal
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Switzerland
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Spain
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Canada
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
UK
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
India
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Netherlands
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Germany
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Ireland
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Belgium
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Norway
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Austria
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Finland
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Sweden
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Chile
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
France
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Italy
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Taiwan
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
0
10
20
30
40
Position
Typical time of peak position
Denmark
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
China
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Week
Position
Typical time of peak position
Japan
1-3
4-6
7-10
10+
Figure A.4: Trajectory of songs for various countries Songs are categorized into four
groups based on their highest positions: those ranking between 1 to 4 are represented by
the color blue, positions 5­9 are denoted by red, positions 10­14 are indicated by yellow,
and positions exceeding 15 are assigned the color green. The red vertical line marks the
average week when songs typically reach their peak positions.
76
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
==PAGE:85==
A.2
Trendsetter analysis
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
77
==PAGE:86==
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Austria - Australia
Count
Belgium - Australia
Count
Brazil - Australia
Count
Bulgaria - Australia
Count
Canada - Australia
Count
Denmark - Australia
Count
Finland - Australia
Count
France - Australia
Count
Germany - Australia
Count
Greece - Australia
Count
Ireland - Australia
Count
Italy - Australia
Count
Netherlands - Australia
Count
New Zealand - Australia
Count
Norway - Australia
Count
Portugal - Australia
Count
Spain - Australia
Count
Sweden - Australia
Count
Switzerland - Australia
Count
UK - Australia
Count
USA - Australia
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Austria
Count
Belgium - Austria
Count
Brazil - Austria
Count
Bulgaria - Austria
Count
Canada - Austria
Count
Denmark - Austria
Count
Finland - Austria
Count
France - Austria
Count
Germany - Austria
Count
Greece - Austria
Count
Ireland - Austria
Count
Italy - Austria
Count
Netherlands - Austria
Count
New Zealand - Austria
Count
Norway - Austria
Count
Portugal - Austria
Count
Spain - Austria
Count
Sweden - Austria
Count
Switzerland - Austria
Count
UK - Austria
Count
USA - Austria
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Belgium
Count
Austria - Belgium
Count
Brazil - Belgium
Count
Bulgaria - Belgium
Count
Canada - Belgium
Count
Denmark - Belgium
Count
Finland - Belgium
Count
France - Belgium
Count
Germany - Belgium
Count
Greece - Belgium
Count
Ireland - Belgium
Count
Italy - Belgium
Count
Netherlands - Belgium
Count
New Zealand - Belgium
Count
Norway - Belgium
Count
Portugal - Belgium
Count
Spain - Belgium
Count
Sweden - Belgium
Count
Switzerland - Belgium
Count
UK - Belgium
Count
USA - Belgium
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Brazil
Count
Austria - Brazil
Count
Belgium - Brazil
Count
Bulgaria - Brazil
Count
Canada - Brazil
Count
Denmark - Brazil
Count
Finland - Brazil
Count
France - Brazil
Count
Germany - Brazil
Count
Greece - Brazil
Count
Ireland - Brazil
Count
Italy - Brazil
Count
Netherlands - Brazil
Count
New Zealand - Brazil
Count
Norway - Brazil
Count
Portugal - Brazil
Count
Spain - Brazil
Count
Sweden - Brazil
Count
Switzerland - Brazil
Count
UK - Brazil
Count
USA - Brazil
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Bulgaria
Count
Austria - Bulgaria
Count
Belgium - Bulgaria
Count
Brazil - Bulgaria
Count
Canada - Bulgaria
Count
Denmark - Bulgaria
Count
Finland - Bulgaria
Count
France - Bulgaria
Count
Germany - Bulgaria
Count
Greece - Bulgaria
Count
Ireland - Bulgaria
Count
Italy - Bulgaria
Count
Netherlands - Bulgaria
Count
New Zealand - Bulgaria
Count
Norway - Bulgaria
Count
Portugal - Bulgaria
Count
Spain - Bulgaria
Count
Sweden - Bulgaria
Count
Switzerland - Bulgaria
Count
UK - Bulgaria
Count
USA - Bulgaria
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Canada
Count
Austria - Canada
Count
Belgium - Canada
Count
Brazil - Canada
Count
Bulgaria - Canada
Count
Denmark - Canada
Count
Finland - Canada
Count
France - Canada
Count
Germany - Canada
Count
Greece - Canada
Count
Ireland - Canada
Count
Italy - Canada
Count
Netherlands - Canada
Count
New Zealand - Canada
Count
Norway - Canada
Count
Portugal - Canada
Count
Spain - Canada
Count
Sweden - Canada
Count
Switzerland - Canada
Count
UK - Canada
Count
USA - Canada
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Denmark
Count
Austria - Denmark
Count
Belgium - Denmark
Count
Brazil - Denmark
Count
Bulgaria - Denmark
Count
Canada - Denmark
Count
Finland - Denmark
Count
France - Denmark
Count
Germany - Denmark
Count
Greece - Denmark
Count
Ireland - Denmark
Count
Italy - Denmark
Count
Netherlands - Denmark
Count
New Zealand - Denmark
Count
Norway - Denmark
Count
Portugal - Denmark
Count
Spain - Denmark
Count
Sweden - Denmark
Count
Switzerland - Denmark
Count
UK - Denmark
Count
USA - Denmark
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Finland
Count
Austria - Finland
Count
Belgium - Finland
Count
Brazil - Finland
Count
Bulgaria - Finland
Count
Canada - Finland
Count
Denmark - Finland
Count
France - Finland
Count
Germany - Finland
Count
Greece - Finland
Count
Ireland - Finland
Count
Italy - Finland
Count
Netherlands - Finland
Count
New Zealand - Finland
Count
Norway - Finland
Count
Portugal - Finland
Count
Spain - Finland
Count
Sweden - Finland
Count
Switzerland - Finland
Count
UK - Finland
Count
USA - Finland
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - France
Count
Austria - France
Count
Belgium - France
Count
Brazil - France
Count
Bulgaria - France
Count
Canada - France
Count
Denmark - France
Count
Finland - France
Count
Germany - France
Count
Greece - France
Count
Ireland - France
Count
Italy - France
Count
Netherlands - France
Count
New Zealand - France
Count
Norway - France
Count
Portugal - France
Count
Spain - France
Count
Sweden - France
Count
Switzerland - France
Count
UK - France
Count
USA - France
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Germany
Count
Austria - Germany
Count
Belgium - Germany
Count
Brazil - Germany
Count
Bulgaria - Germany
Count
Canada - Germany
Count
Denmark - Germany
Count
Finland - Germany
Count
France - Germany
Count
Greece - Germany
Count
Ireland - Germany
Count
Italy - Germany
Count
Netherlands - Germany
Count
New Zealand - Germany
Count
Norway - Germany
Count
Portugal - Germany
Count
Spain - Germany
Count
Sweden - Germany
Count
Switzerland - Germany
Count
UK - Germany
Count
USA - Germany
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Greece
Count
Austria - Greece
Count
Belgium - Greece
Count
Brazil - Greece
Count
Bulgaria - Greece
Count
Canada - Greece
Count
Denmark - Greece
Count
Finland - Greece
Count
France - Greece
Count
Germany - Greece
Count
Ireland - Greece
Count
Italy - Greece
Count
Netherlands - Greece
Count
New Zealand - Greece
Count
Norway - Greece
Count
Portugal - Greece
Count
Spain - Greece
Count
Sweden - Greece
Count
Switzerland - Greece
Count
UK - Greece
Count
USA - Greece
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Ireland
Count
Austria - Ireland
Count
Belgium - Ireland
Count
Brazil - Ireland
Count
Bulgaria - Ireland
Count
Canada - Ireland
Count
Denmark - Ireland
Count
Finland - Ireland
Count
France - Ireland
Count
Germany - Ireland
Count
Greece - Ireland
Count
Italy - Ireland
Count
Netherlands - Ireland
Count
New Zealand - Ireland
Count
Norway - Ireland
Count
Portugal - Ireland
Count
Spain - Ireland
Count
Sweden - Ireland
Count
Switzerland - Ireland
Count
UK - Ireland
Count
USA - Ireland
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Italy
Count
Austria - Italy
Count
Belgium - Italy
Count
Brazil - Italy
Count
Bulgaria - Italy
Count
Canada - Italy
Count
Denmark - Italy
Count
Finland - Italy
Count
France - Italy
Count
Germany - Italy
Count
Greece - Italy
Count
Ireland - Italy
Count
Netherlands - Italy
Count
New Zealand - Italy
Count
Norway - Italy
Count
Portugal - Italy
Count
Spain - Italy
Count
Sweden - Italy
Count
Switzerland - Italy
Count
UK - Italy
Count
USA - Italy
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Netherlands
Count
Austria - Netherlands
Count
Belgium - Netherlands
Count
Brazil - Netherlands
Count
Bulgaria - Netherlands
Count
Canada - Netherlands
Count
Denmark - Netherlands
Count
Finland - Netherlands
Count
France - Netherlands
Count
Germany - Netherlands
Count
Greece - Netherlands
Count
Ireland - Netherlands
Count
Italy - Netherlands
Count
New Zealand - Netherlands
Count
Norway - Netherlands
Count
Portugal - Netherlands
Count
Spain - Netherlands
Count
Sweden - Netherlands
Count
Switzerland - Netherlands
Count
UK - Netherlands
Count
USA - Netherland
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - New Zealand
Count
Austria - New Zealand
Count
Belgium - New Zealand
Count
Brazil - New Zealand
Count
Bulgaria - New Zealand
Count
Canada - New Zealand
Count
Denmark - New Zealand
Count
Finland - New Zealand
Count
France - New Zealand
Count
Germany - New Zealand
Count
Greece - New Zealand
Count
Ireland - New Zealand
Count
Italy - New Zealand
Count
Netherlands - New Zealand
Count
Norway - New Zealand
Count
Portugal - New Zealand
Count
Spain - New Zealand
Count
Sweden - New Zealand
Count
Switzerland - New Zealand
Count
UK - New Zealand
Count
USA - New Zealan
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Norway
Count
Austria - Norway
Count
Belgium - Norway
Count
Brazil - Norway
Count
Bulgaria - Norway
Count
Canada - Norway
Count
Denmark - Norway
Count
Finland - Norway
Count
France - Norway
Count
Germany - Norway
Count
Greece - Norway
Count
Ireland - Norway
Count
Italy - Norway
Count
Netherlands - Norway
Count
New Zealand - Norway
Count
Portugal - Norway
Count
Spain - Norway
Count
Sweden - Norway
Count
Switzerland - Norway
Count
UK - Norway
Count
USA - Norway
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Portugal
Count
Austria - Portugal
Count
Belgium - Portugal
Count
Brazil - Portugal
Count
Bulgaria - Portugal
Count
Canada - Portugal
Count
Denmark - Portugal
Count
Finland - Portugal
Count
France - Portugal
Count
Germany - Portugal
Count
Greece - Portugal
Count
Ireland - Portugal
Count
Italy - Portugal
Count
Netherlands - Portugal
Count
New Zealand - Portugal
Count
Norway - Portugal
Count
Spain - Portugal
Count
Sweden - Portugal
Count
Switzerland - Portugal
Count
UK - Portugal
Count
USA - Portugal
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Spain
Count
Austria - Spain
Count
Belgium - Spain
Count
Brazil - Spain
Count
Bulgaria - Spain
Count
Canada - Spain
Count
Denmark - Spain
Count
Finland - Spain
Count
France - Spain
Count
Germany - Spain
Count
Greece - Spain
Count
Ireland - Spain
Count
Italy - Spain
Count
Netherlands - Spain
Count
New Zealand - Spain
Count
Norway - Spain
Count
Portugal - Spain
Count
Sweden - Spain
Count
Switzerland - Spain
Count
UK - Spain
Count
USA - Spain
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Sweden
Count
Austria - Sweden
Count
Belgium - Sweden
Count
Brazil - Sweden
Count
Bulgaria - Sweden
Count
Canada - Sweden
Count
Denmark - Sweden
Count
Finland - Sweden
Count
France - Sweden
Count
Germany - Sweden
Count
Greece - Sweden
Count
Ireland - Sweden
Count
Italy - Sweden
Count
Netherlands - Sweden
Count
New Zealand - Sweden
Count
Norway - Sweden
Count
Portugal - Sweden
Count
Spain - Sweden
Count
Switzerland - Sweden
Count
UK - Sweden
Count
USA - Sweden
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Switzerland
Count
Austria - Switzerland
Count
Belgium - Switzerland
Count
Brazil - Switzerland
Count
Bulgaria - Switzerland
Count
Canada - Switzerland
Count
Denmark - Switzerland
Count
Finland - Switzerland
Count
France - Switzerland
Count
Germany - Switzerland
Count
Greece - Switzerland
Count
Ireland - Switzerland
Count
Italy - Switzerland
Count
Netherlands - Switzerland
Count
New Zealand - Switzerland
Count
Norway - Switzerland
Count
Portugal - Switzerland
Count
Spain - Switzerland
Count
Sweden - Switzerland
Count
UK - Switzerland
Count
USA - Switzerlan
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - UK
Count
Austria - UK
Count
Belgium - UK
Count
Brazil - UK
Count
Bulgaria - UK
Count
Canada - UK
Count
Denmark - UK
Count
Finland - UK
Count
France - UK
Count
Germany - UK
Count
Greece - UK
Count
Ireland - UK
Count
Italy - UK
Count
Netherlands - UK
Count
New Zealand - UK
Count
Norway - UK
Count
Portugal - UK
Count
Spain - UK
Count
Sweden - UK
Count
Switzerland - UK
Count
USA - UK
50
0
50
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - USA
50
0
50
Count
Austria - USA
50
0
50
Count
Belgium - USA
50
0
50
Count
Brazil - USA
50
0
50
Count
Bulgaria - USA
50
0
50
Count
Canada - USA
50
0
50
Count
Denmark - USA
50
0
50
Count
Finland - USA
50
0
50
Count
France - USA
50
0
50
Count
Germany - USA
50
0
50
Count
Greece - USA
50
0
50
Count
Ireland - USA
50
0
50
Count
Italy - USA
50
0
50
Count
Netherlands - USA
50
0
50
Count
New Zealand - USA
50
0
50
Count
Norway - USA
50
0
50
Count
Portugal - USA
50
0
50
Count
Spain - USA
50
0
50
Count
Sweden - USA
50
0
50
Count
Switzerland - USA
50
0
50
Count
UK - USA
50
0
50
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.5: Diagram showing the normalized distribution of differences in the num­
ber of days between the peak popularity of songs across all countries. It features a
histogram that represents the day difference for peak times of a song in paired countries.
The histogram’s bin size is set at 7 days. The color coding of the diagrams is based on
their median values: gray indicates a median of 0, red signifies a median less than 0, and
blue is used when the median is greater than 0.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
79
==PAGE:88==
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Austria - Australia
Count
Belgium - Australia
Count
Brazil - Australia
Count
Bulgaria - Australia
Count
Canada - Australia
Count
Denmark - Australia
Count
Finland - Australia
Count
France - Australia
Count
Germany - Australia
Count
Greece - Australia
Count
Ireland - Australia
Count
Italy - Australia
Count
Netherlands - Australia
Count
New Zealand - Australia
Count
Norway - Australia
Count
Portugal - Australia
Count
Spain - Australia
Count
Sweden - Australia
Count
Switzerland - Australia
Count
UK - Australia
Count
USA - Australia
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Austria
Count
Belgium - Austria
Count
Brazil - Austria
Count
Bulgaria - Austria
Count
Canada - Austria
Count
Denmark - Austria
Count
Finland - Austria
Count
France - Austria
Count
Germany - Austria
Count
Greece - Austria
Count
Ireland - Austria
Count
Italy - Austria
Count
Netherlands - Austria
Count
New Zealand - Austria
Count
Norway - Austria
Count
Portugal - Austria
Count
Spain - Austria
Count
Sweden - Austria
Count
Switzerland - Austria
Count
UK - Austria
Count
USA - Austria
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Belgium
Count
Austria - Belgium
Count
Brazil - Belgium
Count
Bulgaria - Belgium
Count
Canada - Belgium
Count
Denmark - Belgium
Count
Finland - Belgium
Count
France - Belgium
Count
Germany - Belgium
Count
Greece - Belgium
Count
Ireland - Belgium
Count
Italy - Belgium
Count
Netherlands - Belgium
Count
New Zealand - Belgium
Count
Norway - Belgium
Count
Portugal - Belgium
Count
Spain - Belgium
Count
Sweden - Belgium
Count
Switzerland - Belgium
Count
UK - Belgium
Count
USA - Belgium
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Brazil
Count
Austria - Brazil
Count
Belgium - Brazil
Count
Bulgaria - Brazil
Count
Canada - Brazil
Count
Denmark - Brazil
Count
Finland - Brazil
Count
France - Brazil
Count
Germany - Brazil
Count
Greece - Brazil
Count
Ireland - Brazil
Count
Italy - Brazil
Count
Netherlands - Brazil
Count
New Zealand - Brazil
Count
Norway - Brazil
Count
Portugal - Brazil
Count
Spain - Brazil
Count
Sweden - Brazil
Count
Switzerland - Brazil
Count
UK - Brazil
Count
USA - Brazil
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Bulgaria
Count
Austria - Bulgaria
Count
Belgium - Bulgaria
Count
Brazil - Bulgaria
Count
Canada - Bulgaria
Count
Denmark - Bulgaria
Count
Finland - Bulgaria
Count
France - Bulgaria
Count
Germany - Bulgaria
Count
Greece - Bulgaria
Count
Ireland - Bulgaria
Count
Italy - Bulgaria
Count
Netherlands - Bulgaria
Count
New Zealand - Bulgaria
Count
Norway - Bulgaria
Count
Portugal - Bulgaria
Count
Spain - Bulgaria
Count
Sweden - Bulgaria
Count
Switzerland - Bulgaria
Count
UK - Bulgaria
Count
USA - Bulgaria
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Canada
Count
Austria - Canada
Count
Belgium - Canada
Count
Brazil - Canada
Count
Bulgaria - Canada
Count
Denmark - Canada
Count
Finland - Canada
Count
France - Canada
Count
Germany - Canada
Count
Greece - Canada
Count
Ireland - Canada
Count
Italy - Canada
Count
Netherlands - Canada
Count
New Zealand - Canada
Count
Norway - Canada
Count
Portugal - Canada
Count
Spain - Canada
Count
Sweden - Canada
Count
Switzerland - Canada
Count
UK - Canada
Count
USA - Canada
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Denmark
Count
Austria - Denmark
Count
Belgium - Denmark
Count
Brazil - Denmark
Count
Bulgaria - Denmark
Count
Canada - Denmark
Count
Finland - Denmark
Count
France - Denmark
Count
Germany - Denmark
Count
Greece - Denmark
Count
Ireland - Denmark
Count
Italy - Denmark
Count
Netherlands - Denmark
Count
New Zealand - Denmark
Count
Norway - Denmark
Count
Portugal - Denmark
Count
Spain - Denmark
Count
Sweden - Denmark
Count
Switzerland - Denmark
Count
UK - Denmark
Count
USA - Denmark
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Finland
Count
Austria - Finland
Count
Belgium - Finland
Count
Brazil - Finland
Count
Bulgaria - Finland
Count
Canada - Finland
Count
Denmark - Finland
Count
France - Finland
Count
Germany - Finland
Count
Greece - Finland
Count
Ireland - Finland
Count
Italy - Finland
Count
Netherlands - Finland
Count
New Zealand - Finland
Count
Norway - Finland
Count
Portugal - Finland
Count
Spain - Finland
Count
Sweden - Finland
Count
Switzerland - Finland
Count
UK - Finland
Count
USA - Finland
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - France
Count
Austria - France
Count
Belgium - France
Count
Brazil - France
Count
Bulgaria - France
Count
Canada - France
Count
Denmark - France
Count
Finland - France
Count
Germany - France
Count
Greece - France
Count
Ireland - France
Count
Italy - France
Count
Netherlands - France
Count
New Zealand - France
Count
Norway - France
Count
Portugal - France
Count
Spain - France
Count
Sweden - France
Count
Switzerland - France
Count
UK - France
Count
USA - France
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Germany
Count
Austria - Germany
Count
Belgium - Germany
Count
Brazil - Germany
Count
Bulgaria - Germany
Count
Canada - Germany
Count
Denmark - Germany
Count
Finland - Germany
Count
France - Germany
Count
Greece - Germany
Count
Ireland - Germany
Count
Italy - Germany
Count
Netherlands - Germany
Count
New Zealand - Germany
Count
Norway - Germany
Count
Portugal - Germany
Count
Spain - Germany
Count
Sweden - Germany
Count
Switzerland - Germany
Count
UK - Germany
Count
USA - Germany
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Greece
Count
Austria - Greece
Count
Belgium - Greece
Count
Brazil - Greece
Count
Bulgaria - Greece
Count
Canada - Greece
Count
Denmark - Greece
Count
Finland - Greece
Count
France - Greece
Count
Germany - Greece
Count
Ireland - Greece
Count
Italy - Greece
Count
Netherlands - Greece
Count
New Zealand - Greece
Count
Norway - Greece
Count
Portugal - Greece
Count
Spain - Greece
Count
Sweden - Greece
Count
Switzerland - Greece
Count
UK - Greece
Count
USA - Greece
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Ireland
Count
Austria - Ireland
Count
Belgium - Ireland
Count
Brazil - Ireland
Count
Bulgaria - Ireland
Count
Canada - Ireland
Count
Denmark - Ireland
Count
Finland - Ireland
Count
France - Ireland
Count
Germany - Ireland
Count
Greece - Ireland
Count
Italy - Ireland
Count
Netherlands - Ireland
Count
New Zealand - Ireland
Count
Norway - Ireland
Count
Portugal - Ireland
Count
Spain - Ireland
Count
Sweden - Ireland
Count
Switzerland - Ireland
Count
UK - Ireland
Count
USA - Ireland
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Italy
Count
Austria - Italy
Count
Belgium - Italy
Count
Brazil - Italy
Count
Bulgaria - Italy
Count
Canada - Italy
Count
Denmark - Italy
Count
Finland - Italy
Count
France - Italy
Count
Germany - Italy
Count
Greece - Italy
Count
Ireland - Italy
Count
Netherlands - Italy
Count
New Zealand - Italy
Count
Norway - Italy
Count
Portugal - Italy
Count
Spain - Italy
Count
Sweden - Italy
Count
Switzerland - Italy
Count
UK - Italy
Count
USA - Italy
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Netherlands
Count
Austria - Netherlands
Count
Belgium - Netherlands
Count
Brazil - Netherlands
Count
Bulgaria - Netherlands
Count
Canada - Netherlands
Count
Denmark - Netherlands
Count
Finland - Netherlands
Count
France - Netherlands
Count
Germany - Netherlands
Count
Greece - Netherlands
Count
Ireland - Netherlands
Count
Italy - Netherlands
Count
New Zealand - Netherlands
Count
Norway - Netherlands
Count
Portugal - Netherlands
Count
Spain - Netherlands
Count
Sweden - Netherlands
Count
Switzerland - Netherlands
Count
UK - Netherlands
Count
USA - Netherland
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - New Zealand
Count
Austria - New Zealand
Count
Belgium - New Zealand
Count
Brazil - New Zealand
Count
Bulgaria - New Zealand
Count
Canada - New Zealand
Count
Denmark - New Zealand
Count
Finland - New Zealand
Count
France - New Zealand
Count
Germany - New Zealand
Count
Greece - New Zealand
Count
Ireland - New Zealand
Count
Italy - New Zealand
Count
Netherlands - New Zealand
Count
Norway - New Zealand
Count
Portugal - New Zealand
Count
Spain - New Zealand
Count
Sweden - New Zealand
Count
Switzerland - New Zealand
Count
UK - New Zealand
Count
USA - New Zealan
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Norway
Count
Austria - Norway
Count
Belgium - Norway
Count
Brazil - Norway
Count
Bulgaria - Norway
Count
Canada - Norway
Count
Denmark - Norway
Count
Finland - Norway
Count
France - Norway
Count
Germany - Norway
Count
Greece - Norway
Count
Ireland - Norway
Count
Italy - Norway
Count
Netherlands - Norway
Count
New Zealand - Norway
Count
Portugal - Norway
Count
Spain - Norway
Count
Sweden - Norway
Count
Switzerland - Norway
Count
UK - Norway
Count
USA - Norway
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Portugal
Count
Austria - Portugal
Count
Belgium - Portugal
Count
Brazil - Portugal
Count
Bulgaria - Portugal
Count
Canada - Portugal
Count
Denmark - Portugal
Count
Finland - Portugal
Count
France - Portugal
Count
Germany - Portugal
Count
Greece - Portugal
Count
Ireland - Portugal
Count
Italy - Portugal
Count
Netherlands - Portugal
Count
New Zealand - Portugal
Count
Norway - Portugal
Count
Spain - Portugal
Count
Sweden - Portugal
Count
Switzerland - Portugal
Count
UK - Portugal
Count
USA - Portugal
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Spain
Count
Austria - Spain
Count
Belgium - Spain
Count
Brazil - Spain
Count
Bulgaria - Spain
Count
Canada - Spain
Count
Denmark - Spain
Count
Finland - Spain
Count
France - Spain
Count
Germany - Spain
Count
Greece - Spain
Count
Ireland - Spain
Count
Italy - Spain
Count
Netherlands - Spain
Count
New Zealand - Spain
Count
Norway - Spain
Count
Portugal - Spain
Count
Sweden - Spain
Count
Switzerland - Spain
Count
UK - Spain
Count
USA - Spain
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Sweden
Count
Austria - Sweden
Count
Belgium - Sweden
Count
Brazil - Sweden
Count
Bulgaria - Sweden
Count
Canada - Sweden
Count
Denmark - Sweden
Count
Finland - Sweden
Count
France - Sweden
Count
Germany - Sweden
Count
Greece - Sweden
Count
Ireland - Sweden
Count
Italy - Sweden
Count
Netherlands - Sweden
Count
New Zealand - Sweden
Count
Norway - Sweden
Count
Portugal - Sweden
Count
Spain - Sweden
Count
Switzerland - Sweden
Count
UK - Sweden
Count
USA - Sweden
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - Switzerland
Count
Austria - Switzerland
Count
Belgium - Switzerland
Count
Brazil - Switzerland
Count
Bulgaria - Switzerland
Count
Canada - Switzerland
Count
Denmark - Switzerland
Count
Finland - Switzerland
Count
France - Switzerland
Count
Germany - Switzerland
Count
Greece - Switzerland
Count
Ireland - Switzerland
Count
Italy - Switzerland
Count
Netherlands - Switzerland
Count
New Zealand - Switzerland
Count
Norway - Switzerland
Count
Portugal - Switzerland
Count
Spain - Switzerland
Count
Sweden - Switzerland
Count
UK - Switzerland
Count
USA - Switzerlan
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - UK
Count
Austria - UK
Count
Belgium - UK
Count
Brazil - UK
Count
Bulgaria - UK
Count
Canada - UK
Count
Denmark - UK
Count
Finland - UK
Count
France - UK
Count
Germany - UK
Count
Greece - UK
Count
Ireland - UK
Count
Italy - UK
Count
Netherlands - UK
Count
New Zealand - UK
Count
Norway - UK
Count
Portugal - UK
Count
Spain - UK
Count
Sweden - UK
Count
Switzerland - UK
Count
USA - UK
50
0
50
0.000
0.025
0.050
Count
Australia - USA
50
0
50
Count
Austria - USA
50
0
50
Count
Belgium - USA
50
0
50
Count
Brazil - USA
50
0
50
Count
Bulgaria - USA
50
0
50
Count
Canada - USA
50
0
50
Count
Denmark - USA
50
0
50
Count
Finland - USA
50
0
50
Count
France - USA
50
0
50
Count
Germany - USA
50
0
50
Count
Greece - USA
50
0
50
Count
Ireland - USA
50
0
50
Count
Italy - USA
50
0
50
Count
Netherlands - USA
50
0
50
Count
New Zealand - USA
50
0
50
Count
Norway - USA
50
0
50
Count
Portugal - USA
50
0
50
Count
Spain - USA
50
0
50
Count
Sweden - USA
50
0
50
Count
Switzerland - USA
50
0
50
Count
UK - USA
50
0
50
==PAGE:89==
Figure A.6:
showing the normalized distribution of differences in the number of
days it takes for songs to reach peak popularity from their first appearance in the
country, across all countries. It includes a histogram displaying the day differences
between the debut of a song and its peak position in paired countries. The histogram’s
bin size is set at 7 days. The color coding of the diagrams is based on their median values:
gray indicates a median of 0, red signifies a median greater than 0, and blue is used when
the median is less than 0.
Understanding Global Trends in Pop Music Ranking Dynamics
81
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
