==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
January 2024
Master’s Thesis
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial
Appendage
Author:
Bjørn Marius Schreblowski Hansen
Supervisors:
Professor
Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
Clinical Associate Professor
Klaus Fuglsang Kofoed
Co-Supervisors:
Ph.D Stud.
Kristine Aavild Juhl
Ph.D Stud.
Michael Cuong Pham
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This thesis is a fulfillment of the requisites for earning a Master of Science (MSc) degree in Math-
ematical Modelling and Computation at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Technical University of Denmark.
Copenhagen, January, 2024
Bjørn Marius Schreblowski Hansen
s183986
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Strokes often originate from the heart, particularly from the Left Atrium (LA) in individuals suffering
from Atrial Fibrillation (AF). While significant research has focused on the LA, the Left Atrial
Appendage (LAA) remains relatively unexplored. The LAA is a complex, finger-like extension on
the LA with significant morphological variation across individuals. Recent hypotheses suggest a
possible link between LAA morphology and thrombosis risk, but definitive connections between
specific shapes and thrombosis still remains unclear.
This thesis investigates the application of Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) to model the LAA,
using a subset of data from the Copenhagen General Population Study (CGPS). This subset of
data includes 170 spatio-temporal Computed Tomography (CT) scan series. Four distinct types of
VAE-based models are explored: a standard VAE as a baseline, a Hierarchical VAE (HVAE) for
added complexity, and two models designed to capture temporal dependencies—one incorporating
a temporal embedding and the other using an LSTM-cell for auto-regressive temporal modeling.
Experiments on the baseline VAE were conducted using both mean-squared-error (MSE) loss and
smooth-L1 loss. Additionally, the impact of a voxel-wise loss versus an averaged loss was explored.
Model performance is assessed based on reconstruction accuracy, synthetic data generation, and the
organization of the latent space.
The baseline VAE struggled with posterior collapse and produced reconstructions deviating from
the original data. The HVAE, however, demonstrated superior performance, capturing the broader
structural aspects of the LAA, generating anatomically realistic LAAs, and maintaining a well-
differentiated latent space. Of the temporal models, the one with temporal embedding encountered
posterior collapse, leading to a non-informative latent space and identical reconstructions.
The
LSTM-based model effectively captured the heart cycle’s temporal dynamics (expansion and con-
traction) but failed to produce diverse reconstructions.
The findings in this thesis suggest that basic VAEs are inadequate for complex spatio-temporal
voxel data, advocating for more advanced models like HVAEs. The model with temporal embedding
experienced posterior collapse, making its effect inconclusive. In contrast, while the LSTM-based
model also encountered posterior collapse, the findings indicate that the LSTM’s auto-regressive
nature successfully captures the dynamics of the cardiac cycle. This occurs despite it disregarding
the encoder’s input, which makes a LSTM-based approach a promising direction for future research.
Furthermore, these results stress the critical role of hyperparameter optimization in the training of
VAEs to prevent posterior collapse.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Clinical Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aim of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Related Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Data
6
2.1
Copenhagen General Population Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Cardiac Functional Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory and Methods
11
3.1
A general overview of Variational Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Mathematical Foundation of Variational Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Cyclic β-Variational Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Loss Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Establishing a Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
Temporal Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.7.1
Long Short-Term Memory Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.7.2
Temporal Embedding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Experiments And Results
24
4.1
Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Baseline Model with Smooth-L1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Temporal Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.1
Temporal Embedding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.2
One-to-Many Long Short-Term Memory Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Discussion
50
6
Conclusion
53
Appendix
57
iv
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Much like electrons orbit the nucleus in an atom, the heart serves as the center of the circulatory
system. It functions as the core around which all other bodily processes orbit. This vital organ
is the main author in the complex and long story of life by pumping blood throughout the body,
ensuring the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to many cells. Without a doubt, the heart is one of
the main ingredients to sustain our existence, making it one of the most important components of
the human body.
The heart has consistently served as a wellspring of new knowledge and inspiration, not only in the
realms of science but also in music and art. In the latter context, many argue that our profound
understanding and most remarkable creations date back several decades. Conversely, in the field of
science and medicine, our abstract comprehension of the underlying mechanics is currently evolving
and just now gradually taking form.
Because the heart is the center of our circulatory, it is likewise the center and origin of several severe
conditions. Among the most serious are strokes. A stroke is one of the deadliest and most disabling
pathologies that can occur to a human. According to the Danish health authorities, around 12000
people are hospitalized with a stroke each year, and 1 in 7 Danes will experience a stroke in their life
time [1]. This makes strokes the fourth most common reason of death in Denmark, and the most
frequent reason for adults to become disabled.
The link between strokes and the heart is found in the anatomical connection between them, namely
the arteries. Oxygenated blood from the the left ventricle is pumped into the aorta, from where
15% to 20% of the blood enters the carotid- and vertebral arteries that leads to the brain. If a blood
clout is present in either of the left heart chambers dislodges there is a great chance it will end in
the brain, causing a strokes. This makes the left atrium- and ventricle (LA and LV) one of the main
areas of interest and research when investigating strokes.
Cardiologists have in recent years hypothesised a connection between the blood clout tendency and
the morphology of the left atrium. Especially the left atrium appendage (LAA), a small, finger-like
extension of the LA, known to have large morphological variability, have shown to be the origin
of a large amount of the blood clouts stemming from the heart [2], however it still remains largely
unexplored. The placement and the shape of the LAA is illustrated in Figure 1.1a. It plays a
role in the circulation of blood within the heart, where it is believed to work as a decompression
chamber when the LA pressure is high [3]. Despite large variations, the different morphologies have
been categorised. Among them are the chicken wing, windsock, cactus, cauliflower and double lobe
1
==PAGE:6==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 1 – Introduction
configuration as visualized in Figure 1.1b
(a) Placement of the LAA outlined with a circle in
the top right. Source: https://www.pngegg.com/en/
png-xlmen
(b) A section of the most common LAA shapes.
Names are given according to resemblance with
everyday
objects.
Source:
https://dgk.org/
kongress_programme/jt2018/aV854.html
Figure 1.1: Left: Illustration of the heart and its 4 chambers. The LAA’s placement on the LA
is outlined. Right: Common LAA morphologies and proposed names.
1.1
Clinical Hypothesis
Various hypothesis have been proposed regarding how different morphologies of the LAA may affect
the risk of stroke. However, most of them are focusing on how the morphology affect patients in the
context of atrial fibrillation (AF) [4, 5] and/or heart trabeculations [6]. Morphologies that slow down
the blood flow velocity in the LAA and promote coagulation increase the chance of blood stasis.
These morphologies facilitates the formation of thrombi (blood clouts) that can become dislodged
and lead to strokes. Migdady et al. [7] estimates that patients with AF have a 4- to 5-fold increased
risk of ischemic stroke, where a significant part of the thrombi stems from the heart. It is estimated
that up to 99% [2] of the reported heart thrombi are located in the LAA.
A cerebrovascular event, or a stroke, is the medical term used to describe either an ischemic-or
hemorrhagic stroke. Strokes in general are notorious due to their lethality and long term effects
on patients. Many people are left with disabilities such as paralysis, speech impairments, visual
problems and other types of loss of amenity.
The word ischemic means ”deficiency of oxygen”, which perfectly encapsulates the biological dangers
of this type of stroke. This type of stroke is characterized by a blocked artery in the brain, typically
by a blood clout, preventing brain tissue from getting oxygen and nutrients, thus damaging the
tissue. Ischemic strokes account for ≈85% of all cerebrovascular events.
The second type of stroke called hemorrhagic occurs when a blood vessel is leaking or bursting. The
blood then accumulates and compress the surrounding tissue, and as a result the part of the body
controlled by the damaged area cannot function properly. Hemorrhagic stroke accounts for ≈15%
of cerebrovascular events. In Figure 1.2a below, respectively ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke is
shown on the left and right, together with their incidence rate. Ischemic stroke and thrombosis is
of particular interest in this work because of it’s relatedness to the LAA as previously argued.
The three main components in blood stasis is visualized in the fire triangle of thrombosis in Fig-
ure 1.2b.
These components, endothelial injury, hypercoagulability and abnormal blood flow,
describes the main ingredients needed for formation of blood clouts.
1. Endothelial Injury is the damage of endothelial cells. Endothelial cells line the interior of
blood vessels and functions as an interface between blood in the lumen and the rest of the
2
==PAGE:7==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 1 – Introduction
(a) Ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke is illustrated
on the left and right respectively. The blocked artery
prevents blood from passing through, and the rupture
creates a compression on surrounding tissue. Source:
https://nnbv.dk/om-iskaemisk-apopleksi/
(b)
The
fire
triangle
of
thrombosis
illustrates
the three main elements of blood clouts forma-
tion, namely endothelial injury, hypercoagulability
and abnormal blood flow.
Source:
https://www.
medicinehack.com/2011/07/virchows-triad.html
Figure 1.2: Left: Source of cerebrovascular strokes. Right: Fire triangle of thrombosis
tissue. This type of injury can occour from i.e. major surgery, trauma, drugs and radiation
therapy.
2. Hypercoagulability is the increased tendency for blood to thrombose. This tendency can
be either inherent or acquired. Inherent hypercoagulability is usually due to antithrombin
deficiency, protein C or S deficiency, Factor V Leiden or other mutations or diseases that
increases the coagulability of blood. Acquired hypercoagulability can usually be contributed
to cancer, smoking, antiphospholipid syndrome, inflammation, chemotherapy etc.
3. Abnormal blood flow is usually contributed to chronically medical conditions that occurs
due to lack of mobility, advanced age, obesity and heart failure. These conditions commonly
cause a remodelling of the heart morphology, resulting in abnormal blood flow patterns.
These three ingredients in the triangle of thrombosis are what is typically causing cardioembolic
strokes. Hypercoagulability often receives medical intervention through anticoagulants or antiplatelet
medications, and endothelial injury, typically resulting from trauma, is unpredictable and not easily
modeled. This leaves abnormal blood flow as a crucial focus for investigation. My thesis particularly
examines abnormal blood flow within the heart, notably in the LAA. Abnormal blood flow in the
LA is often a consequence of heart ’remodelling,’ as depicted in Figure 1.3. It is hypothesized
that abnormal flow contributes to stroke risk, with notable interactions between blood flow, AF,
and stroke occurrence. Remodelling of the heart, often induced by factors like atherosclerosis or
AF, leads to increased heart size to accommodate the required blood throughput. This enlargement
strains the heart, creating a negative feedback loop where further remodelling exacerbates the risk
of thrombosis, AF, and stroke.
An example of such remodelling is the increase in LA volume. The maximal volume of the LA
(LAmax) is an important parameter that can provide valuable insights into cardiac health and serve
as a prognostic indicator for various cardiac diseases [8]. LAmax refers to the largest volume that
the LA reaches during the cardiac cycle. Among some of the common applications of LAmax is
prediction of AF [9], heart failure [10] and valvular heart disease [11]. The LA function has been
established as a prognostic indicator for patient mortality. Both the left atrial fractional change
(defined as the difference between maximal and minimal LA volume) and the left atrial ejection
fraction (LAEF) serve as measures assessing the LA’s function. In a study conducted by K¨uhl et al.
[12], it was discovered that diminished LA function independently predicts mortality and holds
prognostic significance equal to LAmax.
3
==PAGE:8==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 1 – Introduction
Figure 1.3: Flowchart emphasizing the relationships and significance among remodelling, AF,
and stroke. This model suggests that the dysrhythmia caused by AF results in contraction issues
and stasis for LA, which over time results in structural remodelling and a worsening of the car-
diopathy. source: https://doi.org/10.1161/strokeaha.115.012004
While the link between LA remodelling and thrombosis risk is well-studied, the specific impact of
LAA remodelling remains largely unexplored. It is hypothesized that changes in LAA morphology
and volume might similarly be indicative of thrombosis risk and patient mortality, a hypothesis that
could, upon validation, significantly enhance life-saving stratification strategies.
1.2
Aim of the Thesis
Developing a learning-based model designed for stroke-risk stratification based on the morphology
of the LAA could significantly assist cardiologists in their clinical practice. Such a model would
not only facilitate risk assessment but also enable the analysis of influential parameters, potentially
revealing new prognostic factors for categorizing stroke-risk. However, modelling a complex and
3-dimensional structure such as the LAA is no easy feat. This thesis aims to work as an exploratory
study for modelling the morphology of the LAA with Variational Autoencoders (VAEs). The VAE
framework is chosen due to the level of explainability it provides over other deep learning based
approaches. VAEs are additionally simple to understand, allows for low-dimensional latent space
representations of the data distribution and are inherently generative, making them a suitable
starting point exploring the possibilities of modelling the LAA. The aims of the thesis can thus be
broken down into:
1. Explore how VAEs extend to volumetric data.
2. Investigate how various loss functions influences VAEs ability to accurately reconstruct LAAs.
3. Evaluate VAE’s ability to generate anatomically plausible synthetic LAA configurations.
4. Explore the options of modelling the temporal dimension on volumetric data with VAEs.
4
==PAGE:9==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 1 – Introduction
1.3
Related Works
Neural networks operating on 3D- or 4D data have been an area of extensive research due to the
widespread modelling opportunities and applications. Generally, the biggest issues with an image
modality with more than 2 dimensions is to have a sufficient amount of high quality data and the
scalability of networks. The curse of dimensionality of simply having 1- or 2 additional dimensions
makes learning voxel-distributions considerably harder. Feature extraction becomes increasingly
difficult in higher dimensional data and the areas of interest and significance often constitutes a
small part of the image.
Qiao et al. [13] present a conditional generative network to describe the heart’s 4D spatio-temporal
anatomy and its connection with clinical factors. They employ a conditional β-Variational Autoen-
coder [14, 15, 16] (β-VAE) to learn latent representations of cardiac anatomies. Additionally, a
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) is used to encode clinical conditions into a latent vector. Temporal
dependencies are modelled with a temporal module with a one-to-many LSTM cell structure, gen-
erating sequential latent codes from both image and clinical factor representations. Their setup
enables both generation of synthetic spatio-temporal cardiac anatomies as well as visualization of
the data distribution in the latent space.
Rather than solely modeling a series of images, Qin et al. [17] approach cardiac imaging by esti-
mating both a 2D pixel-wise motion field and a segmentation mask. Their dual-branch architecture
features an unsupervised Siamese [18] spatial transformer [19] network for cardiac motion estima-
tion, leveraging multi-scale features and recurrent units for sequence prediction and a segmentation
branch that benefits from joint feature learning for weakly-supervised segmentation.
Another approach is adopted by Meng et al. [20] where a mesh-based framework for 3D motion
tracking is utilized. They model the heart as a 3D geometric mesh and introduce a deep learning
method for estimating the heart mesh motion from 2D CMR images. This method includes a mesh
displacement estimation module, a mesh prediction module, and a novel differentiable mesh-to-image
rasterizer, allowing for effective 3D motion estimation from 2D multi-view images.
Likewise, Beetz et al. [21] uses meshes as surface modality and propose the Mesh Deformation U-Net
for reconstructing 3D cardiac surfaces from 2D MRI slices. Combining spectral graph convolutions
and mesh sampling in an encoder-decoder architecture, they initially fit a template mesh to MRI
contours. The Mesh Deformation U-Net subsequently corrects misalignments due to respiratory and
heart-beating motion, utilizing multiple MRI views and the anatomical template mesh.
A notable difference between [13] and [17, 20, 21] is the generative aspect of a VAE. VAEs have
the ability to extrapolate from the learned data distribution and generate new synthetic cardiac
anatomies, allowing for a visual investigation of how different condition affects the shape. Sander
et al. [22] introduces a method to model 3D left ventricle shapes as a continuous implicit function, us-
ing an auto-decoder similar to [23]. This model reconstructs shapes through a latent space and deep
implicit functions, representing surfaces as zero iso-surfaces of their signed distance fields (SDF),
parameterized by an MLP. Each left ventricle shape vector is optimized alongside the model pa-
rameters for accurate SDF reconstruction. This setup enables the generation of synthetic anatomies
by optimizing a randomly initialized latent vector at inference time, but the removal of a decoder
makes interpretation of the latent shape vector difficult because the limited regularization of the
latent space.
5
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Data
This chapter outlines the data used in this thesis, focusing on its acquisition, analysis, and prepara-
tion. Initially, it introduces the study that provided the data, covering key details like the number
of patients, the study’s duration, and the types of health assessments conducted.
Next, the focus shifts to cardiac functional analysis (CFA), the primary source of imaging data used
in this thesis. This section explains how a CFA image series is captured and the relevance of CFA
in studying the LAA.
Lastly, the final section of this chapter describes the data preparation process. This includes how
segmentation mask are obtained, and the important preprocessing steps that ensures the data is
suitable for the VAE architectures used.
2.1
Copenhagen General Population Study
The data utilized in this thesis is sourced from the Copenhagen General Population Study (CGPS).
This study represents a comprehensive examination of the health status of the Copenhagen popula-
tion, with its origins tracing back to 1976. The study continues to be ongoing to this day, spanning
nearly five decades.
To date, it has involved the examination of over 26,000 randomly selected
men and women aged 20 and above, spanning five distinct time periods: 1976-78, 1981-83, 1991-94,
2001-03, and 2011-15. The long study duration means that most individuals have been continu-
ously monitored for more than 45 years, allowing unique insights to the health of humans. A sixth
examination round is currently underway, with invitations for participation extending from 2023 to
2025.
An examination encompasses a range of health assessments, including an electrocardiogram (ECG),
echocardiography (TTE), blood pressure measurement, a pulmonary function test, height and weight
measurements, the collection of 11 blood samples, and for some, and most importantly for this thesis,
a CFA which will be described in the following section of this chapter. This collection of tests makes
the examination similar to a thorough general health checkup and is expected to take approximately
2 hours and 15 minutes.
The primary focus of the CGPS is the investigation of genetic epidemiology, cardiovascular diseases,
and the impact of underlying risk factors on these conditions.
As of April 2022, 1,262 scientific articles have been published based on the data from CGPS. Among
6
==PAGE:11==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 2 – Data
these publications, 26 have taken the form of doctoral dissertations, while an additional 92 are Ph.D.
theses. Currently, approximately 20 Ph.D. students and several hundred researchers are actively
engaged in research utilizing CGPS data.
2.2
Cardiac Functional Analysis
A subset of individuals from the CGPS was invited to undergo a cardiac Computed Tomography
(CT) scan. Lately, this CT scan in the CGPS study has evolved into a Cardiac Functional Analysis
(CFA). A CFA is typically likewise performed using a cardiac CT imaging technique. The CFA scan
provides detailed information about the structure and function of the heart and its blood vessels.
The process of taking a CFA scan be broken down into 3 steps:
1) Preparation: The patient is laid down on the CT scanner table. ECG electrodes are attached
on the patient to monitor the electrical activity of the myocardium during the scan. Then,
a contrast dye, usually iodine-based, is injected into the patient’s bloodstream through an
intravenous (IV) line. The contrast dye helps to enhance the visibility of blood vessels and
the heart on the CT images.
2) Scanning: During the scan, the patient is moved into the scanner, which is shaped like a
donut as visualized in Figure 2.1.
The X-ray tube rotates around the patient, emitting
X-ray beams. To capture images at specific points in the cardiac cycle, the CT scanner is
synchronized with the patient’s heartbeat using the ECG. This synchronization allows for
images to be acquired when the heart is in a specific phase, typically from end-diastolic (ED)
(heart at rest) to end-systolic (heart contracts) frames.
3) Data processing: As the X-ray tube rotates, it captures a series of cross-sectional images
(slices) of the heart and surrounding structures from multiple angles. After the scan is com-
plete, a computer processes the acquired images to reconstruct multiple 3D images of the heart
and its chambers. Each of the 3D images represents a point in time, and the whole series con-
sisting of 20 frames makes up one heart cycle. In Figure 2.2 9 slices from respectively frame
1/20 and 17/20 is visualized for two patients.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: CT-scanner at the Department of Radiology and Scanning, Rigshospitalet. Among
other CT-scanners used in the CGPS study.
7
==PAGE:12==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 2 – Data
(a) Slice {7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, 56, 63} of CFA-scanning
1/20 of patient 0058.
(b) Slice {7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, 56, 63} of CFA-scanning
17/20 of patient 0041
Figure 2.2: Data show case of two time frames in the CFA-series for patient 0058 and 0041 from
the CPGS. Scans in each series are usually of size 560 × 560 × 70, and each series consists of 20
scans in total.
2.3
Data preparation
Out of the hundreds of CFA-scans in the entire CPGS, a subset of 170 unique scans that was readily
available at the start of the thesis were used. Because each CFA-scan consists of 20 time points, the
data effectively translates to 3400 unique volumetric CT images.
Due to the predominantly unlabeled nature and shear volume of the CFA-scans in the CGPS,
implementing a supervised deep learning methods as outlined in Chapter 1.2 poses a challenge.
To model the LAA’s complex anatomy using VAEs, many expert annotations are typically required.
However, these annotations are time-consuming and scarce.
To address this, it was decided to
automate the annotation process with a suitable segmentation network.
I initially found inspiration in the TotalSegmentator framework by Wasserthal et al. [24], a tool
capable of precise segmentation of CT images. Despite its accuracy in segmenting the ventricles and
atria, TotalSegmentator lacks specific training for the LAA, thus not fitting the thesis’ data needs.
However, the network architecture of TotalSegmentator is heavily inspired by nnU-Net [25], a seman-
tic segmentation network that automatically adapts to the provided data. The nnU-Net framework
has proven itself in numerous competitive settings. At MICCAI 2020 and 2021 respectively, 9/10
and 5/7 challenge winners built their framework upon it.
In order to train nnU-Net my co-supervisor, Kristine Aavild Sørensen, manually segmented the LAA,
LA, and pulmonary veins in 108 ’best-face’ CT images of the heart. These are images captured at
the cardiac cycle’s phase where the heart is the most still. I trained nnU-Net on these annotated
images, enabling it to generate LAA masks for my subset of CFA-scans from the CGPS. To ensure
anatomical accuracy, 50/170 of the nnU-Net predictions were manually analyzed by myself for
outliers and errors. None were found, and all data points were thus kept for further training.
Figure 2.3 demonstrates two nnU-Net predictions visualized using Slicer. In these examples, the
LA is represented in brown, the pulmonary veins in green, and the LAA in yellow. The images
8
==PAGE:13==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 2 – Data
showcase predictions from different planes (axial, coronal, sagittal) and a 3D surface rendering.
(a) nn-UNet prediction for patient 0022
(b) nn-UNet prediction for patient 0048
Figure 2.3:
Visualization of two predictions from nn-UNet rendered with Slicer.
For both
Figures 2.3a and 2.3b the brown class represents the LA, the green class the pulmonary veins,
and the yellow class the LA. The image in (1,1) is taken from the axial-plane, (2,1) from the
coronal-plane and (2,2) from the sagittal-plane.
The image in (1,2) visualizes the prediction
rendered as a 3D surface.
Because the sole focus of this thesis is the morphology of the LAA, the labels for the LA and
pulmonary veins from the nnU-Net predictions were discarded, thus making the prediction masks
binary where ’0’ represents the background and ’1’ denotes the LAA.
The original subset of CFA-scans from the CGPS, and thus also the binary prediction masks,
had an anisotropic spacing of approximately (0.4mm, 0.4mm, 2.0mm). To achieve uniform spatial
resolution and prevent distortion or feature bias, each scan was resampled to isotropic spacing of
(0.5mm, 0.5mm, 0.5mm). Subsequently, a 128 × 128 × 128 crop centered around the LAA’s center
of mass was extracted from each resampled scan. This step is important for preserving the LAA’s
intricate details while keeping the data size manageable. Finally, each binary crop is transformed into
a Signed Distance Field (SDF). In this SDF, voxels within the LAA (class 1) are assigned negative
values proportional to their Euclidean distance from the LAA’s surface, and external voxels (class
0) assigned positive values likewise based on their Euclidean distance to the surface.
The goal of this thesis is to learn the morphology of the LAA, which essentially involves learning
about its surface. Therefore, the focus is primarily on the voxels near the zero-level isocontour.
To achieve this, each SDF is adjusted: voxels with values below -10 are clamped to -10, and those
9
==PAGE:14==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 2 – Data
exceeding 10 are similarly set to 10. This approach ensures that the model concentrates on the most
relevant area, namely the LAA surface. Figure 2.4 illustrates four examples of SDFs from the data
set. The illustrated SDFs have not been clamped yet.
(a) SDF for patient 0031, scanning 5/20 in CFA.
(b) SDF for patient 0035, scanning 10/20 in CFA.
(c) SDF for patient 0123, scanning 12/20 in CFA.
(d) SDF for patient 200, scanning 11/20 in CFA.
Figure 2.4: Four randomly selected examples of SDFs representing the LAA. Each figure displays
25 slices ranging from 0 to 125 in increments of 5. The examples are taken at different time points
in the CFA-scan series. Lines corresponds to levels of isocontours ranging between −10 and 10 in
increments of 2.
10
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Theory and Methods
This chapter presents the fundamental theories and principal methodologies that forms the core
of this thesis. Initially, the thesis provides an introductory overview of VAEs, setting the stage
with their key conceptual elements.
Following this, we dive into a more detailed mathematical
explanation that helps to understand and motivate the general architecture of VAEs.
We then
explore the β-VAE model, an extension of the standard VAE framework characterized by a slightly
altered loss function. Subsequently, a section presenting the various losses used for the models is
presented. Then, the baseline VAE of the thesis and its architecture is introduced. This is followed
by a section on Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders, an advanced variant of standard VAEs,
offering increased complexity and modeling capabilities. Concluding the chapter, we delve into two
different approaches for capturing the temporal dynamics of CFA-scan series: the integration of an
LSTM-module and the implementation of temporal embeddings.
3.1
A general overview of Variational Autoencoders
Among the most popular generative models are VAEs. Kingma and Welling [14] introduced the core
architecture in 2013, which has since been steadily improved upon over numerous iterations. VAEs
distinguish themselves in their capability to approximate the underlying data distribution, making
them a popular tool in a generative setting.
VAEs is a member of the autoencoder family, a type of neural network typically utilized for dimen-
sionality reduction and feature learning. The fundamental pipeline of a VAE can be broken down
into 4 steps:
1) Data encoding: The initial phase of the network involves a data encoder responsible for
extracting information from the input data point and transforming it into a latent space
representation. Typically, this encoding process employs convolutional layers or transformer
architectures [19] to extract essential information from the input data. Convolutional layers
often utilize a technique like increased kernel stride for dimensionality reduction.
2) Latent Space: The latent space serves as the bridge connecting the encoder and decoder
components, as depicted in Figure 3.1. It represents the final, dimensionality-reduced data
representation for each data point. While traditional autoencoders map an image to a fixed,
continuous vector in the latent space, VAEs introduce a different approach. VAEs map data
points to probability distributions, frequently regularized by the standard Gaussian distribu-
11
==PAGE:16==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
tion, allowing the model to capture variations and uncertainties within the data. This results
in a data distribution described as z ∼N(µ, σ2I).
3) Reparameterization: To reconstruct a data point, we need to select a representation within
the latent space. However, sampling directly from the distribution associated with a data point
(i.e. z = µ + σ) is a non-differentiable operation, obstructing the use of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). To overcome this problem, a reparameterization trick is utilized. Instead of
sampling from the Gaussian distribution, we introduce a variable, ϵ, typically likewise sampled
from a standard Gaussian distribution N(0, 1). A linear transformation is then applied to the
sampled latent variable, resulting in z = µ + ϵ · σ. This trick makes the sampling operation
differentiable with respect to both µ and σ, and is one of the core elements of VAEs
4) Data decoding: The decoding phase is responsible for reconstructing the latent variable
sampled with the reparameterization trick. It learns to map the latent variable back into the
original data space with the objective of reconstructing the original data point. The latent
codes are typically up-sampled using techniques like transposed convolutions.
Figure 3.1: General overview of a variational autoencoder. An input X is fed to the encoder
that learns features and reduce the dimensionality of the input. Subsequently, the information
is passed to the latent space, where the information is transformed into two latent vectors µ
and σ2 representing a normal distribution associated with the input X. Lastly, a point from
the distribution is sampled with the reparameterization trick and passed to the decoder, that
learns to produce a reconstruction X′ of the input. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Variational_autoencoder
3.2
Mathematical Foundation of Variational Autoencoders
This section delves into a more sophisticated mathematical interpretation of VAEs within a Bayesian
framework. VAEs are construed as a pair of coupled yet individually parameterized models: the
encoder and the decoder that support each other.
The encoder provides the decoder with an approximation to its posterior over latent random vari-
ables, a necessity for the parametric update of the model as will be introduced shortly. Conversely,
the decoder relies on the encoder model to formulate good representations of the data, serving as
the approximate inverse of the encoder, in accordance with Bayes’ rule [26].
In the following section, let X denote the distribution of the observed data in a high-dimensional
space. Each data instance x is a realization drawn from this distribution such that x ∼X. The goal
12
==PAGE:17==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
is to model this distribution using a latent space representation. Correspondingly, let z denote the
latent variables in a low-dimensional space, capturing the essential generative factors of the data.
Assume that we aim to learn a generative model parameterized by θ a joint distribution pθ(x, z).
This distribution can be factorized as illustrated below:
pθ(x, z) = pθ(x|z)p(z)
(3.1)
The decomposition in Eq. (3.1) aligns with the generative modeling idea of capturing the essence
of data generation as a hierarchical process: from abstract, hidden factors (latent variables, z) to
observable outcomes (data, x).
A VAE attempts to learn the joint distribution in Eq. (3.1) by optimizing the marginal log-likelihood,
or evidence, of the data given by:
log pθ(x) = log
Z
pθ(x, z)dz = log
Z
pθ(x|z)p(z)dz.
(3.2)
The evidence log pθ(x) is a measure of how well the model explains the observed data x. It inte-
grates over all possible configurations of the latent variables z, effectively considering every way the
model could have generated the data. However, the evidence is intractable to calculate due to the
integration over all latent variables z, and thus infeasible to optimize directly. To circumvent this
challenge, VAEs utilize a different approach. Instead of directly maximizing the evidence, VAEs
maximize the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO). The ELBO acts as a tractable ”replacement” to the
marginal log-likelihood and is derived through the introduction of an approximate posterior distri-
bution denoted as qϕ(z|x) parameterized by ϕ. The approximate posterior distribution qϕ(z|x) is
introduced due to the intractability of the ”true” posterior distribution pθ(z|x). This intractability
becomes apparent when expanding the true posterior using Bayes’ rule:
pθ(z|x) = pθ(x, z)
pθ(x)
=
pθ(x|z)p(z)
R
pθ(x|z)p(z)dz
(3.3)
Computing the denominator once again requires the integration over all latent variables z, making it
computationally infeasible. Thus, by instead learning an approximation such that qϕ(z|x) ≈pθ(z|x)
it remedies this intractability.
Understanding the emergence of the ELBO and its role in maximizing the evidence requires exam-
ining the evidence term log pθ(x). The following derivation will reveal how optimizing the ELBO
serves as an effective replacement for maximizing the evidence. We begin by considering:
log pθ(x) = log
Z
pθ(x, z)dz
(3.4)
= log
Z
pθ(x, z)qϕ(z|x)
qϕ(z|x)dz
(3.5)
Because the logarithm is concave, Jensen’s inequality for expectations can be utilized. The inequality
13
==PAGE:18==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
states for a concave function f, f(E[X]) ≥E[f(X)], thus simplifying Eq. (3.5) by letting f = log(·):
log pθ(x) ≥
Z
qϕ(z|x) log pθ(x, z)
qϕ(z|x) dz
(3.6)
=
Z
qϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x, z) −log qϕ(z|x)] dz
(3.7)
=
Z
qϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z) + log p(z) −log qϕ(z|x)] dz
(3.8)
=
Z
qϕ(z|x) log pθ(x|z)dz +
Z
qϕ(z|x) log p(z)dz −
Z
qϕ(z|x) log qϕ(z|x)dz
(3.9)
=
Z
qϕ(z|x) log pθ(x|z)dz −
Z
qϕ(z|x) log qϕ(z|x)
p(z)
dz
(3.10)
= Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] −Eqϕ(z|x)

log qϕ(z|x)
p(z)

|
{z
}
=DKL(qϕ(z|x)∥p(z))
(3.11)
Finally, from Eq. (3.11), we have the ELBO
Lθ,ϕ(x) = Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] −DKL (qϕ(z|x)∥p(z))
(3.12)
≤log pθ(x)
(3.13)
The first term in Eq. (3.12) is the expected log-likelihood of the data given the latent variables
under the approximated posterior. The second term is the KL-divergence between the approximated
posterior and the prior which measures how different the two distributions are. The KL divergence is
non-negative and is zero only when the encoder’s distribution matches the prior, meaning the ELBO
is maximized when the KL-divergence is minimized. By maximizing the ELBO, we are maximizing a
lower bound on the log-likelihood of the data, and simultaneously minimizing the difference between
our approximate posterior and the prior. Maximizing the ELBO ensures that the model generates
data that closely resemble the observed data (high likelihood), and that the approximate posterior
is a good and regularized approximation of the prior. Note that the prior p(z) is not parameterized
by θ, as it is chosen a priori as will be discussed in a bit.
The first term in Eq. (3.12) is commonly known as the reconstruction term as it measures how well
the decoder reconstructs the input data from samples of latent variables drawn from the encoder’s
distribution, and can thus be interpreted as a form of ”reconstruction loss”.
In practice, this
reconstruction loss is often represented by a specific form of the log-likelihood. For continuous data,
the choice of loss typically depends on the assumed distribution of the reconstruction errors. If
the errors follows a Gaussian distribution, the mean squared error (MSE) also denoted L2 loss,
is typically used as the MSE is the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) for Gaussian residuals.
Conversely, if the errors are assumed to follow a Laplacian distribution, the loss would be mean
absolute error (MAE) also denoted L1 loss, as this is the MLE under Laplacian residuals. The
second term in Eq. (3.12) is called the regularization term, as it acts as a regularization term that
encourages the encoder’s distribution to be close to the prior distribution, typically a standard
normal distribution.
The standard normal distribution is a compelling choice for a prior p(z), due to its advantageous
properties. It is straightforward to sample from, which is important for both implementing the repa-
rameterization trick during training and generating synthetic data post-training. The distribution’s
symmetry around zero and its spherical shape encourage the encoder to create a dense latent space,
minimizing large, unmapped areas. This characteristic is particularly useful for smooth interpola-
tions between latent points. Additionally, the shape of the distribution naturally regularizes the
14
==PAGE:19==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
learning process by favoring encodings closer to the latent space’s origin, which in turn enhances
the model’s ability to generalize as it prevents overfitting. The mathematical simplicity of the stan-
dard normal distribution also leads to a closed-form expression for the KL-divergence between the
approximate posterior and the prior, simplifying computations. This simplicity allows for a more
efficient optimization of the VAEs loss function.
In our case, where the prior distribution is chosen to be a standard normal distribution we have
that p(z) = N(z; 0, I), which is the prior, and the encoders distribution is given by q(z|x) =
N(z; µ, σ2I). The KL-divergence between these two normal distributions are then given by:
DKL (q(z|x)∥p(z)) =
Z
q(z|x) log
q(z|x)
p(z)

dz
=
Z
q(z|x) log



1
√
2πσ2 e−(z−µ)2
2σ2
1
√
2πe−z2
2


dz
(3.14)
By expanding the logarithm we get:
DKL (q(z|x)∥p(z))
(3.15)
=
Z
q(z|x)

log

1
√
2πσ2

+ log

e−(z−µ)2
2σ2

−log

1
√
2π

−log

e−z2
2

dz
(3.16)
=
Z
q(z|x)

−1
2 log
 2πσ2
−(z −µ)2
2σ2
+ 1
2 log(2π) + z2
2

dz
(3.17)
Now, each term remains to be integrated which will be done below. Integrating the first term in
Eq. (3.17) yields:
Z
q(z|x)

−1
2 log
 2πσ2
dz = −1
2 log
 2πσ2
(3.18)
Note that in Eq. (3.18) we are integrating over the probability density function q(z|x) which by
definition is 1. For the second term in Eq. (3.17) we have:
Z
q(z|x)

−(z −µ)2
2σ2

dz = −1
2σ2
Z
q(z|x)(z2 −2zµ + µ2)dz
(3.19)
By recognising that the RHS of Eq. (3.19) can be rewritten as expectations, the expression simplifies
to:
−1
2σ2
Z
q(z|x)(z2 −2zµ + µ2)dz = −1
2σ2
 E[z2] −2µE[z] + µ2
(3.20)
Since E[z] = µ and E[z2] = µ2 + σ2 per our assumption of z ∼N(µ, σ2I), these expressions are
substituted into Eq. (3.20) above to obtain:
Z
q(z|x)

−(z −µ)2
2σ2

dz = −1
2σ2
 µ2 + σ2 −2µ2 + µ2
.
(3.21)
The third term in Eq. (3.17) equates to:
Z
q(z|x)
1
2 log(2π)

dz = 1
2 log(2π)
(3.22)
And for for the last term in Eq. (3.17) we have that:
Z
q(z|x)
z2
2

dz = 1
2E[z2] = 1
2(µ2 + σ2)
(3.23)
15
==PAGE:20==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
By combining Eq. (3.18) and (3.21) to (3.23) we obtain that:
DKL (q(z|x)∥p(z)) = −1
2 log
 2πσ2
−1
2 + 1
2 log(2π) + 1
2
 µ2 + σ2
= 1
2
 µ2 + σ2 −log(σ2) −1

(3.24)
The final expression for the KL divergence between the encoder and prior thus becomes:
DKL (q(z|x)∥p(z)) = 1
2
 µ2 + σ2 −log(σ2) −1

,
(3.25)
Note that it is common practice for VAE encoders to parameterize log(σ2) rather than σ2. This
is because 0 ≤σ by definition, and thus log-transforming the variance leads to an unconstrained
optimization problem, which gives a more stable and efficient optimization.
For the rest of the thesis when mentioning the KL-divergence in Eq. (3.25), ”regularization term”,
”KL loss” and ”KL term” will be used interchangeably.
3.3
Cyclic β-Variational Autoencoder
As described in Chapter 3.2 the total loss for a VAE is composed of a reconstruction term and a
regularization term. A standard VAE typically aims to maximize the ELBO given in Eq. (3.12).
However, this approach has several downsides. If there is a large difference in magnitude between
the reconstruction loss and the KL-divergence, the model usually tends to focus on one of the
terms, rather than performing a simultaneous optimization. Additionally, if the KL-divergence is
too low, the encoder might not learn meaningful latent representations capturing the underlying
data distribution. Balancing the loss of VAE is notoriously difficult, and even minor discrepancies
between the two terms leads to widely different results.
In order to overcome these issues and create a more balanced loss, Higgins et al. [16] proposes the
β-VAE framework where they modify the ELBO loss by introducing an adjustable hyper parameter
β such that it becomes:
Lθ,ϕ(x) = Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] −βDKL (qϕ(z|x)∥p(z))
(3.26)
The β-parameter gives the ability to balance the reconstruction loss and the KL-divergence, while
simultaneously controlling the extend the model focus on the latent space encodings. Higgins et al.
[16] show that introducing the hyper parameter β increases latent space disentanglement, learning
stability and creates better qualitative and quantitative results.
All trained models in this thesis have adapted the hyper parameter β as a scalar multiplied onto the
regularization term. The magnitude of β is chosen such that the magnitude of the reconstruction
term and the regularization term are approximately equal, forcing the model to prioritize both.
The chosen value of β is constant throughout the training of the model and is selected based on
experimentation.
One of the main issues of VAEs, as will also be discussed later in this thesis, is the vanishing of the
regularization term of the loss. The vanishing can be caused by a lack of good latent codes when
training the decoder at the beginning of optimization, the encoder learning a trivial representation
of the data distribution, or something entirely different. To remedy this issue, papers such as [27]
and [28] proposes an annealing weight schedule for the KL term. This thesis have adopted the cyclic
annealing scheme presented by Fu et al. [28], which in a cyclic-fashion increases and decreases a
16
==PAGE:21==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
weight scalar τ that is multiplied onto the β parameter and thus the KL term in the total loss. This
schedule is visualized in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Cyclic annealing scheme of τ, the scalar weight multiplied onto β in the KL loss
term.
This cyclic scheme introduces phases in the learning process. In the initial phase where τ is low,
the model can focus on learning to reconstruct the data accurately through the decoder. This phase
helps in establishing a better foundation for the decoder to understand and reconstruct the observed
data. As τ gradually increases, it increases the effect of β, imposing stronger regularization on the
KL term and thus the encoder. A high value of τ (0.5 ≤τ) shifts the focus from reconstruction
to learning more disentangled and informative latent representations. A learning schedule like this
”eases” the model into the more complex task of disentanglement without overwhelming it from the
start. The cyclic reduction of τ back to lower values provides an opportunity for the model to escape
potential local minima. This is similar to a form of ”refreshing” or ”resetting” the focus back to
emphasising on reconstruction. This allows the model to explore different regions of the parameter
space, potentially leading to better learning. This setup is effectively similar to a variable learning
rate only influencing the KL term.
3.4
Loss Functions
In the field of VAE research, there’s a general preference for using a voxel-wise reconstruction
loss rather than an averaged loss during training. This approach aligns with the ELBO loss in
Eq. (3.12). In an image composed of numerous voxels, the total log-likelihood, Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)]
is calculated as the sum of the log-likelihoods for each individual voxel (assuming independence),
rather than simply averaging their log-likelihoods.
In a practical setting, using a voxel-wise loss across all voxels can lead the model to focus more on
minimizing larger errors. These errors have a greater impact on the total loss, thereby influencing
the model’s learning priorities. On the other hand, models trained with a mean loss are encouraged
to reduce the average error. This can result in more balanced learning, that can be particularly
useful as not all LAA morphologies in the data set have the same size. Throughout this thesis, the
terms ’voxel-wise’ and ’summed’ loss will be used interchangeably. Similarly, ’mean’ and ’averaged’
loss will also be considered synonymous.
17
==PAGE:22==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
Theoretically, the only difference between the sum and mean loss should be a factor equivalent to the
product of the image size and the batch size. However, as will be seen later, the observations made
in this thesis suggest that the impact on the model’s performance is considerably more substantial in
practice. This stems from the balance between the two terms; the reconstruction error and the KL-
divergence. Having a good balance between the two proves challenging and dramatically alters the
performance of the model. Most of the architectures discussed in this thesis will thus be evaluated
using both using a voxel-wise loss and using an averaged loss to explore and compare the differences.
Figure 3.3: Illustration of L1 (blue), L2 (orange),
and Smooth-L1 norm (green) behaviors with γ = 1.
Employing MSE as a reconstruction loss in VAE
architectures can become an issue due to its sen-
sitivity to outliers. Particularly in our case, as
the dataset consists of SDFs with large numer-
ical values, a squared loss can be problematic.
As will be demonstrated in the results, I ex-
perimented with overcoming this issue by inte-
grating the Smooth-L1 loss function, a hybrid
approach that combines the advantages of both
L1 and L2 norms to achieve a more balanced
and robust loss. Let ˆy be the reconstruction of
the ground truth input y. The smooth-L1 loss
is then formulated as:
smooth L1(x, y) =
(
0.5 (ˆy −y)2 /γ
if |ˆy −y| < γ
|ˆy −y| −0.5 · γ
otherwise
(3.27)
As depicted in 3.3, the Smooth-L1 loss function resembles the L1 loss, but transitions to the L2
loss in the interval where |ˆy −y| ≤γ, smoothing the error curve. The multiplication of 0.5/γ when
|ˆy −y| < γ and the subtraction of −0.5 · γ otherwise in Eq. (3.27) prevents discontinuity at the
transition point |ˆy −y| = γ. The loss effectively reduces the steepness of the loss-curve which is
characteristic of the MSE-loss.
All of the models, whether they are trained with MSE loss, smooth-L1 loss, either averaged or
summed, are all weighted by the inverse of the absolute value of the SDF. Let ˆyk,i,j,l represent the
reconstruction of the k’th input sample at voxel location (i, j, l) by the decoder, SDFk,i,j,l the ground
truth value of the signed distance field at the same location, and N be the number of elements in
the batch. The optimized loss of a model trained with summed MSE loss is then given by:
argmin
θ,ϕ


N
X
k=1
X
i,j,l
(ˆyk,i,j,l −SDFk,i,j,l)2
|SDFk,i,j,l| + ε
+ τ · β · DKL(qϕ(z|x)∥p(z))


(3.28)
Here ε is a small constant to avoid division by zero. The weighting of the loss is done to force the
model to focus on what is most important in the data, namely the zero-level isocontour. Without the
weightening, unimportant voxels far away from the zero-level would dominate the loss, as these voxels
have larger numerical values and they constitute the majority of the data. Additionally, because
the voxel-wise summed loss results in large gradients, these gradients were clipped to ensure that
their norm did not exceed a maximum value of 10.0.
3.5
Establishing a Baseline Model
This section presents the baseline VAE that forms the foundation of all subsequent models trained
in this thesis. A baseline is established to assess whether added complexity improves the model’s
18
==PAGE:23==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
performance. Within the context of this thesis, the baseline is represented by a standard vanilla
VAE architecture. The architecture is visualized in Figure 3.4. The encoder of the baseline VAE
Figure 3.4: Baseline variational autoencoder. Each DownBlock consists of two 3D convolutions
where the initial utilizes a stride of 2, functioning as a down-sampling technique. The UpBlocks
consists of two 3D transposed convolutions, where the initial employ a stride of 2, serving as an
up-sampling technique.
consists of DownBlocks. Each DownBlock applies two 3D convolutions; the initial one employs a
kernel size of 4 and a stride of 2, whereas the subsequent one uses a kernel size of 3 with a stride of 1.
Each convolution is followed by a layer of 3D batch normalization and a ReLU activation function.
The strategy of using a stride of 2 in the initial convolution is to reduce the input dimensions by
half, serving as a down-sampling technique.
Conversely, the decoder consists of UpBlocks. Each UpBlock utilizes two transposed 3D convolu-
tions, with the initial one also using a kernel size of 4 and a stride of 2, and the subsequent one
a kernel size of 3 with a stride of 1. The initial transposed convolution thus functions as an up-
sampling approach. Each transposed convolution in the UpBlocks are likewise followed by a layer
of 3D batch normalization and a ReLU non-linearity.
The mean value, µ, and the logarithm of the variance, log σ2, are each represented by a linear layer
with 128 neurons before they are added together using the reparameterization trick. Before the
reparameterized vector is parsed into the decoder, it goes through a linear layer with 1024 neurons
to match the image size and number of channels of the first convolution in the decoder.
3.6
Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders
One of the major issues with classical VAEs in general is how the latent space is formed. Because the
latent space is formed solely from the output of the final convolution, the input has to be represented
based purely on the information remaining at the end of the encoder. This typically means, that
some intricate morphological details are lost, and the latent code the decoder is provided does not
contain sufficient information for a detailed reconstruction that is true to the details seen in the
input.
It is well known that high frequency features tend to be learned in the lower stages (at the start)
of convolutional neural network, whereas more complex features such as shapes and patterns are
learned in the higher stages (at the end) [29, 30]. Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders (HVAEs)
attempt to overcome this issue by forming a latent space based on information from multiple stages
of the encoder, thus bringing both high- and low level features into play. The HVAE architecture
employed in this thesis is based on the model formulation by Vahdat and Kautz [31] and the 3D
ConvNet by Tran et al. [32]. The architecture is visualized in Figure 3.5 below.
19
==PAGE:24==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
Figure 3.5: Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder architecture. Purple convolutions represents
3D convolutions or transposed 3D convolutions with kernel size 4 and stride 2 for the encoder and
decoder respectively, acting as a downsampling and upsampling technique. The turquoise residual
connections in the encoder are performed with 3D convolutions with a kernel size of 1 and a stride
of 2. The dark-green residuals connections in the decoder are 3D transposed convolutions with a
stride of 2 and kernel size of 2. Larger version of figure can be found in appendix, Figure A.1
As for the baseline VAE, the HVAE consists of DownBlocks in the encoder and UpBlocks in the
decoder. Each block in HVAE stacks 8 convolutions compared to the 2 convolutions in the baseline.
This effectively increases the receptive field of the HVAE drastically.
The purple convolutions at the start of each block illustrated in Figure 3.5 represents down-
sampling and up-sampling convolutions for the encoder and decoder respectively. The sampling
technique is identical to the one utilized in the baseline, meaning that the down-sampling convolu-
tions consist of 3D convolutions utilizing a kernel size of 4 and a stride of 2, whereas the up-sampling
convolutions consists of transposed 3D convolutions likewise with a kernel size of 4 and a stride of
2.
The remaining convolutions of the DownBlocks and UpBlocks respectively consists of 3D convolu-
tions and transposed 3D convolutions, both with a kernel size of 3 and a stride of 1. Each convolution
is likewise followed by a 3D batch normalization layer and a ReLU non-linearity.
Residual connections are added around each block for ease of training and better feature propagation
due to stacking 8 convolutions sequentially. The blue residual connections in the encoder consists of
3D convolutions with a stride of 2 and a kernel size of 1, while the dark-green residual connections
of the decoder consists of 3D transposed convolutions with a stride of 2 and kernel size of 2. The
last ReLU non-linearity of each block is applied after the addition of the residual connection as per
the standard.
The output of the third block goes through two linear layers with respectively 128 and 256 neurons.
The output of these linear layers are then split into two vectors of size 128 that are concatenated
onto the output of the linear layers forming the latent space for µ and log σ2. The whole encoder
pipeline thus forms a latent space consisting of 128 neurons from the third stage and 128 neurons
from the final stage, for a total of 256 neurons for both µ and log σ2 that represents the distribution
of the input. This architectural design is what distinguishes a HVAE from a VAE, as this allows
the latent space to consist of information from multiple stages.
3.7
Temporal Modelling
In the baseline VAE, each image in a CFA-scan is treated independently, without considering its
place in a temporal sequence. However, considering the available data, it’s evident that the tem-
poral dimension contains significant information about patient health which is not captured by
looking at snapshots. This section aims to address this gap by introducing two different models; one
that utilizes the entire set of 20 volumetric scans of the cardiac cycle captured in each CFA-scan,
and another that directly incorporates the temporal dimension into the model. These approaches
20
==PAGE:25==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
effectively translates to viewing each CFA-scan as a cohesive sequence rather than isolated data
points.
Incorporating temporal aspects into deep learning models adds a layer of complexity to an already
complicated task.
Moving from a 3-dimensional to a 4-dimensional data representation creates
unique challenges, making some traditional methods less effective or even impractical. I will cover
two distinct strategies for integrating temporal information into a model. The first strategy involves
the use of a Long Short-Term Memory Cell (LSTM-cell), a widely recognized technique in deep
learning. The section on this approach will cover how LSTM-cells function and how it is adapted
into my model. The second strategy revolves around a temporal embedding specific to each time
point in the CFA-scans. The motivation behind this approach and the implementation details will
be covered in the section covering the embedding.
3.7.1
Long Short-Term Memory Cell
The approach by Qiao et al. [13] showcases the effective use of a LSTM-cell for modeling temporal
relationships in volumetric images. Their architecture, as illustrated in Figure 3.6, demonstrates
a novel application of a LSTM-cell in this context.
Figure 3.6: Temporal module proposed by Qiao et al. [13]. This design employs an encoder
to generate a single latent code, which is then expanded into a series of latent codes through a
one-to-many LSTM-cell. This type of LSTM-cell, henceforth referred to simply as ’LSTM-cell’
in this thesis, takes a single input and produces a sequence of outputs, each dependent on the
previous input. The series of latent codes produced by the LSTM is subsequently fed to a decoder
for reconstruction. Image sourced from their publication [13].
In their architecture, the LSTM-cell processes two distinct inputs: a conditional vector zc, repre-
senting non-clinical aspects of the image, and z0, the reparameterized output from the encoder.
These vectors are combined and fed into the LSTM-cell.
Drawing inspiration from this study, I have adapted and integrated an LSTM-cell into my existing
baseline architecture. An LSTM-cell is comprised of four main components: the forget gate, the
input gate, the cell update, and the output gate, each modelling how information flows within the
21
==PAGE:26==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
cell. The forward pass of the LSTM is described through a series of six equations. Let xt represent
an input vector to the LSTM unit, σg denote the sigmoid activation function, σh the hyperbolic
activation function, and ⊙the element-wise multiplication. The equations are as follows:
ft = σg (Wfxt + Ufht−1 + bf)
(3.29)
it = σg (Wixt + Uiht−1 + bi)
(3.30)
ot = σg (Woxt + Uoht−1 + bo)
(3.31)
˜ct = σh (Wcxt + Ucht−1 + bc)
(3.32)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙˜ct
(3.33)
ht = ot ⊙σh (ct)
(3.34)
1. The Forget Gate, as defined in Eq. (3.29), outputs a value between [0, 1].
This value
determines how much information is retained from the previous cell, using both the current
input xt and the prior hidden state ht−1.
2. The Input Gate in Eq. (3.30) determines the significance of the candidate cell ˜ct in updating
the cell state vector by likewise producing a number between [0, 1].
3. The Output Gate, described in Eq. (3.31), controls the degree to which information from
the cell state ct is added to the hidden layer ht.
4. The Candidate Cell, as per Eq. (3.32), outputs a range between [−1, 1], due to the hy-
perbolic tangent activation function.
It captures new information from the input xt and
determines the data to be written to the cell state ct.
5. The Cell State in Eq. (3.33), is a combination of the prior cell state ct−1 and the candidate
cell ˜ct. The forget gate ft regulates the information retention of the previous cell state ct−1,
while the input gate it influences the addition of new information from the candidate cell ˜ct.
6. The Hidden Layer, as explained in Eq. (3.34), results from the element-wise multiplication
of the output gate ot with the hyperbolic tangent function applied to the cell state ct. The
hidden layer describes the transformation of the input xt based on prior information fed into
the LSTM block.
Similarly to the network architecture proposed by Qiao et al. [13], my encoder only takes the first
frame of each CFA-series (ED frame) as input and produces a single latent code z0. Rather than
passing this latent code to the decoder as in the baseline model, z0 is instead passed to an LSTM-
cell where the hidden layer and cell state is initial set to zero. The LSTM-cell then sequentially
generates 20 latent codes in an auto-regressive fashion, where previous hidden layers and cell states
are used as seen in Eq. (3.29) to (3.33) above. This effectively produces 20 latent codes based on a
single initial heart cycle frame, that are then passed to the decoder and processed sequentially. The
decoder thus produces 20 reconstructions aiming to capture the temporal dynamics of the heart,
based solely on the initial frame. The architecture thus effectively aims to capture a latent code z0
representing the morphology of the input LAA with convolutions, and then subsequently model the
temporal dynamics with the LSTM-cell.
3.7.2
Temporal Embedding
Another strategy to model the temporal dynamics of cardiac scans is through a learned temporal
embedding. This embedding is designed to capture the essence of the temporal changes in the scans.
The rationale behind this approach is based on the observation that the general morphology of the
LAA remains relatively stable throughout the cardiac cycle from ED to ES phase. Despite the
22
==PAGE:27==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 3 – Theory and Methods
LAA’s expansion and contraction, its core structure is largely consistent. The embedding aims to
provide the model with the needed information into these predictable patterns of change.
In essence, an embedding functions as a lookup table, learning fixed-size vector representations for
items in a given dictionary. Positional embeddings are commonly used in natural language processing
(NLP) for words, but this technique has been adapted in the thesis to a temporal embedding for
each time point t = 0, . . . , 19, in the CFA-scans. When a key t = {0, 1, . . . , 19} is input into the
embedding dictionary, it outputs a corresponding vector vt of a predetermined size. This vector is
then concatenated with the flattened output from the final convolution layer of the encoder before
being passed to the linear layers responsible for generating µ and log σ2
To balance the influence of temporal information from the embedding with the morphological infor-
mation from the encoder, each embedding is set to a size of 16. This is to prevent the temporal data
from dominating the encoder’s contribution, which in the baseline is a vector with a dimensionality
of 128. It’s critical to note that because the encoder’s output vector is regularized to approximate
a normal distribution, specifically N(0, 1), it is necessary to add a constraint on the embeddings.
To maintain a balance representation between the temporal and encoder-derived information the
maximum norm of the embeddings is constrained to 1.0 i.e.
if ∥vt∥> 1.0, then vt = vt/∥vt∥.
This adjustment ensures that the magnitude of the latent vector from the encoder is similar to the
magnitude of the embeddings.
23
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4
Experiments And Results
In this section, we delve into the experiments conducted and the results of this thesis. Given the
limited availability of quantitative metrics that concretely assess the generative performance of mod-
els, the analysis will include mostly qualitative perspectives—emphasizing aspects such as sample
quality and diversity, which will be evaluated based on linear latent space interpolations between
patients LAA. The purpose of visualizing these interpolations is to observe how the model adjusts
and extrapolates from the parameters µ and σ2, and to examine its proficiency in generating both
synthetic LAAs and reconstructing the ground truth. The selected patient pairs for interpolation
are chosen based on their dissimilarity in latent space, ensuring a more challenging and revealing
extrapolation task. This involves sampling 10 random cases and choosing the pair with the lowest
cosine similarity in their latent codes for interpolation. Given the complexity involved in visual-
izing and interpreting a 3D SDF, all produced SDFs are transformed into 3D surfaces. This was
achieved using the marching cubes algorithm to render the zero-level isocontour, which represents
the predicted surface of the LAA.
Additionally, another important aspect of this thesis is understanding how the models have captured
the data distribution, which will be examined by visualizing the latent space. This visualization will
be accomplished using the T-SNE technique [33] to project the learned µ and σ2 associated with
each data point to a 2D plane.
The results will be presented in the following order; initially, the results from the baseline model,
trained using both averaged and summed MSE will be presented. This will be followed by the results
from the model trained with the smooth-L1 loss. Afterwards, the results obtained from the HVAE
model will be presented. Finally, the outcomes from the temporal models, starting with the one
using temporal embedding and followed by the LSTM-cell model will be presented.
All models incorporate the β and τ parameter on the KL-loss as detailed in Chapter 3.3. Models
trained with an averaged loss had β = 10, and models trained with a summed loss had β = 10000.
The cyclic scheme for τ was set to undergo 4 phases during the full training for all models. These
parameters were selected based on performance in earlier experiments.
4.1
Baseline Model
The first experiment conducted was with the baseline model, trained using both a summed and
averaged MSE loss. In Figure 4.1 the top row visualizes four original LAA surfaces from patients
24
==PAGE:29==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
0161, 0061, 0086, and 0060. The bottom row presents the reconstructions of these LAAs using the
baseline model trained with the averaged MSE loss.
Figure 4.1: Top row: Ground truth LAA surface for patient 0161, 0061, 0086, and 0060. Bottom
row: Reconstructions of the above LAA surfaces from the baseline model trained on averaged MSE
loss.
When comparing the reconstructed images, it’s particularly noteworthy that the LAAs of patients
0161 and 0060 (bottom row, left and right columns respectively) appears nearly identical. A similar
observations extends to patient 0061 and 0086 (bottom row, central columns). Arguably, it appears
that patient 0161 and 0060 are the most distinct in their morphology among the four LAAs, and
it is thus expected that the reconstructions would be the most dissimilar. Additionally, the recon-
structions for patient 0061 and 0086 appears smaller than the other two due to marching cubes
not being able to locate a zero-level isocontour, thus rendering a surface corresponding to a lower
isocontour level. These reconstructions gives an indication of the model not capturing the intricate
nuances in the LAA morphology.
Figures 4.2a and 4.2b below showcases two examples of linear interpolation between patients in the
latent space for the baseline model trained on the averaged MSE loss. The transitions from the LAA
of patient 0158 to patient 0032 in Figure 4.2a appear smooth and maintain a plausible anatomical
coherence throughout the interpolation steps. Likewise applies for the transition between patient
0117 and 0160 in Figure 4.2b. Neither of the interpolations show any abrupt changes or distortions
in the morphologies that would indicate a lack of continuity or realistic anatomical progression in
the generated shapes.
25
==PAGE:30==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Latent space interpolation between patient 0158 (top)
and patient 0032 (bottom).
(b) Latent space interpolation between patient 0117 (top)
and patient 0160 (bottom).
Figure 4.2: Linear latent space interpolation between two sets of two different patients LAA from
baseline model trained with averaged MSE loss. The first and last row shows the ground truth
LAA for the patients, and the remaining rows represents sequential steps in the interpolation
between them.
Each column visualizes the same reconstructed surface rotated by 60◦around
the y-axis. Colouring is done according to the position of the x-coordinates for clearer spatial
interpretation. Note that all subsequent figures visualizing latent space interpolations will have
an identical setup as described here.
In the vast majority of cases, the interpolation process did not produce any artifacts or anatomically
implausible LAA shapes, suggesting that the latent space generally allows for a smooth transition
between shapes, even when the patients are located far from each other within the latent space.
Importantly, when considering both figures and interpolation steps in Figure 4.2 there does not
seem to occur major changes in the morphology, hinting that sampling two distinct points in the
latent space did not affect the reconstructions significantly. This is also evident when comparing the
ground truth LAA morphology visualized in the top and bottom row of Figures 4.2a and 4.2b.
The more intrinsic details have not been captured by the model, and it appears the model focuses
mostly on the overall shape of the LAA.
In Figure 4.3 reconstructions of ground truth shapes are extended to the baseline model trained
with the summed MSE loss.
26
==PAGE:31==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
Figure 4.3: Top row: Ground truth LAA surface for patient 0058, 0154, 0088 and 0166. Bottom
row: Reconstructions of the above LAA surfaces from the baseline model trained on summed MSE
loss.
The reconstructions in Figure 4.3 captures the larger morphological features such as size and bends
significantly better than previously seen in Figure 4.1. While the reconstruction for patient 0088
does not appear to stay true to the ground truth, the remaining reconstructions are following the
ground truth shapes accurately.
In Figure 4.4 below the linear latent space interpolation is similarly extended to the baseline model
trained using a summed MSE loss. The reconstructions visualized, however, displays a much larger
morphological variation that stays true to the ground truth LAAs compared to the baseline model
trained on averaged loss. In Figure 4.4a the initial grund truth morphology of patient 0125 seems
to have a slight angled bend towards the right, which is accurately captured by the reconstruction.
The sequential interpolation steps 2 and 3 in the latent space seems to represent an increasingly
slimmer and magnified bend in the morphology. The model seems to diverge from this tendency
when the morphology abruptly change in interpolation step 4/6 where the bend seems to have
disappeared and the shape becomes thicker. Step 5/6 displays a structure with minor artifacts in
the bottom of the generated LAA. These artifacts manifests as a coarse, tacky surface on the bottom
of the LAA, where thin layers seems to stick out of the otherwise smooth surface.
27
==PAGE:32==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Latent space interpolation between patient 0125 (top)
and patient 0111 (bottom).
(b) Latent space interpolation between patient 0131 (top)
and patient 0169 (bottom).
Figure 4.4: Linear latent space interpolations for baseline model trained with summed MSE loss.
A similar observation can be made for Figure 4.4b where the model trained with summed MSE loss
seemingly manages to capture more of the ground truth morphology of the LAA compared to what
was observed in Figure 4.2 on the model trained with the averaged MSE loss. The model seems to
smoothly generate anatomically plausible LAA morphologies in all steps of the interpolation process
except at step 4/6 where the generated surface contains a few holes and a tacky surface. This again
indicates that the model is somewhat able to extrapolate the latent space parameters in between
patient 0131 and 0169 to generate connected surfaces.
Interestingly, the results above does not generalize to all the interpolations created during the
experiments. The summed loss baseline model seems to generally struggle generating anatomically
plausible structures of the LAA’s as seen in Figure 4.5 below.
28
==PAGE:33==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Latent space interpolation between patient 0085 (top)
and patient 0120 (bottom).
(b) Latent space interpolation between patient 0100 (top)
and patient 0132 (bottom).
Figure 4.5: Linear latent space interpolations for baseline model trained with summed MSE loss
showcasing two examples of poor parameter extrapolation.
In both Figures 4.5a and 4.5b the reconstructions diverge from the anatomically plausible struc-
tures of the LAA during the interpolation process. Despite the model accurately captures the initial
LAA morphology as seen when comparing the first and second row, the subsequent morphologies
produced feature multiple lobes, tacky surfaces, branches, holes, and configurations that are atypical
for a LAA structure. For instance, Figure 4.5b displays the development of a second, disconnected
surface from interpolation step 3/6 that persists throughout the rest of the series. This artifact sug-
gests that although the model was trained on connected surfaces, it fails to consistently represent
the LAA as a single, contiguous surface, particularly when interpolating within the latent space.
This bifurcated LAA structure during the intermediate steps between patient 0100 and 0132 may
imply that the corresponding region in the latent space encodes two distinct anatomical variations,
leading the decoder to output a hybrid of the two.
The low shape-variation of the averaged loss baseline model as seen in Figure 4.2 and the emergence
of interpolation artifacts from the summed loss baseline model in Figure 4.4 is investigated by
looking at the distribution of the latent codes associated to the data points. The projection in
Figure 4.6 provides a 2D visualization of this space for both the averaged and summed MSE loss
models.
For the model trained with averaged MSE loss, the spread of points in the latent space appears less
scattered and more dense as seen when comparing Figure 4.6a to Figure 4.6b. Such a pattern
suggests that the averaged loss model encodes a latent space where latent codes corresponding to
diverse LAA morphologies are more closely aligned than in the summed loss model. In scenarios
where latent codes are more uniform, interpolating between these points tends to yield less variation
in reconstructions. This occurs because the latent codes are not sufficiently dispersed; as a result,
interpolations may traverse latent space regions that do not reflect significant changes in LAA
morphology. This phenomenon also implies that the encoder may not effectively differentiate LAAs
related to distinct patients in the latent space.
Consequently, the reconstructions lean towards
representing an amalgamation of morphologies rather than staying true to individual, unique shapes.
29
==PAGE:34==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
On the other hand, the model trained with summed MSE loss visualized in Figure 4.6b, resulted
in a latent space with a more scattered distribution with what appears to be higher density clusters
associated with each patient. This suggests that the model to a better degree created more distinct
representations for different morphologies, which might be why the larger variations is observed
when interpolating between patients. However, the downside is that the generated anatomies might
not always be plausible as previously seen in Figure 4.5. More distinct representations leads to
well spread data points; however, the presence of smaller, unpopulated regions is apparent. Such
’undefined’ areas, and particularly those situated between clusters without any data points, forces the
model to extrapolate the parameters for µ and σ2. This extrapolation can lead to the generation of
dual structures related to two distinct LAAs, rather than a smooth transition between them, during
the interpolation of two distant points as seen in Figure 4.5b.
(a) Latent space visualization for the model trained with
averaged MSE loss.
(b) Latent space visualization for the model trained with
summed MSE loss, colour according to patient ID
Figure 4.6: T-SNE projection of the latent space for baseline model trained with MSE. The
color coding corresponds to individual patients, with consistent coloring across different temporal
scans for each patient. The data point distribution of Figure 4.6b appears more scattered with
what appears to be higher density clusters associated with each patient than in Figure 4.6a.
Lastly we investigate if any clusters appear in the latent space according to the temporal dimension
of the data.
In Figure 4.7 below the T-SNE projection of the latent space is visualized with
color-coding according to the time point of the scan.
30
==PAGE:35==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Latent space visualization for the model trained with
averaged MSE loss
(b) Latent space visualization for the model trained with
summed MSE loss
Figure 4.7: T-SNE projection of the latent space for baseline model trained with MSE. The
color coding corresponds to individual time points, with consistent coloring across each patient.
No clusters are identifiable, suggesting the model to a lesser extend prioritize temporal features.
Distinct clusters was somewhat apparent with patient ID-based coloring as seen in Figure 4.6, but
no apparent clusters seems to form when coloring is based on the time point. Closer examination of
Figure 4.7 suggests a potential directional trend in the temporal dimension within the projected
latent space. To investigate this, the mean of each patient’s T-SNE projected latent codes was
calculated and then subtracted from the original codes. This approach effectively centers the T-
SNE projection around the origin, setting the mean of each patient’s latent codes to zero. This
process is illustrated for both the averaged and summed MSE models in Figure 4.8:
(a) Latent space where the mean of each patient’s latent
codes is subtracted from Figure 4.7a
(b) Latent space where the mean of each patient’s latent
codes is subtracted from Figure 4.7b
Figure 4.8: Zero-mean T-SNE projection clearly indicates a temporal trend in the data not
visible previously. The initial time points are typically located in the lower part, the intermediate
in the top left and the final to the right.
31
==PAGE:36==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
The zero-mean projection in Figure 4.8 reveals a clear temporal trend previously unnoticed. Data
points associated with the initial phases of the CFA scans tend to be located at the bottom of the
projection, intermediate stages in the top left, and final time points towards the center-right. For a
more detailed view of these temporal dynamics, a subset of 8 patients’ latent codes from the model
trained on summed MSE loss is visualized in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: A subset of 8 unique patient’s latent codes from the model trained on summed MSE.
Numbering indicate the scans time point t = {0, . . . 19} in the CFA series.
Figure 4.9 shows that some scans from patient 0049, 0153, 0100, and 0188 are situated away from
their main cluster. Notably, it is not consistently the same time points that diverge. Some of the
patients appears to form dense clusters such as patient 0049, whereas the distribution appears more
spread for patient 0153. Although sequential time points often lie adjacent, there is no consistent
pattern for when this adjacency ceases. This indicates that while a temporal direction might be
present, it is not fully captured by the model.
In summary, the baseline VAE captures individual anatomical variations and some temporal changes,
but features purely related to the temporal dimension, such as heart cycle expansion and contraction,
32
==PAGE:37==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
are not the primary influencers in the latent codes. There is a indication that temporal information
is captured as seen in Figure 4.8, where early time points are more prevalent in the lower part of
the latent space projection, the intermediate in the top left, and the final time points towards the
center-right. However, this trend is not consistent across all data points.
4.2
Baseline Model with Smooth-L1
The second experiment conducted was with the baseline model trained with the smooth-L1 loss.
Two models has been trained with this loss like in the previous section with MSE; one with an
averaged loss and the other with a summed loss.
In Figure 4.10 below four ground truth LAA morphologies has been reconstructed with the model
trained on the averaged smooth-L1 loss.
Figure 4.10:
Top row: Ground truth LAA surface for patient 0083, 0106, 0150, and 0146.
Bottom row: Reconstructions of the above LAA surfaces from the baseline model trained on
averaged smooth-L1 loss. No change in the reconstructed LAA morphology is observed although
the decoder was provided with latent codes associated to distinct data points.
It becomes apparent when comparing the ground truth LAAs in the first row with the reconstructed
in the second, that the model reconstructs the same shape for every input provided. To investigate
whether the issues arises because the encoder maps all the input morphologies to the same data
point, or because the decoder ignores the latent codes and reconstructs the same shape for all inputs,
the distribution of the latent codes is visualized in Figure 4.11 below.
33
==PAGE:38==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
Figure 4.11: T-SNE projection of the latent space for base line model trained with averaged
smooth-L1 loss.
The color coding corresponds to individual patients, with consistent coloring
across different temporal scans for each patient.
The data points does not appear to have collapsed into a singularity as one would expect if the
encoder learned an identical latent code representation for all of them. The issue can thus be isolated
to the decoder ignoring the provided latent code and reconstructing the same LAA morphology no
matter what.
There might be several clues to why the model has learned this behavior.
The encoder might
not have learned to capture meaningful information about the morphology of the input LAA, and
the latent codes might likewise contain no meaningful information for the decoder to use in its
reconstructions. An indication of the encoder not providing any information would be that the KL
loss of the model would be approximately 0. The KL loss of the model is visualized in Figure 4.12
below.
34
==PAGE:39==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) KL loss of model trained with averaged smooth-L1 loss.
(b) Log-domain of the KL loss of the model trained with averaged smooth-L1 loss.
Figure 4.12: KL-loss over the course of training using averaged smooth-L1 loss. Note that the
graph display the magnitude of the loss multiplied by the parameter τ and β.
The KL term appears to vanish after ≈5k iterations, suggesting that the encoder perfectly ap-
proximates the assumed prior such that qϕ(z|x) ≃qϕ(z) = N(0, 1). This phenomenon is known as
”posterior collapse”. The encoder chooses to simply approximate the assumed prior rather than pro-
vide useful information about the input. The approximate posterior becomes almost disconnected
from the input, and as a result x and z becomes independent of each other. Because the output
latent vector z from the encoder is too weak or noisy, the decoder thus simply ignores it and learns
the average input. This suggests that the magnitude of the β = 10 parameter on the KL term is
too high, and the approximate posterior is regularized too much to be equal to the prior.
In contrast to the averaged smooth-L1 loss model, the summed smooth-L1 model displays an im-
provement in its ability to reconstruct ground truth LAA morphologies as seen in Figure 4.13
below.
35
==PAGE:40==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
Figure 4.13:
Top row: Ground truth LAA surface for patient 0192, 0049, 0164, and 0178.
Bottom row: Reconstructions of the above LAA surfaces from the baseline model trained on
summed smooth-L1 loss. The visualization indicates that the model is proficient in replicating the
general structural characteristics of the input LAA morphology. However, in the specific instance
of patient 0049, the reconstruction were not successful, showcasing a limitation in the model’s
capability.
The reconstructions appears to capture the overall morphology to a lesser extend than the summed
MSE model previously seen in Figure 4.3, but is clearly superior to the model trained with aver-
aged smooth-L1 loss. To further investigate the models capabilities a latent space interpolation is
visualized in Figure 4.14.
36
==PAGE:41==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Latent space interpolation between patient 0064 (top)
and patient 0043 (bottom).
(b) Latent space interpolation between patient 0085 (top)
and patient 0166 (bottom).
Figure 4.14: Linear latent space interpolations for base line model trained with summed smooth-
L1 loss. The morphology follows the ground truth to a large extend and a clear deformation in
the morphology is observed over the course of the interpolation.
In Figure 4.14a, where the interpolation between patient 0064 and 0043 is visualized, the model
appears to capture a larger part of the LAA morphology of patient 0064 and 0043, as seen when
comparing the top two rows, and the bottom two rows. The LAA of patient 0064 in the first row
appears to have a slight bend towards the right in the initial frame. In the following columns, it
becomes apparent that the LAA is long and thin. The reconstruction by the model in the second
row manages to capture both the bend while maintaining a thin and long structure when rotated.
Over the course of the interpolation towards the shape of patient 0043, a clear deformation of the
morphology is seen, where the shape appears to become wider and rounder, which matches the
overall morphology of patient 0043 as seen in the last row.
Similarly, the interpolation between patient 0085 and 0166 in Figure 4.14b appears to display
more variation in the intermediate interpolation steps compared to the averaged smooth-L1 model,
while still maintaining an anatomically plausible LAA morphology throughout the process. The
change over the course of the interpolation is not as drastic as for Figure 4.14a, but deformation
is apparent when comparing intermediate steps.
The model trained using the averaged smooth-L1 loss encountered issues with posterior collapse,
leading to uninformative outcomes. In contrast, the model utilizing the summed smooth-L1 loss
managed to capture the larger morphological features of the input. However, it still fell short in
detail compared to the results obtained with the summed MSE loss.
4.3
Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder
In this section the results obtained with the HVAE architecture outlined in Chapter 3.6 is pre-
sented. The HVAE architecture has been trained only on the summed MSE loss. In Figures 4.15
to 4.17 below, selected examples of latent space interpolation are visualized.
37
==PAGE:42==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Interpolation between patient 0022 and 0090
(b) Interpolation between patient 0034 and 0166
Figure 4.15: Illustration of the latent space interpolations by the HVAE. Reconstructions capture
the morphology with high accuracy and intermediate steps maintain an anatomical plausible
structure.
The subsequent Figures 4.16 and 4.17 likewise illustrate interpolations from the
HVAE.
(a) Interpolation between patient 0043 and 0111
(b) Interpolation between patient 0173 and 0097
Figure 4.16
38
==PAGE:43==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Interpolation between patient 0194 and 0192
(b) Interpolation between patient 0169 and 0090
Figure 4.17
Comparing the interpolations in Figures 4.15 to 4.17 to previous interpolations results makes it
clear that the HVAE significantly improves the extrapolation and reconstruction. The HVAE ar-
chitecture not only generates anatomically accurate LAAs during the interpolation steps but also
closely matches the overall structure of the ground truth morphology. This alignment is particularly
noticeable when comparing the top row (ground truth morphology) with the second row (HVAE
reconstructions), and similarly, the last row with the second last in the interpolation figures. Al-
though the reconstructed output appears as a smoothed version of the ground truth, it effectively
replicates the original height, width, and curvature to a large extent.
In Figure 4.18 10 new latent codes z are sampled z ∼N(0, 1) and reconstructed, effectively
generating new, synthetic LAA morphologies.
39
==PAGE:44==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
Figure 4.18: 10 latent codes z sampled from z ∼N(0, 1) and reconstructed. Each row represents
a reconstructed latent code, and the columns the associated surface rotated by 60◦
From Figure 4.18 it is evident that the HVAE is capable of generating a diverse array of LAA mor-
phologies that are anatomically realistic. The absence of any dual structures, holes, or implausible
morphologies in the generated results suggests that despite the model encountering latent codes it
has never seen before, it can successfully extrapolate from its learned parameters to produce realis-
tic representations of LAAs. The HVAE model does not produce any extraneous structures in the
generated images. Instead, it consistently models the LAA surface as a single entity, demonstrating
its effectiveness in capturing and replicating the morphology of the LAA.
In Figure 4.19 the latent space for the HVAE is visualized.
40
==PAGE:45==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Latent space visualization for the HVAE, coloring cor-
responds to patient ID.
(b) Latent space visualization for the HVAE, coloring
corresponds to time points in CFA-series.
Figure 4.19: T-SNE projection of the latent space for HVAE. Coloring based on patient ID
(left) clearly shows formation of clusters, while coloring based on time points (right) indicates a
temporal direction.
The latent space visualization in Figures 4.19a and 4.19b shows a noticeable improvement in the
separation of latent code distributions compared to previous models. Most patients are represented
as a unique cluster in this space with minimal overlap.
This distinct separation indicates that
the latent space primarily captures patient-specific morphological features. However, Figure 4.19b
indicates that the temporal dimension show a directional characteristic similar to what was observed
in the baseline model trained with MSE loss. In the CFA scan series, the earlier time points tend
to be positioned below the center of the clusters identified by patient ID, whereas the intermediate
time points consistently appear above the center. This pattern indicates that the model not only
recognizes the scans in a sequence as belonging to the same patient but also consistently assigns a
similar direction to the time points in the scan series. This behavior suggests that the model has
effectively captured the general patterns of contraction and expansion that are characteristic of the
cardiac cycle.
4.4
Temporal Models
As previously argued in Chapter 3.7.2, I attempt to model the temporal dynamics in the heart
scans with two different methods. Namely, using a temporal embedding and by incorporating a
one-to-many LSTM cell. In the following section, I will initially presents the results obtained using
the temporal embedding, and afterwards the results obtained from the architecture incorporating
the one-to-many LSTM cell.
4.4.1
Temporal Embedding
The implementation of a temporal embedding provides a simple method for incorporating the time
dimension of the CFA series into the baseline network architecture. In Figures 4.20 and 4.21
below, two GIFs showcasing the reconstruction all the CFA-scans for patients 0095 and 0195 are
presented. These results are obtained with the model utilizing the temporal embedding and the
41
==PAGE:46==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
averaged MSE loss. Despite the figures visualizes reconstructions from distinct latent codes there
seems to be little to no difference in the reconstructed morphology for the two LAAs.
Besides
this, hardly any change over the temporal dimension is observed. Only minor changes in the local
geometry of the surface is observed, such as a pair of triangles appearing and disappearing or small
permutations of the edges in a neighborhood in some frames.
Figure 4.20: Predicted cardiac cycle for patient 0095 from the model with a temporal embedding
and averaged MSE loss
Figure 4.21: Predicted cardiac cycle for patient 0195 from the model with a temporal embedding
and averaged MSE loss
The apparent lack of change in the reconstructed morphology is similar to the phenomena previously
observed in the model trained on the averaged smooth-L1 loss. Similarly, to conclude that this can
42
==PAGE:47==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
be attributed to posterior collapse, the KL-loss and the latent code distribution is investigated. In
Figure 4.22 below the KL-loss is visualized.
(a) KL loss of model trained with temporal embedding on averaged MSE loss.
(b) Log-domain of the KL loss of model trained with temporal embedding on averaged MSE loss.
Figure 4.22: KL-loss over the course of training using temporal embedding and averaged MSE
loss. Note that the graph display the magnitude of the loss multiplied by the parameter τ and β.
It is apparent that the KL-loss rapidly goes to zero and maintains this level after ≈1.5k iterations,
indicating that the approximate posterior perfectly matches the prior. Figure 4.23 below shows
the distribution of learned latent codes with a T-SNE projection:
43
==PAGE:48==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
Figure 4.23: T-SNE projection of the latent space for baseline model with embedding trained on
averaged MSE loss. The color coding corresponds to individual patients, with consistent coloring
across different temporal scans for each patient.
The input LAA morphologies are all represented with a distinct latent code, suggesting that the
model suffers from posterior collapse as previously argued.
A model using temporal embedding and summed MSE reconstruction loss was trained. However,
this model often had difficulty in creating a zero-level isocontours in the output SDF, which made
using marching cubes and visualizing the surfaces challenging. When a zero-level isocontour did
emerge, it was typically not a single, continuous surface but rather several smaller, disconnected ones.
Consequently, generating a temporal sequence of reconstructions for even one LAA morphology was
not feasible. However, a few latent space interpolation was possible. Figure 4.24 below showcases
two examples of latent space interpolation, illustrating the poor reconstruction abilities of the model.
44
==PAGE:49==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
(a) Latent space interpolation between patient 0120 (top)
and patient 0023 (bottom)
(b) Latent space interpolation between patient 0143 (top)
and patient 0134 (bottom)
Figure 4.24: Linear latent space interpolations for the model utilizing the temporal embedding
and summed MSE loss.
It is evident that the zero-level isocontour is hardly present in Fig-
ure 4.24a, and that the surface is not contiguous in Figure 4.24b.
To investigate whether the model trained with an averaged MSE reconstruction loss and a temporal
embedding learns a latent space distribution according to patient morphology, time, or a mix of
both, the latent codes are visualized in Figure 4.25 below.
(a) Latent space visualization with coloring according to
ID.
(b) Latent space visualization with coloring according to
time.
Figure 4.25: Latent space distribution of LAAs for the model trained with an averaged MSE
reconstruction loss and a temporal embedding.
The distribution here shows a significant cluster formation skewed away from the origin, contrasting
with the more scattered and origin-centered distributions seen in earlier models discussed in the
thesis.
This cluster suggests a strong influence of the temporal embedding on the latent space
45
==PAGE:50==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
arrangement and might also explain why no inter-patient morphology is seen in the reconstructions.
Notably, data points for early cardiac phases (t = 4 and 5) are situated around the main cluster, a
pattern not observed previously. The orange isolated grouping at time point t=15 suggests that the
temporal aspect may be overshadowing the encoding of morphological features. To investigate if
this behavior can be contributed to the temporal embedding its weight is visualized in Figure 4.26
below.
Figure 4.26:
Visualization of the weights in the embedding matrix.
All weights have been
multiplied with a factor of 1000. Notably, almost all embedding vectors (rows) contains weights
that are approximately zero. The exception is at 4th (t = 4), 5th (t = 5) and 15th (t = 15) row
that contains the embedding vectors with the largest weight magnitude.
All the weights in the embedding has been multiplied by a factor of 1000 in Figure 4.26, suggesting
a limited utilization of information from the embedding. Notably, the 4th, 5th, and 15th rows, which
correspond to the temporal embedding vectors for time points t = 4, 5, and 15 respectively, has the
largest magnitudes in terms of temporal embeddings. This observation aligns with the previously
noted behavior where the early cardiac phases at t = 4 and t = 5 are positioned outside the main
cluster, and the distinct cluster observed at t = 15. However, the rationale behind the model’s
tendency to emphasize these particular time points more than others remains unclear.
4.4.2
One-to-Many Long Short-Term Memory Cell
The integration of an LSTM-cell into the framework is designed to capture the dynamic temporal
changes of the heart during its ED to ES cycle. While the encoder and decoder architecture are
identical to the baseline model, as detailed in Chapter 3.7.1, its design diverges significantly in
functionality. Unlike the temporal embedding model, which does not directly leverage information
46
==PAGE:51==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
from previous time steps, the LSTM-based model primarily focuses on this aspect. It predicts the
heart’s surface movements throughout the entire cycle of 20 scans concurrently, contrasting with
the temporal embedding model’s approach of considering and predicting only a single time-point at
a time.
The reconstruction ability of this model is presented in Figures 4.27 and 4.28, where the recon-
structions of a heart cycle for patients 0023 and 0132 are depicted. These GIFs demonstrate the
LSTM model’s ability to both capturing the contraction and expansion phases of the heart cycle,
along with the structure of the LAA.
However, an issue similar to that encountered with the embedding model emerges. As shown in the
comparisons of Figures 4.27 and 4.28, there is a noticeable lack of inter-patient morphological
variation, as no visible difference is observed. This limitation is not isolated to these two patients,
but extends to all the reconstructed latent codes examined.
Figure 4.27: Predicted cardiac cycle for patient 0023 from the one-to-many LSTM model.
47
==PAGE:52==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
Figure 4.28: Predicted cardiac cycle for patient 0132 from the one-to-many LSTM model.
As previously mentioned in Chapter 3.7.1 the LSTM-model does not directly provide the decoder
the latent code produced by the encoder, but rather the output of the LSTM-cell.
Thus, the
low-dimensional latent code representing the LAAs is here the associated hidden state from the
LSTM-cell rather than the latent code produced by the encoder. In Figure 4.29 below the hidden
states, or latent codes, produces by the LSTM-cell is visualized.
(a) Latent space visualization for LSTM model, coloring
according to ID
(b) Latent space visualization for LSTM model, coloring
according to time
Figure 4.29: Latent space distribution of LAAs for the model trained with an averaged MSE
reconstruction loss and LSTM module.
Figure 4.29a visualizes the latent codes colored according to patient ID, while Figure 4.29b
visualizes the latent codes colored corresponding to a time step t = 0 . . . 19.
In contrast to all
previously investigated latent space distributions, the LSTM-model is the only one who clusters the
48
==PAGE:53==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 4 – Experiments And Results
input scans according to their temporal dimension as seen in Figure 4.29b. This is not surprising,
as this is the only model where the whole sequence of scans in the CFA series is explicitly modelled
concurrently. Additionally, the latent codes seemingly follows a temporal trajectory in the latent
space, starting in the top-center and progressively moving in a clock-wise fashion. This phenomenon
is similar to the initial hypothesis of how the latent space distribution would look like, however, it
was expected that the latent codes would form in smaller clusters based on patient-ID, twirling
around in small trajectories around the origin of the cluster, thus forming the temporal dimension.
Interestingly, the cluster for time step t = 0 and 1 forms two large, round clusters in the top of
the latent space. As we have previously seen in Chapter 3.7.1, the dynamics of the hidden layer
ht, as detailed in Eq. (3.34), are influenced by two key components: the output gate ot, given in
Eq. (3.31), and the cell state ct, given in Eq. (3.33). Notably, the cell state is largely determined
by its preceding state ct−1 and the candidate cell ˜ct, presented in Eq. (3.32). This candidate cell’s
behavior is dependent on both the previous hidden state ht−1 and the current input. Consequently,
two critical elements that constitute the cell state are initially influenced by parameters set to zero
in the first time frame. Similarly, the output gate, which is affected by the input and the previous
hidden state ht−1, also depends on a parameter initially set to zero. This initial parameter setting
may lead to a notable distinction between the first and second hidden states compared to subsequent
ones, as observed in Figure 4.29b.
49
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5
Discussion
Working with volumetric data presents unique challenges, primarily due to the added complexity
inherent in voxel distribution across an extra dimension. This complexity necessitates the use of more
parameters to effectively model the data compared to standard 2D images. Within this context,
using generative models like VAEs for volumetric data has proven challenging. This difficulty is
evident in the trained baseline VAEs with either the voxel-wise or averaged loss, on either MSE
or smooth-L1. The results from these models indicate that a vanilla VAE struggles to accurately
model the morphology of the LAA to a degree where reconstructions reliably match the ground
truth data. For this reason, none of the models were tested on an independent set as they arguably
had not generalized sufficiently.
Specifically, the models trained with voxel-wise loss tended to produce reconstructions that varied
significantly in quality. While they often captured the broader structural aspects of the input LAA
morphology, they struggled to produce SDFs with a zero-level isocontours and frequently included
extraneous structures for parameters of µ and σ2 not learned in the training. This issue suggests a
possible overfitting to the training data, as the models failed to extrapolate from unseen µ and σ2
parameters to generate anatomically plausible LAA morphologies. Conversely, models trained with
averaged loss consistently generated SDFs with zero-level isocontours included, but showed minimal
variation in surfaces created from different latent codes. The reason behind this phenomenon can
be contributed to posterior collapse and suggest that the β-weight on the KL-term was set to high.
If β is too high, the loss overemphasize the regularization of the approximate posterior to approach
the prior in optimization, leading to latent codes without information about the input morphology.
However, it was observed that if β was too low, the models would not consistently be able to generate
zero-level isocontours in the output SDFs as the emphasis on learning a structured latent space were
too low.
On a more positive note, the HVAE model showed improvement in capturing the general morpho-
logical features of the input LAAs. This model not only consistently generated SDFs with zero-level
isocontours but also avoided the creation of extraneous structures, demonstrating superiority over
the baseline VAE models. This success was somewhat unexpected, especially considering the differ-
ences in latent space visualizations between the HVAE (as seen in Figure 4.19) and the baseline
model trained with MSE (in Figure 4.6). The HVAE managed to map the whole series of CT-
images in a CFA-scan associated to the same patient into more distinct clusters than the baseline
model, thus making interpolation more difficult. The larger gaps in the latent space likely explains
the greater morphological variation in the reconstructions, as the model learned to capture features
50
==PAGE:55==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 5 – Discussion
that distinguish different morphologies. Additionally, it did not encounter difficulties in extrapolat-
ing from unseen µ and σ2 parameters, managing to capture the essence of LAA-variation in the
synthetic generation.
Training the VAEs/HVAE in this thesis has been challenging due to inherent difficulty of balancing
a mixed loss. Because the reconstruction loss of the models trained with the voxel-wise loss were
of magnitude ≈1e6 it was difficult to balance the reconstruction and KL-terms for optimal opti-
mization. Modifying one of the terms slightly made the model behave in a completely unexpected
way. Without the phases introduced by the τ parameter and the emphasize of the KL-term by β,
the models would not learn any meaningful reconstructions. A better approach for future studies
would be to create a grid-search over the τ and β parameters to get a better estimate of optimal
values. However, this is not a trivial problem at all as it requires a meaningful metric to associate
each point in the grid with. The experiences made in this thesis suggests that the reconstruction
error can be misleading in quantifying the performance of the models as reconstructing an average
LAA generally leads to a low error.
Of the temporal models, the temporal embedding did not produce the anticipated results. The
embedding was motivated by the fact that the LAA morphology in the individual CT-scans of the
CFA-series associated to a patient does not change significantly over the course of the whole series,
but rather exhibits a predictable pattern of expansion and contraction. However, it was observed
in Figures 4.20 and 4.21 that barely any change over the course of the reconstructed CFA-series
occurred, suggesting a posterior collapse. This also hints to why the weights of each embedding
vector were so low as seen in Figure 4.26. The embedding weights are never learned if the decoder
simply ignores the information from the latent space.
The architecture incorporating the LSTM-module on the other hand successfully modeled the tem-
poral dimension of expansion and contraction but at the cost of not representing variations in
the morphology between patients. All of the reconstructed CFA-series exhibited the same pattern
where the reconstructed LAA appeared identical and the temporal dimension was accurately rep-
resented. To some surprise, the LSTM-model was the only model where the latent codes primarily
captured the temporal aspect of the data rather than the patient specific morphology as seen in
Figure 4.29. This combined with the lower inter-patient variation in the reconstructions suggests
that the LSTM-module perhaps is not the best way to capture the temporal dimension of the data,
as all the LAA details associated with a patient are lost. A possible explanation for this pattern
could be that the convolutional encoder responsible for providing the LSTM-cell with z0 suffers
from posterior collapse. The LSTM-cell and decoder thus solely learns the dynamics associated
with a cardiac cycle, and the output becomes the average over the data. However, this remains to
be investigated. Incorporating the LSTM-cell into the HVAE rather than the baseline model could
potentially resolve the issue of no inter-patient variation in morphology due to posterior collapse.
A model that can accurate capture morphologies while modelling the temporal dimension has the
possibility of providing valuable insights to the learned distribution. Including non-image features
such as age, weight, blood pressure, and pathologies into such a model could potentially reveal
previously unknown tendencies in the LAA morphology and cardiac cycle related to stroke.
It’s important to note that while projecting high-dimensional data into a lower-dimensional space
can be informative, it does not capture all the nuances in the data. This limitation is due to the
nature of projections in general, where a non-dominant feature such as temporal characteristics
are discarded even though these features could be present in higher-dimensional space.
This is
consistent with the observations made on temporal trends in the data in Figure 4.8. By centering
the T-SNE projections it became apparent that the baseline models trained on MSE had a tendency
to distinguish between earlier, intermediate and later cardiac phases. This tendency was likewise
51
==PAGE:56==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 5 – Discussion
observed for the HVAE model. These trends, however, were overshadowed by the patient-specific
features learned.
Generally, neural networks excel in classification over regression due to their proficiency in modeling
probability distributions. Experiments were conducted where the LAA was represented as a binary
mask rather than as a SDF. However, despite modifications to the loss such as a weighting due to
class imbalance, the results were consistently worse than modelling the LAAs as SDFs.
Autoencoders tends to ”blur” or ”smooth” reconstructions of data points despite being well trained.
This is also what was observed in the reconstructions by the HVAE in this thesis.
The more
intricate details associated to the LAA such as minor bends, ramifications and dents are lost in
the reconstruction and only the broader structural aspects of the morphology remains. There are
multiple reasons for this phenomena; for instance, the regularization of the approximate posterior
(forcing the model to learn more general patterns), the MSE loss (averaging out voxel-values), and
limited model capacity (to capture complex morphologies). A type of model that does not suffer
from the issues encountered in this thesis are denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM).
A diffusion model could iteratively refine a SDF (or binary mask) through a series of denosing
steps. This allows the model to preserve more of the intricate details lost with an autoencoder.
Additionally, DDPMs does not have to balance the reconstruction and regularization loss as they
do not rely on a latent space the same way a VAE does. This makes DDPMs more stable and easier
to train, as they do not tend to suffer from posterior collapse. However, utilizing DDPMs would
also change the focus of the study from having a model with a potentially informative latent space
to a purely generative problem.
Another obvious approach which future studies could explore is to incorporate a transformers based
architecture. The spatial embedding of transformers and the attention mechanism makes them an
obvious candidate to model series of images as a sequence of image tokens. A transformer approach
is thus more suited to capture temporal dependencies in the data than a single LSTM-cell or a
temporal embedding.
52
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This thesis investigated three approaches to modeling the LAA in CFA-scans using VAEs. The
first approach, a baseline model using either the averaged MSE or averaged smooth-L1 loss, often
led to posterior collapse or low-quality reconstructions. This resulted in an uninformative latent
space and poor generalization. Contrary to these results, the models trained on a voxel-wise MSE
or smooth-L1 loss, effectively changing the balance between the reconstruction and regularization
term, enabled the baseline model to more accurately represent the LAA’s structural morphology.
Moreover, it was observed that patient-specific latent codes were more distinctly clustered when
using the voxel-wise loss, compared to the averaged loss approach.
The second approach, the HVAE achieved the most accurate reconstructions and well-separated
latent space in this study. This lead to smoother interpolations with more variation. Notably, the
HVAE was also successful in generating diverse and anatomically plausible synthetic LAAs true to
the distribution of the training data set.
The attempts to describe the temporal dimension of the CFA scans via two different models led to
mixed outcomes. Despite both models showing signs of posterior collapse, the LSTM-based model
effectively captured the expansion and contraction patterns inherent to the cardiac cycle.
Future exploration in improved HVAE architecture could be promising due to its observed ability
to isolate distinct features in the latent space. With insights into which patients that are prone to
strokes, the HVAE could potentially identify specific LAA morphologies associated with an increased
risk of stroke.
Future research focusing on improving the HVAE architecture shows promise, particularly given its
demonstrated capability to isolate distinct features/morphologies within the latent space. With in-
sights into which patients that are susceptible to strokes, A HVAE could potentially help identifying
specific LAA morphologies that are linked to a heightened risk of stroke.
53
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1] Sundhedsstyrelsen.
Faktaark:
Stroke
i
danmark.
https://www.sst.
dk/-/media/Udgivelser/2020/Stroke/Faktaark-stroke.ashx?la=da&hash=
5A3D3EF6673A8FE92810AED1827BF527C54826A4, 2020. Accessed: 2023-30-12.
[2] Michael Glikson, Rafael Wolff, Gerhard Hindricks, John Mandrola, A John Camm, Gregory
Y H Lip, Laurent Fauchier, Tim R Betts, Thorsten Lewalter, Jacqueline Saw, Apostolos Tzikas,
Leonid Sternik, Fabian Nietlispach, Sergio Berti, Horst Sievert, Stefan Bertog, Bernhard Meier,
and ESC Scientific Document Group. EHRA/EAPCI expert consensus statement on catheter-
based left atrial appendage occlusion – an update.
EP Europace, 22(2):184–184, 08 2019.
ISSN 1099-5129. doi: 10.1093/europace/euz258. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/europace/
euz258.
[3] N. M. Al-Saady, O. A. Obel, and A. J. Camm. Left atrial appendage: structure, function, and
role in thromboembolism. Heart (British Cardiac Society), 11 1999. URL https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1760793/.
[4] Luigi Di Biase, Pasquale Santangeli, Matteo Anselmino, Prasant Mohanty, Iacopo Salvetti,
Sebastiano Gili, Rodney Horton, Javier E. Sanchez, Rong Bai, Sanghamitra Mohanty, Agnes
Pump, Mauricio Cereceda Brantes, G. Joseph Gallinghouse, J. David Burkhardt, Federico
Cesarani, Marco Scaglione, Andrea Natale, and Fiorenzo Gaita. Does the left atrial appendage
morphology correlate with the risk of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation? results from a
multicenter study. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 60(6):531–538, 2012. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2012.04.032.
[5] Andre Samuel Kanderian, A. Marc Gillinov, G¨osta B. Pettersson, Eugene Blackstone, and
Allan L. Klein. Success of surgical left atrial appendage closure: assessment by transesophageal
echocardiography. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 52(11):924–929, 2008. doi:
10.1016/j.jacc.2008.03.067.
[6] Roy Beigel, Neil C. Wunderlich, Siew Yen Ho, Reza Arsanjani, and Robert J. Siegel. The
left atrial appendage: anatomy, function, and noninvasive evaluation. JACC. Cardiovascular
Imaging, 7(12):1251–1265, 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2014.08.009.
[7] Ibrahem Migdady, Andrew Russman, and Adam B. Buletko. Atrial fibrillation and ischemic
stroke:
A clinical review.
Seminars in Neurology, 41(4):348–364, 2021.
doi:
10.1055/
s-0041-1726332.
[8] J Tobias K¨uhl, Jacob Lønborg, Andreas Fuchs, Mads J Andersen, Niels Vejlstrup, Henning
Kelbæk, Thomas Engstrøm, Jacob E Møller, and Klaus F Kofoed. Assessment of left atrial vol-
ume and function: a comparative study between echocardiography, magnetic resonance imaging
and multi slice computed tomography. International Journal of Cardiovascular Imaging, 28(5):
1061–71, 2012. ISSN 1569-5794. doi: 10.1007/s10554-011-9930-2.
54
==PAGE:59==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 6 – BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] S. M. Vaziri, M. G. Larson, E. J. Benjamin, and D. Levy. Echocardiographic predictors of
nonrheumatic atrial fibrillation. the framingham heart study. Circulation, 89(2):724–730, 1994.
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.89.2.724.
[10] Andrea Rossi, Mariantonietta Cicoira, Luisa Zanolla, Roberto Sandrini, Giuseppe Golia, Piero
Zardini, and Maurice Enriquez-Sarano. Determinants and prognostic value of left atrial volume
in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 40(8):
1425, 2002. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(02)02305-7.
[11] Maurice Enriquez-Sarano, Jean-Francois Avierinos, David Messika-Zeitoun, Dominique De-
taint, Michael Capps, Vuyisile Nkomo, Christopher Scott, Hartzell V. Schaff, and A. Jamil
Tajik. Quantitative determinants of the outcome of asymptomatic mitral regurgitation. The
New England Journal of Medicine, 352(9):875–883, 2005. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa041451.
[12] J Tobias K¨uhl, Jacob E Møller, Thomas S Kristensen, Henning Kelbæk, and Klaus F Kofoed.
Left atrial function and mortality in patients with nstemi an mdct study. J A C C: Cardiovas-
cular Imaging, 4(10):1080–7, 2011. ISSN 1936-878X. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmg.
2011.08.008. Copyright © 2011 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
[13] Mengyun Qiao, Shuo Wang, Huaqi Qiu, Antonio de Marvao, Declan P. O’Regan, Daniel Rueck-
ert, and Wenjia Bai.
Cheart: A conditional spatio-temporal generative model for cardiac
anatomy, 2023.
[14] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2022.
[15] Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using
deep conditional generative models. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and
R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2015. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2015/
file/8d55a249e6baa5c06772297520da2051-Paper.pdf.
[16] Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a
constrained variational framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy2fzU9gl.
[17] Chen Qin, Wenjia Bai, Jo Schlemper, Steffen E. Petersen, Stefan K. Piechnik, Stefan Neubauer,
and Daniel Rueckert. Joint learning of motion estimation and segmentation for cardiac mr image
sequences, 2018.
[18] Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Siamese neural networks for one-shot
image recognition. In ICML Deep Learning Workshop, 2015.
[19] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2023.
[20] Qingjie Meng, Wenjia Bai, Tianrui Liu, Declan P O’Regan, and Daniel Rueckert. Mesh-based
3d motion tracking in cardiac mri using deep learning, 2022.
[21] Marcel Beetz, Abhirup Banerjee, and Vicente Grau.
Reconstructing 3d cardiac anatomies
from misaligned multi-view magnetic resonance images with mesh deformation u-nets. In Erik
Bekkers, Jelmer M. Wolterink, and Angelica Aviles-Rivero, editors, Proceedings of the First
International Workshop on Geometric Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis, volume 194
55
==PAGE:60==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 6 – BIBLIOGRAPHY
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3–14. PMLR, 18 Nov 2022. URL https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v194/beetz22a.html.
[22] J. Sander, B. D. de Vos, S. Bruns, N. Planken, M. A. Viergever, T. Leiner, and I. Iˇsgum.
Reconstruction and completion of high-resolution 3d cardiac shapes using anisotropic cmri seg-
mentations and continuous implicit neural representations. Computers in Biology and Medicine,
164:107266, 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107266.
[23] Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation, 2019.
[24] Julian Wasserthal, Hannes-Christian Breit, Mathias T. Meyer, Marco Pradella, David Hinck,
Alexander W. Sauter, Tobias Heye, Daniel Boll, Jithin Cyriac, Shuo Yang, Marleen Bach, and
Michael Segeroth. Totalsegmentator: Robust segmentation of 104 anatomic structures in ct
images. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence, 2023. doi: 10.1148/ryai.230024.
[25] Fabian Isensee, Paul F. Jaeger, Simon A. Kohl, Jens Petersen, and Klaus H. Maier-Hein. nnu-
net: A self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation. Nature
Methods, 18(2):203–211, 2021.
[26] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. An introduction to variational autoencoders. Founda-
tions and Trends® in Machine Learning, 12(4):307–392, 2019. doi: 10.1561/2200000056. URL
https://doi.org/10.1561%2F2200000056.
[27] Samuel R. Bowman, Luke Vilnis, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew M. Dai, Rafal Jozefowicz, and Samy
Bengio. Generating sentences from a continuous space, 2016.
[28] Hao Fu, Chunyuan Li, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Lawrence Carin.
Cyclical annealing schedule: A simple approach to mitigating kl vanishing, 2019.
[29] Saad Albawi, Tareq Abed Mohammed, and Saad Al-Zawi. Understanding of a convolutional
neural network.
In 2017 International Conference on Engineering and Technology (ICET),
pages 1–6, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ICEngTechnol.2017.8308186.
[30] Manjunath Jogin, Mohana, M S Madhulika, G D Divya, R K Meghana, and S Apoorva. Feature
extraction using convolution neural networks (cnn) and deep learning.
In 2018 3rd IEEE
International Conference on Recent Trends in Electronics, Information and Communication
Technology (RTEICT), pages 2319–2323, 2018. doi: 10.1109/RTEICT42901.2018.9012507.
[31] Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2020/hash/e3b21256183cf7c2c7a66be163579d37-Abstract.html.
[32] Du Tran, Lubomir Bourdev, Rob Fergus, Lorenzo Torresani, and Manohar Paluri. Learning
spatiotemporal features with 3d convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.0767, 2015.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.0767.
[33] Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton.
Visualizing data using t-sne.
Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 9(86):2579–2605, 2008.
URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/
vandermaaten08a.html.
56
==PAGE:61==
Appendix
57
==PAGE:62==
Variational Autoencoders and the Left Atrial Appendage
Chapter 6 – BIBLIOGRAPHY
Figure A.1: Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder architecture. Purple convolutions represents 3D convolutions or transposed 3D convolutions
with kernel size 4 and stride 2 for the encoder and decoder respectively, acting as a downsampling and upsampling technique. The turquoise
residual connections in the encoder are performed with 3D convolutions with a kernel size of 1 and a stride of 2. The dark-green residuals
connections in the decoder are 3D transposed convolutions with a stride of 2 and kernel size of 2.
58
