==PAGE:1==
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic
Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation
in Amorphous Silicon Waveguides
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics
==PAGE:2==
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modu­
lation in Amorphous Silicon Waveguides
Thesis subtitle
Master Thesis
January 2024
By
Paschalis Kyrtsoudis
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics, Ørsteds Plads,buiding 343,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for High­Speed Optical
Communications, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in En­
gineering Physics, MSc Eng.
The title of the thesis is ”Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by
Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous Silicon Waveguides”. The supervisors were Peter
David Girouard, and Michael Galili.
Paschalis Kyrtsoudis ­ s212437
Signature
Date
ii
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Broadband frequency combs with high repetition rates have been widely researched due
to their applications in metrology, imaging, spectroscopy and optical communications.
One route to obtain optical frequency combs is to use third­order optical nonlinearities
to create dissipative Kerr soliton combs. An alternative method to generate broadband
combs is to spectrally broaden an electro­optic comb that is generated by a series of phase
and intensity modulators. Nonlinear waveguides with strong Kerr nonlinearity and normal
dispersion can achieve broadening via self­phase modulation. While the properties of
electro­optic combs are well understood, the effect of self­phase modulation imparted by
integrated nonlinear waveguides on the individual comb lines is not yet well­characterized.
Linewidth is indeed a property that helps characterize a broadened electro­optic comb.
The linewidth provides information about the spectral purity and stability of the comb lines,
enabling a comprehensive understanding of the comb’s overall performance. Conse­
quently, in this thesis an experimental setup for measuring laser linewidths using the de­
layed self­heterodyne technique is created. The experimental results focus on different
single mode fiber lengths, ranging from 25 km to 70 km, and their impact on the power
spectrum. The thesis emphasizes the comparison between simulation and experimental
outcomes and concludes that the optimal fiber delay length for the fiber delay is 59.9km,
concerning only white noise as the source of noise. In this case the linewidth of the contin­
uous wave laser (cobrite DX1 tunable laser) that will be used for the whole project should
be 58.355kHz.
This experimental setup will be used to measure the linewidth characteristics of the comb
lines before and after the spectral broadening. Last but not least the impact of the spectral
broadening on the linewidths of the individual lines of the frequency comb will be studied.
Both for the comb lines in the electro­optic comb and for the comb lines in the broadened
electro­optic comb, the study reveals a consistent trend in linewidth values, with minimal
variation observed both among the different comb lines and compared to the linewidth of
the cobrite tunable laser. These findings may be useful in communication systems that
must minimize noise interference. To support this claim, delayed self­heterodyne tech­
nique method improvements and component sensitivity, are needed to improve or select
different components for more precise characterization of noise.
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would want to express my gratitude who contributed to this project. Firstly, my sincere
gratitude goes to Peter Girouard, one of my supervisors, who, despite no longer being at
the university, played a pivotal role in guiding me throughout the project. His assistance
and advice were invaluable in helping me understand the design and modelling of the
devices and systems required for this project. We spent many hours in the lab together,
which helped me broaden my understanding, and design and simulate my project. I also
want to express my appreciation to my second supervisor, Michael Galili, whose support
during the final two months was essential in clarifying complex details of my thesis. Lastly,
I want to thank all the researchers in the lab who provided practical support, especially
during challenging times.
iv
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Measurement of Linewidth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Cascade of modulators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Linewidth characterization of the cobrite DX1­tunable laser
8
3.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Linewidth characterization of 25 GHz EO comb lines
15
4.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Linewidth characterization of specific lines of the broadened 25GHz EO comb 23
5.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Bibliography
38
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
Setup for the (DSHI) technique of a laser linewidth. The figure is reprinted
from [6]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Setup for EOC generation when using an IM after the PM. The figure is
reprinted from [9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Setup for DSHI technique of a laser linewidth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
a)Simulation and the actual detected power spectrum for delayed fiber
length of 25km . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
b)Simulation and the actual detected power spectrum for delayed fiber
length of 50km . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
c)Simulation and the actual detected power spectrum for delayed fiber length
of 59.9km . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
d)Simulation and the actual detected power spectrum for delayed fiber
length of 75km . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.1
Schematic of the experimental setup used to measure the linewidth of the
25GHz EO comb lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Spectrum of the 25 GHz comb, the center wavelength is 1550nm, with ap­
proximately 7nm bandwidth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Isolation of the EO comb line centered at 1550nm when the wavelength
span setting of the OSA is set to 2 nm (left) and Zoomed­in View (right)
. . 17
4.4
Filtering three specific wavelengths in EO Comb Spectrum
. . . . . . . . . 18
4.5
linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1550nm . . . . . . . . 19
4.6
Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1553.264nm
. . . . . 20
4.7
Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1546.852nm
. . . . . 21
5.1
Schematic of the experimental setup used to measure the linewidth of spe­
cific lines of the broaden 25GHz EO comb
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Broadened EO comb spectrum, the center wavelength is 1550nm, with ap­
proximately 35nm bandwidth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Spectrum of the waveguide, the center wavelength is 1550nm, with approx­
imately 7nm bandwidth
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.4
Isolation of the EO comb line centered at 1546.813nm when the wavelength
span setting of the OSA is set to 2 nm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.5
Filtering 5 specific wavelengths in the droadened EO comb spectrum
. . . 27
5.6
Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1545.044nm
. . . . . 28
5.7
Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1546.813nm
. . . . . 29
5.8
Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1550nm . . . . . . . . 30
5.9
Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1553.024nm
. . . . . 31
5.10 Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1554.488nm
. . . . . 32
vi
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
3.1
DSHI measurements results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.1
Power Distribution Analysis at Key Stages of the Experimental Setup . . . . 18
4.2
Linewidth Measurements and Mean Values for Each Comb Line of the EO
comb
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.1
Linewidth Measurements and Mean Values for Each Comb Line
. . . . . . 27
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
vii
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
CW Continuous Wave
SPM Self­Phase Modulation
OSA Optical Spectrum Analyzer
ESA Electrical Spectrum Analyzer
EDFA Erbium­doped Fiber Amplifier
EO Electro Optic
PM Phase Modulator
IM Intensity Modulator
AOM Acousto­Optic Modulator
SNR Signal to Noise Ratio
DSHI Delayed Self­heterodyne Interferometer
VOA Variable Optical Attenuator
PSD Power Spectral Density
FWHM Full Width at Half Maximum
RF ratio frequency
ASE Amplified spontaneous emission
TE Transverse Electrical
viii
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:10==
MI Modulation Instabillity
EOC Electro optic comb
SMF single mode fiber
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
ix
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
In the evolution of optical communications, the development of frequency combs has
been instrumental. Broadband frequency combs with high repetition rates have found
extensive applications across various domains, including optical communications, spec­
troscopy, metrology, and atomic clocks[1]. Electro­optic combs(EOCs) have emerged
as a promising avenue for generating high­repetition­rate frequency combs, offering en­
hanced bandwidth and efficiency for optical communications systems[2]. Utilizing nonlin­
ear waveguides for spectral broadening, EOCs have the potential to greatly impact optical
communications technology. Despite their promising applications, the specific effects of
self­phase modulation(SPM) imparted by integrated nonlinear waveguides on individual
comb lines remain inadequately characterized.
Understanding the dynamics of self­phase modulation and its impact on comb perfor­
mance is crucial for optimizing the functionality of EOCs in practical applications. By em­
ploying advanced techniques like the delayed self­heterodyne interferometric technique
(DSHI), it is possible to unlock insights into linewidth dynamics and better understand
the intricacies of comb behavior. The DSHI method enables precise measurements of
comb linewidths, providing valuable information for optimizing comb performance in opti­
cal communications and other related fields.
1.2
Outline
The thesis consists of the main work obtained in this project and is divided into five chap­
ters.In addition, this thesis includes conclusions and a discussion section at the end of
the chapter’s skeleton.
• Chapter 1: presents the motivation of the project about studying the linewidth for an
EOC and a broadened EOC as well as a description of the outline of the thesis.
• Chapter 2: demonstrates the key theories related to the DSHI technique. It also presents
the theory of producing an EOC that is generated by a series of phase modulators(PMs)
and intensity modulators(IMs).
• Chapter 3: describes the experimental setup of the DSHI technique, the limitations, and
the comparison between different fiber delays in order to obtain measurements with suf­
ficient accuracy.
• Chapter 4: analyze and evaluate the experimental setup used to measure the linewidth
of a 25GHz EOC. Moreover the linewidth of Different comb lines is studied and compared
with the linewidth of the continuous wave(CW) laser.
• Chapter 5: exhibits the spectrum broadening by a 25 GHz EOC propagating through
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
1
==PAGE:12==
an amorphous silicon waveguide. In addition, the linewidth of Different comb lines is
studied and compared with the linewidth of the CW laser
2
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Measurement of Linewidth
Random fluctuations in intensity, phase, and frequency are all part of laser noise. These
noises are regarded as stochastic variables. Two parameters are generally used to char­
acterize basic properties of a stochastic variable x(t): its expectation, E[x(t)] or ⟨x(t)⟩and
its autocorrelation, Rx = E [x(t)x∗(t −τ)] [3]:
⟨x(t)⟩= lim
T→∞
1
T
Z T/2
−T/2
x(t)dt,
Rx(τ) = lim
T→∞
1
T
Z T/2
−T/2
x(t)x∗(t −τ)dt.
(2.1)
Stochastic variables are inherently uncertain. Randomness is a fundamental concept
in probability theory. The characterization of randomness is often done through statistical
tools and measures[4]. For example, the probability distribution of a random variable de­
scribes the likelihood of different outcomes, and the Power Spectral Density(PSD) is one
way to characterize the frequency components of a stochastic process. PSD is obtained
as the Fourier transform of autocorrelation function, i.e., Wiener–Khinchin theorem [3]:
Sx(f) =
Z ∞
−∞
Rx(τ)e−j2πfτdτ = lim
T→∞
1
T

Z T/2
−T/2
x(t)e−j2πft dt
(2.2)
The linewidth of a laser refers to the width of its optical spectrum, commonly measured as
the full width at half­maximum (FWHM). To be more specific, it refers to the width of the
(PSD) of the electric field that is emitted, as a function of either frequency or wavelength[5].
The autocorrelation for the Electric field of a laser with Amplitude Eo , written as [3]:
RE(τ) = lim
T→∞
1
T
Z T/2
−T/2
E(t)E∗(t −τ)dt
=
h
A2 D
ej∆ϕ(t,τ)E
+
D
a(t)a(t −τ)ej∆ϕ(t,τ)E
+ A
D
[a(t) + a(t −τ)]ej∆ϕ(t,τ)Ei
ejω0τ
(2.3)
• E(t) = Eoe−j(ωot+ϕ(t)), the equation of Electric field of a laser in which we assume only
phase noise
• ∆ϕ(t, τ) = ϕ(t) −ϕ(t −τ)
• ωo = πc
nL
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
3
==PAGE:14==
To obtain the linewidth of a single­frequency laser, with high coherence, for example 100
kHz, the heterodyne method is often used. In order to get the interference of a laser wave
with itself, delayed long enough, the DSHI technique is often used. Figure 2.1 presents
the setup of this technique
Figure 2.1: Setup for the (DSHI) technique of a laser linewidth. The figure is reprinted
from [6]
The combined field in the optical coupler, after the AOM will be [3]:
ET(t) = κE0e−j[(ω0+ωm)t+ϕ(t)] + (1 −κ)E0e−αF∆L/2e−j[ω0(t−τd)+ϕ(t−τd)]
= κE0e−j[(ω0+ωm)t+ϕ(t)] h
1 + bej∆ϕ(t,τd)ej(ωτd+ωmt)i
(2.4)
•b = [ (1−κ)
κ
] · e(−αFz
2 )
•aF :fiber loss coefficient
•ωm:frequency shift of the AOM
•τd = η·∆L
c
: delay with fiber length difference of between the two arms
• Phase noise models usually consider three contributions to the phase noise PSD: white,
flicker and random walk noises. k is the constant that gives the strength of flicker fre­
quency noise and random walk frequency noise, respectively[7].
The spectrum given by the Electrical Spectrum Analyzer(ESA) is proportional to the au­
tocorrelation of optical intensity [3].
RI(τ) = ⟨ET(t)E∗
T(t)ET(t −τ)E∗
T(t −τ)⟩
=κ4E4
0
Dn
1 + b2 + b
h
ej∆ϕ(t,τd)ej(ωτd+ωmt) + c.c.
io
·
n
1 + b2 + b
h
ej∆ϕ(t−τ,τd)ej[ωτd+ωm(t−τ) + c.c.
ioE
(2.5)
RI(τ) = κ4E4
0
h 1 + b22 + 4b
 1 + b2
e−U cos ωτd + 2b2  e−V + e−W cos 2ωτd
i
(2.6)
4
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:15==
where
U =
D
[ϕ(t) −ϕ (t −τd)]2E
/2
V =
D
[ϕ(t) −ϕ (t −τd) −ϕ(t −τ) + ϕ (t −τ −τd)]2E
/2.
W =
D
[ϕ(t) −ϕ (t −τd) + ϕ(t −τ) −ϕ (t −τ −τd)]2E
/2
For white noise, the three expressions are reduced to
U = τd/2τc
V = (2τd + 2|τ| −|τd −τ| −|τd + τ|) /2τc
W = (2τd −2|τ| + |τd −τ| + |τd + τ|) /2τc.
S(f) =e−τd/τcδ (f −fm) +
τc/2
1 + 4π2 (f −fm)2 τ 2c
·

1 −

cos 2π (f −fm) τd + sin 2π (f −fm) τd
2π (f −fm) τc

e−τd/τc

,
(2.7)
For simplicity b = 1. The term with cos(2ωτd) gives smaller contributions to the PSD.
The term in the square brackets multiplied with the term, e−τd/τc, will disappear when the
delay line is significantly longer than the coherence length of the laser, τd > τc. The au­
tocorrelation spectrum that is obtained exhibits a Lorentzian shape. This true Lorentzian
corresponds to the delay time when the phases of the optical field have become decorre­
lated. The formula for calculating the linewidth of autocorrelation is: ∆v =
1
2πτc
and can be obtained from the spectrum from ESA, which is twice the laser’s Lorentzian
linewidth.
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
5
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Cascade of modulators
A common technique to achieve a flat­topped EOC involves using one or more PMS fol­
lowed by an IM. This approach is especially noteworthy as it remains unaffected by the
repetition frequency and eliminates the need for additional optical components[8]
Figure 2.2: Setup for EOC generation when using an IM after the PM. The figure is
reprinted from [9]
As the laser passes through the photoelectric crystal in the PM, the phase of the light wave
undergoes modulation. Assuming that the equation of the electric field of the incident light
is:E(t) = Eoej(ωot+ϕ(t))
The phase change ϕ(t) will occur after being modulated by the PM of modulation index
K, and then the output optical field becomes [9]:
A(t) = A0eiωctei∆φ = A0eiωcteiKV0 sin(ωmt).
(2.8)
• The sinusoidal electric field that the modulator is driven is: V (t) = V0 sin (ωmt).
In the frequency domain, the amplitude spectrum is obtained by FT:
˜A(ω) = A0δ (ω −ωc) ∗
 Z ∞
−∞
∞
X
n=−∞
Jn (KV0) eit(nωm−ω)dt
!
= A0
∞
X
n=−∞
Jn (KV0) δ (ω −nωm −ωc) ,
(2.9)
where Jn are the Bessel functions of the first kind
where all the frequencies of the comb are defined by:
ω ≡ωn = nωm + ωc
with
n ∈Z
From Eq.2.9 it can be shown that the single­frequency laser source after phase mod­
ulation becomes multi­frequency light, and each frequency band is symmetrical about the
6
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:17==
zero­order frequency band[10].
Because the zeros of the Bessel functions can cause comb lines inside the spectrum
to have extremely low intensities, the comb structure is not monotonic. When utilizing an
IM after the PM, this issue may be resolved by flattening the comb. A flattened spectrum
is obtained by keeping just the linearly chirped portion of the phase­modulated light by
employing electrical components to shift the RF signal delivered to the IM.[11]
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
7
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3
Linewidth characterization of the cobrite
DX1­tunable laser
The conventional approaches, employing high­resolution spectrometers and scanning
Fabry­Perot interferometers, are limited to resolutions of several megahertz when mea­
suring laser linewidth. The utilization of the DSHI enhances the precision in detecting
laser linewidth, achieving resolutions in the order of several kilohertz [12]. However, the
accuracy of DSHI becomes less precise when the laser linewidth is narrower than 1 kHz
due to 1/f frequency noise. In the range of 1 kHz to 1 MHz, DSHI accuracy is compara­
ble to other methods, such as the amplitude difference comparison of coherent envelope
(ADCCE) method[13].
In this master thesis, the CoBrite DX1 – Tunable Laser is utilized, with a typical linewidth
of approximately 25kHz[14], the chosen technique for measurement is the (DSHI). This
chapter introduces an analytical approach that delves into the limitations and various
strategies associated with the application of DSHI.
3.1
Experimental setup
Figure 3.1: Setup for DSHI technique of a laser linewidth
The experimental setup for measuring the linewidth of the cobrite DX1­tunable laser is
illustrated in Fig 3.1. The output light of the laser is divided between the two arms with
a 10 dB coupler. In The first arm which contains a spool of single­mode fiber (SMF) to
provide optical delay in the interferometer, the 90% pulse is manipulated by a polarization
controller so that polarization shift is not introduced.
In order to frequency shift the beat note signal an acousto­optic modulator (AOM) was
placed in the shorter arm of the interferometer, through which only 10% of the laser
passes. The AOM driver frequency was 110 MHz. A Variable Optical coupler(VOA) is
used to control the output power of the AOM to equalize the power from both arms of the
8
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:19==
interferometer.
Both beams are superimposed on a 3dB optical coupler. The mixing product is obtained
by using a square­law photodetector, commonly a photodiode. Through the process of
conducting experiments, 2 photodiode models, were employed in an attempt to enhance
the process. The obtained results remained uniform across the 2 models. The results
were all the same because the signal degradation was high in both photodiodes, so I de­
cided to continue with a photodetector with bandwidth equal to or above 50GHz. A bias
tee is used to suppress any DC offset present in the photodetector signal. The output
signal is then analyzed by the ESA both locally and remotely to obtain and analyze the
results precisely.
3.2
Limitations
The first criterion which is usually used is that the delay length must be larger than the
coherence length, and the latter is derived from the (measured) linewidth itself. As stated
in the introduction paragraph, the laser linewidth is approximately 25kHz[14], so [15]:
Lcoh = [ (c)
π·∆ν ] = [
3·108
3.14·2.5·104 ] =⇒Lcoh = 3.8km
•∆ν:linewidth
Coherence length is the propagation length at which the coherence function’s magnitude
corresponds to 1/e of its value.
In summary, when the delay time τd significantly exceeds the laser output’s coherence
time, the two throughputs become uncorrelated. Consequently, a 3 dB spectral spread
that is somewhat broader than the original spectrum will be visible when using a spectrum
analyzer to examine the noise spectrum of the mixer output.[16]
Additionally, it is required that the fiber not cause any polarization changes. To achieve
this, a polarization controller is inserted into the feedback loop, as seen in figure 3.1. A
commonly used fiber polarization controller exploits the birefringence that is caused by
bending a fiber. Typically, three fiber coils are employed in a series. The central coil
functions as a half waveplate, while the surrounding coils serve as quarter waveplates.
The rotation of each coil can be performed along an axis that is aligned with the input and
output fibers. By manipulating the alignment of the three coils, it is possible to convert a
certain input state of polarization at a constant wavelength into any desired output state
of polarization. The optimal state of polarization is the one that yields the highest power
output[17].
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
9
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Experimental Results
The power spectrum was observed for four different lengths of single mode fiber(SMF)
delays: 25km, 50km, 59.9km, 70km. These lengths correspond to delay times of approx­
imately 0.120, 0.240, 0.288, and 0.336ms. The equation is given by: τd =
L
c/n
• n: refractive index of the fiber. Silica glass optical fibers usually have refractive in­
dices of about 1.44 at 1500 nm[18].
• When the fiber delay is 25km, the Powerc is positive so a fixed optical attenuator was
utilized to convert the Powerc into a negative value, as the detector. accepts only negative
values. All measurements were taken with the laser operating at 18dBm.
Fiber Length(km)
Powerc(dBm)
Pmax(dBm)
Wavelength(nm)
Laser Power(dBm)
75
­7.2
­97
1550
18
59.9
­4.5
­70
1550
18
50
­2.5
­62.9
1550
18
25
3.4
­54.1
1550
18
Table 3.1: DSHI measurements results
• Although Pmax has a negative value, it represents the maximum measurable power on
the (ESA)
•Powerc: The power that has been measured in both arms, and as referred in the in­
troductory section, equivalency in power between the two arms has been established.
Because the calculation of Power in dBm is logarithmic, negative numbers mean that the
signal is not so strong. In the linear scale that is used in order to express the power in SI
the equation utilized to convert data from dBm to mW is:
y(mW) = 10
y(dBm)
10
10
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: a)Simulation and the actual detected power spectrum for delayed fiber length
of 25km
Figure 3.2: b)Simulation and the actual detected power spectrum for delayed fiber length
of 50km
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: c)Simulation and the actual detected power spectrum for delayed fiber length
of 59.9km
Figure 3.2: d)Simulation and the actual detected power spectrum for delayed fiber length
of 75km
By comparing the simulation and the experimental results shown in Fig.3.2a), 3.2b), 3.2c),
3.2d) for the different fiber delays that have been studied it is evident that, under the
assumption of white noise as the sole contributor to laser noise, equation 2.7, the data
aligns effectively with the Lorentzian fitting. This is substantiated by the high R­squared
12
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:23==
values, especially evident in the last two graphs, approaching nearly 100% between Yobs
and Ypred.
Generally, the R­squared method is a statistical measure that quantifies the degree of any
linear correlation.
•Yobs:experimental data
•Ypred:Lorentzian fitting data
R2 = 1 −SSres
SStot
•SStot: The total sum of squares
•SSres:The sum of squares of residuals.
Moreover, it is evident that the laser linewidth decreases with an increase in the delay
fiber length and progressively aligns with the theoretical linewidth value. It is observed
that the most suitable fiber delay lengths are 59.9km and 75km as the Lorentzian fitting
aligns well with the data at those lengths.
Last but not least, upon a detailed comparison of the final two figures, namely, Fig. 3.2c)
and Fig. 3.2d), the decision is made to proceed with the subsequent measurements us­
ing a 59.9km fiber delay. This choice is based on the slightly higher power observed, as
indicated in Table 3.1.
More precisely, the Powerc for the 59.9km configuration is recorded as ­4.5dBm, while for
the 75km fiber delay,is ­7.2dBm, with corresponding Pmax values of ­70dBm and ­97dBm,
respectively. Examination of the plots for these two different fiber delays reveals that the
discrepancies between the power levels are not substantial. However, considering the
losses incurred in both the photodetector and the Electrical Spectrum Analyzer (ESA), it
becomes crucial to minimize power loss to ensure improved and more stable measure­
ments throughout the remainder of the project.
In conclusion, it is imperative to highlight two key points. Firstly, while a comprehen­
sive exploration encompassed various fiber lengths, specific emphasis was intentionally
placed on lengths such as 25 km, 50 km, 59.9 km, and 70 km. These particular lengths
were chosen strategically, as they offer essential insights into the employed technique.
Secondly, when comparing the expected laser linewidth of approximately 25 kHz with the
measured value, 58.355kHz which is twice the theoretical value, it becomes evident that
close proximity is not achieved. However, it is crucial to emphasize that the primary objec­
tive of this project extends beyond the meticulous examination of laser linewidth character­
ization. The overarching goal is to establish a reliable method for obtaining measurements
with sufficient accuracy to drive continuous progress in the broader project.
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
13
==PAGE:24==
3.4
Summary
This chapter explores the application of the (DSHI) technique for the precise characteri­
zation of the linewidth of the CoBrite DX1–Tunable Laser. Traditional methods face lim­
itations in achieving high resolutions, prompting the adoption of DSHI, which enhances
precision to resolutions in the order of kilohertz.
The experimental setup involves splitting the laser output into two arms, with one contain­
ing a single­mode fiber for optical delay. The study delves into the limitations associated
with DSHI, such as the requirement for a delay length exceeding the coherence length
and the necessity to avoid polarization changes in the fiber.
The experimental results focus on different fiber lengths, ranging from 25 km to 70 km,
and their impact on the power spectrum. The chapter emphasizes the comparison be­
tween simulation and experimental outcomes, revealing insights into the decrease in laser
linewidth with an increase in fiber delay length.
The R­squared method is employed to quantify the linear correlation between experimen­
tal and predicted data, showcasing the effectiveness of the Lorentzian fitting. The optimal
fiber delay length is 59.9km determined based on considerations of power levels and
alignment with theoretical linewidth values.
14
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Linewidth characterization of 25 GHz EO
comb lines
Frequency combs with spacings ranging from 25 to 100 GHz are of potential use in com­
munications systems at various transmission distances. Consequently, it becomes crucial
to employ the analytical technique discussed in the previous chapter for the examination
and analysis of linewidths of different comb lines. In this section, the focus is on a 25 GHz
EO comb designed from my supervisors.
This comb, is generated through the integration of two PMs and one IM. The characteri­
zation of this EOC is of paramount importance as it forms the initial part of the analysis in
the subsequent chapter, where the spectrum of the EOC will be further expanded using
an amorphus silicon waveguide.
4.1
Experimental setup
Figure 4.1: Schematic of the experimental setup used to measure the linewidth of the
25GHz EO comb lines
Figure 4.1 illustrates the experimental arrangement used to measure the linewidth of the
25GHz EO comb lines. The CW laser used to pump the EO comb is centered at 1550nm
with an average power of 18dBm. The EO comb consists of two PMs followed by an IM,
all driven by the same 25 GHz oscillator. Polarization­maintaining fibers connect the PMs
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
15
==PAGE:26==
and the CW laser. Power supplies are used to operate the amplifiers and to set the bias
voltage of the IM.
A 25 GHz spacing is produced by an oscillator (Atlantic Microwave phase­locked dielec­
tric resonator oscillator OSC1C­KX­821149­S5S5), where a 100MHz ratio frequency(RF)
signal generator is used to excite the oscillator. At the modulation frequency used here,
a tunable free space optical delay of approximately 3mm is sufficient to tune the phase
by π/2. Also, a tunable optical delay line is used between the PM and IM to optimize the
flatness. Spectral broadening is observed as the result of the SPM. The comb spectrum
is shown in Fig 4.2. The frequency­wavelength broadening has been expanded symmet­
rically on both sides because the EO modulation was centered on the frequency of the
CW laser.
Figure 4.2: Spectrum of the 25 GHz comb, the center wavelength is 1550nm, with ap­
proximately 7nm bandwidth
The fluctuations in the spectrum result from the point that the optimum bias point for the
modulators depend on temperature and will cause the modulation to vary slightly.
With two cascaded PMs, the output optical field is the phase modulation spectrum of
each input frequency band from PM1, so that much more frequency bands can be ob­
tained. And then different laser phase modulation spectra are obtained by adjusting the
RF driving voltage of PM1.
Individual comb lines from the output spectrum were selected using a reconfigurable filter
(Finisar WaveShaper 4000A), amplified, and filtered with a 0.8 nm bandpass filter.The
16
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:27==
bandpass filter following the EDFA serves to refine the signal further, ensuring that only
the targeted frequencies pass through while attenuating or blocking unwanted compo­
nents(especially the unwanted noise that the EDFA introduce).[19]
Three distinct values are carefully chosen, using the Finisar application: the center fre­
quency and one value on each side of the spectrum, representing the left and right ’ears’
of the EO comb.
To selectively isolate a particular comb line using the filter, the output spectrum of the filter
must be precisely aligned with the central frequency of the specific EO comb line under
consideration,as shown in FIgure 4.3. This alignment ensures optimal resonance and
accurate analysis of the targeted spectral feature. Subsequently, the output of the filter is
connected to the DSHI setup, where detailed linewidth measurements are conducted.
Figure 4.3: Isolation of the EO comb line centered at 1550nm when the wavelength span
setting of the OSA is set to 2 nm (left) and Zoomed­in View (right)
4.2
Experimental results
The measurement of linewidth is examined in three lines of the EOC. More precisely, in
the comb lines that centered in the following wavelengths: 1550nm, 1553.264nm and
1546.852nm. Figure 4.4 displays the spectrum of the EOC and highlights the three spe­
cific lines at the previously indicated wavelengths. The power was measured at each
significant stage of the setup to determine the level of attenuation, as indicated in table
4.2. This table displays only the Power values for the central frequency, for simplicity.
The output power of the waveshaper(Pws), the output power of the EDFA(PEDFA) and the
output power of the bandpass filter(Pf) vary for the other two wavelengths.
It is important to carefully consider the (Pws). The Pws is the input of the EDFA, and
when the input power to the EDFA is low, the Noise Figure, which is caused by the am­
plified spontaneous emission(ASE), is increasing[20]. In order to achieve optimal results,
it is essential to reduce the attenuation of the waveshaper to reduce noise and minimize
its impact on the sensitivity of the ESA in the linewidth measurements. This is important
because the previous chapter shows that the power level is low.
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
17
==PAGE:28==
Laser Power(dBm)
PEO(dBm)
Pws(dBm)
PEDFA(dBm)
Pf(dBm)
18
0.88
­30.2
16.7
12.75
Table 4.1: Power Distribution Analysis at Key Stages of the Experimental Setup
Figure 4.4: Filtering three specific wavelengths in EO Comb Spectrum
For the linewidth measurements, extreme precision was ensured. Since the differences
between the different comb lines are very small, the measurements were repeated 5
times, and the average value was calculated as shown in table 4.2. Figures 4.5, 4.6,
4.7 show the linewidth measurement as well as the Lorentzian fitting of the data used
to calculate the linewidth for the comb lines that are centered in the wavelengths listed
above.
wl(nm)
(a)(kHz)
(b)(kHz)
(c)(kHz)
(d)(kHz)
(e)(kHz)
Mean value(kHz)
1550
58.432
58.576
58.628
58.981
58.483
58.620
1553.264
59.483
59.708
59.620
59.786
59.881
59.696
1546.852
59.812
59.954
59.306
59.691
59.581
59.723
Table 4.2: Linewidth Measurements and Mean Values for Each Comb Line of the EO
comb
• The letters (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) in the plots correspond to the sequential order of the
measurements conducted. Specifically, letter (a) represents the first measurement, letter
(b) corresponds to the second measurement, and so forth until letter (e), which represents
the fifth measurement.
18
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.5: linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1550nm
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
19
==PAGE:30==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.6: Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1553.264nm
20
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:31==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.7: Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1546.852nm
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
21
==PAGE:32==
Upon comparing the simulation and experimental results depicted in Figures 4.5, 4.6 and
4.7 for the three comb lines that were investigated, it is clear that the data strongly cor­
responds to the Lorentzian fitting when assuming that laser noise is solely caused by
white noise, as assumed in the previous chapter also. This is supported by the strong
R­squared in all figures. The correlation between Yobs and Ypred approaches 100%.
Again, the linear scale is used, unit of measurement:mW, to indicate the power that is
measured in the ESA.
Upon analyzing the mean values of the linewidth in the table 4.2, it becomes evident
that the linewidth remains almost stable across the comb lines. A small increase from the
comb line centered at 1550nm to the comb lines centered at the ears of the comb is no­
ticeable. When comparing these values with the linewidth of the cobrite laser discussed
in the previous chapter, it is evident that the linewidth remains almost stable.
Upon careful examination of the plots, it becomes evident that the power decreases as
one moves from the ears of the EOC to the central wavelength. This decline in power
is attributed to the minimum Pws occurring at the central wavelength of the waveguide,
measured at ­30 dBm, which is the minimum value compared to the power values of the
comb lines on the ears. The output power of the waveguide was measured at 0.88dBm
as indicated in table4.2
4.3
Summary
This chapter discusses the experimental setup utilized for measuring the linewidth of var­
ious comb lines in a 25GHz EO comb. The analytical technique discussed in the previous
chapter is crucial for examining and analyzing the linewidths of different comb lines. The
25 GHz (EO) comb is integrated from two phase modulators (PMs) and one intensity mod­
ulator (IM).
Characterization of this EO comb is pivotal as it forms the initial part of the analysis in
the subsequent chapter, where the spectrum of the EO comb will be expanded using a
nonlinear waveguide. The 25 GHz spacing is generated by an oscillator, and spectral
broadening is observed due to SPM. Individual comb lines are selected using a reconfig­
urable filter, amplified, and filtered with a 0.8 nm bandpass filter. Linewidth measurements
are conducted on the selected three comb lines centered at specific wavelengths.
Power measurements are recorded at significant stages of the setup, with considerations
made for noise figure and sensitivity. Linewidth measurements ensure extreme precision,
repeated five times to calculate the average value. Results show minimal variation across
comb lines, indicating almost stable linewidths values, making it impossible to draw safe
conclusions and characterize the noice sources.
22
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Linewidth characterization of specific lines
of the broadened 25GHz EO comb
Self­phase modulation in a nonlinear waveguide is an alternative technique to generate
optical frequency combs. This approach is used to broaden the spectral range of either
an EO comb [21] or the comb created by a high repetition mode­locked laser [22]. In this
chapter, a comparable study is conducted. The EO comb source that was analyzed in the
previous chapter is shaped using a filter in a waveshaper, resulting in a Gaussian comb.
This comb is then directed towards the amorphous silicon waveguide. In this chapter, the
DSHI technique will be used to analyze the effect of spectral broadening on the linewidths
of the individual lines of the broadened comb.
5.1
Experimental setup
Figure 5.1: Schematic of the experimental setup used to measure the linewidth of specific
lines of the broaden 25GHz EO comb
The experimental setup for measuring the linewidth of individual lines in the broadened
EO comb is depicted in Figure 5.1. The 25GHz EO comb that was analyzed in the previ­
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
23
==PAGE:34==
ous chapter is compensated using a waveshaper (Finisar WaveShaper 4000S) to attain
a transform­limited Gaussian signal.
The comb is then amplified by cascaded EDFAs(Pre­Amp EDFA: Amonics AEDFA­C­PA­
35­B­FA, high power EDFA: Keopsys high power EDFA).The output power of the PreAmp
EDFA is approximately 17.7dBm, as the high­power EDFA requires high enough power
to operate. Two bandpass filters are employed in the process, serving to diminish ASE
and ensure optimal signal quality.
Through the process of wave shaping, the objective is to transform an arbitrary spec­
trum into a Gaussian profile that is limited by transformation. Given that the spectrum
comprises comb lines, the focus lies primarily on the envelope of these lines. This wave­
shaping process was developed from my supervisors, aligning with my main objective of
calculating the linewidth of the broadened comb’s comb lines
An electronically controlled VOA (OZ Optics DD­100­11­1550­9) controls the input power.
A 20dB (99:1) splitter is used to tap off a small monitor signal. This signal is measured,
through a 3dB coupler, with a power meter. Based on this feedback, it is able to adjust
the attenuator in order to set the optimum input signal to the waveguide. An optical switch
allows access to either the input or the output of the waveguide within the OSA. For sim­
plicity, the OSA is omitted from the diagram. The shaped input spectrum was coupled to
and from the chip using tapered fibers, which are controlled by stepper controllers (3­axis
Piezo controller MDT693B), which also are not depicted in this setup for simplicity. A
polarization controller was used to optimize coupling to the TE mode by maximizing the
spectral broadening.
It is crucial to emphasize that before each measurement, it is important to verify the EO
comb spectrum. The EO comb signal must exhibit optimal characteristics, as depicted in
figure 4.2. The broadened EO comb spectrum is shown in figure 5.3
Once more, as in the previous chapter figure 4.2, the fluctuations in the spectrum arise
because the optimal bias point for the modulators is temperature­dependent, leading to
slight variations in modulation. So if fluctuations are present in the EO comb spectrum,
they will also be apparent in the broadened EO comb spectrum.
Additionally, figure 5.3 illustrates both the EO comb spectrum and the broadened EO
comb spectrum. It is evident that new wavelengths are generated between 1535nm and
1570nm.
24
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.2: Broadened EO comb spectrum, the center wavelength is 1550nm, with ap­
proximately 35nm bandwidth
Figure 5.3: Spectrum of the waveguide, the center wavelength is 1550nm, with approxi­
mately 7nm bandwidth
In the previous chapter, the setup was detailed for calculating the linewidth at three dif­
ferent lines of the EO comb. Now, the same components will be used,a waveshaper,
an EDFA, and a bandpass filter(as shown in figure 5.1), in order to study the linewidth
of comb lines centered at different wavelengths in the broadened EO comb. However,
because of the ESA’s sensitivity limitations, only 5 five comb lines were analyzed.
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
25
==PAGE:36==
To accurately isolate a specific comb line using the filter, the output spectrum of the filter
must align perfectly with the central frequency of the particular broadened EO comb line
under investigation as shown in figure 5.5. It is evident from figure 5.5 that for this comb
line, all the signals are centered at the same point, although it is expected that perfect
alignment may not be achieved for all the examined comb lines. Based on this alignment,
the filter’s output is connected to the DSHI setup for precise linewidth measurements.
Figure 5.4: Isolation of the EO comb line centered at 1546.813nm when the wavelength
span setting of the OSA is set to 2 nm
5.2
Experimental results
Through the examination of five lines of the broadened EO comb, the measurement of
linewidth is carried out. In further detail, the comb lines that centered in the following
wavelengths were as follows: 1545.044nm, 1546.810nm, 1550nm, 1553.024nm, and
1554.488nm.
In Figure 5.5, the spectrum of the EO comb is displayed, and the five
particular lines that are located at the wavelengths that were previously identified are
highlighted. For the linewidth measurements, the highest possible level of accuracy was
maintained. Because the variations in the predicted value of the linewidth between the
comb lines are extremely small, the measurements were carried out five times, and the
average value was computed as presented in table 4.2.
The linewidth measurement and the Lorentzian fitting of the data are displayed in figures
5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, and 5.10 respectively. Again, the letters (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) relate
to the sequence in which the measurements were carried out in sequential order.
26
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.5: Filtering 5 specific wavelengths in the droadened EO comb spectrum
wl(nm)
(a)(kHz)
(b)(kHz)
(c)(kHz)
(d)(kHz)
(e)(kHz)
Mean value(kHz)
1545.044
59.296
59.068
59.270
59.279
58.389
59.060
1546.810
58.350
58.602
58.760
57.998
58.870
58.516
1550
57.761
56.702
57.390
56.794
57.189
57.167
1553.024
58.325
58.447
57.979
58.166
57.749
58.133
1554.488
57.742
58.135
57.618
58.082
57.605
57.836
Table 5.1: Linewidth Measurements and Mean Values for Each Comb Line
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
27
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.6: Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1545.044nm
28
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:39==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.7: Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1546.813nm
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
29
==PAGE:40==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.8: Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1550nm
30
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.9: Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1553.024nm
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
31
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.10: Linewidth measurement of the comb line centered at 1554.488nm
32
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:43==
The simulation and experimental results for the five comb lines show a strong correlation
with the Lorentzian fitting, assuming laser noise is solely caused by white noise. The
correlation between Yobs and Ypred approaches 100%. The linear scale, mW, is used to
indicate the power measured in the ESA.
The mean values of linewidth in table 5.1 show consistent stability across comb lines, with
minimal variation. Comparing these values with the cobrite laser linewidth discussed in
the previous chapter, it is evident that linewidth remains almost stable. In this case it is
difficult to notice a variation trend compared to the trend that it was noticeable in the EO
spectrum.
Upon careful examination of the plots, it becomes evident that the power decreases as
one moves from the center wavelength toward both ends. This time the trend is different
compared to what was noticed in the plots in the previous chapter. This decline in power
is attributed to the maximum Pws occurring at the central wavelength of the waveguide,
measured at ­22.7 dBm, and decreasing as it moves towards the ears of the EOC. The
output power of the waveguide was measured at 2.7dBm.
5.3
Summary
SPM in a nonlinear waveguide is an alternative technique to generate optical frequency
combs, broadening the spectral range of an EO comb. This chapter uses the DSHI tech­
nique to analyze the effect of spectral broadening on the linewidths of individual lines
of the broadened comb. The experimental setup for measuring the linewidth of individ­
ual lines in the broadened EO comb includes a 25GHz EO comb compensated using a
waveshaper, amplified by cascaded EDFAs, and two bandpass filters. The objective is
to transform an arbitrary spectrum into a Gaussian profile. The shaped input spectrum is
coupled to and from the chip using tapered fibers controlled by stepper controllers and a
polarization controller to optimize coupling to the TE mode by maximizing spectral broad­
ening.
The output signal of the waveguide is connected through a waveshaper, an EDFA, and a
bandpass filter(3rd in the setup) to the 10dB coupler of the DSHI setup in order to mea­
sure the linewidth of the selected comb lines. To accurately isolate a specific comb line
using the 3rd filter, the output spectrum of the filter must align perfectly with the central
frequency of the particular broadened EO comb line.
The simulation and experimental results show a strong correlation with the Lorentzian fit­
ting, assuming laser noise is solely caused by white noise. The mean values of linewidth
show consistent stability across comb lines, with minimal variation. Comparing these val­
ues with the cobrite laser linewidth discussed in the previous chapter, it is evident that
linewidth remains almost stable.
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
33
==PAGE:44==
Discussion
In this section, we delve into a comprehensive discussion of the outcomes derived from
the conducted measurements
• DSHI technique­1st chapter
The DSHI technique is a useful method for studying laser linewidth. It uses a SMF delay
line that must exceeds the source’s coherence length, resulting in a Lorentzian line profile.
Combining experimental research and numerical analysis indicates a linewidth of about
58 kHz, which is approximately double compared to the theoretical value.
Improving the DSHI technique should consider the impact of laser 1/f­noise as delay
length increases. While a Voigt fitting scheme offers greater accuracy in mitigating this ef­
fect, its efficacy remains limited [23]. Shortening delay fiber lengths effectively prevents 1/f
noise occurrence and alters the spectral line of the beat signal away from the Lorentzian
pattern. [24]
• EO comb­2nd chapter
Upon careful examination of the mean linewidth values, it’s apparent that the linewidth
remains relatively stable across the comb lines, with a slight increase observed from the
center comb line at 1550nm to the comb lines at the edges. This incremental trend aligns
with the amount of phase noise, as suggested by [25]. These results are promising for
applications in communication systems, where minimal noise interference is important
to be low enough and does not affect a lot the efficiency of the system. However, to
substantiate this claim, enhancements to the DSHI technique are imperative for achieving
greater precision in the linewidth measurement results.
• Broadened EOC­5th chapter
In the last part of this thesis, the study looked at how SPM caused by integrated nonlinear
waveguides affected the separated comb lines. After assembling all significant compo­
nents necessary for broadening the EOC and conducting linewidth measurements, five
comb lines of the broadened EOC were examined. While a trend of increasing linewidth
towards shorter wavelengths was observed for the central comb line, this trend is not per­
sist towards larger wavelengths. The linewidth closely resembled the values obtained in
the initial chapter for the cobrite DX1 tunable laser.
These findings hold promise for applications in communication systems where minimizing
noise interference is critical. However, to substantiate this assertion, enhancements to
the DSHI technique and improvements in the sensitivity of the components, particularly
ESA, are important for achieving greater precision in linewidth measurements.
Finally considering the variation of the power as one moves from the center wavelength
to the ears,it is difficult to give an exact trend. On the one hand in the 4th chapter, it is
obvious that the power is increasing from the central wavelength to the ears but on the
other hand in the broadened EOC the power exhibits the opposite trend, more specifically
is maximum in the center of the spectrum. The only thing that it is different is the output
power of the system. In the first case, the output power of the EOC is 0.88dBm compared
to the output power of the broadened EOC which is 2.7dBm.
34
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:45==
Conclusion
• DSHI technique­3rd chapter
In­depth analysis revealed that long delays in DSHI technique offer a practical means
of determining the laser’s Lorentzian linewidth, particularly concerning white noise. In
particular, it is found that if a fiber delay of 59.9km is used, the linewidth of the cobrite
DX1 tunable laser should be 58.355 kHz.
• EOC­4th chapter
In the examination of linewidth across three distinct comb lines within the 25GHz EOC,
precise power measurement at various stages is imperative to mitigate potential noise­
induced fluctuations. The study reveals a consistent trend in linewidth values, with minimal
variation observed among the different comb lines. Specifically, there is a slight increase
in mean linewidth values as we move from the central comb line at 1550nm towards the
ears of the comb.
• Broadened EOC­5th chapter
Examining five comb lines centered at different wavelengths within the comb, this chap­
ter aimed to determine the impact of spectral broadening through the waveguide on the
linewidth of the cobrite tunable laser and the linewidth through the broadened EO comb.
Both simulation and experimental results displayed a strong correlation with Lorentzian
fitting. Across comb lines, the mean linewidth values exhibited consistent stability with
minimal variation. Comparing these values with the cobrite laser linewidth discussed in
the 3rd chapter, it is evident that the linewidth remained almost stable at 58.355kHz.
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
35
==PAGE:46==
Future work
In the previous section, it was observed that the 1/f frequency noise significantly impacts
linewidth measurements across both the EOC and the broadened EOC spectrum. To ad­
dress this, the proposal is firstly to employ a Voigt fitting, which is given in terms of the
convolution of a Gaussian and a Lorentzian distribution function [26], and secondly to use
shorter delay fiber lengths in the DSHI technique to minimize system noise [24].
The need to decouple noise from critical components for consistent linewidth measure­
ments is also emphasized. For precise comparisons between linewidths before and after
the waveguide, it’s crucial to replicate all other components of the setup with artificial loss
resembling the components’ behavior in order to give emphasis only in what happens
before and after the waveguide
Furthermore, exploring the use of EO combs with shorter repetition rates(below 10GHz)
offers advantages in simultaneous measurement capabilities, especially when applying
machine learning techniques to analyze trends across numerous lines.
In conclusion, mitigating the impact of the 1/f frequency, refining measurement tech­
niques, and exploring alternative comb repetition rates are vital for enhancing the ac­
curacy and applicability of research findings, paving the way for future advancements in
optical frequency comb analysis and application ..
36
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:47==
Appendix
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
37
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
Haipeng Lou et al. “Broadband optical frequency comb covering spectral regions
at UV, VIS, and NIR”. In: Optics Communications 537 (2023), p. 129457. ISSN:
0030­4018. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optcom.2023.129457. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0030401823002043.
[2]
Rongjin Zhuang et al. “Electro­Optic Frequency Combs: Theory, Characteristics,
and Applications”. In: Laser & Photonics Reviews 17.6 (2023), p. 2200353. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.202200353. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
pdf/10.1002/lpor.202200353. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
lpor.202200353.
[3]
Zujie Fang et al. Single Frequency Semiconductor Lasers. Vol. 9. Jan. 2017. ISBN:
978­981­10­5256­9. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-5257-6.
[4]
Sheldon M. Ross. “CHAPTER 2 ­ Random Variables”. In: Introduction to Probability
Models (Tenth Edition). Ed. by Sheldon M. Ross. Tenth Edition. Boston: Academic
Press, 2010, pp. 21–95. ISBN: 978­0­12­375686­2. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-375686-2.00010-8. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780123756862000108.
[5]
Rongqing Hui and Maurice O’sullivan. “Chapter 3 ­ Characterization of optical de­
vices”. In: Fiber­Optic Measurement Techniques (Second Edition). Ed. by Rongqing
Hui and Maurice O’sullivan. Second Edition. Academic Press, 2023, pp. 297–446.
ISBN: 978­0­323­90957­0. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-90957-0.
00001-1. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780323909570000011.
[6]
R. Paschotta. Self­heterodyne Linewidth Measurement. RP Photonics Encyclope­
dia. Available online at https://www.rp-photonics.com/self_heterodyne_linewidth_
measurement.html. Apr. 2005. DOI: 10.61835/ssg. URL: https://www.rp-photonics.
com/self_heterodyne_linewidth_measurement.html (visited on 12/26/2023).
[7]
Stefano Camatel and Valter Ferrero. “Narrow Linewidth CW Laser Phase Noise
Characterization Methods for Coherent Transmission System Applications”. In: Jour­
nal of Lightwave Technology 26.17 (2008), pp. 3048–3055. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.2008.
925046.
[8]
Andrew J. Metcalf et al. “30  GHz electro­optic frequency comb spanning 300  THz
in the near infrared and visible”. In: Opt. Lett. 44.11 (June 2019), pp. 2673–2676.
DOI: 10.1364/OL.44.002673. URL: https://opg.optica.org/ol/abstract.cfm?URI=ol-
44-11-2673.
[9]
Alexandre Parriaux, Kamal Hammani, and Guy Millot. “Electro­optic frequency combs”.
In: Adv. Opt. Photon. 12.1 (Mar. 2020), pp. 223–287. DOI: 10.1364/AOP.382052.
URL: https://opg.optica.org/aop/abstract.cfm?URI=aop-12-1-223.
[10]
Yanfei Xing et al. “Frequency chirp linearization for ultraflat optical frequency comb
generation based on group velocity dispersion”. In: Opt. Lett. 38.13 (July 2013),
pp. 2188–2190. DOI: 10.1364/OL.38.002188. URL: https://opg.optica.org/ol/
abstract.cfm?URI=ol-38-13-2188.
[11]
Rui Wu et al. “Generation of very flat optical frequency combs from continuous­
wave lasers using cascaded intensity and phase modulators driven by tailored radio
frequency waveforms”. In: Opt. Lett. 35.19 (Oct. 2010), pp. 3234–3236. DOI: 10.
1364/OL.35.003234. URL: https://opg.optica.org/ol/abstract.cfm?URI=ol-35-19-
3234.
38
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:49==
[12]
C. Lennartz et al. In: Journal of Optical Communications 17.4 (1996), pp. 138–146.
DOI: doi:10.1515/JOC.1996.17.4.138. URL: https://doi.org/10.1515/JOC.1996.17.4.
138.
[13]
Shihong Huang et al. “Laser Linewidth Measurement Based on Amplitude Differ­
ence Comparison of Coherent Envelope”. In: IEEE Photonics Technology Letters
28.7 (2016), pp. 759–762. DOI: 10.1109/LPT.2015.2513098.
[14]
Data Sheet CoBrite­DX1. https://www.id-photonics.com/images/stories/PDF/Data_
sheet_CBDX1-x-x-xx.pdf. Accessed: 2023­12­31.
[15]
R. Paschotta. Coherence Length. RP Photonics Encyclopedia. Available online at
https://www.rp-photonics.com/coherence_length.html. Jan. 2005. DOI: 10.61835/bix.
URL: https://www.rp-photonics.com/coherence_length.html (visited on 01/17/2024).
[16]
Takanori Okoshi, Kazuro Kikuchi, and Akira Nakayama. “Novel method for high res­
olution measurement of laser output spectrum”. In: Electronics letters 16.16 (1980),
pp. 630–631.
[17]
R. Paschotta. Fiber Polarization Controllers. RP Photonics Encyclopedia. Available
online at https://www.rp-photonics.com/fiber_polarization_controllers.html. Nov.
2009. DOI: 10.61835/4xc. URL: https://www.rp-photonics.com/fiber_polarization_
controllers.html (visited on 01/18/2024).
[18]
R. Paschotta. Fibers. RP Photonics Encyclopedia. Available online at https://www.
rp-photonics.com/fibers.html. Dec. 2005. DOI: 10.61835/l1k. URL: https://www.rp-
photonics.com/fibers.html (visited on 01/27/2024).
[19]
R. Paschotta. Optical Filters. RP Photonics Encyclopedia. Available online at https:
//www.rp-photonics.com/optical_filters.html. May 2005. DOI: 10.61835/4wk. URL:
https://www.rp-photonics.com/optical_filters.html (visited on 01/27/2024).
[20]
Rajneesh Kaler and R.S. Kaler. “Gain and Noise figure performance of erbium
doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) and Compact EDFAs”. In: Optik 122.5 (2011), pp. 440–
443. ISSN: 0030­4026. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2010.02.028. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0030402610001397.
[21]
Israel Rebolledo­Salgado et al. “Coherent supercontinuum generation in all­normal
dispersion Si3N4 waveguides”. In: Optics Express 30 (Mar. 2022), pp. 8641–8651.
DOI: 10.1364/OE.450987.
[22]
Hao Hu and Leif Oxenløwe. “Chip­based optical frequency combs for high­capacity
optical communications”. In: Nanophotonics 10 (Feb. 2021). DOI: 10.1515/nanoph-
2020-0561.
[23]
Hanne Ludvigsen, Mika Tossavainen, and Matti Kaivola. “Laser linewidth measure­
ments using self­homodyne detection with short delay”. In: Optics Communications
155.1 (1998), pp. 180–186. ISSN: 0030­4018. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 /
S0030 - 4018(98 ) 00355 - 1. URL: https: / / www .sciencedirect . com / science /article /
pii/S0030401898003551.
[24]
Zhongan Zhao et al. “Narrow laser­linewidth measurement using short delay self­
heterodyne interferometry”. In: Opt. Express 30.17 (Aug. 2022), pp. 30600–30610.
DOI: 10.1364/OE.455028. URL: https://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-30-
17-30600.
[25]
Xin Zhang et al. “Sub­100 fs all­fiber broadband electro­optic optical frequency
comb at 1.5&#x2005;&#x00B5;m”. In: Opt. Express 28.23 (Nov. 2020), pp. 34761–
34771. DOI: 10.1364/OE.409838. URL: https://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?
URI=oe-28-23-34761.
[26]
Thorsten Tepper García. “Voigt profile fitting to quasar absorption lines: an ana­
lytic approximation to the Voigt–Hjerting function”. In: Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 369.4 (July 2006), pp. 2025–2035. ISSN: 0035­8711. DOI:
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
39
==PAGE:50==
10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10450.x. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/369/4/2025/3829818/mnras0369-2025.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2966.2006.10450.x.
40
Characterization of Noise in Electro­Optic Combs Broadened by Self­Phase Modulation in Amorphous
Silicon Waveguides
==PAGE:51==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads,buiding 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
