==PAGE:1==
A Masters Thesis by Sara Kristine Holmskov Eberle & Frederikke Ellemose Vad
Holistic design of municipal
climate adaptation projects
January, 2024
An intervention for citizen engagement in climate adaptation projects
in Department of Traﬃc and Urban Spaces in Frederiksberg Municipality
==PAGE:2==
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
An intervention for citizen engagement in climate adaptation projects in Department of Traffic
and Urban Spaces in Frederiksberg Municipality
Design & Innovation Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
January, 2024
By
Sara Kristine Holmskov Eberle & Frederikke Ellemose Vad
==PAGE:3==
Declaration
This thesis has been prepared over five months, in the period of September 2023 ­ January 
2024. It is composed as the final project of our masters’ degree in Design & Innovation at 
Technical University of Denmark.
We hereby confirm it is our own work, and the contribution to this report and the project as 
a whole is equally distributed among us.
Word count: 24834
Sara Kristine Holmskov Eberle, s211691
Signature
Date
Frederikke Ellemose Vad, s173852
Signature
Date
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
ii
January 26th 2024
January 26th 2024
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The urgent challenges of climate changes force an immediate need for urban climate adap­
tation in Danish Municipalities, to ensure the future of cities. A literature review on the topic
reveals the responsibility of cities to perform holistic urban adaptation, by engaging citizen
in the development, ensuring the sustainability of future cities and its’ synergy between the
built city, the local society and the changing climate. Literature even states, several princi­
ples and recommendations for local authorities in order to perform good citizen engagement
in urban development. Unfortunately, a list of examples of closed or prolonged municipal
climate adaptation projects in Denmark do exists, due to pressure from reluctant and raging
citizens resulting from poor involvement.
The literature review of this thesis project reveals a gap of insufficient research on real­life
cases ensuring performance and implementation of citizen engagement practices that cre­
ates value in urban climate adaptation projects. Additionally, it contributes with a definition
of a Sustainable City, utilized as a baseline of the systemic approach of this thesis project.
Therefore the project goal is to contribute to closing the gap, by investigating how to support
the development of future sustainable cities, by doing a real­life case study on Frederiksberg
Municipality.
In order to reach the project goal, a combined systems engineering and frame creation
approach allows for an in­depth investigation of the origin of the problem situation in the
Department of Traffic and Urban Spaces in Frederiksberg Municipality. Applying design
thinking methods, an analyses of the context and stakeholders involved, allows for a re­
framing of citizen engagement among the project managers of the Department of Traffic &
Urban Space.
The analyses identify the challenge as being an internal problem of Frederiksberg Municipal­
ity, i.e., project managers’ lack of motivation and competences, and organisational structure,
limiting the value­creation of citizen engagement, thereby leading to unsustainable adapta­
tion to climate changes.
The result of this project is an interactive intervention design, named the CitiCo Canvas,
developed as an example on how to solve the challenge. It consists of three types of cards,
designed for the Department of Traffic & Urban Space aiming at supporting them in reflect­
ing and sharing experiences of citizen engagement methods. Moreover, a physical canvas
board, aspire to structure the citizen engagement practice, with the goal of fostering a new
culture of transparent communication, and increased awareness of the value addition po­
tential of successful citizen engagement.
A discussion points out potential limitations of the CitiCo Canvas in supporting the develop­
ment of future sustainable cities. Despite, workshops and tests reveal that the CitiCo Canvas
provides a platform for building competencies, sharing knowledge and experiences, it is still
unknown to what extent it promotes successful facilitation of citizen engagement creating
added value on stage. This leaves a need for further extensive tests and research studies
of the CitiCo Canvas’ performance in real­life contexts.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
iii
==PAGE:5==
Learning Objectives
Project specific learning objectives.
After completing the master thesis, we demonstrate that we:
• can describe a Danish municipal climate adaptation project.
• can analyze socio­technical challenges of a climate adaptation project with a systemic
approach considering society, city and climate and identify system objects and bound­
aries.
• can develop a socio­technical intervention with key stakeholders in a collaborative way
addressing stakeholder values, system challenges and evaluated system objectives.
• can design an intervention creating value for key stakeholders in a clearly communi­
cated way, that is useful in a real life context.
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) Learning objectives. (DTU 2023)
A graduate of a M.Sc. program from DTU:
• can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction
between the various components that make up an issue.
• can, based on a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at an in­
ternational level to develop ideas and solve problems.
• masters technical scientific methodologies, theories, and tools, and can take a holistic
view of and delimit a complex, open issue, put it into a broader academic and societal
perspective, and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions while considering
sustainability.
• can develop relevant models, systems, technologies, and processes aimed at solving
technological problems
• can communicate and mediate research­based knowledge both orally and in writing.
• is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within their specialist
area.
• can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development, and spe­
cialization.
• masters technical problem­solving at a high level through cross­disciplinary teamwork,
and can work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timeta­
bles, design, solution, and documentation.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
iv
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
A special thank, and appreciations are dedicated to the following people:
To Josef Oehmen, Associate Professor at DTU Construct, for supervising us in manag­
ing a complex socio­technical project, with your expertise in complex system management,
throughout the thesis project.
To May Lundsgaard, Head of the Department of Traffic and Urban Spaces, for the chance to
collaborate with you, and for allowing us access to the processes and data behind climate
adaptation projects in Frederiksberg Municipality.
To the Project Managers of the Department of Traffic and Urban Spaces Climate Adaptation
Team: Dorte Winkler Nilsson, Malene Rockall Muus, Dorthe Stender, Ruben Filskov, and
Bo Rasmussen. Thank you for your warm and proactive collaboration. Your insights have
been invaluable, contributing significantly to the realization of this thesis.
To Gitte Sørensen, Administrative Coordinator of the Department of Traffic and Urban Spaces,
for consistent and generous support, and extensive assistance when organizing workshops
and meetings.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
v
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
DTU = Technical University of Denmark
FC = Frame Creation
PM = Project Manager
PD = Participatory Design
SE = Systems Engineering
TUS = Department of Traffic and Urban Spaces, Frederiksberg Municipality
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
vi
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Declaration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Context of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Project Goal and Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Approach
4
2.1
Systems Engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The Frame Creation Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Project Design Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Project Design Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Data Sources and Data Collection Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Answer to Research Question 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Literature Review
18
3.1
Climate change and the roles of cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Urban development towards a future sustainable city . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Citizen engagement in climate adaptation projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Gap in Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Answer to Research Question 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Project Scope
27
4.1
System Levels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Answer to Research Question 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Situation Analysis
33
5.1
Archaeology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
System Analysis
39
6.1
Paradoxes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.4
Themes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.5
Root­Cause Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.6
Catalogue of Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.7
Answer to Research Question 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Development of Alternative Interventions
59
7.1
Frames
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.2
Futures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.3
Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
8
Final Intervention
78
8.1
The CitiCo Canvas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
8.2
Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
vii
==PAGE:9==
8.3
Answer to Research Question 5
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
9
Discussion
89
9.1
The Methodological Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
9.2
The CitiCo Canvas Intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
10 Conclusion
93
A Interview Guides
98
A.1 Interview Guide 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
A.2 Interview Guide 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
B Questionnaires
99
B.1 PM Values, Needs and Motivations Questionnaire
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B.2 Final Intervention Prototype Test Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C Iterations of Paradoxes
101
D Map of Actors of TUS Climate Adaptation Project Phases
103
E
Citizen Workshop Material
104
F
Values, Needs and Motivations Table
109
G Themes of shared values, needs and motivations Map
110
H PD workshop exercise templates
111
I
1st iteration prototypes of final intervention elements for test with PMs
112
J
Client Material
117
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
We are living in a time facing the urgent challenge of climate changes, which is calling for
innovative adaptation of societies, and the cities they inhabit. Frederiksberg Municipality
is making significant investments to enhance Frederiksberg’s resilience and robustness re­
lated to the changing climate conditions. This involves an extensive urban development,
that considers the adaptation to future challenges, such as cloud bursts, increased rain
amounts, drought, and higher temperatures.
Based on the definition of a Sustainable City, i.e., a system of subsystems being city, society
and climate (Section 3.1.1), this thesis aims at investigating how to support resilient urban
development enhancing synergies between the three subsystems and creating future sus­
tainable cities and societies, by performing a case study on climate adaptation projects car­
ried out by Frederiksberg Municipality. The study investigates challenges and opportunities
within the municipality and the Department of Traffic and Urban Spaces (TUS) to promote
municipal climate adaptation projects that supports the development of future sustainable
cities. In particularly, are the engagement of citizens from the local society considered chal­
lenging by TUS, and thereby constituting the primary problem of the project.
Through a combined Systems Engineering and Frame Creation approach, the citizen en­
gagement challenge of climate adaptation projects in TUS are investigated, analysed in
depth, and further challenged by thinking in innovative and radical alternatives. It has led to
the development a final intervention designed specifically to the context of the Department
of TUS, aiming at solving the explored problems and limitations to support the development
of future sustainable cities.
The structure of this study begins with a presentation of the approach and methodological
framework of the project, followed by a literature review revealing the gap, that this project
aims at contributing to close. Then the project scope and the system levels are defined,
which leads to the situation analysis of the main problem and its origin, and the system
analysis exploring complex paradoxes, stakeholder landscapes, stakeholder drivers and
motivations, root­causes of the problem. It all results in a catalogue of objectives, guiding
the development of new interventions, approaching the problem. A comprehensive eval­
uation helps select the promising intervention, which are refined to the context of the De­
partment of TUS, considering future implementation and opportunities for impact. Finally,
a discussion on the final intervention performance and ability to support a development of
future sustainable cities are conducted.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
2
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Context of the project
Cities serve as focal points for human existence, bringing people together. They shape
individuals and communities. Yet, people, gathered in cities, also play a significant role in
shaping cities. Cities are dynamic and developing systems. With an accelerating urbani­
sation, studies estimates that 70% of the worlds population will live in cities in 2030, and
so will the problems and challenges impacting cities (Bank 2023). Evidence suggests that
cities and its societal activities make them the primary contributor to climate change, but as
well the areas most affected. As the majority of the worlds population are located in cities, it
makes them significantly vulnerable (Lamia and A. Roberts 2009). With this in mind, comes
a great responsibility and need for cities to manage the impacts ­ either by mitigating or by
adapting to the changes.
The increasing concerns about the climate change impacts, and a shared interest in urban
development, combined with an academic knowledge on sustainability, initiated the moti­
vation for looking into the challenges of sustainable cities and climate change. An initiate
research on the field revealed a great challenge within Danish municipalities to foster sus­
tainable urban development, from where this thesis on supporting the development of future
sustainable cities arise. Several articles and Danish news channels has addressed a signif­
icant resistance from citizens towards climate adaptation projects in Danish municipalities,
which often resulted in multiple projects being closed down (Skov 2023).
One municipality, often mentioned in articles and news channels, struggling with adapting
its city to the climate changes, was Frederiksberg Municipality (Slavensky 2019, Børrensen
2022). Known as being the warmest and most dense municipality in Denmark, and with
specific projects closed down, they seemed appropriate for a collaborative case study.
1.2
Project Goal and Research Questions
The main goal of the project is:
To reach this main goal, the thesis will answer the following research questions chronologi­
cally through the report chapters. The term ”future sustainable cities” relates to the definition
of the Sustainable City (Section 3.1.1), defined in the literature review of this thesis.
Research questions
1. How can Systems Engineering be applied to design interventions that support a sus­
tainable development of future cities?
2. What are meaningful objectives for a design project aimed at developing sustainable
cities for the future?
3. How will this design project, scoped with Frederiksberg Municipality as a case study,
contribute to a holistic development of future sustainable cities?
4. What is the opportunities within development of future sustainable cities for Frederiks­
berg Municipality?
5. What design interventions, explored through a Frame Creation approach, can support
future sustainable cities and be implemented by Frederiksberg Municipality?
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Approach
This chapter explains the approach of the project aiming at designing a socio­technical in­
tervention creating value for a future Sustainable City, by optimizing citizen engagement in
climate adaptation projects managed by the Department of Traffic and Urban Spaces (TUS)
in Frederiksberg Municipality. A future Sustainable City, refers to the definition specifically
used in this project (Section 3.1.1).
The project methodologies of Systems Engineering (SE) and Frame Creation (FC) are in­
troduced, and their application in the project process explained. Finally, the design methods
and data sources are presented and explained in the context of the project.
This chapter will answer Research Question 1:
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
4
==PAGE:13==
2.1
Systems Engineering
This project investigates the development of a future Sustainable City, that creates value for
both society, city, and climate, which we consider as a complex socio­technical challenge.
Züst and Troxler 2006 states: ”If a system comprises interacting people, i.e., participants and
persons affected, beside technical elements, this system is called a socio­technical system.”
In connection with that, society, city and climate are considered as interacting socio­technical
subsystems, confirming that this project is approached as an Systems Engineering (SE)
project.
Züst and Troxler 2006 defines SE as: ”A systematic way of thinking and a method to man­
age the problem solving processes in the context of challenging socio­technical questions.
Primarily, the application of SE is recommended for projects with large object complexity
and large size where it is difficult to efficiently develop, implement and control a sustainable
solution due to the many parties involved.” Engineering systems are defined by five char­
acteristics (Weck, Roos, and Magee 2012), and the Sustainable City system (Figure 2.1) of
this project fulfills them as follows:
1. Exists in the real world: The Sustainable City system evolves around the city of Fred­
eriksberg and its urban settlements, which are tangible elements that exist in real­life.
2. Is artificial: Cities and the act of doing urban development are human interventions.
Mankind inflicts nature and have created an artificial and protected environment, i.e., cities
and urban settlements, for human life to unfold in.
3.
Has dynamic properties: Properties of the Sustainable City systems continuously
changes, e.g., politics affecting climate ambition, regulation and budgets, societal trends
increasing awareness and willingness towards climate, and climate changes’ impact on city
infrastructures.
4. In a hybrid state: Different states of the Sustainable City occur, e.g., extreme weather
events caused by climate changes are of discrete nature, whereas the daily city life of Fred­
eriksberg’s citizens are of constant character.
5. Have some human control: The adaptation initiatives for climate change in urban devel­
opment of the Sustainable City system are planned, carried out and controlled by humans.
This is to adapt the city to the autonomously surroundings of changing climate and often
quite extreme weather events.
2.1.1
Thinking principles
The project is carried out with a systems thinking approach considering heuristic principles
(Weck, Roos, and Magee 2012):
Considering time­related changes
Systems are a subject of constantly changing environments, which forces SE projects to
continuously consider that. This should be done by examining the past, present and future,
which is done in this project, by analyzing the current challenges of citizen engagement
in TUS’ climate adaptation projects, by understanding the previous attempts to address the
challenges and the history behind, and by considering future impacts of our final intervention.
Furthermore, the design process itself evolved in an iterative way, constantly re­considering
previous steps as new findings emerged. This was done in order to secure the project goal
of designing an intervention, that creates value for TUS and for the future Sustainable City.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
5
==PAGE:14==
Working from a general to a detailed perspective
As the project is approached as an SE project, the overall project structure is based on the
hierarchy of complexity of three interrelated systems levels (Figure 2.1):
Engineering System Level A class of systems characterized by a high degree of technical
complexity, social intricacy, and elaborate processes, aimed at fulfilling important functions
in society (Weck, Roos, and Magee 2012).
Complex System Level A set of interacting components, technical artefacts, with well de­
fined behavior and a well­defined function or purpose (Weck, Roos, and Magee 2012).
Artefact System Level A design or intervention operating as an element of the system and
originated from a study or experiment.
Figure 2.1: The three system levels of the project
Thinking in alternatives
Challenging the presented problem situation and seeking innovative solutions are done
throughout the entire design process ­ especially when developing frames, i.e., the devel­
opment of alternative interventions (Chapter 7). The comprehensive exploration of TUS’
citizen engagement challenge, ideation of alternative solutions, evaluation and reflection
of many parameters ensures a final intervention of high feasibility and quality, that meets
certain objectives and the overall project goal.
2.1.2
The Problem­Solving Cycle
The design process of the project (Figure 2.2) is based on the SE concept of The Problem­
Solving Cycle (Züst and Troxler 2006). With the system oriented problem­solving approach,
the project allows itself to investigate the problem origins and turn it into a feasible solution.
The three major steps of the cycle are:
1. Search for objectives: What do we want to achieve?
2. Search for solutions: What alternative solutions exist?
3. Selection: Which solution fits best?
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
6
==PAGE:15==
In this project, searching for objectives is performed through a situation analysis (Chapter
5) describing the current context and surrounding system of the problem. It leads to a defi­
nition of the project goal, and system levels. The search for solutions is based on a system
analysis (Chapter 6) investigating paradoxes, stakeholder values, root­causes, and leads to
a determination of the system boundaries for the problem area, and a definition of objectives
on all system levels, based on findings from the situation analysis. The development of al­
ternative solutions (Chapter 7) is carried out as a creation of new frames that challenges the
current problem situation rapidly. The selection of the most suitable intervention (Chapter
8) is based on an evaluation of the performance and fulfilling of objectives, and feedback
from TUS.
The steps are carried out in this project by design practices of the FC model (Section 2.2).
Figure 2.2: The Problem­Solving Cycle (Züst and Troxler 2006)
2.2
The Frame Creation Model
The Frame Creation (FC) model is used as the design approach to support SE. It applies
design thinking but goes beyond the usual techniques, and takes an innovative approach
to solving modern problem situations. C. H. Dorst 2015 defines FC as ”[An] approach to
resolving problems, and create the new thinking that is sorely needed to deal with the newly
open, complex, dynamic, and networked nature of today’s world.”
In the FC approach, problems are perceived as paradoxical problems of conflicting state­
ments (Ibid.), which in this project relates to holistic climate adaptation projects carried out
by Frederiksberg Municipality. Paradoxical problems are solved by using reasoning pat­
terns of design abduction, where the paradoxical problem is approached in new, innovative
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
7
==PAGE:16==
and creative ways different from what conventional problem­solving practices would do, by
applying frames or metaphors to reach a desired outcome:
Starting out with the only known, i.e., a desired outcome, and a developed frame, new to the
original problem situation, the designer investigates how the elements, i.e., the things and
people, and the patterns of relationship, i.e., the interactions between the elements, should
be designed to achieve the desired outcome or value.
Figure 2.3: The equation of design abduction (C. H. Dorst 2015)
The FC model consists of nine steps that guide designers through the complex practice of
Frame Creation. The design process of this thesis is guided by the nine steps (Figure2.4).
The steps and its application in this project is briefly explained as follows:
Figure 2.4:
The FC Model steps
(C. H. Dorst 2015)
1.
Archaeology: The first step of the FC Model
includes an in­depth analysis of the apparent prob­
lem, as well as previous attempts to solve it. The
archaeological step is facilitated by empirical data,
such as, recorded semi­structured interviews with
project managers (PMs), data materials and docu­
ments provided by Frederiksberg Municipality, i.e.,
citizen questionnaires, project descriptions, and po­
litical strategies, which results in a in­depth analysis
of the history of climate adaptation in Frederiksberg
Municipality, to investigate their problems, earlier at­
tempts to solve them, and the dynamics of the organ­
isation.
2. Paradoxes: After defining the apparent problem,
this step moves on to investigate the initial problem
definition itself. According to C. H. Dorst 2015, sev­
eral issues are often intertwined, why it is important to
identify the deadlocks, that keeps the problem owner
from solving the problem, i.e., the core paradox. This
is expressed as a clash of rationalities in a series
of because statements.
The insights from the ar­
chaeological step was used to investigate the initial
problem, by applying because statements, revealing
three core paradoxes that limits TUS from solving the
apparent problem.
3. Context: In the third step, the paradoxes are put
aside to explore the practices of the inner circle of
stakeholders. It is those involved in the problem situ­
ation, and those who might be necessary for a possi­
ble solution. This step resulted in a map of stakehold­
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
8
==PAGE:17==
ers, necessary to the climate adaptation projects. It
revealed an understanding of their individual influ­
ence, behaviours, strategies and values. Additionally, two other maps were created: one
showing the inner circle of stakeholders’ relation to different citizen engagement practices
carried out by TUS, and one illustrating stakeholders’ involvement in the typical phases of
a general climate adaptation project in TUS.
4. Field: In the fourth step of the FC model, the context or the field is widened to include
an outer circle of stakeholders, meaning all stakeholders with a potential connection to the
problem. It concentrates on their individual interests, values, and practices. Besides map­
ping the outer circle of stakeholders, a system demarcation was developed to define the
solution area, as well as a structured overview of different values, needs and motivation for
a Sustainable City.
5. Themes: The fifth step is a theme analysis. The designer seeks to understand the
deeper factors that underlie the findings from the fourth step, i.e., the values, needs and
motivations shared between stakeholders, which is referred to as the universals. The struc­
tured overview of values, needs and motivations for a Sustainable City was analysed and
compared between the inner and outer circles of stakeholders, and created the foundation
for multiple themes.
6. Frames: Based on the emerging themes, this step entailed the creation of alternative in­
terventions. According to C. H. Dorst 2015, the ideation of new frames must be approached
as a creative leap. A frame can be formulated as an idea that adopting a certain pattern of
relationship, i.e., a metaphor, will lead to a desired outcome (Figure 7.1).
Figure 2.5: The process of creating frames
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
9
==PAGE:18==
Selecting one of the core paradoxes as the problem and choosing appropriate values de­
rived in the fifth step, served as the starting point of for creating frames. This was followed
by an investigation of examples of citizen engagement used in other real­life contexts, and
led to a rapid brainstorm on frames ideas. The next step involved a construction of frames
by choosing a frame idea, then developing the how or the working principles and identifying
the what or necessary elements for the frame, to reach the desired outcome and solve the
paradoxical problem. Three frames was created.
7. Futures: The proposed frames are nowreshaped in a process of co­evolution (C. H. Dorst
2015). In this step the designer generates ideas on the elements. A participatory design
(PD) workshop with PMs supported the development of elements by addressing different
concerns, based on an evaluation of parameters corresponding to values from the themes
step. It revealed which of the frames were most fruitful and had the potential to be turned
into realistic solutions.
8. Transformation: During the step of transformation, a critical evaluation of the frames
and solution directions are performed. Such evaluation was carried out as to determine the
performance of the system level objectives. The evaluation led to selecting a frame for the
final intervention design. The first iteration of a concept was then created, based on an
individual brainstorming by the design team, and a prototype test of frame elements with a
group of PMs. Finally, this step investigated the necessary changes of practices in TUS,
and strategies recommended for implementation.
9. Integration: In the ninth and last step of the process the designer must ensure that new
frames and solutions are well integrated into the context of the organisation. The impacts
and new opportunities within the network of climate adaptation projects in Frederiksberg
Municipality, deriving from the implementation of a new frame and concept, was identified.
Reflections were made on the opportunities for TUS to do better citizen engagement and
contributions to a Sustainable City development, if the final intervention are implemented
successfully.
2.3
Project Design Process
The design process of this project is carried out as a combination of the Problem­Solving
Cycle and the FC model. The Problem­Solving Cycle forms the main structure of the project
phases, whereas the actual design work and development of interventions are performed
using design practices of the FC model.
The Problem­Solving Cycle encourages a systems thinking approach and heuristic thinking
principles, considering the three interacting systems on engineering, complex and artefact
level, that constitute the Sustainable City in this project. It allows for evaluation and reflection
on how design interventions contribute to the project goal in a way that creates value. The
reflective approach is necessary when working with a complex socio­technical challenge.
The FC model enables a systematic step­by­step framework aiming at designing feasible
interventions and selecting the best one for a specific real­life case. This aligns with the
heuristic principle of Thinking in alternatives (Section 2.1.1).
The project case calls for radical and great innovations on complex and artefact system
level, i.e., the climate adaption system and the climate adaptation practices, in order to meet
the project goal at engineering level, i.e., the Sustainable City. Throughout the project, we
use systems thinking and the heuristic principle of Working from a general to a detailed
perspective (Section 2.1.1) by operating on all system levels in an iterative way, constantly
considering and evaluating how to design an intervention fulfilling objectives on all levels
and meeting the project goal.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
10
==PAGE:19==
The combination of the two methodologies (Figure 2.6), makes it possible to tackle the
socio­technical challenge of urban climate adaptation’s impact on the future Sustainable
City in a tangible way by the creation of new ways to engage the local community. The
SE principles allows for considerations of societal effects, impacts and value creation of
the final intervention ­ not only for TUS themselves, but for the entire holistic system of the
Sustainable City. The FC framework pushes for great innovation, challenging the current
problem situation in a way that is needed in TUS.
Figure 2.6: Combination of The Problem­Solving Cycle and The FC steps
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4
Project Design Methods
This section lists the different methods applied in the project, followed by an explanation of
how they have been used.
Table 2.1 is an overview of design methods used in the four design process steps, i.e.,
situation analysis, system analysis, development of alternative interventions and final inter­
vention, and the nine steps of the FC model.
Report
section
Frame Creation step
Design method
Data collection source
5. Situation analysis
5.1 Archaeology
Desk­research
TUS material; strategies, questionnaires,
project process overviews, web page, liter­
ature
5.1 Archaeology
Semi­structured interview
Interviews with Project Managers and Cli­
mate Adaptation Consultants
5.1 Archaeology
Observation
Citizen meeting
6. System Analysis
6.2 Context
Stakeholder mapping
TUS material; strategies, questionnaires,
project process overviews, web page, and
Interviews with Project Managers, and Cli­
mate Adaptation Consultants
6.3 Field
System demarcation
TUS material; strategies, questionnaires,
project process overviews, web page, and
Interviews with Project Managers, and Cli­
mate Adaptation Consultants
6.3 Field
Scenario games
PD design workshop with citizens
6.3 Field
Questionnaire
PM inputs
6.4 Themes
Affinity diagram
Questionnaire, PD citizen workshop, Sce­
nario games, TUS material;
strategies,
questionnaires, project process overviews,
web page, and Interviews with Project Man­
agers, and Climate Adaptation Consultants
Fish bone diagram
Questionnaire, PD citizen workshop, Sce­
nario games, TUS material;
strategies,
questionnaires, project process overviews,
web page, and Interviews with Project Man­
agers, and Climate Adaptation Consultants
7. Development of Alternative Interventions
7.1 Frames
Rapid brainstorm
7.2 Futures
”How do you?...” ­ idea gen­
eration cards
PD workshop at PM Theme Day
7.2 Futures
Walking brainstorm
PD workshop at PM Theme Day
7.2 Futures
Spider web diagram
PD workshop at PM Theme Day
7.3 Transformation
Weighted objectives matrix
7.3 Transformation
Individual brainstorm
8. Final Intervention
7.3 Transformation
Prototyping
PM test of 1st iteration frame elements pro­
totypes, Final test of high fidelity prototype
Table 2.1: Overview of design methods
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
12
==PAGE:21==
2.4.1
Situation Analysis Methods
Stakeholder maps
Stakeholder maps help to visually consolidate and communicate the key constituents of a
design project (Martin and Hanington 2012). Stakeholder maps have been used iterative to
understand the inner and outer circle of stakeholders, their interactions and relations.
System demarcation
Working with systems is complex. To help specify, communicate and adapt the scope of a
project, Züst and Troxler 2006 suggest to define the boundaries of a system by applying the
system demarcation method. When demarcating a system, you distinguish between three
terms:
1. Intervention system: the area where interventions and changes related to a given
problem, can possibly take place
2. Environment: the real world outside the system,
3. Area of investigation: the sum of the intervention system and environment.
As part of the situation analysis and field step, a demarcation of the system that makes up a
climate adaptation project in TUS was made to point out what elements and stakeholders,
related to the project, should be considered for a potential change. Throughout the project,
the demarcation of the system changed, as new insights into the problem situation derived
and the scope narrowed.
Affinity diagram
An affinity diagram is a collection of large amounts of data that is organized into groups or
themes based on their relationships (Dam and Teo 2022). An affinity diagram was produced
to organize and cluster data of stakeholder values, needs and motivation for a Sustainable
City. The diagram helped to identify universals or themes of shared values, needs, and
motivations between different stakeholder groups. These themes played a central role later
in the project, as they were used in the creation of frames, to ensure they represented values
for the Sustainable City.
Fish bone diagram
Fish bone diagram, also referred to as cause­effect­diagram or Ishikawa­diagram, is a visual
tool used to dissecting a problem, by organizing theories about the root­causes of a problem.
It is a visual representation of the factors that might contribute to an observed effect or
phenomenon that is being examined (Juran 2018). As part of the system analysis, a fish
bone diagram was used to investigate the root­causes of the problem situation. This led to
a diagram exploring the root­causes, which became the foundation for a list of objectives
for the final intervention design.
2.4.2
Conceptualisation methods and tools
Brainstorming
Brainstorming is the general term for a variety of different underlying creative thinking meth­
ods used to generate ideas (Boeijen, Daalhuizen, and Zijlstra 2021). Brainstorming was
used in the development of the intervention concepts. Both a rapid brainstorm method,
walking brainstorm method, and individual brainstorm method was used internally in the
design team and in collaboration with the PMs.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
13
==PAGE:22==
”How Might We?” idea generation cards
”How Might We” statements (HMWs) are used to inspire us during ideation and when we’re
brainstorming solutions to a complex problem. Basically, they’re design challenges framed
as questions that we answer by generating ideas (O’Donoghue 2023). The idea generation
cards were used in a PD workshop with PMs. The PMs noted their concerns, questions and
thoughts related to a presented frame concept. This was followed by a walking brainstorm
generating solutions to their questions and concerns.
Prototyping
Prototyping gives the opportunity to bring an idea to life, to test the design with end­users
and clients, and investigate potential problems and improvements (Friis Dam and Yu Siang
2020). Based on the purpose of the prototype, it can both be low­ and high­fidelity. A
physical prototype of the final solution was created in the transformation step of the FC
model, with the purpose of testing the an intervention concept. More specifically, the test
concerned usability and design of three categories of cards, which are elements of the final
intervention, initiating better citizen engagement performance. The prototype was tested
on a group of four PMs from TUS. Finally, a high­fidelity prototype are tested during a one
month period in the real life context at the TUS office.
2.4.3
Evaluation methods and tools
Spider web diagram
A spider web diagram is used to evaluate how concept ideas perform on different criteria
(Valgeirsdottir et al. 2023). A spider web diagram was used in this project to evaluate three
frame concepts in a PD workshop with 16 PMs from TUS. The evaluation criteria were
based on universals, i.e., the themes that defined the shared values, needs, and motivations
investigated earlier in the project.
Weighted objective matrix
A weighted matrix helps designers to identify and prioritize the design concepts of most
promising character. The matrix ranks design concepts against different key success criteria
defined by the designers (Martin and Hanington 2012). An evaluation of the three frame
concepts ability to create a successful and feasible solution was carried out by weighted
objective matrices. The criteria of evaluation was the catalogue of objectives, based on
project findings and root­causes.
2.5
Data Sources and Data Collection Methods
2.5.1
Secondary Data
Literature review
See section 3.0.1 for literature review methodology used to search for scientific journals,
articles, books etc.
Desk­research
To support the collection of empirical data, desk­research was performed. This data col­
lection method contributed to multiple steps of the design process, e.g., to understand the
current situation in Frederiksberg Municipality, to explore the stakeholders involved, to get
an overview of the municipal strategies and actions on climate adaptation, and understand
previous and present attempts to solve challenges similar to the ones Frederiksberg Munic­
ipality is dealing with.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
14
==PAGE:23==
2.5.2
Empirical Data
Semi­structured interviews
A qualitative research method that combines a predefined set of open and closed questions.
The interview focuses on a specific subject, with the opportunity to develop in new directions
due to unexpected responses (Adams 2015). The project was carried out in close collabo­
ration with TUS, with whom a large number of semi­structured interviews were conducted.
See appendix A for interview guides. These interviews contributed with knowledge and in­
sights to PM experiences, values, needs and motivations, as well as general understandings
of the climate adaptation practices in Frederiksberg Municipality.
Observation
Observation is a part of ethnographic methods in the exploratory phase of design processes.
The intent is to collect information by observing with an open mind (Martin and Hanington
2012). Observations were used in the archaeological step to witness a citizen meeting, and
invisibly observe the interaction between Frederiksberg Municipality employees and part­
ners, and citizens, and obtain knowledge of citizen drivers and concerns regarding climate
adaptation projects.
Questionnaire
A research tool of specific, closed­ended or open­ended questions, used to conduct surveys,
and intended to gather information about people’s needs, opinions, beliefs and drivers (Boei­
jen, Daalhuizen, and Zijlstra 2021). A questionnaire collecting data on PM values, needs
and motivation for a Sustainable City was made (Appendix B). The questionnaire included:
• a mix of +80 nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs taken from the steps of archaeol­
ogy and context, as well as literature review on a Sustainable City, and the question:
”Choose 5­10 words that describes your future vision for Frederiksberg”
• An enclosed question to elaborate on the words chosen.
As part of the evaluation of the final intervention, a high fidelity prototype test was carried
out after the project end. The feedback was conducted through a questionnaire filled out by
TUS PMs, concerning use experience, graphic appeal, use context relevance, and added
value creation to citizen engagement in climate adaptation projects in TUS (Appendix B).
Participatory design workshops
Participatory Design (PD) workshops are a method based on Participatory Design. It is
a quick and flexible tool for designers to use to investigate specific situation by adopting
co­design principles (Lamas et al. 2015). PD workshops were performed twice during the
project:
1. A PD workshop with nine citizens was performed to provide insights to citizens’ under­
standing, awareness and perception of climate change and climate adaptation. During
the PD workshop specially designed scenario games regarding extreme weather and
climate adaptation in a fictive city was played. The outputs from the PD workshop was
used to generate themes of values, needs and motivations.
2. A PD workshop with 16 PMs as participants with the purpose of evaluating and further
ideating on alternative intervention ideas. The specific design methods used in the PD
workshop is further explained in section 2.4.2 and section 2.4.3.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
15
==PAGE:24==
Event cat­
egory
Date
Name of event
No. of
partic­
ipants
Discussed topics
Data collection method
Interviews
06.09.23
Meeting 1 with PM#4
1
Project: ”Peter Bangs Vej”
Semi­structured interview
11.09.23
Meeting 1 with PM#1
1
Project: ”The Square behind the townhall”
Semi­structured interview
11.09.23
Meeting 1 with cloudburst project leader
1
Introduction to climate adaptation projects, the organi­
sational structure, procedure and citizen engagement in
Frederiksberg Municipality
Semi­structured interview
11.09.23
Meeting 1 with PM#2
1
Project: ”Mayor Godskesens Square”
Semi­structured interview
11.09.23
Meeting 1 with PM#5
1
Project: ”Fuglebakkekvarteret, part 1”
Semi­structured interview
12.10.23
Meeting with PM#3
1
LINKS project
Semi­structured interview
14.09.23
Meeting 2 with PM#2
1
Project: ”Egernvej” and citizen engagement in Frederiks­
berg Municipality
Semi­structured interview
25.09.23
Meeting 2 with PM#1
1
Evaluation of ”The Square behind the town hall” citizen
meeting and citizen engagement challenges
Semi­structured interview
25.09.23
Meeting 2 with cloudburst project leader
1
Climate adaptation projects and citizen engagement in
Frederiksberg Municipality
Semi­structured interview
28.09.23
Meeting 3 with PM#2
1
Climate adaptation projects and citizen engagement in
Frederiksberg Municipality
Semi­structured interview
06.11.23
Meeting with PM from Department of Urban
Development
1
Citizen engagement tool used in Copenhagen Municipality
Semi­structured interview
08.11.23
Meeting whit Ramboll Climate Risk Consul­
tant
1
Challenges with citizen engagement in climate adaptation
projects
Semi­structured interview
Observations
20.09.23
”The Square behind the town hall” citizen
meeting
25+
Project: ”The Square behind the town hall”
Observation
Design workshops
13.11.23
Workshop with Frederiksberg citizens
9
Citizen climate awareness, perception of climate adapta­
tion needs and collaboration with Frederiksberg Munici­
pality
Participatory
design
work­
shop
30.11.23
Theme day with Frederiksberg Municipality
project managers
16
Evaluation of alternative interventions
Participatory
design
work­
shop
20.12.23
Workshop with Frederiksberg Municipality
project managers
4
Test and evaluation of final intervention elements
Semi­structured
interview
and prototype test
Questionnaires
25.10.23
Field data exercise with project managers
5
Field data: Elements and vision for the future sustainable
city
Questionnaire
26.01.24
Project manager evaluation of final inter­
vention
16
Feedback and evaluation on test of final intervention
Questionnaire
Table 2.2: Data collection activities
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
16
==PAGE:25==
2.6
Answer to Research Question 1
This answer is based on the project approach (Chapter 2), and explains how SE can be
applied to design interventions that support the development of future sustainable cities.
Cities are perceived as large scale, complex socio­technical systems, consisting of multiple
different subsystems and elements. SE is applied in this thesis, as it enables a system­
atic thinking and methodology to manage a socio­technical problem­solving process, when
working with great systems like cities.
In this project, the system thinking approach and heuristic thinking principles of SE enables
a holistic comprehension of the complexity of the Sustainable City system, by considering
the hierarchy of the three interrelated system levels and investigating the challenges and
synergies within their individual subsystems of city, society, and climate. Furthermore, the
main structure of the design process is based on the SE concept of the Problem­Solving
Cycle, which allows for the project to turn the problem origin into feasible interventions,
which creates value for the entire system, and most importantly meet the project goal and
needs of the main stakeholders, i.e., TUS, Frederiksberg citizens and the city of Frederiks­
berg itself. Additionally, the FC model is applied as a guiding design thinking tool to support
the SE approach in the search of alternative solutions. It consists of nine steps providing
a clear structure and tangible methods to the design process, which we have integrated in
the Problem­Solving Cycle process. The combination of design methods of SE and the FC
model structured by the Problem­Solving Cycle ensures an extensive and holistic investiga­
tion of the problem situation origin and creation of innovative and radical interventions, that
deals with the socio­technical complexity, are suitable for the majority of stakeholders, and
contributes to a value creating development of the Sustainable City and its subsystems of
city, society and climate.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
17
==PAGE:26==
3
Literature Review
This chapter covers the literature review of the role of cities in addressing climate change.
The exploration leads to the formulation of a definition of a Sustainable City, and enlightens
the gap in literature, which this thesis will contribute to close.
This chapter will answer Research Question 2:
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
18
==PAGE:27==
3.0.1
Literature review methodology
The Open Science oriented Library Services Platform of DTU, findit.dtu.dk, was the main
search tool used literature research and data­mining, as the tool provides an extensive range
of STEM data. A systematic approach to data­mining was performed by using search­strings
on specific topics, e.g.,:
3.1
Climate change and the roles of cities
The International Panel on Climate Change, IPCC 2022 defines climate change as “the state
of climate that can be identified by the changes in the mean and/or variability of its properties
that persist for an extended period, typically decades or longer”. Climate changes result
in rising temperatures and global warming, longer warm seasons, and shorter cold ones.
It is likely that more extreme weather events will happen, such as sea level rises, cloud
bursts, extreme heat waves, flooding due to intense rainfalls, droughts, and storms, leaving
the global world extremely vulnerable. It is even stated by Kumareswaran and Jayasinghe
2023a, that climate change is ”the most significant threat of our century [...] which demands
an immediate, all­encompassing global reaction”. A clear consensus exists in literature that
climate change and its threatening impacts are closely connected to cities, resulting in what
can be seen as a paradoxical challenge.
Giordano et al. 2020 states that cities are exposed to all kind of stressors driven by climate
change and climate variability. Since the majority of the worlds population is located in cities,
and their assets and economic activities are as well, cities are both contributors to climate
change and extremely vulnerable to its impacts.
Studies on the field points to the disparity between the climate situation of today and the
way cities are built. Short and Farmer 2021 claim that: ”Cities around the world were largely
built for previous climate regimes. In the short to medium term, there is a mismatch between
the climate regime that cities were designed for and the climate regime they now inhabit.”.
The way urban infrastructure is constructed, drives the of risk of environmental hazards,
while the rapid growth and densities of cities make them the prime site of vulnerability to
climate. As Mukim and M. ( Roberts 2023 argues ”it is also in cities, however, that many of
the solutions to the climate crisis will be found, not least because by 2050 almost 70 percent
of the world’s population will call cities home.”
From a global perspective, mitigation and adaptation are the two approaches to combat
climate change in cities. Until today, they have proven to be useful. They are shaping
the current and incoming climate strategies, policies and measures worldwide. Mitigation
is a long­term strategy, focusing on limiting the impact of climate change on the planet by
reducing the concentrations of emissions of heat­trapping greenhouse gases, i.e., by using
alternative energy sources. Adaptation focuses on adjusting and restructuring cities to meet
the demand of the present and future climate. In relation to cities, Short and Farmer 2021
states that ”cities are important platforms for climate change adaptation and mitigation.”
These actions are essential to the survival of cities and their citizens. Kumareswaran and
Jayasinghe 2023b refers to this as cities possessing ”urban climate resilience” defined as
”the capacity of cities to function, whereas making certain that people who live, and/or work
in cities survive and thrive combating climate risk and shocks.”
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
19
==PAGE:28==
The reviewed literature on climate change and the role of cities reveals that:
1. Climate change is a global threat, as rising temperatures cause global warming and
extreme weather events worldwide. It requires immediate action if these changes are
to be tackled.
2. Cities face a paradoxical challenge, as they are significant contributors to climate
change, but at the same time extremely vulnerable of the impacts that is generated.
Urbanization is continuously increasing, and so are the assets and activities in cities.
However, as the construction of cities are not designed for the climate regime of today,
it leaves cities worldwide extremely vulnerable and at risk.
3. It is imperative for cities to ensure urban climate resilience in present future by adapting
to the impacts generated by the changing of the climate in a way, that, at the same
time, makes certain that humans thrive.
3.1.1
Defining The Sustainable City
In this section, different definitions and elements stated in literature (Bibri and Krogstie 2017;
Kumareswaran and Jayasinghe 2023a; United Nations Environment Programme 2018; Ca­
magni 2017; Abdullahi and Pradhan 2017) of what makes up a Sustainable City is reviewed,
with the aim to synthesize one definition suitable for this thesis. The definition of a Sustain­
able City will be the one referred to throughout the project report.
The literature on sustainable cities reveal a strong consensus that sustainable cities must
be viewed as systems compromising various elements. These elements are defined as
interdependent components that transforms a city into a sustainable city, and are described
as:
• ”[Sustainable] cities should be seen as urban ecosystems that comprise interactions
between the physical, social, and ecological components.” (Bibri and Krogstie 2017).
• ”When considering the problem [of sustainability] in its entirety, we must combine the
socio­cultural, economic and environmental elements which all go towards the con­
struction of that complex set of relations we call a city.” (Abdullahi and Pradhan 2017).
• ”Cities cannot remain sustainable nor contribute to global sustainability by address­
ing individually the complex interwoven components that define them. Intervention in
the functioning of individual components will invariably lead to complications in other
components. This is a fundamental characteristic of systems.” (Egger 2006).
However, the literature reviewed accommodate different elements necessary for the system
that makes up a sustainable city. Some papers argues that, a significant part of what makes
a sustainable city, is the city as a physical element. Bibri and Krogstie 2017 argues that “the
physical component is associated with urban morphology (urban forms, spatial configura­
tions, integration values, etc.), a field of study that is concerned with the spatial structures,
organizations, and characteristic features of cities. The spatial distribution of activities, effi­
cient use of resources, and accessibility of different services and facilities are crucial aspects
of sustainable cities in terms of urban forms, operations, functions, and services, as well as
their interconnections.”
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
20
==PAGE:29==
According to Egger 2006, ”Cities are far more than physical containers storing people, goods
and knowledge. Cities are in themselves an expression of society, requiring software in the
form of management, governance, commerce, culture, education and community to facilitate
a milieu for human existence and interaction. Without the human lifeblood that flows through
the streets of the physical city, the urban structure ultimately becomes as irrelevant as the
cadaver to the human soul.”
Kumareswaran et. al and the United Nations follows, by pointing out, that thriving societies
and citizens are core elements of the greater system. Kumareswaran and Jayasinghe 2023a
argues that ”the ultimate goal of sustainable cities is to generate satisfied happy citizens with
good physical and mental well­being leading a decent living and being highly productive to
contribute to the economic development of the nation”. The argument is supported by the
11th goal of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDG’s), i.e., Sustainable
Cities and Communities, as they define a city as complex systems, that gather communi­
ties to live, work and play, i.e., ”the heartbeat of societies” (United Nations Environment
Programme 2018).
A third element, i.e., the environment or the urban ecosystem, plays an essential part of the
system as well. The environmental element is in literature referred to as uncertain climate,
extreme weather activity, resource shortages, climate risks, volatile shocks, and stresses.
For a city to be sustainable it must have systems in place, that are resilient and prepared to
withstand and adapt to long­term climate disasters and risks. Does a city have such systems
in place, the standard of living will be maintained (Kumareswaran and Jayasinghe 2023a;
United Nations 2021; Camagni 2017).
Kumareswaran and Jayasinghe 2023a states that cities “are believed to be dynamic sys­
tems in uncertain climate context capable of managing, adapting, and thriving in climate
risks, volatile shocks, and stresses. Urban climate change resilience encompasses climate
change adaptation, mitigation actions, and disaster risk reduction measures. It ensures the
resilience in terms of robust nature of city, people, and institutions to cope with stress and
shocks”. Other papers confirms, and emphasize the importance of the dynamic interacting
systems, as Kumareswan states. To ensure its sustainability, a city must continually rein­
vent itself, evolve, and be capable of adapting to the dynamic externalities (Egger 2006;
Camagni 2017).
Definition of The Sustainable City used in this thesis
The definition of a Sustainable City in this project, refers to the definition of a system of three
dynamic and synergistic subsystems. They are interconnected and highly impacting each
other. Changes to one of the subsystems, will affect the other two, and thereby the greater
system. In this project, the subsystems are defined as:
The city system is a physical system of spatial structures, organizations, services, facilities,
and forms. It is a system designed by humans and societies, formed by cultural values, to
ensure their living.
The society system is a system deeply connected to the city system. It is a system of a
well­functioning society and thriving citizens. The elements making up the society system
are humans and their act of living, their cultural practices, and values. The elements of the
a society system often differs from city to city.
The climate system is the system that defines the surrounding climate. It is a constant
dynamic and dominant system, where temperature rises, extreme weather events, risks
uncertainties, and continuous changes are happening.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.1: The system of a Sustainable City
To ensure the sustainability of a city, specific criteria must be met. First, the subsystems
comprising a Sustainable City system, i.e., city, society, and climate must be dynamic, evolv­
ing and capable of adapting to any externalities that a city may encounter. Additionally, there
must be synergy among these subsystems.
3.2
Urban development towards a future sustainable city
In the reviewed literature on urban development (Pongruengkiat et al. 2023; Kanarp and
Westberg 2023; Eriksen et al. 2011), multiple recommendations for the creation of a resilient
and adaptive city, i.e., characteristics of the climate system of a future Sustainable City
(Section 3.1.1), emerge:
Pongruengkiat et al. 2023 defines sustainable urban development as ”a holistic and in­
tegrated approach to urban planning and management that seeks to balance economic
growth, environmental protection, and social equity. It emphasizes the importance of inte­
grated and participatory planning, green infrastructure, compact and connected urban form,
and social inclusion”.
Kanarp and Westberg 2023 states ”to contribute to a society able to withstand known and
unknown effects of the climate crisis, those responsible for developing, enabling and im­
plementing adaptation measures need to question ingrained thought patterns, routines and
preconceived working methods. They need to create practices that are open and reflex­
ive in planning, prioritising and decision­making, and foster critical (self) reflection.” This
refers to a need of claimed responsibility and self­reflective innovation by authorities, that is
considered crucial for urban development of a climate resilient society, i.e., a Sustainable
City.
Eriksen et al. 2011 points that not all climate adaptation actions and practices result in do­
ing ”the good”, and states that it is only sustainable if it contributes to social justice and
environmental integrity. To secure sustainable adaptation, four principles are presented:
1. recognize the context of vulnerability, including multiple stressors, 2. acknowledge that
different values and interests affecting adaptation outcomes, 3. integrate local knowledge
into adaptation responses, and 4. consider potential feedback between local and global
processes. However, the study claims the four principles does not guarantee sustainable
adaptation, and emphasises the existence of a gap concerning missing examination on how
they can be used in a real­life practice.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
22
==PAGE:31==
The key points from the reviewed literature are interpreted into the following recommenda­
tions for urban development promoting a Sustainable City:
1. A holistic approach considering all interacting systems surroundings are evident. This
requires a participatory approach to urban development, which illustrates a need for
engagement of citizens, the local community and other relevant stakeholders.
2. Governmental authorities must understand their power position and claim responsibil­
ity for adapting cities for climate change. It requires a reflective and innovative attitude,
that challenges current organisational structures in order to develop sustainable cities,
that are resilient to future challenges.
3. The four adaptation principles by Eriksen et al. 2011 fosters a thinking, highlighting that
urban development for a Sustainable City possesses a need for contextual and local
consideration, increased awareness of the complexity rising from different stakeholder
values and interests, the importance of involving all knowledge from a diverse local
community, and that adaptation actions are linked in interrelations on local and global
scale, i.e., big and large scale systems affects one another.
3.3
Citizen engagement in climate adaptation projects
In literature (Kumareswaran and Jayasinghe 2023a; Sobol 2023; Pallathadka, Chang, and
Ajibade 2023) on urban development, considering climate adaptation, a great amount of
principles and recommendations for practices are presented, but studies testing them in the
real world are limited. Research agrees on the importance and value­creation of engaging
citizen in a sustainable development towards resilient and adaptive cities:
Kumareswaran and Jayasinghe 2023a argues that collaborative inclusion and contextual
awareness of users throughout the entire project, are essential to project leaders and de­
cision makers in urban development: “For successful implementation of green infrastruc­
tures into sustainable building or urban development; a context­based and people­oriented
approach should be adopted [...] Constructive engagement with the end users and their
acceptance, prioritizing social inclusion and participatory approach in decision making in all
phases [...] are fundamental to the success of all green infrastructure projects.“
Sobol 2023 emphasises the contribution of citizen engagement to urban development as
creating better collaboration and support between local authorities and citizens: “From a
perspective of governance, developing a city means that a local government should respond
to what citizens in the city address. In this sense active participation of inhabitants in local
development makes the process more effective because local authorities can better reply
for their needs and expectations.“
Pallathadka, Chang, and Ajibade 2023 claims citizen engagement are inevitable for sus­
tainable development: “Engaging with stakeholders and local communities is crucial for the
successful implementation of sustainability initiatives, as they can provide valuable insights
into the challenges and opportunities present in their communities.” Furthermore, the im­
portance of skill is pointed to: ”Community engagement is an effective tool for implementing
urban sustainability, although its overall success depends on the stakeholders, community
participation, tools, and processes employed by the projects.“
Several principles and recommendations (Powell 2022; Tortzen and Agger 2023) on how
to do fruitful involvement of citizens in climate adaptive urban development are found in
literature:
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
23
==PAGE:32==
Powell 2022 defines six principles for climate change adaptation of cities on a higher struc­
tural level. It is defined as transformative adaptation, that ”reorients urban climate action
around addressing entrenched equity and climate justice challenges. It focuses on sys­
temic changes to development processes that improve people’s quality of life, enhance the
social and economic vibrancy of cities, and ensure sustainable, resilient, and inclusive urban
futures.”(Institute 2019). Powells principle no. 4, reflects citizen engagement, and is formu­
lated as: ”Cities need to engage residents – particularly the most vulnerable and exposed
communities. [...] The most successful and impactful actions will also need to be rooted in
local knowledge and designed to address social, economic, and environmental inequities –
not just climate risks. Strong community engagement will help achieve these goals.”
Tortzen and Agger 2023 presents a list of factors initiating successful citizen engagement
based on a review of research studies on best practices on international level:
(The following factors are translated from Danish)
• Knowledge of local context and specific local conditions
• Early and continuous engagement of the local community throughout the process
• Collaboration with local citizens, e.g., through contact persons or focus groups
• Openness to citizens impact on decisions by involving local knowledge and needs
• Collective value for the local community through jobs, investments in the local area,
etc.
The factors are supported by central recommendations for local authorities, when facilitating
successful citizen engagement in municipal urban development projects:
(The following recommendations are translated from Danish)
• Built of trust, relations, networks and alliances ­ internally and externally
• Openness to other parties needs and interests
• Clear alignment of expectations ­ also in the collaboration
• Political and organisational sense ­ to create internally mandate and support
• Bravery, consistency and creativity
• Personal attitude and consistency
Tortzen and Agger 2023 argues that co­creation with citizens through a participatory ap­
proach led by local authorities is evident to do sustainable urban climate adaptation. Based
on an extensive study of four climate projects operating with citizen engagement through
co­creation, five recommendations are formulated:
(The following recommendations are translated from Danish)
1. The right participants: It is important to recruit and gather ”the right participants”, i.e.,
ones with relevant competences and networks for the project. Diversity is a strength in
a group of actors aiming for driving a co­creation initiative. The participants personal
style do also count ­ it could be a good idea to hand pick participants, that are good in
collaborating, and open to new pathways.
2. It have to make sense: Meaningfulness is key in co­creation. It is important to create
a focus on local challenges, which makes a difference. Concrete hands­on­initiatives,
where different approaches are tested, increases participants motivation. Likewise, it
is important to remind of the bigger goal.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
24
==PAGE:33==
3. Motivation is key: It is the motivation of the participants which drives the co­creation.
It is essential to maintain the motivation throughout. It could be done by increasing the
groups unity through social activities ­ and by creating a fun and warm atmosphere.
4. The important facilitation: The facilitating and collaborative effort is essential for co­
creation to succeed. A close collaboration depends highly on a good leader. It is one
who understand to plan and facilitate the dialogue, creating possibilities for participants
to understand perspectives and interests of one another, and share their knowledge
in a respectful and equal atmosphere.
5. Bridging the gap between ”logics”: The foundation of co­creation is actors meeting
across sectors. They represent different ”logics”. Therefore, openness and curiosity to
other sector ”logics” are essential for successful co­creation across sectors. Language
use is of great importance, e.g., how an initiative is framed to fit into an existing political
agenda.
3.4
Gap in Literature
The reviewed literature reveals proposals for successful citizen engagement principles and
recommendations for citizen engagement practices in urban development, to a large ex­
tent. The important role and contribution of engaging citizens in sustainable urban devel­
opment is emphasized. In addition, the power position of local authorities in society and
community development is pointed out, which indicate the need for claimed responsibility
and strong leadership in guiding the urban development towards the creation of future sus­
tainable cities.
Nevertheless, there is a gap in literature indicating insufficient research on real­life cases that
investigate how to ensure performance and implementation of citizen engagement practices
creating value in urban climate adaptation projects, in reality. ”Creating value” refers to
fulfilling the citizen engagement principles and recommendation outlined in literature.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
25
==PAGE:34==
3.5
Answer to Research Question 2
The answer is based on the literature review (Chapter 3).
The literature review of cities’ roles in climate change provided valuable insights to the chal­
lenges, that future cities will face. It supports the formulation of a definition of the funda­
mental elements of a Sustainable City, perceived as a large system consisting of multiple
subsystems. The project goal in this design project, is to support the development of future
Sustainable Cities. In this project a Sustainable City is defined as:
A system of three dynamic and synergistic subsystems. They are interconnected and highly
impacting each other. Changes to one of the subsystems, will affect the other two, and
thereby the greater system. In this project, the subsystems are defined as:
The city system is a physical system of spatial structures, organizations, services, facilities,
and forms. It is a system designed by humans and societies, formed by cultural values, to
ensure their living.
The society system is a system deeply connected to the city system. It is a system of a
well­functioning society and thriving citizens. The elements making up the society system
are humans and their act of living, their cultural practices, and values. The elements of the
a society system often differs from city to city.
The climate system is the system that defines the surrounding climate. It is a constant
dynamic and dominant system, where temperature rises, extreme weather events, risks
uncertainties, and continuous changes are happening.
To ensure the sustainability of a city, specific criteria must be met. First, the subsystems
comprising the Sustainable City system, i.e., city, society, and climate, must be dynamic,
evolving and capable of adapting to any external influences that a city may encounter. Ad­
ditionally, there must be a balancing synergy between these subsystems.
The primary objective is to enhance holistic synergies among all the subsystems that com­
prise the Sustainable City, i.e., city, society, and climate, to ensure sustainability of future
cities. This project focuses on achieving a strong relation between city and society that
adapts to the dominant climate. The contributing city system holds objectives of urban de­
velopment fostering sustainability and climate resilience. Objectives of a thriving society
system contributing to creating synergy, considers wisely involvement of the local commu­
nity and citizens. Frederiksberg Municipality focuses on adapting the city to future impacts of
climate changes, thereby fostering stronger synergies between the city and climate systems.
However, it leaves the society system potentially neglected, or in a state where society and
citizens are not always thriving. As systems are perceived as dynamic and interrelated, a
meaningful objective for designing the Sustainable City is, that all subsystems and their in­
terlinks must be considered in order to accomplish the desired holistic synergy­balance and
meet the project goal. Drawing from the literature review, two objectives for the engineer­
ing system level (Section 6.6) works as specific requirements for the intervention concept
developed in this project. The two objectives aligns with the above mentioned scope of the
project.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
26
==PAGE:35==
4
Project Scope
This chapter describes the scope of the project which has originated from a systemic think­
ing (Section 2.1.1). All system levels and synergies between the three subsystems, i.e., city,
society and climate, of the Sustainable City (Section 3.1.1), are described and illustrated in
detail. This project considers sustainability as described in the Sustainable City definition,
which means the social and environmental dimension of the traditional depiction of sustain­
ability (Purvis, Mao, and Robinson 2019) are prioritised, and the economic dimension are
black­boxed and out of scope.
The project system boundaries and overall scope is based on the project goal (Section1.2).
The system levels are defined from the perspective of TUS, with the aim of providing realistic
opportunities for the project to create an output contributing to sustainable urban climate
adaptation of Frederiksberg, and the development of a Sustainable City.
This chapter will answer Research Question 3:
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
27
==PAGE:36==
4.1
System Levels
This project considers three interrelated systems, that represents different levels of com­
plexity, i.e., the engineering level, the complex level and the artefact level (Figure 2.1).
Each level consider the three subsystems of a Sustainable City (Section 3.1.1), i.e., city,
society, and climate. The three system levels and their subsystems are defined based on
obtained data: The engineering system level is based on the literature review (Chapter 3).
The complex and artefact system levels are mainly defined by collected data from the case
study of climate adaptation projects provided by TUS and findings from the situation analy­
sis (Chapter 5). The application of this systemic thinking allows for the creation of a tangible
intervention on artefact level that is able to meet the project goal and thereby create impact
on the engineering system level. This is done through a constant consideration of influence
on all three system levels and the possibilities for enhancing value creation.
The engineering system level represents the overall project goal of supporting the devel­
opment of future sustainable cities considering city, society, and climate synergies. The
complex system level operates with the climate adaptation system of the Sustainable City
and represents the case study of this thesis, i.e., climate adaptation projects in the TUS. The
artefact system level is closely linked to the complex system level, and works with the TUS
practices for climate adaptation, focusing on citizen engagement. The final intervention op­
erates on this lowest level, from where its effect in the TUS organisation are evaluated on the
complex system level. Its impact on society and to the Sustainable City is then considered
on the engineering system level.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the 3 system levels of the project
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
28
==PAGE:37==
4.1.1
Engineering Level
Figure 4.2: The engineering system level
The engineering system level (Figure 4.2) considers the future Sustainable City and the
project goal. The three subsystems on this level is defined as:
City: Urban spacial environment with infrastructures of transport, services and facilities
which is formed and affected by authorities, politicians, organisations and societies of human
life and cultures.
Society: Human urban way of daily living, cultural norms and values of society, and activities
carried out in the city spacial environment. The societal city infrastructures of resources,
urban design and regulation are formed by the human action through a thriving living.
Climate: The surrounding system of a changing climate which are inevitable, constant and
experienced as unpredictable extreme weather events impacting the systems of city and
society, e.g., rising temperatures and sea levels, and more frequent storms and heavy rains.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
29
==PAGE:38==
4.1.2
Complex Level
Figure 4.3: The complex system level
The complex system level (Figure 4.3) demonstrates climate adaptation of Frederiksberg,
carried out by TUS. The three subsystems on this level are defined as:
City: The urban settlement of the Frederiksberg area and urban municipal development
plans and policies.
Society: Values and norms of Frederiksberg citizens, local authorities, and politicians and
their effect on climate adaptation initiatives in the urban spaces.
Climate: Local extreme weather events and predictions revealing an urgent need to combat
the changing climate and forecasts showing more frequent incidents of 10­, 20­, and 100­
year events.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
30
==PAGE:39==
4.1.3
Artefact Level
Figure 4.4: The artefact system level
The artefact system level involves the practices of TUS in municipal climate adaptation
projects. As illustrated in Figure 4.4, all system elements are located in the overlapping
areas, which demonstrates that the subsystems’ relations are interesting. The three sub­
systems’ relations on this level are defined as:
City & society: The involvement of citizens in urban development and climate adaptation,
i.e., the direct interaction between Frederiksberg citizens and PMs working in TUS, through
citizen engagement practices.
Climate & city: The technical initiatives and elements in urban areas that manages the
climate changes effects and makes the city resilient to, e.g., cloudbursts and rising temper­
atures.
Society & climate: The willingness and awareness of the local community of Frederiksberg
to support municipal urban adaptation initiatives.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
31
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Answer to Research Question 3
The answer is based on the scoping of project (Chapter 4).
A study focusing on supporting a holistic development of future Sustainable Cities, deals with
systems of high complexity. Applying system thinking allows for a profound understanding
of a complex system, such as a city. Likewise, a case study addressing a real­life prob­
lem is beneficial for conducting an in­depth exploration of such complex and multi­faceted
situations. This is why a case study, scoped with Frederiksberg Municipality, forms the
foundation for this design project. It enables a deep comprehension of the current problem
situation, involving mechanisms, elements, and stakeholders needed for the urban climate
adaptive development, along with their interconnections, and potential conflicts, revealed
through SE approaches.
In particular, this design project, scoped with Frederiksberg Municipality as case, investi­
gates how a design intervention can help strengthen the relationship and synergy between
the city and society system of Frederiksberg. The aim is to make these systems more resis­
tant and adaptive to the dominant and changing climate system. Neglect of the interrelation
of the city and society systems, leads to an approach resulting in a non­holistic development
of future cities.
Furthermore, the three levels of complexity of the interrelated subsystems of a Sustainable
City enable the development of a tangible final intervention at the artefact system level, that
is able to meet the project goal, by impacting on the complex and engineering system level,
and creating an holistic impact. Given that Frederiksberg Municipality have expressed a
general challenge in engaging citizens in their urban development for climate adaptation, a
project of this scope allows for a collaborative case study, developing and testing a real­life
intervention design.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
32
==PAGE:41==
5
Situation Analysis
The first major step in the Problem­Solving Cycle, aiming at searching for objectives and
determining what the project wants to achieve, consists of two analyses, i.e., the situation
analysis and system analysis (Chapter 6). The situation analysis forms the foundation for the
coming steps of the Problem­Solving Cycle, and investigates the current problem situation,
through in­depth analysis of the apparent problem situation and previous attempts to solve
it. To accomplish this, the first step of the FC model, i.e., archaeology, has been carried out.
This chapter will contribute to answer Research Question 4:
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
33
==PAGE:42==
5.1
Archaeology
An in­depth analysis of the apparent problem situation, the role of the problem owner, as
well as earlier attempts to solve it, was performed based on empirical data, i.e., recorded
semi­structured interview with PMs from TUS, observations during a citizens meeting, and
data materials from previous and on­going climate adaptation projects in TUS, e.g., project
descriptions and procedures, surveys on climate adaptation, and documents on the strate­
gies and future plans, as well as a core storytelling about climate adaptation in Frederiksberg
Municipality, outlining their goals, plans, and strategies of the climate adaptation area.
5.1.1
A Need for Climate Adaptation
During the summer of 2011, the Capital Region of Copenhagen witnessed a cloud burst of
historical dimensions. An amount of 135 millimeters of rainwater caused severe problems for
Frederiksberg Municipality, its infrastructure, and citizens. The municipal sewer system was
incapable of managing the enormous amounts of rainwater, leading to flooded basements
in homes, stores, and even urban areas were under water as the level rose to 0.5 meters.
The extreme weather event prompted efforts to make the city resilient to climate change and
initiated the development of municipal strategies for cloudburst resilience in Frederiksberg
Municipality, such as the Climate Adaptation Plan 2012 (Frederiksberg Kommune 2013) and
The Frederiksberg Strategy 2020, i.e., the municipal development plan (Kommune 2023).
The different strategies outline the main objectives of preventing flooding, ensuring a maxi­
mum of 10 centimeters of water above ground when a 100­year rain incident happen. These
are accompanied by various climate adaptation initiatives, such as the initiative to fully es­
tablish a robust system capable of managing cloud bursts and heavy rains, connected to
the existing wastewater system, by the year of 2036.
5.1.2
Climate Adaptation Projects in Frederiksberg Municipality
Several climate adaptation projects in Frederiksberg Municipality has already been accom­
plished with 1/3 of the planned projects completed. A demand for climate adaptation of
municipal areas arises either from political requests or a need for urban development of a
challenged areas.
Two different kinds of climate adaptation exist in Frederiksberg Municipality:
1. Climate adaptation projects where adaptation is the main objective.
2. Climate adaptation projects where adaptation are added as an additional element to
an existing urban development project.
Nevertheless, all climate adaptation facilities are two­folded, comprising both advanced
technical elements to ensure cloudburst resilience, and recreational components designed
to meet the needs, values, and enrich daily life of local citizens.
In Frederiksberg Municipality, climate adaptation is managed by the department Traffic & Ur­
ban Spaces (TUS). They are responsible for the technical development and construction of
climate adaptation facilities, which also involves engaging local citizens. After constructing
a climate adaptation facility, the Department of Operation of Urban Spaces of Frederiksberg
Municipality, will take over the operation of the urban areas, where the facility has been con­
structed. Nevertheless, climate projects are planned and designed by TUS, and are highly
influenced by other stakeholders during a project process. As an example, a climate adapta­
tion project must be validated by the Urban Environment and Traffic­committee ­ a board of
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
34
==PAGE:43==
local politicians. It is also the committee who ensures the political agendas are met, before
carrying out a project. Experience shows, that only projects consulting local citizens’ needs
are approved by the board. Over time, this has created a culture of citizen engagement as
a standard element in TUS climate adaptation projects.
Climate adaptation at Frederiksberg is funded by Frederiksberg Utility Company ­ as they
manage the municipal sewer system, which most cloud burst facilities are connected to.
However, the company are not the only ones financially linked to the adaptation initiatives.
Frederiksberg citizens are as well a great contributor, as their taxes on water supply con­
tribute to the municipal climate adaptation budgets too.
When planning and carrying out a climate adaptation project, a general structure is followed
among PMs. This structure consists of seven project phases, i.e., 1. financial approval, 2.
disposition, 3. programming, 4. urban design, 5. construction tendering, 6. construction,
and handover. However, when comparing projects, the specific planning and execution
can differ significantly, illustrating highly personalized management styles of the different
PMs. For instance, the choice of citizen engagement practices, timing of project phase,
and in­depth processing of stakeholder involvement inputs. A handbook with a framework
for project planning and execution, considering project phases, practices and requirements,
and stakeholder involvement, is currently being developed in­house, in order to streamline
work routines of future climate projects.
5.1.3
A holistic approach to climate adaptation
Strategies on climate adaption of Frederiksberg Municipality is characterized by holistic prin­
ciples, that originates from a political agenda of developing the city in collaboration with its
citizens.
The strategies for cloudburst resilience emphasize, more specifically, that the development
of climate adaptation must be approached holistically, e.g.,: ”The overall climate adaptation
of Frederiksberg is only truly successful when both citizens and Frederiksberg Municipal­
ity, along with Frederiksberg Utility Company, discover holistic solutions on multiple scales”
(Translated from Danish) (Kommune 2023). Hence, focusing on technical elements of cli­
mate adaptation alone cannot ensure a sustainable development of Frederiksberg when
implementing climate adaptation. It is crucial that climate adaptation creates value for its
local society and citizens as well.
5.1.4
A Challenging Task
Meeting political demands of involving citizens in multiple phases of the process, has be­
come a normal practice for PMs working with climate adaptation projects. Research show,
that several citizen engagement practices and methods are currently or have been utilized
by TUS, to reach the majority of citizens in the most comprehensive ways (Table 5.1).
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
35
==PAGE:44==
Citizen Engagement
Practice
Description
Use Context
Outcomes &
Challenges
Citizen Meeting
Presentation of project
by both PMs,
entrepreneurs,
architects, and
politicians. Open for all
interested stakeholders,
and afterwards question
sessions.
Used in different phases
of a project, both as an
initial idea generation to
understand the values,
and needs of citizens
and other interests, and
as to evaluate a project
proposal later in a
process
An efficient way to
share a great load of
information in a quick
and easy way.
However, this practice
only reach a certain
group of inhabitants on
Frederiksberg, and
requires a lot of
preparation, hence very
resource consuming.
Orientation Letter
Letters sent either by
e­boks.dk or by post
informing nearby
citizens about a new
project, or the status of
an ongoing project
Used in different phases
of a project, and only as
to orientate nearby
citizens
Simply a one­way
communication practice,
hence no indication
about how the
orientation is perceived
On­site Dialogue
Project Managers are
present at the
construction area of a
project in announced
timeslots, to give
citizens the possibility to
express their concerns
and ask questions
through a casual talk
Used if a need for extra
citizen interaction is
needed. Both in initial
project phases and in
construction periods
Project Managers get
the chance to engage
with the ”unknown”
group of citizens, but it
is a time consuming
practice
Online Public Hearings
Public online hearings
at the blivhørt.dk
platform. Citizens can
write comments and
inputs on urban
development project
proposals either
anonymously or not.
Online public hearings
of project proposal are
politically decided.
Used for citizen
evaluation of concrete
design proposals. The
comments and inputs
are used to refine the
final project proposal,
and as indication to
local politicians that
citizens has been
consulted and their
needs considered
The online format
results in a very sceptic
and harsh attitude.
Usually it is only citizens
who have something to
complain about, who
express his or hers
opinion, and often many
repetitions.
On­site Information
Signs
Large temporary signs
with project information;
typically construction
period, project
description and contact
details for Frederiksberg
Municipality
Used during a
construction period, the
signs provides citizens
and other users of the
construction area with
easy accessible
information
Challenging to find the
right balance of
information on the
posters. Either too
much, or too little.
Idea Cards
Small cards handed out
to citizens, where
questions for ideas,
wishes, and concerns
can be expressed
In the initial state of a
project
Often turns out as a
long list of different
wishes, which cannot
be met. Hence, citizens
feel neglected.
Gamification
A barometer game,
where citizens voted on
possible ideas for
initiatives of the specific
project
Used only one time due
to the Covid­19
pandemic bans of public
gatherings.
A very time consuming
practice for the Project
Managers as it required
their physical presence
and facilitation, and was
carried out over multiple
weeks
Table 5.1: Citizen engagement practices used by TUS
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
36
==PAGE:45==
Despite the implementation of multiple citizen engagement practices, no streamlined pro­
cedure or guidance on how and when to engage citizens are actively used. The only official
requirement is based on local politicians’ requests for consulting of local citizens, without
considering the actual execution of the engagement practice itself. This leaves it up to the
individual PM in TUS, whose expertise lies within technical development of climate adapta­
tion, to select and plan the appropriate method and timing for engagement. Moreover, a lack
of allocated resources for citizen engagement, and general in­house expertise complicates
the execution and neglects the quality of citizen engagement in the projects. For instance,
only a narrow group of citizens are often involved, and primarily this group is elderly people
and therefore not fully representing the entire local community. Hence, it is evident, that
PMs are struggling with approaching citizens engagement in innovative ways, and often
adhere to well­known and familiar citizen engagement methods, without reflecting on the
suitability and actual value of the method.
PMs experience multiple challenges and problems related to citizen engagement in their
climate adaptation projects. These are stated by PMs in multiple interviews (Appendix A.1),
and listed below:
• Time consuming preparation
• A heavy follow up interactions with citizens after engagement
• Minor level of added value to the project itself from citizen feedback and inputs
• Extension of projects, due to follow­up management of frustrated and bad behaving
citizens
• Missing reflection between choice of citizen engagement practice and project phase
• Engagement of a broad demographic citizen group (Often only elderly and mostly
angry citizens engage)
• Engagement practices do not counteract citizen scepticism and harsh attitude
• Citizens complains about neglect and too little involvement
These challenges foster an unmotivated attitude among PMs, that promotes the experience
of citizen engagement to often involve frustrated and complaining citizens, unwilling to co­
operate. The engagement of these citizens are perceived by PMs as not adding value to
climate adaptation projects, and thereby seen as a burden. This is further emphasized by
a PM in interview by the following quote:
(The following statement is translated from Danish)
”It [citizen engagement practices] still results in a lack of qualified inputs from citizens, that
can help enhance the quality of the projects, as well as frustrated citizens.”
5.1.5
Attempts To Solve the Challenges
An initiative to enhance citizen engagement in climate adaptation projects has been carried
out by the PMs, by writing a document known as The Core Storytelling. Originally, it was
written as a narrative to convey Frederiksberg Municipality’s need for climate adaptation,
when persuading local politicians to prioritize climate considerations in coming budgets and
political agendas. However, as an attempt to address the challenges with frustrated and
reluctant citizens, and to reach a more diverse group of citizens, The Core Storytelling is
now utilized as an introduction to inform citizens about why climate adaptation is on the
municipal agenda. It is often part of the initial project phases, presented at public orientation
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
37
==PAGE:46==
citizen meetings regarding upcoming urban climate adaptation projects in their local area.
The objective is to enlighten citizens and minimize future frustrations and reluctance, that
PMs potentially must to deal with. While the true value of this initiative remains unclear, it
has streamlined the initial information to citizens from Frederiksberg Municipality when new
projects are initiated.
Another attempt by TUS has been to construct technical cloud burst projects without engag­
ing local citizens. Due to skepticism about the potential value­creation of engaging citizens,
some PMs have opted not to engage citizens in order to prevent extension of project peri­
ods, caused by the management of frustrated citizens. This attempt, however, resulted in
significant resistance and disturbance from dissatisfied and furious citizens. It resulted in
an undesired need of considerable resources of the responsible PMs, in order to deal with
the urgent turmoil.
Despite the attempts to address the challenges, PMs find themselves adhering to unchanged
procedures, methods and practices, even though it still do not uncover the full potential for
creating added value to the projects. The choice of engagement practices depends on indi­
vidual experiences and factors such as available time and resources, and fosters a tendency
of considering it as pure political formality among some PMs. Consequently, the PMs con­
tinue to experience the same challenges and frustrations from citizens about the climate
adaptation initiatives changing the urban environment.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
38
==PAGE:47==
6
System Analysis
This chapter presents the system analysis of the project, which is the second analysis in the
first step of the Problem­Solving Cycle searching for project objectives. It evolves from the
situation analysis (Chapter 5) data and insights of the apparent problem, which are further
explored in depth through analysis of intertwined paradoxes of the problem origin, mapping
of affecting stakeholders, and a study of different stakeholder drivers for a Sustainable City
formulated as values, needs and motivations. The system analysis investigates the system
around the problem origin of the project case through multiple steps of the FC model (Section
2.2). It provides fundamental insight and a comprehension of the context that the future
design intervention must operate in, and what must be considered in relation to the project
case meeting the project goal of supporting the development of the Sustainable City and
balancing its subsystems synergies (Section 3.1.1).
This chapter will contribute to answer Research Question 4:
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
39
==PAGE:48==
6.1
Paradoxes
The apparent problem, defined in the situation analysis (Chapter 5), is that citizen engage­
ment carried out by TUS faces challenges with creating added value to climate adaptation
projects in Frederiksberg. To understand the problem origin and investigate the reasons to
its occurrence, paradoxes of the initial challenge was explored. A high level of complex­
ity to the problem and contradicting intertwined elements limiting TUS in approaching the
apparent problem was revealed through a series of because statements (C. H. Dorst 2015).
Multiple iterations of because statements series was carried out (Appendix C). This led to
the formulation of three core paradoxes, which are defined as:
1. A commission: Citizen involvement is a pro forma act, and therefore does not benefit
citizens and the development of the climate adaptation project in an innovative way
(Figure 6.1).
2. Process and competences: A lack of streamlined processes and in­house compe­
tences limits information flows and neglects the value­creation of citizen engagement
(Figure 6.2).
3. A wide citizen target group: Citizens are not just citizens, who find value in the
same solutions and designs. This often leaves citizens with a feeling of insufficient
involvement, and a distant relationship with Frederiksberg Municipality (Figure 6.3).
The core paradoxes evolved from the archaeological step carried out in the situation analysis
(Chapter 5):
A commission originates from the structure of the surrounding political system, with local
politicians requiring involvement of citizens with the purpose of political promotion rather
than enlightenment of a project with extra knowledge of the local community values and
needs.
Process and competences evolves from the organisational structure of TUS and Fred­
eriksberg Municipality, expecting uneducated PMs to plan and carry out difficult citizen en­
gagement tasks on own initiative. No streamlined procedure or requirements of format is
provided as guiding, which causes a great amount of resources and time allocation of the
PMs available working hours. As a result, an internal attitude of meaninglessness and feel­
ing of citizen engagement being too demanding has commenced within TUS.
A wide citizen target group is based on the data pointing the typical demography of par­
ticipating citizens in previous engagement activities carried out by TUS. PMs experience
challenges with attracting a diverse and representative group of the local community when
inviting for engagement activities. Most often it is elderly and very frustrated citizens partic­
ipating and sharing their thoughts and concerns.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
40
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.1: Because statement series defining Core Paradox 1: A commission
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.2: Because statement series defining Core Paradox 2: Process and compe­
tences
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
42
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.3: Because statements series defining Core Paradox 3: A wide target group
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
43
==PAGE:52==
6.2
Context
To understand the human actors important to the problem situation, an investigation was
carried out to explore stakeholders, who have previously been directly involved in municipal
climate adaptation projects in Frederiksberg and citizen engagement managed by TUS.
6.2.1
Stakeholder Maps
Figure 6.4 illustrates a stakeholder map of the actors involved in the problem situation. It
reveals their mutual interrelations and connections to a TUS climate adaptation project,
meaning either the technical elements of a climate adaptation facility (Climate adaptation
facility in figure 6.4), or the recreational urban space (Urban space in figure 6.4). The key
stakeholders are defined as the PMs from TUS, local citizens, and local retailers, who are
inevitable for the future intervention, why their needs and interests must be considered.
Figure 6.4: Stakeholder map
The stakeholder map evolves from the perspective of TUS PMs, in order to study their po­
sition and power in relation to the other actors involved in climate adaptation projects in
Frederiksberg Municipality. It reveals that the municipal political board of the Urban Envi­
ronment and Traffic­committee holds the financial power of approving budgets for a urban
climate development project, which then are inflicted by strategies and political agendas of
local politicians. Additionally, finance flows from Frederiksberg Utility Company and local
citizen tax payments are mapped out. The design of the climate adaptation facility with
all its technicalities are designed in close collaboration with Frederiksberg Utility Company,
who shares the responsibility of operation with The Department of Urban Operation of Fred­
eriksberg Municipality. This means that the ones operating the facilities on a daily basis,
are not the ones planning, designing and building it, as that is done by TUS PMs. Another
interesting insight, is the position of local citizens and retailers, i.e, the second key stake­
holder of this project, that only links to the Urban Areas of a climate adaptation project. This
indicate that the local community mainly interacts with the urban spaces and not with the
technical climate adaptation facilities, which is reflected in their interests, climate awareness
and perception of urban climate adaptation needs in Frederiksberg.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
44
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.5 illustrates a second stakeholder map of the stakeholders relation to citizen en­
gagement practices carried out by PMs in previous and current TUS climate adaptation
projects (Table 5.1). It shows the capabilities of the citizen engagement practices, i.e., con­
tent and direction of information flows, and what engagement practices link different stake­
holders together.
Figure 6.5: Map of stakeholder relation to citizen engagement practices
The map (Figure 6.5) reveals a majority of informative engagement activities connecting
PMs and the local community, i.e., citizens living at Frederiksberg, local citizens living in
the climate adapted area, and local retailers. This indicates a predominant use by TUS of
one­way communicative citizen engagement practices, e.g., on­site information signs, ori­
entation/information signs, idea cards, and the online public hearing portal BlivHørt (https:
//blivhoert.frederiksberg.dk). Nevertheless, dialogue with local actors of society are done by
TUS through two­way communicative engagement practices, i.e., on­site meetings and citi­
zen meetings. The representation of only two dialogue­creating involvement practices illus­
trates a narrow selection, which is analysed as a lack of reflective method choice in relation
to project context, citizen demography, and a familiarity to the PMs. The broader selection
of informative engagement practices is interpreted to reflect the PM attitude, prioritisation
of citizen involvement, and available resources of time, skill etc. Furthermore, the map il­
lustrates local politicians are only engaged with citizens through citizen meetings, which
represents the politicians’ perspective of citizen involvement, that also suffer from choice
of convenience and familiarity. Citizen meetings are the preferred choice of engagement
to politicians, as it also invites to a in­person appearance and political promotion, bringing
them closer to the local community.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
45
==PAGE:54==
6.2.2
Actors of TUS Climate Adaptation Project Phases
The context of stakeholders engaged in the general structure of project phases in TUS
climate adaptation projects was mapped out (Appendix D). This created the understanding
of stakeholders relation to TUS and their position of impact. Most importantly it gave an
overview of when local citizens most often are involved.
The following stakeholders are involved in the general phases of a climate adaptation project
in TUS:
1. Financial approval phase: PMs, and Urban Environment and Traffic­Committee
2. Disposition phase: PMs, Urban Environment and Traffic­Committee, Frederiksberg
Utility Company, and local citizens
3. Programming phase: PMs, Frederiksberg Utility Company, local citizens, and De­
partment of Operation of Urban Spaces in Frederiksberg Municipality
4. Urban Design phase: PMs, architects, local politicians, and local citizens
5. Construction Tendering phase: PMs, and entrepreneurs
6. Construction phase: PMs, lawyers of Frederiksberg Municipality, and local citizens
7. Handover phase: PMs, Frederiksberg Utility Company, and Department of Operation
of Urban Spaces in Frederiksberg Municipality
6.3
Field
To explore the surrounding system of the apparent problem, the perspective of the stake­
holder map (Figure 6.4) was investigated in a broader range to define all potential actors
connected to the challenge with citizen engagement in TUS. Stakeholders are divided into
an inner circle of key stakeholders, with current or earlier interaction in TUS climate adap­
tation projects, and an outer circle of stakeholders, with potential relation to urban climate
development managed by Frederiksberg Municipality.
Figure 6.6: Map of inner circle and outer circle stakeholders
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
46
==PAGE:55==
The inner circle includes TUS PMs with the role of leading and planning, the local society
of citizens, retailers and visitors engaging and operating in the urban area effected by the
adaptation, and the Urban Environment and Traffic­Committee approving finances of bud­
gets. All possess direct impact to the execution of TUS climate adaptation projects. The
outer circle involves stakeholders of the climate adaptation facility construction work, i.e.,
climate adaptation consultants, entrepreneurs, architects, and stakeholders who manages
the facility in operation, i.e., project mangers from the Department of Operation of Urban
Spaces, Frederiksberg Utility Company, and Frederiksberg Gardening and Road Service,
and stakeholders of authorities, i.e., the mayor of Frederiksberg, and The Danish Parlia­
ment making local and national laws and regulations. All with the potential of influencing the
development of a climate adaptation facility.
6.3.1
System Demarcation Map
Scoping of project system boundaries was done by creating a system demarcation map
(Figure 6.7). It narrowed the focus and helped determining the area of solution space, and
understand the impact on the greater system, when developing the future intervention for
optimizing citizen engagement in TUS. The map shows stakeholders and non­human actors
that might be affected by a potential change of a future intervention, related to the surround­
ing environment it operates in. The system demarcation map evolved during the project
through multiple iterations, as more insights and a deeper understanding of the challenge
of citizen engagement in TUS and the possible areas of impact was gained.
Figure 6.7: System Demarcation Map
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
47
==PAGE:56==
The intervention system is the area where potential changes are made. It includes the
area of solution that corresponds to the future intervention and its’ operation.
Area of solution indicates by the content, that the development of alternative solutions and
final intervention prioritises the perspectives of PMs in TUS and the local community, i.e., the
key stakeholders of citizens and retailers, and aims at improving the organisational structure
and application of citizen engagement practices in TUS.
The intervention system shows that visitors of Frederiksberg, The Urban Environment and
Traffic­Committee, the climate adaptation facility, and urban areas for adaptation are actors
of possible impact for change when developing the final intervention, and therefore must be
considered.
Area of effect illustrates that PMs from the Department of Operation of Urban Spaces, the
Core Storytelling of Frederiksberg, The Frederiksberg Strategy and the project handbook
must be considered as exposed to possible effect by the final intervention.
The environment reflects the surrounding system of actors relevant to citizen engagement
and climate adaptation projects in TUS, i.e., entrepreneurs, Frederiksberg Utility Company,
climate adaptation consultancies, architects and academia. Therefore their position and
interests are important to take into consideration when developing a final intervention. E.g.,
the position of architects, as they attend certain citizen engagement events when designing
a new facility.
All together, the before mentioned areas corresponds to the area of investigation, which
makes up the entire system and network of actors, that this project considers. Climate
adaptation legislation in Denmark and EU is part of the surrounding system as it have
external and undeniable impacts on climate adaptation in Frederiksberg Municipality. Its
existence are considered but black­boxed in this project, as it is out the projects ability to
influence.
6.3.2
Citizen Workshop
In November 2023, a PD workshop with nine local citizens at Frederiksberg Town hall was
arranged. All participants had previously been engaged in a climate adaptation project by
Frederiksberg Municipality. The purpose was to extend the first­hand data collection from
the other key stakeholder of this project, i.e., the local community. An additional objective
was to understand citizens’ perception of climate adaptation projects and their experiences
of interacting with Frederiksberg Municipality.
The objectives for the workshop was to:
1. Understand the current situation: In what way have the citizens earlier been in­
volved, what are their expectations of involvement, and what are their perception of
climate adaptation projects in general?
2. Enlighten the citizens of the complexity level of climate adaptation: Communi­
cate technical requirements of climate adaptation in relation to effect of the city and its
inhabitants.
3. Evaluate the collaboration between Frederiksberg Municipality and local citi­
zens: Does it make a difference to educate the citizen with more technical background
knowledge? How would the citizens like to be involved, what are their role, and what
is needed for a close collaboration with Frederiksberg Municipality?
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
48
==PAGE:57==
The workshop consisted of three exercises. Each of these contributed with data and find­
ings, that in combination fulfilled the intended workshop purpose. All workshop material
were designed specifically to this project (Appendix E), and consisted of:
Intro exercise: Question cards used to collect data on citizen experiences and evaluation
of their own engagement in climate adaptation projects.
City map game: Mapping of potential impacts of climate change in a fictive city, aiming at
revealing the participants’ knowledge on climate change, and their climate perception. The
mapping was done through group dialogue initiated by the question cards.
Scenario game: Based on a case description, the participants were asked to act as PMs
planning a climate adaptation project in a fictive city. The purpose was to show the com­
plexity and position of power of Frederiksberg Municipality. Throughout the game, they got
presented for five scenarios of climate adaptation initiatives, leading to conflicting citizen
groups, which they should managed through citizen engagement practices ensuring most
satisfied citizens.
Intro exercise
Citizens discussing climate changes in the city
map game
Workshop findings
(All quotes of this section are translated from Danish to English)
A strong support towards climate adaptation of Frederiksberg, and a great desire to
be involved
Throughout the city map game, several citizens expressed a willingness to participate in
municipal climate adaptation project but requested more presence of and better guidance
from Frederiksberg Municipality. One participant claimed: ”The municipality is not very good
at providing information. I have to search for a lot of information myself, and that is not ac­
ceptable.”, which indicate poor communication, that fosters frustration and drain the engage­
ment motivation of citizens. Actually, the web­page of Frederiksberg Municipality contains a
great amount of climate adaptation materials, e.g., videos explaining about cloud bursts, and
documents outlining municipal urban climate adaptation strategies. However, the content
is either inadequate in relation to the needs of the citizens, or the dissemination of content
insufficient.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
49
==PAGE:58==
Another interesting observation is the citizens’ awareness and expectation of shared re­
sponsibility for urban climate adaptation between Frederiksberg Municipality and the local
community. A workshop participant expressed: ”We have a responsibility as citizens, but
Frederiksberg Municipality do not provide any guidance on what we can do ourselves.”
Citizens have a desire to contribute to the climate adaptation of the city, which can be
considered as a beneficial resource, but currently is not utilised by Frederiksberg Munic­
ipality. Furthermore, a workshop participant stated: ”Citizens hold multiple competences
and knowledge, and that should be acknowledged when we are engaged.” This indicates
an unrevealed potential of citizens, that could contribute significantly to the urban climate
adaptation in Frederiksberg.
The city map game board with citizen inputs on
question cards
Introduction of the scenario game
Citizens discussing adaptation initia­
tives playing the scenario game
The scenario game managed to illustrate the com­
plexity of accommodating interests and needs of dif­
ferent societal groups to the workshop participants.
It presented different scenarios of implementation of
climate adaptation initiatives, aiming to accommo­
date different citizen groups of a society, in a fic­
tive public square.
Throughout the game, several
requests of neglecting the needs of certain citizen
groups were observed. A workshop participant said:
”Lets do a citizen meeting. We do not have to listen
to what the sport idiots says!”.
Nevertheless, while the workshop participants ac­
knowledged the challenging task of dealing with
contradicting citizen needs, sympathy with Fred­
eriksberg Municipality was expressed, formulated by
workshop participant as: ”I feel sorry for the munici­
pality. It is a difficult task to find the citizens one need
to speak with. Also the ones without a voice.”. Still,
self­interest and the prioritisation of individual needs
were surprisingly present in the game discussions.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
50
==PAGE:59==
The ocean of citizen values, interests and needs are infinite
Throughout the different workshop exercises, several discussions revealed a significant di­
version of needs among the participants. Some advocated for the prioritisation of parking
lots, while others wished for more trees in urban areas. One participant shared a story
about local retailers struggling to maintain their revenue, due to limited access to their store
caused by construction work periods. Another participant described the construction of a
new playground in his local area, which are now highly enjoyed by local families, but from
his point of view neglecting the old vision and history of the urban area. A workshop partic­
ipant claimed: ”The municipality do not consult us about good ideas. That is a fundamental
defect.” Citizens posses a drive to engage, and hold valuable ideas and opinions on urban
development and climate adaptation of the city. The game revealed a general wish to be
involved and to witness possibilities for actual impact.
6.3.3
Values, Needs and Motivations
Along with the mapping of inner and outer circle stakeholders positions of impact in the
system demarcation, an investigation of the stakeholders’ values, needs and motivations
for a Sustainable City was conducted as part of the FC model field step. This was done to
study possible shared drivers between stakeholders, which are important when developing
an intervention that must accommodate multiple actors and relations to citizen engagement
and urban climate adaptation in Frederiksberg.
The stakeholder drivers derive from a broad range of data, i.e., findings from the archaeology
(Section 5.1), TUS PM interviews (Appendix A), an interview with a PM of Urban Planning,
a questionnaire on TUS PMs’ values for a Sustainable City (Appendix B), citizen workshop
findings (Section 6.3.2), observations from a citizen meeting, public hearing responses by
citizens, responses from a satisfaction survey of the public sewage system of Frederiksberg,
desk­research, the Core Storytelling of Frederiksberg, climate adaptation project materials,
and documents about urban development strategies of Frederiksberg Municipality.
Examples from the study shows that citizens living in affected areas of climate adaptation
appreciate feeling heard, green surroundings, and privacy. PMs from TUS cherish holistic
solutions, efficiency, and inclusion. Frederiksberg Utility Company value quality, responsi­
bility, and inspiration of green choices. The Urban Environment & Traffic­Committee regards
highly of climate awareness, societal relation, and political reputation. The complete study
is documented in Appendix F.
6.4
Themes
This project aims to create an intervention that supports the development of future sustain­
able cities at the engineering system level. To understand the drivers for a Sustainable City
analysed during the FC model context step (Section 6.2) and field step (Section 6.3), a sys­
tematic clustering of shared values, needs and motivations of the inner and outer circle of
stakeholders, i.e., the universals, was conducted. However, as the engineering level can­
not be addressed without taking the complex and artefact level into account, the clustering
outcome formed a structured selection of themes shared by multiple stakeholders, which is
desirable to accommodate when creating an intervention supporting the development of a
Sustainable City.
The clustering of themes was performed through two iterations. In the first iteration the
values was grouped into clusters based on similarities. A review of the clusters showed a
need for a second iteration, as the constructed themes encompassed too many different
values, needs and motivations.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
51
==PAGE:60==
The second iteration of clustering turned into more specific similarities of two or more values
(Figure 6.10). Even though, this resulted in an increased number of themes, encompass­
ing less values in one cluster, more similar values, needs and motivations was linked, and
thereby captured more facets of the drivers for a Sustainable City (Appendix G).
Figure 6.10: Examples of clustered themes illustrating shared values, needs and motiva­
tions
The drivers for a Sustainable City was organised into a relatively large number of themes. As
this project takes a systemic approach to supporting the development of a future Sustainable
City by considering all three system levels, it was considered necessary to investigate which
of the clusters related to the paradoxes of the apparent problem. It revealed the themes’
ability to contribute to solving the problem, and led to the selection of nine themes (Figure
6.11).
Figure 6.11: The nine selected themes
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
52
==PAGE:61==
6.5
Root­Cause Analysis
To understand the underlying factors that contribute to the problem situation of citizen en­
gagement carried out by TUS faces challenges with adding value to climate adaptation
projects, an investigation and dissecting of the problem was conducted to reveal the root­
causes. The investigation is based on the situation analysis (Chapter 5) and system anal­
ysis, i.e., the apparent problem stated by the PMs, and the analytical findings derived in
the archaeology step (Section 5.1), paradoxes (Section 6.1), the context step (Section 6.2),
and the field step (Section 6.3). The diagram (Figure 6.12) illustrates the six factors and
their root­causes to the problem situation in Frederiksberg Municipality. The factors exam­
ined in the root­cause analysis are: 1. Political motivation, 2. Misaligned expectations, 3.
Choice of engagement practices, 4. Technical level of project, 5. Citizen motivation, 6. PM
Motivation. The root­causes supports the development of objectives for a final intervention
(Section 6.6).
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.12: Fish bone diagram illustrating root­causes
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
54
==PAGE:63==
6.5.1
Political motivation
One of the key challenges of creating value of citizen engagement in climate adaptation
projects, stems from the political motivation and ­ request for engaging citizens. Though, the
motivation is not driven by a specific wish for citizen engagement adding value to projects in
Frederiksberg. Instead, this motivation is driven by political agendas and personal branding
of politicians. Additionally, studies show a lack of trust in citizens’ abilities to comprehend
and contribute to the projects, which results in neglect of well performed engagement adding
value for the local society.
6.5.2
Misaligned expectations
Another challenge is the misaligned expectations between PMs and citizens when perform­
ing citizen engagement. The analysis of the problem situation (Section 5.1), revealed that
no streamlined procedures, nor structural guidance on how to engage citizens exists within
TUS. As a consequence, PMs often end up misinforming citizens about their role and reason
for being engaged. It leaves citizens unknown of their possibilities to influence in climate
adaptation projects.
6.5.3
Choice of engagement practice
Climate adaptation projects in Frederiksberg Municipality are performed by TUS, whose ex­
pertise lies in the technical development of climate adaptation facilities. However, although
citizen engagement is requested by the Urban Environment & Traffic­Committee, they do
not specify any official requirements for the format and output of engagement practice. Con­
sequently, TUS does not adhere to a standardized or streamlined procedure when engaging
citizens. A lack of expert knowledge and skills makes it challenging to select appropriate en­
gagement practices. As a result, the choice of engagement practice is driven by resources
and personal experiences to a specific methods rather than their suitability to project context.
6.5.4
Technical level of project
A fundamental lack of trust in citizens’ ability to comprehend the technical aspects of climate
adaptation facilities, has resulted in a widespread exclusion of citizens from decision­making
and development of technical elements. This includes decisions of cloud burst technologies
and specific facility locations. This often leaves citizens with frustrations, as they struggle
to comprehend and justify decisions made. At the technical level, another root­cause lies
with the way PMs choose to communicate crucial technical information to citizens. Despite,
excluding citizens from the majority of technical decisions, the communication of technical
aspects at citizen meetings or in information letters, is not presented in an easily under­
standable and inclusive manner, hindering citizens from providing valuable inputs to the
projects.
6.5.5
Citizen motivation
The drivers behind citizens’ motivation is limiting the quality of their engagement in climate
adaptation projects. Although TUS often are met by highly motivated citizens, it became
evident during the citizen workshop 6.3.2 and observation of a citizen meeting, that their
motivation is driven by an individual understanding of climate change. Unfortunately, this un­
derstanding is insufficient, as they lack comprehension of the required resources, urgency,
and long­term benefits of climate adaptation. This deficiency has proved challenging, as
their motivation decreases, when actual engagement in projects are happening.
For instance, TUS experience that citizens’ motivation changes when their own needs and
interests must be set aside in favor of societal benefits a climate adaptation project gener­
ates. However, the explanation for this can be traced back to the previous factor of technical
level of projects, where insufficient and unclear communication limits the value­creation of
citizen engagement.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
55
==PAGE:64==
6.5.6
PM motivation
Another factor that limits the value adding of citizen engagement is a lack of motivation
among PMs to invest and allocate resources for citizens engagement. The root­causes be­
hind this are correlated. Within TUS, there is a prevailing prioritization of technical abilities
over societal functionality, given their expertise in the technical aspects of climate adapta­
tion. Consequently, since citizen engagement is merely a political requirement and not an
prioritized practice in TUS, the allocation of time and resources is constrained.
This limited allocation of time and resources uncovers a lack of thoughtful consideration
in the selection of citizen engagement methods. Typically, favouring the well­known and
familiar methods, which has been demonstrated to limit the potential added value of citizen
engagement. Instead, it results in frustrated citizens and a need for time­consuming follow­
up management, ultimately affecting PMs motivation in negative ways.
6.6
Catalogue of Objectives
To ensure an unbiased development of a final intervention that accomplishes the project
goal and creates value for TUS, a catalogue of objectives, i.e., a SE concept, was formu­
lated. The objectives derived from the literature review (Chapter 3), and findings obtained
from the situation analysis (Chapter 5) and the root­cause analysis (Section 6.5). The ob­
jectives provides a list of weighted objectives to systematically and critically evaluate the
performance of alternative intervention concepts (Section 7.3). This provides a framework
guiding the search for solutions towards achieving the project goal in best possible way.
The list of objectives is categorized according to the three system levels. The objectives of
the engineering system level considers the ability of accommodating the project goal of sup­
porting a development of The Sustainable City and creating synergy between society, city
and climate (Section 3.1.1). Objectives for the complex and artefact system levels relates
to the project case study of citizen engagement in TUS climate adaptation projects, con­
sidering the surrounding system of the organisational structures in TUS and Frederiksberg
Municipality impacting their urban climate adaptation, and the tangible actions and citizen
engagement practices carried out by TUS.
The objectives are prioritised on a scale from 1­3:
1. nice to have (an extra feature)
2. need to have (a need, that should be fulfilled)
3. a must (inevitable and must be fulfilled)
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
56
==PAGE:65==
System
level
Category
Characteristic
Prioritisation
Engineering system level: The Sustainable City
1.1
Ensures a sustainable urban development
enabling adaptation to a changing and ex­
treme climate
Meaning an urban development accommo­
dating all three subsystems i.e., city, soci­
ety, and climate
3
1.2
Fosters an urban development enhancing
synergies between society and city
3
Complex system level: Climate adaptation system
2.1
Ensures involvement of all relevant stake­
holders
3
2.2
Creates a culture in Frederiksberg Munici­
pality that motivates citizen engagement
Meaning a culture where the value of citizen
engagement is inevitable, and the practice
is rewarding for PMs
3
2.3
Increases citizens’ awareness of what cli­
mate adaptation requires
Requirements refers to urban development,
facility technicalities and daily life of citizens
1
2.4
Creates a feeling of a shared responsibility
for climate adaptation in Frederiksberg
Meaning, a shared responsibility between
Frederiksberg Municipality and its citizens
1
2.5
Supports a knowledge­ and experience
sharing culture internally in TUS
2
2.6
Integrates citizen engagement as a funda­
mental part of Frederiksberg Municipality’s
climate adaptation projects
3
2.7
Improves clear communication of respon­
sibilities and contributions between stake­
holders in climate adaptation projects
Clear communication mainly between citi­
zens and Frederiksberg Municipality on cit­
izens’ roles, responsibilities and level of in­
fluence.
2
Artefact system level: Climate adaptation practices
3.1
Supports urban climate resilience holisti­
cally on Frederiksberg
This is based on Frederiksberg Municipal­
ity’s values and visions in the Core Story­
telling
3
3.2
Fosters an innovative approach to citizen
engagement
”Holistically has to be elaborated” (quote
from the Core Storytelling)
2
3.3
Helps to attract suitable groups of citizens
for engagement
The intervention must support them in at­
tracting specific target groups of citizens, in
different ways and suitable for the project
context
2
3.4
Makes it feasible to engage citizens in cli­
mate adaptation projects
2
3.5
Encourages PMs to reflect on their choice
of specific citizen engagement practice
3
3.6
Creates an equal and transparent commu­
nication and dialogue between Frederiks­
berg Municipality and citizens
This
will
help
improve
communication,
which is currently affected by tenseness
and negativity
1
Table 6.1: Catalogue of objectives
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
57
==PAGE:66==
6.7
Answer to Research Question 4
The answer is based on the situation analysis (Chapter 5) and the system analysis (Chapter
6).
The exploration of opportunities within TUS, refers to possibilities to create a final interven­
tion supporting a future sustainable city of Frederiksberg.
The situation analysis (Chapter 5) shows that the expertise of TUS lies within developing
technical climate adaptation facilities and developing a city resistant to a changing climate,
resulting in neglect of society needs. This means that the society system are mostly chal­
lenged. TUS are aware of their challenges with involving the local community, and have
done previous attempts to solve them without significant result.
The system analysis (Chapter 6) reveals conflicting elements hindering Frederiksberg Mu­
nicipality from developing a future Sustainable City (Section 3.1.1). More specifically, TUS is
in a situation, where citizen engagement appears to be a pro forma act from local politicians,
yet TUS do only possess little professional expertise on citizen engagement, which results
in insufficient engagement of the citizens. A general negative attitude and lack of motiva­
tion, poor communication and mutual understanding limit the potential for creating a society
system in synergy, which is required to accomplish the development of a Sustainable City.
The opportunities within the development of a society system in balance for TUS is many,
and lies with the PMs competences and approach towards citizen engagement. Creating
a culture in Frederiksberg Municipality that motivates for citizen engagement, where knowl­
edge and experiences are shared between PMs, will encourage them to reflect on their
choice of citizen engagement practices. Likewise, an equal and transparent dialogue of
responsibilities and contributions in climate adaptation projects with citizens, will as well
make opportunities. A general focus on strengthening PMs competences with citizen en­
gagement, and fostering of a more innovative approach towards citizens in Frederiksberg
Municipality, is of high relevance as well. If an intervention design for Frederiksberg Munic­
ipality and TUS, ensures to fulfill these aspects, then they will boost the society system and
become one step closer in developing of a future Sustainable City.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
58
==PAGE:67==
7
Development of Alternative Interventions
This chapter describes the development of alternative interventions, which was carried out
as a creation of new frames to challenge the current problem situation. Based on the out­
comes and findings derived in the situation analysis (Chapter 6) and system analysis (Chap­
ter 5), this step describes the creation of frames, developed from reasoning patterns of
design abduction, aiming at approaching the problem situation in Frederiksberg Municipal­
ity in new, innovative and creative ways different from what conventional problem­solving
practices would do. It results in a presentation of three frames, i.e., alternative interven­
tion concepts, a PD workshop reshaping the frames in a process of co­evolution with TUS
PMs, and a critical evaluation done by weighted matrices on the performance of each frame
concept in regard to the catalogue of objectives 6.6.
This chapter will contribute to answer Research Question 5:
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
59
==PAGE:68==
7.1
Frames
Based on the emerging themes (Figure 6.11), this step entailed the creation of new frames
promoting new, radical and innovative ways of seeing the problem. Three frames was cre­
ated, and was initiated by formulating this sentence (C. H. Dorst 2015):
The problem relates to one of the core paradoxes (Section 6.1), and the solution are a new
frame idea. The new frame ideas evolved from a rapid brainstorm on alternative ways to
engage citizens, with respect to the nine themes related to the core paradox of the problem.
Prior to the rapid brainstorm, a study of innovative ways to involve and collaborate with local
societies in other contexts was conducted to kick­start the creative mindset of the design
team.
Then, the definition of problem and solution, led to the 4­step method of Figure 7.1:
Figure 7.1: The four step method (K. Dorst et al. 2016)
Step 1 Definition of values, i.e., a selection of themes related to the core paradox. (These
were already defined when the frame idea was selected in the initial sentence.)
Step 2 The frame idea from the rapid brainstorm. (Already defined in the initial sentence.)
Step 3 Definition of how, i.e., the working principles constituting to an inspirational concept
observed in another context.
Step 4 Definition of what, i.e., the elements that is needed for the frame to adopt the working
principle. This is crucial for creating an intervention to the TUS context.
The four steps leads to the outcome, and by that fulfills the second formulation of the frame
idea concept, which was the groundwork for the development of the frame description. This
framework was carried out for all three core paradoxes, leading to the creation of the three
frame concepts.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
60
==PAGE:69==
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
61
==PAGE:70==
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
62
==PAGE:71==
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
63
==PAGE:72==
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
64
==PAGE:73==
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
65
==PAGE:74==
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
66
==PAGE:75==
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
67
==PAGE:76==
7.2
Futures
7.2.1
PD Workshop testing frame concepts
In the previous step, the three frame were applied to the problem situation. To assure the
frames could lead to realistic and fruitful interventions, they were reshaped in a process of
co­evolution in a PD workshop with 16 PMs from TUS. The objectives for the workshop were
to:
1. Understand the TUS context Investigate the necessary changes required for the
intervention concepts, to meet the context of TUS. What elements should be added,
kept and further developed?
2. Evaluate the three alternative intervention concepts with PMs How do the three
alternative intervention concepts, i.e. the frames, perform? Which one seems most
valuable for the PMs as well as the inner circle of stakeholders and area of solution?
The workshop consisted of two parts, and three continuous exercises, that was facilitated
to multiple groups of four PMs. The first part consisted of a critical reflection of frame pit­
falls, which was followed by an idea generation session. The second part consisted of an
evaluation of the three frame concepts. All workshop material were designed specifically to
this project (Appendix H). The workshop exercises carried out were:
”How Might We” idea generation cards PMs’ reflections on potential pitfalls, aspects, and
elements that appeared either unrealistic or necessary to ensure the frame can meet the
TUS context in a valuable way.
”Walking brainstorm” The PMs select one of their ”How might We” reflections and note it
on a blank paper sheet. It is then used in a two­minute brainstorm on new elements that
could accommodate any potential pitfalls. The paper sheet is then passed on to another PM,
who continues the brainstorming for two minutes. The process is repeated until everyone
has contributed to all paper sheets.
Spider web diagram An assessment of how well each of the three frame concepts meet
five criteria on a scale from 1­3, based on the derived themes (Section 6.4). 1 is insufficient
performance of the criteria, and 3 is a complete performance of the criteria.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
68
==PAGE:77==
Workshop findings
The first part of the workshop revealed pitfalls and aspects necessary to consider for each
frame:
(All quotes of this section are translated from Danish to English)
A concern about how to attract citizens to The Lab
The ”How might We” idea generation cards and walking brainstorms revealed a general
concern among PMs on how to make The Lab attractive for citizens. E.g., one of the idea
generation cards questioned: ”How Might We make people attend and participate?”. To ac­
commodate the concern, PMs brainstorm ideas suggested different things, e.g., structural
modifications, such as to make the laboratory politically anchored, a collaborative initiative
with local educational institutions, and making it a neutral place, not only used for events
and projects facilitated by TUS. Additionally, more practical and logistical modifications were
proposed, such as long opening hours, free water and coffee, and central location sugges­
tions.
Figure 7.2: Example of ideas for a ”How Might We”­question for The Lab
Another finding from the exercise was a concern regarding the quality and quantity of com­
petences and resources needed to transform citizen engagement in climate adaptation into
a laboratory of experiments, knowledge­sharing, and information, facilitated by TUS PMs.
Some of these concerns was expressed as: ”How Might We staff the Lab?
(time and
employees)” and ”How Might We make sure that it do not end as complicated one­way­
communication?”.
A question of responsibility and administration of The Physical Map
Reflections on responsibility, maintenance, and administration were noted on several ”How
Might We” idea generation cards. The reflections addressed implementation of The Physical
Map, an example was: ”How Might We kick off The Map, so we don’t start out with an empty
wall?”. The need for extensive administration of the map was expressed, to ensure it would
foster knowledge­sharing and adding value. A PMs wrote: ”How Might We ensure that the
map is continuously updated? And thereby keeps its news value?”. Suggestions on how
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
69
==PAGE:78==
to ensure that The Physical Map would be used, included considerations of location and
visual design. One PM proposed: ”There must be name on the inputs/feedback card/note”.
Another PM idea, was to arrange a launch event. As part of this idea, it was suggested
to: ”Ask all departments to fill out cards and do a release event with inspiration talks on
how to use it, and approval from our boss to spent resources on it”. This was to ensure a
successful implementation in TUS. A concern among the PMs was as well the anchoring of
The Physical Map, and what elements of the intervention that would help create value and
knowledge­sharing. One PMs suggested: ”Could you have a poster­session as part of a
department meeting?”, which was by supported by ideas of a monthly meet up at the map,
where new ideas and experiences should be presented and challenged by questions. A PM
suggested: ”Talk about it on ”theme” meetings in the department. Meeting at the map for
10 min. and present methods, experiences and ideas.”
Output from the first part of the PD
workshop
PMs working on the ”How Might We” idea generation
cards
The role of ambassador
The concerns among PMs regarding the Local Ambassadors concept, primarily revolved
around different aspects of the organisational setup. The representativeness of a local am­
bassador was considered, e.g., ”How might we ensure that a person can represent a wide
group of citizen?” and ”How Might We ensure anchoring in society, so that citizens don’t
see it as just another link between the municipality and citizens?”.
Different ideas on how to address these potential pitfalls were generated, along with various
ways to reshape the concept. Some of the suggested ideas were as follows:
• ”Use existing structures; e.g., a chairman from the owner’s association or cooperative
association.”
• ”Research on local citizens and thereby a standard procedure for how to choose a
citizen representative.”
• ”Make local ambassadors selected by local citizens (democratically).”
• ”Ensure that the ambassador feels like a part of the municipality, without being an
employee.”
• ”A different profession than the employees in Frederiksberg Municipality ­ or be able
to detach from us.”
• ”Shouldn’t be financed directly by the municipality.”
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
70
==PAGE:79==
However, one of the PMs questioned if a local ambassador as a person even was the good
solution.
Another concerning aspect, was the potential absence of an element securing the exper­
tise and competences of a local ambassador. The PMs questioned how to ensure valuable
knowledge­sharing, e.g., ”How Might We ensure that knowledge is handed over from am­
bassador to PM, in a way that ensures it is used in projects?”. The ideas to accommodate
these concerns was to implement structured procedures for projects, e.g., a checklist for
the ambassadors to make data streamlined and comparable, as well as to use visual doc­
umentation tools such as videos.
However, the two repeated exercises revealed a common trend of PMs merging the con­
cepts, by incorporating elements from one intervention concept into another in discussions.
For instance, a PM suggested that a close relationship between local ambassadors and
citizens could be facilitated by ”open coffee meetings in the LAB, where ambassadors are
present to answer questions some mornings afternoons and evening.”
Spiderweb evaluation
Figure 7.4: Example of filled out Spiderweb diagram for The Lab
The Spiderweb evaluation of the three frame concepts, assessed how well the they per­
formed the five criteria on the scale from 1­3 based on the derived themes, i.e., Collabora­
tion, Innovative, Information, Create awareness, and Inclusive. In groups of four the PMs
evaluated and assessed the two frame concepts, they had brainstormed on. A total score
of each concept was found by an average of each group scores. The total scores was as
follows:
The Lab
The Physical Map
Local Ambassadors
Collaboration
2
2
2.5
Innovative
2.25
0.66
2
Informative
2.25
3
2.25
Visibility
2.33
2.8
2.25
Including
1.9
2
2.75
TOTAL
9.92
10.46
11.75
Table 7.1: Spider web evaluation scores
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
71
==PAGE:80==
The high scores of table 7.1 indicate a general positive attitude towards all the frame ideas
and intervention concepts. It indicates the Local Ambassadors concept met the five crite­
ria best. Though, based on the findings and observations from the PD workshop, results
of the scoreboard might have turned out this way, as the Local Ambassadors represent a
quite similar role as the PMs current position. The Lab, however, turned out as the most
radical and resource demanding frame, which explains the lowest score. The spider web
evaluations were analysed to be of biased and subjective character to the PMs.
7.3
Transformation
A critical evaluation of the frames, i.e., the three alternative intervention concepts (Section
7.1), related to the catalogue of objectives (Table 6.1), was carried out to investigate the fea­
sibility to the TUS context and performance towards the system level requirements (Section
6.6). The evaluation is a review on the most promising elements of frame concepts, and
their abilities to meet the requirements, along with the extent of needed changes to the TUS
organisation, other stakeholders, and system relations for implementing it in to real­life. The
frames are evaluated on complex and artefact system level objectives, as the intervention
concepts operate on these levels related to the project case of citizen engagement in TUS
climate adaptation projects. Nevertheless, the engineering system level objectives are of in­
evitable character and must be met. But as they operate on a higher systemic agenda, and
do not have direct impact on the context feasibility of the TUS case, they are not considered
important when selecting a frame for the final intervention development.
7.3.1
Evaluation of frames
The following tables shows the evaluation of the three frames and their fulfillment of the
complex level and artefact level objectives, carried out as weighted objective matrices. The
frame performance of meeting the requirements, is evaluated on a scale from 1­5, where 5
is complete satisfactory fulfillment and 1 is not meet at all. The evaluation is carried out by
the design team only.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
72
==PAGE:81==
Frame 1: The Lab
Objective
Prioritisation
Score
Weighted
score
Reasoning
2.1 Ensures involvement of all
relevant stakeholders
3
3
9
Creates a physical space for a diverse group of citizens,
but it doesn’t ensure the involvement in itself
2.2 Creates a culture in Fred­
eriksberg Municipality that moti­
vates citizen engagement
3
4
12
As the Lab in it self enables a lot of different activities and
opportunities to invite citizens to engage, it also enable
the possibilities for Frederiksberg Municipality to engage
with citizens in fun, creative and inclusive ways, which
increases the general motivation for citizen engagement
2.3 Increases citizens’ aware­
ness of what climate adaptation
requires
1
4
4
The Lab has educational and informative elements, e.g.,
talks, information boards, requirements and process up­
dates about ongoing climate adaptation projects
2.4 Creates a feeling of a shared
responsibility for climate adapta­
tion in Frederiksberg
1
4
4
The welcoming atmosphere and inviting educational and
informative elements, e.g. talks, workshops and infor­
mation boards highlight local projects, and ensure trans­
parency as moves it from behind the scenes of the munic­
ipality and makes citizen engagement and climate adap­
tation projects an entrenched part of the city, and fosters
a local responsibility feeling
2.5 Supports a knowledge and
experience sharing culture inter­
nally in TUS
2
1
2
The Lab doesn’t lead to knowledge and experience shar­
ing between employees
2.6 Integrates citizen engage­
ment as a fundamental part of
Frederiksberg Municipality’s cli­
mate adaptation projects
3
2
6
The Lab it self doesn’t set the organisational structure and
”rules” about how citizen engagement should be carried
out. The Lab is a frame for doing citizen engagement,
but Frederiksberg Municipality must lay down rules and
organisational structures for how citizen engagement in
the Lab must be an entrenched part of the projects
2.7 Improves clear communica­
tion of responsibilities and con­
tributions between stakeholders
in climate adaptation projects
2
3
6
Some elements and activities in The Lab helps highlight­
ing involved stakeholders and their roles, e.g., an idea
generation workshop will invite citizens to contribute and
share knowledge, whereas a talk made by an expert
within the field will invite citizens to just listen and observe
­ and not contribute directly. It is a question of commu­
nication and how the events and activities is promoted.
Furthermore, PMs should be available in The Lab too,
to be able to clarify the responsibilities to different stake­
holders of the projects.
3.1 Supports urban climate re­
silience holistically on Frederiks­
berg
3
4
12
With its different elements and activities, The Lab is a
neutral and attractive place for different stakeholders to
meet, innovate, and share knowledge and experiences
3.2 Fosters an innovative ap­
proach to citizen engagement
2
5
10
The Lab is a new, collaborative and innovative way of
doing citizen engagement in Frederiksberg Municipality,
that is very different from the current way. The Lab fosters
a frame evolved from the perspective of meeting citizens
equally. The citizens are in focus, and the lab generates
a huge knowledge about the locals, which can be used in
climate adaptation projects.
3.3
Helps
to
attract
suitable
groups of citizens for engage­
ment
2
2
4
The Lab is originally more focused on attracting a wide
group of citizens, than a specific group.
Though, The
Lab makes it possible for the projects managers to ar­
range target specific events to attract certain groups of
citizen. It is i.e. possible to host kids activity workshops
during the day, to attract a specific group who use a spe­
cific playground in the city.
3.4 Makes it feasible to en­
gage citizens in climate adapta­
tion projects
2
4
8
The Lab creates the physical frame for citizen engage­
ment and thereby makes it easier to invite citizens to en­
gage in the projects
3.5 Encourages PMs to reflect
on their choice of specific citizen
engagement practice
3
1
3
The Lab is creating a frame for engaging the local citi­
zens in climate adaptation in innovative and interesting
ways. With the different areas, i.e., a workshop zone or
lecture hall, it provides great opportunities for the project
managers to use a wide range of engagement practices.
Though, it does not in any way ensure that reflections of
choice of practice is done by the project managers, which
can lead to invaluable outcomes of engagements.
3.6 Creates an equal and trans­
parent communication and di­
alogue between Frederiksberg
Municipality and citizens
1
4
4
A neutral and casual atmosphere is the foundation for
The Lab. A place where citizens can meet each other,
as well as meet employees from the municipality, leading
to exchange of knowledge, ideas, inputs, questions etc.
Total weighted score
84
Table 7.2: Weighted matrix of Frame 1: The Lab
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
73
==PAGE:82==
Frame 2: The Physical Map
Objective
Prioritisation
Score
Weighted
score
Reasoning
2.1 Ensures involvement of all
relevant stakeholders
3
2
6
The reviews contain evaluations on target group and the
success of use, but this doesn’t ensure that the project
managers involve all relevant stakeholders
2.2 Creates a culture in Fred­
eriksberg Municipality that moti­
vates citizen engagement
3
4
12
The physical and visual map located in the hall way, has
predefined questions, reviews and level of value addition
to be filled out by the project managers. Hence, the wall
makes the engagement practices structured, easy to ac­
cess, and thereby motivates the PMs to try out and reflect
on citizen engagement
2.3 Increases citizens’ aware­
ness of what climate adaptation
requires
1
1
1
This is not the case with The Map. Instead it is up for the
project managers during an engagement event
2.4 Creates a feeling of a shared
responsibility for climate adapta­
tion in Frederiksberg
1
1
1
This is not the case with The Map. Instead it is up for the
project managers during an engagement event.
2.5 Supports a knowledge and
experience sharing culture inter­
nally in TUS
2
4
8
The Map’s primary purpose is to work as a tool for sharing
knowledge and experiences between the PMs
2.6 Integrates citizen engage­
ment as a fundamental part of
Frederiksberg Municipality’s cli­
mate adaptation projects
3
4
12
As the Map is physical and very visible it makes citizen
engagement inevitable
2.7 Improves clear communica­
tion of responsibilities and con­
tributions between stakeholders
in climate adaptation projects
2
2
4
The Map doesn’t do it in itself, but it can possibly provide
citizen engagement practices that enables clear commu­
nication
3.1 Supports urban climate re­
silience holistically on Frederiks­
berg
3
3
9
The Map will make project managers more reflected on
their citizen engagement practices, which should lead to
a closer collaboration with citizens, and thereby higher
quality outputs which support the hostical approach to ur­
ban climate resilience on Frederiksberg
3.2 Fosters an innovative ap­
proach to citizen engagement
2
3
6
The Map provides the PMs with a new way of accessing
engagement practices. The physical element enables for
seeking inspiration and new ways of engaging citizens,
thereby fostering an innovative approach
3.3
Helps
to
attract
suitable
groups of citizens for engage­
ment
2
3
6
The review contains an evaluation of the citizen group
who was engaged in a specific project, and whether it
succeeded in attracting this group
3.4 Makes it feasible to en­
gage citizens in climate adapta­
tion projects
2
3
6
The Map provides knowledge and inspiration on differ­
ent practices and ways of doing citizen engagement.
Though, it does not support the actual engagement ac­
tivity on site
3.5 Encourages PMs to reflect
on their choice of specific citizen
engagement practice
3
5
15
The purpose with The Map and the Review cards is to
make project managers to seek inspiration and experi­
ences from each others, forcing them to reflect on suit­
ability and context before choosing a citizen engagement
practice
3.6 Creates an equal and trans­
parent communication and di­
alogue between Frederiksberg
Municipality and citizens
1
1
1
The Map doesn’t do it in itself, but it can possibly help
indicate which citizen engagement practices who focus
on this
Total weighted score
87
Table 7.3: Weighted matrix of Frame 2: The Physical Map
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
74
==PAGE:83==
Frame 3: The Local Ambassadors
Objective
Prioritisation
Score
Weighted
score
Reasoning
2.1 Ensures involvement of all
relevant stakeholders
3
4
12
The local ambassadors operate in the local community
and posses knowledge about who is the relevant stake­
holders to involve in a project and how to attract them to
engage or express their opinions
2.2 Creates a culture in Fred­
eriksberg Municipality that moti­
vates citizen engagement
3
3
9
The relation to the citizens are close and casual, which
makes the engagement with less friction and challenge.
Though, it can also allocate the responsibility for citizen
interaction to the ambassadors, and thereby make the
distance between Frederiksberg Municipality and its cit­
izens greater. This can limit the feeling of the citizens
needs from the municipality.
2.3 Increases citizens’ aware­
ness of what climate adaptation
requires
1
1
1
There is a chance that the ambassadors doesn’t have
the expertise to inform about climate adaptation require­
ments
2.4 Creates a feeling of a shared
responsibility for climate adapta­
tion in Frederiksberg
1
1
1
Having an ambassador doesn’t necessarily foster the
feeling of shared responsibility among citizens
2.5 Supports a knowledge and
experience sharing culture inter­
nally in TUS
2
1
2
The ambassadors will help increase the knowledge­
sharing about his/hers own local area; who are the citi­
zens, how to best engage with them, what is the charac­
teristics and values of this area. But the ambassador will
not increase the knowledge­sharing regarding citizen en­
gagement practices between project managers internally
2.6 Integrates citizen engage­
ment as a fundamental part of
Frederiksberg Municipality’s cli­
mate adaptation projects
3
4
12
The idea of ambassadors, is to make citizen engagement
easier as the initiative is based on a person who can help
the municipality to engage citizens, and help citizens pro­
vide knowledge and experiences, ideas engagement in­
evitable
2.7 Improves clear communica­
tion of responsibilities and con­
tributions between stakeholders
in climate adaptation projects
2
3
6
It is up to the single ambassador, but there is a great po­
tential for clear communication of the responsibility and
contribution in a project if the ambassador makes it a part
of his/hers tasks
3.1 Supports urban climate re­
silience holistically on Frederiks­
berg
3
4
12
The job of an ambassador is to work as the link between
Municipality and citizens and thereby ensure that citizens
values and inputs are handed over to the project man­
agers and further into climate adaptation projects
3.2 Fosters an innovative ap­
proach to citizen engagement
2
1
2
The ambassadors do not secure good citizen engage­
ment practices, they only provide with knowledge about
the local community
3.3
Helps
to
attract
suitable
groups of citizens for engage­
ment
2
4
8
As the ambassadors knows the local community, they
can help localising most suitable stakeholders for a
project. The ambassador is in the position where he/she
can reach out in person in a causal and friendly way
3.4 Makes it feasible to en­
gage citizens in climate adapta­
tion projects
2
4
8
It becomes feasible for project managers to engage citi­
zens, as the ambassadors support them and are the ones
who reach out to citizens from their their local areas
3.5 Encourages PMs to reflect
on their choice of specific citizen
engagement practice
3
2
6
The ambassadors can provide insights on how the citi­
zens prefer to be engaged, but in the end the responsibil­
ity of reflecting and choosing the final citizen engagement
practice is up to the project mangers
3.6 Creates an equal and trans­
parent communication and di­
alogue between Frederiksberg
Municipality and citizens
1
2
2
When having an ambassador there is a chance that the
Municipality can feel even distanced to the citizens, and
thereby limit an equal and transparent dialogue
Total weighted score
81
Table 7.4: Weighted matrix of Frame 3: The Local Ambassadors
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
75
==PAGE:84==
Result of weighted scores
The Physical Map was evaluated with the highest weighted score of 87 points. The Map is
an intervention of high feasibility and ease of implementation right away, with little require­
ment of major changes in organisational structure of TUS. It is able to built and develop
internal citizen engagement competences among the PMs on a short term basis, which
contributes to the creation of the crucial foundation to do successfully involvement of the
local society creating value for the climate adaptation projects. The concepts of the Lab
and the Local Ambassadors requires much more effort to bring into real­life, and addresses
a more long­term vision of how citizen engagement should be innovated in Frederiksberg
Municipality. With the aim in mind of creating a rapid and possible impact, The Physical
Map was selected as the frame for further development and detailing towards the creation
of the final intervention of this project.
7.3.2
Individual brainstorm on the The Physical Map
The selection of The Physical Map as the most suitable frame, led to individual brainstorms
by the design team members to initiate the further development of the final intervention of this
project. The brainstorm explored how frame elements should be designed and function, to
meet the objectives and project goal. It resulted in two detailed concept descriptions, which
then were discussed and merged into a first iteration. The first iteration of the final concept
consists of two main elements: a physical canvas located at the department of TUS, and
three types of cards, i.e., Review cards for evaluation and knowledge­sharing, Inspiration
cards for inspiration of new engagement methods, and Tips&Tricks cards for facilitation and
planning tips.
7.3.3
Test of frame element prototypes
(All quotes of this section are translated from Danish to English)
The concept definition of the first iteration, was further refined in a PD workshop inviting four
PMs to co­design and test prototypes of the frame elements. Design proposals of the three
cards types, and four canvas layouts was tested (Appendix I). The purpose was to evaluate
usability, graphic appeal, level of comprehension ­ both visually and text formulations, and
feasibility for the TUS context.
PMs discussing the canvas design
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
76
==PAGE:85==
The workshop provided insights on:
• Usability and need of the different card types. A PM suggested: ”Create extra card
decks one can bring at workshops. They will be super good at workshops, and for
internal project kick­offs, planning etc.”
• Clear and comprehensive text formulations of Review card questions
• Definitions of card categories. One PM stated: ””Hearing” has a two­folded meaning
in Frederiksberg Municipality. The category should be ”Public Hearing” instead.”
• Graphic design of cards. A PM suggested: ”Make the Tips&Tricks card in a different
color than the Inspiration cards.”
• Graphic design and content of map canvas. A PM expressed: ”The project phases do
not fit. E.g., Financial approval do not concern any citizen contact.”
• Map location and possible use context in TUS
• Anchoring and implementation needs and requirements
These insights were used in the finalizing detailing of the final intervention (Chapter 8).
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
77
==PAGE:86==
8
Final Intervention
This chapter explains the final design intervention of this project, based on the co­evolution
process of the PD workshop in (Section 7.2.1), the critical evaluation of system level ob­
jectives (Section 7.3.1), and the prototype test of frame elements with PMs (Section 7.3.3).
This is followed by a reflection of implementation requirements of TUS for the final inter­
vention to reveal its full potentials. Nevertheless, the last ninth step of the FC model, the
integration step, is carried out by investigating how a sustainable implementation of the fi­
nal intervention will contribute to new opportunities within the networks of the TUS climate
adaptation system.
This chapter will contribute to answer Research Question 5:
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
78
==PAGE:87==
8.1
The CitiCo Canvas
The final intervention builds on the Physical Map frame concept (Section 7.1) and the proto­
type test with four PMs (Section 7.3.3) providing inputs, comments, and new ideas, leading
to further refining and reshaping of the intervention concept, and setting the foundation for
a second iteration of a concept leading to the development of the final intervention. The
final intervention is named the CitiCo Canvas, and holds the overall purpose of enabling
internal knowledge­sharing and competences development, supporting implementation of
structured procedures on how, when, and why to involve citizens in TUS. With its different
elements, the intervention design aims at increasing the awareness of citizen engagement
internally and help a tangible communication and reflection on citizen engagement practices
and methods in TUS.
8.1.1
Canvas
Figure 8.1: CitiCo Canvas
The CitiCo Canvas will be placed on a mobile whiteboard in the TUS office, as suggested
by the PMs in the prototype test workshop (Section 7.3.3). In that way, it integrates citizen
engagement as a physical part of the office, and the mobility allows for moving it around in
the Frederiksberg Municipality buildings for meetings, workshops, etc. This will enable TUS
to bring it to their department meetings, where the CitiCo Canvas will be updated regularly.
Over time magnetic cards containing PMs’ citizen engagement experiences will be added
to the board.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
79
==PAGE:88==
The Canvas design is based on general the project phases of a climate adaptation project
in TUS. They were originally defined by archaeological findings (Section 5.1.2), as financial
approval, disposition, programming, urban design, construction tendering, construction, and
handover, but during the prototype test workshop PMs claimed only four of the phases as
relevant, which were further redefined during the prototype test workshop. The four phases
of the canvas are: Planning, Programming, Urban design and Construction. Additionally
the Events phase was added, as it was expressed by a PM during the prototype workshop
(Section 7.3.3), that it is often very resource demanding to plan events. This made the
CitiCo Canvas seemed an obvious platform to share experiences and knowledge about
how to arrange, invite and facilitate public climate adaption project events. Furthermore,
the canvas design includes a section for idea cards, i.e. Inspiration cards and Tips&Tricks
cards. Two card holders are placed at the canvas, making them easy accessible to the PMs
always.
8.1.2
Cards
The cards consists of three types with different purposes i.e., Review cards, Inspiration cards
and Tips&Tricks cards. All together, the cards provides a comprehensive set of elements to
support PMs in developing a more reflective and knowledge­sharing approach to engaging
citizens. The cards helps to develop and strengthen their competences and thereby provide
the right foundation for creating valuable citizen engagement in their climate adaptation
projects.
Review cards
Figure 8.2: Example of a Review card
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
80
==PAGE:89==
The first type of card is the Review card (Figure 8.2). The purpose of the card is to:
• Encourage PMs to reflect on the citizen engagement methods they use in specific
project, and share their experiences with colleagues
• Help the search for either a suitable citizen engagement method for a specific project,
or find inspiration to try out new and alternative methods
To support the PMs in structured sharing of experience, the Review cards are divided in four
categories of citizen engagement practice types: Public Hearing, Co­creation, Information,
and Dialogue. The categories are inspired by Tortzen 2023 definition of engagement levels
of citizen involvement. The Review cards consist of six questions (Figure 8.2), that apply to
all categories. This is based on the findings from PMs’ inputs from the prototype workshop
(Section 7.3.3), and the situation and system analysis (Chapter 5; Chapter 6), revealing
PMs do not adequately consider suitability and context of a method.
The Review cards is suggested to be used every time a citizen method has been used in a
project. Furthermore, the Review cards can potentially be implemented as a consistent part
of the agenda at TUS’ department meetings, where newly filled­out cards will be presented
in plenum and added to the canvas.
The choice of questions are elaborated as follows:
Name of Project Manager:
Makes it possible for a PM to reach out to the owner of the Review card.
Date:
Included to trace­back projects, and a parameter to look for when updating the canvas.
Engaged citizens:
A couple of lines is included to elaborate on the group of citizens engaged. One parameter
for successful citizen engagement is knowing who the target group is.
Output:
A couple of lines to explain the output of the engagement method.
How much time has been allocated for this citizen engagement method:
According to PMs (Section 7.3.3), knowing the amount of time needed to allocate for a
specific citizen engagement methods are highly valuable. Therefore, a question on hours
is included.
A good advice:
A couple of lines is included as an opportunity for the owner of the Review card to express
their experience e.g., a good advice or any other valuable information. It is perceived as
fundamental to share knowledge and experiences when reviewing a citizen engagement
method.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
81
==PAGE:90==
Inspiration cards
Figure 8.3: Example of an Inspiration card
The second type of card is the Inspiration cards. The system analysis (Chapter 6) revealed
that many PMs adhere to well­known citizen engagement methods. Therefore, the Inspira­
tion cards aims at fostering an innovative and open­minded approach to citizen engagement
in TUS, by providing innovative and alternative examples of how to engage citizens. The
Inspiration cards are used by PMs in the search of new citizen engagement practices.
Each card consists of a description of the method and an example of use, either from real­
life or hypothetical. E.g., the Storytelling Inspiration card is based on the idea of, during
an initial information meeting about a future climate adaptation project, citizen will be told
a fictive story implying who and how people might be affected. This will help citizen to
comprehend the coming consequences and impacts.
Like the Review cards, the Inspiration cards are divided into the four levels of citizen engage­
ment categories defined by (Tortzen 2023), to guide PMs in selecting appropriate methods
based on the project phase they are working in. The cards are placed on the CitiCo Canvas,
in the blue box, for PMs to locate and seek inspiration easily (Figure 8.1).
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
82
==PAGE:91==
Tips&Tricks cards
Figure 8.4: Example of a Tips&Tricks card
The last type of card is the Tips&Tricks cards. As the system analysis (Chapter 6) revealed
a general lack of in­house experts on citizen engagement in TUS, this type of card provides
recommendations and good advice for how to facilitate and plan successful citizen engage­
ment. The Tips&Tricks cards are placed on the CitiCo Canvas, in the same blue box as the
Inspiration cards for easy accessibility (Figure 8.1).
As an extra feature, extra card decks of Inspiration and Tips&Tricks cards are created, with
the purpose of encouraging the PMs to bring the cards to planning meetings, workshops
etc. where the canvas whiteboard is not possible to bring along.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
83
==PAGE:92==
8.1.3
Final test of high fidelity prototype
The final step of refining the complete design of the CitiCo Canvas, are the final test of a
high fidelity prototype carried out in the real­life context of TUS. The test was initiated by an
launching event held by the design team, presenting the CitiCo Canvas, its card elements,
and instructions of use to TUS. The participating PMs filled­out a Review card relating to a
previous used citizen engagement practice in one of their climate adaptation projects, and
placed them on the canvas. The canvas board was then placed for testing in the TUS office
(Figure 8.5). The test are running for a one month period, and are still on­going at this time
of writing. Therefore, the test results will not be presented in this report. Nevertheless, the
PMs expressed great interest and motivation for trying out the CitiCo Canvas during the
launch presentation of the prototype.
Figure 8.5: High fidelity prototype at launch presentation
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
84
==PAGE:93==
8.1.4
Implementation at TUS
To utilise the possibilities of the CitiCo Canvas and help it to do a value­creating impact in
reality, necessary requirements of implementation are recommended to be addressed by
TUS. These are developed based on a discussion at the launch presentation of the high
fidelity prototype with the PMs about needs of TUS for a sustainable implementation of the
CitiCo Canvas.
An advocate role Currently, there is no citizen engagement responsible or expert in TUS. To
ensure a sustainable and successful integration in to daily work routines, it is recommended
that TUS select a PM responsible for CitiCo Canvas. Especially during the initial introduction
phase, it is important to have an advocate reminding to use the canvas for inspiration and
planning, and fill­out of Review cards. Overtime, the responsible PM must keep the canvas
updated with cards only of relevance, i.e., new citizen engagement methods of Inspiration
cards, and only keep Review cards with useful reflections of actual projects.
Integrated part of daily work routines The Review cards gather valuable internal knowl­
edge and reflections on citizen engagement. To fully leverage these benefits, the reflections
should be shared in plenum within TUS, facilitated through department routines, e.g., an in­
tegrated part of their weekly meetings.
Maintenance To secure the relevance of the CitiCo Canvas, the citizen engagement meth­
ods of the Inspiration cards should be updated regularly. Frederiksberg Municipality is cur­
rently having a catalogue of citizen engagement developed by consultants, which potentially
could be added as new Inspiration cards. Therefore, digital design­files of all CitiCo Can­
vas elements are shared with TUS as part of the client material for future development and
customization.
Client material A workbook are specially designed for TUS and shared with them together
with the digital design­files (Appendix J). It explains the background of this project, and the
CitiCo Canvas intervention, i.e, the purpose and possibilities to solve the apparent problem,
the use of the design elements of the canvas and three card types, and recap of recommen­
dation for sustainable implementation.
8.2
Integration
A successful implementation of the final intervention, fosters a new approach of citizen en­
gagement in TUS climate adaptation projects, creating new opportunities within the stake­
holder landscape and system relations.
The CitiCo Canvas is designed with the intention of solving the citizen engagement chal­
lenges of TUS. It is developed to provide the best conditions for accommodating the objec­
tives from the catalogue of objectives (Table 6.1), on the complex and artefact system levels.
The ability of the CitiCo Canvas to achieve these objectives within the context of TUS, re­
flects its potential to make significant impact. The level of achievement is also dependent
on implementation circumstances, e.g., TUS organisational structures, PM and citizen moti­
vations, stakeholder relations, and other elements of the surrounding system. A successful
integration, i.e., an sustainable implementation of the CitiCo Canvas that supports the ob­
jectives on the complex and artefact system levels, will unlock its full potential contributing
with improved conditions for citizen engagement that creates added value to urban climate
adaptation in Frederiksberg.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
85
==PAGE:94==
Within TUS, the CitiCo Canvas promotes the opportunities for:
• Involvement of all relevant stakeholders by securing a reflective approach of target
group selection and project context advanced through the Review ­, Inspiration­, and
Tips&Tricks cards, and their project phase placement at the canvas.
• Promotion of a motivated, knowledge­sharing citizen engagement culture inter­
nally by introducing the physical artefact of a canvas on a mobile whiteboard, that
creates an easy and fun structure initiating the PMs to interact with each other.
• Creating an improved, transparent, and equal communication between local
citizens and Frederiksberg Municipality by educating PMs through the Review ­,
Inspiration­, and Tips&Tricks cards, and advancing their competences towards better
citizen engagement practices.
• Creating a shared climate adaptation responsibility between local citizens and
Frederiksberg Municipality by educating PMs through the Review ­, Inspiration­,
and Tips&Tricks cards, advances their competences towards better citizen engage­
ment practices, and makes them capable of communicating and inviting for a stronger
collaboration of responsibilities.
• Integration of citizen engagement as a fundamental part of project procedure by
presenting the an easy comprehensive structure with the canvas and Review cards
fill­outs, allowing for it to easily be integrated as part of the daily work routines at TUS.
• Supporting a holistic climate resilient urban development by putting citizen en­
gagement on the TUS agenda and securing a good practice, leading towards a holistic
approach prioritising the local society, the city itself, and the changing climate.
• Developing a innovative and reflective citizen engagement practice approach by
providing well­selected collection of method inspiration, facilitation tips, and urging PM
reflections of leanings and use through the cards.
• Attraction of suitable citizens for engagement by securing a reflective approach of
target group selection and project context advanced through the Review ­, Inspiration­
,and Tips&Tricks cards and their project phase placement at the canvas, fosters a
better understanding of citizen demography and needs.
Additionally, other opportunities improving the complex system of climate adaptation in TUS,
by a sustainable integration of the CitiCo Canvas, are:
Increased awareness of the top management
The CitiCo Canvas holds an opportunity to foster a new culture revealing the value­creating
potential of good citizen engagement, by the streamlined and tangible structure it provides.
With time, this citizen engagement culture showing the importance and valuable contribu­
tions, will lead to better urban climate adaptation in Frederiksberg, and increase the aware­
ness for the top management. This will hopefully make them prioritize citizen engagement
and allocate resources within Frederiksberg Municipality, which is highly needed to make
pioneering involvement of the local society, and help a sustainable and holistic urban devel­
opment. With time, the CitiCo Canvas holds a great potential of being integrated into other
departments of Frederiksberg Municipality. This will streamline the attitude towards citizen
engagement within the entire organisation, and contribute to a extensive knowledge bank
of citizen engagement reflections fostering collaboration and knowledge­sharing across de­
partments.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
86
==PAGE:95==
Citizens as a future fundamental resource
The relation to and perception of citizen abilities is recommended to be addressed in an
empowering way. By considering them as an important and available resource, will create
opportunities for TUS in making a strong collaborative partner. This requires that citizens
are involved early in the urban development project planning, seen as equals, and given
more impact. It will change their stakeholder position and strengthen the relation to Fred­
eriksberg Municipality, by making them more present, which should be considered as a huge
advantage for the desired holistic urban development. The CitiCo Canvas holds the oppor­
tunity to change the attitude towards citizens and reveal their potentials of value­creating
contributions, by pushing a more reflective approach and educate what successful citizen
engagement impacts consist of.
A leading example
The new approach towards citizen engagement, holds the opportunity of making Frederiks­
berg Municipality a leading example. The CitiCo Canvas holds an opportunity for driving
a prioritising and professional facilitating of citizen involvement in local urban development
with great ambition and transparency. This creates an example of innovative local authori­
ties trusting in the society and utilising its competences to help the development of a Sus­
tainable City. The approach will be of great inspiration and part of an important development
in pushing the development of Sustainable Cities in other Danish municipalities.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
87
==PAGE:96==
8.3
Answer to Research Question 5
The answer is based on Development of Alternative Solutions (Chapter 7) and Final Inter­
vention (Chapter 8).
Based on the creation of frames, three concepts were designed as possible ways to sup­
port the development of future sustainable cities on a higher systemic level. All three frame
concepts were created to solve the core paradoxes of the citizen engagement challenge of
climate adaptation projects in TUS in each their ways. However, The Physical Map frame,
were evaluated as the most promising. This frame concept was the baseline for the de­
velopment of the final intervention, i.e., the CitiCo Canvas. Detailing and refinement of the
final intervention has been carried out through a co­evolution approach, co­designing and
testing the concept and its elements with PMs and in real life use context in TUS. Tests and
feedback showed an eager support and willingness to adopt the concept, and great discus­
sions on citizen engagement imitated by the CitiCo Canvas, have been observed. Still, a
final user test of a high fidelity prototype of the intervention at the TUS office of a one month
period is on­going, leaving the results unknown at the time writing.
The final intervention aims on a complex system level to encourage PMs to reflect on their
choice of citizens engagement practice. It sets a structure for fostering the reflective ap­
proach and a development of optimised internal competences within citizen engagement in
TUS. This is considered a fundamental element to master before making major and radi­
cal initiatives to innovative the citizen engagement culture and approach completely. E.g.,
the alternative interventions are more extensive by introducing a interactive learning lab, or
allocating the responsibility of local community involvement to externals such as local am­
bassadors. By enhancing a foundation of better understanding and competences of citizen
engagement in TUS, will result in more sustainable climate adaptation projects leading to
an urban development supporting a Sustainable City in Frederiksberg.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
88
==PAGE:97==
9
Discussion
This chapter presents a discussion of the methodological framework of this thesis, and per­
formance of the final intervention related to its contribution to closing the gap defined in the
literature review, and its ability to meet the project goal.
9.1
The Methodological Framework
As this thesis applies Systems Engineering and Frame Creation methodologies to approach
a complex socio­technical challenge, it allowed for a systemic and innovative approach to
design an intervention, aiming at supporting the development of future Sustainable Cities.
Despite, SE and FC aim at solving modern and complex problems, their application and ap­
proach are different. In this thesis project, it led to wisely chosen thinking principles, design
methods, and theories, which in some cases called for modifications, to fit the context of the
project. Even though, the combined framework allowed for the design of an intervention try­
ing to solve the project goal, the methodological framework in our study can be discussed,
as some challenges were faced along the process.
One of the challenges of the framework is to know when to operate on and navigate between
the three system levels of SE. FC is primarily applied to case­specific problem situations,
mostly acting at artefact and complexsystem level, whereas SE forces designers to also
account for the higher engineering level considering how artefacts can impact the greater
system. It is therefore worth to discuss the framework of this thesis, and whether alternative
ways of approaching and combining SE and FC could have led to different analyses ­ and
potentially, alternative interventions.
As the thesis project have evolved from a case study, the primary explorations have been
carried out at the artefact and complex system level, by following the steps of the FC model.
However, a modification of the FC methodology was needed during the investigation of the
themes, the universals, to ensure to accommodate the development of sustainable cities
on the engineering level. The FC model recommends to investigate the underlying values,
needs, and motivations related to the problem situation. The obvious way to perform this
step had been to investigate the underlying values, needs, and motivations for citizen en­
gagement in Frederiksberg Municipality. However, we chose to base the analysis of the
underlying values, needs, and motivations relating to a future Sustainable City, rather than
solely focusing on the values, needs and motivation for successful citizen engagement in
Frederiksberg, which constitute the artefact and complex level. It can be discussed whether
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
89
==PAGE:98==
a different choice of focus than the engineering level, would have led to different values,
needs and motivations and thereby a development of themes.
9.1.1
Limited level of innovation and radicalism?
Despite SE thinking principles emphasize to think in alternatives, SE methods have been
applied to ensure the development of a final intervention design that fulfills realistic objec­
tives, and makes it possible to implement and exist in the real world. However, it can be
discussed whether applying the SE methodology in combination with the framework of the
FC approach, has limited the level of radical innovation of the interventions. As this thesis
project revolves around a modern and complex problem, aiming to support the develop­
ment of future sustainable cities, the FC methodology was specifically chosen. It enables a
structure to approach problems in new, innovative and highly creative ways, different from
conventional problem­solving practices, by applying design­abduction and utilizing frames
or metaphors, to reach a desired outcome in innovative ways.
Limiting the level of radical innovation by applying SE can potentially be the case for this
study, as our application of the methodology called for tangible assessments of the perfor­
mance of the alternative design interventions based on objectives defined from the real­life
case under study. Even though, the intervention concepts originated from the Frame Cre­
ation process, using design­abduction and metaphors, one can question if the final interven­
tion, i.e., the CitiCo Canvas challenges the PMs from TUS’ citizen engagement approach
enough, and whether applying FC alone could have pushed for even more radical initiatives
of optimising citizen engagement in Frederiksberg Municipality.
9.2
The CitiCo Canvas Intervention
The reviewed literature (Section 3) revealed a gap of insufficient research on real­life cases
investigating how to perform and implement value­creating citizen engagement practices in
urban climate adaptation projects. Despite, the CitiCo Canvas derives from a comprehen­
sive case study, it can be discussed whether the intervention succeeds in being a prime
example of how actual value­creation can be carried out.
9.2.1
A question of value­creating facilitation
With its different elements, i.e., the canvas and cards, the CitiCo Canvas provides a platform
for building competences, sharing knowledge and experiences, for future citizen engage­
ment situations. However, a potential pitfall is, that the intervention design does not in itself
ensure that PMs’ execution of citizen engagement practices on stage, actually will create
value. The CitiCo Canvas supports PMs in structuring and planning citizen engagement, but
not during executing in the actual field. Even by implementing the Tips & Tricks cards, which
hold important guidance for good facilitation,evident to creating successful and valuable in­
volvement of the local society, the planning and facilitation of a citizen engagement practice
still completely relies on the individual PMs themselves. For instance, the CitiCo Canvas
is not able to fulfill the objectives of equal and transparent communication and increases
citizens’ awareness of what climate adaptation requires in itself. It is doubtful, whether the
CitiCo Canvas are able to foster a better facilitation and quality of citizen engagement prac­
tice when it is actually carried out in reality.
9.2.2
The responsibility of PMs ­ is too big?
During development of alternative solutions, a brainstorm idea of a method catalog was
discussed. Creating a method catalog with step­by­step guidance for value­creating citizen
engagement, might seem as the most obvious way to support PMs in value­creating facilita­
tion. However, such a tool was agreed on as being insufficient and narrow, as literature and
the analyses of this project emphasize, that citizens are not just citizens, but rather a diverse
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
90
==PAGE:99==
set of individuals with different values, needs and livings. Engaging citizens in projects such
as climate adaptation projects is highly complex, due to multiple variables influencing the
outcome of engagement. This is another potential challenge of the CitiCo Canvas, as it is
not designed as a supporting tool used on stage. Despite the Tips & Tricks cards for great
citizen engagement planning and facilitation, these unpredictable variables, e.g., type of
citizen, attitude towards the municipality, and understanding of climate adaptation, places
a high demands on PMs to navigate between the different types of citizens, to reflect on
what a good method is in certain context, and obtain knowledge on appropriate facilitation
in a given situation. One may question, to what extent the CitiCo Canvas succeeds in sup­
porting them in choosing suitable methods through the Review cards. They are designed
to encourage PMs to share methods, own experiences, knowledge and tips, and further in­
spire them to reflect on context and potential differences in stakeholder values. This should
foster an involvement of a diverse range of local knowledge, and help them to use their own
and colleagues’ experiences to asses the most suitable methods for a given project.
9.2.3
A need for measuring value­creation?
Even though, ”creating value” refers to fulfilling the citizen engagement principles and rec­
ommendations outlined in literature, uncertainty arises regarding evaluation of when a citi­
zen engagement practice can be measured as value­creating, in a tangible way. It should
be considered whether it is even possible to do such measurements with qualitative pa­
rameters, as citizen engagement are depended on unpredictable impacts, e.g., involved
citizens with highly subjective perspectives and different perceptions of what value­creation
consist of. Then again, is such harsh benchmark of value creating citizen engagement even
necessary, or is it the awareness and the discussions it brings along that makes the impor­
tant impact? No matter what, it must be acknowledged that citizen engagement are very
complex, and no strict recipe applicable for all contexts are possible to develop.
9.2.4
A driver for the Sustainable City?
This thesis defines, that a Sustainable City are achieved when synergies between the sub­
systems of the city, society and climate occur. Additionally, the balance in interrelations of
the subsystems are to be considered on all three system levels. At artefact system level
this project contributes with the CitiCo Canvas intervention enabling an evident foundation
and support of the PMs to do value­creating citizen engagement, as previously discussed.
At complex system level one could argue, that by optimising the involvement of the local
community, the CitiCo Canvas helps contributing towards a more sustainable urban devel­
opment, which are able to resist climate and societal challenges. The reflective approach
of suitable and comprehensive engagement fostered by the CitiCo Canvas, could poten­
tially lead to more actors being consulted, and more stakeholders being favored in climate
adaptation projects. On the other hand, this broader involvement could create challenges
of increased demands for accommodating synergies on all three system levels, as more
needs then must be considered and the workload potentially increases.
Furthermore on engineering level, the more inclusive and robust urban development holds
great potential to enhance the connection between the local society and city. This rela­
tion are important to boost, as currently TUS’ expertise lies within development of technical
initiatives, adapting the city to the climate changes. To support a development of Frederiks­
berg becoming a Sustainable City, the synergy between the city and society systems must
be prioritised. Their relations to the climate system are difficult to define, as the changing
climate are dominant and constantly changing. This creates strong requirements for the city
and society systems to constantly be in a dynamic development, dependent on the climate.
One could question, if the CitiCo Canvas is able to support this dynamic environment of
subsystems?
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
91
==PAGE:100==
The Sustainable City requires synergy among its subsystems, but when is the stage of syn­
ergy attained, and what does it exactly entail? It should be acknowledged that determining
when one subsystem is benefiting from another is a challenging task. Mostly argued due to
the different characters held by the subsystems. A synergy do also provoke compromises.
It should be considered, when such compromises have reached a point causing too much
neglect of other subsystem needs. One could argue, that the best one could strive for, is
an awareness, alertness and acknowledgement of these contradicting perspectives within
system synergies. It calls for a transparent approach that accommodates the dynamic de­
velopment. Nevertheless, through workshops and tests with PMs the CitiCo Canvas has
proven to be capable of fostering a highly reflective approach of citizen engagement. The
question is whether it is reflective enough to foster a synergy within the subsystems, needed
for a Sustainable City.
It can be discussed to what extend the CitiCo Canvas operates as an exemplary initiative
on how to perform value­creating citizen engagement. This should be further investigated
through future extensive tests at the TUS office, and a research study on its’ impact to
the citizen engagement carried out in the climate adaptation projects. However, this thesis
contributes to filling the gap from the literature review with new knowledge derived from a
comprehensive real­life case study, that can add to the development of future sustainable
cities from the perspective of urban climate adaption accommodating synergy between the
systems of city, society and climate.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
92
==PAGE:101==
10
Conclusion
The project goal of this thesis has been to support a development of future sustainable cities
enabling society, city and climate synergies. It has been carried out by doing Systems Engi­
neering design of interventions for climate adaptation projects carried out by Frederiksberg
Municipality, through a Frame Creation design approach. The search for new interventions
accommodating the project goal, started out with Frederiksberg Municipality presenting the
main challenge of climate adaptation projects as being challenges of engaging the local
society. Through comprehensive analyses of the problem situation context and origin, it
was revealed that the municipal organisational structure, internal engagement practice pro­
cedures and competences, and motivations and attitudes of PMs caused limitations and
insufficient citizen engagement outputs. The main problems from the analyses was formu­
lated as three core paradoxes:
• The first one being the surrounding political system demanding citizen involvement,
often driven by the opportunity for political promotion, rather than obtaining local knowl­
edge and interest to the climate adaptation projects.
• The second paradox reveals a lack of internal competences and streamlined structures
within TUS, resulting in citizen engagement of very different quality, and an unmoti­
vated attitudes among PMs.
• The final paradox evolves around the challenge of attracting a wide citizen target group
with the right suitability to the climate adaptation project, when PMs are making citizen
engagement activities.
The paradoxes reveals other perspectives to the apparent problem compared to what initially
was presented by TUS. These were further explored through the creation of three interven­
tion alternatives, i.e, the three frame concepts, each accommodating a paradox and relating
to the project goal of supporting a development of future sustainable cities. Based on rec­
ommendations derived from the literature review, evaluations of objective performances,
and feedback from citizens and the PMs during PD workshops, the most promising concept
was found, which led to the creation of the final intervention, called the CitiCo Canvas.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
93
==PAGE:102==
The CitiCo Canvas is designed to provide an informative platform for competence devel­
opment and knowledge­sharing of citizen engagement.
Over time, this should foster a
motivated culture, a more transparent communication of responsibilities, and an increased
awareness of citizen engagement possibilities, which will create value in TUS and help a
thriving local society. The intervention are created to improve the fundamentals and con­
ditions for planning, but are not able to secure the actual performance successful citizen
engagement practices on stage.
The CitiCo Canvas enhances a better understanding within TUS of the local society, whose
expertise lies with urban development and technical climate adaptation initiatives. It puts
citizen engagement on the agenda of Frederiksberg Municipality, boosting the prioritising of
the society system, enabling a closer and more sustainable involvement of citizens. This
will result in urban climate adaptive developments of Frederiksberg, that favors to create
value for the city and society systems withstanding the changing climate system. The en­
lightenment of a complex greater system and the impact of interacting elements, helps to
create a holistic perspective of climate adaptation in TUS, that helps synergies between city,
society and climate. This will fulfill the project goal and support the development of a future
sustainable city of Frederiksberg.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
94
==PAGE:103==
References
Abdullahi, Saleh and Biswajeet Pradhan (2017). “Sustainable Urban Development”. en. In:
Spatial Modeling and Assessment of Urban Form. Ed. by Biswajeet Pradhan. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, pp. 17–34. ISBN: 978­3­319­54216­4 978­3­319­54217­
1. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-54217-1_2. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-
54217-1_2 (visited on 10/09/2023).
Adams, William C. (Aug. 2015). “Conducting Semi￿Structured Interviews”. en. In: Handbook
of Practical Program Evaluation. Ed. by Kathryn E. Newcomer, Harry P. Hatry, and Joseph
S. Wholey. 1st ed. Wiley, pp. 492–505. ISBN: 978­1­118­89360­9 978­1­119­17138­6.
DOI: 10.1002/9781119171386.ch19. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/
9781119171386.ch19 (visited on 01/04/2024).
Bank, The World (Apr. 2023). Urban Development. URL: https://worldbank.org/en/topic/
urbandevelopment/overview.
Bibri, Simon Elias and John Krogstie (2017). “Smart sustainable cities of the future: An
extenxive interdisciplinary literature review”. English. In: Sustainable Cities and Society.
Elsevier, pp. 183–212.
Boeijen, Annemiek van, Jaap Daalhuizen, and Jelle Zijlstra (2021). Delft Design Guide. 2nd
Revised. Bispublishers.
Børrensen, Bo (Sept. 2022). Protesterer over legeplads­projekt: Nu har naboer søsat en
underskriftindsamling. URL: https://frederiksbergliv.dk/frederiksberg/protesterer- over-
legeplads-projekt-nu-har-naboer-soesat-en-underskriftindsamling.
Camagni, Roberto (2017). “Sustainable Urban Development: Definition and Reasons for
a Research Programme”. en. In: Seminal Studies in Regional and Urban Economics.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 261–282. ISBN: 978­3­319­57806­4 978­3­
319­57807­1. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-57807-1_13. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-319-57807-1_13 (visited on 12/23/2023).
Dam, R. F and Yu Siang Teo (2022). “Affinity Diagrams: How to Cluster Your Ideas and Re­
veal Insights”. English. In: Interaction Design Foundation. URL: https://www.interaction-
design.org/literature/article/affinity-diagrams-learn-how-to-cluster-and-bundle-ideas-and-
facts (visited on 12/18/2023).
Dorst, Cornelis Hans (2015). Frame innovation: create new thinking by design. eng. Design
thinking, design theory. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. ISBN: 978­0­262­
32431­1.
Dorst, Kees et al. (2016). “Part 3: Methods”. In: Designing for the common good. ISBN:
978­90­6369­408­1.
DTU (2023). MSc in Desing & Innovation. en. URL: https://sdb.dtu.dk/myline#Master’s_
thesis.
Egger, Steve (Sept. 2006). “Determining a sustainable city model”. en. In: Environmental
Modelling & Software 21.9, pp. 1235–1246. ISSN: 13648152. DOI: 10.1016/j.envsoft.
2005.04.012. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1364815205001313 (visited
on 12/26/2023).
Eriksen, Siri et al. (Jan. 2011). “When not every response to climate change is a good one:
Identifying principles for sustainable adaptation”. en. In: Climate and Development 3.1,
pp. 7–20. ISSN: 1756­5529, 1756­5537. DOI: 10.3763/cdev.2010.0060. URL: http://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.3763/cdev.2010.0060 (visited on 12/19/2023).
Frederiksberg Kommune (Sept. 2013). Klimatilpasningsplan 2012. URL: https : / / www .
klimatilpasning.dk/media/801152/klimatilpasningsplan_2012_frederiksberg.pdf.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
95
==PAGE:104==
Friis Dam, Rikke and Teo Yu Siang (2020). Stage 4 in the Design Thinking Process: Pro­
totype. URL: https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/stage-4-in-the-design-
thinking-process-prototype.
Giordano, Raffaele et al. (Jan. 2020). “Urban adaptation to climate change: Climate ser­
vices for supporting collaborative planning”. en. In: Climate Services 17, p. 100100. ISSN:
24058807. DOI: 10.1016/j.cliser.2019.04.004. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S2405880718300955 (visited on 10/20/2023).
Institute, World Resource (2019). RELEASE: New Research Finds Climate Adaptation Is
an Opportunity for Transformative Change in Cities. en. URL: https://www.wri.org/news/
release- new- research- finds- climate- adaptation- opportunity- transformative- change- cities
(visited on 12/20/2023).
IPCC (June 2022). Global Warming of 1.5°C: IPCC Special Report on Impacts of Global
Warming of 1.5°C above Pre­industrial Levels in Context of Strengthening Response
to Climate Change, Sustainable Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty. 1st ed.
Cambridge University Press. ISBN: 978­1­00­915794­0 978­1­00­915795­7. DOI: 10.1017/
9781009157940. URL: https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/9781009157940/
type/book (visited on 12/21/2023).
Juran (May 2018). The Ultimate Guide to Cause and Effect Diagrams. URL: https://www.
juran.com/blog/the-ultimate-guide-to-cause-and-effect-diagrams/ (visited on 12/29/2023).
Kanarp, G. C. S. and Lotten Westberg (Feb. 2023). “Adapting climate change – how gov­
ernment authorities in Sweden make sense of adaptation through a network practice”.
en. In: Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, pp. 1–21. ISSN: 0964­0568,
1360­0559. DOI: 10.1080/09640568.2023.2171278. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/full/10.1080/09640568.2023.2171278 (visited on 12/19/2023).
Kommune, Frederiksberg (Jan. 2023). Klimatilpasning på Frederiksberg. Dansk. (Visited on
10/04/2023).
Kumareswaran, Keerththana and Guttila Yugantha Jayasinghe (2023a). “Chapter 2: Climate
Resilience and Sustainable Cities”. en. In: Green Infrastructure and Urban Climate Re­
silience. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 39–97. ISBN: 978­3­031­37080­9
978­3­031­37081­6. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-37081-6_2. URL: https://link.springer.com/
10.1007/978-3-031-37081-6_2 (visited on 12/19/2023).
– (2023b). “Climate Resilience and Sustainable Cities”. en. In: Green Infrastructure and Ur­
ban Climate Resilience. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 39–97. ISBN: 978­
3­031­37080­9 978­3­031­37081­6. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 031- 37081- 6_2. URL: https:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-031-37081-6_2 (visited on 12/19/2023).
Lamas, Raphael et al. (2015). “Please Let me in: A Participatory Workshop Approach to
the Design of a Driver­to­driver Communication Device”. en. In: Procedia Manufacturing
3, pp. 3309–3316. ISSN: 23519789. DOI: 10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.413. URL: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S235197891500414X (visited on 01/04/2024).
Lamia, Kamal­Chaoui and Alexis Roberts (2009). Competitive Cities and Climate Change,
OECD REgional Development Working Papers N2, URL: https://www.oecd.org/cfe/
regionaldevelopment/44232251.pdf.
Martin, Bella and Bruce Hanington (2012). Universal Methods of Design. First edition. Rock­
port.
Mukim, Megha (ed.) and Mark (ed.) Roberts (2023). Thriving : Making Cities Green, Re­
silient, and Inclusive in a Changing Climate. Washington, DC: World Bank. URL: http:
//hdl.handle.net/10986/38295.
O’Donoghue, Jack (2023). Design Thinking: 54 How Might We Examples. Design Thinking.
URL: https://makeiterate.com/design-thinking-54-how-might-we-examples/ (visited on
12/29/2023).
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
96
==PAGE:105==
Pallathadka, Arun, Heejun Chang, and Idowu Ajibade (Aug. 2023). “Urban sustainability
implementation and indicators in the United States: A systematic review”. en. In: City and
Environment Interactions 19, p. 100108. ISSN: 25902520. DOI: 10.1016/j.cacint.2023.
100108. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2590252023000107 (visited on
10/09/2023).
Pongruengkiat, Wiwat et al. (Dec. 2023). “Assessing sustainability of Chiang Mai urban de­
velopment”. en. In: Discover Sustainability 4.1, p. 54. ISSN: 2662­9984. DOI: 10.1007/
s43621-023-00174-2. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s43621-023-00174-2 (visited
on 12/19/2023).
Powell, Martin, ed. (May 2022). The Climate City. en. 1st ed. Wiley. ISBN: 978­1­119­74627­
0 978­1­119­74629­4. DOI: 10.1002/9781119746294. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/book/10.1002/9781119746294 (visited on 12/20/2023).
Purvis, Ben, Yong Mao, and Darren Robinson (May 2019). “Three pillars of sustainability:
in search of conceptual origins”. en. In: Sustainability Science 14.3, pp. 681–695. ISSN:
1862­4065, 1862­4057. DOI: 10.1007/s11625-018-0627-5. URL: http://link.springer.com/
10.1007/s11625-018-0627-5 (visited on 01/08/2024).
Short, John Rennie and Abbey Farmer (Nov. 2021). “Cities and Climate Change”. en. In:
Earth 2.4, pp. 1038–1045. ISSN: 2673­4834. DOI: 10.3390/earth2040061. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2673-4834/2/4/61 (visited on 12/28/2023).
Skov, Mathias (May 2023). Hans Tavsens park udskudt igen. URL: https://www.magasinetkbh.
dk/indhold/hans-tavsens-park-udskudt-igen.
Slavensky, Espen (Oct. 2019). Massiv kritik af skybrudsprojekt: Sankt Jørgen Sø er en fredet
perle. URL: https://www.tv2kosmopol.dk/kobenhavn/massiv- kritik- af- skybrudsprojekt-
sankt-jorgen-so-er-en-fredet-perle.
Sobol, Agnieszka (2023). “Governance and citizens’ engagement in terms of local sustain­
able development”. en. In: Journal of Economics and Management 2015.Vol 19 (). ISSN:
1732­1948. URL: https://www.ue.katowice.pl/fileadmin/user_upload/wydawnictwo/JEM_
Artyku%C5%82y_1_30/JEM_19/05.pdf (visited on 12/20/2023).
Tortzen, Anne (2023). Borgerinddragelse ­ hvorfor og hvordan? Dansk. Presentation.
Tortzen, Anne and Annika Agger (2023). Klima, demokrati og samskabelse. Kommunen som
katalysator for klimaengagement. DK. 1.udgave. Vol. 2023. Akademisk Forlag, Køben­
havn. ISBN: 978­87­500­6273­8.
United Nations (2021). “Climate Change: The Paris Agreement”. English. In: URL: https:
//www.un.org/en/climatechange/paris-agreement.
United Nations Environment Programme (2018). “SDG 11 Issue Brief: Make Cities and Hu­
man Settlements Inclusive, Safe, Resilient and Sustainable”. In: URL: https://wedocs.
unep.org/20.500.11822/25763.
Valgeirsdottir, Dagny et al. (2023). Spider Web. URL: https://universaldesignguide.com/
method/spiderweb/.
Weck, Olivier L. de, Daniel Roos, and Christopher L. Magee (2012). Engineering systems:
meeting human needs in a complex technological world. eng. Engineering systems. Cam­
bridge: MIT press. ISBN: 978­0­262­01670­4.
Züst, Rainer and Peter Troxler (2006). No More Muddling Through. en. Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands. ISBN: 978­1­4020­5017­6 978­1­4020­5018­3. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4020-
5018-3. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4020-5018-3 (visited on 10/09/2023).
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
97
==PAGE:106==
A
Interview Guides
All interviews conducted are based on the interview guides, but the obtained data and
knowledge of different subjects are affected by the interviewees interest, due to the semi­
structured format and loose control of conversation. The interview guides was used to initi­
ate a dialogue and secure some structure of the data outcome.
A.1
Interview Guide 1
Interviewees: PM#4, PM#1, PM#2, PM#5
1. Can you describe the climate adaptation project you’re project managing in detail?
2. What is the difference of citizen involvement and citizen orientation?
3. In terms of planning and execution, how is it done? What are the successes and
challenges?
(a) How is the climate adaptation project presented to citizens?
i. Materials?
(b) Why are you actually doing citizen engagement? And what would you miss if you
didn’t?
4. Climate adaptation projects ­ what works well and what are often challenges?
A.2
Interview Guide 2
Interviewees: PM#1, PM#2, Cloudburst project leader
1. What do you see as the biggest challenges with citizen engagement in TUS?
(a) Time, method knowledge, activity/engagement, input from citizens, understand­
ing citizens and purpose?
2. What value does citizen engagement add to the climate projects in TUS?
(a) What is the reason why it should be done?
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
98
==PAGE:107==
B
Questionnaires
All questionnaires are originally developed in Danish.
B.1
PM Values, Needs and Motivations Questionnaire
Respondents: PM#4, PM#1, PM#2
What elements are important for a future sustainable city?
1. Choose 5­10 words which describes your future vision of the city of Frederiksberg
Liveable
exotic
green infrastructure
modern
exciting
accessibility
green
changing
local ambience
public spaces
development
private spaces
multifunctional
generations
futuristic
dynamic
old
technical
picturesque
beautiful
participatory
lakes
cosmopolitan
fountain
recreational
compact
hierarchical
busy
spacious
collaboration
hectic breathable
resilient
across generations
public infrastructure
environmental
development
green spaces
preservation of historic buildings
adaptable
high speed
human­centred
protective
energetic
innovative
dynamic
trees
traditional
park
community cohesion
intelligent
water
cultural diversity
community orientated
private cars
playgrounds
community engagement
biodiversity
conflictual
inclusive
insects
meeting areas
active
birdsong
impact
overwhelming
co­creating
privacy
engaging
tranquillity
loud
feeling heard
chaotic
noisy
crowded
crowded
contemporary
lively
grass
visionary
flowers
2. Please elaborate on your choice of words (write)
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
99
==PAGE:108==
B.2
Final Intervention Prototype Test Questionnaire
This questionnaire is a follow­up and evaluation of the test period of the ”CitiCo Canvas”
board in January 2024. The respondents are employees of TUS, and answers are collected
after this thesis are handed in.
The Concept
• How have you used the ”CitiCo Canvas” board in your daily work? (E.g., searching for
inspiration, knowledge or sharing experiences)
• What learnings and impacts in your work has the board contributed to?
• Have citizen involvement and methods gained more attention in the office, in conver­
sations with colleagues and in your own work? If so, how?
• How has TUS as a department used the whiteboard? (E.g., routines, workflows, ex­
amples of use)
• Has the whiteboard been used in contexts other than the office? If so, where and how?
• What does it take to ensure the use of the board? (E.g., frameworks and resources in
Traffic and Urban Space?)
• Expansion to other departments in Frederiksberg Municipality?
Review Cards
• How have you made use of the Review Cards?
• What have the Review Cards contributed to your own work and in TUS?
• How can the Review Cards be improved and optimised?
Inspiration Cards
• How have you made use of the Inspiration Cards?
• What has the Inspiration Cards contributed to your own work and in TUS?
• How can the Inspiration Cards be improved and optimised?
Tips&Tricks Cards
• How have you made use of the Tips&Tricks cards?
• What have the Tips&Tricks cards contributed to your own work and in TUS?
• How can the Tips&Tricks cards be improved and optimised?
Canvas
• What do you think of the canvas design? (E.g., Usability, placement of the cards, the
division of the project phases?)
• How can the canvas design be improved and optimised?
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
100
==PAGE:109==
C
Iterations of Paradoxes
Figure C.1: 1st Iteration of Paradoxes
Figure C.2: 2nd Iteration of Paradoxes
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
101
==PAGE:110==
Figure C.3: 3rd Iteration of Paradoxes
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
102
==PAGE:111==
D
Map of Actors of TUS Climate
Adaptation Project Phases
Figure D.1: Map of actors of TUS climate adaptation project phases
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
103
==PAGE:112==
E
Citizen Workshop Material
All workshop material are originally developed in Danish.
Hvilke projekter har du været inddraget i?
Borgerinddragelsesworkshop
Inddragelseskort
Hvordan blev du inddraget af Frederiksberg Kommune?
Hvad synes du om inddragelsesprocessen eller -aktiviteten?
Giv din bedømmelse på en skala fra 1-5, hvor 1 er virkelig dårlig og 5 er virkelig god.
Hvorfor?
1
2
3
4
5
Hvilke projekter har du været inddraget i?
Borgerinddragelsesworkshop
Inddragelseskort
Hvordan blev du inddraget af Frederiksberg Kommune?
Hvad synes du om inddragelsesprocessen eller -aktiviteten?
Giv din bedømmelse på en skala fra 1-5, hvor 1 er virkelig dårlig og 5 er virkelig god.
Hvorfor?
1
2
3
4
5
Figure E.1: Intro exercise question cards
Figure E.2: City map question cards
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
104
==PAGE:113==
Skole
Rådhus Pladsen
Butiksområde
Idrætsanlæg
Den bakkede park
Legepladsen ved åen
Privatboliger
Boligblokke
Figure E.3: City map game board
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
105
==PAGE:114==
SPORTSANLÆG
VILLAKVARTER
FREDERIKSBERG HAVE
HANDELSGADE
FREDERIKSBERG 
PLADSEN
ANDEDAM
Figure E.4: Scenario game board
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
106
==PAGE:115==
CASE
I er ansat i Frederiksberg Kommune, og skal designe, planlægge og 
udføre klimatilpasning af “Frederiksberg Pladsen”. Pladsen er et 
kommunalt område som grænser op til et villakvarter, en handelsga-
de, et sportsanlæg og Frederiksberg Have. 
Der en andedam og byens borgere bruger området til boldspil, hun-
deluftning og gåture.
Området omkring pladsen har udfordringer med oversvømmelser, og 
derfor skal pladsen omlægges til et skybrudsanlæg som kan håndte-
re fremtidens øgede mængder regnvand - både dagligdags, samt for 
en 10 og 20 års hændelse.
MÅL
Pladsen skal klimatilpasses så den kan håndtere 2000 km3 vand 
med ﬂest mulige tilfredse borgere.
BORGERINDRAGELSE TOOLBOX
Online borgerhøring  
 
 
2 tilfredse borgere // 2 ressourcer
Borgermøde 
 
 
 
5 tilfredse borgere // 4 ressourcer
Direkte dialog 1 til 1 borger-kommune  
1 tilfreds borger  // 3 ressource 
Orienteringsbrev i e-boks  
 
4 tilfredse borgere // 1 ressource
Informationsskilt på pladsen  
3 tilfredse borgere // 1 ressource
Figure E.5: Case description for scenario game
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
107
==PAGE:116==
KLIMATILTAG 1
Anlæg af permable asfalt som forsinker regnvandet til kloakken.
Klima: Håndterer 2000 m3 vand og lyddæmper traﬁkken.
Borgertilfredshed: Butiksejere er bekymret for deres omsætning, da deres butikkers tilgængelig er forringet i 
anlægsperioden. Villa kvarteret ser frem til mindre støjende traﬁk. 
*hvordan skal borgerkonﬂikten håndteres? 
KLIMATILTAG 2
Anlæg af 3 regnvandsbede.
Klima: Håndterer 5000 m3 vand og tilføjer mere begrønning i området.
Borgertilfredshed: Butiksejere og villakvarteret er modstandere mod fjernelse af 5 parkeringspladser. Frederiks-
berg borgere ser frem til øget begrønning i bybilledet som fremmer biodiversiteten.
*hvordan skal borgerkonﬂikten håndteres?
KLIMATILTAG 3
Anlæg af permeable ﬂiser på pladsen.
Klima: Håndterer 300 km2 vand. Begrønning fjernes og biodiversiteten forringes.
Borgertilfredshed: Teenagere kan bruge pladsen til mødested og boldspil. Villakvarteret er bekymret for øget 
aktivitetsniveau og larm. 
*hvordan skal borgerkonﬂikten håndteres? 
KLIMATILTAG 4
Anlægning af nedgravede vandmagasiner.
Klima: Håndterer 800km3 vand. 
Borgertilfredshed: Naboer er glade for en “usynlig” løsning under jorden, og ønsker et grønt byrum med legeplads 
og træningsområde.
NOTE: Dette tiltag er meget dyrt at anlægge. Gennemføres dette må i droppe ét tidligere gennemført tiltag. I får 4 tilfredse borgere.
KLIMATILTAG 5
Udvidelse af andedam til at håndtere øgede mængder vand.
Klima: Håndterer 700km3 vand og øger dyrelivet.
Borgertilfredshed: Børnefamilier fra villakvarteret er begejstret for bedre forhold for dyreliv. Sportsforeningen 
udviser modstand for nedlægning af den oﬀentlig trappe (som de bruger til trappetræning), som udvidelsen kræver.
*hvordan skal borgerkonﬂikten håndteres? 
Figure E.6: Climate adaptation initiative cards for scenario game
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
108
==PAGE:117==
F
Values, Needs and Motivations Table
Figure F.1: Values, Needs and Motivations Table
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
109
==PAGE:118==
G
Themes of shared values, needs and
motivations Map
Figure G.1: Values, Needs and Motivations Table
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
110
==PAGE:119==
H
PD workshop exercise templates
Figure H.1: The ”How Might We” idea generation cards and Spider web diagram templates
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
111
==PAGE:120==
I
1st iteration prototypes of final
intervention elements for test with PMs
All prototypes are developed in Danish.
INFORMATION
metode
INFORMATION
metode
Figure I.1: Example of Review Card front
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT:
 
Inputs til udformning af klimatilpasningsprojekt/anlæg
 
Feedback på projektelementer
 
Idéer til byrumselemener
 
Videreformidling af projektinformation
 
Orientering af projektrammer
 
Andet:__________________________________________________
ET GODT RÅD: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVAD ER TIDEN BRUGT PÅ?
 
Planlægning
 
Facilitering
 
Dataindsamling
 
Databehandling
INFORMATION
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT:
 
Inputs til udformning af klimatilpasningsprojekt/anlæg
 
Feedback på projektelementer
 
Idéer til byrumselemener
 
Videreformidling af projektinformation
 
Orientering af projektrammer
 
Andet:__________________________________________________
ET GODT RÅD: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVAD ER TIDEN BRUGT PÅ?
 
Planlægning
 
Facilitering
 
Dataindsamling
 
Databehandling
INFORMATION
Figure I.2: Example of Review Card back
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
112
==PAGE:121==
DIALOG
inspirationskort
Pop-Up Pølsevogn
HØRING
inspirationskort
HappyOrNot knap
Figure I.3: Example of Inspiration Card front
Inviter borgere fra lokalmiljøet til dialog over en pølse fra 
pølsevognen eller anden form for pop-up bod.
EKSEMPEL
Fredericia Kommune gjorde brug af en politisk pølsevogn på Egeskov 
torv under kommunalvalget i 2019. Det skabte et fysisk rum for 
borgerne til at mødes med politikerne over en uforpligtende snak. Her 
blev borgere og politikere klogere på hinandens behov og idéer, og 
bidrog til at skabe en tættere relation. 
TIP
Overvej hvilken type borgere der skal tiltrækkes; skal der serveres 
vegetarpølser eller cappuccinos? Husk at åbningstiderne for pop-up 
boden er afgørende for at tiltrække speciﬁkke grupper af borgere.  
DIALOG
HØRING
Giver borgere mulighed for at give inputs direkte i lokalom-
rådet. Sæt et barometer artefakt op og spørg, hvad borger-
ne synes om et speciﬁkt element eller tiltag.
EKSEMPEL
Under projektet “Pladsen bag Rådhuset” var et barometer stillet op. 
Brug byrummet aktivt til at opsætte et artefakt, til at indsamle lokale 
borgeres inputs. Artefaktet kan være en HappyORNot knap, barome-
ter, postkasse, etc.
TIP
Giv borgere klare muligheder for at være for og imod. Overvej om der 
skal være mulighed for videre uddybelse af svaret og hvordan. 
Figure I.4: Example of Inspiration Card back
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
113
==PAGE:122==
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Afsæt tid og ressourcer
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Spring ud i det!
Figure I.5: Example of Tips&Tricks Card front
AFSÆT TID OG RESSOURCER
Borgerinddragelse kan være besværligt, det tager lang tid, 
og det er ikke altid let. Derfor er det noget, der skal afsæt-
tes tid og ressourcer til. Det betyder, at både politikere og 
ledere i kommunerne skal bakke op og have fokus på det, så 
de gode intentioner ikke drukner i den daglige drift.
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
TIPS & TRICKS
TIPS & TRICKS
SPRING UD I DET!
Borgerinddragelse er ikke noget, man bare kan, fordi man er 
en dygtig arkitekt eller ingeniør, det skal læres. Sørg derfor 
for, at I har de rigtige kompetencer og sørg for at øve jer, så 
I hele tiden bliver skarpere på, hvordan I inddrager netop 
jeres borgere. Kommunerne er forskellige, og nogle gange 
må man simpelthen bare kaste sig ud i det for at ﬁnde ud 
af, hvad der virker.
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
Figure I.6: Example of Tips&Tricks Card back
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
114
==PAGE:123==
Inspirationskort
Figure I.7: Canvas design layout 1
+ BORGER-
   KONTAKT
+ TID
- TID
- BORGER-
  KONTAKT
Inspirationskort
Figure I.8: Canvas design layout 2
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
115
==PAGE:124==
INFORMATION
Inspirationskort
HØRING
DIALOG
SAMSKABELSE
Figure I.9: Canvas design layout 3
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
116
==PAGE:125==
J Client Material
Client material begins on next page and is designed in Danish.
Holistic design of municipal climate adaptation projects
117
==PAGE:126==
HØR BORGERNE!
Et værktøj til vidensdeling og kompetenceopbygning for værdiskabende borgerinddragelse i klimatilpasningsprojekter,
til afdelingen for Trafik og Byrum i Frederiksberg Kommune
Januar 2024
==PAGE:127==
Hør
Borgerne!
er
resultatet
af
et
specialeprojekt
udarbejdet
af
to
kandidatstuderende fra Design og Innovation, DTU. Projektets grundlag er et
casestudie udarbejdet i tæt samarbejde med afdelingen Trafik og Byrum i
Frederiksberg Kommune i perioden september 2023 - januar 2024.
Værktøjet Hør Borgerne! understøtter Trafik og Byrums inddragelse af borgere i
byudviklingsprojekter, der retter sig specifikt mod klimatilpasning. Det er baseret
på
omfattende
analyser
af
udfordringer
og
optimeringspotentialer
for
borgerinddragelse i klimatilpasningsprojekter, som kommer af et studie i Trafik og
Byrums klimatilpasningsstrategier og -processer, samt inputs fra workshops og
tests med projektledere og borgere bosat i Frederiksberg Kommune.
En særlig tak til:
May Lundsgaard, afdelingsleder for Trafik og Byrum, for muligheden for et
samarbejde, og for at lade os komme med ind i kommunens maskinrum og
undersøge processer, projekter og strukturerne bag klimatilpasningsprojekter i
Frederiksberg Kommune.
Projektlederne i Trafik og Byrum, samt en særlig tak til Dorte Winkler Nilsson,
Malene Rockall Muus, Dorthe Stender, Ruben Filskov og Bo Rasmussen.
Tak for jeres engagement og aktive deltagelse i projektet. Jeres viden og indsigter
har været uvurderlige og særdeles betydningsfulde bidrag til udarbejdelsen af
dette specialeprojekt.
Gitte Sørensen, administrativ koordinator i Trafik og Byrum, for utrolig
imødekommende og løbende støtte, samt omfattende hjælp til organisering og
planlægning af workshops og møder.
Frederikke Ellemose Vad & Sara Kristine Holmskov Eberle
FORORD
1
==PAGE:128==
BAGGRUND
3
FORMÅL
4
ELEMENTER
5
TAVLEN
6
REVIEW KORT
7
INSPIRATION KORT
8
TIPS&TRICKS KORT
9
BRUGSEKSEMPEL
10
IMPLEMENTERING
11
INDHOLD
==PAGE:129==
BAGGRUND
Klimaforandringerne er til stede overalt i vores samfund. Vores byer oplever højere
temperaturer, større mængder regn og hyppigere tilfælde af ekstremt vejr.
Forskning viser at byer bidrager markant til det forandrende klima, men samtidig
er yderst sårbare. Derfor har byer et stort ansvar for at udvikle lokalsamfund til at
kunne modstå konsekvenserne af klimaforandringerne..
Danske kommuner driver den lokale urbane udvikling og har derfor ansvaret for at
sikre klimarobuste byer og samfund. Artikler viser, at kommuner oplever
udfordringer med lokalsamfund, som ikke billiger klimatilpasningsprojekter, da de
opfattes som radikale forandringer af bybilledet. Den store borgermodstand har
ført til, at flere kommunale klimatilpasningsprojekter er blevet droppet på grund af
stor borgermodstand. Dette gør sig gældende i bl.a. Frederiksberg Kommune.
Et eksempel er anlægsprojektet ved Skt. Jørgens Sø, der blev droppet på grund af
borgermodstand,
og
som
også
har
dannet
udgangspunktet
for
dette
specialeprojekt.
Dette
projekt
har
undersøgt
og
analyseret
Trafik
og
Byrums
klimatilpasningsprojekter, ved at betragte det holistisk fra et tredelt systemisk
perspektiv. Ambitionen er at bidrage med en intervention, der optimerer
borgerinddragelsen i klimatilpasningsprojekter, som vil for at sikre en robust og
holistisk udvikling af Frederiksberg som by. Det vil skabe en urban udvikling som
tilgodeser samfundet, byen og klimaet og deres indbyrdes relationer, som vil sikre
en fremtidig bæredygtig by på Frederiksberg.
Værdiskabende borgerinddragelse, der bidrager til bæredygtig kommunal
byudvikling, anbefales i litteraturen at opfylde følgende faktorer (Tortzen et. al,
2023):
Faktorerne for succesfuld borgerinddragelse er understøttet af centrale
anbefalinger for god facilitering henvendt til kommunale myndigheder (Tortzen et.
al, 2023):
•
Kendskab til samfundskontekster og specifikke lokale forhold
•
Tidlig og kontinuerlig inddragelse af lokalsamfundet gennem hele processen
•
Samarbejde med lokale borgere, fx gennem en kontaktperson eller
fokusgruppe
•
Åbenhed overfor borgers indfyldelse på beslutninger ved at involvere lokal
kendskab og behov
•
Samfundsmæssig værdi for lokalsamfundet gennem jobs, investeringer i
lokalområdet, osv.
•
Tillidsopbygning, relationer, netværk og alliancer - både internt og eksternt
•
Åbenhed overfor andre parter og interesser
•
En klar forventningsafstemning - også internt i organisationen
•
Politisk og organisatorisk værdi - til at skabe internt mandat og støtte
•
Mod, kontinuitet og kreativitet
•
Personlig attitude og kontinuitet
3
==PAGE:130==
Hør Borgerne! er et værktøj udviklet til at fremme og understøtte intern
vidensdeling og kompetenceudvikling for borgerinddragelse.
Med værktøjets forskellige elementer sigter Hør Borgerne! mod at øge den interne
bevidsthed og værdiskabelse af borgerinddragelse. Elementerne er designet til at
støtte projektledere, i at kommunikere og reflektere over borgerinddragelses-
praksisser og -metoder, før, under og efter borgerinddragelse finder sted.
Hør Borgerne! består af en tavle og tre typer af kort, designet med hver deres
individuelle formål. De forskellige elementer er udviklet på baggrund af viden og
indsigter indsamlet gennem specialeprojektet, og er dermed designet specielt til
at passe i Trafik og Byrums kontekst. Hør Borgerne! er testet af forskellige
omgange under korte og længerevarende testforløb med Trafik og Byrums
projektledere. Værktøjet er designet til at være dynamisk og muligt at
videreudvikle, redesigne og opdatere, for at sikre dets aktualitet og kvalitet.
FORMÅL
4
==PAGE:131==
ELEMENTER
5
==PAGE:132==
ELEMENTER
TAVLEN
Hør Borgerne!-tavlen skaber de fysiske rammer for refleksion og vidensdeling i
Trafik og Byrum. Tavlen udgør et 2xA0 canvas. Dets grafiske design er baseret på
fire universelle faser af et klimatilpasningsprojekt i Trafik og Byrum, samt en ekstra
femte fase;
1.
planlægning
2.
programmering
3.
projektering
4.
anlæg
5.
events
Disse faser bidrager til en struktureret inddeling af et klimatilpasningsprojekt, som
over tid bliver fyldt ud med “anmeldelser” af afprøvede borgerinddragelsesmetoder
via Review kort. Review kortene placeres i en af de fem projektfaser, for at sikre at
vidensdelingen er struktureret og let at overskue.
Hør Borgerne!-tavlens placering på Trafik og Byrums kontor gør borger-
inddragelse til en fysisk og iøjnefaldende del af afdelingens daglige arbejdsgange.
For at sikre en alsidig brug af Hør Borgerne!-værktøjet, placeres tavlen på et
mobilt whiteboard, der giver mulighed for at skifte placering, såfremt det skal
indgå i f.eks. opstarts- og afdelingsmøder eller workshop i Frederiksberg
Kommune.
I højre side af tavlen findes Inspirationskort og Tips&Tricks kort, som altid er
tilgængelige for projektledere for inspiration til nye inddragelsesmetoder og
faciliteringsråd.
6
Boks der illustrerer Inspiration
og Tips&Tricks kort
==PAGE:133==
ELEMENTER
KORT
Hør Borgerne!-værktøjet indeholder tre typer kort, med hver deres anvendelse,
formål og farve. De grønne kort er Review kort, som udfyldes af projektledere, de
lyserøde kort er Inspirationskort, og de gule kort er Tips&Tricks kort.
Tilsammen hjælper kortene projektlederne til at udvikle en mere refleksiv og
vidensdelende tilgang til borgerinddragelse. Kortene hjælper desuden til at udvikle
og styrke kompetencer, og er dermed grundlaget for at udføre værdiskabende
borgerinddragelse i klimatilpasningsprojekter.
Fælles for Inspirationskort og Review kort er at de er inddelt i fire kategorier
baseret på forskellige borgerinddragelsestyper inspireret af Anne Tortzen, som
hjælper til at strukturere omgangen med borgerinddragelse yderligere for
projektledere:
INFORMATION
inspirationskort
Historiefortælling
INFORMATION
metode
TIPS & TRICKS
Husk at
forventningsafstemme
7
•
Offentlig Høring
•
Dialog
•
Information
•
Samspil
==PAGE:134==
Review kortet anvendes til at give en “anmeldelse” af de borgerinddragelses-
metoder der anvendes. Det er udviklet for at opfordre og støtte projektlere til:
REVIEW KORT
ELEMENTER
Kortet anbefales at blive anvendt hver gang en borgerinddragelsesmetode har
været brugt i et projekt, og delt i plenum på afdelingsmøder.
•
at reflektere over valg og udbytte af en borgerinddragelsesmetode,
samt dele erfaringer og oplevelser med kollegaer
•
at vælge en metode der passer til et specifikt projekt
•
at søge inspiration og afprøve nye og innovative metoder
Et Review kort kan anvendes på to måder:
Anvendelse
1. Et Review kort anvendes efter en borgerinddragelsesmetode har været taget i brug.
Projektlederen vælger hvilken type kategori af borgerinddragelse der er foretaget, skriver
metoden på forsiden af kortet, og udfylder herefter spørgsmålene på bagsiden. Kortet placeres
på tavlen i den projektfase hvor borgerinddraglesesmetoden er blevet udført.
2. Projektledere der søger inspiration til en borgerinddragelsesmetode kan på baggrund af
borgerinddragelseskategorierne og projektfaserne udvælge et Review kort og få indsigt i
hvordan en pågældende borgerinddragelsesmetode har været brugt, hvilke borgere metoden har
hjulpet til at inddrage, samt hvilke erfaringer og tips, som er gode at være opmærksom på.
INFORMATION
metode
NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
UDBYTTE (F.eks. feedback, inputs, videregivelse af information, etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MEGET TID ER DER BRUGT?
____________ TIMER
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
INFORMATION
Valgte metode
Spørgsmål der udfyldes af projektleder
Borgerinddragelseskategori
8
==PAGE:135==
ELEMENTER
Inspirationskort
bidrager til at fremme en innovativ og åben tilgang til
borgerinddragelse. Denne type kort bidrager med innovative og alternative
eksempler på hvordan borgerinddragelse kan udføres. De indeholder eksempler
som kan anvendes direkte i projekter, eller som kan være til inspiration og dermed
ændres så metoden passer til en specifik kontekst.
Inspirationskortene
er
inddelt
i
de
fire
borgerinddragelseskategorier:
så det er nemmere for den enkelte projektleder at navigere i de forskellige
inspirationseksempler.
På forsiden af hvert kort er metodenavnet noteret. På bagsiden er et hypotetisk
eller virkeligt eksempel på hvordan metoden enten kan bruges eller tidligere er
blevet brugt i virkeligheden.
Da inspirationskortene skal inspirere til at afprøve nye borgerinddragelsesmetoder,
er der desuden inkluderet et lille tip, nederst på hvert kort. Tippet er enten noget,
der er godt at huske på ved brug eller ved facilitering af metoden.
Inspirationskortene er placeret sammen med Tips&Tricks kortene i den blå boks
til højre på HørBorgerne!-tavlen. Hermed er de altid visuelt præsenteret og let
tilgængelige.
INSPIRATIONSKORT
INFORMATION
inspirationskort
Historiefortælling
En imaginær fortælling, der skal fange borgeres opmærksomhed og
fremhæve information, der er relevant for berørte borgere.
EKSEMPEL
En historiefortælling kan tage udgangspunkt i et fremtidigt klimatilpasnings-
projekt. Historien kan udspille sig hos en beboer på Frederiksberg, som oplever
projektet tæt på; oplevelsen af maskiner uden for vinduet mellem 7-12, hvordan
beboeren nyder godt af de flotte blomsterbede, som har erstattet p-pladserne, for
at undgå potentielle oversvømmelser i ejendommen - som var tilfældet året før, og
som tilmed pynter og skaber et smukt udsyn fra stuevinduet en lørdag morgen i
april. Dermed videregives information om klimatilpasningprojektets betydning og
påvirkning, på en letforståelig og relaterbar måde.
TIP
Start med at liste alle de information og oplysninger, som er relevante at have med
og husk at historien skal være kort. Du kan eventuelt fremhæve den vigtige
information med fed skrift, for at gøre vigtig information endnu tydeligere for
borgerne.
INFORMATION
Beskrivelse af metoden
Borgerinddragelseskategori
Metode til inspiration
9
•
Offentlig Høring
•
Dialog
•
Information
•
Samspil
==PAGE:136==
Tips&Tricks kortet bruges til at styrke de interne kompetencer, gennem en række
anbefalinger og gode råd til hvordan man faciliterer og planlægger værdiskabende
borgerinddragelse.
Hvert kort indeholder et tip eller et trick til god borgerinddragelse, som på kortets
bagside er uddybet yderligere, for at sikre en fuld forståelse.
Kortet er placeret sammen med Inspirationskortene i den blå boks til højre på
HørBorgerne!-tavlen.
TIPS & TRICKS KORT
ELEMENTER
TIPS & TRICKS
Husk at
forventningsafstemme
HUSK AT FORVENTNINGSAFSTEMME
Sørg for hurtigt at lave en forventningsafstemning med borgeren om, hvad der
er givet, og hvad de har indflydelse på. Hvis de kun har ringe indflydelse, så
skal I vælge inddragelsesformer, der afspejler det. Ellers stikker I folk blår i
øjnene, og det er meget lettere at opnå en accept af de beslutninger, der er
taget, hvis I spiller med åbne kort.
Reference: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-
borgerinddragelse-otte-gode-raad
TIPS & TRICKS
Tip
Beskrivelse af tip eller trick
10
==PAGE:137==
IMPLEMENTERING
For at sikre en bæredygtig og successfuld
implementering af Hør Borgerne!-
værktøjet, som en integreret del af den
daglige arbejdsrutine i Trafik og Byrum,
anbefales det at der udvælges en ansvarlig
for Hør Borgerne! .Særligt i den
indledende fase, da det er afgørende at
have en ambassadør, der minder om at
bruge tavlen til inspiration, planlægning og
udfyldelse af Review kortene. Det
anbefales at den ansvarlige sikre rat Hør
Borgerne! holdes opdateret med kort af en
vis relevans.
For at få det største udbytte af Review
kortene og de erfaringer, der opnås ude i
projekterne, anbefales det at nye Review
kort deles i plenum i Trafik og Byrum,
f.eks. på de ugentlige tavlemøder.
Inspirationskortene kan med fordel
opdateres løbende, hvis projektledere
støder på innovative og alternative
eksempler på inddragelse af borgere.
Opdateringer er desuden med til at
opretholde aktualiteten og værdien af
Inspirationskortene. En mappe med
digitale inDesign-filer er vedlagt, hvori
ændringer og opdateringer kan foretages.
GODE RÅD TIL IMPLEMENTERING
EN TAVLE-ANSVARLIG
INTEGRERET DEL AF DE DAGLIGE
RUTINER
VEDLIGEHOLDELSE
11
==PAGE:138==
INFORMATION
metode
INFORMATION
metode
==PAGE:139==
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT: (Eksemplevis feedback, inputs, formidling af information etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MANGE TIMER ER DER BRUGT PÅ METODEN?
____________ TIMER
 
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
 
INFORMATION
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT: (Eksemplevis feedback, inputs, formidling af information etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MANGE TIMER ER DER BRUGT PÅ METODEN?
____________ TIMER
 
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
 
INFORMATION
==PAGE:140==
OFFENTLIG HØRING
metode
metode
OFFENTLIG HØRING
==PAGE:141==
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT: (Eksemplevis feedback, inputs, formidling af information etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MANGE TIMER ER DER BRUGT PÅ METODEN?
____________ TIMER
 
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
 
OFFENTLIG 
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT: (Eksemplevis feedback, inputs, formidling af information etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MANGE TIMER ER DER BRUGT PÅ METODEN?
____________ TIMER
 
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
 
OFFENTLIG 
==PAGE:142==
DIALOG
metode
DIALOG
metode
==PAGE:143==
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT: (Eksemplevis feedback, inputs, formidling af information etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MANGE TIMER ER DER BRUGT PÅ METODEN?
____________ TIMER
 
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
 
DIALOG
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT: (Eksemplevis feedback, inputs, formidling af information etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MANGE TIMER ER DER BRUGT PÅ METODEN?
____________ TIMER
 
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
 
DIALOG
==PAGE:144==
SAMSKABELSE
metode
SAMSKABELSE
metode
==PAGE:145==
PPROJEKTLEDER NAVN: 
__________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT: (Eksemplevis feedback, inputs, formidling af information etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MANGE TIMER ER DER BRUGT PÅ METODEN?
____________ TIMER
 
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
 
SAMSKABELSE
PROJEKTLEDER NAVN: __________________________________________________
DATO: _________________
INDDRAGEDE BORGERE: 
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
OUTPUT: (Eksemplevis feedback, inputs, formidling af information etc.)
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
HVOR MANGE TIMER ER DER BRUGT PÅ METODEN?
____________ TIMER
 
ET GODT RÅD:
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
 
SAMSKABELSE
==PAGE:146==
INFORMATION
inspirationskort
Historiefortælling
INFORMATION
inspirationskort
SoMe Opslag
==PAGE:147==
En imaginær fortælling, der skal fange borgeres opmærk-
somhed og fremhæve information, der er relevant for berør-
te borgere. 
EKSEMPEL
En historiefortælling kan tage udgangspunkt i et fremtidigt klimatil-
pasningsprojekt. Historien kan udspille sig hos en beboer på Frede-
riksberg, som oplever projektet tæt på; oplevelsen af maskiner uden 
for vinduet mellem 7-12, hvordan beboeren nyder godt af de ﬂotte 
blomsterbede, som har erstattet p-pladserne, for at undgå potentielle 
oversvømmelser i ejendommen - som var tilfældet året før, og som 
tilmed pynter og skaber et smukt udsyn fra stuevinduet en lørdag 
morgen i april. 
Dermed videregives information om klimatilpasningprojektets betyd-
ning og påvirkning, på en letforståelig og relaterbar måde.
TIP
Start med at liste alle de information og oplysninger, som er relevante 
at have med og husk at historien skal være kort. Du kan eventuelt 
fremhæve den vigtige information med fed skrift, for at gøre vigtig 
information endnu tydeligere for borgerne. 
INFORMATION
INFORMATION
SoMe-opslag kan bruges til at nå speciﬁkke borgergrupper 
afhængig af det valgte medie. 
EKSEMPEL
Danmarks Radio er et godt eksempel på, hvordan SoMe kan anvendes 
til at sprede information om et givent emne, f.eks. anvender de i høj 
grad Instagram stories til at nå et yngre publikum og på den måde 
sikre at information om et emne når bredt ud til befolkningen. 
TIP
Det er en god idé at linke til eksterne sider, der kan give yderligere 
information til borgeren. 
==PAGE:148==
OFFENTLIG 
inspirationskort
SoMe Meningsmåling
inspirationskort
Meningstræet
OFFENTLIG 
==PAGE:149==
SoMe meningsmålingerkan bruges til at nå speciﬁkke 
borgergrupper og få deres holdninger om og inputs til 
klimatilpasning på Frederiksberg. 
EKSEMPEL
Danmarks Radio og andre organisationer og tænketanke bruger 
Instagrams’ integrerede meningsmålingsfunktion i deres instagram 
stories, til hurtigt at tilegne sig viden om danskeres holdninger, 
meninger, værdier, etc. 
TIP
Husk at respondér på de svar der indsamles og gør kontinuerligt brug 
af denne metode. 
OFFENTLIG HØRING
Et fysisk element placeret i det oﬀentlige rum skaber blik-
fang og giver borgere mulighed for at hænge sedler på 
træet med deres holdninger og meninger på en innovativ 
måde.
EKSEMPEL
Danmarks Radio er et godt eksempel på, hvordan SoMe kan anvendes 
til at sprede information om et givent emne, f.eks. anvender de i høj 
grad Instagram stories til at nå et yngre publikum og på den måde 
sikre at information om et emne når bredt ud til befolkningen. 
TIP
Det er en god idé at linke til eksterne sider, der kan give yderligere 
information til borgeren. 
OFFENTLIG HØRING
==PAGE:150==
DIALOG
inspirationskort
Pop-Up Pølsevogn
inspirationskort
HappyOrNot knap
OFFENTLIG 
==PAGE:151==
Inviter borgere fra lokalmiljøet til dialog over en pølse fra 
pølsevognen eller anden form for pop-up bod.
EKSEMPEL
Fredericia Kommune gjorde brug af en politisk pølsevogn på Egeskov 
torv under kommunalvalget i 2019. Det skabte et fysisk rum for 
borgerne til at mødes med politikerne over en uforpligtende snak. Her 
blev borgere og politikere klogere på hinandens behov og idéer, og 
bidrog til at skabe en tættere relation. 
TIP
Overvej hvilken type borgere der skal tiltrækkes; skal der serveres 
vegetarpølser eller cappuccinos? Husk at åbningstiderne for pop-up 
boden er afgørende for at tiltrække speciﬁkke grupper af borgere.  
DIALOG
Giver borgere mulighed for at give inputs direkte i lokalom-
rådet. Sæt et barometer artefakt op og spørg, hvad borger-
ne synes om et speciﬁkt element eller tiltag.
EKSEMPEL
Under projektet “Pladsen bag Rådhuset” var et barometer stillet op. 
Brug byrummet aktivt til at opsætte et artefakt, til at indsamle lokale 
borgeres inputs. Artefaktet kan være en HappyORNot knap, barome-
ter, postkasse, etc.
TIP
Giv borgere klare muligheder for at være for og imod. Overvej om der 
skal være mulighed for videre uddybelse af svaret og hvordan. 
OFFENTLIG HØRING
==PAGE:152==
SAMSKABELSE
inspirationskort
Idékonkurrence
SAMSKABELSE
inspirationskort
Borgere som bygherrer
==PAGE:153==
En idekonkurrence kan bruges til at co-designe med kom-
munens borgere, og giver muligheden for direkte indﬂydelse 
i idéudviklingsfasen af et klimatilpasningsprojekt.  
EKSEMPEL
En åben idékonkurrence blev anvendt til at videreudvikle Refshaleøen 
i København. I løbet af efteråret 2023 var konkurrencen åben og 
henvendte sig til både fagfolk, studerende, nyuddannede og interesse-
rede borgere. Denne metode sikrede at der blev bygget bro mellem 
fortid, nutid og fremtid, så Refshaleøen fortsat kan genkendes, og 
bydelen for fremtiden er tydeligt forankret i Refshaleøens nuværende 
kvaliteter der er at ﬁnde. 
TIP
Gør opmærksom på hvordan og i hvilken grad vinderen af konkurren-
cen får indﬂydelse på udviklingen af det endelige klimatilpasningsan-
læg. Husk at belønne deres indsats og inputs og gøre opmærksom på 
dette i de lokale byrum, for at øge opmærksomheden på samarbejdet 
mellem kommune og lokale borgere. 
SAMSKABELSE
SAMSKABELSE
Engagér borgerne i at være med til at bygge og skabe nye 
elementer for at øge indﬂydelse, medbestemmelse og skabe 
en ejerskabsfølelse.
EKSEMPEL
Virksomheden TagTomat faciliterer baggårdsprojekter hvor skralde-
skure og blomsterkasser opsættes i tæt samarbejde med lokale 
beboere. TagTomat agerer som facilitator og rådgivende ekspert under 
forskellige workshops, hvor de stiller materialer og værktøj til rådig-
hed.
TagTomat inviterer beboere med ind i  idéudviklingen af deres 
baggårds design, og giver dem desuden rollen som den drivende 
arbejdskraft under opførelsen af skurene.
TIP
Sæt klare rammer for mulighederne og vær transparente med tilgæn-
gelige ressourcer fx. tid, penge og kompetencer. Vær åben for borger-
nes input og tag deres visioner seriøst. - byen skal designes for 
borgerne, ikke for kommunen!
==PAGE:154==
INFORMATION
inspirationskort
Fremtidsscenarie
INFORMATION
inspirationskort
Biografreklame
==PAGE:155==
Udstil fysiske bud på fremtidsscenarier på konsekvenserne 
for Frederiksbergs byrum, hvis ikke kommunen klimatilpas-
ses. 
EKSEMPEL
Københavns Kommune har, som del af en kampagne, opsat forhøjede 
bybænke rundt omkring i byrummet, for at sætte fokus på globale 
temperaturstigninger, der blandt andet vil skabe forhøjede vandstan-
de og oversvømmelser. De forhøjede bybænke giver danskerne et 
konkret billede af, hvordan fremtiden bliver, hvis ikke der gøres en 
indsats nu. 
TIP
Denne metode kan gøres lokalt, men kan også bruges generelt på 
Frederiksberg for at øge bevidstheden om klimatilpasning og dermed 
indstillingen til de forandringer, som er nødvendige, når der anlægges 
et klimatilpasningsprojekt. 
INFORMATION
INFORMATION
En biografreklame kan tages i spil når generel information 
om klimatilpasningsprojekter skal formidles. Det kan enten 
være rettet mod et speciﬁkt projekt eller mere generelt om 
arbejdet med klimatilpasning. 
EKSEMPEL
Skal der anlægges et større klimatilpasningsprojekt, kan en biografre-
klame være et middel til at nå ﬂere forskellige borgergrupper; både 
barselsforældrene, der måske ikke får orienteret sig i e-boks og blot 
skal have kort og klar information, til Frederiksbergs unge borgere, 
samt til de ældre grupper af borgere, hvor en biografreklame kan 
agere samtalestarter og invitere til efterfølgende deltagelse i den 
videre process. 
TIP
Vær bevidst om hvilken borgergruppe der ser reklamen, og dermed 
hvilken information der gives og hvordan. 
==PAGE:156==
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Vær struktureret
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Vær kreativ, 
men husk formålet
==PAGE:157==
VÆR STRUKTURERET 
Når I arbejder med borgerinddragelse, er første skridt at 
ﬁnde ud af, hvad I vil have ud af det. Spørg jer selv, hvad 
formålet med inddragelsen er, og hvem I skal inddrage for 
at nå jeres mål.  Først derefter kan I overveje formater og 
metoder, så I får skabt nogle processer, der understøtter 
formålet.
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
TIPS & TRICKS
TIPS & TRICKS
VÆR KREATIV, MEN HUSK FORMÅLET
Det er ﬁnt at lave kreativ borgerinddragelse med masser af 
Post-it og gratis aftensmad, men hvis I ikke får fat i de 
rigtige input, så er I lige vidt. Selvom I har haft en god dag 
sammen med borgerne med masser af god energi og fest-
fyrværkeri, så kan I stadig ende med en dårlig sag i lokalavi-
sen, hvis borgerne ikke føler sig hørt, fordi I ikke bruger de 
input, I får.
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad 
==PAGE:158==
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Husk at
forventningsafstemme
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Inddrag kun så meget,
som der er behov for
==PAGE:159==
HUSK AT FORVENTNINGSAFSTEMME
Sørg for hurtigt at lave en forventningsafstemning med 
borgeren om, hvad der er givet, og hvad de har indﬂydelse 
på. Hvis de kun har ringe indﬂydelse, så skal I vælge inddra-
gelsesformer, der afspejler det. Ellers stikker I folk blår i 
øjnene, og det er meget lettere at opnå en accept af de 
beslutninger, der er taget, hvis I spiller med åbne kort. 
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
TIPS & TRICKS
TIPS & TRICKS
INDDRAG KUN SÅ MEGET, SOM DER ER BEHOV FOR
Husk også, at I ikke skal inddrage folk mere, end der er 
behov for. Det er vigtigt, at vi bliver bedre til at arbejde med 
borgerinddragelse, og at borgerne bliver inviteret indenfor i 
en demokratisk proces, men hvis deres input ikke skal 
bruges til noget, så er det bedre at lade være.
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
==PAGE:160==
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Inddrag så tidligt
som muligt
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Husk, uenighed er OK
==PAGE:161==
INDDRAG SÅ TIDLIGT SOM MULIGT
Succesfuld borgerinddragelse handler ofte om tidlig inddra-
gelse. Overvej, om I skal inddrage borgerne allerede inden 
den lovpligtige inddragelse, så I får adgang til den værdiful-
de viden, borgerne kan ligge inde med, tidligt i processen.
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
TIPS & TRICKS
TIPS & TRICKS
HUSK, UENIGHED ER OK
Ægte borgerinddragelse kræver, at I får skabt en ligeværdig 
dialog med borgeren. Det kræver, at I skal være klar til at 
lytte og anerkende, at de har et synspunkt. Det betyder ikke, 
at I skal være enige, det vigtige er at gøre sig umage med at 
lytte og forstå borgernes synspunkt. 
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
==PAGE:162==
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Afsæt tid og ressourcer
TIPS & TRICKS
inspirationskort
Spring ud i det!
==PAGE:163==
AFSÆT TID OG RESSOURCER
Borgerinddragelse kan være besværligt, det tager lang tid, 
og det er ikke altid let. Derfor er det noget, der skal afsæt-
tes tid og ressourcer til. Det betyder, at både politikere og 
ledere i kommunerne skal bakke op og have fokus på det, så 
de gode intentioner ikke drukner i den daglige drift.
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
TIPS & TRICKS
TIPS & TRICKS
SPRING UD I DET!
Borgerinddragelse er ikke noget, man bare kan, fordi man er 
en dygtig arkitekt eller ingeniør, det skal læres. Sørg derfor 
for, at I har de rigtige kompetencer og sørg for at øve jer, så 
I hele tiden bliver skarpere på, hvordan I inddrager netop 
jeres borgere. Kommunerne er forskellige, og nogle gange 
må man simpelthen bare kaste sig ud i det for at ﬁnde ud 
af, hvad der virker.
Kilde: https://www.komponent.dk/projekt/bliv-staerk-borger-
inddragelse-otte-gode-raad
