==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore 
wind plant FRT analysis and validation
Nikolaos Fotopoulos
DTU Wind Energy-M-0729 
January 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0729 
January 2024
Project period: 
August 2023 – January 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Nicolaos A. Koutouloulis
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Lisa Calearo
Rambøll
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: Nikolaos Fotopoulos
Title:
Dynamic simulation framework for 
offshore wind plant FRT analysis and 
validation
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been carried out at the Department of Wind and Energy Systems of
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for obtaining the
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
Under the supervision of Lisa Calearo (Senior Electrical Engineer, Expert in EV Grid
Integration at Rambøll) and Nicolaos A. Cutululis (Professor at DTU), the work was car-
ried out between September 2023 and January 2024 at the Power Systems Department
of Rambøll.
This thesis is worth 30 ECTS for the Master of Science in Electrical Engineering.
Nikolaos Fotopoulos - s220022
Signature
Date
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis introduces a dynamic simulation framework tailored for Fault-Ride-Through
(FRT) analysis in offshore wind plants, addressing the crucial need for these facilities
- particularly offshore wind farms - to remain connected to the grid and maintain op-
eration during grid disturbances. The study emphasizes the automation of simulation
processes and monitoring dynamic performance under FRT conditions. The integra-
tion of Python scripting with PowerFactory software is a cornerstone of this research,
streamlining the operations of wind farms and reducing the need for extensive man-
ual intervention. The framework’s flexibility to adapt to various grid codes highlights
its potential applicability in diverse regulatory environments. This work not only aids in
validating the FRT capabilities of wind farms but also tackles broader challenges asso-
ciated with integrating renewable energy sources into the power grid, meeting specific
grid code requirements. The research outcomes contribute significantly to the stability
and reliability of power systems as the adoption of renewable energy sources escalates
globally.
ii
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The end of this thesis marks two years since I came to Denmark. Two incredible years
with many experiences that helped me grow as a person and I will forever be grateful
for the choice I have made.
I would like to thank everyone who aided me in my studies, especially Nicos and Lisa for
their continued guidance and support throughout my master’s thesis. My thanks also
go to all professors from the power systems department at DTU and especially Joachim
Holbøll.
To the friends I made since moving to Denmark, you made this journey as fun as it could
be. You were there to support me when needed, and I am grateful for that.
A special thanks to all my friends from Patras. I know I could not have made it without
you. Thanks to Evriviadis for being my partner in crime. Dimitris, Spyros, Themis, and
Mitsos were bringing me joy when everything seemed dark. Alexandra, Angeliki, and
Effie thank you for being patient with me and giving me the best advice when I needed
it. A special thanks to the Plucked String Orchestra of Patras. I found a family there and
you will always be a part of my life.
Finally, the biggest thanks go to my family for their unrelenting support. To my parents
for their encouragement at every point of my academic journey. To my brother Thanos,
thank you for being the kindest and funniest person I have ever met. To my cousins
for all the times we have spent together. And a big thanks to the rest of the family for
always trusting and believing in me.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
AC
Alternating Current
DC
Direct Current
POC
Point of Connection
PCC
Point of Common Coupling
PF
DigSILENT PowerFactory
W
Watts
V
Volts
WF
Wind Farm
IAC
Inter-Array Cable
HV
High Voltage
DFIG
Doubly Fed Induction Generator
SCIG
Squirel Cage Induction Generator
FRT
Fault Ride-Through
UI
User Interface
RMS
Root Mean Square
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission
P
Active Power
Q
Reactive Power
V
Voltage
I
Current
DSL
DigSILENT Simulation Language
p.u.
Per Unit
PV
Photovoltaic
WTG
Wind Turbine Generator
iv
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Shift Towards Renewable Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Faults in the Power System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Assumptions and Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Fault Ride-Through: Technologies and Requirements
5
2.1
Wind Turbine Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Overview on Offshore Wind Farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Grid Codes and Requirements for FRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
PowerFactory and Python Interfacing
15
3.1
PowerFactory in a nutshell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Linking Python and PowerFactory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Setting up a simulation through Python scripting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.4
Accessing Variables and External Objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Dynamic Simulation Environment Design
35
4.1
PowerFactory model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
Developed Python Script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5
Fault Ride-Through Analysis and Framework Performance Evaluation
45
5.1
Example Simulation with Voltage Playback
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Case Studies with Voltage Playback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.3
Case Studies with Fault Event Creation at the POC . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.4
Recreation of the Grid Code Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6
Conclusions and Future Research
57
Bibliography
59
A Appendix
61
A.1 Current and Voltage results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
The Shift Towards Renewable Energy
Pursuing sustainable and clean energy sources is crucial in the modern world, with
offshore wind energy playing a pivotal role. Currently, the energy sector is the cause of
more than 75% of the greenhouse gas emissions [1], which means transitioning away
from fossil fuels is mandatory in the strive of keeping the rise of temperature below 1.5◦C
as proposed in the Paris agreement. This rising necessity for reliable, climate-friendly
and cost-effective energy provisions has initiated the rapid expansion of the offshore
wind market. Offshore wind is expected to play a pivotal role in the decarbonisation of
energy systems and aid in achieving the long-term goal of carbon neutrality by 2050.
With 8.8 GW of installed generation in 2022, the total offshore wind power capacity
amounts to 64.3 GW globally [2]. The current market expansion rhythm shows promising
signs. The Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC) Market Intelligence predicts that by the
end of 2032, the total global offshore wind capacity could surpass 447 GW.
Figure 1.1: Growth of installed Offshore Wind Capacity [2]
1.2
Faults in the Power System
With the growing size and complexity of the electrical power system comes the neces-
sity for countermeasures against possible faults that can occur in the network. Such
faults can reduce the reliability of the system and cause considerable economic losses.
Integrating renewable energy sources into the existing power grids comes with chal-
lenges, particularly in maintaining grid stability and reliability. The increase in the share
of renewables brings the disconnection of the conventional synchronous generators that
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
1
==PAGE:10==
work with fossil fuels. This disconnection comes, however, with the loss of ancillary ser-
vices such as Fault Ride-Through or FRT.
A case highlighting this issue is the blackout in the UK in 2019 [3]. A lightning strike
caused the disconnection of an overhead line and, as a result, the loss of some active
power generation. However, the unexpected disconnection of an offshore wind farm
caused a cascading effect of disconnection of generation units. This chain of events
ended in the disconnection of 1.1 million customers.
This blackout event showcases the necessity of broader FRT capabilities for wind farms
and the dire need to perform extensive and detailed testing simulations. In striving to
achieve harmonious electrical energy system operation, transmission system opera-
tors worldwide have created specific requirements that new power plants must fulfil to
connect to the grid. These regulations result from a mutual agreement between the op-
erators and the wind farm owners.
This thesis focuses on developing a dynamic simulation framework for Fault-Ride-Through
analysis in offshore wind farms. FRT capability is essential for ensuring grid stability
during disturbances, and this research seeks to create a flexible environment for testing
FRT compliance with various regional grid codes, emphasizing the Danish and Italian
Grid Codes.
1.3
Assumptions and Limitations
An offshore wind farm model was developed to test the simulation framework. The
components in the model -such as cables, transformers, wind turbines, etc- all use the
templates provided by the DigSILENT library. One of those templates is the IEC wind
turbine model discussed in section 4.1. In a real-world scenario, models and parameters
for the network components should be provided by the manufacturers for more realistic
recreation of the wind farm under research. Such parameters and models could refer
to wind turbine controllers, transformer types, cable lengths and properties, etc. These
properties have a great impact on the performance of the offshore wind farm, and there-
fore, detailed information is critical for obtaining accurate results.
Furthermore, the example model only consists of a single string of five wind turbine gen-
erators. This was done to avoid issues during simulations, such as very long execution
times or crashes due to poor conditioning of the controllers, while also giving the ability
to test the framework’s effectiveness.
A vital aspect of this research is including a voltage source in the simulation framework.
This aims to work around the limitations of PowerFactory concerning the definition of
fault events in the grid stemming from the way PowerFactory handles fault events. Fault
events in PF can only be defined by their type, impedance and duration. This means
accurately recreating a specific voltage at a certain point in the grid is very difficult un-
less the user has very detailed knowledge of the tested grid. The voltage source, thus,
enables the study to mimic the behaviour of wind farms during voltage fluctuations re-
alistically, thereby ensuring that the simulations accurately reflect their ability to support
the grid during critical moments. The framework is still able to perform simulations with
both methods, giving the user the choice to select between them.
2
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:11==
1.4
Research Objectives
The key research questions addressed in this thesis are:
• Developing a Python script for calculating and analyzing FRT requirements
in offshore wind farms, integrating these with a PowerFactory model.
The interaction between Python and PowerFactory is a powerful tool for automat-
ing simulations. It allows for result plotting, easy access to the element parameters
and network testing with minimal human interaction and PowerFactory expertise.
Retrieving simulation results through Python can provide valuable insights and
important details concerning FRT analyses on a wind power plant.
• Application of the dynamic simulation framework to specific FRT grid codes,
demonstrating its adaptability and versatility.
A critical factor in the development of the framework should be the ability of the
model to transition between tests quickly. The Python code should be developed
to allow for the choice of the parameters dictating the voltage at the point of con-
nection. This can ensure that the user can easily swap between grid code curves
and test the wind farm’s capability to fulfil the FRT requirements for grid connec-
tion.
• Validation of the framework through selected challenging case studies, high-
lighting its effectiveness in real-world scenarios.
After the Python code is developed, it is essential that it is applied to an offshore
wind farm model. This procedure will highlight the ability of the framework to test
the FRT capabilities of a wind farm adequately. This will be achieved by providing
all critical parameters -such as voltages, currents and loadings- that are crucial in
evaluating the power plant’s performance during a fault instance.
1.5
Thesis Outline
1. Chapter 1: Introduction
This chapter introduces the significance of offshore wind energy and the chal-
lenges in its integration into power grids. It outlines the research objectives, ques-
tions, and rationale for using a voltage source in simulation frameworks.
2. Chapter 2: Fault Ride-Through: Technologies and Requirements
This chapter discusses current technologies in offshore wind energy, focusing on
wind turbine technologies and the requirements set by transmission system oper-
ators for FRT capabilities.
3. Chapter 3: PowerFactory and Python Interfacing
The methodology chapter presents the development process of the Python script
for FRT analysis and its integration with PowerFactory, highlighting the approach
for creating a flexible and adaptable simulation environment.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
3
==PAGE:12==
4. Chapter 4: Dynamic Simulation Environment Design
This chapter focuses on the design and implementation of the dynamic simulation
environment, detailing the developed Python script and PowerFactory model.
5. Chapter 5: Fault Ride-Through Analysis and Framework Performance Eval-
uation
In this chapter, the thesis presents case studies for FRT analysis, evaluates the
performance of the simulation framework, and discusses the recreation of grid
code curves.
6. Chapter 6: Conclusions and Future Research
The concluding chapter summarizes the key findings, discusses their implications,
and addresses the limitations of the current research, suggesting directions for
future work.
4
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:13==
2
Fault Ride-Through: Technologies and
Requirements
2.1
Wind Turbine Technologies
Through the years, there has been a dramatic development in the utility and efficiency
of wind turbine generators. The first models in the 1990s used an induction machine
[4]. Induction machines offer advantages such as low production costs and robustness.
Type I Wind Turbine Generators
The first generation of Wind Turbines (Type I/A)
consists of a squirrel-cage induction generator (SCIG) directly connected to the grid.
The rotor connects to the turbine shaft through a gearbox. Because SCIGs have a min-
imal speed range from zero to nominal output power, these turbines are often referred
to as fixed speed. This type of turbine is cheap but comes with multiple disadvantages,
such as high reactive power consumption and the lack of FRT capabilities.
Since 2000, most developed wind turbine models have been variable speed. Their
primary purpose is to achieve high efficiency for a broader range of wind speeds by
introducing the ability to change the shaft’s rotating speed.
Type II Wind Turbine Generators
The first model providing a limited Variable Speed
capability was the Type II or Type B wind turbine generator. Type II generators have a
variable resistance deployed on the rotor in order to improve the torque-speed charac-
teristic and allow variability in the turbine rotation speed. Type II turbines, however, still
suffer from the same issues that type I generators do.
Type III Wind Turbine Generators
The disadvantages of Type I and II generators and
the rapid increase in the installed wind generation capacity have led to a new generation
of wind turbine generators. Type III or Type C generators use a wound rotor induction
machine. The difference is that while the stator is still directly connected to the grid, the
rotor circuit is connected via a back-to-back pair of voltage source converters. These
generators are known as doubly-fed induction generators (DFIG) and are the typical
technology deployed in modern onshore installations. This turbine topology comes with
the advantage of introducing the ability to control the reactive power output of the gen-
erator. Therefore, type III turbines are the first model to provide support to the network
during faults.
Type IV Wind Turbine Generators
Type IV or Type D wind turbine generators con-
sist of generators fully decoupled from the grid. This means the synchronous or asyn-
chronous machine is connected via a full-size electronic converter. A sample diagram
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
5
==PAGE:14==
can be seen in Figure 2.1. This generation of wind turbines improves some of the ca-
pabilities of DFIGs but also comes with disadvantages. Type IV wind turbines present
the best fault ride-through characteristics out of all wind turbine generators. During a
fault, any excess active power generation is dissipated on the chopper at the converters.
The grid-side converter can supply reactive power to the grid during this time. After the
fault is cleared, the chopper can be disconnected, and active power can be transferred
almost instantly through the converter. The disadvantages of the type IV topology are
mostly sprouting from the decoupling from the grid. Firstly, the stator cannot spot a
short-circuit in the system. Therefore, short-circuit current injection into the system de-
pends on the controlling action of the grid-side converter, which can cause problems in
detecting faults in the system. Type IV turbines also provide no natural inertial response.
Also, due to the size of the converters, the type IV concept is the most expensive to re-
alize.
Despite the disadvantages, the reduction in maintenance concerns and the increase in
controllability deem type IV generators most suitable for offshore wind installations [5].
Figure 2.1: Diagram of a Type IV Wind Turbine Generator [4]
2.2
Overview on Offshore Wind Farms
For increasing controllability and decreasing costs, several wind turbines -typically Type
IV- are deployed together and are connected to the onshore grid at the same point. This
point is called the Point of Connection (POC). Wind farms typically consist of two parts:
the power generation and the power transmission system [6]. Figure 2.2 portrays a
structural example of an offshore wind farm.
6
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Basic Structure of an Offshore Wind Farm [6]
Generally, the output of the joint generator-converter system is at 690 V. The voltage
level is stepped up to 66 kV with a transformer. Multiple turbines can be connected in ar-
rays using Inter-Array Cables (IAC). Figure 2.3 shows typical layouts for the connection
of wind turbines in an offshore wind farm.
Figure 2.3: Example Layouts in OWFs [7]
All turbines are then connected to a collection point and then to the offshore substa-
tion. The main components of the offshore substation include a transformer, a backup
conventional generator, converters and compensation equipment [7]. The transformer
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
7
==PAGE:16==
steps up the voltage at the optimum level for minimization of losses. The backup gen-
erator aids in the case of power losses from the export cable. Converters are present
if the connection to the onshore grid is via HVDC. Finally, compensation units such as
capacitors, reactors, SVCs or STATCOMs are used to ensure maximum active power
transmission to the onshore grid. There are two solutions for achieving connection to
the onshore grid:
For connection distances below 50 km, an HVAC connection is common since it is easier
and more economical. A transformer raises the voltage level to HVAC (132 kV, 220 kV,
300 kV), and an AC cable connects the offshore and onshore substations. Due to the
capacitive nature of the submarine AC cables, compensation measures are necessary
at both ends. Another disadvantage of the HVAC connection is that it cannot connect
two systems working at different frequencies.
When the distance is above 50 km, reactive power produced by the AC cables becomes
a serious issue due to the high capacitance. Consequently, the active power capacity
of the cable is significantly reduced with increasing distance. Then, HVDC is the typical
configuration. The HVAC level is converted to HVDC by an AC/DC converter at the off-
shore substation. Afterwards, active power is delivered through the HVDC transmission
system to the onshore grid, where another DC/AC converter converts HVDC to HVAC.
The necessity for power electronic converters makes this configuration very costly.
2.3
Grid Codes and Requirements for FRT
The rapid advancement in wind generation installations results in the disconnection of
synchronous generation units that depend on fossil fuels for power generation. With the
disconnection of the more traditional power plants comes the loss of provision of ancil-
lary services to the grid. Ancillary services include, among others, Fault Ride-Through
(FRT). During faults, synchronous generating units can provide support by remaining
connected and injecting reactive current into the grid. Before the immersion of renew-
able sources, traditional generators dominated the grid, and thus, wind generation units
did not have to be designed with the capability of providing those services. However,
the increase in the share of renewables has created the necessity of adequate con-
trol actions to ensure stability in power delivery and maintain grid integrity during fault
events.
An agreement between the transmission system operator of the country and the wind
farm operator dictates the behaviour of the generating units. This agreement consists of
a list of regulations which constitute the grid code. Each country or region has their grid
code. However, to ensure the robustness of the electrical network, organisations such
as the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E)
have created templates that the separate region grid codes should follow.
2.3.1
European regulation framework
More specifically, the 2016 European Commission [8] created a regulatory framework
specifying the requirements new generation plants should meet to connect to the grid.
8
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:17==
Regarding FRT, these regulations provide a range of parameters to be chosen by the
regional operators. Those parameters should be chosen adequately depending on the
system’s needs and the amount of renewable sources connected.
Figure 2.4 is the proposed fault ride-through curve by ENTSO-E. The graph represents
the lower limit for the voltage at the connection point under which the power plant oper-
ator is allowed to disconnect the generation units. More specifically:
• Uret is the voltage retained at the point of connection during the fault and is the
lowest voltage at which the generators are required to remain connected to the
grid.
• tclear is the time the fault is cleared
• Urec1, Urec2, trec1, trec2 and trec3 specify lower limits for the voltage recovery after
the fault is cleared.
Figure 2.4: Fault ride-through curve specified by Entso-E
ENTSO-E also provides proposed ranges for these values as seen in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Parameter values for power generating models by ENTSO-E
Voltage parameters [pu]
Time parameters [seconds]
Uret
0.05 – 0.3
tclear
0.14 – 0.25
Uclear
0.7 – 0.9
trec1
tclear
Urec1
Uclear
trec2
trec1 −0.7
Urec2
0.85 – 0.9
trec3
trec2 −1.5
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
9
==PAGE:18==
According to the regulations, the power generating module must be capable of remain-
ing connected to the network and continue operation in the cases of symmetrical faults
as long as the voltage remains above the lower limit defined in Figure 2.4 unless the
protection schemes require disconnection. It is crucial to design the protection in a way
that does not hinder the FRT performance of the generating module. The power park
operator should also set the under-voltage protection to the maximum capabilities of the
generation units unless the region’s network operator requires less strict settings. Dur-
ing asymmetrical faults, the capabilities have to be designed by separate transmission
system operators.
For this thesis, the grid codes under investigation are the Danish regulations defined by
Energinet and the Italian regulations defined by Terna.
Energinet requirements for FRT-Danish grid code
Energinet has specified the requirements for wind power plants with a generation ca-
pacity above 11 kW [9]. Figure 2.5 defines the voltage dip tolerance requirements for
wind power plants above 1.5 MW. At a minimum, the power plant should withstand a
voltage dip down to 20% of the nominal operation voltage for at least 0.5 seconds.
Figure 2.5: Fault ride-through curve specified by Energinet
There are three areas defined in the graph.
• In Area A the power plant must stay connected and maintain production.
• In Area B the power plant must remain connected to the grid and also provide
10
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:19==
voltage support by injecting reactive current to the grid.
• In Area C the operator of the power plant is allowed to disconnect the generation
units.
Energinet specifies that if the voltage at the point of connection is restored to Area A
for 1.5 seconds, a subsequent voltage dip should be dealt with as a new fault situation.
If several faults occur while in Area B and the voltage-time characteristic at the point of
connection progressively enters Area C, disconnection is allowed.
While in Area B, the wind power plant should be deployed with an adequate function
controlling the reactive current as specified in Figure 2.6. The voltage used for the
realisation of the control action is to be specified by the wind turbine supplier. During
voltage dips, the supply of reactive current should take priority. However, active power
output should be maintained if possible.
Figure 2.6: Reactive Current-Voltage characteristic specified by Energinet
It is important to note, that these regulations are the minimum requirements for grid
connection.
Energinet also provides a table listing possible recurring faults in the grid. The require-
ments specified by Figure 2.5 apply to the point of connection, but faults can happen
anywhere in the grid.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
11
==PAGE:20==
Table 2.2: Fault types and duration in the public electricity supply grid
Type
Duration of fault
Three-phase short circuit
Short circuit for 150 ms
Phase-to-phase-to-earth
short
circuit/phase-to-phase short circuit
Short circuit for 150 ms followed by a new
short circuit 0.5 to 3 seconds later, also
with a duration of 150 ms
Phase-to-earth short circuit
Phase-to-earth fault for 150 ms followed
by a new phase-to-earth fault 0.5 to 3
seconds later, also with a duration of 150
ms
Terna requirements for FRT-Italian grid code
Similarly, Terna has defined regulations for connection to the Italian grid. Figure 2.7 de-
fines the under- and over-voltage profiles under which the power plant should maintain
a connection to the grid. Again, the profiles are the minimum criteria for the design of
the individual components. If the power plant can provide a wider FRT characteristic, it
should not be limited by the proposed regulations [10].
Figure 2.7: Fault ride-through curve specified by Terna
For the under-voltage ride-through characteristic, Terna specifies that for a 0 p.u. voltage
dip, the wind power plant must remain connected to the grid for at least 0.2 seconds. The
ending point of the ramping part of the curve is defined based on the voltage level at the
connection point. For 132/150 kV, 220 kV and 380 kV, the time in seconds is 2, 2.8 and 4,
accordingly. For over-voltage, the wind turbine manufacturer can define the voltage level
for the response in the first 0.1 seconds. The voltage level can not be lower than 130%
of the nominal operating voltage. If the fault persists and the voltage characteristic at
the point of connection enters the greyed-out area, the wind farm operator is allowed to
12
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:21==
disconnect the turbines. At the zones above 1.15 p.u. and below 0.85 p.u., the turbine
controllers should limit the active power output to support retaining regular operating
voltage. After restoring the voltage, the wind power plant should be able to provide at
least 90% of the active power provided before the fault within 2 seconds, and the total
recovery should be completed within 4 seconds.
Terna specifies a reactive power-voltage droop characteristic in a similar way to En-
erginet, as seen in Figure 2.8. Important to note is the fact that there is a dead band
around the reference voltage to avoid oscillations around normal operation conditions.
Figure 2.8: Reactive Current-Voltage characteristic specified by Terna
In summary, it is essential to note again that the requirements above represent minimum
limits. Those lower limitations vary in different regions. The main reason for these
differences is variations in the complexity and robustness of each region’s electrical
network. This means robust systems can be less strict on the regulations imposed on
the wind power plant since the system can maintain regular operation during faults,
possibly without the support of the wind generation.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:23==
3
PowerFactory and Python Interfacing
3.1
PowerFactory in a nutshell
PowerFactory was developed by DigSILENT and is one of the leaders in power sys-
tems analysis software [11]. It is thus used extensively in both industry and academia.
It is designed to analyse power systems of any size. It covers various capabilities, from
standard features to advanced and complicated applications such as wind power, dis-
tributed generation, and real-time simulations. More specifically, PowerFactory offers
the tools for extensive studies on power transmission and distribution in large inter-
connected systems and analyses of all power generation components. It also allows
for complex studies on integrating renewable sources into the power system and re-
search on power system challenges stemming from distributed generation. Last but not
least, it is fully Windows-compatible. The Base Package of PowerFactory comprises
various analysis modules, a comprehensive selection of power equipment models, and
integrated functionalities. These elements collectively support the fundamental applica-
tions of PowerFactory. The following are the main features of the PowerFactory Base
Package.
3.1.1
Activating Projects and Study Cases
To begin with, PowerFactory provides an elaborate data managing tool that helps quickly
swap between different projects saved in the user’s library. Any project already activated
is highlighted in bold letters. The data manager allows for easy management of the
projects and provides capabilities such as moving projects in different folders, copying,
and importing and exporting projects from .pfd files.
Figure 3.1: Activating Projects from the Project Library
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
15
==PAGE:24==
After activating a project on the left of the UI, the user is provided a project overview
with all available Study Cases and Operation Scenarios. Study Cases and Operations
Scenarios can be created within a project to conduct analyses on different aspects and
under different conditions on the same network without creating new projects. This
can range from different simulation events to controller and network element set-points
to disconnection and re-connection of grid elements, thus allowing for separate test-
ing without interfering with the different cases and scenarios. Again, active cases and
scenarios are indicated in bold.
Figure 3.2: Project Overview Page
3.1.2
Power Equipment Models
In their comprehensive Equipment Type Library[11], PowerFactory includes equipment
models for grid components such as Synchronous and Asynchronous machines, Static
generators for modelling wind or PV generators, AC cables and others.
To use an integrated model from the equipment type library, the user must access the
DigSILENT library from the PowerFactory data manager. This is where all the templates
mentioned above are stored and are ready to be integrated into the user’s grid.
16
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Integrated PowerFactory Library
3.1.3
Network Diagrams and graphic features
PowerFactory provides various tools for electrical network visualisation, including geo-
graphic representations. Included is the ability to easily navigate between data and the
opportunity to create customised graphics.
The easiest way to create a network diagram is through the Drawing Tools provided by
PowerFactory. Here, the user can choose between essential network elements. After
selecting a component, the user can click on the active grid page and place the compo-
nent in the desired location.
Figure 3.4: Basic Drawing Tools in Powerfactory
3.1.4
Dynamic simulations in PowerFactory
In the advanced package, Powerfactory also provides tools that are valuable in analysing
both short- and long-term transients under balanced and unbalanced conditions. These
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
17
==PAGE:26==
RMS simulations can be applied to both AC and DC networks. The solver step size and
maximum loop iterations can be adjusted to fit the studies.
Initialisation and simulating
To perform a real-time simulation, it is necessary first to
let PowerFactory calculate a starting condition for the network. To do this, PowerFactory
performs a static load flow to find the starting point for all network elements. Accurate
Initialisation of the model is vital in obtaining the expected results from the RMS simu-
lation. At this stage, the user can also choose a solver step size, maximum number of
loop iterations, maximum allowed error and other settings for the simulation. After the
successful Initialisation of the model, the user can perform a real-time simulation. Now
is when the length of the simulation can be chosen. The user should also ensure the
RMS tool is linked to the initial conditions of the network correctly.
Figure 3.5: PowerFactory UI for RMS Simulation
Creating an event
One of the most essential features of PowerFactory is the capability
to create dynamic events that occur during the RMS simulation. These events can be
between other load events, generation events or fault events. When creating an event,
the user can choose between them in the software interface, as seen in Figure 3.6.
18
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.6: Interface for creating an event in PowerFactory
After choosing an event type, the user is taken to the specific event interface. Here, in
the case of a short-circuit event, for example, the user can choose the moment of the
fault, the type, and the fault characteristics such as fault resistance and reactance.
Figure 3.7: Short-Circuit Event Page
Successfully creating an event will save it in the events folder of the activated project
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
19
==PAGE:28==
and can then be put in and out of service by the user, depending on the purpose of the
ongoing study.
3.2
Linking Python and PowerFactory
PowerFactory also provides the user the opportunity to automatise tasks through the
use of interfacing with Python. Python scripting enables actions such as result extrac-
tion, plotting, and multiple load flow calculations with a single script execution. These
functions are not possible when performing simulation within PowerFactory itself. At the
same time, the PowerFactory-Python interfacing is powerful enough so that the script
can perform most of the features available from PowerFactory.
3.2.1
Creating a Python Script in PowerFactory
To create a Python script in PowerFactory, the user needs to navigate the project library
as seen in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: How to navigate to the script library in PowerFactory
Then, to create a script, the user should follow the process shown in Figure 3.9.
20
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:29==
(a) Step 1
(b) Step 2
Figure 3.9: Creation of a Python Script in PowerFactory
3.2.2
Basic Options page and linking PowerFactory to the Python code
In the script’s Basic Options page, the user can create variables and external objects
that can be accessed from the Python Script. Variables can range from Power System
values and set points to the folder path for the results file. Variables can only be between
string, double, and integer. The user can add inputs such as lists and matrices in the
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
21
==PAGE:30==
external object section. For example, in Figure 3.10, the variable PathOutput specifies
the folder in which the results file should be saved. The external object TransformerSet
contains all network transformers relevant to the study case and whose results should
be extracted. When read from the script, the GridCodeCurve external object contains a
matrix that can recreate the PQ capability curve requirements from a specific Grid Code.
Figure 3.10: Script Variables and External Objects
To execute a script, the PowerFactory interpreter has to be pointed to the written Python
code. This can be done from the Script section in the developed script. The user must
click the ”...” symbol, navigate to the desired directory and choose the correct Python
file.
22
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.11: Linking the interpreter to the Python script
3.2.3
Creating Variables and External Objects from the PowerFactory UI
After successfully creating a new Python script following the guide in Section 3.2.1, the
user is taken to a blank Basic Options page, as seen in Figure 3.12. Here, the user
can choose the script’s name and create variables and external objects that the Python
code can read and access.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.12: Starting with a new Python Script
Variables
Creating a new Variable is pretty straightforward. To create a new row in the variables
table, the user should right-click and select ”Append Row(s)”. This should create a new
row to store a variable in the variables table. In the type column, the user can select
the variable type between integer, double and string. The Name of the variable refers
to the Name used to access the variable from the Python code. In the Value and Unit
columns, the user should enter the Value to be stored in the variable. Specifying the
units aids in creating a more user-friendly script, and so does adding a small description
in the Description column. It is important to note that the last two sections provide
users with information and do not affect the simulation.
External Objects
In the case of External Objects, the process is more complicated. The same process
as above should be followed to add a new row. Again, in the Name column is the name
with which the object is accessed from the Python code. The user should double-click
on the blank object column to create a new object.
24
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:33==
Matrices
Matrix objects can be very useful in creating data frames and/or curves that
the Python code can access. Figures 3.13 until 3.15 show an example process on how
to create a matrix object.
Figure 3.13: Creating a new external object
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.14: Choosing the IntMat type for the external object
26
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.15: Getting the new Matrix object
On the Matrix page, the user can now append rows and columns to the matrix by right-
clicking in the cells. Labels can also be added to the labels page on the Matrix interface.
SetSelect Objects
SetSelect objects are a powerful tool provided by PowerFactory
that allows linkage between network elements and the Python code. SetSelect objects
are lists of references to the network objects, and an example process for creating one
is below.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.16: Creating a new external object
28
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.17: Choosing the SetSelect type of the external object
Figure 3.18: Accessing the contents of the object
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.19: Adding an object to the list
Figure 3.20: Creating the reference to the network element
Following the guide above should bring the user to a page containing all grid elements.
Double-clicking on one should create the appropriate reference. The script can then be
exported from PowerFactory and imported into a different project’s library.
3.3
Setting up a simulation through Python scripting
At the beginning of every Python script, the user must load the PowerFactory applica-
tion to initialise the connection between Python and PowerFactory. The following code
snippet ensures a successful connection and enables simulations to be run through the
Python script [12].
1
import sys
2
import powerfactory as pf
3
4
app = pf.GetApplication()
5
app.ResetCalculation()
6
script = app.GetCurrentScript()
7
StudyCase = app.GetActiveStudyCase()
Listing 3.1: Python code to initialise a simulation in PowerFactory
30
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:39==
3.3.1
Load Flow
To perform a Load Flow calculation, the user must first get the load flow object and then
execute the calculation. Then, it is possible to retrieve results such as Bus voltages,
generator outputs, line currents, and loading [13]. The following code snippet is an
example of how to achieve this [14]:
1
#Get Load Flow Object
2
LoadFlow = app.GetFromStudyCase('ComLdf')
3
4
#Execute the Load Flow
5
LoadFlow.Execute()
6
7
#Get the list of all Generators in the network
8
Generators = app.GetCalcRelevantObjects('*.ElmSym')
9
for Gen in Generators: #Loop through the generator list
10
name = Gen.GetAttribute('loc_name')
11
P = Gen.GetAttribute('c:p')
12
Q = Gen.GetAttribute('c:q')
13
app.PrintPlain('Output of Generator %s: P = %.2f MW, Q = %.2f MVAr' %(
name,P,Q)
14
15
#Get the list of all Buses in the network
16
Buses = app.getCalcRelevantObjects('*.ElmTerm')
17
For Bus in Buses: #Loop through the buses list
18
name = Bus.GetAttribute('loc_name')
19
V = Bus.GetAttribute('m:u')
20
app.PrintPlain('Voltage of Bus %s: V = %.2f pu' , %(name,V))
21
22
#Get the list of all Lines in the network
23
Lines = app.getCalcRelevantObjects('*.ElmLne')
24
for Line in Lines: #Loop through the lines list
25
name = Line.GetAttribute('loc_name')
26
Loading = Line.GetAttribute('c:loading')
27
app>PrintPlain('Loading of Line %s: %.2f percent', %(name,Loading))
Listing 3.2: Python code to perform a load flow and retrieve results
3.3.2
RMS Simulation
In the case of an RMS simulation, the process is slightly different. To begin with, the
user must perform an initialisation of the model. Only then can the user perform an RMS
simulation. Retrieving results from a real-time simulation is also different in this case.
The user must first indicate the results that PowerFactory needs to monitor to be able
to extract them after the simulation is performed. After a successful simulation, the user
can extract and save the results into a text or Excel file. Following is an example of how
to set up an RMS simulation and extract results for line loading and Wind Generator
outputs [15].
1
#Set up the initialisation and simulation objects
2
comInc = app.GetFromStudyCase("ComInc")
3
comSim = app.GetFromStudyCase("ComSim")
4
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
31
==PAGE:40==
5
#Initialise
6
comInc.Execute()
7
8
#Get the Results objects
9
elmRes = app.GetFromStudyCase('*.ElmRes')
10
11
#Get the Lines list from the network
12
Lines = app.GetCalcRelevantObjects('*.ElmLne')
13
for Line in Lines: #Loop through the lines list
14
elmRes.AddVariable(Line, 'c:loading')
15
16
#Get the Wind Generators from the network
17
WTG = app.GetCalcRelevantObjects('*.ElmGenStat')
18
for WT in WTG: #loop through the Wind Turbines list
19
elmRes.AddVariable(WT, 'm:i1Q:bus1')
20
elmRes.AddVariable(WT, 'm:i1P:bus1')
21
elmRes.AddVariable(WT, 'm:Psum:bus1')
22
elmRes.AddVariable(WT, 'm:Qsum:bus1')
23
24
#Execute the Rms simulation
25
comSim.Execute()
26
27
#Load the results
28
app.ResLoadData(elmRes)
Listing 3.3: Python code to perform an RMS simulation and retrieve results
At this point, the results are monitored by PowerFactory. For the next step, the user
should extract the results so that they can be saved in a separate file. This is an example
of how to achieve this. Let us assume the user needs the results from a generator named
WTG_1 and Line_45.
1
2
#Get number of rows and columns
3
NrRow = app.ResGetValueCount(elmRes, 0)
4
5
#Get the Objects of Interest
6
WTG = app.getCalcRelevantObjects('WTG_1.ElmGenStat')[0]
7
Line = app.getCalcRelevantObjects('Line_45.ElmLne')[0]
8
9
#Get the index of the variables of interest
10
ColIndex_time = app.ResGetIndex(elmRes,elmRes ,'b:tnow')
11
ColIndex_P = app.ResGetIndex(elmRes,WTG,'s:P1')
12
ColIndex_Q = app.ResGetIndex(elmRes,WTG,'s:Q1')
13
ColIndex_Loading = app.ResGetIndex(elmRes ,Line,'c:loading')
14
15
16
#Pre-allocate space for the result variables
17
result_time = np.zeros((NrRow ,))
18
result_P = np.zeros((NrRow))
19
result_Q = np.zeros((NrRow))
20
result_loading = np.zeros((NrRow))
21
32
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:41==
22
#Get the results for every time step
23
for i in range(NrRow):
24
result_time[i] = app.ResGetData(elmRes ,i,ColIndex_time)[1]
25
result_P[i] = app.ResGetData(elmRes,i,ColIndex_P)[1]
26
result_Q[i] = app.ResGetData(elmRes,i,ColIndex_Q)[1]
27
result_loading[i] = app.ResGetData(elmRes ,i,ColIndex_Loading)[1]
Listing 3.4: Python code to extract and save results
Results are now stored in the lists and ready for further utilisation, such as plotting or
saving into a different file.
3.4
Accessing Variables and External Objects
The user must first link the Python code to the script in PowerFactory’s library to access
the script’s variables and external objects. Here are the commands to achieve this:
1
2
#Get the PowerFactory application
3
app = pf.GetApplication()
4
5
#Create connection to the script
6
script = app.GetCurrentScript()
Listing 3.5: Initialising connection to the script
Variables
The following snippet is an example of how the code reads a variable name
P_set and gives this value as a set point for all Synchronous Generators in the network
before performing a load flow calculation, always assuming the connection to Power-
Factory has been made, and there is a network with a certain number of synchronous
generators.
1
2
#Read Active Power setpoint from PowerFactory
3
Setpoint = script.P_set
4
5
#Get the list of all active synchronous generators
6
Gens = app.GetCalcRelevantObjects('*.ElmSym')
7
for Gen in Gens: #Sweep through the list of gens
8
Gen.pgini = Setpoint
9
10
#Execute the LoadFlow
11
LoadFlow.Execute()
Listing 3.6: Accessing and using a variable
Matrix objects
Assuming the user has created a matrix in the script’s external objects
for the FRT voltage characteristic at the Point of Connection with the name ”Example_Matrix”.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
33
==PAGE:42==
If this matrix has time in the first column and voltage in the second, the following code
snippet explains how to retrieve the input from the Python code.
1
2
#Read the matrix from PowerFactory
3
Grid_Code = script.Example_Matrix
4
5
#Get the number of rows and columns
6
nRows = Grid_Code.GetNumberOfRows()
7
nColumns = Grid_Code.GetNumberOfColumns()
8
9
#Create the list
10
GridCodeLine_List = []
11
12
#Indicate the columns where time and voltage are stored
13
t_ColNo = 1
14
V_ColNo = 2
15
16
#Save the input in the created list
17
for i in range(1, nRows + 1):
18
V =
Grid_Code.Get(i, V_ColNo)
19
t =
Grid_Code.Get(i, t_ColNo)
20
GridCodeLine_List.append([t, V])
Listing 3.7: Python code to access a Matrix external object
SetSelect objects
Similarly, if the user has created a SetSelect object with the name
Buses_List for retrieving the voltage of specific buses in the network, here is an example
of how to handle it in Python. The following snippet retrieves the referenced buses
created as explained in 3.2.3 and prepares PowerFactory to record their voltages for an
RMS simulation.
1
2
#Read the matrix from PowerFactory
3
Buses = script.Buses_List
4
#Buses is now a list containing a reference to all the necessary buses
5
6
#Sweep through the list of buses and prepare PowerFactory to record the
voltage results
7
for Bus in Buses.All():
8
addRecordedResult(elmRes, Bus, 'm:u')
Listing 3.8: Python code to access a SetSelect external object
34
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:43==
4
Dynamic Simulation Environment
Design
4.1
PowerFactory model
An example PowerFactory model was created to test the capabilities of the dynamic
simulation framework. This model represents an off-shore wind farm which consists
of a single string of five wind generators, each with a generation capacity of 15 MW.
The generators are connected to low-voltage terminals at 690 V and then with 690 V
to 66 kV, 17 MVA transformers to the medium-voltage terminals. A 66 to 220 kV, 85
MVA transformer connects the 66 kV collector terminal to the off-shore 220 kV bus.
The wind farm connects to the on-shore grid through a 50 km cable. The off-shore and
on-shore 220 kV buses are equipped with the appropriate compensation shunts. The
configuration of the network can be seen in Figure (4.1).
Figure 4.1: PowerFactory Off-shore Wind Farm model
4.1.1
Main Network components
The transformers, cables and compensation shunt designs follow the generic design
pattern of such components in PowerFactory. Therefore, their parameters are not listed
in full detail in this thesis.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
35
==PAGE:44==
Wind Turbine model
All wind generators of the network use the IEC 61400-27-1 template for a Type4A Wind
Turbine from the DigSILENT library in PowerFactory. The Type4A model was preferred
since it ignores the aerodynamic and mechanical parts of a wind turbine and is thus sim-
pler to incorporate. Detailed documentation for the used template can be found in [16].
The template represents the turbine as a static generator and contains an integrated
turbine controller with five main modules. A great benefit of the interfacing between
PowerFactory and Python is that most of the control parameters can be accessed from
the Python code, enabling quicker transitions between different simulations. Figure 4.2
shows the modular structure of the Type4A model as defined by IEC.
Figure 4.2: Modular Structure of a Type4A Turbine [16]
P Control Module
The active power control module’s purpose is to control the wind
generator’s response in the case of frequency deviations from the standard operating
frequency. Here, the user can specify how aggressively or passively the wind turbine re-
sponds to changes in the grid frequency. An aggressive controller would mean quicker
frequency response at the risk of oscillations around the nominal frequency after restora-
tion. This thesis focuses on the low-voltage-ride-through capabilities of the generation
plant. In this case, the frequency response of the plant is not relevant, and thus, the
controller settings were set to the default values.
Q Limitation Module
The reactive power limitation module helps set the reactive
power limits for the wind turbine model. The user has the choice of setting limits for
36
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:45==
the regular operation of the turbine regarding the active power generation and voltage
to the connected terminals. These limits can be surpassed in the case of the detection
of a fault in the system.
Q Control Module
The reactive power control module splits between two different
functions, normal and FRT operation. Therefore, the user has to choose a control mode
for each of those two operation modes.
There are five different control modes for normal operation: voltage control, reactive
power control, open loop reactive power control, power factor control and open loop
power factor control. The controllers were set to the second setting for the developed
model, meaning reactive power control. This mode ensures that the controller keeps
the reactive power at the given setpoint at the simulation’s start during regular operation.
This setpoint is also re-activated after the voltage restoration in the case of a fault. This
means that after clearing the fault and deactivating the FRT controllers, the generators
are set to their initial setpoint again. The user also has the choice to modify the settings
regarding the controller’s response time, but these values were kept at default for this
thesis model.
The FRT controller has four modes that differ regarding the reactive current injection
function during and after the fault. The mode used for this thesis was the third. Reactive
current during the fault is a summation of the pre-fault current and a term depending on
the voltage deviation from the pre-fault voltage. After clearing the fault, the controller
aims to restore the reactive current to its pre-fault values. The user can choose to add
a post-fault current injection term. For the developed model, this value was set to zero.
The Q Control page is also where the user can select the parameters for the FRT
response from the controllers. Initially, under-voltage and over-voltage detection limits
were set to 0.9 p.u. and 1.1 p.u. accordingly. These limits ensure that the models are
set up correctly to accommodate the Danish and Italian grid codes tested for this thesis.
A voltage change (∆U) dead-band is necessary to specify the thresholds where the
FRT controllers should cease operation to avoid unnecessary oscillations after voltage
restoration. The upper limit of the dead band was set at 0.1 p.u. and the lower limit at -
0.1 p.u. around the pre-fault voltage. Correct initialisation of the model should result in a
pre-fault voltage close to 1 p.u. in most cases. Last but not least, the voltage controller
gain during FRT was increased to 2 to achieve the desired reactive current injection
specified by the grid code requirements.
Every parameter that has not been mentioned so far remained at its default value.
Current Limitation Module
The current limitation module allows the user to set the
maximum operation currents for continuous operation and voltage dips. An essential
setting in the case of FRT is to set the controller’s priority to reactive power rather than
active power during faults. Other than that, the current settings remained at their default
values.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
37
==PAGE:46==
Grid Protection Module
The grid protection module is one of the most crucial compo-
nents for this thesis’ investigation. Here, the user can define regular and fault operation
voltage and frequency limits. For normal operation, the user only needs to change
the value on the protection module page. In the case of the fault conditions, however, a
lookup table is required since time is also a factor. All simulations for the thesis were per-
formed for nominal frequency. Therefore, the settings for the frequency limits remained
unchanged. On the other hand, the voltage thresholds were modified accordingly to
ensure compliance with both Italian and Danish grid codes.
4.1.2
Voltage Source Model
To control a voltage source, there are two different approaches [17]. The first solution
is to apply parameter events. While simple, this method can only create voltage steps
and thus does not allow for the application of the grid code curve. This is why a sim-
ple DSL model was developed, that allows the voltage source to read a voltage curve
directly from a text file. The text file should contain pairs of voltage and time values.
The source is designed to connect the points in the voltage-time curve and create the
voltage playback at the POC. Detailed reasoning on the presence of the voltage source
in the model can be found in section 4.2.1.
4.2
Developed Python Script
The goal of the Python code developed for this script is to create a dynamic simula-
tion framework in collaboration with PowerFactory. The framework aims to automate
FRT testing, requiring minimal human interaction to perform the analyses. With a user-
friendly interface, the user does not need in-depth PowerFactory knowledge, as vari-
ables can be easily selected. The successful implementation of this script results in re-
duced time required to perform studies on offshore wind farms. Additionally, the Python
script enables the saving of results in an Excel file for further analysis.
4.2.1
Main Features
List of Variables and External Objects
In Figures 4.3 and 4.4 are the input variables and external objects used by the developed
script to perform the dynamic simulation. By order of appearance:
Script Variables
• FaultType is an integer variable. The user can choose between 0, 1, 2 and 3.
These values correspond to a three-phase fault, a two-phase fault, a two-phase
to-ground fault and a single-phase fault. The script obtains this value and then
creates the desired fault event.
• FaultLocation is a string variable. The user should select the element where the
fault instance should be created. It is important to ensure the given value corre-
sponds to a grid component; otherwise, the script will result in an error. For the
investigation of this thesis, the fault was always created at the Point of Connection.
38
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:47==
• FaultDuration is a double variable which the user can utilise for specifying the
duration of the fault event in seconds.
• FaultTime is a double variable that refers to the moment in the simulation when
the fault should happen in seconds.
• PathOutputFolder is a string variable. It points the script to the folder where
Python should save the Excel file containing the results. The user should make
sure it is an existing folder, or the script will result in an error
• SimulationDuration is a double variable used for specifying the total duration of
the simulation in seconds. It is important to note that increasing the duration can
result in a lengthy process of storing the results in the Excel file.
• FaultResistance and FaultReactance are double variables used for specifying
the fault impedance and reactance of the event.
• ConnectSource is an integer variable. This is where the user can select testing
the model with or without a voltage playback. A value of one corresponds to a con-
nected voltage playback. A detailed explanation of the functionality of the voltage
playback can be found in 4.2.1.
Figure 4.3: List of Developed Script Variables
Script External Objects
This section describes the external objects used in the script
developed for this thesis. A detailed guide on creating external objects in PowerFactory
is in section 3.2.3.
• GridCodeCurve is a matrix object that, when read from the script, should aid in
the recreation of the voltage curve for Fault Ride Through of the desired grid code.
• BusesForVoltage lists the important Buses of the network whose voltage Should
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
39
==PAGE:48==
be saved in the Excel file. Each entry in the list should contain a reference to a
Bus element in the tested network.
• StudyCases is an object through which the user can choose the desired study
case the script should activate.
• TurbinesForOutput lists all Wind Turbines whose currents and power dispatch
should be saved in the Excel file. Each entry should be a reference to a Static
Generator element from the tested network.
• CompensationShunts lists all shunt reactors whose stage should be saved in
the Excel file. Each entry should be a reference to a Shunt element in the tested
network.
• Transformers lists all transformers whose tap positions should be saved in the
Excel file. Each entry should be a reference to a Transformer element in the tested
network.
Figure 4.4: List of Developed Script External Objects
Setting up the simulation
The developed Python code handles the simulation set-up differently than described in
3.3. The purpose is to give the user more choices regarding duration, simulation step,
and the moment the simulation should start. A function named setupSimulation pre-
pares the initialisation of the model for an RMS simulation and sets the desired step size
and simulation duration. The function runSimulation then executes both the initialisa-
tion and the simulation itself.
Fault or Voltage Playback at the Point of Connection
The Python script initialises the model by calculating a starting point for the root mean
square (RMS) simulation, as explained in section 3.3.2. After that, it prepares the Pow-
erFactory solver to monitor the required results. The user is then presented with two
40
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:49==
options: create a fault at the point of connection (POC) to the on-shore grid or connect
a voltage source to the POC that recreates the desired voltage signal.
Fault at the POC
The first method is a more realistic approach. However, PowerFac-
tory faults can only be described by their type and impedance. This means creating
the desired voltage signal -meaning precision in the size of the voltage dip- can prove
to be very complex and requires a very detailed knowledge of the network elements.
Nonetheless, creating a fault event at the POC comprises the most accurate way of
conducting FRT analyses on the Wind Farm model. Therefore, the user can directly
choose the fault instance, duration, resistance and reactance from the PowerFactory
interface. The script then uses the input to create a fault event and an event for clearing
the fault after the desired time.
The developed code has the necessary functions for creating a fault and a fault-clearing
event. The user has the ability to select the location of the fault, its type, the moment it
happens, the fault duration, and the fault impedance. The choice can be made from the
PowerFactory interface, and the values are read from the script in a similar way to what
is described in section 3.4. When a test is conducted with the use of a voltage source,
the functions are not called to avoid possible conflicts.
Voltage Source at the POC
The second approach involves the connection of a volt-
age source at the POC to work around the aforementioned issue. This voltage source
forces a voltage playback at the POC. The voltage source reads the voltage signal from
a text file as explained in 4.1. This method has the advantage of allowing the user to
create any desired voltage signal at the POC. This can prove very useful in monitoring
the behaviour of the grid components, especially the wind turbines, in the event of a
fault of specific characteristics. This approach, however, comes with the drawback of
losing the ability to see the effect of the controlling action of the Turbines on the POC
voltage since it will always follow the voltage playback. Also important to note is the fact
that selecting to connect a voltage source at the POC stops the script from creating fault
events.
Preparing PowerFactory for monitoring the simulation results
Due to how PowerFactory handles RMS simulations, it is essential to initiate the result
recording before the simulation is performed. The function addRecordedResult was
created for that purpose. This function is designed in a way that provides freedom in the
way the inputs are defined. It effectively prepares PowerFactory to monitor all necessary
parameters for a thorough examination of the wind farm’s FRT capabilities.
Results are then saved in an Excel file. The parameters that are monitored for this
research are as follows:
• Bus Voltages:
During FRT simulations, the voltage of the system’s terminals is one of the most
crucial parameters. Voltage levels are essential in evaluating the design of the
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
41
==PAGE:50==
wind farm, and its compliance with the grid code regulations in terms of the time-
voltage characteristics.
• Wind Turbine Currents and Power Outputs:
As with voltage results, the output of the wind turbine generators constitutes a
major parameter for FRT testing. Grid codes specify minimum requirements for
the injection of reactive current during faults. Therefore, it is critical to ensure the
turbines meet those expectations.
• Cable and Transformer Loading:
Adequate sizing of the cables and transformers is very important in the design of
an offshore wind farm. Sizing can prove to be a critical issue, especially in fault
situations due to the added current injection from the generators. During FRT,
loading limits can be exceeded and lead to disconnection of network components,
which could cause failure in meeting the grid code requirements.
• Transformer Tap Positions and Compensation Shunt Stages:
In the case where the transformers and compensation units are deployed with
dynamic controls, it could prove beneficial to monitor the actions of the controllers
during faults. This ensures that the controlling actions have the desired result.
Creating a data frame to store results
After successfully setting the simulation up and then running it, the next step is to get
the recorded results from PowerFactory and create a DataFrame. This data frame aids
in saving the results in an Excel file later. The following code snippet is an example of
how to get all the required bus voltage results. Time is always the first column of the
data frame.
1
2
3
#Create an empty DataFrame to store all required data
4
all_data_df = pd.DataFrame(columns=["t"])
5
6
# Add time data to the DataFrame
7
all_data_df["t"] = result_time
8
9
#Finding the column of the time variable in the results folder
10
Time_index = app.ResGetIndex(elmRes,elmRes ,'b:tnow')
11
12
#Add the voltage results to the DataFrame
13
for Bus in Buses.All(): #Sweep through the buses list
14
VBus = Bus #Temporary assignment
15
16
#Find the index of the column where bus voltage results are stored
17
ColIndex_u_bus1 = app.ResGetIndex(elmRes , VBus, 'm:u')
18
19
#Get the number of rows in the results file
20
NrRow = app.ResGetValueCount(elmRes, 0)
21
22
#Pre-allocate space
23
result_time = np.zeros((NrRow ,))
42
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:51==
24
result_u_bus = np.zeros((NrRow))
25
results_list = []
26
27
#Sweep through the rows and retrieve the result
28
for i in range(NrRow):
29
30
#Get the time instance
31
result_time[i] = app.ResGetData(elmRes , i, Time_index)[1]
32
33
#Get the voltage at the specific time instance
34
result_u_bus[i] = app.ResGetData(elmRes , i, ColIndex_u_bus1)[1]
35
36
#Add them to the results list
37
results_list.append((result_time[i], result_u_bus[i]))
38
39
# Add voltage data to the common DataFrame
40
all_data_df[f"V_{Bus.loc_name}"] = result_u_bus
Listing 4.1: Code for creating a DataFrame containing the simulation results
The Excel results file contains 6 Sheets as shown in Figure 4.5. The Grid_Code_Curve
Sheet contains the voltage-time FRT characteristic of the grid code under investigation.
All_Buses_Voltages contains the voltage results for all the buses the user has cho-
sen from the PowerFactory user interface. Sheets All_Wind_Turbine_Currents and
Wind_Turbine_Powers contain the results for active and reactive current and power
injection from the wind turbines. Transformers_and_ShuntReactors has information
on the transformer tap positions and shunt stages. Finally, Cable_Loadings is filled
with the loadings in % of all the cables in the grid. For every column, there is an appro-
priate header for easy identification.
Figure 4.5: Example of Results in the Excel File
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:53==
5
Fault Ride-Through Analysis and
Framework Performance Evaluation
A series of simulations were performed to evaluate the effectiveness of the developed
model and code, and the results are shown in the following sections. The case studies
were chosen to show the framework’s effectiveness in quickly transitioning between
different regulations defined by different region grid codes.
5.1
Example Simulation with Voltage Playback
Table 5.1 is the required input for the voltage source with the goal to create a voltage dip
of 50 % of the nominal voltage at the POC lasting for 1 second. Each row represents a
triplet of time voltage and frequency points. The voltage signal is recreated by linearly
connecting the voltage-time and frequency-time pairs. The resulting voltage profile at
the POC is shown in Figure 5.1.
Table 5.1: Input File Setup for the Voltage Source
Time (s)
Voltage (pu)
Frequency (pu)
0
1
1
1
1
1
1.00001
0.5
1
2
0.5
1
2.00001
1
1
Figure 5.1: Example Voltage at POC
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
45
==PAGE:54==
After running the script, the simulation is performed, and the results are stored in the
Excel file. The results can be seen in Figures 5.2 through 5.6.
Figure 5.2: Voltage Results for Example Run
Figure 5.3: Current Results for Example Run
46
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.4: Power Results for Example Run
Figure 5.5: Shunt and Transformer Results for Example Run
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.6: Loading Results for Example Run
5.2
Case Studies with Voltage Playback
For each grid code, the modelled grid was tested once with the use of the voltage source
by performing a series of tests with faults that test along the grid code curves defined in
section 2.3.1. To show the versatility of the framework, the results for the voltages are
all printed in the same plot. These tests prove the effectiveness of the implementation
of the voltage source in accurately reproducing the desired voltage drop at the point of
connection.
Table 5.2: Danish Grid Code Voltage Dip Tests
Voltage Dip
Duration (seconds)
20% of nominal voltage
0.5
35% of nominal voltage
0.7
50% of nominal voltage
1.0
65% of nominal voltage
1.2
80% of nominal voltage
1.35
Voltage Results
In Figures 5.7 and 5.8 are the voltages at the 66 kV collector busbar of the network for
each of the tests performed on the modelled grid. The grid code curves are also added
in the graphs for visualisation of the wind farm’s FRT capabilities.
48
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:57==
Table 5.3: Italian Grid Code Voltage Dip Tests
Voltage Dip
Duration (seconds)
0% of nominal voltage
0.2
21.25% of nominal voltage
0.85
42.5% of nominal voltage
1.5
63.75% of nominal voltage
2.15
85% of nominal voltage
2.8
Figure 5.7: Voltage Results for Danish Grid Code Testing
Figure 5.8: Voltage Results for Italian Grid Code Testing
By changing the input file for the voltage source, the user can quickly test through a
range of different voltage and time characteristics. The framework allows seamless
data analysis by saving all essential results in Excel. Combining the results from multiple
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
49
==PAGE:58==
simulations makes it easier to spot weaknesses in the wind farm design or the failure of
the grid components.
This testing method has a major drawback. The voltage signal is forced on the POC by
means of playback. This means that the voltage source model absorbs any additional
reactive power injection from the generators, and as a result, the impact of the reactive
power controllers cannot be seen on the voltages of the network’s terminals. These
simulations can, nonetheless, be valuable in testing the reactive current injection and
reactive power capabilities of the wind turbine generators under faulty conditions.
Wind Turbine Current Injection
A very important aspect of FRT testing is ensuring that the reactive current injection
from the wind turbine generators meets the minimum requirements specified in the grid
code regulations.
Figures 5.9 and 5.10 contain the reactive current injection from a single generator across
all five tests for the Danish and Italian grid codes. By studying those results, it can be
seen that the model provides an adequate FRT characteristic that fulfils the regulations.
More specifically, the reactive current requirements shown in Figure 2.6 indicate a min-
imum of 0.25 p.u. in the reactive component of the current for a voltage at the POC that
is 80% of the nominal. This expectation is met and exceeded in the testing, as reactive
current injection of a 20% voltage dip reaches 54% of the nominal current. The effect
of the current limitation module can also be seen since, in the most severe fault cases,
it limits the reactive current at 130% of the nominal current.
Figure 5.9: Current Results for Danish Grid Code Testing
50
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.10: Current Results for Italian Grid Code Testing
In all cases, it can be seen that after the fault is cleared, the FRT controllers are deac-
tivated, and the reactive current injection returns to its pre-fault condition as discussed
in section 4.1.
5.3
Case Studies with Fault Event Creation at the POC
In the case that more realistic results should be obtained, the user still has the choice of
creating actual fault instances at the point of connection by defining the fault resistance,
reactance and duration. This method can be beneficial in the case of very detailed
network knowledge. This knowledge would allow for precise calculation of the fault
characteristics and accurate testing along the grid code curves. The user can quickly
create a simulation with various fault events by changing the abovementioned values in
the PowerFactory scripting user interface.
The tests performed were the following:
Table 5.4: Fault Event Characteristics
Test
Duration (s)
Fault Resistance (Ohm)
Fault Reactance (Ohm)
A
0.2
0
0
B
1
2
2
C
1.5
4
4
D
2
6
6
The resulting voltages at the Point of Connection can be seen in Figure 5.11. Apart from
Test A, it is shown that due to PowerFactory’s limitations, creating desired voltage dips
at the POC is not possible. Even when the fault impedance is increased linearly, the
voltage at POC does not follow the same characteristic.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.11: POC Voltages with Fault Events
Figure 5.12 includes the resulting Collector Busbar voltages for the four different testing
scenarios. Important to note here is the fact that these are the actual voltages to be
experienced in the case of faults with characteristics resembling the ones from Table
5.4.
Figure 5.12: Collector Busbar Voltages for the Fault Events
Creating actual fault events at the POC also allows the user to see the effects of the
controlling actions of the wind turbines on the terminal voltages of the modelled network.
52
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.13 shows the results of the turbine control actions on the voltage of the Collector
Busbar terminal of the modelled grid.
Figure 5.13: Comparison between POC and Collector Busbar Voltages
Initially, the collector bus voltages follow the voltage at the POC. With the quick con-
trolling action on the generators and the reactive power injection into the system, this
voltage is increased considerably higher than the one at the fault location. This response
can prove very beneficial, especially in the case where a short-circuit has happened at
a point in the onshore grid close to the point of connection of the wind farm. This short-
circuit would cause a voltage drop at the POC that the wind turbine FRT controllers can
detect and, therefore, start injecting reactive current to provide voltage support to the
grid. This action could help improve the voltage at the point of connection and possibly
avoid unnecessary disconnection of the generators.
5.4
Recreation of the Grid Code Curves
How the voltage source is implemented allows for applying any voltage signal at the
POC. This enables the user to test the network on the entirety of the grid code curve.
This voltage playback that is recreated on the POC comes with drawbacks. During the
ramping segments of the grid code curves, the imposed rise of the voltage creates con-
flicts with the controlling actions of the wind turbines. Therefore, the monitored results
will likely have noticeable differences from the actual values in a realistic situation. Ap-
plying the entire grid code curve can still, however, be very useful in the initial evaluation
of the FRT capabilities of an offshore wind farm. Such a preliminary test can highlight
cases where the protection schemes of the wind turbines are falsely activated. That
would mean unnecessary disconnection of the generators and violation of the regula-
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
53
==PAGE:62==
tions. Ensuring adequate initial design of the model provides a valid starting point for
the application of the two methods mentioned above. Figure 5.14 highlights how the
voltage source recreates the grid code curves on the POC.
Figure 5.14: Recreation of the Grid Code Curves at the POC
5.5
Summary
Summarising, the framework’s emphasis is on the automation of the simulation pro-
cesses on offshore wind farms. Automation is crucial for reducing the need for ex-
tensive manual intervention, thus increasing efficiency and decreasing the chances of
human error. This can result in more accurate testing, which is necessary to ensure
the farms can maintain operation during grid disturbances. A vital part of the framework
is the introduction of Python scripting, which enables access to all element parameters
and allows for result extraction and plotting. Saving the results in an Excel file allows
for easy comparison between the fault cases and gives a better overview of the wind
farm’s capabilities during faulty situations. The framework can carry out network tests
with minimal human interaction and provide valuable information for the FRT analyses.
The developed model is designed to be flexible, adapt to multiple grid codes, and transi-
tion easily between tests. The Python code is formed in a way that allows for the choice
of the parameters that dictate the voltage at the point of connection. This enables easy
transition between tests on varying grid code curves. Results from the performed tests
highlight the model’s effectiveness in performing the simulations and providing informa-
tion on crucial parameters such as voltages, currents, and loadings. These parameters
are essential in evaluating a wind farm’s operation during a fault. With these in mind,
the framework aims to contribute to the overall stability and reliability of power systems
by increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of FRT on offshore wind farms, whose
adoption is escalating globally.
54
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:63==
However, it is obvious that both methods used for this thesis come with certain limita-
tions. On the one hand, creating an actual fault event at the POC recreates real-world
situations more accurately. Results from these simulations better portray the actual
system state that will be experienced during an actual fault. At the same time, due to
PowerFactory’s nature, it is hard to specify the fault characteristics needed to achieve
the desired voltage at the fault location. This thesis proposes imposing a voltage play-
back on the point of connection to overcome this issue. This voltage signal can easily
replicate any voltage dip. However, it comes with the disadvantage of losing the ability
to monitor the effects of the controlling actions on the terminal voltages.
While both methods have disadvantages, they also provide the user with valuable in-
sights into the performance of the tested wind farm model. A combination of these
methods is strongly advised to evaluate a wind farm’s FRT capabilities more effectively.
Another limitation that should be discussed is the size of the tested model. While the
results confirm the effectiveness of the framework that was created with the use of the
interfacing between Python and PowerFactory, they do not replicate results from a real-
istic wind farm model. That limitation concerns only the PowerFactory model, however.
The script is modelled in such a way that when tested on a realistic wind farm model,
it should still provide the necessary results, provided that the farm controlling schemes
are adequately designed.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:65==
6
Conclusions and Future Research
Conclusions
This thesis attempts to establish a dynamic simulation framework for Fault-Ride-Through
(FRT) analysis in offshore wind plants, addressing the critical need for renewable en-
ergy sources to maintain grid stability during disturbances. The integration of Python
scripting with PowerFactory software aids in streamlining the operations of wind farms,
reducing the need for extensive manual intervention and increasing the efficiency of the
FRT analysis. The framework’s adaptability to various grid codes, particularly the Dan-
ish and Italian regulations, has been highlighted, showcasing its potential applicability
in diverse regulatory environments.
The research outcomes aim to contribute to the stability and reliability of power systems,
especially as the adoption of renewable energy sources escalates globally. This work
not only validates the FRT capabilities of wind farms but also addresses broader chal-
lenges associated with integrating renewable sources into the power grid while meeting
specific grid code requirements.
This thesis has addressed the research questions indicated in the introduction as fol-
lows:
1. Python Script Development: The creation of a Python script for FRT analysis
in offshore wind farms has been achieved. This tool can streamline the process
of FRT compliance testing, proving effective in evaluating the FRT capabilities of
wind farms under various grid conditions.
2. Framework Application to Grid Codes: The adaptability of the developed sim-
ulation framework to diverse grid codes, especially the Danish and Italian regu-
lations, has been demonstrated. This adaptability underscores the framework’s
relevance and applicability in a global context.
3. Framework Validation Through Case Studies: The simulation framework has
been validated with challenging case studies.
These studies have shown the
framework’s effectiveness in ensuring the stability and reliability of power systems
during faults.
Future Directions
It is vital to note that all simulations and testing of this thesis were done in an exam-
ple wind farm model. This model was limited in size and contained only one string of
five generators. While the results of this thesis are encouraging and confirm the frame-
work’s effectiveness, the script still needs to be tested on a more realistic offshore wind
farm model. Such a model should contain multiple turbine strings. To perform effec-
tive simulations on an extensive model requires adequate modelling and configuration
of the controlling schemes. Implementing a controller on the wind farm level could aid
in achieving this goal. However, such an implementation requires extensive modelling
knowledge and was considered out of the scope of investigation for this master’s thesis.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
57
==PAGE:66==
The script can also be expanded with the intention to incorporate the ability to perform
a series of multiple simulations at once. Potential prospects could also be the further
testing of FRT grid codes from different regions, but more importantly, the expansion
of the framework to include studies other than FRT. Such studies could be frequency
response analyses of the offshore wind farm. A way to provide frequency support is im-
plementing a virtual inertia model on the wind turbines or providing frequency reserves
through curtailment of the produced active power.
Successful implementation of the above would broaden the framework’s capabilities
and further improve the efficiency of simulations on offshore wind farms. Automating
the design and testing processes of offshore wind farms is a vital aspect in achieving
the goal of a quick and seamless transition to renewable sources in the future and, at
the same time, securing grid stability and robustness.
58
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). NDCs and renewable energy
targets in 2023: Tripling renewable power by 2030. Abu Dhabi: International Re-
newable Energy Agency, 2023.
[2]
Global Wind Energy Council. Global Offshore Wind Report 2023. Accessed: 2024-
01-15. 2023. URL: file-5gDJOLrOPOIZCwXwFSj5opaS.
[3]
UK Energy Research Centre. What happened on August 9th – the investigations.
https://ukerc.ac.uk/news/august-9-investigations/. Accessed: 2024-01-22. 2019.
[4]
Mattia Marinelli. Wind Turbines Typologies. Course 46745 - Lecture 05a, DTU
Wind and Energy Systems. Technical University of Denmark. Sept. 2022.
[5]
Energy Systems Integration Group (ESIG). Modeling of Type 4 Wind Turbine Gen-
erators. Accessed: 2024-01-11. 2023. URL: https://www.esig.energy/modeling-of-
type-4-wind-turbine-generators/.
[6]
Q. Wei et al. “Overview of offshore wind farm configurations”. In: IOP Conference
Series: Earth and Environmental Science 93 (2017), p. 012009. DOI: 10.1088/
1755-1315/93/1/012009. URL: https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1755-
1315/93/1/012009.
[7]
O. Anaya-Lara. “Offshore wind farm arrays”. In: Offshore Wind Farms. Woodhead
Publishing, 2016, pp. 389–417. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100779-2.00012-X.
[8]
European Commission. COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) 2016/631 of 14 April
2016 establishing a network code on requirements for grid connection of genera-
tors. Official Journal of the European Union. Text with EEA relevance. Apr. 2016.
[9]
Energinet.dk. Technical Regulation 3.2.5 for Wind Power Plants above 11 kW.
Technical Regulation Revision 4. Accessed: 2024-01-12. Energinet.dk, 2016.
[10]
Terna. Technical Regulation for Wind Power Plants. Revision 3. Terna. Italy, Mar.
2023.
[11]
DIgSILENT. PowerFactory. https://www.digsilent.de/en/powerfactory.html. Ac-
cessed: 2024-01-05.
[12]
The Smart Insights. Run DIgSILENT PowerFactory through Python. https : / /
thesmartinsights.com/run-digsilent-powerfactory-through-python/. Accessed: 2024-
01-05.
[13]
DIgSILENT GmbH. PowerFactory 2022 Technical Reference Common Result Vari-
ables for Terminals and Elements Load Flow. Accessed: 2024-01-08. 2022.
[14]
DIgSILENT GmbH. Python Reference 2022. Accessed: 2024-01-08. 2022.
[15]
DIgSILENT GmbH. PowerFactory 2022 Technical Reference Common Result Vari-
ables for Terminals and Elements RMS Simulation. Accessed: 2024-01-08. 2022.
[16]
International Electrotechnical Commission, IEC. Wind energy generation systems
- Part 27-1: Electrical simulation models - Generic models. Accessed: 2024-01-08.
2018.
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
59
==PAGE:68==
[17]
DIgSILENT GmbH. How can I control a voltage source in a RMS simulation? https:
//www.digsilent.de/index.php/en/faq-reader-powerfactory/how-can-i-control-a-
voltage-source-in-a-rms-simulation.html. Accessed: 2024-01-10. 2024.
60
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
A.1
Current and Voltage results
Figure A.1: Voltage Results for POC Voltage at 0.2 pu
Figure A.2: Current Results for POC Voltage at 0.2 pu
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.3: Current Results for POC Voltage at 0.35 pu
Figure A.4: Voltage Results for POC Voltage at 0.35 pu
62
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.5: Current Results for POC Voltage at 0.5 pu
Figure A.6: Current Results for POC Voltage at 0.5 pu
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.7: Voltage Results for POC Voltage at 0.65 pu
Figure A.8: Current Results for POC Voltage at 0.65 pu
64
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.9: Voltage Results for Test A
Figure A.10: Current Results for Test A
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.11: Voltage Results for Test B
Figure A.12: Current Results for Test B
66
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.13: Voltage Results for Test C
Figure A.14: Current Results for Test C
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.15: Voltage Results for Test D
Figure A.16: Current Results for Test D
68
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
==PAGE:77==
Dynamic simulation framework for offshore wind plant FRT analysis and validation
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
