==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
A deterministic emitter for quantum optics:
Experiment and theory
Authors:
Rasmus Holmelund Jarbøl (s183781)
Valdemar Bille-Lauridsen (s183765)
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
2 𝛍𝐦
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors:
Jesper Mørk, DTU Electro
Evangelos Dimopoulos, DTU Electro
George Kountouris, DTU Electro
Pawel Holewa, DTU Electro
Submitted January 28th. 2024
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for over six months at the Nanophoton section in the De-
partment of Electrical and Photonics Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU.
The authors declare equal participation in the production of this thesis and the work
presented herein.
Rasmus Holmelund Jarbøl - s183781
Signature
Date
Valdemar Bille-Lauridsen - s183765
Signature
Date
i
January 28th. 2024
January 28th 2024
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis, new designs for a quantum emitter are proposed and characterised. The new
designs aim to provide a more scaleable solution compared to current quantum emitter
designs by creating devices that may be fabricated deterministically while maintaining
performance on par with existing solutions.
Through finite element methods, a new type of quantum emitter cavity system is stud-
ied and designed. This novel emitter design combines a nanobeam cavity with a buried
heterostructure and uses the cavity geometry to restrict the size of the buried heterostruc-
ture. This design exposed the active material, which was found to increase non-radiative
recombinations, which greatly impaired the devices’ performance. However, through ex-
perimental characterisation and rate equation analysis, it was found that this effect could
be successfully negated by using passivation.
The resulting cavities showed signs of lasing and had measured Q-factors of up to 8000.
This was low compared to the theoretical Q-factors of the designs, which were found to
be up to multiple millions. This discrepancy was mainly attributed to the roughness of
the fabricated devices. Additionally, simulations showed that the new designs confine light
with mode volumes down to 0.2 (λ/n)3.
Theoretical examinations showed that the overall designs could be altered to display a
quantum dot-like separation of the exciton energies of 36 meV between the fundamental
and first excited exciton transitions. Furthermore, using a master equation framework,
it was found that devices might display both strong coupling and lasing with additional
optimisation. However, this altered design is not yet realisable with the current fabrication
methods.
In conclusion, this work presents a novel quantum emitter cavity design with the potential
for deterministic fabrication. Yet, challenges such as roughness and fabrication methods
must be addressed for the theoretical design to be used in practical applications. Future
research should focus on refining the design and optimising fabrication techniques.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, we would like to express our sincere gratitude to our primary super-
visor Professor Jesper Mørk, for his insights and enriching discussions. We would also
like to thank Postdoc Evangelos Dimopoulos for his supervision, especially regarding the
experimental work of this thesis. Additionally, our thanks are extended to PhD student
Geroge Kountouris for his general supervision, especially regarding the numerical simula-
tion and nanobeam design process. Special thanks to Postdoc Pawel Holewa and Academic
Technician Meng Xiong for the valuable discussion regarding the fabrication and exper-
imental results. We also acknowledge PhD student Matias Bundgaard for his valuable
contributions to our understanding of the master equation framework.
Additionally, we thank Research Assistant Adrian Dubré for fabricating our designs, which
made the experimental characterizations possible. For the further passivation of the de-
vices, we thank Postdoc Yury Berdnikov.
Finally, we acknowledge Postdoc Aurimas
Sakanas for the original fabrication of the buried heterostructure, which serves as the
foundation for our work.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
This work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Nano Cavities and optical confinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Quantum emitters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Quantum light-matter interactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Passivation of III-V semiconductors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Finite element simulations
16
3.1
Methods of optical simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Far-field transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Methods of electronic simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Results of optical simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Results of electronic simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.8
Fabrication considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Experimental investigations
48
4.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
First fabrication round - Unpassivated cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
First fabrication round - Passivated cavities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4
Second fabrication round . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.5
Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5
Rate equation analysis
65
5.1
Theoretical framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.4
Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Master equation analysis
74
6.1
Theory of open quantum systems and master equations
. . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.3
Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7
Conclusion and discussion
85
8
Bibliography
88
A Appendix A: Finite element simulations
95
B Appendix B: Fabrication and experimental results
105
C Appendix C: Scripts
110
==PAGE:6==
1
|
Introduction
In our digital age, computing infrastructure makes up the backbone of modern society,
facilitating many technological advancements and services.
The progress in computing
has primarily been driven by the exponential decrease in transistor sizes, allowing for
smaller devices with increased computing capabilities [1]. However, as the electrical circuits
decrease in size, the power density increases, leading to increased heat dissipation due to
ohmic resistance in the electronics. The heat generated is one of the main limiting factors
in the further development of smaller and more powerful chips [2].
Furthermore, the
fabrication of smaller transistors is becoming increasingly complex as the size of modern
transistors is approaching the scale of a few nanometers. In this regime, quantum effects
may also negatively impact the reliability of the transistors, introducing a new set of
problems [3].
To continue increasing computing capabilities, optical on-chip and chip-to-chip intercon-
nects have been proposed [4]. Photonic systems are already facilitating fast, long-range
communication through optical fibres [5], and in data centres, advancements in the Vertical
Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers (VCSELs) have allowed for energy-efficient and high-speed
optical interconnects [6, 7].
Optical systems have the potential to both increase the speed of integrated circuits, reduce
heat generation, as there are no ohmic losses in waveguides, and improve power efficiency.
However, to fully integrate optics as on-chip or chip-to-chip connects, the development
of small lasers with extremely low operating thresholds is required to compete with the
current established electronic systems [5]. Recent work on 2D photonic crystal nanolasers
utilising buried heterostructures has shown an ultra-low operating threshold of 730 nA at
telecom wavelengths [8], making this platform a promising candidate for energy-efficient
nanoscale emitters. In this context, nanocavities emerge as crucial elements supplying the
necessary feedback for an optical emitter to transition into lasing.
While the realisation of photonic crystal cavities such as the one seen in figure 1.1(a)
provides the fundamental building blocks for nanolasers, they also offer a fundamental
level of control over optical modes. In parallel with the development of nanoscale optical
cavities, advancements in low-dimensional semiconductor structures, including quantum
wells and quantum dots, have facilitated the control of electronic properties. Combining
the manipulation of optical and electronic states has allowed for exploring fundamental
physics, including the strong coupling of light and matter [9]. In this context, a particularly
interesting feat of engineering is the realisation of single photon devices, which can be used
as qubits in quantum computers [10].
However, there are still multiple challenges within the field, and a better understanding of
photonic cavities and the coupling between light and matter will allow for the realisation
of new solutions and advancements within the field of integrated photonic circuits and
emitters [11]. In the following paragraphs, we present recent developments within the field
1
==PAGE:7==
x
z
y
Semiconductor 
Air holes
(b): Nanobeam cavity
(a): Line defect cavity
(c) EDC cavity
(d): LDQD cavity
x
z
y
x
z
y
Figure 1.1: Overview of some different nanocavity structures.
The cavities introduced
here will be detailed later. The EDC cavity is reprinted from [12], and the LDQD cavity
is reprinted from [13].
of nanocavities and quantum emitters, which provide the foundation for this thesis.
Nanophotonic devices have a trade-off between spatial and temporal confinement of light.
Plasmonics have been superior in confining light spatially, and photonic crystal cavities
superior in temporal confinement [14]. However, the recently developed bowtie structures
offer both excellent spatial and temporal confinement [15]. Dielectric cavities have been
widely used due to their superior temporal confinement and despite the larger mode vol-
umes, which are on the order of the light wavelength. However, in 2006, Gondarenko et
al. found that a bowtie-like structure could theoretically confine light at volumes much
smaller than the wavelength [16]. The recent development of the topologically optimised
extreme dielectric confinement (EDC) structures realised this experimentally [17]. Figure
1.1(c) shows an example of the structure. These developments allow for a degree of control
in the optical modes, which was not believed to be possible, opening up new possibilities
in photonic engineering.
The EDC cavities are altered and optimised 2D photonic crystal cavities (PhC). While
this type of cavity allows for relatively easy confinement of light, the structures have a
large footprint. Furthermore, in and out-coupling of light from the cavity must happen
in the out-of-plane direction. This makes it challenging to integrate such cavities with
conventional integrated optical waveguides.
To miniaturise PhC structures and enable
efficient coupling to waveguides, nanobeam structures like the one sketched figure 1.1(b)
may be considered an alternative to the larger PhC slabs [18]. As the technology matures
and larger photonic systems become realisable, the nanobeam offers multiple practical
advantages because of its smaller size and easier integration with waveguides.
Combining the optical confinement and manipulation of light with low-dimensional semi-
conductor emitters allows for the simultaneous manipulation of optical and electron states.
Quantum dots (QDs) have shown good single photon emission properties and are thus a
promising platform for a wide range of technologies [11]. QDs are already widely used
for multiple applications within communication and computing, and the interplay between
single photons and quantum dots embedded in photonic nanostructures has been subject to
extensive research [9]. With the 2023 Nobel Prize in Chemistry awarded for the discovery
and development of quantum dots, it is clear that this technology is of great importance
[19].
A challenge is that the QDs are grown in a random stochastic process, meaning
2
==PAGE:8==
that the size and position of a single quantum dot cannot be fully controlled. Due to this
fabrication method, below 1% of the developed devices are functional [20]. This makes it
very difficult to use quantum dots as a practical platform, as the fabrication is not scalable
and not deterministic. In photonic circuits with multiple emitters, this may especially be
a problem, as one needs to be able to position them where needed.
Gschrey et al. reported a deterministic technique for fabricating single quantum dot mesa-
structures. Their lithographic method allows for the selection and processing of sample
areas containing single QDs, improving the yield and reliability of the fabrication [20].
However, even these deterministic techniques will have scalability problems as they still
rely on quantum dots that have been stochastically grown [13]. Optical lithography can
be used to position quantum dots deterministically, but it has other drawbacks, such as
poorer resolution [21]. Kountouris et al. examined the possibility of defining the quantum
dots in the middle of an EDC cavity using lithography. Figure 1.1(c) shows the so-called
lithography-defined quantum dot (LDQD) design. Unfortunately, this solution was limited
by carrier diffusion [13].
Building on the idea of Kountouris et al., the carrier lifetime may be vastly increased
by implementing a so-called Buried heterostructure (BH). The Buried heterostructure is
an alternative active material based on the quantum well technology [22]. These can be
deterministically fabricated, which is necessary if devices are to be used for large-scale
commercial production. Additionally, by using a BH instead of defining a QD lithograph-
ically, one has increased freedom in optimising the geometric shape of the cavity without
having to worry about carrier confinement. Previous studies on PhC lasers with quantum
dots as active material have also shown rapid carrier diffusion and non-radiative recom-
bination at the air boundary [23]. This effect can be combated by introducing a buried
heterostructure, as the carriers will be confined to the BH [24]. However, similar surface
recombination effects may arise if the BH is etched and exposed to air. One may em-
ploy passivation methods to suppress the non-radiative recombination rate to combat this
[25, 26].
1.1
This work
In this project, the ideas from the bowtie structures and EDC cavities will be combined
with the BH structures in a nanobeam design based on III-V semiconductors. This novel
combination of technologies will allow for additional degrees of freedom compared to litho-
graphically defined QD and allows for deterministic placement, overcoming the challenges
associated with devices relying on stochastically grown QDs. This is done in an effort to
address the problems of scalability with the current quantum emitter designs. This the-
sis presents extensive investigations and characterisations of this new nanobeam design,
aiming to develop a structure that matches the performance of existing solutions based on
QDs.
The main question explored in this project is whether it is possible to design a quantum
emitter-cavity system with excellent temporal and spatial optical confinement which can
be fabricated deterministically and serve as a building block for future photonic circuits.
Furthermore, it is examined if these devices can display QD-like emission properties even
though they are based on buried heterostructures. This will be achieved by restricting the
size of the BH using lithography, thereby effectively making a QD-sized active material.
Through a combination of simulations, theoretical analyses, and experimental studies, we
extract various properties of these designs and propose new designs for next-generation
nanophotonic devices.
3
==PAGE:9==
The report consists of seven chapters, including this introduction. The next chapter in-
troduces the fundamental theoretical concepts of nanocavities and quantum emitters. In
the third chapter, simulations are performed using the COMSOL Multiphysics® finite
element software. First, the approach and numerical methods are presented, and hereafter,
different nanobeam cavity designs are examined. By changing geometrical parameters, it
is studied how different geometries affect the confinement of light and carriers. In this
chapter, two domains are studied. First, simulations in the optical domain are performed
to define cavities with a large temporal and spatial confinement. Secondly, simulations are
performed in the electronic domain to inspect how different geometries alter the eigenen-
ergies and mode profiles of carriers. Using the simulation results, nanobeam designs are
proposed. Some of these are fabricated at DTU Nanolab for experimental characterisation;
others provide the foundation for further theoretical studies.
In chapter four, the new designs are characterised experimentally. Three rounds of ex-
periments were conducted, and these are presented in three sections. First, the initial
fabrication of unpassivated structures is considered. In the second part, the devices are
passivated and characterised to examine the effect of the passivation. In the last part, a new
set of passivated devices is fabricated, characterised, and compared to the first fabrication
round.
In chapter five, a rate equation framework is presented and used to analyse the experimental
results. Here, lasing parameters are obtained and the effects of passivation are quantified.
The experimental results are interpreted to examine how the design could be improved and
identify the main factors determining their performance. Based on theoretical designs and
rates extracted from simulations and experiments, a master equation approach is employed
in chapter six. Here the emission characteristics of small cavity designs are analysed to
predict the performance of such devices and infer if strong coupling may be obtained. The
final chapter will summarise and discuss the most important results, focusing on further
research and possible applications.
4
==PAGE:10==
2
|
Theory
This chapter serves to familiarise the reader with the theoretical concepts used to describe
the optical and electronic properties of the devices presented in this thesis. In this the-
sis, the coupled quantum emitter nanocavity system will be examined. Low-dimensional
quantum emitters, such as quantum dots or quantum wells, have allowed for control of the
electronic properties of matter, while the nanocavity controls the confinement of the optical
modes. By combining the control of electronic and optical modes, one can manipulate the
light-matter coupling, with numerous possibilities for exploration of fundamental physics
as well as engineering advanced devices.
In the following sections, the basic theoretical concepts of first nanocavities will be pre-
sented, and thereafter quantum emitters in the form of quantum dots and quantum wells
will be introduced. Furthermore, the coupled system will be introduced through the Rabi
model. Finally, a short section on the physical principles behind passivation of III-V ma-
terials is presented
2.1
Nano Cavities and optical confinement
This section is based on Introduction to dielectric waveguides by Jesper Lægsgaard [27].
The optical field in a cavity can be described by its cavity modes. The mode solutions are
described by Maxwell’s equations written as:
∇· D = ρf,
(2.1)
∇· B = 0,
(2.2)
∇× E = −∂B
∂t ,
(2.3)
∇× H = σE + ∂D
∂t .
(2.4)
In the above, E is the electric field, B is the magnetic field, and ρf is the free charge
density. Furthermore, the auxiliary fields D and H, and the conductivity σ have been
introduced. These quantities are convenient to use when working with electromagnetic
fields in materials. They are defined as:
D = ε0εE,
(2.5)
H = µ−1
0 µ−1B,
(2.6)
5
==PAGE:11==
where ε0 and ε are the material’s vacuum permittivity and dielectric function. Likewise,
µ0 and µ are the material’s vacuum permeability and relative permeability. In this work,
the materials considered are dielectrics, and for these, it is safe to assume that there are no
free changes (ρf = 0), the relative permeability is one (µ = 1) and that the conductivity
will be negligible (σ ≃0).
If it is assumed that the dielectric function ε and conductivity σ are constant in time, the
time dependency of the solutions to Maxwell’s equations can be described as an exponential
function, with an eigenfrequency ω:
H(r, t) = H(r) exp(iωt),
(2.7)
E(r, t) = E(r) exp(iωt).
(2.8)
With these assumptions, Maxwell’s equation can be simplified to:
∇· (εE) = 0,
(2.9)
∇· H = 0,
(2.10)
∇× E = −iµ0ωH,
(2.11)
∇× H = iωε0εE.
(2.12)
By combining the equations, one can eliminate the H-field or E-field to obtain:
∇× (∇× E (r)) = ω2
c2 ε(r)E(r)
(2.13)
By solving this eigenvalue problem for the electrical field with appropriate boundary con-
ditions, one can obtain an eigenvalue corresponding to the cavity mode’s frequency ω = ωc.
Often, this is also formulated in terms of the wave vector, which magnitude is given as
|k| = ω√ε/c.
Realistically, the cavity may not be perfect at confining the mode, and thus, the optical
mode will decay over time, resulting in complex eigenfrequencies. Mathematically, the
leaky cavity modes can be described within the framework of quasinormal modes.
2.1.1
Quasi-normal modes and figures of merit
This section is based on Modeling electromagnetic resonators using quasinormal modes:
Erratum by Kristensen et al. [28].
For non-perfect cavities, there will be a leakage or dampening of the mode. For these modes,
solutions to the eigenvalue problem in equation 2.13 yield complex eigenfrequencies. Here,
the real part corresponds to the cavity’s resonance frequency, and the imaginary part is
the dampening. The dampening is related to the quality factor (Q-factor), which can be
defined from the complex eigenfrequency ω = ωc + iδ as:
Q = ωc
2|δ|
(2.14)
The Q-factor describes the temporal confinement of the field and is one of the most im-
portant figures of merit used to characterise optical cavities. The Q-factor is related to the
decay rate of optical energy in the cavity, κ:
κ = ωc/Q
(2.15)
6
==PAGE:12==
This decay results in the mode having a certain bandwidth δωc, which may be used to
experimentally measure the Q-factor, as it can be calculated from the measured bandwidth
and resonance frequency ωc as:
Q = ωc
δωc
,
(2.16)
Due to the leaky cavity, the electric fields do not converge to zero in the far field. Thus,
for calculations, one should impose the Silver–Müller radiation condition:
ˆr × ∇× E(r, ω) →−i εω
c E(r, ω),
r →∞
(2.17)
This relies on the fact that there are no radiation sources in the far field and therefore only
allows the far field to travel away from the resonator. A mode obeying these conditions is
referred to as a Quasi Normal Mode (QNM). As the magnitude of the electric field diverges
far from the resonator, such fields are not easily normalisable. Fortunately, one can still
normalise the modes by taking into account the surface integral of the field at the boundary
where the Silver-Muller radiation condition is fulfilled
⟨⟨F(r) | F(r)⟩⟩= 1
2ϵ0
Z
V
[ϵ0ϵR(r)E(r) · E(r) −µ0H(r) · H(r)] dV
+
i
2ϵ0ω
Z
∂V
[[r∂rE(r)] × H(r) −E(r) × [r∂rH(r)]] · ˆndA.
(2.18)
Here, the F is used to symbolize the six-component electromagnetic field vector F(r, ω) =
[E(r, ω), H(r, ω)]T. This expression can be used to normalise QNM strictly. However, it
should be noted that the contribution from the surface integral is negligible for the types
of systems examined in this work, and in such cases the surface integral in equation 2.18
may be omitted.
The quality factor characterises the temporal confinement of the field in an optical cavity,
however, it is also important to consider the spatial confinement of the field. Typically,
this is characterised by the mode volume, which may be defined as [29, 30]:
1
V Q
p
= Re
 1
vQ

,
vQ =
⟨⟨E | E⟩⟩
ϵ (rc) E2 (rc),
(2.19)
Here rc is the point where the field takes its maximal value. This definition of the mode
volume is used for leaky cavities.
However, if the Q-factor is very high, then vQ will
practically be real, and the equation can be simplified.
In this case, the field can be
normalised regularly and without the surface integral in equation 2.18. In this case, the
effective mode volume can be defined in the following way:
Vp =
R
ϵ|E|2 dV
max (ϵ|E|2)
(2.20)
The cavities examined in this project are active, containing a gain medium. To increase
the light-matter interaction, it is desirable to confine the optical mode to the volume of the
gain medium. To quantify the spatial overlap of the optical mode and the active material,
the confinement factor Γ is used [31]:
Γ =
R
Va n2
a|E(r)|2 d3r
R
V n2(r)|E(r)|2 d3r,
(2.21)
where Va and na are the volume and refractive index of the active region respectively, as
opposed to V and n denoting the total volume and general position-dependent refractive
7
==PAGE:13==
x
z
y
a
1D PhC
2D PhC
a
Figure 2.1: Left: A 1D photonic crystal. The colours indicate materials with different
refractive indices. Right: A 2D photonic crystal. Air holes are etched into the material in
a triangular pattern. The lattice constant is defined by a.
index. Considering a small active medium situated at the field’s centre, the mode volume
can be approximated from the confinement factor:
Vp = Va/Γ =
R
V n(r)2|E(r)|2 d3r
1
Va
R
Va n2a|E(r)|2 d3r,
(2.22)
This corresponds to the total field energy, normalised to the mean-field energy density
inside the active region. If the size of the active region is reduced to a point, this expression
reduces to equation 2.20. In this work, Γ and Vp are used to quantify the spatial confinement
of the optical fields.
The combination of temporal (Q) and spatial confinement (Vp) of light within an active
cavity allows for the definition of another performance metric known as the Purcell factor
PF . It can be calculated as [32]:
PF =
3
4π2
Q
Vp
λ
n
3
.
(2.23)
The Purcell factor describes the enhancement of the spontaneous emission rate in a cavity,
and it quantifies the increase in the rate at which an emitter, such as an atom or quantum
dot, emits photons when placed inside a cavity, as compared to when it is in free space. The
Purcell factor is of interest because it can increase the efficiency of LEDs and modulation
speeds [33]. From equation 2.23, it is clear that a high Q-factor and a low mode volume
are required to increase the Purcell enhancement.
Increasing the temporal and spatial confinement in nanocavities hinges on optimising the
geometry of a given structure. The cavities can take many different forms, with different
shapes, sizes, and dimensionalities. Some of the common cavity designs are micropillars,
micro discs, photonic crystals in both two and three dimensions, and one-dimensional
nanobeams [34]. In this work, we consider nanobeam photonic crystal cavities, and the
next section introduces the fundamental concepts of photonic crystal cavities.
2.1.2
Photonic crystal cavities
A photonic crystal (PhC) is a periodic dielectric structure that exhibits optical properties
comparable to the electronic band gaps in semiconductors [35]. The core concept is illus-
trated in figure 2.1. The left illustration shows a 1D photonic crystal. Here, a periodic
change in refractive index is introduced in one dimension. As light propagating in the
z-direction encounters a change in refractive index, it will be partly reflected. As light
propagates deeper into the material, these partial reflections happen periodically. This
creates an interference pattern leading to destructive interference at specific frequencies,
8
==PAGE:14==
(a)
a
x
y
(b)
Figure 2.2: (a): Reprinted from [35]. A photonic bandgap diagram of a 2D PhC slab. The
red lines represent TE modes, and the blue lines represent TM modes. (b): Defects in the
periodic structure of the PhC allow for cavities where light can be confined.
preventing propagation at these frequencies. The range of forbidden frequencies is also
known as the ’photonic bandgap’ of the PhC.
The concept of photonic crystals can also be extended to two and three dimensions. The
right illustration in figure 2.1, shows a 2D photonic crystal. The triangular pattern of holes
introduces the periodic change in refractive index. Thus, a range of frequencies is forbidden
in the whole plane of the PhC slab, while the light may be confined in the z-direction by
total internal reflection (TIR).
In reciprocal space, the optical modes propagating in a photonic crystal can be represented
by a band structure analogous to the electronic bands of solid-state crystals. In this context,
the band structure represents the relationship between the frequency and the propagation
constant of photons within the crystal [35]. In figure 2.2(a), the photonic band structure of
a PhC slab is shown. The red lines represent transverse electric (TE) modes, and the blue
lines represent transverse magnetic (TM) modes. The highlighted TE-like gap indicates a
range of frequencies where no TE-modes are propagating in the structure. By changing
various geometrical parameters of the PhC, such as the thickness or lattice constant, one
may tailor the structure to facilitate a bandgap at other frequencies. The purple shaded
area of figure 2.2(a) represents the light cone of the given geometry. Here, light is not
confined by total internal reflection.
This happens when the out-of-plane wave vector
component, k⊥, becomes sufficiently large compared to the in-plane vector component, k∥
at a given frequency.
By introducing defects to the periodicity of the photonic crystal, one may create a cavity
that allows for in-plane propagation of light with frequencies in the photonic bandgap.
This is illustrated in 2.2(b), where five holes are removed from a 2D PhC. Such a structure
is called a line-defect cavity, also referred to as a LN defect, with N denoting the number
of missing holes. Such a structure can be used to confine light, and they have been subject
to numerous studies on nanolasers [36].
2D Photonic crystal defect cavities have been widely studied.
Designs with simulated
Q-factors of multiple millions and experimental Q-factors of more than 1 million have
been found [37]. However, their large footprint and the practical difficulties with in and
out-coupling of light from the cavity make the smaller but closely related nanobeams a
promising alternative [18].
9
==PAGE:15==
x
z
y
Semiconductor 
Air holes
Defect
Figure 2.3: The sketch shows a PhC Nanobeam defect cavity. Airholes are etched into a
dielectric material. In the centre of the nanobeam, a defect is introduced, allowing for the
confinement of light.
2.1.3
Nanobeam photonic crystal cavities
Photonic crystal nanobeam cavities (PCNCs) are nano-scale waveguide-like structures with
a periodic change in refractive index in one dimension. In figure 2.3, a PCNC is sketched.
The nanobeam may be made of a dielectric material, and the change in index is introduced
by air holes. Similar to the PhC cavity, a photonic bandgap is formed, and by introducing
a defect, a state can be formed in the bandgap, confined to the defect [18].
The PCNC was first proposed by Villeneuve et al. in 1995, and two years later, they were
experimentally realised by Foresi et al. [38, 39]. The theoretical Q-factor of these cavities
was found to be Q = 280. However, through optimisation of the nanobeam geometry, to
better match the confined mode, the quality factor can be drastically increased. Studies
have been conducted to, among other things, optimise the hole size, the number of holes
and tapering of the hole sizes [18]. In 2009, Deotare et al. presented silicon nanobeam
cavities with theoretical Q-factors of > 107 and measured Q-factors of 75000 at telecom
wavelengths [40]. The large Q-factors were attributed to the photonic crystal mode-gap
effect and tapering of the hole sizes and spacing.
In this work, we focus on indium phosphide (InP) nanobeams. While much work has gone
into high Q-factor silicon nanobeams, there are several practical problems using silicon
[22]. Similarly to silicon, InP is transparent at telecom wavelengths, making it an ideal
candidate for use in integrated photonics [41]. However, III-V materials such as InP are
known for their excellent optical gain characteristics, making them good candidates for
use as active materials in photonic devices. As will be introduced in section 2.2, an III-V
compound is placed in the centre of the nanobeam. To facilitate better lattice matching
and easier fabrication it is thus advantageous to use InP.
The Q-factor is essential for the Purcell factor, as seen from equation 2.23.
However,
equally important is mode volume. Until recently, it was accepted that mode volumes could
not be decreased beyond the so-called diffraction limit of (λ/2n)3 in dielectric cavities.
However, in 2006, Gondarenko et al. proposed a bowtie-shaped structure based on an
evolutionary simulation process [42] which was later shown to confine light below the
diffraction limit. Recent advances in fabrication have allowed for experimental realisation
of such structures displaying confinement of light to sub-wavelength geometries [15, 43].
The so-called Extreme Dielectric Confinement (EDC) cavities are designed to confine light
based on the slot and anti-slot effect, which will be explained in the following section.
2.1.4
Slot Anti-slot effect
To introduce the physical phenomenon responsible for the sub-wavelength confinement
of light, a structure with 3 layers of materials with alternating high and low dielectric
constants is considered. This is sketched in figure 2.4.
The slot effect is based on the continuity of the normal component of the electric displace-
ment field Dn,low = Dn,high. This leads to an enhancement in the electric field in the low
10
==PAGE:16==
𝜖ℎ
𝜖ℎ
𝜖ℎ
𝜖ℎ
Slot effect (S)
Antislot effect (AS)
ASS
ASSAS
Bowtie
…
S/A interlocking
𝜖𝑙
𝜖𝑙
𝐸𝑛,𝑙= 𝜖ℎ
𝜖𝑙
𝐸𝑛,ℎ
𝐷𝑡,ℎ= 𝜖ℎ
𝜖𝑙
𝐷𝑡,𝑙
Figure 2.4: Interlockning of slots and anti-slots marked by the letters S and AS leads to
the formation of the bowtie geometry.
permittivity areas by:
En,low = ϵhigh
ϵlow
En,high
(2.24)
If a material of low permittivity is slotted into a region of high permittivity, it enhances
the electric field by ϵhigh/ϵlow. Oppositely, the tangential component of the electric field
is continuous across an interface Et,high = Et,low. This leads to an enhancement in the
electric displacement field,
Dt,high = ϵhigh
ϵlow
Dt,low
(2.25)
This effect is termed the anti-slot effect and enhances the displacement field of ϵhigh/ϵlow.
By combining the two effects and interlocking multiple slots and anti-slots, one gets the
bowtie geometry. This may drastically increase the energy density in regions smaller than
the wavelength of the confined light.
Thereby, Hu and Weiss explained how it is possible to confine light in dielectric cavities in
volumes much smaller than the optical wavelength [15]. This was an important discovery
as it showed the theoretical possibility of creating dielectric cavities with both a high Q-
factor and a small mode volume. This is especially important for light-matter interaction
effects such as the Purcell enhancement.
In this project, we explore different designs of nanobeam cavities, examining the possibility
of using the slot/anti-slot effect to confine light below the diffraction limit while maintaining
high Q-factors. However, to fully understand the light-matter interactions that these types
of cavities can lead to, the fundamentals of quantum emitters need to be introduced.
2.2
Quantum emitters
To generate photons in the cavity, an emitter is needed. The simplest quantum model for
emitters is the atom-like emitter, in which there are only two levels or states: a fundamental
state and an excited state.
If many atoms are put together in a periodic crystal, the
two levels develop into a bulk structure’s continuous valence and conduction bands. The
recombination of an electron in the upper band and a hole in the lower band can generate
a photon [44]. In materials, this recombination may happen in several ways, as illustrated
in figure 2.5. The first is spontaneous emission, where the electron and hole recombine
and emit a single photon with an energy equal to the difference between the energy levels.
Another is stimulated emission, in which a photon stimulates the recombination and results
in the emission of two identical photons [44]. Stimulated emission is what gives lasing light
11
==PAGE:17==
Spontaneous 
Emission
Stimulated 
Emission
Stimulated 
Absorption
Non-radiative
Emission
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 2.5: a) During spontaneous emission, an excited state decays, releasing a photon
in a random direction. b) Stimulated emission involves an incoming photon initiating the
decay of an excited state. The emitted light is in phase with the incoming photon. c)
Stimulated absorption involves the consumption of one photon, resulting in the creation
of one excitation. d) Non-radiative recombination may occur when the excess energy is
dissipated in the form of a phonon
its characteristics.
For light-emitting devices, another important process is stimulated
absorption, where a photon is absorbed by an electron in its low-energy state, resulting in
an excitation. This process is shown in figure 2.5 (c).
Finally, non-radiative processes may also occur in which no emission of photons takes place.
An example of a non-radiative process is electrons being caught in a defect trap. In this
case, some of the energy may be dissipated in the form of phonons associated with lattice
vibrations in the material, and a photon may then be emitted with a lower energy [45].
Another example is Auger recombination, where an electron and a hole recombine, but
instead of emitting a photon, the energy is transferred to an electron in the conduction
band. The electron is then brought to the band edge by expelling the excess energy as heat
[46]. Light-emitting devices may be categorised into an LED regime, where the emission
is dominated by spontaneous emissions, and a laser regime, where stimulated emission is
the primary source of radiation. In both cases, non-radiative processes are generally not
desired, as this leads to lower output power.
In the following sections, two types of quantum emitters will be presented. The first is the
quantum dot, which displays properties quite like an atom-like system with a few numbers
of well-defined energy levels. The second is the quantum well, which is more similar to
the bulk structure but still has quantised energy levels. In these types of structures, the
electrons and holes are localized which may lead to the formation of excitons. An exciton
is a quasi-particle consisting of a bound electron-hole pair. Excitonic recombination will
generally dominate in small quantum emitters as studied in this project [44].
2.2.1
Quantum dots
Quantum dots (QDs) are semiconductor nanostructures with discrete energy levels, and
the density of states (DOS) is characterised by sharp peaks corresponding to these discrete
energy states [47]. The optical and electrical properties of QDs are size-dependent and can
be tailored to specific applications during fabrication [48].
A key characteristic of quantum dots is the large separation between exciton energy levels.
Quantum dots have an energy separation of around 50 meV between the fundamental and
first excited exciton state but can be fabricated to display separations of up to 150 meV
[49, 50]. For telecom wavelengths, InAs-based QDs on InP may be used. These QDs have
an unequal strain in the two lattice directions, resulting in elongated structures. While the
12
==PAGE:18==
symmetric QDs might have a separation of up to 80 meV, highly elongated structures will
have a lower separation of 20 meV [51]. Other fabrication techniques have been developed to
minimise the elongation. However, even using these techniques, the separation is between
20 and 30 meV [52].
The distinct energy separation is necessary for single-photon applications. Single-photon
devices usually operate at very low temperatures, where kbT ≈2meV. The energy separa-
tion needs to be much larger than this, so thermal energy cannot excite carriers to higher
levels [53].
However, scalability is a great challenge with quantum dot technology as the growth of
quantum dots is a stochastic process [11].
There are multiple problems regarding the
growth and alignment of cavity structures with quantum dots, which make them difficult to
use for deterministic large-scale fabrication. It is therefore interesting to look for alternative
solutions which might solve some of these challenges.
2.2.2
Quantum well and the Buried Heterostructure
Quantum wells are thin semiconductor layers sandwiched between barrier layers of ma-
terials with larger band gaps. This results in carrier confinement, leading to quantised
energy levels [54]. In the ideal case, a three-dimensional infinite potential quantum well
has discrete energy levels given by
E = π2ℏ2
2m
 
n2
x
Lx2 + n2
y
Ly2 + n2
z
L2z
!
,
(2.26)
Here ℏis the reduced Planck constant, m is the effective electron mass in the quantum
well, and Lx,y,z corresponds to the size of the quantum well in each direction. The different
modes correspond to the different combinations of nx, ny and nz, which only take natural
numbers. From equation 2.26, it becomes clear that the smallest dimension Li largely
determines the energy.
In this regard, a comparison to the quantum dot DOS can be made. For an infinite quantum
well of 8.1×50×50 nm3, the ground state energy is 0.151 eV when the effective mass of the
electron is assumed to be 0.04 times the electron mass. In that case, the distance to the
second mode is only 3.7 meV, which is not much larger than kbT = 2 meV. This is similar
in size to the QWs which will be studied in this thesis. In reality, the potential barriers
are finite, so the results will differ for an actual quantum well. The finite potential leads
to lower confinement energies, as the wave functions will spread out into the barriers.
In this project, the buried heterostructure (BH) is studied. The BH is a two-dimensional
quantum well, with GaInAsP being the active layer and AlInGaAs InAlAs as a bi-layer
potential wall in the z-direction. The materials are buried in InP, which then also con-
stitutes a potential wall in the in-plane direction of the cavity. The fabrication process is
detailed in the PhD thesis by Sakanas [22]. The wafers were produced before the start of
this project with BHs of varying in-plane sizes from 5 × 5 nm to 300 × 300 nm. Further
details about the properties of the BH are introduced in a later chapter.
To model finite quantum wells such as buried heterostuctures, numerical methods may be
employed to solve Schrödinger’s equation for complex structures:
−h2∇·
∇ψ(r)
2m(r)

+ V (r)ψ(r) = Eψ(r)
(2.27)
In this project, numerical simulations are performed in the finite element software, COM-
SOL Multiphysics® [55]. The eigenvalue problem is solved for the eigenenergy E and
13
==PAGE:19==
eigenfunctions ψ(r) with appropriate boundary conditions. The potential V (r) and the
effective mass m(r) depends on the materials in the quantum well. More details on the
numerical simulations are presented in chapter 3.
Having introduced how cavities may be used to confine light, and how low-dimensional
quantum emitters may be used to manipulate electronic states, we will now present a
model for the quantum interaction between light and matter.
2.3
Quantum light-matter interactions
One of the simplest cases of quantum light-matter interaction is described by the Rabi
model. In this section, the model is used to present a method of calculating the interaction
strength. The interaction between a single mode field and a two-level emitter is modelled
through a threefold Hamiltonian [56]:
ˆH = 1
2ℏω0ˆσz + ℏωc

ˆa†ˆa + 1
2

+ ℏg

ˆa + ˆa†
ˆσx
(2.28)
In the above, ω0 is the electronic transition frequency and ωc is the cavity frequency. The
last term describes the interaction Hamiltonian:
Hint = ℏg

ˆa + ˆa†
ˆσx
(2.29)
Here g is the interaction strength, ˆa† and ˆa are the creation and annihilation operators
of the optical field, ˆσx and ˆσz are the Pauli spin matrices. The interaction Hamiltonian
may be expressed under dipole approximation, where the atom is small compared to any
changes in the field [56]. The Hamiltonian can, in this case, be written as:
Hint = −ˆd · ˆE
(2.30)
Using the QNM framework, the quantized field may be defined as ˆE = E(r)ˆa+H.c., where
E(r) is the electric field.
In the case that the emitter is not a perfect point but is a small volume. The magnitude of
the dipole moment d can be substituted with an integral over the polarisation ˆd =
R ˆP(r)dV
[13]. The polarisation is then estimated by the total dipole moment p and the exciton
wave function as ˆP(r) = pχ(r)ˆσx.
Here, χ(r) is the product of the electron and hole
wavefunctions:
χ(r) = ψe(r)ψh(r)
(2.31)
Using the above, one can rewrite equation 2.30 as:
Hint = p
Z
χ(r)e · E(r)dr

ˆa + ˆa†
ˆσx,
(2.32)
where the dot product with e = (1, 1, 1) is used to sum over the contribution from each of
the components of the electric field. The expression, given by equation 2.32 is now used
to estimate the coupling strength from equation 2.29:
ℏg = p
Z
χ(r)e · E(r)dr
(2.33)
The total dipole moment is calculated from:
p =
e
m0ωc
r
m0Ep
2
,
(2.34)
14
==PAGE:20==
where m0 is the rest electron mass and Ep is the Kane energy which is taken as 20 eV, as
is commonly found in semiconductors similar to the ones considered in this project [13].
Equation 2.33 can then be used to examine how different geometrical designs will affect the
coupling strength, as it can be calculated directly from the wavefunctions and the electric
field extracted, which can be extracted from simulations.
2.4
Passivation of III-V semiconductors
As described in the previous sections, non-radiative recombination is one of the main
contributors to the loss of light in semiconductor emitters. In III-V semiconductors such
as InP, GaAs and InGaAs, studies have shown that surface effects contribute significantly
to non-radiative recombination [26].
Surface passivation is a method for reducing the
amount of defects in the hope of achieving better electrical properties.
As materials are exposed to the atmosphere, oxidation occurs. Especially for III-V semi-
conductors, this may lead to a large number of defect states, resulting in poor electronic
properties. There are two leading causes for the large defect density at III-V oxide inter-
faces [57]. The first is strain induced by lattice mismatch, which may create dangling bonds
- that is, unpaired electrons at the interface, which may introduce localised electronic traps
within the bandgap of the semiconductor. This process was sketched in figure 2.5(d).
The other source of defects is also related to dangling bonds, but it is caused by the chem-
ical properties of GaAs that is used in the buried heterostructure. Compared to silicon
surfaces, GaAs have much more complex surface reconstructions. The surface of GaAs may
have both Ga and As dangling bonds. In contrast to Si, which may be terminated with
hydrogen, leading to a flat surface, the complexity of the GaAs surface has proven hard to
passivate. Based on the electron counting rule, Roberson and Lin proposed trivalent oxides
such as Al2O3 as a passivating layer for GaAs [58]. Here As-terminated GaAs is bounded to
Al-terminated Al2O3, while Ga-terminated GaAs is matched by the O-terminated Al2O3.
The passivating layer binds the dangling bonds and prevents further oxidation, which may
introduce strain and more dangling bonds.
The photoluminescence emission intensity from GaAs can be significantly increased by
surface passivation. This is attributed to the reduction in the surface recombination rate
of carriers. In 2022, Jacob et al. showed that for GaAs nanopillars with a diameter of 3
microns, the surface recombination rate was 150 ps for unpassivated devices. This could
be increased to 1.1 ns with passivation [25]. The surface recombination gets increasingly
important as the device gets smaller. For the nanopillars, it was found that the surface
recombination lifetime is proportional to the nanopillar width [59].
In this project two methods of applying passivating materials are used. The first is atomic
layer deposition (ALD). ALD is an iterative process, where thin films may be deposited
in atomic scale thicknesses. Using different precursor gasses, single atomic layers may be
deposited on a substrate in a self-limiting process. This means each precursor gas adsorbs
on the substrate in a monolayer before another gas is introduced which then adsorbs onto
the precursor. The second method is metal organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE). This
is an epitaxial process which grows crystalline layers by flowing precursor gasses over the
substrate. This process is performed in a pressurised chamber, which allows for parallel
processing of multiple wafers, and high growth rates. Both processes may be used to apply
passivating layers. While ALD offers better precision, MOVPE is a faster process [60].
15
==PAGE:21==
3
|
Finite element simulations
The numerical studies conducted in this project are performed using the COMSOL Mul-
tiphysics® finite element software [55].
Both the optical and electrical properties of
nanobeam cavities are investigated. The optical fields are simulated using the wave optics
module, while the electronic simulations are performed using the Semiconductor module.
The purpose of the simulations is to suggest new designs for nanobeam photonic crystal
structures with a buried heterostructure.
Initially, optical simulations were performed
to create high-Q cavities with a large confinement factor, Γ. The electronic simulations
serve to verify that the electronic states would be confined in the buried heterostructure
for all designs, and they are hereafter used to propose alternative theoretical designs.
Furthermore, when changing the general geometry, the optical modes are expected to see
the greatest impact. Because of the BH, the electronic modes are confined and not sensitive
to the general geometry, as the modes will be confined by the quantum well.
The general approach for the simulations is therefore as follows:
• The first step is to get some intuition for how changing the geometrical parameters
influences the optical modes.
• The second step is to choose some designs and make them work for different BH
lengths and optimise these. This is done to create equally optimised cavities with
a large Q and Γ for all the BH sizes. Thereby, the influence of the BH size can be
studied experimentally later.
• The third step is to do the electronic simulations and examine how the geometry
affects the electronic modes. The geometry is used to alter the carrier wavefunctions
and the eigenenergies. The difference between the energy of the different modes is of
special interest. The goal is to examine if the BH can display properties similar to a
QD.
• In parallel with the third step, the optical and electronic simulations are used to
calculate the interaction between the optical and electronic modes. This is done to
see if the geometry can be used to tailor the interaction strength.
In the first two sections of this chapter, the simulation methods and the geometrical pa-
rameters used for these investigations are introduced. The simulation results are presented
in the following three sections.
In the first result section, only the optical modes are
examined. In the second section, the results of the electronic simulations are presented.
Here, the coupling between the optical and electronic modes is also calculated. In the
last section, our findings and the design chosen for fabrication are discussed. Additionally,
possible effects of fabrication errors are considered, and far-field emission spectra will be
studied, as they could help better explain experimental results, which will be presented in
the next chapter.
16
==PAGE:22==
ra
rb
Nmirrors
L
w
BHL
R
Tapering section
a
Air
InP
BH
1 μm
Gap size
Figure 3.1: A top-down view on the PhC nanobeam structures considered in this project.
Variable parameters are sketched. The insert shows a close-up of the central cavity region
and the buried heterostructure.
3.1
Methods of optical simulations
The optical fields are solved using the Comsol wave optics interface [61]. The simulations
are conducted in the frequency domain, calculated in the QNM framework, where Maxwell’s
equations are solved as explained in section 2.1.1. The eigenfrequencies are returned as
complex values, which may be used to calculate the Q-factor as in equation 2.14. From
the field profile, the confinement factor Γ and mode volumes are calculated by equations
2.21 and 2.22. The confinement of the field in the xy-plane Γxy is also defined. Here, we
only consider the z = 0 plane, where the field intensity of the primary cavity mode is the
largest. In this case, the volume integrals in equation 2.21 are reduced to area integrals.
In the initial investigations, the confinement factor is also used to indicate changes in the
mode volume, as they are correlated (see equation 2.22).
3.1.1
Geometrical parameters
During the simulations, several geometrical parameters were varied to optimise the con-
finement of light. The general geometry of the structures considered in this project is
presented in figure 3.1.
The InP nanobeams were simulated as floating in air, as the actual devices will be mem-
branised and suspended in the air.
Membranisation has been shown to lead to higher
Q-factors, as the internal reflectance is increased as opposed to a beam placed on silicon
or similar materials. The InP nanobeams are modelled with a refractive index of 3.165.
The nanobeams can be quantitatively divided into two different sections. One is the mirror
section, which contains Nmirror holes acting as Bragg mirrors used to achieve the 1D PhC
effect. These are defined with a radius R. The second section is the tapering section, where
a parameter ftap dictates a tapering on the radius of the inner five holes. With n = 0 being
the inner hole and n = 4 being the outer hole of the tapering section, their radii are given
by:
rinner,n = R(ftap + (1 −ftap)n
5 )
(3.1)
The main difference between this structure and the nanobeams studied in the literature
is the shape of the inner holes encompassing the BH. These holes are elliptical, given by
two semi-axis radii ra and rb. While the inner holes are smaller due to the tapering, two
17
==PAGE:23==
Component
Ex
Ey
Ez
X-axis
Anti-Symmetric
Symmetric
Symmetric
Y-axis
Anti-Symmetric
Symmetric
Anti-Symmetric
Z-axis
Symmetric
Symmetric
Anti-Symmetric
Table 3.1: The symmetry of the electrical field components in the full model simulation.
additional parameters were defined to squish the innermost holes further. The parameter
squishr changes the length of both semi-axes, and squisha changes only the length of ra.
This allows for more degrees of freedom in changing the size and shape of the inner holes.
These parameters are introduced, as they are thought to be important for improving the
confinement and might allow the design to utilise the slot anti-slot effect. Furthermore,
they are used to alter the shape and size of the BH for the electronic simulations. The
gap size between the two innermost holes can be tuned by the parameter gap size. The
length L and width w of the beam are also variable. Due to the fabrication methods, the
thickness in the z-direction of the nanobeam is set to a constant of 250 nm. Finally, a
parameter scalexy is introduced to scale all lengths in the x and y plane. This parameter
can be used to control the resonance frequency. This scaling is implemented such that it
does not influence the gap size.
In the middle of the cavities is the BH, with a side length of BHL. The BH is composed of
multiple materials but is modelled as a single structure with an effective refractive index
of 3.29. The calculation details can be seen in appendix A.1, and the precise material
composition of the BH can be found in table 3.2 in the next section, where the electronic
properties of the device are investigated. A geometric model of the BH is shown here as
well.
With an effective refractive index, the BH can be implemented as one single structure with
a total thickness of 51 nm. The thickness is fixed to this value, while the side lengths
are varied. In the following sections, the BH sizes will be referred to by their side length,
such that a BH size of 100 means BHL = 100 nm. In this work, the confinement factor is
calculated based on the spatial overlap between the optical mode and the entire volume of
the BH, as stated in equation 2.21. As the well material GaInAsP of the BH is only 8.1
nm thick, the calculated confinement Γ may be off by a factor of approximately 51/8.1 if
compared to the literature.
3.1.2
Boundary conditions and Symmetry considerations
Using finite element methods, it is common to use symmetry conditions to reduce the size
of the model and thus speed up calculations. By enforcing symmetry conditions, it is in
this case possible to reduce the simulation volume to 1/8th of the actual volume.
The symmetry of the electrical field was found in the full geometrical model without the
symmetry conditions. In table 3.1, the symmetries of the field components for the funda-
mental mode are presented. The following section will introduce the main considerations
regarding symmetry conditions. More details on the considerations and the fieldcompo-
nents can be found in appendix A.3.
In Comsol, the symmetric boundary conditions are implemented using the Perfect Elec-
tric Conductor (PEC) and Perfect Magnetic Conductor (PMC) boundary conditions, as
sketched in figure 3.2. The PEC imposes anti-symmetry for electric field components tan-
gential to the boundary by setting n × E = 0, with n begin the normal vector. As the
Ex and Ez are found to be anti-symmetric along the y-axis, while the Ey component is
18
==PAGE:24==
Silver-Müller Radiation Condition
Perfect Electric 
Conductor
Perfect Magnetic
Conductor
10 μm
1.5 μm
Air
InP
BH
1.5 μm
Figure 3.2: The electromagnetic simulations are performed in a symmetry-reduced domain,
allowing for faster calculations. Silver-Muller radiation conditions are imposed far from
the cavity. Perfect Electric and Magnetic boundary conditions are imposed according to
the symmetry of the field.
symmetric, the boundary orthogonal to the y-axis, corresponding to the xz-plane, is set to
have the PEC boundary condition.
The PMC imposes symmetry for electric fields tangential to the boundary by setting n ×
B = 0. This boundary condition is enforced on yz- and xy-plane to ensure that Ey is
symmetric in all directions.
As a result of this, the model is restricted to modes that
have the observed symmetry of the primary cavity mode, and the computational time is
significantly reduced. Finally, the Silver-Müller radiation condition is enforced far from
the cavity, as explained in section 2.1.1. This is done by forcing the so-called scattering
boundary condition in Comsol.
When simulating a physical system, it is important to conduct convergence studies to
ensure that the results are accurate and reliable. In this project, convergence studies of
the Q-factor, frequency and confinement factor are conducted to determine the sufficient
size of the simulation region size and mesh size. The domain size is shown in figure 3.2. A
free tetrahedral mesh is used which is refined in the central region of the cavity, where the
smallest dimensions are present. The results of the convergence tests and the final meshing
parameters can be found in appendix A.2.
3.2
Far-field transformation
Often, the near-field of a device is known, but the far-field and radiation patterns are also
of interest. This is, for example, the case for experimental studies of antennas [62]. More
relevant, the study of open domain problems through simulations, like the study of leaky
cavities, also often requires this type of transformation [63]. Therefore, one often utilises
near-field calculations or measurements to estimate the far-field radiation pattern. Multiple
approaches for the transformation exist, but most use Kirchhoff’s integral to determine the
far-field. This method assumes the field to be known on an arbitrary closed surface that
encloses all sources [64]. Comsol has built-in modules to calculate far-field radiation from
the near-field [61]. These will be used in this project. The analysis is used qualitatively to
see which effects small geometric changes can have on the emission angles. However, more
rigorous theoretical approaches for quasinormal modes also exist [65].
In Comsol, the Stratton-Chu formula, which is one possible representation of Kirchhoff’s
19
==PAGE:25==
GaInAsP
AlInGaAs
InAlAs
InP
Figure 3.3: The simulation domain of the electronic simulations. The BH is built by adding
layers with different potential and effective masses.
integral, is used:
Ep = jk
4πr0 ×
Z
[n × E −ηr0 × (n × H)] exp (jkr · r0) dS,
(3.2)
Here S is a surface far away from the radiating dipole. Ep is the calculated far-field. The
magnetic field at the far-field point is calculated in free space and is therefore given by:
Hp = r0 × Ep
η0
(3.3)
The power flow in the far-field in the direction r0 can be found from the Poynting vector
S:
r0 · S = r0 · Re
 Ep × H∗
p

,
(3.4)
where r0 is a unit vector pointing from origo. The far-field radiation patterns are found
from |Ep|2, which is proportional to the pointing vector S. The radiation pattern Rad(r0)
will be normalized by its maximal value as:
Rad(r0) =
|Ep|2
max(Ep)2
(3.5)
3.3
Methods of electronic simulations
The electronic simulations are performed in Comsol using the Semiconductor module with
the Schrödinger interface. The stationary Schrödinger equation (equation 2.27) is solved
numerically to obtain the carrier eigenenergies E and eigenfunctions ψ(r). The potential
V (r) and effective masses m(r) for holes and electrons are presented in table 3.2.
3.3.1
Geometrical parameters
The model is spatially restricted to the central region of the cavity, containing the buried
heterostructure. A block of InP is constructed with the dimensions sketched in figure 3.3.
Elliptical air holes may be created from extruded ellipses with semi-axes ra and rb. Similar
to the electromagnetic simulation, a meta-parameter squisha is introduced to control the
shape of the air holes. The air holes create a gap characterised by the distance gap size,
as seen in the insert of figure 3.3. The geometrical parameters used in this model are the
20
==PAGE:26==
GaxIn1−xAsyP1−y
AlxInyGa1−x−yAs
InxAl1−xAs
InP
Estimated x
0.224
0.291
0.52
-
Estimated y
0.846
0.469
-
-
Potential e [eV]
0
0.36
0.62
0.31
Potential h [eV]
0
-0.16
-0.21
-0.32
Effective mass e [m0]
0.0394
0.0575
0.0575
0.08
Effective mass h [m0]
0.3705
0.41
0.41
0.6
Length z [nm]
8.1
11.3
10
-
Table 3.2: The parameters used for the different materials in the electronic simulations.
The values are found in the literature [22, 13, 44, 66].
same as in the optical model, so that for a given set of parameters, the geometry of the
electronic simulation area will correspond to the geometry in the optical simulation.
Apart from the smaller simulation area, the main difference between the two models is
that in the electronic simulations, each layer of the BH in the z-direction is constructed
with their corresponding material parameters. The parameters are listed in table 3.2. The
buried heterostructure is implemented by adding different potential energies and effective
electron and hole masses to the different materials. Here, the potential values reported in
the PhD thesis of Sakanas are used [22], and the effective masses of electrons and holes
are estimated from the material compositions of the layers based on previous work and
literature [13, 44, 66].
Studies have shown that for strained materials, the strain lifts the degeneracy of the heavy
holes with the light-hole band [67].
As the active layer in the buried heterostructures
is strained, the heavy hole masses are used in the simulations [22].
As in the optical
simulations, the size of the BH in the y-direction is given by the parameter BHL, while
the gap size air-holes influence the size in the x-direction. ´
3.3.2
Coupling strength calculations
As a part of the electronic simulations, the calculated wave functions are used to determine
the coupling strength. The coupling strength calculations are based on the theory presented
in section 2.3, where a procedure was introduced for calculating the coupling strength based
on the joint carrier wave function χ(r) and the electromagnetic field, which is restated here:
ℏg = p
Z
χ(r)ˆr · E(r)dr
(3.6)
Before the coupling is calculated, it is important that both the electric field and wave func-
tion are normalised. The electric field is normalised using equation 2.18. The normalised
electric field used in the gain calculations is calculated as follows:
E(r) =
r
ℏωc
2ϵ0
Ecs(r)
p
⟨⟨Ecs(r)|Ecs(r)⟩⟩
,
(3.7)
where Ecs(r) is the electrical field as calculated in Comsol.
However, when the normalisation was calculated, it was found that the contribution of the
surface integral in equation 2.18 is negligible. The results could therefore be normalised as
regular resonant modes.
21
==PAGE:27==
Therefore, the surface integral in equation 2.18 can be neglected.
The integral of the
probability densities of the wave functions |ψ(r)|2 are normalised to 1 when integrating
over the whole domain volume in Comsol.
3.3.3
Boundary conditions and symmetries of the wavefunction
The Zero Probability boundary condition is used for all boundaries between InP and air.
This sets ψ = 0. At the domain walls, the open boundary condition is used. The open
boundary allows for the wave function to take non-zero values at the boundary. This is used
because the nanobeams are larger than the simulated domain area, and the wavefunction
should be allowed to extend out into the rest of the nanobeam. However, as the domain
is larger than the BH, the value of wavefunction at this boundary will practically be
zero. Similar to the optical simulations, convergence tests are performed to determine the
sufficient mesh density and domain size. These tests can be found in appendix A.2.2.
As there can be multiple electron and hole eigenfunctions, one can save time in calcula-
tions by considering the symmetry of the electronic and optical modes to see if they will
contribute to the coupling strength. Only some exciton transitions will be allowed, and
only some electric field components will have the right symmetry for a given exciton wave
function χ(r), to yield a net contribution to the coupling strength. If we assume that
the wave function for the electrons and holes are similar enough that only the transition
between the same order modes is allowed, then the exciton wave function χ(r) will always
be symmetric. Therefore, the electric field will also have to be symmetric in all directions.
This is only true for the y-component, which is transverse to the nanobeam. See appendix
A.3.
22
==PAGE:28==
𝐸2
V
m
a) xy-view
b) xz-view
c) zy-view
× 108
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
Figure 3.4: The optical field profile |E|2 for a cavity designed in this project, at the planes
z, y and x = 0.
3.4
Results of optical simulations
The goal of the investigations presented in this section is to examine how different geo-
metrical parameters alter the optical field in the cavity. The geometry of the cavities is
optimised to increase the Q-factor and the confinement factor Γ while maintaining a wave-
length of approximately 1550 nm. In figure 3.4, the field profile for an optimised cavity is
shown from three different angles.
To examine the multidimensional parameter space, multiple 2-dimensional parameter sweeps
were performed. In the following section, the results of some of these sweeps are presented.
An interpolation between the simulation points is introduced to make the results easier to
read and to discover tendencies more easily. The actual simulations are marked by the tick
marks on the axis and by the grid intersections. Additional one-dimensional parameter
sweeps are available in the appendix A.5. The most important findings are presented in
the following four subsections, with the following goals:
• Finding the geometrical parameters most important for the Q-factor.
• Finding the geometrical parameters most important for the confinement factor, Γ.
• Creating cavities with a high Q-factor and Γ for all BH sizes.
• Examining the influence of the gap size.
3.4.1
Optimising the quality factor
First, the Q-factor is examined. In figure 3.5, it is seen that adjusting the radius of the
mirror holes and the spacing between them is crucial for obtaining a high Q-factor in the
cavity. There seems to be an optimal relation between the hole radius and spacing, leading
to the highest Q-factors. For the configuration shown in figure 3.5, one observes that the
radius of the holes should be around 33% of the spacing. Further investigations revealed
that the optimal R/a ratio may vary a few percentage points depending on the design.
Furthermore, the tapering of hole size is important, as only specific tapering values lead
to high Q-factors for a particular cavity. This is seen in figure 3.5(b). As an example, it is
here shown how a slight change of 10 nm in the gap size will significantly alter the optimal
tapering. For 2D PhC structures, it is known that shifts in the hole positions close to the
cavity centre can lead to significant improvements in the Q-factor [68]. This is because
these holes, apart from leading to the confinement of the field, are also the main reason
for the cavity losses [69]. Therefore, it is not surprising that adjusting the tapering of the
holes in a nanobeam could lead to improvements in the Q-factor.
23
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: The Q-factor simulated for two varying model parameters. In figure (a), the
spacing and radius of the holes are changed. In figure (b), the tapering and the gap size
are changed. Here, there is also an optimal area. The other parameters are fixed to the
values of the gap size 128 nm cavity, reported in table 3.3.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: The confinement factor Γ as a function of the two model parameters. In (a),
the bow tie gap and radius of the two central holes are changed. In (b), the shape and size
of the two central holes are changed. In general, smaller feature sizes at the centre of the
cavity seem to improve the confinement factor.
3.4.2
Optimising the confinement factor
As presented in section 2.1.4, changing the radius or shape of the central holes of the cavity
is thought to be most important for achieving larger spatial confinement. This is based
on earlier studies on cavities exhibiting extreme confinement of light [70]. The results of
the simulations agreed with the prediction. Two main factors are found to be essential for
improving the confinement factor. The first is the distance between the central holes. As
seen in figure 3.6(a), better confinement is found for smaller gap sizes. The other factor
that significantly influenced Γ was the shape of the central hole. This is shown in figure
3.6(b).
On the y-axis, it is seen that a smaller hole radius, given by squishr < 1, increases the
confinement factor. Furthermore, changing the shape of the central hole is also found to
contribute to better confinement. Interestingly, it is found that the confinement factor is
larger when squisha < 1. This corresponds to the holes having a shorter semi-axis ra, such
that they are elongated in the direction perpendicular to the width of the nanobeam.
It should be considered that for larger BH sizes, the holes may cut into the BH, reducing
24
==PAGE:30==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: The Q-factor as a function of the BH size and the tapering. It can be observed
that changing the BH size will alter the Q-factor. However, one can compensate by also
changing the tapering. The other parameters in the simulation is as for the gap size 128
nm cavity, reported in table 3.3
the amount of active material and thus reducing Γ. However, for these calculations, the
BH size is 100 nm, so the variations to the hole geometry do not affect the volume of
active material. Therefore, the effects of squishing the inner holes cannot be attributed to
a reduction of BH size for these cavities but is rather an effect of increased confinement.
Another way to increase the confinement factor is to increase the volume of active material.
This is easily achieved by increasing the BH size. However, a larger active medium may
not be advantageous for laser applications, as it may result in a higher lasing threshold [8].
For single-photon devices, having a larger active material is not viable either. The reason
for this will be discussed later in the report.
For the optimised designs the confinement factor is Γ ∼0.005 and Γxy ∼0.02 at z = 0,
when the BH size is 50 nm. The confinement in the xy-plane is thus qualitatively different
than in the z-direction, as the holes provide an in-plane PhC effect. In contrast, out of the
plane, the confinement is only due to reflections from the InP/air interfaces. Assuming a
uniform field distribution in the centre of the cavity, one may estimate the confinement in
the z-direction as the fraction of the BH height compared to the nanobeam height, which is
approximately 0.036 for the devices studied in this report. From simulations, it was found
to be slightly better, which is intuitively understood, as the mode is not actually uniform
but instead has a higher intensity in the middle of the nanobeam.
Based on the results presented in this and the previous section, it appears that the mirror
section and tapering sections largely determine the Q-factor. At the same time, the geom-
etry of the central region controls the spatial confinement. The effect of adjusting other
combinations of all the other geometrical parameters was also studied, and they all altered
both the Q-factor and the confinement to a lesser degree.
3.4.3
Varying the BH-size
In the later experimental investigations, cavities with different BH sizes are fabricated and
characterised. Therefore, it must be ensured that the designed cavities have equally high
Q-factors and confinement factors for all BH sizes. The optimisation studies suggested that
a re-optimisation must be done for a varying BH size. Previous studies on the optimisation
of nano-laser devices utilising BHs of varying sizes in 2D photonic crystals came to the
same conclusion [71].
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.8: The Q-factor, resonant wavelength and confinement factor of 4 different design
suggestions with varying gap sizes. The parameters are different for each BH-length in
order to keep the wavelength stable and the Q-factor optimised. It is seen that larger gap
sizes lead to higher Q-factors.
Increasing the size of the BH in the simulations without changing other parameters de-
creases the quality factor. This is shown in figure 3.7(a). This is likely due to the change
in the refractive index introduced by the BH. As seen from figure 3.7(a), adjusting the
tapering of the hole sizes can, to a large extent, reoptimise the cavities for a high Q-factor.
However, increasing the tapering and BH size leads to a higher resonant wavelength, which
must be readjusted to 1550 nm. This may be done by scaling the device in the xy-direction
as seen from figure 3.7(b).
By following the steps to optimisation presented in the last sections, nanobeam cavities
with different BH sizes may be constructed to achieve a similar Q-factor and a resonance
close to 1550 nm. It should be noted that the BHs that are larger than the gap size will
be etched through. In the optical simulations, this had little effect on the figures of merit,
and through a slight change in tapering of the hole sizes and scaling of the geometry, this
was compensated for. However, as introduced in the previous chapter, this may greatly
impact the performance of the devices through non-radiative processes at the interface
between the active medium and air. This will be investigated further when considering the
experimental results in the next chapter.
3.4.4
Effects of changing the gap size
From the results, it may seem that decreasing the gap size is beneficial, as this leads to
a higher confinement factor, Γ. However, there was a trade-off between large confinement
factors and high Q-factors for all devices studied. In figure 3.8, it is seen that for the
smaller gap sizes, a high Q-factor was not achievable.
It was found that the resonant wavelength decreased drastically as the gap size was reduced.
When other characteristic lengths, such as the width or height of the nanobeam, are
decreased, the wavelength also decreases. This is similar to the Fabry Perot cavity, where
the resonant wavelength increases with the size of the cavity.
Therefore, to maintain a wavelength of 1550 nm, parameters such as the hole radius,
26
==PAGE:32==
Gap size 102 nm 
Reference 
600 nm
Figure 3.9: Mask designs of a gap size 102 nm and reference cavity. The gap size 128 nm
is similar in shape to the left figure but with a larger gap size. A BH with side lengths of
100 nm is illustrated in the middle.
Gapsize
a
w
r
f_tap
squish_r
squish_a
scalexy
84
640
630
0.38a
0.53-0.64
0.75
0.9
1.18-1.01
102
622
630
0.35a
0.59-0.645
0.75
0.9
1.065-1
128
610
630
0.33a
0.64-0.66
0.75
0.9
0.99-0.965
150 Reference
420
640
110
0.8-0.88
1
1
1-0.94
Table 3.3: The geometrical parameters for the three new optimised cavity designs and the
optimised reference cavity. The range in tapering f_tap and scalexy indicates how the
design should be changed when the BH size is varied from 50 nm to 300 nm.
tapering and scaling had to be adjusted to compensate for the decreased gap size. This
drastically impacted the Q-factor, as it seems that the Q-factor then becomes limited by
the requirement of a wavelength of 1550 nm. Further plots on this behaviour are presented
in appendix A.5. It was found that it is possible to achieve high Q-factors at the same
resonance wavelength by increasing the height. However, increasing the height will lower
the confinement in the z-direction, partially defeating the purpose.
3.4.5
Comparison with a reference cavity
Based on the optimisations and considerations presented in the previous sections, cavities
with a gap size of 102 nm and 128 nm designs were chosen for fabrication. The final design
parameters can be seen in table 3.3, and a GDS mask design of the cavity with a gap size
of 102 nm is shown in figure 3.9, where BH with side lengths of 100 nm is sketched in the
middle of the cavities. The gap size 128 nm cavity is similar in shape to the 102 nm design
but with a larger gap.
A nanobeam cavity design resembling conventional nanobeams studied in the literature
[72, 40] is used as a reference for comparison with the new designs. This design has smaller
mirror-section holes, and the centre holes are not elliptical as in the new design. Studies on
similar structures have shown simulated Q-factors of multiple millions. However, compared
to the new designs, the confinement factor will be lower [40]. A GDS mask design of the
reference cavity is also shown in figure 3.9, and the geometrical parameters are also shown
in table 3.3.
The reference cavity is used to experimentally and numerically investigate which effects it
has to decrease the gap size and introduce the smaller elliptical central holes. The very
high theoretical Q-factors of these cavities have not yet been achieved experimentally in
InP. Therefore, it might be more advantageous to reduce the gap size and thereby increase
Γ, than it seems from the theoretical simulations, as the Q-factors for the different device
designs might be quite similar in reality.
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.10: The effective mode volume as calculated by equation 2.22 for four different
designs is seen in the left plot. This may be compared to the diffraction limit of (λ/n)3 =
1.2 · 108 nm3. The Purcell enhancements for the four cavity designs are seen on the right
plot.
Figure 3.11: The trade-off between the mode volume Vp and the Q-factor, as seen for
optimised cavities with different gap sizes. Qref refers to the Q-factor of the reference
cavity at a gap size og 150 nm.
The effective mode volume as calculated by equation 2.20 is shown in figure 3.10. It can be
seen that the new designs show a much smaller mode volume compared to the reference.
However, all the cavities confine light below the diffraction limit of (λ/n)3 = 1.2 · 108 nm3,
and the best-performing cavities display mode volumes down to 0.2 (λ/n)3.
Nevertheless, considering the Purcell enhancement, the decreased mode volume of the
new designs does not compensate for the lower Q-factor, and thus from the simulations,
the Purcell factor is larger for the reference cavities. The trade-off between the Purcell
factor, Q and the mode volume can be seen in figure 3.11. The Q-factor seems to drop
exponentially, whereas the decrease in the mode volume tapers off. The resulting Purcell
factor also drops exponentially. However, whether the trade-off is worth it will depend
on the application and the obtainable Q-factor after fabrication. Additionally, it should
be noted that these Purcell enhancements are purely calculated from the Q-factor of the
cavity, and for high Q-factors, it has been found that the Purcell enhancement will become
limited by the bandwidth of the emitter [33].
To better understand the trade-off between the spatial and temporal confinement, we
consider the 1D line plot in figure 3.12. Here, the electrical field from the centre and out
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.12: The magnitude of the electric field along the x-axis, at the centre line for
y=z=0. The electric field is plotted for three different cavity designs.
along the x-axis is plotted at y = 0 and z = 0. The electrical field is observed to taper off
more quickly for the gap size 102 nm and 128 nm cavities than for the reference cavity with
a gap size of 150 nm. This is in general agreement with the above discussions of the mode
volumes. However, one approach to increasing the Q-factor of a cavity is to confine the
field more gently. This has been studied extensively for 2D PhC [68, 69, 71]. Because the
inner holes in 2D PhC are the primary origin of out-of-plane scattering and, thereby loss,
shifting the inner holes outwards is found to increase the Q-factor [69]. However, when the
gap size in the nanobeam cavity is decreased, the exact opposite will happen. In this case,
the holes are shifted inward, which might lead to increased losses. This could explain why
there is a trade-off between the Q-factor and the field confinement.
3.4.6
Other resonant modes in the cavities
As the cavities will be fabricated and experimentally characterised, it is important to know
whether other cavity modes could influence the measurements. The whole geometrical
model was used to investigate if there were other optical modes in the range from 1400 nm
to 1600 nm. This was calculated without the symmetry conditions from section 3.1.2 to
ensure all modes were found. There was only one pronounced cavity mode for the gap size
102 nm and 128 cavities. All other modes had Q-factors below 100 and were not confined
spatially in the nanobeam. However, for the reference nanobeam design, several modes
were found with Q-factors over 1000. A few were confined in the air holes, but one other
mode with a wavelength of 1647 nm was confined in the InP. The "air"-modes were found
at 1385 and 1360 nm. The modes profile of these modes can be seen in the appendix A.4.
The frequencies and the mode profiles of these air modes were found to be sensitive to the
length of the nanobeam.
3.5
Discussions
In the investigations of the optical modes, it was found that alterations to the feature
sizes and hole positions in the nanobeam can be used to tailor both the temporal and
spatial confinement of the optical modes. The geometry of the mirror section is found to
be most important for the Q-factor, while the central geometry is most important for the
confinement factor.
29
==PAGE:35==
We propose novel nanobeam designs with simulated Q-factors of up to 106 and mode
volumes down to 0.2 (λ/n)3. The proposed nanobeam designs have a trade-off between the
achievable Q-factor and the confinement factor. The quality factor was found to be higher
for devices with larger gap sizes, and the spatial confinement was better for devices with
smaller gap sizes. It was suggested that a smaller gap size leads to increased scattering at
the central holes. To investigate the scattering further, one could use the Fourier transform
of the electrical field and the distribution of the electrical field in k-space to quantify the
so-called leaky regions of the cavity. One may then determine if the components in the
light cone can be suppressed by moving or changing the shape of the two central holes.
This approach has led to significant improvements in the Q-factor of 2D PhC cavities [73].
The trade-off between Q and Γ may be partially combated by changing the geometry in
ways, which have not been explored in this project. Here, an approach such as topology
optimisation might be employed to increase the Q-factor [17]. Another suggestion is to
perform further alterations of the central elliptical holes, such as implementing a bowtie
shape. Theoretical studies of the bowtie unit found an optimal relation between the bowtie
curvature and the gap size, which gives an optimal confinement effect [70].
The optimisation studies presented in this work were based on systematic parameter sweeps
from which a qualitative selection of parameter areas was selected for further investiga-
tion. This approach is naturally limited by the ability of the authors to choose the right
parameter space and is, to some degree, based on guesswork. A logical next step is to use
one of the more systematic approaches, such as those mentioned above, to further optimise
the nanobeam designs presented. Nonetheless, multiple optimised designs were presented,
some of which will be fabricated and subject to both experimental and theoretical investi-
gations.
30
==PAGE:36==
𝐸electron,1
𝐸electron,2
𝐸electron,n
𝐸hole,n
𝐸hole,2
𝐸hole,1
…
…
𝐸gap
Conduction band
Valence band
Energy
𝐸exciton,1
𝐸exciton,2
𝐸exciton,𝑛
…
…
BH_size = 200 nm, Eigenmode 1
BH_size = 200 nm, Eigenmode 2
Position
Figure 3.13: The exciton energies are calculated as the energy difference between the n’th
allowed transition. The two first electron eigenmodes are shown for a cavity with a gap
size of 102 nm and with a BH size of 200 nm.
3.6
Results of electronic simulations
With designs optimised to confine light, electronic simulations were performed to calculate
the carrier wave functions for the same designs. The wave functions can then be used to
calculate the coupling strength to quantify the strength of the light-matter interactions.
Furthermore, we present investigations to determine whether it is possible to tune the
geometry, such that the optical mode has greater spatial overlap with selected electronic
modes, thereby coupling better into these.
In the second part of this section, we will explore whether it is possible to tune the geometry
such that the separated exciton energies become comparable to that in quantum dots
and thereby, in practice, achieve a two-level system at low temperatures.
Combining
these effects, it may be possible to create a deterministic, partially lithographically defined
quantum emitter with optical and electrical properties similar to a quantum dot.
In the following sections, we will refer to the eigenmodes and eigenenergies of the carrier
wavefunctions by their mode numbers such that Eelectron,n corresponds the the eigenenergy
of the n’th eigenmode. As sketched in figure 3.13, the first mode corresponds to the mode
confined deepest in the quantum well. The exciton energies are calculated between hole-
and electron modes of the same order, as justified in section 3.3.
3.6.1
Coupling strength
In this section, the results of the coupling strength calculations are presented. The cavity
designs examined are those with 102 nm and 128 nm gap sizes. The results for different
BH-sizes are shown in figure 3.14. The calculations of the coupling strength were subject
to numerical errors, which caused the fluctuations seen. In most cases, the profiles were
calculated correctly, and increasing the mesh density reduced the fluctuations. However,
some of the larger fluctuations are caused by a mismatch in the electronic mode of the
hole mode.
This was the case for mode number 4 for the gap size 128 nm cavity at
BH lengths between 150 nm and 200 nm. The numerical errors were found to be small
for the fundamental mode at small BH sizes, and this is the only case in which the exact
calculated value will be used. For the other results, the general tendencies are clear despite
the numerical errors.
31
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.14: The coupling strength for two designs for varying BH sizes. The modenumbers
refer to the exciton modes.
The coupling between the optical mode and the first four carrier wavefunctions correspond-
ing to the four eigenmodes with the lowest energy show similar tendencies for both cavities.
It is seen that the cavity with a smaller gap size displays larger coupling strengths of up to
∼150µeV. This is expected, as the confinement factor Γ is larger for this cavity. For both
types of cavities, there is a clear tendency for the gain to decrease when the BH becomes
large. Furthermore, there is a lower coupling between the optical mode and higher-order
electronic modes. This is especially pronounced for the larger BH sizes.
The decreasing coupling strength for larger BH sizes can be explained by comparing the
optical and electronic modes. A comparison is seen in figure 3.15. Here, the 1/8th of the
domain used for calculations of the optical domain is shown at z = 0. The first row is the
optical mode, the second row is the electron wavefunction of the fundamental electronic
mode, |Ψe|2, and the third row is the coupling strength pr. nm3. For all BH sizes, the shape
of the optical mode is similar. This is expected, as each device is optimised to its BH size.
The probability density |Ψe|2 is confined within the BH for all electronic wavefunctions.
It is seen that for smaller BH sizes, the electronic wavefunction is well confined to the
centre of the BH. In this case, the whole mode is in the high-intensity area of the optical
mode. However, when the BH gets larger, the wavefunction will overlap with areas where
the magnitude of the electric field is lower, thereby resulting in lower coupling strength.
The higher-order modes have lower coupling for the same reason, as these modes are more
spread out within the BH. The higher order modes are presented in appendix A.4.2. The
wavefunction of the holes is similar in shape to that of the electron, however, it varies
slightly due to the different effective masses.
The calculated coupling strengths are slightly stronger than what was reported by Koun-
touris et al. for the lithography-defined quantum dot (LDQD) using the same calculation
methods [13]. However, in the case of the LDQD, the carriers are not confined in-plane to
the degree as in the quantum well, which may result in a lower overlap between the optical
mode and carrier wavefunction. Experimental results estimating the coupling strength of
nanobeam cavities similar to the designs studied in this project report coupling strengths of
up to 112 µeV using a single quantum dot [74]. This aligns well with the results presented
in this thesis.
One of the goals of calculating the coupling strength was to investigate whether the gain
could be engineered such that only some specific electronic modes have significant coupling
32
==PAGE:38==
BH_size = 70 nm
BH_size = 170 nm
BH_size = 300 nm
𝑬𝒚𝟐,
𝐕𝟐
𝐦𝟐
𝜳𝒆𝟐,
𝟏
𝐦𝟑 
ℏ𝐠
𝐧𝐦𝟑,
𝛍𝐞𝐕
𝐧𝐦𝟑 
Figure 3.15: The optical mode, compared to the electronic probability density, |Ψe|2, of
the first mode at different BH sizes at z = 0. The coupling strength pr nm3 is shown in
the third row. For small BHs, the overlap with the field is better, but for larger BHs, there
is still a large overlap. The dotted lines indicate the BH size and inner hole size. The 102
nm gap size design was used for this figure.
to the optical mode. However, as long as the optical mode is much larger than the electronic
modes, as is the case for BH-size of 70 nm, seen in the left of figure 3.15, this will not be
possible. It is worth noting, that the results show that for an optical field with better
spatial confinement, such methods may be possible. From these investigations, it would
seem that larger BH sizes are beneficial for engineering selective coupling. However, in this
case, one should also consider the density of states, as there will be a lot more modes to
consider for larger BH sizes. This will be shown in the next section.
33
==PAGE:39==
𝐿𝑥= Gap size
𝐿𝑦= BHL
-50
50
-50
50
-50
50
-50
50
(b) Etched holes
(a) No Etching
𝐿𝑥= BHL
𝐿𝑦= BHL
Figure 3.16: The analytical calculations of the energy in an infinite potential quantum well
are based on two geometries sketched here. Figure (a): The quantum well is fully enclosed
and varied equally in Lx and Ly as the BH sidelength is changed. Figure (b): Air holes
are introduced. Ly is set to be a constant of BHL, but as the gap size is varied to smaller
dimensions than BHL, Lx is changed accordingly.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.17: The exciton energies as calculated by Comsol and equation 2.26. In figure
(a), the simulated quantum well is a square, and the results fit the theoretical result very
well. However, when the QW is etched through, the estimate is not as good as seen in
figure (b). Here, the geometry becomes important. Note that the theoretical values have
been shifted.
3.6.2
Density of states
In this section, we examine the possible electronic transitions using the exciton energy.
The exciton energy is calculated as follows:
Eexiton,n = Eelectron,n + Ehole,n + Ebandgap
(3.8)
This corresponds to the energy of the n’th allowed transition. Only transition between
same-order modes is allowed. In other words, transitions between electronic modes in the
valence and conduction band with the same quantum numbers (nx, ny, nz) are allowed.
These transitions were also sketched in figure 3.13. This assumes that the wave function for
the electrons and holes are similar. The bandgap energy for a Ga0.224In0.776As0.846P0.154
alloy is 0.648 eV [75].
To study the density of states for different BH sizes, Comsol is used to calculate the carrier
eigenenergies for different geometries. However, as these calculations are time-consuming,
34
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.18: Comparison of the electron density of states for quantum wells with sidelengths
of 50, 100 and 150 nm and a height of 8.1 nm, as calculated by equation 2.26. The energies
are shifted by −0.124 eV. A bin size of 0.2 meV is used.
it is considered whether the effects could be modelled with analytical expression for the
energy of an infinite potential quantum well presented in section 2.2.2. Here, it is assumed
that equation 2.26, describing the energy in an infinite potential quantum well, can be
used to estimate the confinement energy.
First, we consider a situation where a buried heterostructure is enclosed in InP with no
etched air holes as sketched in figure 3.16(a), and we compare the simulated eigenenergies
to the infinite quantum well model. The side length of the BH is varied between 50 and
250 nm in the xy dimension, while the height is 8.1 nm. The parameters in equation 2.26
are Lx = Ly = BHL and Lz = 8.1. The first eight modes are plotted in figure 3.17(a). As
the size of the quantum well increases, the eigenenergies decrease. The infinite quantum
well model aligns well with the numerical simulations and accounts for the degeneracy of
the second and third modes. It is noted that the model generally predicts much higher
eigenenergies than the simulations, and the energy levels of the theoretical model are
therefore shifted by −0.13 eV in figure 3.17. This is expected, as the finite potentials of the
BH walls allow for leakage of the mode through the potential walls into the surrounding
InP, thus lowering the mode energy.
The same effect may explain why the numerical
simulations align better with the theory for large BH sizes than for smaller BHs. Similarly,
the value of the probability distribution |ψ|2 near the edges is larger for higher-order modes,
which might also explain why the fundamental mode is most easily approximated.
To model geometries more similar to the ones studied in this project, we consider simu-
lations introducing elliptical air holes, as sketched in figure 3.16(b). Here, the BH length
is set to 100 nm, and the gap size is varied. The Lx length parameter is set to the gap
size, as the etched holes effectively make the quantum well smaller, keeping Ly and Lz
constant. As the air holes cut into the BH at a gap size of less than 100 nm, the quantum
well effectively becomes smaller. As seen in figure 3.17(b), the infinite quantum well model
seems to align with the numerical simulations for larger gap sizes. However, as the gap
decreases, the system becomes more complex, as the buried heterostructure is deformed
into a complex shape. In the case of small gap sizes, the simpler theoretical model assumes
35
==PAGE:41==
𝑠𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑎= 0.5
𝑠𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑎= 100
[nm]
Figure 3.19: (Left): The energy of the fundamental mode for different geometries. The
energy is highest when the BH is made as small as possible. (Right): Electronic mode
profile for the fundamental mode for different central geometries. One with a very high
squisha and one with a lower squisha.
a rectangular geometry of the quantum well.
Therefore, it is expected that there is a
discrepancy between the theoretical model and numerical simulations. However, the theo-
retical model explains the energy exciton energies very well down to a gap size of around
30 nm.
These results also explain why it is beneficial to work with smaller BH sizes for systems
where one wants to control the energy states in a quantum well. For smaller quantum
wells, the eigenenergies will be more separated compared to larger quantum wells. This is
shown in figure 3.18, where the infinite potential quantum well model has been applied for
three different BH sizes. The electron eigenenergies and their degeneracy are plotted from
the fundamental mode up to an energy of 0.36 eV, corresponding approximately to the
depth of the quantum well for electrons in the BHs considered in this project. A bin size
of 0.2 meV is used, in which the degeneracy is computed. As with the calculations above,
the energy is shifted, in this case by −0.124 eV, corresponding to the shift of electron
energies between the analytical model and numerical simulations. From the figure, it is
clear that smaller quantum wells display more separated modes, which makes smaller BHs
more interesting for devices where one wishes to geometrically control the eigenenergies,
and the better option if one wants to realise the 2-level emitter system.
In the next section, it is examined how the geometry of the BH will influence the electronic
wavefunction and its energies. The geometry will be altered by etching through the BH,
decreasing the gap size and altering the shape of the central holes.
3.6.3
Examining energy separation for different geometries
The influence of the gap size on the confinement energy was examined in the previous
section. In this section, we explore the general influence of changing the shape of the BH
using Comsol. Two extremes of the cases studied in this section can be seen in the right
part of figure 3.19. A sweep over squisha changes the structure from a BH with very
narrow bowtie-like cutouts with squisha = 100 to an almost rectangular BH with a width
of the gap size with squisha = 0.5. The modes inside the BH were examined for a 50 nm
36
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.20: The energy difference between the fundamental mode and higher order exciton
modes as shown for different geometries. The separation between the first and second
modes is greater for larger gaps and a more rectangular-shaped BH. The separation to the
third mode is larger for smaller gaps and a bowtie-like BH structure.
BH structure. In the left part of figure 3.19, the fundamental electron mode energy is
plotted for varying geometries within this span. It is seen that the eigenenergies vary more
for geometries with a low squish factor. This may not come as a surprise, as in that case,
the holes take up a larger portion of the BH, as compared to when a larger squisha factor
is used. For larger squisha, changing the gap size does not reduce the volume of the active
material as drastically.
As discussed throughout the report, it is interesting to investigate whether a mode-separation
of the 20-30 meV, similar to what is found in some QD, is obtainable [51, 52]. The following
investigations aim to optimise the cavity to display energy separations to this degree while
maintaining a large temporal and spatial confinement.
In the following, we restrict our investigations to the first three modes of the electron
wavefunction.
Due to the shape of the wavefunctions, they are affected differently by
changes in geometry. For example, the second mode has a node in the centre of the BH,
where the probability density is almost zero. Oppositely, the probability density of the
first and third most takes its max value at this point. Thus, by changing the gap size, as
seen in figure 3.19 in the right insert, the first and second electronic wavefunctions will be
similar in shape and energy. In figure 3.20(a), the separation in energy between the first
and second electronic wavefunctions is shown for the same geometries as in the previous
figure. For these geometries, the separation is greatest for a low squish parameter but for
larger gap sizes. With a larger gap size, the geometry does not force the fundamental mode
into the same shape as the second mode, and as such, a larger separation is obtainable.
From these geometries, it is not possible to obtain a separation larger than 8 meV. More
advanced geometries may be able to increase the separation further.
However, the third mode is symmetric across the x-axis, similar to the fundamental mode.
Therefore, the increase in energy when decreasing the gap size is very similar for these
two modes. Furthermore, at a small gap size, it is possible to increase the energy of the
third mode much more than the fundamental mode by using a bowtie-like shape. In figure
3.20(b), it is seen that a separation of more than 40 meV is obtainable. However, for this
geometry, the separation between the first and second modes is almost zero.
This study was limited to BH sizes down to 50 nm. By using an even smaller BH structure,
37
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.21: The first (a) and second mode (b) wavefunctions for the electrons. The energy
difference is 38 meV.
it would be possible to achieve larger separations, however, as will be introduced later,
fabrication limitations prohibited this. The energy separation between the first and second
modes is found to be comparable to the energy separation in quantum dots when the BH
has a side length of approximately 20 nm.
If it is possible to suppress the second transition, one could effectively achieve a separation
of 40 meV and thereby only have a single transition at low temperatures. In the previous
section, it was found that the coupling strength did not vary significantly between the
first five electronic modes. Further studies may be made to develop cavities where the
overlap of the optical mode and selected wavefunctions are smaller, such that the second
transition could be suppressed. This could be realised if the optical mode volume was
decreased significantly compared to the current design.
Realistically, there are multiple caveats when fabricating devices with the dimensions pre-
sented in this section. Fabrication constraints limit the minimum feature size, and rough-
ness after etching may provide unforeseen effects. Furthermore, the emission peaks of single
transitions in the BH are broadened and can be much broader than the separation between
them. For similar BH structures, the FWHM was found to be 59 nm [22]. This broadening
is thought to be due to the roughness and impurities introduced during the fabrication.
Therefore, we limit ourselves to fabricating and experimentally characterizing the cavities
with larger gap sizes optimised to large Q-factors. From this, it may be possible to learn
more about the optical properties of said nanobeams.
Nonetheless, the structures with smaller gap sizes are interesting to explore theoretically.
In the next section, further simulations are conducted to propose an alternative design
with a small gap size.
3.6.4
Alternative design
In this section, the theoretical possibility of effectively creating a two level emitter is
studied further by creating holes which can be etched into the BH from multiple directions.
Theoretically, it is possible to create a device design in which the electronic modes are
similar to those of a quantum dot. In the suggested design, two slits have been added to
the nanobeam so that the BH can be made smaller in the y-direction as well. The electronic
simulation results are shown in figure 3.21 for a BH size of 50 nm. Here, the first and second
electronic mode profiles are shown. This design has a 36 meV separation in the confinement
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.22: Electron eigenenergies of the alternative design calculated in Comsol - Energies
are continuous outside the potential as expected. No modes were found to be degenerate
in the well.
energy of the first two electron modes. The DOS for all electron eigenmodes calculated
in Comsol can be seen in figure 3.22. Compared to the designs studied previously, fewer
states are observed. As the eigenenergies are calculated in Comsol using a finite potential
barrier, modes with eigenenergies larger than the barrier energy become continuous.
For the design, the gap size is only 25 nm. As studied in the previous section, this may
drastically decrease the Q-factor, and thus, it becomes challenging to find a nanobeam
design with a high enough Q-factor for this design to be viable. The central geometry of
the so-called alternative design was implemented in the optical simulations. Two designs
with a Q-factor of over 1000 were found at a resonant wavelength of 1550 nm. The central
part of the design can be seen in figure 3.23. In the first design seen in figure 3.23, two slits
have been introduced. In the other design, the slits are replaced by very small ellipses.
The mode volume for these alternative designs is Vp = 4.4 · 107 nm3. So even though the
gap size is decreased even further than for the designs proposed in the previous section,
the introduction of slits increased the mode volume by a factor of 2.2. In further studies,
one could try to examine how changing the exact shapes of the central elements would
affect the mode volume in an effort to decrease it.
The coupling strength of the design was also calculated. The increased mode volume of
the design leads to lower coupling strength. The coupling strength for these alternative
cavity designs was estimated to be ℏg = 18.2 µeV or g = 0.03 THz. This is significantly
lower than the coupling strength found for the fundamental mode of the gap size 102 nm
and 128 nm designs. Here, it was found to be 140-150 µeV. This is due to the much larger
mode volume of the alternative design. It is thought that further optimization studies
could decrease the optical mode volume further, and thus the coupling strength may be
increased.
Another interesting feature of this design is that the slits seem to cause the electronic
wavefunction mode profiles to take shapes which mostly occupy the central region. The
slits may thus be used to define areas of the BH where the mode is not localised, causing
the density of states to look similar to the case of a much smaller square BH. This may
be used to generate a large energy separation at even larger BH sizes, as the slits prohibit
the wave function from extending in the y-direction.
For the so-called alternative design presented in this section, additional fabrication chal-
lenges should be addressed. The width of both the slits and the ellipses is less than 10 nm
39
==PAGE:45==
Width = 900 nm
x
y
Figure 3.23: The central part of 2 nanobeam designs, which have a QD-like electronic
performance and Q-factor of over 1000. For scale, it is noted that both nanobeams have a
width of w ≈900 nm.
at its narrowest points. Additionally, the bridges between the central part with the BH
and the main section of the nanobeam are less than 15 nm wide at some points. Studies
using the same fabrication methods as will be used to fabricate the devices in this project
have found that feature sizes in InP under 50 nm may cause the material not to be etched
through [76]. Therefore, the design is not viable for experimental testing with the cur-
rent fabrication techniques. However, it does prove the theoretical possibility of creating
a device with separable electronic transitions comparable to that of quantum dots using
etched-through BHs and a nanobeam cavity.
3.7
Discussions
In this chapter, the coupling strength was calculated for the different cavity designs. The
coupling strength was found to be 150 µeV at best. This generally agrees with experimental
results, where it was estimated to be 112 µeV for a similar nanobeam design with a single
QD as the active material [74]. Furthermore, it is larger than the approximately 90 µeV
reported by Kountouris et al. for the lithography-defined quantum dot (LDQD) using the
same calculation methods [13].
Furthermore, the exciton energy separation was examined. From the investigation of dif-
ferent geometries, it was found that to achieve an energy separation of more than 20 meV,
one would have to change the initial nanobeam design presented in section 3.1. In this
work, two approaches for achieving a QD-like system are proposed.
The first approach is a reduction of optical mode volume such that there is no overlap
between the optical mode and the second electronic mode. The second option is an etching
of the small BHs to achieve a density of states similar to that of quantum dots.
Using the designs proposed in this chapter, the first option was not viable. However, to
further examine this possibility, one could replace the central ellipses with bowties, to see
if that would give the necessary suppression of the second mode. Recent work on self-
40
==PAGE:46==
assembled photonic cavities in silicon achieved confinement of light at telecom wavelength
to 2 nm air gaps [77].
Similar methods may be employed in InP to achieve stronger
confinement than what was obtained in this work. Although it was not possible to reduce
the mode volume to a degree where there was no overlap between the optical mode and
the second electronic mode, relatively high coupling strengths were calculated.
The other option proved more viable using the current designs. A theoretical nanobeam
design with a Q-factor above 1000 and a separation between the two first exciton energies
of 36 meV was achieved using this technique. The alternative design includes feature sizes
down to 10 nm. Therefore, to realise the alternative design, better fabrication methods
are required. Further studies could improve the designs by using smaller BHs or different
shapes of etched air holes. For the alternative design to have practical use, the broadening
of each transition has to be smaller than the separation. In this project, such effects were
not considered, but further studies could examine this by performing photoluminescence
measurements on similar designs.
It should also be considered that the methods for optimising the geometry were based
on a qualitative selection of the parameter space. Future optimisation could most likely
improve both the energy separation and the Q-factor of the designs by employing similar
systematic methods or other automated methods such as topological optimisation [17].
41
==PAGE:47==
3.8
Fabrication considerations
This section details the process of transforming theoretical designs into a mask that can be
used to fabricate the devices. Furthermore, additional calculations are performed to study
how fabrication uncertainties and roughness might affect the performance. Additionally,
the far-field radiation patterns of the theoretical designs are studied as this might influence
the experimental results. But first, a short overview of the fabrication process is presented.
3.8.1
Fabrication overview
We did not perform the fabrication in this project but had our designs fabricated by
Adrian Dubre and Meng Xion. Therefore, only the major steps in the fabrication process
are outlined here.
The BHs were fabricated before the start of the project by Aurimas Sakanas. The methods
are described in the PhD thesis of Sakanas [22]. The wafer used is based on a silicon
substrate with 1200 nm of SiO2 on top. On the top of the SiO2 is a 250 nm layer of InP.
The BHs sit in the InP layer. These structures are the starting point of the fabrication, in
which the cavity designs are defined. The fabrication method is outlined in the following
steps, which are also illustrated in the appendix in figure B.1.:
1. First, a hard mask of silicon nitride SiNx is deposited on top of the chip using plasma-
enhanced vapour deposition.
2. On top of this, a CSAR electron-beam (E-beam) resist is deposited using a spin
coater.
3. The cavity structures are defined in the CSAR by an E-beam. The E-beam pattern
is developed using an e-beam puddle developer.
4. The pattern is then transferred to the silicon nitride using an III-V Inductively Cou-
pled Plasma (ICP) etch.
5. The remaining CSAR resist is removed.
6. The pattern is then finally transferred into the InP using a bromine wet chemical
etching.
7. The last step is to remove the remaining silicon nitride mask, which is done using
buffered hydrofluoric acid. This step also membranises the device as the hydrofluoric
acid also etches through the exposed SiO2, which was exposed by the InP etching.
More details on the fabrication can be found in the master project of Borregaard and
Dubré, in which other devices were fabricated using the same scheme [78].
3.8.2
Matching the cavity designs to the fabricated Buried Heterostruc-
tures
A similar set of BH devices was characterised before the start of this project.
In this
characterisation, Borregaard and Dubré found that the fabricated BH sizes deviated sig-
nificantly from the designed [78]. As shown in figure 3.24, the square BHs are etched to a
smaller size. It was found the actual device sizes could be mapped to a linear relation:
BHL,lithography = 1.09 · BHL,design −50.52 nm
(3.9)
42
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.24: Scanning electron microscopy images of the photoresist used to define the
buried heterostructures. The designed sizes of the BHs do not align with the fabricated
ones. This must be taken into account in the design process. Reprinted from [78]
Furthermore, BHs with sidelengths under 55 nm are not observed. This deviation must be
taken into account when etching the cavities optimised for a given BH sidelength. In this
project, we will refer to the fabricated BH sizes as the assumed sizes BHL,lithography given
by relation 3.9.
From figure 3.24, it is also apparent that while the BHs are designed to be squares, the
corners are rounded. This effect is difficult to quantify, and therefore, the BHs are assumed
to be perfect squares for all simulations and designs.
This is expected to be a good
approximation for the larger BH sizes, but it might have a significant effect on the smaller
BHs.
3.8.3
Fabrication error corrections
During the fabrication of the devices, electron-beam lithography is used to define the holes.
Due to backscattered electrons, the etched features tend to be slightly larger than in the
mask [79]. Therefore, the mask is designed to have a smaller-than-desired radius for all
holes. To increase the likelihood that one of the devices has the desired dimension, the
mask is designed with three different radius corrections ranging from Rm/Rd = 0.94 to
Rm/Rd = 0.91, where Rm is the hole radius in the mask, and Rd is the hole radius in
the intended design. These corrections could be important for the device’s performance.
Simulations show that an increase in hole radius of 5 nm leads to a drop in wavelength of
approximately 5 nm, and the Q-factor will be lowered by 10%. Furthermore, the larger
radii would result in a smaller gap size.
For different gap sizes, different geometrical
parameters must be changed to optimise the Q-factor. Changing the gap size by 10 nm
without changing other parameters may drastically change the wavelength by 15 nm and
43
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.25: The dependency of the wavelength on the height and width of the nanobeam.
decrease the Q-factor by 50%. Therefore, it is important to correct for any over-etching.
The presented values are based on the simulations found in appendix A.5.
Due to uncertainties in fabrication, the height and width of the nanobeams might also be
different than expected. As shown in figure 3.25, the resonance is sensitive to the height
and width of the nanobeam. If the height of the nanobeam is decreased by 1 nm, the
wavelength drops roughly 1.5 nm. If the width is reduced by 1 nm, the wavelength drops
0.6 nm. Furthermore, changes to the width can also lower the Q-factor, while it is not so
sensitive as to the height. The nanobeam width of the mask is therefore also increased by
20 nm to compensate for over-etching.
In addition to the altered dimension of the device, the etching method will also result in
some degree of roughness in the side walls of the cavity, which may greatly impact the
Q-factor [80]. The Q-factor is related to the decay rate κ, as stated previously:
κ = ωc
Q
(3.10)
If it is assumed that the decay rate has two contributions: a decay which is inherent in the
theoretical design due to the design of the mirror Qd, and a decay which comes from the
surface roughness Qr, then the total decay κ and actual measurable Q-factor Qm might
be rewritten:
κ = ωc
Qm
=
ωc
Qd + Qr
(3.11)
The measured Q-factors can then be roughly estimated from the following equation:
1
Qm
= 1
Qr
+ 1
Qd
,
(3.12)
This suggests that the actual cavities might be much more similar in their Q-factors than
what was found in the simulations. For 2D PhC, fabricated using the same techniques
as used in this project, a study found that Qr ∼200 000 [80].
If it is assumed that
Qr ∼200 000 for the fabricated nanobeam designs, this would result in the reference cavity
having a Q-factor close to 200 000, while the 128 nm gap design would have a Q-factor
of around 170 000 and the smaller 102 nm gap design would have a Q-factor of around
70 000. Therefore, the Q-factors of the fabricated devices will likely be much more similar
than what the simulations suggest, and the large simulated Q-factor of the reference cavity
might not be as advantageous as it may seem theoretically. The losses due to roughness
44
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.26: The far-field radiation patterns for three nanobeam designs for varying BH-
lengths.
Qr will vary between different types of designs, and thus it might be very different for
nanobeams.
To overcome problems with aligning the cavities to the BHs, the placement of the cavities
relative to the placement of the fabricated BHs is considered. The cavities are fabricated
with a slight shift of ±25 nm in both the x and y direction to compensate for a possible
shift of the BH. This results in 9 different shifts including the case, where the cavity is
not shifted relative to the BH. Devices are fabricated for varying BH sizes with sidelengths
ranging from 90 nm to 265 nm. Considering the nine shifts and three corrections to the
radius, 27 cavities of both types with a gap size of 102 and 128 nm are fabricated for each
BH size. Furthermore, three reference cavities are fabricated with no placement corrections
for each BH size. Mask designs were made using the Python module GDSPY [81].
3.8.4
Far-field
The far-field radiation patterns are also investigated. They are calculated in Comsol as
explained in section 3.2. The far-field is of interest as the devices will all be characterised
by measuring the radiation from above. Differences in the radiation pattern between the
devices would therefore influence the measured results. Furthermore, the advantage of the
nanobeam is that it is easier to couple into the cavity in-plane. Although this coupling is
not done experimentally in this project, the in-plane radiation patterns of nanobeams are
thus also of interest for further studies.
45
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.27: The relative far-field radiation right above the nanobeam (vertical emission)
and at the end of the nanobeam (mirror emission).
The far-field is calculated for the three fabricated designs, the designs with a gap size of
102 nm and 128 nm and the reference design with a gap size of 150 nm. This was done for
different BH sizes. The general radiation patterns can be seen in figure 3.26. There are
large differences in the patterns for different BH sizes, especially the cavity with a gap size
of 102 nm and 128 nm. So even though the Q-factor is similar for the devices, the change
in the BH and the minor adjustments in the cavity design led to significant changes in the
field and thereby the far field.
The most noticeable difference between the reference design and the new designs is that the
majority of the radiation for the reference cavities is through the mirror section, which is
not the case for the other designs. When the gap size is reduced, it seems that the devices
begin to radiate at off-axis angles, as seen from the xz-plane plots in figure 3.26. The
cavities with a gap size of 128 nm or 102 nm primarily radiate at a 30° or 60° out-of-plane
angle. Furthermore, the emission from the 102 nm cavity is broader than for the 128 nm
cavity. It is seen that the 102 nm cavity radiates in more diagonal directions. This diagonal
radiation might be caused by the central holes. When these are moved closer together,
light seems to scatter out in a multitude of directions. In contrast, when they are further
apart, light primarily radiates out along the nanobeam, as seen for the reference cavity.
To further quantify and visualise the difference, the data from figure 3.26 is further anal-
ysed. From these radiation patterns, two results are extracted: the value right above the
nanobeam (90° on zy-plane) and the value at the end of the nanobeam (0° on the xy-plane).
These values are plotted as a function of the BH-size in figure 3.27. Again, it is seen that
the emission in-plane through the nanobeam is a primary radiation direction for the refer-
ence cavity. In contrast, the 102 nm gap size cavities have no significant radiation in this
direction. As may be expected, the cavities with a gap size of 128 nm fall somewhere in
between. However, it is very dependent on the BH size.
Considering the vertical emission, it is very BH size-dependent for all three cavity designs.
The vertical emission will be related to how much light can be measured in the following
experiments on these cavities, as emissions will be collected from above. The relatively
low vertical emission of the gap size 128 nm cavities at some BH length could therefore
suggest that measuring the vertical emission may be difficult to do. In the planned exper-
imental measurements, vertical coupling is used to characterize the cavities, and as such
the planned measurement scheme may not be ideal for these cavities. On the other hand,
these results are calculated assuming all surfaces and structures are perfectly smooth, and
surface roughness can significantly change the radiation angles [82]. It is therefore likely
46
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.28: Simulated performance of the fabricated cavities. With these parameters the
wavelength and Q-factor drops for larger BH-sizes.
that the radiation patterns of the fabricated devices will deviate considerably from the
simulation results, especially because oxide layers or passivation layers are not taken into
account in the above analysis either. Further studies could examine more advanced far-field
simulations.
3.8.5
Design error in first fabrication round
Based on the results of the simulations, two families of devices with a gap size of respectively
102 nm and 128 nm were fabricated in the first round of fabrication. Additionally, a few
reference cavities were. Unfortunately, due to a minor error in the simulations, they were
fabricated with sub-optimal parameters. After the mistake was corrected, the expected
performance of the fabricated devices was found in Comsol. The expected behaviour of
the fabricated devices is shown in figure 3.28, where it is seen that the Q-factor and
wavelength drop for larger BH sizes due to the error. The design parameters can be found
in appendix A.6.
The error was corrected for the second round of fabrication. In this round, the expected
Q-factor and wavelengths should be constant for all BH sizes as was shown in figure 3.8.
47
==PAGE:53==
4
|
Experimental investigations
In this chapter, the fabricated cavities will be characterised through three different experi-
ments. First, a scanning electron microscope (SEM) is used to examine fabrication errors,
then Q-factor measurements are performed, and finally, input/output curves are collected.
The goal is to characterise the lasing performance of the nanobeam devices, where etching
has been used to define the geometry and expose the buried heterostructure.
This chapter is divided into five sections. The first section presents the experimental setups
for the Q-factor and input/output measurements. As introduced in the previous chapter,
three cavity designs were fabricated. These are the designs with a gap size of 102 and 128
nm and reference cavities with a gap size of 150 nm. The cavities are characterised in three
rounds, and the results are outlined in three corresponding sections.
In the second section of this chapter, cavities from the first fabrication round with BH sizes
ranging from 90 nm to 265 nm are characterised. They were fabricated with different hole
radii corrections and shifts relative to the BHs ,as discussed in section 3.8. In addition to
the characterisation methods introduced above, SEM images of both active and passive
cavities are obtained. Furthermore, SEM images of nanobeams with multiple identical holes
with radii ranging from 50 nm to 220 nm are obtained to measure the fabrication error
on the circular holes and other feature sizes. The third section of this chapter investigates
how passivation by atomic layer deposition (ALD) affects the cavities. Here, input/output
curves are compared before and after passivation. As air holes are etched through the
buried heterostructure, increasing non-radiative recombination is thought to occur at the
interface between the active material and air. As introduced in section 2.4, this may be
combated by passivating the devices.
The fourth section details the results from the second fabrication round. Slight corrections
to the mask design are made, and metalorganic vapour-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) is used
for passivating the devices instead of ALD. New Q-factor measurements and input/output
curves are obtained, and the results are compared to the previous fabrication round. The
final section of this chapter serves to conclude on the findings of the experiments and
discuss the method and results.
4.1
Methods
In this section, the two setups used to characterise the cavities are introduced. The purpose
of the first setup is to measure the Q-factor of passive cavities. The obtained values can then
be compared to the Q-factors obtained through finite element simulations in the previous
chapter. In the second setup, active cavities are pumped with varying input powers and the
output light is collected. This generates input/output curves, which provide information
about the output power and lasing threshold.
These curves are also used in the next
48
==PAGE:54==
Camera
Microscope
Sample
SLED
PC
BS
Collimator
PBS
Collimator
OSA
Polarisation
filter
Figure 4.1: Schematic of the experimental setup used to measure the quality factor of the
cavities. Yellow lines depict fibres, the red lines depict the SLED light, and the green lines
represent light which has coupled into a cavity.
chapter, where a rate equation model is used to extract various parameters characterising
the cavities.
4.1.1
Passive cavity Q-factor measurement
Passive cavities, without the active material, are used to measure the Q-factor of the
cavities. The overall idea is to focus a broad-spectrum light source onto the cavity. The
light from the source will couple into the cavity at the resonance frequency. A Q-factor
can then be calculated from the spectrum of the light which couples back out of the cavity.
The polarisation of the mode is used to avoid measuring the light that is just reflected
from the sample. The method is similar to the one used by Gali et al. in 2009 [83]. The
schematic of the setup is presented in figure 4.1.
In the setup, a super-luminescent diode (SLED) is used as the broadband source. The light
is sent through a polarisation controller, so the polarisation can be adjusted to achieve
optimal transmission through a polarising beam splitter (PBS). The light is transmitted
through the PBS to ensure the incoming light is x-polarized. The transmitted light is then
guided through the microscope with a beam splitter (BS) and focused onto the sample
surface using a 50x objective. The sample is placed on a piezoelectric stage such that
it can be precisely moved and aligned with the incoming light. An infrared camera is
used as a guide to position the cavities. The sample is rotated at 45° so that the mode
polarisation is at 45° to the polarisation of the incoming light. The x-polarized incoming
light will thereby have a component in the cavity mode polarisation direction. When the
light couples back out of the cavity, it will retain the 45° polarisation. The light is collected
by the same microscope and sent back to the PBS. The PBS will now partially reflect the
out-coupled light, as it will now have a component in the y-polarisation direction. The light
that has not been coupled into the cavity mode will still be x-polarised and will thereby
not be reflected by PBS. As a result of this, the majority of the background SLED light
will be filtered away. After the PBS, a polarisation filter filters out any remaining signal
from the SLED. Hereafter, the light is sent to the OSA.
The measured signal will result from the interference between the continuous spectrum of
the SLED signal and the discrete modes of the cavity. This interference gives rise to an
asymmetric peak shape termed a fano resonance [84]. These can be fitted by the following
function:
49
==PAGE:55==
Camera
Microscope
Sample
Variable
Att.
Collimator
PC
Dichroic
mirror
Coupler
1 %
99 %
Pulsed Laser
980 nm
BS
Collimator
OSA
PM
99 %
Figure 4.2: Experimental setup for measuring the input/output characteristics of the de-
vices. Yellow lines indicate fibres and blue lines indicate light coming from the laser diode.
Red lines indicate light scattered from the sample.
F(ω) = A0 + F0
[q + 2 (ω −ω0) /δωc]2
1 + [2 (ω −ω0) /δωc]2
(4.1)
The Q-factor can then be calculated from the linewidth δωc and the resonance frequency
ω0 found from the fit of a given mode:
Q = ω0
δωc
,
(4.2)
The other parameters q, A0, and F0 are only used as fitting parameters, where q relates to
the asymmetry of the Fano shape, A0 is a shift in power, and F0 is a scaling parameter.
4.1.2
Input/Output curves
A different setup is used to characterise the active cavities and measure whether the devices
are lasing. A schematic of the setup can be seen in figure 4.2. Here, the cavities are pumped
optically with a wavelength below the cavity resonance. The strength of the input can be
varied using an electronically controlled variable attenuator. The input light is focused
onto the sample using a microscope. A dichroic mirror is used to filter out the pump signal
so that it is mainly the light emitted from the cavity that is captured.
A pulsed laser was used to reduce the heating of the samples. The pulsed laser used a
modulator set to 10 % duty cycle, 1 A of current and 0.2 µs periodicity. The laser light
is sent through a polarisation controller to make it possible to change the polarisation of
the incoming light. This is done in order to achieve maximal coupling into the cavity
mode. Hereafter, the light is coupled to free space and sent into the microscope, where it
is directed through a 50x objective and focused onto the sample. The same microscope is
used to collect the light emitted from the cavity. This light passes through the dichroic
mirror. Here, the short wavelengths of the pump are filtered away. Hereafter, it is sent to
a beam splitter. From the beam splitter, the light is coupled into an infrared (IR) camera
and the optical spectrum analyser (OSA). The spectrum of the OSA is then collected for a
given attenuation, and software is used to save the data at varying attenuation to produce
light-in/light-out (LL) curves. The sample is placed on a piezoelectric stage such that the
sample can be precisely moved and aligned with the incoming light.
50
==PAGE:56==
4.2
First fabrication round - Unpassivated cavities
This section presents the results obtained from unpassivated cavities in the first fabrication
round using the two setups introduced in the previous section. We begin this section by
presenting a selection of the obtained SEM images.
2 𝛍𝐦
Figure 4.3: A SEM image of one of the fabricated nanobeams. It is seen that the nanobeam
is suspended in air.
4.2.1
SEM measurements
The fabrication errors can be quantified using SEM measurements by measuring the feature
sizes on images similar to the one in figure 4.3. The circular hole radii fabrication error was
quantified using the nanobeams with identical holes as seen in figure 4.4(a). The results
are plotted in figure 4.4(b). The function Rf(Rd) = b Rd was fitted in order to find the
deviation between the intended designed hole sizes Rd and the actual fabricated size Rf.
Here b is the fitting parameter. It was found that the holes are approximately 4 % larger
than designed. The smallest correction in this fabrication round was 6 %, and thus all
holes are likely smaller than designed.
Hereafter, the dimensions of the final fabricated devices were measured. The average width
of the nanobeams was found to be 22.5 ± 2.0 nm smaller than the mask design. This is
similar to what was expected as the mask had been designed with a width correction of
20 nm. However, the discrepancy between the mask and fabricated width varied a lot
from device to device. The standard deviation of the discrepancy was 16.1 nm. This is
expected to influence the resonance wavelength. Due to this width variation, the measured
resonance might vary by more than 10 nm between devices which are designed to be
identical. Similarly, the gap size was measured to be 18.0 ± 0.3 nm smaller than the mask
size, with a measured standard deviation of 2.3 nm. During fabrication, the thickness of
the membrane structures was measured as approximately 225 nm using ellipsometry, which
is much smaller than the expected 250 nm.
Overall, the first round of fabrication had some unusual fabrication errors, which could
affect the performance of the devices significantly.
However, importantly most of the
nanobeams were intact and membranized, although with relatively rough sidewalls as seen
from figure 4.4(a).
4.2.2
Passive cavity Q-factor measurements
Even though passive cavities had been fabricated for three different designs the Q-factor
was unfortunately only measurable for the reference designs. The cavity modes of the 128
nm and 102 nm gap size designs were unfortunately not detectable in the experiment. For
51
==PAGE:57==
200 nm
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Figure (a): A SEM image showing the sidewall roughness of the holes and sides
of the nanobeams. Figure (b): The measured radii as a function of the radius in the mask
design. The error bars are the standard deviation calculated from measuring four holes of
the same designed size.
the reference cavities, twelve passive cavities were fabricated in total. Four with each of
the 3 radius corrections. The radius R ranged from a mask radius of Rm = 104 nm down
to a mask radius Rm = 99 nm. The Q-factor measurements were only successful for the
Rm = 101.5 nm and Rm = 99 nm designs.
The average Q-factor for the Rm = 99 nm designs was Q = 7954 with a standard deviation
of 641. For the Rm = 101.5 nm design, the average Q-factor was Q = 6261 with a standard
deviation of 380.
The largest measured Q-factor was 8338.
The data and fit for this
measurement can be seen in figure 4.5(a).
If equation 3.12 is used to calculate the roughness component of the Q-factor, the roughness
component Qr for these devices is found to be around 10000, which is low compared to
what has been found for 2D PhCs using the same fabrication methods [8]. This would
mean that the Q-factors of the other cavities may only be slightly lower at around 5000.
However, as we could not measure any Q-factors from the spectra of these cavities, the
numbers cannot be verified. It is speculated that the roughness might matter more for
nanobeam designs compared to 2D PhC cavities, as the relative amplitude of the electric
field may be stronger at the airhole interface of the nanobeam designs.
The resonant frequency of the cavities is also found in the Q-factor experiment. Strikingly,
the cavities’ resonant modes seem to be at a wavelength of ∼1460 nm, much smaller than
the expected 1550 nm. This may be attributed to fabrication errors not accounted for in
the mask design. As noted previously, the membrane thickness is found to be around 25 nm
smaller than designed, which would result in a shift of the wavelength of 38 nm. Moreover,
the SEM images revealed discrepancies between the mask design and the fabricated devices.
Combining these effects with a slight variation in the nanobeam width, one may find the
wavelength to be reasonable.
For all nanobeam structures, some additional modes were observed, as shown in figure
4.5(b). These modes were observed for both the reference structures and the new designs.
As the wavelength of these modes does not depend on the design, it is unlikely that they
are confined in the centre of the cavities. These peaks may stem from a mode that was
52
==PAGE:58==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Two examples of the data captured during the Q-factor measurements. Figure
(a): The fano shape given by equation 4.1 is fitted to the experimental data extracted from
the Q-factor setup when measuring a reference cavity. From the fit, the Q-factor of the
cavity is found. Figure (b): Some other modes observed during the Q-factor experiments.
excited between some of the structures on the wafer. As there are multiple peaks, one can
calculate the length of a cavity which would lead to a similar mode-spacing using the free
spectral range [85]:
L =
λ2
2n∆f ,
(4.3)
where L is the length of the cavity, and ∆f is the spacing between between adjacent
peaks. For a spacing around 1 nm this would lead to a cavity length of 0.3 mm, which
roughly matches the thickness of the wafer. Therefore, we conclude that these modes are
not related to the specific cavity design, and thus they will not be studied further.
In conclusion, the devices displayed wavelength much lower than anticipated, and unfortu-
nately the cavity mode was not detected for the designs with a gap size of 102 or 128 nm.
This is thought to be related to fabrication errors, which may be corrected in the second
round of fabrication.
4.2.3
Input/Output curves
Before examining the BH size dependent performance, it was examined which of the cor-
rections to the hole radius resulted in the best performance of the lasers. Here it was
found that the smallest hole radius correction of 6% resulted in higher output powers.
This agrees with the SEM measurements, which showed that a 4% correction would have
been optimal. For the BH-placement it was found that the cavities that were shifted up-
wards gave slightly higher output power, however, the results were inconclusive. Details
on these measurements can be found in appendix B.2. In the following analysis, cavities
with similar corrections are compared.
In figure 4.6(a), the wavelength of emitted light at the maximum output power is plotted
for different BH lengths. For smaller BH sizes, no emission could be observed. For the
reference cavities, no corrections were made for increasing BH lengths, and it is therefore
expected that the wavelength increases as the BH size increases. However, the increase
is found to be larger than in simulations, which may suggest that the effective refractive
index is lower in the actual cavities. It may also be due to other effects such as heating,
which are not accounted for in the simulations.
53
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: The wavelength and output power as a function of the BH size, for the 3
different cavity designs. The markers indicate the measurements, while the lines are a
guide to the eye.
For the devices with gap sizes of 102 and 128 nm, the wavelength is relatively constant
and drops for larger BH sizes. Compared to the simulations the wavelength of cavities
with a gap size of 102 nm and 128 nm is expected to drop much more. The discrepancies
between the simulated and measured resonance wavelengths have the same tendency as for
the reference cavity. This suggests that it is caused by a common cause, such as a lower
effective refractive index or heating, rather than random fabrication uncertainties.
The maximum output power of the devices is shown in figure 4.6(b). The devices designed
to have a high confinement display higher output power than the reference device with
a high Q-factor. This is generally in line with the result that a higher Q-factor leads to
lower output power before the lasing threshold. This is explained by the definition of the
Q-factor, which is inversely proportional to the optical decay rate κ, as stated in equation
2.15, which is related to the optical power emitted from the cavity [86].
For devices with a gap size of 128 nm, the maximum output power seems to drop for larger
BH sizes. This is not expected, as larger BH sizes should lead to larger output power. The
number of carriers is thought to be correlated with the size of the BH, as the pump spot
size is larger than the BH sizes. It might be that for larger BHs the etching causes a larger
surface area of active material to be exposed. As introduced in section 2.4, this generally
leads to larger non-radiative recombination, which may cause less light to be emitted. For
the smaller BHs, the lower output power may simply be correlated with fewer carriers
available.
The Light-in/Light-out (LL) curves were captured for two designs for different BH sizes,
and the results are shown in figure 4.7. The input power is the peak pulse power. As
the output power of the reference cavities was low, LL curves were not obtained for these.
None of the devices shows signs of lasing, as a clear S-shaped curve is not seen. The LL
curves show the same tendencies for all input powers as the previous measurements of the
maximum output powers.
In general, the output power was very low for these devices. However, since the BH is
etched through and exposed, there might be significant surface recombination occurring.
Another explanation for the low output may be that the cavities are misaligned to the
buried heterostructure. In another project running in parallel with this, Adrian Dubre
realised that other cavities fabricated on the same chip were misaligned to the BH by up
to 100 nm. This was realised using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Such a large
54
==PAGE:60==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: LL curves. Input powers are measured at the objective of the microscope. No
devices show signs of lasing. The markers indicate the measurements, while the lines are
a guide to the eye.
shift would also result in low output power, as it would result in less light-matter coupling.
The problems with alignment were solved, and for the second fabrication round, the devices
should be aligned more accurately to the BHs. Due to the possible misalignment, the BH
might also be etched through for smaller BH sizes, making these susceptible to increased
non-radiative recombination. The effects of recombination will be studied in the following
section.
4.3
First fabrication round - Passivated cavities
In the previous section, it was speculated that the low output power of the devices may
be caused by the etching of the BH, exposing the active material. To test this hypothesis,
an aluminium oxide passivating layer was deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD) and
the devices were characterized again. The deposition was performed by Yury Berdnikov
at DTU nanolab.
As the devices have been exposed to air, oxides will form on the surface.
To apply a
passivating layer and still achieve the same hole sizes, first, an oxide removal in NH4OH
Figure 4.8: Full spectrum obtained for passivated cavities displaying the highest output
power. Only one significant mode is observed for each cavity.
55
==PAGE:61==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Figure (a): The resonant wavelength of the passivated devices. The devices
follow the same trend as the unpassivated devices. Figure (b): The max output power of
the passivated devices.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: The difference in wavelength and maximum output power after passivation.
Figure (a): The wavelength is blueshifted for all cavities, and significantly for the reference
cavities. Figure (b): The output power of the reference cavities is increased significantly
after passivation.
and (NH4)2S is performed, and afterwards 7 nm of AL2O3 is deposited by atomic layer
deposition.
After passivation, a full spectrum was obtained using the input/output curves setup for
some of the best-performing devices. The results are seen in figure 4.8. Although other
modes were found from the Q-factor measurements, only one significant mode is observed
for each cavity. In the lasing setup, it is also seen that the maximum output power of the
reference cavity is increased significantly compared to before passivation.
4.3.1
Shift in wavelengths and output powers
To further inspect the effects of passivation, the output power and wavelength at max
output power are measured as in the previous section, and the results are shown in figure
4.9(a). It is found that the passivated devices follow the same trends as the unpassivated.
However, the wavelength blue shifts slightly for all devices after passivation. This is seen
in figure 4.10(a), where the shift in wavelength after passivation is plotted for different
BH sidelengths. The blueshift suggests an over-etch from the NH4OH during passivation,
56
==PAGE:62==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: Figure (a): The LL curves for both passivated and unpassivated devices.
These are shifted approximately −10dB in input power after passivation. The maximum
achievable input power was lower in the second round of experiments. Figure (b): No shift
is observed when comparing the LL curve of a 2D PhC before and after passivation. This
suggests that the passivating layer indeed causes the shift of the LL curves seen for the
nanobeams.
increasing the hole sizes and reducing the gap size and the width of the nanobeam. SEM
imaging could verify this. The larger blueshift observed for the reference cavity wavelength
is thought to be due to the much smaller hole sizes of the reference cavities compared to
the other designs. The absolute increase in hole radius caused by the etching will thus
have a larger impact on the reference cavities.
Inspecting the max output power of the devices in figure 4.9(b), it is seen that the maximum
power of light emitted from the reference cavities is much greater than in the two other
types. The other devices show similar changes in the output power compared to what
was measured before passivation. In figure 4.10(b), the shift in output power is shown for
varying BH sizes. The output power of the reference cavities is increased by more than
20 dBm. However, the output powers of the other designs only increase slightly for larger
BH sizes, and for smaller BH sizes, the output power even drops. The increased output
power of the passivated reference cavities suggests these devices are lasing. Furthermore,
the slight increase in output power for the other devices is actually interesting, as it was
achieved at much lower input powers, as seen in the next section.
4.3.2
Input/output curves of passivated devices
LL curves are obtained for multiple devices and compared to unpassivated devices to further
investigate the effects of passivation. Noticeably, it is found that the input power required
to achieve the same output power is reduced by ∼10 dB. This is shown for the devices with
a gap size of 128 nm in figure 4.11(a). A similar trend is observed for the cavities with a
gap size of 102 nm. However, in performing the measurements after passivation, obtaining
input powers over approximately 5 dBm was impossible. This was found to be due to a
problem with the alignment of the setup, reducing the coupling through the microscope.
To verify that this shift seen in figure 4.11(a) is caused by passivation and not by an error in
calibrating input power, a comparison is made between a 2D PhC cavity on the same wafer
before and after passivation. The 2D PhCs were a part of another project, but fortunately,
they were used to test the setup before measurements were made on the nanobeams. In
these cavities, the BH is enclosed in InP and is not exposed by the etching. Therefore, the
57
==PAGE:63==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12: Figure (a): LL curves for the reference cavities. The devices show signs of
lasing, and a threshold is observed. The maximum output power is larger than the other
types of nanonbeams. Figure (b): A spectrum of one of the best-performing reference
cavities in a linear scale. Two peaks are observed due to pulsed pumping, and a FWHM
is found to be 0.04 nm.
passivation should not make a difference in these cavities, as the surrounding InP already
passivates the active material. In figure 4.11(b), LL curves are shown for the same cavity
before and after passivation. Aside from a slight variation attributed to uncertainties in
the measurements and maybe a small change in the geometry due to the etching and
deposition during passivation, the curves are almost identical, and the setup seems to be
calibrated.
Thus, the shift of approximately −10 dB observed in the nanonbeam LL curves may be
attributed to the passivating layer reducing the non-radiative recombination. This agrees
with previous research on passivated devices [25].
Finally, LL curves were obtained for the passivated reference cavities.
The results are
presented in figure 4.12(a).
Unfortunately, no comparison can be made to LL curves
before passivation, as these were not obtained due to low output power. Unlike the LL
curves of the devices with a gap size of 102 and 128 nm, a S-shaped curve is seen, and
a lasing threshold, indicated by the steepest part of the curve, is observed. Whether the
devices are lasing may be determined by the linewidth of the emission spectrum.
In figure 4.12(b), a selected spectrum is shown for a passivated reference cavity at wave-
lengths close to the emission wavelength. A fine resolution of 0.02 nm is used on the OSA
as opposed to previous experiments where a resolution of 2 nm was used. The spectrum
displays two peaks. However, this is due to the pulsed nature of the pump. The integra-
tion time of the OSA is longer than the duty cycle of the pulsed pump, and therefore the
light is collected both when the pump is on and off. Pumping the active material leads to
changes in the carrier density, which in turn changes the refractive index, causing a shift
in wavelength. Moreover, heating may also shift the peak wavelength when pumped. To
avoid this, a continuous wave (CW) pump could be used. However, as will be discussed
shortly, a CW pump caused the nanobeams to burn and melt. The full width at half
maximum (FWHM) of the peak seen in figure 4.12(b) is 0.04 nm. From this a Q-factor
of 1462 nm/0.04 nm ≈37000 may be calculated. This is much larger than Q ≈9000
obtained from measurements of the passive cavities. This reduction in linewidth suggests
that stimulated emission dominates here, and based on this, it is concluded that the device
lases.
58
==PAGE:64==
2 𝛍𝐦
Figure 4.13: A SEM image of a melted nanobeam. For other samples, the nanobeam did
not break, but heating effects were visible as burned spots in the centre of the cavity.
The characteristics of the LL curves obtained from the reference cavities are comparable
to the LL curves obtained for the 2D PhC, both in input and output power and threshold.
This is a promising result for the nanobeams, especially considering the fabrication errors
and roughness. While the devices with a gap size of 102 and 128 nm did not lase, a clear
effect from passivating the devices was observed. Furthermore, the reference cavities lased
after passivation.
4.3.3
Burning of the cavities
The nanobeams were prone to burning when inputting high powers of more than 5 dBm.
In figure 4.13, an SEM image of a melted nanobeam is shown. This nanobeam was exposed
to a continuous wave pump, and after melting multiple samples, a pulsed laser was instead
used. It was observed that the reference cavities did not seem to be as prone to burning
compared to the other designs. This may be due to the smaller size of the holes, allowing
for better heat conductivity away from the central region. With InP having a thermal heat
conductivity at room temperature of approximately 68 W/(m · K) and air a thermal heat
conductivity of 0.026 W/(m · K), one should consider making the airholes smaller in future
iterations of the design to increase thermal performance [87].
The fact that some of the nanobeams melted suggests that the devices heat up to very
high temperatures under the pumping. Naturally, heating to a degree where the device is
permanently damaged is not good. However, heating in general has also been shown to
affect the performance of lasers negatively [88]. In the next chapter, we will investigate
this through a rate equation model fitted to the experimental data.
4.4
Second fabrication round
In the second fabrication round, the problem of aligning the cavities and BHs was solved.
Furthermore, the mask was also corrected so that the expected Q-factor and wavelength
were similar across all BH sizes.
Finally, another passivation method was used in this fabrication round.
Metalorganic
vapour-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) was used to create a thin aluminium film in order to
passivate the cavities. This section details the results obtained in the second fabrication
round. First, a new set of Q-factor measurements is presented and thereafter, a new round
of LL curve measurements are shown.
59
==PAGE:65==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14: The mean Q-factor of the fabricated cavities as a function of the radius
correction factor Rm/Rd. The standard deviation of the mean of the Q-factor is used for
the error bar. The mean resonant wavelength of the cavities was also extracted from the
Q-experiment. These are plotted as a function of the radius correction in figure (b). The
standard deviation of the mean wavelength is around 1 nm for all points.
4.4.1
Second Q-factor measurements
The Q-factor was measured for the three cavity designs with a varying radius correction
of Rm/Rd =0.96, 0.93, and 0.9, where Rm is the radius of the holes in the mask and Rd
is the intended radius of the design. The gap size was also corrected correspondingly by
roughly 10 nm, 20 nm, or 30 nm. In the previous fabrication, the gap over-etching was
measured as 18 nm by SEM imaging. Four copies of each design were fabricated to gather
statistics from the results.
The mean measured Q-factors can be seen in figure 4.14(a), where the standard deviation
is also shown. It is seen that the devices generally had Q-factors between 5000 and 1500,
with a few of them being much worse and a single being much better with a Q-factor of
7250. The highest Q-factor corresponded to a device with a gap size of 128 nm cavity and
a correction factor of 0.96. This device drives up the average for the corresponding point.
Apart from this point, a smaller gap size leads to lower Q-factors.
The Q-factors of devices with different radius corrections varied surprisingly little compared
to what was suggested by the simulations. Two counteracting effects may explain this.
First, the gap size will increase for lower correction factors. From simulations, it was found
that this would lead to higher Q-factors.
The increased gap size can also explain the
increase in wavelength seen in figure 4.14(b). However, as the wavelength increases, the
mirror sections may not be optimised to the geometry, and the hole radius in the mirror
section may be too small. This would lead to lower Q-factors. It is speculated that these
two effects cancel, so no significant change in Q-factors is seen for varying mask correction
factors.
However, as discussed throughout this chapter, roughness may play a prominent role in
reducing the Q-factor. It is believed to be the main limiting factor on Q, as the difference
in the Q-factor for different cavity designs and radius correction is not very large compared
to variation for identical designs. Thus, the cavities displaying a relatively high Q-factor
may exhibit less sidewall roughness rather than a slightly more optimal geometry. Perhaps
SEM imaging of the cavities could verify this hypothesis.
60
==PAGE:66==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.15: Figure (a): The measured output wavelength of the devices from the second
fabrication. All wavelengths are slightly redshifted compared to the designed wavelength
of 1550 nm. The devices with a gap size of 128 nm show significantly larger wavelengths
than the other designs. Figure (b): The maximum output power of the devices from the
second fabrication round. Devices with a gap size of 102 nm display significantly larger
maximum output power than the other designs.
For comparison, the Q-factor measurements of the reference cavities from the first fabrica-
tion round are also plotted in figure 4.14. This Q-factor was significantly higher than for
the reference cavities in the second fabrication round. The lower Q-factors of the second
fabrication round may be because these devices were situated at the edge of the wafer.
Visual inspection of the chip through the microscope showed that areas close to the edge
displayed some derivation in thickness compared to areas further from the edge. Images of
this can be found in appendix B.4. Moreover, the passivisation in the second fabrication
round was performed before Q-factor measurements. SEM images taken during fabrica-
tion showed facets around the holes, which are expected to impact the performance of the
devices negatively. A SEM image can be found in appendix B.4. It may be the case that
the devices with high Q-factors do not have significant fabrication errors, in the form of
facets, in the central cavity region. Further SEM imaging can verify this.
4.4.2
Input/Output curves
As in the previous fabrication round, measurements were performed to determine which
BH shift and radius correction resulted in the best performance. The results can be found
in appendix B.2.2. It was found that the smallest radius correction of Rm/Rd = 0.96
resulted in the emission of light with a wavelength closest to the designed wavelength.
Furthermore, cavities shifted slightly to the right seem to perform slightly better. The
alignment problems limiting the pump power were corrected, such that input powers up
to ∼13 dBm were obtainable again for this characterisation.
The maximum output power and the emission wavelength at maximum output power are
collected from the three types of cavities at varying BH sidelengths. For smaller BH sizes,
no emission could be observed. The results are presented in figure 4.15. Compared to the
previous fabrication round, the emission wavelength of the devices is closer to the designed
1550 nm, and in this fabrication round, the wavelengths were slightly higher than expected.
SEM imaging was not performed for this sample. However, the shift in wavelength of
approximately 10 nm was seen for the reference cavities and the gap size 102 nm cavities,
which may be explained by smaller-than-expected hole sizes. Increased nanobeam height
or width may also affect the wavelength. Noticeably, the wavelengths of the devices with
61
==PAGE:67==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.16: Selected LL curves obtained in the second fabrication round. Figure (a):
Devices with a gap size of 102 nm. Large variations in the LL curves are observed. Some
devices show very high output power. The S-shape of some of the curves indicate lasing.
Figure (b): Devices with a gap size of 102 nm. Very low output powers were observed.
a gap size of 128 nm are more redshifted than that of the other designs. This may be
because these devices are situated closer to the edge of the wafer. If the InP is thicker
here, the height of the nanobeams will increase, leading to larger wavelengths. Ellipsometry
measurements at different areas of the chip could be used to test this hypothesis.
In figure 4.15(b), the maximum output power of the devices is shown. Interestingly, for
some of the larger BH sizes, the devices with a gap size of 102 nm display much larger
output power compared to the two other designs. It is noted that it seemed easier to couple
light into these devices with a gap size of 102 nm compared to the other devices. This
may be correlated with the results of the simulations of the far-field radiation section 3.8.4,
where it was found that these devices displayed higher vertical emission power relative to
the other designs.
Significant variations from device to device are also observed. This may be due to the
facets formed at the holes after passivation.
It is surprising that the 102 nm gap size
design should perform the best generally as all the designs should be affected equally by
this. The facets should primarily affect the Q-factor, and from the Q-factor measurements,
the 102 nm design cavities did not display the largest Q-factors. However, it is noted that
the best devices are concentrated in one area of the wafer. It is speculated that this area
was affected by fabrication errors to a lesser degree.
A difference in the quality of the active material could also explain why devices localized
at one area of the wafer perform the best. It could be that the active material closer to
the edge of the wafer is performing worse, as the general thickness of the InP seems to be
different in this area. The height difference of the InP might also result in different heights
of the BH structure. Using the infinite quantum well model it can be estimated what this
would mean for the wavelength of the lowest exciton transition energy. A change in the
well thickness of only 2 nm would shift the exciton recombination wavelength by more
than 100 nm. This might result in poorer overlap between the cavity mode and electron
transition. This might explain the difference in performance, as the reference and gap size
128 nm designs are closer to the edge and could be affected by this edge effect. Meanwhile,
the measured 102 nm gap size cavity is much further from the edge. Photoluminescence
(PL) spectroscopy could be used to examine the different BHs and test this hypothesis.
A selection of LL curves is shown in figure 4.16. LL curves were not obtained for reference
62
==PAGE:68==
cavities, which display small output powers.
All obtained LL curves can be found in
appendix B.2.2. An important result is that some of the designs with a gap size of 102
nm show signs of lasing with high output power and an LL curve exhibiting a threshold
marked by a significantly steeper part of the curve at an input power of ∼3 dBm. The LL
curves vary for the different BH sizes. For the smallest BH sizes, less active material may
explain the low output power. However, for devices with similar BH sizes, it is speculated
that slight variations, such as roughness or facets introduced by the passivation, may
affect the lasing parameters, such as the Q-factor, differently from device to device. In
the previous section, it was speculated that devices with a larger BH size may display
larger recombination rates, due to more of the BH being exposed to air, causing a drop in
maximum output power. However, based on the results presented in this section, the drop
at larger BH sizes may also be explained by the variations in performance from device to
device. In the next chapter, rate equations will be used to explain the variation in the
performance of different devices with similar gap sizes.
4.5
Discussions
The experimental characterizations presented in this chapter provided important insight
into the characteristics of the nanobeam cavities.
Importantly, lasing was observed for the reference cavities and the new design with a gap
size of 102 nm in the first and second fabrication rounds, respectively. This is a significant
result, as it proves that the new nanobeam designs are good candidates for further studies
of PhC nanocavities. However, the results also highlighted areas of improvement. The
experimental characterisation showed Q-factors of up to 9000. This is low compared to the
finite element simulations. The main explanation is the sidewall roughness of the holes and
sides of the nanobeams. Further design studies could be conducted to create nanobeam
designs more resilient to such effects, and the fabrication methods could be improved to
reduce roughness. It was also suggested that the large hole diameter in the mirror section
compared to the nanobeam width might cause problems with heat transport, leading to the
nanobeams melting at high input powers. Future measurements could also be performed
at lower temperatures to reduce heating effects and lower the noise floor.
In an effort to fabricate designs with a performance comparable to the simulation results,
multiple attempts were made to reduce the impact of uncertainties in the fabrication. This
includes changes to the hole size to combat over-etching and shifting the alignment of
the cavities relative to BH. However, further studies could be made to better understand
how these corrections to the fabricated dimensions impact the performance of the devices.
Specifically, data from more sweeps and SEM images could be compared to gather statistics.
From the results presented in this project, it was hard to conclude how changing the
alignment between the cavity and the BH specifically impacted the performance. In further
studies, one could also fabricate identical active devices to study how variance caused by
the fabrication methods changes the output characteristics of the devices.
An important finding is that passivation is essential when creating structures where etch-
ing is used to define the geometry of the active material. Passivation seems to reduce
the non-radiative surface recombination to a degree where lasing is achievable. Obtaining
lasing in such devices shows the possibility of fabricating deterministic lithography-defined
quantum emitters using the BH if passivation is performed. The positive impact of passi-
vating the devices was justified by comparing passivated nanobeams to 2D PhCs. Similar
experiments could be conducted in future fabrication rounds to gather more information
on how passivation affects the lasing characteristics.
63
==PAGE:69==
Finally, one of the main motivations for studying nanobeam devices is the easy in-plane
coupling to waveguides compared to other nanocavities. In the experiments performed in
this work, light was coupled in and out from above. While this provides a good foundation
for comparing different nanocavities, it is also of great interest to study how in-plane
coupling effects would alter the performance of these designs. This will be left for further
studies.
64
==PAGE:70==
5
|
Rate equation analysis
In this chapter, we present a rate equation analysis to quantify the lasing parameters of
the devices. The experimental results are interpreted to examine how the designs could be
improved and identify the main factors determining their performance. Furthermore, the
analysis will be used to explain how passivation changes the input/output characteristics
of the devices.
In the first section, of this chapter, the theoretical framework of the rate equations is
presented. The second section details the methods used to solve the rate equations numer-
ically and how theoretical LL curves are obtained. In the third section, the experimentally
obtained LL curves are fitted to LL curves obtained through simulations, and in the final
section, the results and methods are discussed.
5.1
Theoretical framework
The theoretical framework presented in the following section is based on chapter 2 of L. A.
Coldren’s book, "Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated Circuits" [44]. The rate equations
are two coupled differential equations that describe the dynamic changes in carrier density
and photon density:
dN
dt = ηiI
qV −N
τ −vggrNp
(5.1)
dNp
dt
= ΓvggrNp + ΓβN
τr
−Np
τp
(5.2)
Equation 5.1 describes the rate of change in carrier density N through three terms.
Through the introduction of a pump, electrons can be excited into the conduction band.
The rate of the excitation process is proportional to the injection current I and injection
efficiency ηi, the latter representing the fraction of the injection current utilised to gen-
erate excited states. This first term is called the generative term. Here, q denotes the
elementary charge, and V represents the volume of the active material. Ultimately, the
excited electrons will recombine with holes residing in the valence band. These carriers
decay at a characteristic rate of 1
τ if there are assumed to be no photons in the cavity. The
total decay rate τ can be calculated from each of the two contributions 1/τ = 1/τr +1/τnr,
where τr accounts for the characteristic time of spontaneous radiative recombination, while
τnr represents the characteristic time of non-radiative recombination. Multiplying 1/τ by
the carrier density yields the second term in Equation 5.1. In the case where photons are
present, recombination can additionally occur due to stimulated emission. The stimulated
emission rate is proportional to the photon density Np, the gain of the active material gr,
65
==PAGE:71==
and the group velocity vg = c/ng, where ng is the group index. This rate is described by
the third term in equation 5.1.
The second rate equation, equation 5.2, describes the time evolution of the photon den-
sity, (Np). Photons within the cavity arise through stimulated and spontaneous emission
mechanisms.
The first term describes the change in the photon density due to stimu-
lated emission. This term is equal to the third term in the first rate equation, except it
is corrected by Γ, as stimulated emission only happens in the region where optical mode
and gain material overlap. The second term describes the spontaneous emission. Only a
fraction of the spontaneous emission effectively couples into the lasing mode. The β-factor
describes this fraction. The photon generation remains proportional to confinement factor
Γ, as spontaneous emission also exclusively occurs within the active region. However, the
photons will also naturally decay due to absorption and scattering phenomena. The rate
is described by their lifespan denoted by τp, which can be calculated from the Q-factor as:
τp = Q
ωc
(5.3)
As the cavities are optically pumped in the experiments performed in this project, the
generative term in Equation 5.1 is reformulated as follows:
ηiI
qV = Ppumpηp
hνpV
(5.4)
Carrier generation depends on the pumping power Ppump, the frequency of the pumping
light νp, and the optical pumping efficiency ηp.
5.1.1
Gain
A crucial parameter in the context of rate equations is the gain gr. This parameter describes
the increase in the photon density caused by stimulated emission. To model the gain, the
logarithmic model is often applied for quantum wells:
gr = g0 ln N
Ntr
(5.5)
Here, Ntr represents the transparency density, describing the carrier density at which
the gain becomes zero. When the carrier density N falls below this threshold, photon
absorption dominates over the stimulated emission for the given wavelength. Oppositely,
when N is greater than Ntr, the number of photons in the lasing mode will increase
exponentially due to stimulated emission. Generally, the gain is related to the light-matter
interaction and is largely determined by the material.
5.1.2
Output power
The laser output originates from the photons leaking out of the cavity, and therefore, the
output power is related to the Q-factor and the total number of photons NpVm.
The
energy of each photon is given by: hc/λ. However, only some of the emitted light will be
measured. This fraction is given by the external efficiency ηe. Combining these terms, the
output power can be calculated as follows:
Pout = NphcVmηe
λτp
.
(5.6)
66
==PAGE:72==
Param.
Γ
Vm
τr [ns]
τnr [ns]
ng
Q
λ
β
ηp
ηe
Ntr [m−3]
g0 [cm−1]
Value
S
S
2 [4]
1 [4]
1
M
M
F
F
F
2 · 1024 [44]
1000 [44]
Table 5.1: The parameters used in the rate equation simulations. Here, the value S means
that the values are taken from the simulations, see section 3.4.5. The value M means that
the measured values are used, see the chapter 4. The value F means that the value is a
fitting parameter. These values will be different for each of the cavities examined.
5.2
Methods
The rate equations (eq. 5.1 and 5.2) are solved numerically in Matlab, and the steady
state solution is found. The implementation of the rate equation simulations is a revised
version of a Matlab program made by the authors for a previous project [71]. An example
of the code used can be seen in the appendix C.1.
The input parameters used in the rate equations are summed up in table 5.1. Here, S means
that the values are taken from the finite element simulations. The confinement factor Γ
and the mode volume Vm are reported in chapter 3. M means that the value is measured
in experiments. The experimentally measured wavelengths and Q-factors are used. These
are reported in figure 4.9. The pump power is chosen as the estimated pump power in
the experiments. The three remaining parameters, ηe and ηp, and the beta factor β, are
determined by roughly fitting the rate equation simulation to the experimental results.
These parameters are marked by F in the table.
Many parameters will be fixed for the rate equation simulations to minimise the number of
fitting parameters. This is the case for τr, τnr, g0, and Ntr, which are approximated using
values for similar systems found in the literature. Optical gain g0 around 1000 [cm−1] is
commonly found for GaAs and InGaAsP quantum wells [44]. For InP/InGaAsP lasers,
a transparency density Ntr of around 2 · 1024m−3 is used [44].
However, studies have
shown that the transparency density may increase by around 1% per degree [88]. The
non-radiative decay time was found to be on the order 1 ns for cavities using a BH as
active material [4] and for passivated GaAs nanopillars similar values of τnr was found
[59]. The radiative decay rate is set to 2 ns as was previously used for the BH structures
by Matsuo et al. [4]. The group index ng is set to 3.17, which is similar to the refractive
index of InP at 1550 nm [89]. The size of the BH is varied, while the size of the pumping
spot on the chip does not change. As the pumping spot is much larger than the BH, the
pumping density Ppump/V is constant.
67
==PAGE:73==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.1: How the confinement Γ in figure (a), the non-radiative decay rate τnr in figure
(b), the transparency density Ntr in figure (c), and the Q-factor in figure (d) changes the
laser output power as a function of the pump power.
5.3
Results
We begin this section by introducing how four selected variables in the rate equation model
change the behaviour of the Light-in/Light-out (LL) curves. In figure 5.1(a), it is seen that
a high confinement factor Γ results in a clearer threshold, and increasing Γ shifts the lasing
threshold towards lower input powers. This is explained by a larger proportion of light
overlapping with the active material and thus more carriers may be excited. From the
finite element simulations, it was found that different BH sizes most notably contribute to
changes in confinement. However, for a fixed pump power, the increase in mode volume
will partly counter this effect, as more carriers need to be excited before transparency is
reached. In the following analysis, variation in LL curves obtained experimentally may be
explained by fitting to rate equations with varying Γ.
Decreasing the non-radiative recombination rate τnr shifts the threshold to lower input
powers, reducing the lasing threshold. The shift seen in figure 5.1(b) can be explained by
the generative rate and thereby the pump power, which does not need to be as high to
negate the losses caused by non-radiative processes. Increasing the transparency density
affects the LL curves somewhat similarly to decreasing τnr, as this directly lowers the
transparency density. This is seen in figure 5.1(b). In the following analysis, LL curves
obtained experimentally for passivated and unpassivated devices are fitted by varying τnr.
68
==PAGE:74==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: Experimental LL curves obtained from the passivated reference cavities in the
first fabrication round are marked by points. These are roughly fitted by rate equation
simulations. Figure (a): The shaded area corresponds to variations in Γ and V caused
by varying the BH-size. Figure (b): Changing the β-factor may explain variations in LL
curves obtained for different devices.
Finally, a more considerable Q-factor results in a lower lasing threshold and a sharper S-
like curve seen in figure 5.1(d). Furthermore, a high Q-factor results in a lasing threshold
at lower output powers. As the photons are confined better temporally, fewer photons are
emitted from the cavity at a given time. However, the device will also reach the lasing
threshold earlier, as there are fewer losses. In the following analysis, some of the variations
in the experimentally obtained LL curves are explained by fitting them to rate equations
with varying Q-factors.
5.3.1
Establishing fitting parameters from experimental results
The first fits are performed to establish approximate values of the two efficiencies ηe and ηp
based on the experimental results obtained in the first fabrication round. For the passivated
reference cavities, clear S-shaped curves were observed, which makes it possible to fit the
rate equations. Furthermore, the results between different BH sizes are fairly consistent
for these.
The data is obtained for varying BH sizes. The rate equation fits are made by systematically
adjusting the confinement factor Γ and active material volume Va to match the values
obtained for each BH size in the corresponding finite element simulations. Rate equation
simulations were conducted for the smallest and largest BH size cavities. The resulting
simulated data points are plotted, and the region between these points is shaded in grey
in figure 5.2(a). This can be compared with the experimental data, shown as points in the
same figure. Data points close to the noise floor with output powers below −84 dBm, are
not included in the fits. As seen from the figure, the rate equations predict LL curves very
similar to the LL curves obtained experimentally if the Q-factor is set to 8000, which is
approximately the average measured Q-factor for the passive reference cavities.
However, not all the variation between the different LL curves can be explained by the
change in Γ and Va. Different parameters were varied, but ultimately, a variance in the
β-factor may explain the variation. To study this, three experimental results are displayed
in figure 5.2(b), accompanied by new fits that exclusively modify the β-factor. Here it
is seen, that some of the variations might be explained by a change in the β-factor. A
β-factor under 1 means spontaneously generated photons couple into modes other than
the assumed lasing mode. From the finite element simulations, no other significant modes
69
==PAGE:75==
Initial fit
β
Q
ηp
ηe
Passivated reference cavities (fig 5.2)
0.3 −0.08
8000
1.5 · 10−3
1.5 · 10−3
Secondary fits
β
Q
τnr [ns]
Ntr [m−3]
Gap size 128 nm, passivated (fig. 5.3)
0.3
1000
-
-
Gap size 128 nm, unpassivated (fig. 5.3)
0.3
1000
0.1
-
Gap size 102 nm, second round (fig. 5.4)
0.1
5000-1000
0.6
4 · 1024
Table 5.2: The extracted parameters from the rate equation fits. The values shown are
changed from the initial values presented in section 5.2. A dash indicates that no changes
are made.
were predicted. However, in the Q-factor measurements, multiple dips were observed in
the spectrum. This suggests that other modes are available for the emitter to couple into.
Spectra showing this behaviour can be found in appendix B.3. A β-factor of 0.3 is still
relatively high, and these other modes may explain the fact that it is not unity. In the Q-
factor measurements, large variations were observed in the spectrum from device to device,
and therefore, it is not unlikely that minor fabrication errors impact the devices differently.
The results presented in figure 5.2 suggest that the interplay between Γ, Va, and β con-
tributes to the overall diversity in the experimental results. However, there are still two
outliers: the BH size 178 nm and 255 nm cavities, which are shifted significantly compared
to the others. Additionally, as introduced in section 3.8.4, there might also be significant
changes in the radiation patterns when the BH size is changed. If the vertical emission for
some cavities is different, it will alter the external efficiency ηe. This would lead to a shift
in the curve similar to what was observed in the LL curves of the BH size 178 nm and
255 nm cavities. Naturally, there will also be variations in the pump efficiency ηp as there
will be slight variations in how the cavity is aligned with the pump during the experiment.
The fitting parameters are summarised in table 5.2 in the subtable ’Initial fit.
5.3.2
Quantifying the non-radiative recombination decay time
Using the fitting parameters found in the previous section, LL curves for cavities with
a gap size of 128 nm are calculated and fitted to the experimental results. In the rate
equation calculations, a slightly lower Q-factor of 4000 is used, as it is expected to be
lower than the measurements on the reference cavity. Furthermore, the confinement factor
Γ is changed to correspond to what was found in the finite element simulations. Both
the measurements performed before and after passivisation are examined with the goal of
quantifying the effects of passivating the cavities. Therefore, an attempt is made to fit the
experimental data to the LL curves generated from the rate equations by only adjusting the
non-radiative decay time τnr. The fitting parameters used in this section are summarised
in table 5.2.
The results are seen in figure 5.3(a). As in the previous section, the shaded areas correspond
to the variations in the Γ and V caused by varying the BH size from 178 nm to 255 nm.
The red area is found using τnr = 1 ns, and the blue area is found when τnr = 0.1 ns.
The triangles in figure 5.3 mark the data obtained from the passivated cavities, while the
data obtained from the unpassivated cavities are marked by circles. The results suggest
that the non-radiative recombination time of carriers in the unpassivated cavities is one-
tenth of that in the passivated cavities. It should be noted that the recombination rate
could vary between devices with different BH sizes. This may be the case for the larger
unpassivated cavities, where the experimentally obtained output power is seen to be much
70
==PAGE:76==
Figure 5.3: Experimental LL curves and the theoretical predictions from the rate equation,
using the parameters found from the reference cavity fits.
For the passivated cavities
τnr = 1 ns is used, and for the unpassivated τnr = 0.1 ns.
lower than predicted by the rate equation model. It could be due to the larger unpassivated
surface area leading to more defect states, which may result in an even lower non-radiative
recombination time. The surface area was found to be important for non-radiative decay in
previous studies [59]. In conclusion, the variation in τnr explains the difference between the
passivated and unpassivated design quite well. Furthermore, the difference in τnr between
the passivated and unpassivated cavities is similar to what is found in the literature [25].
However, using the rate equation parameters from the initial fit, with a Q-factor of 4000,
the shape of the simulated LL curves does not align well with the experimental results.
In figure 5.3(b), it is found that a decrease in the Q-factor to 1000 significantly improves
the agreement between simulated and experimental LL curves.
The low Q-factors are
justified, as it was not possible to measure the Q-factors of these cavities experimentally.
Although decreasing the Q-factor yields more convincing fits, it fails to explain the observed
behaviour fully.
Despite the adjustments, a notable performance difference between the theoretical simula-
tion and the new design persists, suggesting additional factors must be accounted for. A
small change in external efficiency ηe might explain the shift in output powers. Still, the
saturation observed for the experimental results at high input and output powers deviates
from the almost linear line of the fit. This is especially pronounced for passivated cavities.
We suggest that it may be attributed to heating effects not considered directly in the rate
equation simulation. Heating, which is assumed to be significant at higher input powers,
can increase the transparency density [88]. As shown earlier in this chapter, increasing the
transparency density will lower the output power at a given input power. The discrepancy
between experimental and theoretical results may thus be explained by Ntr being depen-
dent on the input power. Considering the variation in the geometry between the reference
cavity and the cavity with a gap size of 128 nm, increased heating might be explained by
the narrower spacing between the etched holes and the nanobeam edge in the new designs.
This may lead to significantly worse heat dissipation through the nanobeam. The increased
heating of the nanobeams compared to the reference design is evident as some of the new
designs melted when pumped by a continuous source.
71
==PAGE:77==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: The experimental LL curves for some of the gap size 102 nm cavities from
the second fabrication round. These are plotted with rate equation simulations using the
parameters found from the reference fit in figure 5.2. However, the transparency density
was changed in order to achieve good agreement between the experimental and theoretical
curves.
5.3.3
Fitting to data from second fabrication round
The last fitting is performed to validate if the parameters chosen in the rate equation model
also explain the results obtained in the second fabrication round.
In the second fabrication round, the cavities with a gap size of 102 nm showed the best
performance.
Although the new chip may have different fabrication errors, the results
are fitted with the rate equation parameters found from the reference cavity in the first
fabrication round. Figure 5.4(a) shows fits of a selection of LL curves obtained in the second
fabrication round. Good fits could be achieved if the transparency density was increased
from 2·1024 m−3 to 4·1024 m−3, and if the non-radiative recombination time τnr was reduced
from 1 ns to 0.6 ns. The change in transparency density may be explained by heating, as
discussed in the previous section, as this design has very similar hole sizes compared to the
designs with a gap size of 128 nm. The reduction in the non-radiative recombination time
is justified because the passivation method used in the second fabrication round differs
from the first fabrication round. Noticeably, the non-radiative recombination rate is still
lower than for the unpassivated devices studied in the first fabrication round.
In figure 5.4, a lot of variation between the LL curves is observed. A much lower Q-factor
might explain the shape of the flatter curves.
This seems reasonable, as the Q-factor
was found to vary a lot for these cavities in the Q-factor measurements. The rest of the
variation might be explained by changes in the external efficiency ηe. This is shown in
figure 5.4(b). Here, two other experimental LL curves can be fitted by changing only the
external efficiency compared to figure 5.4(a). A summary of the fitting parameter can be
found in table 5.2.
It should be noted that the variation between the first and second fabrication rounds might
also be explained by a change in the injection efficiency ηp, rather than τnr and Ntr. The
argument for a change in injection efficiency ηp is that the alignment of the setup was
changed from when the previous measurements were done. This might lead to a slightly
different pump spot size, leading to a different pump injection efficiency ηp. In this case,
the conclusions regarding the Q- and β-factors remain the same.
72
==PAGE:78==
5.4
Discussions
The rate equation analysis revealed three factors to be crucial for the laser performance.
First, it seems that many cavities suffer from surprisingly low Q-factors. This is thought to
be the primary reason that most of the devices did not show lasing. Further studies could
be made to design devices with Q-factors that are more resilient to fabrication errors.
Secondly, it is necessary to passivate the devices.
Otherwise, the performance will be
greatly inhibited by the non-radiative recombination. Lastly, there could be issues with the
thermal performance of the devices. This was found in the experimental characterization,
and the rate equation analysis suggests that the decreasing output powers at high input
powers may be caused by the transparency density being temperature-dependent.
As discussed in the previous section, multiple parameters may be varied in the rate equation
analysis to fit the simulations to the experimental results. Due to the many parameters in
the rate equations, it is difficult to extract accurate values from the fits. All of the values
could potentially vary slightly between different cavities. However, most of the parameters
have to be fixed to prevent over-fitting. Therefore, the rate equation fitting is best used to
examine if a specific parameter can explain a difference between two LL curves. In further
studies, one could try to estimate more parameters to avoid overfitting, and obtain better
fits to the results. Experiments could be designed to obtain gain characteristics of the
BHs, and far-field simulations could be employed to estimate the external efficiency ηe.
73
==PAGE:79==
6
|
Master equation analysis
This chapter will examine whether it is feasible to obtain strong coupling between excitons
and photons in a cavity similar to the one suggested in section 3.6.4, where a buried
heterostructure is used as active material. By obtaining strong coupling, single photon
emitters may be realised. These are characterised by the anti-bunching of photons, which
is observed in small atom-like emitters [90]. Furthermore, strong coupling in nanocavities
can lead to the formation of polaritons [91].
To describe the dissipative dynamics of a coupled cavity and quantum emitter, a master
equation framework may be used. In the following sections, the Lindblad master equation
is introduced and employed numerically to model systems similar to the ones considered
in this project.
6.1
Theory of open quantum systems and master equations
In section 2.3, the Rabi model for closed quantum systems was introduced. In this section,
the open quantum system is introduced. The concepts presented in this section are based
on chapter 9 of the book Quantum Optics by Girish S. Agarwal and the QuTiP Users
Guide [92, 93]. In the following sections, the hat notation of operators is omitted.
Open quantum systems interact with the environment or a so-called bath, which will
introduce random transitions between energy levels and uncertainty in phase information.
This is modelled in a density matrix formulation, where the density matrix ρ encapsulates
the probability distribution of the possible quantum states in a system.
A master equation (ME) is used to describe the time evolution of the density matrix
in the open quantum system. In this thesis, the Lindblad master equation will be used
to study a single-emitter nanolaser numerically through the open-source software QuTiP
[93, 94]. A rigorous derivation of the Lindblad ME will not be performed. However, the
most important equations and the physical approximations used to derive them will be
explained.
In deriving master equations, the starting point is to describe the time evolution of the
density matrix by the von Neumann equation:
∂ρtot
∂t
= −i
ℏ[Htot , ρtot (t)]
(6.1)
Here, the Hamiltonian may be split into three parts:
Htot = Hsys + Henv + Hint
(6.2)
This includes the system Hamiltonian, Hsys, the Hamiltonian of the environment Henv, and
the Hamiltonian describing the interaction between the system and the environment. Even
74
==PAGE:80==
though the environment and system are regarded as one larger closed system, a distinction
between the bath and the original system is still maintained for clarity.
Performing a
partial trace over the environment in equation 6.1 eliminates the need to explicitly account
for the environmental degrees of freedom ρ = Trenv [ρtot ]. In doing so, one may obtain
a master equation describing the system’s time evolution. To obtain the Lindblad master
equation, the following assumptions are made:
1. At t = 0, there are no correlations between the system and the environment. This
means that the total density matrix may be written as the tensor product: ρI
tot (0) =
ρI(0) ⊗ρI
env (0).
2. To perform the trace over the environment, the Born approximation is used. This
assumes that the environment is much larger than the system such that the eigen-
states of the bath do not change significantly during the interaction, and that there
is only weak coupling between the system and bath, such that only the lowest order
interactions are considered, and the system and bath may be considered separable.
This may be written as ρtot(t) ≈ρ(t) ⊗ρenv.
3. The Markov approximation is also applied, assuming that the memory effects of
the environment on the system are negligible, meaning that the current state of the
system contains all the relevant information for its future evolution, and past states
do not significantly influence the dynamics. This is valid if the dynamics of the bath
are fast, such that decay in the environment is much faster than the smallest time-
scales of the system. By applying the Markov approximation, the density matrix will
only depend on the current state of the combined system.
4. The final approximation is the rotating wave approximation (RWA), which assumes
that fast-rotating terms can be neglected. This is generally terms including a†2 and
a2.
Applying these approximations, one may obtain the Lindbald master equation expressed
as:
∂ρ
∂t = −i
ℏ[H(t), ρ(t)] +
X
n
1
2
h
2Cnρ(t)C†
n −ρ(t)C†
nCn −C†
nCnρ(t)
i
(6.3)
Here, H(t) = −ℏ∆a†a + ℏg
 σ†a + a†σ

is the Jaynes Cummings Hamiltonian, where g
is the light-matter interaction coupling introduced in section 2.3, and a and a† are the
annihilation and creation operators, respectively. The coupling is expressed as [56]:
g =
q
d2ωeg/(2ℏϵ0ϵV ),
(6.4)
where d is the dipole moment, V is the mode volume, ϵ the dielectric constant, and ∆=
ωeg −ωc is the detuning between cavity mode and the electronic transitions given by the
transition operator σ = |g⟩⟨e|. This coupling constant is the same as the coupling strength
calculated numerically in chapter 3.
The sum in equation 6.3 includes the so-called Lindblad terms, which account for all
dissipative interactions between the system and the bath. Here Cn = √γnAn is the collapse
operator, which includes An. An is the operator associated with the interaction between
the bath coupled to the system. These interactions are governed by rates described by γn.
A simple example of applying the collapse operator may be measuring the position of a
75
==PAGE:81==
harmonic oscillator at a rate of γ measurements per second. This results in the collapse
operator taking the form C1 = √γ(a† + a). In the case of the single-emitter laser, the
master equation may take the form [95, 96]:
∂ρ
∂t = −i
ℏ[H, ρ] + κDa[ρ] + γDDσ†σ[ρ] + γADσ[ρ] + PDσ†[ρ]
(6.5)
Here the Lindblad terms are expressed by the superoperator D and a subscript denoting
the interaction, such that e.g. Da[ρ] = 1
2

2aρ(t)a† −ρ(t)a†a −a†aρ(t)

. In equation 6.5,
κ is the cavity decay rate linked to the Q-factor by κ = ωc/Q, and γD describes the pure
dephasing rate, governing the dephasing of the off-diagonal elements of the density matrix.
Pure dephasing is linked to phonon scattering effects. The non-radiative decay rate or
carrier decay rate is denoted γA, and P is the emitter pump rate. The pumping term is
modelled as incoherent pumping, where σ† describes the excitation caused by the coupling
to a bath of electrons leaking into the system with a rate P [97]. In this project, the
properties of the nanocavity systems are investigated by varying these parameters.
From the master equation, the mean photon number is calculated as the expectation value
in steady state:
na =
D
a†a
E
= Tr
n
a†aρss
o
(6.6)
Here ρss is the density matrix in steady state. Similarly, the populations ne and ng may be
calculated using the transition operator σ. In quantum optics, the second-order correlation
function, g(2)(τ), is used to describe the correlation between photon events in a quantum
system. It is defined as the ratio between the probability of detecting two photons at two
different times and the product of the probability of detecting a photon at each of the two
times independently [56]. In the case of the single emitter cavity system, the intracavity
g(2)(τ) function may be written as [96]:
g(2)(τ) =

a†a†(τ)a(τ)a

n2a
.
(6.7)
Here, τ is the time delay between the two-photon detection events. The correlation may
be used to characterise the photon statistics of a cavity. An important value is g(2)(0).
The interpretation of the g(2)(0) function depends on its value:
1. g(2)(0) > 1 means that the light is bunched. As the name suggests, the photons may
be detected in bunches. This means there is a higher probability of detecting two
photons simultaneously than for coherent light sources. In this case, the light displays
super-Poissonian statistics, meaning that the variance in the number of photons is
greater than the mean. For the coupled single-emitter cavity systems, this regime is
referred to as a self-quenching regime [98, 95]. Here, the number of carriers saturates
and the photon number drops.
2. g(2)(0) = 1 means that the light is coherent or classical. Photon detection events are
in this case uncorrelated. At this point, stimulated emission dominates and the line
width of the spectrum decreases [95].
3. g(2)(0) < 1 means that the light is anti-bunched.
Here, the light displays sub-
Poissonian statistics. In this case, the probability of detecting two photons simulta-
neously is lower than expected for a classical light source.
76
==PAGE:82==
In the following analysis, g(2)(0) values are found for different pump rates, and the results
will be linked to the spectrum of the emitter.
At the limit t →∞, the spectrum or the power spectral density is found as the Fourier
transform of the two-time correlation function, which in the case of the single emitter
cavity system is [93]:
S(ω) = κ
Z ∞
−∞
dτe−iωτ D
a†(t + τ)a(t)
E
.
(6.8)
From the spectrum, it is possible to identify whether the system is in a weak or strong
coupling regime. Under weak coupling, the spectrum will display one peak at the eigenfre-
quency ωeg. At strong coupling, the n’th energy level, corresponding to the n’th eigenen-
ergy, will split into two states. The resonance frequencies of the two states are determined
by the coupling constant g. The separation between the two peaks is given by the so-called
Rabi frequency:
Ωn = 2g
√
n + 1
(6.9)
Whether the system displays weak or strong coupling will depend on the decay rates in
the master equation compared to the coupling coefficient. The density matrix may be
analysed to obtain expressions for these regimes. Here, a set of coupled rate equations
that govern the decay rates may be derived. These can then be formulated in the basis of
the states of the two-level system and the possible number of photons in the cavity mode.
Linearising the rate equations around a steady-state solution and obtaining the eigenvalues
of the resulting matrix will result in an analytical criterion for achieving strong coupling.
This will be given by the magnitude of the decay rates compared to the gain rate. This
analysis may be done for a simpler system, omitting the pumping term, but initialising in
a state with just one excitation, and considering only the cavity decay rate κ, the coupling
coefficient g and a non-radiative decay term γA [99]. This results in the eigenvalues λ:
λ = −Γ,
λ = −Γ ± 1
2
p
(κ −γA)2 −16g2,
Γ = 1
2(κ + γA)
(6.10)
From the eigenvalues, the distinction between weak coupling and strong may be made
based on whether the eigenvalue returns an imaginary part, which for the simple system
happens when gc > |κ −γ|/4. However, for systems including a pump therm, this analysis
breaks down. Another way to define the onset of strong coupling is when the linewidth
observed in the spectrum is narrower than the splitting (κ+γ)/2 < 2g, or put more simply
when the coupling is larger than the decays g > (γ, κ) [100].
In this report, QuTiP is used to solve the master equation 6.5 and calculate the correlation
function and spectrum for different loss rates corresponding to cavity designs.
Based
on rates obtained through numerical and experimental results, the master equations are
used to predict whether it is possible to get strong coupling in nanobeam cavities using a
quantum well as active material.
6.1.1
QuTip methods
The master equations are solved numerically using the open-source Python software QuTiP
[93, 94].
In QuTip, operators and state vectors are defined using the quantum object
class Qobj which defines a sparse matrix representing a finite-dimensional Hilbert Space.
Hamiltonians may be constructed by combining quantum objects, and complex systems
may be represented by density matrices and state vectors. Through a few lines of code, one
77
==PAGE:83==
may perform common mathematical manipulations to the quantum object class. Examples
of this include calculating the trace Tr() or adjoint dag() of a quantum object.
The Lindblad master equation is constructed by explicitly defining the Liovillian using the
desired Lindblad terms by the QuTiP lindblad dissipator() function. When calculating the
Hamiltonian, it is important to consider a sufficiently large Hilbert space. In this project,
an analytical expression adopted from [96] is used to calculate the size of the Hilbert space
based on rate equations derived from equation 6.5. Using this method, the Hilbert space
is limited to only the necessary size, and the calculations are performed faster. To ensure
that the Hilbert space is large enough for a given calculation, it is checked that the photon
population of the highest state is lower than 10−6.
The steady state for the Liouvillian is solved using the steadystate call, and equation 6.6
is used to calculate the mean photon number. The intracavity second order correlation
function g(2)(τ) may be calculated as in equation 6.7. Finally, the spectrum is calculated
as in equation 6.8. In practice, the QuTiP spectrum() function is used. Using the function,
a sufficiently large time window is used in the Fourier transform in equation 6.8.
6.2
Results
The overall purpose of the master equation analysis is to examine the quantum properties
of the coupled emitter cavity system similar to the one designed in section 3.6.4, where a
buried heterostructure is used as active material. Here, it was found that the fundamental
and second-order transition energies could be separated to a level comparable to quantum
dots.
Now, this quantum emitter design is studied further to determine whether it is
feasible to achieve strong coupling and lasing in such a device. This section is split in
three. First, we investigate how changing the different rates in equation 6.5 affects the light-
matter interaction. Secondly, a condition for strong coupling is introduced, and finally, the
spectrum of a weakly and strongly coupled system is examined for varying pump rates.
Here the evolution of the system is related to the g(2)(0) correlation function.
The rates in the Lindblad master equation 6.5 are varied around values found in the
previous studies presented in this thesis. The coupling strength g is found from the analysis
in section 3.6.1, where finite element simulations were conducted to calculate the overlap
between the optical and electronic modes. The cavity decay rate κ is also determined
from the optical finite element simulations, where the Q-factor was found. The carrier
decay rate, γA, is the same as used for the rate equation fits for the experimental results
presented in chapter 5. The pump power used in the experiments can be converted to an
equivalent pump rate P. From the rate equation fits, the pump rate density is found from
the injection term, which is also stated in equation 5.4:
P
V = Ppumpηp
hνpV
(6.11)
By multiplying with the volume of the active material, the following pump rates are found:
At a pump power of -10dBm, the pump rate is 1.22 THz, and at 10dBm it is 122 THz for
a BH size of 50 nm
It is assumed that the system exhibits zero detuning ∆= 0, which results in the strongest
possible coupling. This is the case when the emitter transition frequency is the same as
the cavity transition frequency. In experiments, this may be achieved by changing the
material composition of the quantum well [44] or the temperature of the cavity, as the
emitter transition redshifts when heated, while the cavity resonance frequency only varies
78
==PAGE:84==
Figure 6.1: Figure (a): The spectrum for an emitter at different Q-factors with g = 0.02
THz. Figure (b): The spectrum for an emitter at different coupling strengths with Q =
1200.
slightly [101]. In most of the following analyses, the pure dephasing rate, γD, is set to
zero. However, the effects of introducing pure dephasing are investigated briefly later in
this chapter.
The rates used in the following results are presented in table 6.1. If a rate is changed or
varied it will be written explicitly in the following paragraphs.
Param.
g [THz]
κ [THz]
Q = ωc/κ
γA [THz]
γD [THz]
∆[THz]
P [THz]
Value
0.02
0.164
1200
0.001
0
0
0.001
Table 6.1: The parameters used in the QuTiP master equation calculations.
6.2.1
Examining the loss rates and coupling strength
In this section, the effects of varying the rates are investigated. From figure 6.1(a) it is
observed that the Q-factor is important for the light-matter interaction. If the Q-factor
is too low, there will not be strong coupling, as in the case of Q = 1000 and Q = 2000.
However, as the Q-factor increases, the photon lifetime increases, thereby increasing the
light-matter interaction, and strong coupling may be observed as the spectrum displays
two peaks by rabi-splitting.
Similarly, the effects of changing the coupling strength are examined in figure 6.1(b). For
a cavity with a Q-factor of 1200, strong coupling is observed when the coupling strength
is above g = 0.04 THz. Furthermore, it is observed that the increased coupling strength
leads to increased Rabi splitting Ωr as expected.
The influence of the carrier decay rate γA is seen in figure 6.2(a). Here, it is observed that
the carrier decay rate does not change the form of the spectrum significantly, as long as
the rate is much smaller than the optical decay rate κ, which for this figure is κ = 0.1
THz. However, larger carrier decay rates lead to a slightly lower emission intensity, which
is expected as fewer carriers may be used to produce photons. Furthermore, if the carrier
decay rate is on the order of the optical decay rate γa ∼κ, the maximum intensity drops
79
==PAGE:85==
Figure 6.2: The spectrum at a Q-factor of 2000 and g = 0.1 THz for different carrier
decay rates is shown in figure (a). In figure (b), the spectrum is shown for different pure
dephasing rates γD.
significantly. If the decay rate is large enough, there will be no strong coupling as seen
for γa = 0.5 THz. At this level, carrier decay becomes the main inhibiting factor for the
light-matter coupling instead of optical decay. The effect of introducing the pure dephasing
γD is shown in figure 6.2. Pure dephasing leads to a broadening of the spectrum and the
suppression of strong coupling if it is large enough, similar to what is seen for the carrier
decay γa. However, an important distinction is that higher pure dephasing does not lead
to lower intensities. This is because pure dephasing introduces fluctuations in the phase
relationships of the system, affecting the off-diagonal elements of the density matrix.
6.2.2
A condition for strong coupling
Having examined how the different rates affect the spectrum of the single-emitter cavity
system, we introduce a conservative condition for strong coupling. Such conditions were
briefly discussed in the previous section, and based on this system, a conservative condition
for strong coupling is chosen 2g ≥κ. This condition assumes that the carrier decay rate γA,
and dephasing rates γD are much smaller than κ, which is true for the cases studied in this
section, where the quality factor is sufficiently large. Using this criterion, the necessary Q-
factor for a given coupling strength is presented in figure 6.3(a). In the parameter space,
three points are highlighted. The orange and blue points fulfil the condition for strong
coupling given by 2g = κ. The last purple point marks the parameters of the current
alternative cavity design presented in section 3.6.4. Here a Q-factor of 1200 and coupling
constant g = 0.03 THz was obtained through finite element simulations. The spectra for
these three cases are compared in figure 6.3(b).
For the blue case, the coupling strength g is lower, and thus, the splitting of the peaks
is smaller. However, the splitting is still visible because the Q-factor is sufficiently large,
such that the strong coupling regime is reached. For the orange case, the splitting is larger
due to the larger coupling strength. Now, the larger coupling strength compensates for the
lower Q-factor. However, if both the Q-factor and coupling strength are low, there will be
no strong coupling, as seen for the purple case, which corresponds to the alternative design.
From this, it can also be seen that for the alternative design to reach the strong coupling
80
==PAGE:86==
Figure 6.3: In figure (a), the condition of 2g = κ is plotted. On the line and in the green
area, Q-factors are high enough to reach strong coupling. This can also be observed from
the spectrum of blue and orange points. The spectrums of these three cases are plotted in
figure (b). Rabi splitting is here observed in two of the cases.
regime, either the Q-factor or the coupling strength needs to be improved by a factor of
3. However, optimising and changing the central geometry is likely to improve the optical
mode volume of the device, leading to a better coupling strength. The optimised cavities
with a significantly larger gap size displayed g ∼0.2 THz. Furthermore, the alternative
design has not been optimised to the same degree as the other cavity. It is therefore likely
that the Q-factor could also be significantly improved.
6.2.3
Examining the lasing threshold
In this last section, the spectrum of a weak and a strong coupled system is examined for
varying pumping rates. This is done to study when lasing is achieved and to investigate
how the correlation function behaves in different pumping regimes. Studies have shown
that single-emitter systems can achieve a lasing regime at moderate pumping rates. How-
ever, when the pumping is further increased, the system will stop lasing and enter the
self-quenching regime [95, 98, 96]. In this section, it will be examined how the system
parameters influence the onset of these different regimes.
In figure 6.4, the spectra of two systems are shown as a function of the pump rate. In
figure 6.4(a), the parameters of the alternative cavity are used and in figure 6.4(b), a
higher Q-factor is used, such that a strong coupling regime is achieved. The other rates
are not varied and are set to the values stated in table 6.1. In figure 6.4(b), the Rabi
splitting is seen, but only at lower pumping rates. When the pumping rate is increased,
the linewidth decreases, and the device have entered the lasing regime. When the pumping
rate is increased even further, the linewidth broadens again, indicating the onset of the
self-quenching regime. For the low Q and g device, no splitting is seen, and the onset of
self-quenching happens at much lower pumping powers.
The onset of the lasing regime and self-quenching regimes can also be seen from the g(2)(0)
correlation function. This is shown in figure 6.5. The lasing regime onset is at pump rates
where g(2)(0) ≈1. The quenching regime begins when the correlation function begins to
approach g(2)(0) ≈2. It is also observed how the photon number na drastically increases
in the lasing regime and that the carrier number ne saturates in the quenching regime. For
the low Q-device, the correlation function goes directly from 0 to 2, and there is only a
81
==PAGE:87==
Figure 6.4: The spectrum at pump rates corresponding to the ones used in the experimental
studies. Figure (a): A weakly coupled cavity with parameters similar to the alternative
design with Q = 1200 and g = 0.03 THz. Figure (b): The spectrum of a strongly coupled
cavity with Q = 12000 and g = 0.03 THz. The other rates are shown in table 6.1.
Figure 6.5: The correlation function g(2)(0), the mean photon number na and carrier
numbers ne, for the 2 designs as examined in figure 6.4 at pump rates corresponding to
the ones used in the experimental studies.
82
==PAGE:88==
Figure 6.6: The g(2)(0) correlation function as a function of the pump rate is shown for
varying Q-factors on the left and varying coupling strengths on the right.
slight increase in the photon number na. The photon number is also observed to be almost
two magnitudes lower in this case. This means that if either the Q-factor or coupling
constant is too low, the device will go directly to self-quenching without lasing, as is seen
for the alternative cavity design.
The threshold of lasing and quenching may now be examined for different systems with
varying Q-factors and coupling strengths. This is done by comparing the correlation func-
tion g(2)(0) as a function of the pump rate P. The results are shown in figure 6.6. Here,
it is observed that when the Q-factor increases, the lasing threshold will lower and more-
over, as the coupling strength increases, the quenching threshold increases. It may also be
deduced that the condition for having a clear lasing regime where g(2)(0) ∼1 is stricter
than the conservative strong coupling condition of 2g ≥κ. In figure 6.6, the orange lines,
corresponding to either Q=12000 in figure (a) or g = 0.3 THz in figure (b), both show a
narrow lasing regime where g(2)(0) ∼1. The lasing regime is also observed in figure 6.4(b)
as the narrowing of the linewidth near P = 0.1 THz in the spectrum.
For both of the orange lines in figure 6.6, the relation between the coupling strength and
optical decay rate is g/2 ≃κ. For comparison, it is noted that for the blue lines in figure
6.6, the coupling strength and optical decay are almost equal, g ≤κ, and no stagnation at
g(2)(0) ≈0 is observed. Therefore, it seems that to achieve lasing in the cavities studied
here, one must have g/2 ≥κ, yielding a four times stricter condition for lasing than for
strong coupling. If the Q-factor is improved and lasing is achieved, it will be at a very
low threshold. For the Q=12000 device in figure 6.6(a), the threshold is at approximately
P = 0.02 THz, which is much lower than the lowest input power used in the experimental
section, which was roughly P = 1 THz. The very low threshold of these types of systems
was also one of the main findings of Mu and Savage, who first proposed the concept of
one-atom lasers [95].
Another interesting non-classical regime is when anti-bunching g(2)(0) < 1 is found from
the simulations, meaning that single photon emitters might be realisable for these systems.
From figure 6.6, it would seem that the cavity with the worst Q-factor and coupling strength
shows significant anti-bunching as g(2)(0) ≈0. This, however, is a misinterpretation as it
is a result of the low number of photons emitted from such a cavity. To better determine if
these cavities are viable as single photon sources, one should also study the time dependence
of the second-order correlation function g(2)(τ), as it should both be less than one at τ = 0
83
==PAGE:89==
but also increase as a function of τ. Furthermore, in the analysis, it is assumed that there
is only one emitter and thereby one electron in the system. Depending on the dimension
of the active material in the final design, the accuracy of this approximation will have to
be considered, as the actual system consists of a small quantum well. Here, it will be
possible for two electrons to be excited at the same time, which will lead to an increase
in g(2)(0).
Further analysis of the single photon characteristics and properties such as
indistinguishability needs to be examined before it can be determined if the emitter is a
viable source for certain quantum information applications.
6.3
Discussions
Returning to the alternative cavity design, it is concluded that to get strong coupling
and lasing, the cavity design must have either a three times larger Q-factor or coupling
strength g than what was found for the initial alternative design. However, by optimising
and changing the central geometry, it is possible to improve the mode volume of the device.
This will lead to a higher coupling strength. Furthermore, the alternative design has not
been optimised to the same degree as the other cavity. It is therefore likely that the Q-
factor could also be significantly improved. An increase in either Q or g by a factor of three
thus seems very feasible. However, to achieve lasing for this cavity, the designs need to be
improved drastically as the condition for lasing is much stricter than for strong coupling.
Overall, there is a lot of potential for further studies and exploration of similar nanobeam
designs as strong coupling is within reach for the theoretical design. Further theoretical
studies could investigate the single photon properties of this and more advanced systems.
To physically realise the type of designs studied theoretically in this chapter, fabrication
techniques must advance in order to achieve feature sizes down to 10 nm in III-V materials.
84
==PAGE:90==
7
|
Conclusion and discussion
In this thesis, a novel design that combines the nanobeam cavity with the buried het-
erostructure was proposed to address scalability problems with the current quantum emit-
ter designs. Through theoretical and experimental investigations, it was examined if the
new design could match the performance of existing solutions based on quantum dots.
This work concludes that the combined nanobeam BH design is a good candidate for a
deterministically fabricable device displaying both excellent temporal and spatial optical
confinement and electronic properties similar to that of single quantum dots. Throughout
the thesis, multiple challenges regarding the realisation of these designs have been ad-
dressed. This section serves to round up the discussions, summarising the most important
results and findings and suggesting further areas of research related to this work.
The first part of this project was dedicated to finite element simulations conducted to
optimise different cavity designs in the optical and electrical domains. Through simulations
in the optical domain, it was found that small changes in the overall geometry could
significantly alter the optical performance, in particular, the wavelength and the Q-factors
of the devices. We proposed novel nanobeam designs with simulated Q-factors of up to
106 and mode volumes down to 0.2 (λ/n)3. The optimisation studies suggested a trade-
off causing the Q-factor to decrease exponentially for decreasing mode volumes. It was
shown that adjustments to the central geometry were particularly important for achieving
good spatial confinement, while changes to the mirror section of the cavities only improved
Q-factors.
The electronic simulations showed that the central geometry significantly affects the carrier
wavefunctions and energies for gap sizes smaller than the BH size.
Thus, the central
geometry of the cavities studied in this work is important because it will determine both
the electronic properties and the optical confinement. Based on the calculated joint carrier
wave function and the electromagnetic field, a method for calculating the coupling strength
was implemented, and coupling strengths of up to ∼150 µeV were obtained in the new
designs. In future designs, this may be increased by enhancing the optical confinement of
the cavities. Particular attention should be given to the central geometry, and systematic
optimisation approaches such as topology optimisation studies could be employed.
Related to these studies, simulations were conducted to design a geometry with a buried
heterostructure displaying a separation between exciton energy levels to a point similar
to quantum dots. The so-called alternative cavity displayed a separation between the two
first exciton energies of 36 meV. This is comparable to that of quantum dots at telecom
wavelengths, making the BH structures a compelling alternative to QDs and this marks an
important milestone in developing a deterministic quantum emitter. However, there might
be several difficulties with fabricating this design. The smallest feature sizes are only 10 nm,
and furthermore, the experimental investigations of the larger designs revealed problems
with aligning the cavity to the BH. This may be even more problematic for the smaller BH
sizes. Finally, the theoretical Q-factor for the proposed design is only approximately 1000,
85
==PAGE:91==
but further optimisation may be performed to increase this. Therefore, the theoretically
high energy separation is unlikely to be observed experimentally before efforts are made
to refine the current fabrication techniques.
It would be of great interest to do more
systematic design optimisations to learn what is theoretically possible. In this context,
it would be valuable to fabricate such a design to learn more about the main fabrication
limitations and adapt the designs to these.
In the last part of the project, the alternative design was studied in the framework of master
equations. Here, it was concluded that an increase in the Q-factor or a reduction of the
mode volume by a factor of three would be necessary to reach strong coupling. Compared
to the theoretical Q-factors and mode volumes found in the other cavity designs, obtaining
such values should be feasible by further optimisation of the cavities. These devices also
have the potential for lasing at a very low threshold. However, the condition for achieving
lasing was four times stricter than for strong coupling. Further studies could build on the
results and investigate the photon statistics of the sources to determine whether they are
viable as single photon sources.
The experimental studies conducted in this project provided valuable insight into the char-
acteristics of the new designs. These studies also showed that the fabricated devices might
perform very differently from what would be expected from the simulations. One of the
main conclusions was that the Q-factor decreased significantly, as the measured Q-factor
never exceeded 9000 for any of the devices. This was believed to be caused by the rough-
ness of the sidewalls. Nevertheless, it was concluded that the new design could perform
on par with the reference design, displaying similar lasing thresholds and maximum out-
put powers. This is an important result, as the new designs had a theoretical Q-factor of
105, significantly lower than the 106 predicted in the reference cavities, suggesting that it
may be more favourable to find ways of increasing the confinement factor rather than the
Q-factor. However, the studies revealed that new designs might be more susceptible to fab-
rication errors, as the results were less consistent. Therefore, future design studies should
focus on examining how to make the Q-factor of the devices more robust to roughness and
fabrication errors rather than achieving excessively large Q-factors.
The experimental results were studied through the rate equation framework, where in-
put/output curves were compared to simulations. It was suggested that the new nanobeam
designs suffer from heating effects, which may decrease the output power significantly. It
is proposed that the performance of the devices might be improved by shrinking the size
of the holes in the nanobeam, which would not alter the theoretical Q-factor of the de-
vices significantly but improve thermal conductivity. In this regard, experiments could be
conducted to quantify the thermal performance of the devices for varying hole sizes in the
mirror section.
The rate equation simulations also suggested that different devices display varying external
efficiencies.
This was also indicated by the far-field simulations performed in Comsol.
However, the far-field simulations may be improved to include effects such as roughness,
oxide or passivation layers to study this further. This might make the far-field simulation
more helpful in predicting the actual behaviour of the fabricated devices, and simulations
may even be used to estimate the external efficiency of devices in future rate equation
studies.
One of the main results of this work is that some of the new devices showed signs of las-
ing after passivation. As the cavity designs lead to etching through the BH and thereby
exposure of the quantum well to air, recombination effects were thought to be detrimental
to the output characteristics of the designs. However, passivation drastically increased the
performance of the devices by reducing the non-radiative recombination rate. It may there-
86
==PAGE:92==
fore be concluded that it is feasible to define the geometry of the buried heterostructure
by etching while retaining decent output characteristics of the devices if passivated.
This thesis presents the passivated nanobeam cavity using a buried heterostructure as an
active material as a promising alternative to cavity designs utilising quantum dots. The
novel designs allow for deterministic placement of the emitter-cavity systems with the
ability to integrate them into photonic circuits. Theoretically, it was shown that with the
so-called alternative cavity design, the BH would display QD-like exciton energy separa-
tion, and the emitter-cavity system might also display strong coupling and lasing with
further improvements. The trade-off between good temporal and spatial optical confine-
ment persists as a challenge in designs where geometrical features are needed to restrict
the carrier wavefunctions spatially.
Furthermore, to experimentally realise the design,
fabrication techniques must be improved to achieve smaller feature sizes and reduce the
effects of surface roughness. Nonetheless, with the suggested further studies, the passivated
BH nanobeam designs could become the new standard for next-generation nanophotonic
devices.
87
==PAGE:93==
8
|
Bibliography
[1] M. M. Waldrop, “The chips are down for moore’s law,” Nature, vol. 530, pp. 144–147,
Feb. 2016.
[2] N. Harris, “Viewpoint:
Moore’s law isn’t broken – it’s overheated.” https://
www.theengineer.co.uk/viewpoint-moores-law-lightmatter/, 2020.
[3] A. Hazari, “Electronics are about to reach their limit in processing power—but
there’s a solution.” https://qz.com/852770/theres-a-limit-to-how-small-we-
can-make-transistors-but-the-solution-is-photonic-chips/,
2017.
Ac-
cessed: 2023-09-28.
[4] S. Matsuo, T. Sato, K. Takeda, A. Shinya, K. Nozaki, H. Taniyama, M. Notomi,
K. Hasebe, and T. Kakitsuka, “Ultralow operating energy electrically driven photonic
crystal lasers,” Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 19, pp. 4900311–4900311,
07 2013.
[5] D. A. B. Miller, “Attojoule optoelectronics for low-energy information processing and
communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 346–396, 2017.
[6] T. Aoki, R. Kubota, S. Yoshimoto, M. Yanagisawa, T. Ishizuka, and H. Shoji, “High-
speed vcsel arrays for 400 gbit/s data center interconnects,” SEI Technical Review,
no. 90, p. 71 – 75, 2020.
[7] A. Ross and L. Christie, “Energy consumption of ict.” https://post.parliament.uk/
research-briefings/post-pn-0677/, 2022. Accessed: 2023-09-07.
[8] E. Dimopoulos, M. Xiong, A. Sakanas, A. Marchevsky, G. Dong, Y. Yu, E. Semenova,
J. Mørk, and K. Yvind, “Experimental demonstration of a nanolaser with a sub-mua
threshold current,” Optica, vol. 10, pp. 973–976, Aug 2023.
[9] P. Lodahl, S. Mahmoodian, and S. Stobbe, “Interfacing single photons and single
quantum dots with photonic nanostructures,” Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 87,
pp. 347–400, May 2015.
[10] Y. Arakawa and M. J. Holmes, “Progress in quantum-dot single photon sources for
quantum information technologies: A broad spectrum overview,” Applied Physics
Reviews, vol. 7, p. 021309, 06 2020.
[11] G. Moody et al., “2022 Roadmap on integrated quantum photonics,” JPhys Photon-
ics, vol. 4, no. 1, 2022.
[12] M. Saldutti, M. Xiong, E. Dimopoulos, Y. Yu, M. Gioannini, and J. MÃ¸rk, “Modal
properties of photonic crystal cavities and applications to lasers,” Nanomaterials,
vol. 11, no. 11, 2021.
[13] G. Kountouris, L. Vestergaard, A. S. Darket, and E. V. Denning, “A lithographically-
defined quantum dot with sub-wavelength confinement of light.” arXiv.
[14] M. Saldutti, M. Xiong, E. Dimopoulos, Y. Yu, M. Gioannini, and J. Mørk, “Modal
properties of photonic crystal cavities and applications to lasers,” Nanomaterials
(Basel), vol. 11, Nov. 2021.
88
==PAGE:94==
[15] S. Hu and S. M. Weiss, “Design of photonic crystal cavities for extreme light concen-
tration,” ACS Photonics, vol. 3, pp. 1647–1653, 9 2016.
[16] A. Gondarenko, S. Preble, J. Robinson, L. Chen, H. Lipson, and M. Lipson, “Sponta-
neous emergence of periodic patterns in a biologically inspired simulation of photonic
structures,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 96, no. 14, pp. 29–32, 2006.
[17] M. Albrechtsen, B. V. Lahijani, R. E. Christiansen, V. T. H. Nguyen, L. N.
Casses, S. E. Hansen, N. Stenger, O. Sigmund, H. Jansen, J. Mørk, and S. Sto-
bbe, “Nanometer-scale photon confinement in topology-optimized dielectric cavities,”
Nature Communications, vol. 13, 2022.
[18] P. B. Deotare and M. Loncar, Photonic Crystal Nanobeam Cavities, pp. 2060–2069.
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2012.
[19] Nobel
Prize
Outreach
AB
2023,
“Press
release.
nobelprize.org.”
https://
www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/2023/press-release.
Accessed:
dec-
2023.
[20] M. Gschrey, F. Gericke, A. Schüßler, R. Schmidt, J.-H. Schulze, T. Heindel, S. Rodt,
A. Strittmatter, and S. Reitzenstein, “In situ electron-beam lithography of deter-
ministic single-quantum-dot mesa-structures using low-temperature cathodolumines-
cence spectroscopy,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 102, p. 251113, 06 2013.
[21] A. Dousse, L. Lanco, J. Suffczyński, E. Semenova, A. Miard, A. Lemaître, I. Sagnes,
C. Roblin, J. Bloch, and P. Senellart, “Controlled light-matter coupling for a single
quantum dot embedded in a pillar microcavity using far-field optical lithography,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 101, p. 267404, Dec 2008.
[22] A. Sakanas, “Buried heterostructure photonic crystal lasers,” PhD Thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2019.
[23] K. Nozaki and T. Baba, “Carrier and photon analyses of photonic microlasers by two-
dimensional rate equations,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 1411–1416, 2005.
[24] M. Takiguchi, H. Sumikura, M. Danang Birowosuto, E. Kuramochi, T. Sato,
K. Takeda, S. Matsuo, and M. Notomi, “Enhanced and suppressed spontaneous emis-
sion from a buried heterostructure photonic crystal cavity,” Applied Physics Letters,
vol. 103, no. 9, pp. 2–6, 2013.
[25] B. Jacob, F. Camarneiro, J. Borme, O. Bondarchuk, J. B. Nieder, and B. Romeira,
“Surface passivation of iii-v gaas nanopillars by low-frequency plasma deposition of
silicon nitride for active nanophotonic devices,” ACS Applied Electronic Materials,
vol. 4, pp. 3399–3410, 7 2022.
[26] L. Zhou, B. Bo, X. Yan, C. Wang, Y. Chi, and X. Yang, “Brief review of surface
passivation on iii-v semiconductor,” Crystals, vol. 8, no. 5, 2018.
[27] J. Lægsgaard, “Introduction to dielectric waveguides, lecture notes for course 34041,”
2021.
[28] P. Trøst Kristensen, K. Herrmann, F. Intravaia, and K. Busch, “Modeling electro-
magnetic resonators using quasinormal modes: Erratum,” Advances in Optics and
Photonics, vol. 13, no. 4, p. 834, 2021.
[29] P. T. Kristensen, C. V. Vlack, and S. Hughes, “Effective mode volumes for leaky
optical cavities,” AIP Conference Proceedings, vol. 1398, pp. 100–102, 2011.
[30] P. T. Kristensen and S. Hughes, “Modes and mode volumes of leaky optical cavities
and plasmonic nanoresonators,” ACS Photonics, vol. 1, pp. 2–10, 2014.
89
==PAGE:95==
[31] M. Saldutti, Y. Yu, and J. Mørk, “The threshold of semiconductor nanolasers,” arXiv,
2023.
[32] D. L. Andrews, Scientific Foundations , Technology Nanophotonic Structures and
Materials. John Wiley and Sons Inc, 2015.
[33] T. Suhr, N. Gregersen, K. Yvind, and J. Mørk, “Modulation response of nanoLEDs
and nanolasers exploiting Purcell enhanced spontaneous emission,” Optics Express,
vol. 18, no. 11, p. 11230, 2010.
[34] C. P. Dietrich, A. Fiore, M. G. Thompson, M. Kamp, and S. Höfling, “GaAs in-
tegrated quantum photonics: Towards compact and multi-functional quantum pho-
tonic integrated circuits,” Laser and Photonics Reviews, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 870–894,
2016.
[35] J. Joannopoulos, S. Johnson, J. Winn, and R. Meade, Photonic Crystals: Molding
the Flow of Light - Second Edition. Princeton University Press, 2011.
[36] P. Lalanne, C. Sauvan, and J. P. Hugonin, “Photon confinement in photonic crystal
nanocavities,” Laser and Photonics Reviews, vol. 2, pp. 514–526, dec 2008.
[37] E. Kuramochi, E. Grossman, K. Nozaki, K. Takeda, A. Shinya, H. Taniyama, and
M. Notomi, “Systematic hole-shifting of l-type nanocavity with an ultrahigh q factor,”
Opt. Lett., vol. 39, pp. 5780–5783, Oct 2014.
[38] P. R. Villeneuve, S. Fan, J. D. Joannopoulos, K. Lim, G. S. Petrich, L. A.
Kolodziejski, and R. Reif, “Air-bridge microcavities,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 67,
pp. 167–169, 07 1995.
[39] J. S. Foresi, P. R. Villeneuve, J. Ferrera, E. R. Thoen, G. Steinmeyer, S. Fan, J. D.
Joannopoulos, L. C. Kimerling, H. I. Smith, and E. P. Ippen, “Photonic-bandgap
microcavities in optical waveguides,” Nature, vol. 390, pp. 143–145, Nov 1997.
[40] P. B. Deotare, M. W. McCutcheon, I. W. Frank, M. Khan, and M. Lončar, “High
quality factor photonic crystal nanobeam cavities,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 94,
p. 121106, 03 2009.
[41] NSM archive, “Inp - indium phosphide - basic parameters at 300 k.” https:
//www.ioffe.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/InP/basic.html. Accessed: oct-2023.
[42] A. Gondarenko, S. Preble, J. Robinson, L. Chen, H. Lipson, and M. Lipson, “Sponta-
neous emergence of periodic patterns in a biologically inspired simulation of photonic
structures,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 96, p. 143904, Apr 2006.
[43] H. Choi, M. Heuck, and D. Englund, “Self-similar nanocavity design with ultrasmall
mode volume for single-photon nonlinearities,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 118, p. 223605,
May 2017.
[44] L. Coldren, S. Corzine, and M. Mashanovitch, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated
Circuits. Wiley Series in Microwave and Optical Engineering, Wiley, 2012.
[45] R.
Paschotta,
“Non-radiative
transitions.”
RP
Photonics
Encyclope-
dia,
Oct
2010.
Available
online
at
https://www.rp-photonics.com/
non_radiative_transitions.html.
[46] D. Meyaard, G.-B. Lin, J. Cho, and E. Schubert, “9 - efficiency droop in gallium
indium nitride (gainn)/gallium nitride (gan) leds,” in Nitride Semiconductor Light-
Emitting Diodes (LEDs) (J. Huang, H.-C. Kuo, and S.-C. Shen, eds.), pp. 279–300,
Woodhead Publishing, 2014.
[47] M. Kuno, Introductory Nanoscience: Physical and Chemical Concepts, ch. Density
of states. CRC Press, 2011.
90
==PAGE:96==
[48] P. Prabhakaran, W. J. Kim, K.-S. Lee, and P. N. Prasad, “Quantum dots (qds) for
photonic applications,” Opt. Mater. Express, vol. 2, pp. 578–593, May 2012.
[49] D. Barettin, J. Houmark, B. Lassen, M. Willatzen, T. R. Nielsen, J. Mørk, and
A. P. Jauho, “Optical properties and optimization of electromagnetically induced
transparency in strained InAs/GaAs quantum dot structures,” Physical Review B -
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, vol. 80, dec 2009.
[50] R. V. Melnik and M. Willatzen, “Bandstructures of conical quantum dots with wet-
ting layers,” Nanotechnology, vol. 15, pp. 1–8, jan 2004.
[51] M. Gawełczyk, M. Syperek, A. Maryński, P. Mrowiński, Dusanowski, K. Gawarecki,
J. Misiewicz, A. Somers, J. P. Reithmaier, S. Höfling, and G. Sek, “Exciton life-
time and emission polarization dispersion in strongly in-plane asymmetric nanos-
tructures,” Physical Review B, vol. 96, no. 24, pp. 1–11, 2017.
[52] M. Gawełczyk, “Atypical dependence of excited exciton energy levels and electron-
hole correlation on emission energy in pyramidal InP-based quantum dots,” Scientific
Reports, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[53] D. C. Agrawal, Introduction to Nanoscience and Nanomaterials. WORLD SCIEN-
TIFIC, 2013.
[54] D. J. Griffiths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (2nd Edition). Pearson Prentice
Hall, 2nd ed., Apr. 2004.
[55] COMSOL AB, “Comsol multiphysics ® version 6.1.” https://comsol.com. Accessed:
sep-2023.
[56] C. Gerry and P. Knight, Introductory Quantum Optics. Cambridge University Press,
2004.
[57] J. Robertson, Y. Guo, and L. Lin, “Defect state passivation at III-V oxide interfaces
for complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor devices,” Journal of Applied Physics,
vol. 117, p. 112806, 03 2015.
[58] J. Robertson and L. Lin, “Bonding principles of passivation mechanism at III-V-oxide
interfaces,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 99, p. 222906, 11 2011.
[59] C. C. Chang, C. Y. Chi, M. Yao, N. Huang, C. C. Chen, J. Theiss, A. W. Bush-
maker, S. Lalumondiere, T. W. Yeh, M. L. Povinelli, C. Zhou, P. D. Dapkus, and
S. B. Cronin, “Electrical and optical characterization of surface passivation in gaas
nanowires,” Nano Letters, vol. 12, pp. 4484–4489, 9 2012.
[60] A. Sarangan, “5 - nanofabrication,” in Fundamentals and Applications of Nanopho-
tonics (J. W. Haus, ed.), pp. 149–184, Woodhead Publishing, 2016.
[61] COMSOL AB, “Comsol multiphysics wave optics.”
https://doc.comsol.com/
6.1/docserver/#!REF:%252Fcom.comsol.help.woptics%252Ftoc.xml:RES:
res_toc_82405980.html. Accessed: nov-2023.
[62] Lotta,
“Antenna radiation pattern - near field to far field transformation.”
https://verkotan.com/2021/antenna-radiation-pattern-near-field-to-far-
field-transformation/, 2021. Accessed: Dec. 27, 2023.
[63] O. M. Ramahi, “Near-and far-field calculations in fdtd simulations using kirchhoff
surface integral representation,” 1997.
[64] N. V. Anyutin, K. I. Kurbatov, I. M. Malay, and M. A. Ozerov, “Algorithm for
transforming antenna electromagnetic near-field measured on spherical surface into
far-field based on direct calculation of stratton and chu formulas,” Radioelectronics
and Communications Systems, vol. 62, pp. 109–118, 3 2019.
91
==PAGE:97==
[65] F. Binkowski, F. Betz, R. Colom, M. Hammerschmidt, L. Zschiedrich, and S. Burger,
“Quasinormal mode expansion of optical far-field quantities,” Physical Review B,
vol. 102, 7 2020.
[66] K. Tanaka, N. Kotera, and H. Nakamura, “Estimation of electron effective mass
in ingaas/inalas multi-quantum well structures using photocurrent spectroscopy,”
Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 309–311, 1999. New Phenomena in
Mesoscopic Structures.
[67] S. Stobbe, J. M. Hvam, and P. Lodahl, “On the interpretation of wave function
overlaps in quantum dots,” physica status solidi (b), vol. 248, no. 4, pp. 855–858,
2011.
[68] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song, and S. Noda, “High-q photonic nanocavity in a
two-dimensional photonic crystal,” Nature, vol. 425, pp. 944–947, Oct 2003.
[69] E. Kuramochi, E. Grossman, K. Nozaki, K. Takeda, A. Shinya, H. Taniyama, and
M. Notomi, “Systematic hole-shifting of L-type nanocavity with an ultrahigh Q fac-
tor,” Optics Letters, vol. 39, no. 19, p. 5780, 2014.
[70] M. Albrechtsen, B. Vosoughi Lahijani, and S. Stobbe, “Two regimes of confinement
in photonic nanocavities: bulk confinement versus lightning rods,” Optics Express,
vol. 30, no. 9, p. 15458, 2022.
[71] R. H. Jarbøl and V. C. Bille-Lauridsen, “Experimental characterization of nanocavity
lasers, eksperimentel karakterisering af nanokavitets lasere,” Bachelor Thesis, DTU,
2021.
[72] M. W. McCutcheon, D. E. Chang, Y. Zhang, M. D. Lukin, and M. Loncar, “Broad-
band spectral control of single photon sources using a nonlinear photonic crystal
cavity,” arXiv: Quantum Physics, 3 2009.
[73] T. Nakamura, Y. Takahashi, Y. Tanaka, T. Asano, and S. Noda, “Improvement in
the quality factors for photonic crystal nanocavities via visualization of the leaky
components,” Optics Express, vol. 24, no. 9, p. 9541, 2016.
[74] R. Ohta, Y. Ota, M. Nomura, N. Kumagai, S. Ishida, S. Iwamoto, and Y. Arakawa,
“Strong coupling between a photonic crystal nanobeam cavity and a single quantum
dot,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 98, no. 17, 2011.
[75] R. L. Moon, G. A. Antypas, and L. W. James, “Bandgap and lattice constant of
gainasp as a function of alloy composition,” Journal of Electronic Materials, vol. 3,
pp. 635–644, Aug 1974.
[76] F. Wang, R. E. Christiansen, Y. Yu, J. Mørk, and O. Sigmund, “Maximizing the
quality factor to mode volume ratio for ultra-small photonic crystal cavities,” Applied
Physics Letters, vol. 113, no. 24, 2018.
[77] A. N. Babar, T. A. S. Weis, K. Tsoukalas, S. Kadkhodazadeh, G. Arregui,
B. Vosoughi Lahijani, and S. Stobbe, “Self-assembled photonic cavities with atomic-
scale confinement,” Nature, vol. 624, pp. 57–63, Dec 2023.
[78] S. K. Borregaard and A. H. Dubré, “Nanolasers based on extreme confinement of
light, nanolasere baseret på ekstrem lokalisering af lys,” Master’s Thesis, DTU, 2023.
[79] S. Sze and M. Lee, Semiconductor Devices: Physics and Technology, 3rd Edition:
Physics and Technology. Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.
[80] E. Dimopoulos, A. Sakanas, A. Marchevsky, M. Xiong, Y. Yu, E. Semenova, J. Mørk,
and K. Yvind, “Electrically-driven photonic crystal lasers with ultra-low threshold,”
Laser and Photonics Reviews, vol. 16, 11 2022.
92
==PAGE:98==
[81] Gdspy’s Documentation, “Gdspy’s documentation - gdspy 1.6.13 documentation.”
https://gdspy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/. Accessed: nov-2023.
[82] H. Sano, G. Mizutani, and S. Ushioda, “Dipole radiation-pattern from surface
adsorbed dye molecules - effects of surface-roughness,” Surface Science, vol. 223,
pp. 621–631, DEC 1989.
[83] M. Galli, S. L. Portalupi, M. Belotti, L. C. Andreani, L. Faolain, and T. F. Krauss,
“Light scattering and Fano resonances in high-Q photonic crystal nanocavities,” Ap-
plied Physics Letters, vol. 94, p. 071101, 02 2009.
[84] U. Fano, “Effects of configuration interaction on intensities and phase shifts,” Phys.
Rev., vol. 124, pp. 1866–1878, Dec 1961.
[85] R. Hui and M. O’sullivan, “Chapter 2 - basic mechanisms and instrumentation
for optical measurement,” in Fiber-Optic Measurement Techniques (Second Edition)
(R. Hui and M. O’sullivan, eds.), pp. 137–295, Academic Press, second edition ed.,
2023.
[86] M. Eichhorn and M. Pollnau, “The q-factor of a continuous-wave laser,” in Conference
on Lasers and Electro-Optics 2012, p. JW2A.29, Optical Society of America, 2012.
[87] J. Jaramillo-Fernandez, E. Chavez-Angel, R. Sanatinia, H. Kataria, S. Anand,
S. Lourdudoss, and C. M. Sotomayor-Torres, “Thermal conductivity of epitaxially
grown inp: experiment and simulation,” CrystEngComm, vol. 19, pp. 1879–1887,
2017.
[88] Y. Barbarin, E. A. J. M. Bente, G. Servanton, L. Mussard, Y. S. Oei, R. Nötzel, and
M. K. Smit, “Gain measurements of fabry-perot inpingaasp lasers using an ultrahigh-
resolution spectrometer,” 2006.
[89] M. Bass, E. W. V. Stryland, D. R. Williams, and W. L. Wolfe, Handbook of Op-
tics Volume II Devices, Measurements, and Properties 2nd edition.
McGraw-Hill
Professional, 1995.
[90] H. Carmichael and L. A. Orozco, “Single atom lases orderly light,” Nature, vol. 425,
no. 6955, pp. 246–247, 2003.
[91] I. A. M. Al-Ani, K. As’ham, O. Klochan, H. T. Hattori, L. Huang, and A. E. Mirosh-
nichenko, “Recent advances on strong light-matter coupling in atomically thin tmdc
semiconductor materials,” Journal of Optics, vol. 24, p. 053001, apr 2022.
[92] G. Agarwal, Quantum Optics. Quantum Optics, Cambridge University Press, 2013.
[93] J. Johansson, P. Nation, and F. Nori, “Qutip: An open-source python framework
for the dynamics of open quantum systems,” Computer Physics Communications,
vol. 183, no. 8, pp. 1760–1772, 2012.
[94] J. Johansson, P. Nation, and F. Nori, “Qutip 2: A python framework for the dynam-
ics of open quantum systems,” Computer Physics Communications, vol. 184, no. 4,
pp. 1234–1240, 2013.
[95] Y. Mu and C. M. Savage, “One-atom lasers,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 46, pp. 5944–5954,
Nov 1992.
[96] M. Bundgaard-Nielsen, E. V. Denning, M. Saldutti, and J. Mørk, “Stochastic ap-
proach to the quantum noise of a single-emitter nanolaser,” Physical Review Letters,
vol. 130, 6 2023.
[97] H. Haken, Laser Theory. Springer-Verlag, 1984.
[98] E. Del Valle and F. P. Laussy, “Regimes of strong light-matter coupling under in-
coherent excitation,” Physical Review A - Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics,
vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 1–21, 2011.
93
==PAGE:99==
[99] J. Mørk and E. Grovn, “34051 ln-qed cavity quantum electrodynamics,” Technical
University of Denmark Course 34051 Lecture note, 2023.
[100] G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, M. Kira, S. W. Koch, and A. Scherer, “Vacuum rabi
splitting in semiconductors,” 2006.
[101] M. Lermer, N. Gregersen, F. Dunzer, S. Reitzenstein, S. Höfling, J. Mørk,
L. Worschech, M. Kamp, and A. Forchel, “Bloch-wave engineering of quantum dot
micropillars for cavity quantum electrodynamics experiments,” Phys. Rev. Lett.,
vol. 108, p. 057402, Jan 2012.
[102] M. Mondry, D. Babic, J. Bowers, and L. Coldren, “Refractive indexes of (al,ga,in)as
epilayers on inp for optoelectronic applications,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters,
vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 627–630, 1992.
[103] H. Dinges, H. Burkhard, R. Lösch, H. Nickel, and W. Schlapp, “Refractive indices of
inalas and ingaas/inp from 250 to 1900 nm determined by spectroscopic ellipsometry,”
Applied Surface Science, vol. 54, pp. 477–481, 1992.
94
==PAGE:100==
A
|
Appendix A: Finite element sim-
ulations
This appendix presents convergence tests for the finite element simulations performed
in Comsol and details on the calculation of the effective refractive index. Furthermore,
symmetry considerations regarding the field profile in the optical domain are presented,
and other modes found in both the optical and electronic domains are shown. Finally,
multiple parameter space sweeps are presented. These were used to optimise the cavities
to high Q and Γ factors.
A.1
Effective refractive index calculations
This value was calculated using equation A.1. The values of the refractive index found in
the literature of the respective materials ni and their thickness ti [102, 103]. The values
are stated in table A.1.
neff =
P
i niti
P
i ti
= 3.29
(A.1)
A.2
Convergence tests
Convergence tests are performed in both the optical and electronic simulations. The fol-
lowing subsections detail this.
A.2.1
Comsol simulations: Optical domain
Three convergence parameters were used for the convergence test of the optical simulations.
The length of the domain Ld, the width of the domain in the y and z directions Wd and
the mesh size. The maximal mesh element size is 1550/hm nm, and the minimum size is
Material
Refractive index ni
Thickness ti
GaInAsP
3.25
8.1 nm
AlInGaAs
3.36
22.6 nm
InAlAs
3.23
20 nm
Table A.1: The values used to calculate the effective refractive index. The refractive indices
of the different materials are found in the literature [102, 103].
95
==PAGE:101==
Ld/2
Wd/2
W/2
Wd/2
Figure A.1: Mesh used in optical simulations
1550/(5 hm) nm, where hm is the mesh parameter. An example of the mesh can be seen
in figure A.1.
The results of the convergence tests can be seen in figure A.2. From these results, the
following parameters were chosen for most of the simulations in the main text: Wd = 3000
nm, Ld = 20000 nm and hm = 6. At these parameter values, the results converged to a
satisfactory degree. However, it was found that for determining the very high Q-factors
of the reference cavity acuratly, a much finer mesh was needed. Here the mesh in the
nanobeam was set to hm = 25, and the mesh in the domain was made coarser.
A.2.2
Comsol simulations: Electronic domain
In the electronic domain, convergence tests were performed on the mesh element size and
the domain size. The mesh is constructed to be finer in the quantum well domain. The
mesh is seen in figure A.3. The mesh is defined from a mesh parameter variable. The
variable represents the largest element size in nm in the quantum well domain, while
the smallest element size is meshparameter/5. In regions outside the quantum well, the
element size is five times larger than in the quantum well region. Thus, a small mesh
parameter corresponds to a fine mesh.
A sweep on the mesh parameter and the relative difference in eigenenergy compared to the
finest mesh is shown in figure A.3(b). It is noted that for the calculations on the overlap, a
fine mesh with a mesh parameter of 3.5 was required, as the mesh affected the field profiles.
In the calculation of the eigenenergy, a courser mesh could be used.
In figure A.4, a domain size convergence test is performed for a cavity with BH sidelengths
of 200 nm. It does not make sense to perform calculations on domain sizes smaller than
the size of the BH. It is seen that only a slightly larger domain size compared to the BH
size is required for the results to converge.
96
==PAGE:102==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.2: Convergence test for three different parameters on three different extracted
values of the optical simulations. Figure (a) is for a cavity with a gap size of 84 nm, and
figure (b) is for the 128 nm gap size structure. The mesh parameter is varied from 1,
which corresponds to a coarser mesh up to 12, corresponding to a very fine mesh. The
domain size is also varied. On the y-axis is the relative error of the Q-factor, wavelength
and confinement factor compared to the final point. The scaling on the y-axis varies.
97
==PAGE:103==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.3: (a): The mesh used in the electronic simulations with a mesh parameter of 3.5.
The walls are hidden to show the inner quantum well domain. (b): A sweep on the mesh
parameter and the change in eigenenergy compared to the finest calculated mesh with a
mesh parameter of 3.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.4: Domain size tests on the electronic simulations. The BH size is set to 200 nm
for these simulations. It is seen that only a slightly larger domain size compared to the
BH size is required for the results to converge.
A.3
Symmetry
Knowing the symmetry of the electric field components can be used to speed up the Comsol
calculations and simplify the calculation of the coupling constant.
The electric field is calculated for the entire geometry in Comsol without symmetry con-
siderations. The results for each electric field component can be seen in figure A.5. The
Ex component is observed to be anti-symmetric along the x-axis and the y-axis. The Ey
component is symmetric in all directions. The Ez component is anti-symmetric along the
y-axis. It was additionally observed to be antisymmetric along the z-axis. However, this
axis is not shown in the figure.
98
==PAGE:104==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.5: Top view of the electrical field components. (a) shows the Ex component, (b)
shows the Ey component and (c) shows the Ez component.
99
==PAGE:105==
A.4
Other modes
A.4.1
Optical domain
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.6: The spatial mode profile for 3 other modes. These are not the modes that are
optimized for in the main text.
This section shows the other modes found from the optical simulation with a Q-factor of
around 1000. These modes are all from the reference cavity. The modes in figure A.6(b) and
(c) were found to be degenerate in the simulations with the other mode being mirrored
across the y-axis. This is likely due to the numerics. The degenerate modes probably
constitute a single symmetric mode. These modes were also found to be sensitive to the
nanobeam length.
100
==PAGE:106==
A.4.2
Electronic domian
This section presents other modes in the electronic simulations for two different BH sizes.
The probability density |Ψ|2 of the electron wavefunction at z = 0 are shown in figure
A.7. It is seen that the degeneracy is lifted when the air holes penetrate the BH. The
wavefunction of the holes has similar shapes, but due to the different effective masses, it
is slightly different. Their wavefunctions are not shown in this report. Furthermore, it is
seen that some of the wavefunctions are slightly asymmetrical.
BH_size = 70 nm
BH_size = 200 nm
Ψ 2
1
m3
Ψ 2
1
m3
Figure A.7: Other modes in the electronic simulation. Field profiles of the electron wave-
function |Ψ|2. When the air holes penetrate the BH, the degeneracy is lifted.
101
==PAGE:107==
A.5
Parameter dependence around optimum
On the following 2 pages, the parameter space for a roughly optimised 102 nm gap size
cavity is shown. Here it is observed how everything that would increase the Q-factor also
lowers the wavelength.
102
==PAGE:108==
103
==PAGE:109==
A.6
Fabricated devices, first fabrication
Due to an error in the Comsol configuration, the first devices were fabricated with sub-
optimal parameters. The parameters are stated in table A.2. Compared to the optimal
parameters reported in table 3.3, it is only the tapering ftap and scalexy at larger BH sizes
that area different.
Gapsize
a
w
r
f_tap
squish_r
squish_a
scalexy
102
622
630
0.35a
0.59-0.74
0.75
0.9
1.065-0.88
128
610
630
0.33a
0.64-0.77
0.75
0.9
0.99-0.86
150 Reference
420
640
110
0.8
1
1
1
Table A.2: The geometrical parameters for the three sub-optimal cavity designs fabricated
in the first fabrication round. The range in tapering and scalexy indicate how the design
should be changed when the BH size is varied from 50 nm to 300 nm.
104
==PAGE:110==
B
|
Appendix B: Fabrication and ex-
perimental results
This appendix first presents the fabrication process flow, and afterwards, the procedure of
selecting the cavities with the best hole radius correction and BH-shift are presented
B.1
Fabrication process flow
The fabrication process flow is sketched in figure B.1.
Figure B.1: The process flow for the fabrication. Reprinted from [78]
105
==PAGE:111==
Figure B.2: Three different fabrication corrections for radius sizes and 9 different BH
placements were examined. The smallest radii correction and a shift of the BH in the y
direction resulted in the highest output powers. The measurements for the 128 nm design
were performed on BH size 230. The measurements for the 102 nm design were performed
on BH size 175 nm.
B.2
Fabrication error experiment
In this section, the method of selecting the cavities with the best hole radius correction
and BH-shift are presented in the first and second fabrication rounds.
B.2.1
First fabrication round
From the results presented in figure B.3, it was decided that further measurements were
performed on devices with device number 8. This corresponds to a radius correction of 6%
and a BH shift slightly upwards of 25 nm. It was hard to define any correlation between
BH shifts and output power, but this type of device generally showed high output powers.
B.2.2
Second fabrication round
From the results summarized in figure B.3 it was decided that further measurements be
performed on devices with device number 3, showing the highest output power.
This
corresponds to a radius correction of Rf = 0.96Rd, and a BH offset of [−25 nm, 0 nm].
The BH offset only made a noticeable difference for the 102 nm gap size designs. The gap
size 102 nm devices performed significantly better in the second round of fabrication.
The devices were compared at an input power of 5 dBm, which was not the maximum
input power. This was done to prevent heating effects which were seen to decrease the
maximum output power when exposed to high pumping power for more than a couple of
seconds.
After the second fabrication round, multiple devices were characterised. Some selected
curves were shown in the main text underlining the main takeaways. In figure B.4, we
present all the LL-curves obtained from devices fabricated in the second fabrication round.
B.3
Other modes seen in the Q-factor measurements
When finding the Q-factor of the passive devices multiple other dips were found. In the nu-
merical simulations, no other significant modes were observed in the nanobeams, however,
the measurements suggest otherwise. In figure B.5(a), the spectrum of a reference cavity
106
==PAGE:112==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.3: Second fabrication round. The smallest radius correction showed wavelengths
closest to the designed wavelength. The highest output power was achieved for BHs that
were not shifted significantly. The measurements were performed for BHs with side lengths
of 270 nm.
(a)
(b)
Figure B.4: All obtained LL curves in the second fabrication round. Figure (a) shows
devices with a gap size of 102 nm, while figure (b) shows devices with a gap size of 128
nm. No LL curves were obtained for the reference cavities, as they showed very low output
power.
107
==PAGE:113==
(a)
(b)
Figure B.5: Full spectra of cavities found from the Q measurements. (a): A reference cavity
from the first fabrication round before passivation. The main resonance dip is hardly seen,
but multiple other modes are seen by dips in the spectrum. (b): A cavity with a gap
size of 40 nm from the second fabrication round. A clear fano shape is seen at the lasing
wavelength, but multiple wider dips are seen at other wavelengths.
is shown. The main resonant wavelength predicted in Comsol was hardly found for this
cavity, however, it was possible to measure it from other cavities. This suggests a variation
from device to device. Furthermore, multiple small dips are observed. This suggests that
broadband light is coupled into other modes. In figure B.5(b), the spectrum of a cavity
with a gap size of 102 nm from the second fabrication round is shown. A clear fano shape
is seen at the lasing wavelength, however, multiple other modes are seen with very low Q
factors.
B.4
Second fabrication round: Visual inspections of the chip
(a)
(b)
Figure B.6: Microscope images of the devices fabricated in the second fabrication round,
magnified 20x. (a): Devices with a gap size of 102 nm. (b): Reference cavities. Changes
to the thickness of InP or the passivation layer may cause variations in the colour.
During the Q-factor measurements, it is speculated that local variations in the thickness of
InP affect the performance of the devices. Visual inspections through the microscope show
vastly different colours of the surface, which may translate to different InP thicknesses or
108
==PAGE:114==
variations in the thickness of the passivation layer. In figure B.6 a 20x objective is used to
image the passive devices with a gap size of 102 nm and reference cavities. The reference
cavities in figure B.6(b) are situated close to the edge of the wafer, where the thickness of
InP may vary.
To inspect the structural effects of passivation, SEM images were obtained after passivation.
Unfortunately, facets were found around the holes, which are expected to significantly
impact the performance of the devices. A SEM image is shown in figure B.7. It is speculated
that the devices showing good lasing performance and high Q-factors do not have significant
fabrication errors at the central holes. Further SEM imaging can verify this.
Figure B.7: A Nanobeam image captured after passivation during fabrication in the second
fabrication round. Facets are seen at the holes.
109
==PAGE:115==
C
|
Appendix C: Scripts
In this chapter, some of the scripts used for the numerical simulations are presented. The
other scripts and Comsol files used in this project are available upon request.
C.1
Rate equation simulations:
The implementation of the rate equation simulations is a slightly adapted version of the
one used by the authors in a previous project [71]. The steady-state solutions are found
for a given set of parameters, for the initial conditions N = 1m−3 and Np = 1m−3. An
example of the results is shown in figure C.1. It is here seen that both N and Np reach
steady values. The final value of Np in the given time span is used to calculate the output
power by equation 5.6. By looping over different pump powers L/L curves are generated.
Figure C.1: An example of a numerical solution to the rate equation. It is seen that both
N and Np reach a steady state. The value of Np at the end of the time span is extracted
and used to calculate the output power.
Below is one of the scripts used to do the numerical calculations and simulation of the rate
equations in Matlab. The calculation for figure 5.2(b) is used as an example.
1
Array1=csvread('20231210 _gap40_Vact_sizes .csv' ,5);
2
Array2=csvread('20231210 _gap60_Vact_sizes .csv' ,5);
3
Array3=readmatrix('20231210 _ref_Vact_sizes .csv','NumHeaderLines ' ,5);
4
Va40 = Array1 (1:5:end , 5);
5
Va60 = Array2 (1:5:end , 5);
6
Varef = Array3 (1:5:end , 5);
7
BH =50:25:300
110
==PAGE:116==
8
9
namelist =['170';'190';'210';'230';'250';'260';'270';'280']
10
11
x={}
12
lambdav ={}
13
y={}
14
15
N=size(namelist ,1);
16
for i=1:N
17
folder=append('pas_LINE_r99_BH_ ', namelist(i,:));
18
fullpath=fullfile(path ,folder ,filename);
19
data=readtable(fullpath);
20
x(i) = {data {: ,1} -2};
21
lambdav(i)
= {data {: ,2}};
22
y(i)
= {data {: ,3}};;
23
BHactlist(i)=BHact(str2num(namelist(i,:)));
24
end
25
26
27
28
global V Gamma
lambda
beta
29
30
dB = -10:10
31
Variables_Ref () %Function
setting
all global
parameters
32
Gammav=linspace (0.018 ,0.035 ,N);
33
hold on
34
Vactfact=linspace(Varef (6),Varef(end -1),N);
35
36
betav =[0.05
0.13 0.3]
37
betac=colororder(gray (4))
38
for j=1:3
39
i=6;
40
V=9* BHactlist(i)^2*10^( -27)*Vactfact(i);
41
Gamma=Gammav(i)*9/51;
42
lambda=mean(lambdav{i}) *10^( -9);
43
beta=betav(j);
44
%Calls
function 'Scurve ()' for
calculating
the LL -curve for the given
input
dBms
45
Pdbm=Scurve(dB);
46
plot(dB , Pdbm ,'-',
'LineWidth ',3,color=betac(j,:))
47
end
48
49
function
Pdbm=Scurve(Pumpdbm)
50
global h c lambda Vm I tau_p
eta_e eta Q beta QMax g0 Ntr Imax
Gamma
tau_nr Pp
51
N0=1;
52
Np0 =1;
53
Y0(1)=N0;
54
Y0(2)=Np0;
55
Prange =10.^(0.1* Pumpdbm)/1000;
56
tau_p=Q*lambda /(2* pi*c);
57
Tspan =[0 ,1]*10^( -8);
58
for
i=1: length(Prange)
59
Pp = Prange(i);
60
[T,Y] = ode15s(@rate_eq_log_opt4 ,Tspan ,Y0 ,[],eta ,beta);
61
Np(i)=Y(end ,2);
62
N(i)=Y(end ,1);
63
64
[val ,time ]=min(abs(Y(:,2) -0.999* Np(i)));
65
Tspan =[0,T(time)*2];
66
end
67
P=Np*h*c*Vm*eta_e /( lambda*tau_p);
111
==PAGE:117==
68
Pdbm =10* log10(P*1000);
69
70
function dy = rate_eq_log4(t,y,eta ,beta)
71
global I Gamma q V tau_r
tau_nr
tau_p vg g0 Ntr Pp h
72
73
c=299792458;
74
lambdap =980*10^( -9);
75
nu_p=c/lambdap;
76
77
Pumping_spot_size =9*300*300*10^( -27);
78
79
gain=g0*log(y(1)/Ntr);
80
dy(1) = eta*Pp/(h*nu_p* Pumping_spot_size )-y(1)/tau_r -y(1)/tau_nr -vg*gain*y
(2);
81
%dy(1) = eta*Pp/(h*nu*V)-y(1)/tau_r -y(1)/tau_nr -vg*gain*y(2);
82
dy(2) = (Gamma*vg*gain -1/ tau_p)*y(2)+Gamma*beta*y(1)/tau_r;
83
y(1);
84
dy=dy ';
Code Listing C.1: Example of a script used for the rate equation simulations.
C.2
Master equation simulations
Below are a few examples of the scripts used to run the master equation simulations in
Python. The scripts import the ME class which is an implementation of the master equation
calculations written by Matias Bundgaard. This class is based on the qutip package.
1
from
me_module
import *
2
import
numpy as np
3
import
qutip as qt
4
import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
5
import
matplotlib as mpl
6
7
#Our design
parameters
8
g = 0.03 #Light -matter
coupling in units of 1/ps
9
k = 0.193 #Cavity
decay
rate in units of 1/ps Ved Q=1000
10
gamma_D = 0 #Pure
dephasing
rate un units of 1/ps
11
gamma_A = 0.0015 #Emitter
decay
rate (non -radiative) in units of 1/ps
12
p = 0.001 #Pump rate of emitter in units of 1/ps
13
detuning = 0 #Detuning of emitter
and cavity in units of 1/ps
14
15
#Frequencies
for
emission
spectrum
16
wrng = np.linspace ( -0.1 ,0.1 ,100)
17
spec = m. emission_spectrum (wrng)
18
19
#%%
20
fig ,ax = plt.subplots (1,1, figsize =(4.5 ,2.25))
21
ax.semilogy(wrng ,spec ,"r-")
22
23
#%%
24
#Loop over Ps to calculate
emission
spectra
25
Z1 = []
26
for p in Ps:
27
m = ME(g,k,p,gamma_A ,detuning ,gamma_D)
28
spec = m. emission_spectrum (wrng)
29
Z1.append(np.abs(spec/np.max(spec)))
30
#%%
31
#Loop over Ps to calculate
emission
spectra
112
==PAGE:118==
32
k = 0.193/12 #Cavity
decay
rate in units of 1/ps Ved Q=12000
33
g=0.03
34
Z2 = []
35
for p in Ps:
36
m = ME(g,k,p,gamma_A ,detuning ,gamma_D)
37
spec = m. emission_spectrum (wrng)
38
Z2.append(np.abs(spec/np.max(spec)))
Code Listing C.2: Script for calculating emission spectrum as a function of the pump rate
as in figure 6.4
1
from
me_module
import *
2
import
numpy as np
3
import
qutip as qt
4
import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
5
import
matplotlib as mpl
6
7
#Our design
parameters
8
g = 0.03 #Light -matter
coupling in units of 1/ps
9
k = 0.193 #Cavity
decay
rate in units of 1/ps Ved Q=1000
10
gamma_D = 0 #Pure
dephasing
rate in units of 1/ps
11
gamma_A = 0.0015 #Emitter
decay
rate (non -radiative) in units of 1/ps
12
p = 0.001 #Pump rate of emitter in units of 1/ps
13
detuning = 0 #Detuning of emitter
and cavity in units of 1/ps
14
15
Qv=np.array ([1200 ,12000])
16
kv =193/ Qv
17
gv=np.array ([0.03 ,0.03])
18
19
#Loop over 10 values of k and
calculate
g2tau for each
value
20
for j in range(0,len(kv)):
21
k=kv[j]
22
Q=Qv[j]
23
g=gv[j]
24
for i,p in enumerate(Ps):
25
m = ME(g,k,p,gamma_A ,detuning ,gamma_D)
26
nas[i],nes[i],_ = m.populations ()
27
g2s[i] = m.g2()
28
ax [0]. semilogx(Ps ,g2s ,color=colors[j],linewidth =4)
29
ax [1]. semilogx(Ps ,nas ,label=f"g={g:.2f} THz , Q={int(round(Q,
-2)):.0f}
",color=colors[j],linewidth =4)
30
ax [2]. semilogx(Ps ,nes ,color=colors[j],linewidth =4)
Code Listing C.3: Script for calculating second-order correlation, function photon, and
carrier numbers as in figure 6.5
1
import
time
2
import
numpy as np
3
import
qutip as qt
4
from os import
getcwd
5
cwd = getcwd ()
6
class ME():
7
def
__init__(self ,g,k,p,gamma_A ,detuning ,gamma_D):
8
#Define
parameters
9
10
#Light
matter
coupling
11
self.g = g
12
13
#Cavity
decay
rate
113
==PAGE:119==
14
self.k = k
15
16
#Pump rate
17
self.p = p
18
19
#Pure
dephasing
rate (population
conserving)
20
self.gamma_D = gamma_D
21
22
#Detuning of cavity and
emitter
23
self.detuning = detuning
24
25
#Non -radiative
decay
rate of emitter
26
self.gamma_A = gamma_A
27
28
#Anlytical
expressions
for
maximum
number of photons:
29
print('g: ' + str(self.g)+' k: '+str(self.k)+' gam: '+str(self.
gamma_D)+' p: '+str(self.p)+' gamma_a: '+str(self.gamma_A))
30
self.F = 4* self.g**2/( self.k+self.p+self.gamma_D+self.gamma_A)
31
self.ne = (3* self.F*self.p + self.F*self.k + self.F*self.gamma_A +
self.p*self.k + self.k*self.gamma_A - np.sqrt(self.F**2* self.p
**2 + 6* self.F**2* self.p*self.k - 2* self.F**2* self.p*self.
gamma_A + self.F**2* self.k**2 + 2* self.F**2* self.k*self.gamma_A
+ self.F**2* self.gamma_A **2 - 2* self.F*self.p**2* self.k + 2*
self.F*self.p*self.k**2 + 2* self.F*self.k**2* self.gamma_A + 2*
self.F*self.k*self.gamma_A **2 + self.p**2* self.k**2 + 2* self.p*
self.k**2* self.gamma_A + self.k**2* self.gamma_A **2))/(4* self.F
*( self.p + self.gamma_A))
32
self.na = -(self.F*self.ne + self.p*self.ne +self.gamma_A*self.ne -
self.p)/( self.F*(2* self.ne -1))
33
34
#Determine
Hilbert
size from
analytical
expression (check
anyways)
35
self.H_size = self.Hilbertsize ()
36
print('Init
hilbert
size: {size:d}'.format(size=self.H_size))
37
38
#Establish
liouvillian
39
self.H, self.a,self.sm = self. get_Hamiltonian_and_basis ()
40
self.L = self.liouvillian ()
41
42
def
Hilbertsize(self):
43
#Calculate
hilbersize
assuming
photons
are
poisson
distributed.
44
45
#Population of upper
state
46
pop = 100
47
48
#Whole
number for
poisson
distribution
49
k = int(self.na)
50
if k == 0:
51
return 15
52
else:
53
while pop > 10**( -7):
54
pop = np.exp(k*np.log(self.na)-self.na -k*np.log(k)+k)
55
k += 10
56
return k
57
58
59
def
liouvillian(self):
60
#Establish
liouvillian
61
L = -1j*(qt.spre(self.H) - qt.spost(self.H)) + \
62
self.k*qt. lindblad_dissipator (self.a) + \
63
self.gamma_D*qt. lindblad_dissipator (self.sm.dag()*self.sm)+ \
64
self.p*qt. lindblad_dissipator (self.sm.dag())+\
65
self.gamma_A*qt. lindblad_dissipator (self.sm)
114
==PAGE:120==
66
67
return L
68
69
70
def
rho_ss_calc(self):
71
L = self.liouvillian ()
72
self.rho_ss = qt.steadystate(L,method='eigen ')
73
return
self.rho_ss
74
75
76
def
populations(self):
77
#Calculate
steady
state
populations
78
try:
79
rho_ss = self.rho_ss
80
except
AttributeError :
81
self.rho_ss_calc ()
82
rho_ss = self.rho_ss
83
84
na = (self.a.dag()*self.a*rho_ss).tr()
85
ne = (self.sm.dag()*self.sm*rho_ss).tr()
86
ng = (self.sm*self.sm.dag()*rho_ss).tr()
87
return na ,ne ,ng
88
89
90
def g2(self):
91
#Calculate g2(0)
92
93
#Try if rho_ss is already
calculated
94
try:
95
out = (self.a.dag()*self.a.dag()*self.a*self.a*self.rho_ss).tr
()
96
norm = (self.a.dag()*self.a*self.rho_ss).tr()
97
return out/norm **2
98
99
#If not
calculate
rhoss
100
except
AttributeError :
101
self.rho_ss_calc ()
102
out = (self.a.dag()*self.a.dag()*self.a*self.a*self.rho_ss).tr
()
103
norm = (self.a.dag()*self.a*self.rho_ss).tr()
104
return out/norm **2
105
106
107
108
109
def
highest_photon (self):
110
#Calculate
population of highest
photon
state.
111
#Try if rhoss is defined
112
try:
113
N = self.H_size
114
a_max = qt.tensor(qt.fock (2 ,0),qt.fock(N,N-1)) + qt.tensor(qt.
fock (2,1),qt.fock(N,N-1))
115
return (a_max.dag()*self.rho_ss*a_max).tr()
116
except
AttributeError :
117
self.rho_ss_calc ()
118
N = self.H_size
119
a_max = qt.tensor(qt.fock (2 ,0),qt.fock(N,N-1)) + qt.tensor(qt.
fock (2,1),qt.fock(N,N-1))
120
return (a_max.dag()*self.rho_ss*a_max).tr()
121
122
123
115
==PAGE:121==
124
def
emission_spectrum (self ,wrng):
125
#Calculate
emission
spectrum
from
stady
state.
126
t0 = time.time ()
127
S = self.k * qt.spectrum(self.L,wrng ,[], self.a.dag(),self.a)
128
print('Spec took: ' +str(time.time ()-t0))
129
return S
130
131
132
def g2_tau(self ,taus):
133
#Calculate g2(tau)
134
135
t0 = time.time ()
136
try:
137
rho0 = self.rho_ss
138
except
AttributeError:
139
self.rho_ss_calc ()
140
rho0 = self.rho_ss
141
142
n = qt.mesolve(self.L, rho0 , taus , [], [self.a.dag() * self.a]).
expect [0]
143
G2 = qt. correlation_3op_1t (self.L, rho0 , taus , [], self.a.dag(),
self.a.dag()*self.a, self.a)
144
self.g2_tau = G2 / (n[0] * n)
145
print('g2(tau) took: ' +str(time.time ()-t0))
146
return np.real(self.g2_tau)
147
148
149
def
get_Hamiltonian_and_basis (self):
150
#Defining
operators
151
N = self.H_size
152
#Sigma
operator (emitter)
153
sm = qt.tensor(qt.destroy (2),qt.identity(N))
154
#Cavity
operator
155
a = qt.tensor(qt.identity (2),qt.destroy(N))
156
H = (-self.detuning)*a.dag()*a + self.g*(sm.dag()*a + a.dag()*sm)
157
return H,a,sm
Code Listing C.4: Module for Master equation simulations written by Matias Bundgaard
116
