==PAGE:1==
'78:LQGDQG(QHUJ\6\VWHPV
5LVNDOORFDWLRQLQUHQHZDEOHSRZHU
SXUFKDVHDJUHHPHQWV
/LGLD)HUUDQGR/HRQ
'78:LQG0
-DQXDU\
==PAGE:2==
'78:LQG0
-DQXDU\
(&76
(GXFDWLRQ0DVWHURI6FLHQFH
6XSHUYLVRUV
/HVOLD0DULH-HDQQH00LWULGDWL
$QGUHD.ULVWLQH*ORSSHQ-RKQVHQ
'78:LQG	(QHUJ\6\VWHPV
5HPDUNV
7KLVUHSRUWLVVXEPLWWHGDVSDUWLDO
IXOILOOPHQWRIWKHUHTXLUHPHQWVIRU
JUDGXDWLRQLQWKHDERYHHGXFDWLRQDW
WKH7HFKQLFDO8QLYHUVLW\RI'HQPDUN
7HFKQLFDO8QLYHUVLW\RI'HQPDUN
'HSDUWPHQWRI:LQG(QHUJ\
)UHGHULNVERUJYHM
5RVNLOGH
'HQPDUN
ZZZYLQGHQHUJLGWXGN
$XWKRU
/LGD)HUUDQGR/HRQ
7LWOH
5LVNDOORFDWLRQLQUHQHZDEOHSRZHU
SXUFKDVHDJUHHPHQWV
'78:LQG	(QHUJ\6\VWHPVLVDGHSDUWPHQWRI
WKH7HFKQLFDO8QLYHUVLW\RI'HQPDUNZLWKDXQLTXH
LQWHJUDWLRQRIUHVHDUFKHGXFDWLRQLQQRYDWLRQDQG
SXEOLFSULYDWHVHFWRUFRQVXOWLQJLQWKHILHOGRIZLQG
HQHUJ\2XUDFWLYLWLHVGHYHORSQHZRSSRUWXQLWLHV
DQGWHFKQRORJ\IRUWKHJOREDODQG'DQLVK
H[SORLWDWLRQRIZLQGHQHUJ\5HVHDUFKIRFXVHVRQ
NH\WHFKQLFDOVFLHQWLILFILHOGVZKLFKDUHFHQWUDOIRU
WKHGHYHORSPHQWLQQRYDWLRQDQGXVHRIZLQG
HQHUJ\DQGSURYLGHVWKHEDVLVIRUDGYDQFHG
HGXFDWLRQDWWKHHGXFDWLRQ
==PAGE:3==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Acknowledgements
To my supervisors, for the personal and professional development.
To Javi, for Mondays.
To my friends, my danish family.
To my family, for always believing in me.
i
==PAGE:4==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Abstract
A Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) is conceived as a ﬁnancial risk measure for energy
projects. The possibility of securing revenue streams as well as enhancing a better ﬁnanc-
ing of projects has awaken strong interest in the renewable energy industry. Nonetheless,
the inherent uncertainties associated with natural resources and ﬂuctuation of the wholesale
market price jeopardize an optimal estimation of the contract pricing scheme.
This thesis addresses an optimization problem of a renewable corporate PPA that estimates,
under speciﬁc contract conﬁgurations, the optimal pricing interval for negotiation. With a
special focus on the economic feasibility of the producer, the oﬀtaker economic requirements
are limiting factors. The simulation model is designed according to a practical case featuring
an oﬀshore wind farm as the seller, and a green hydrogen plant as the buyer.
Accounting for both perspectives, the seller aiming at revenues maximization, and the buyer
at electricity cost minimization, a feasible negotiation range is achieved. Therefore, the risk
attitude of each participant is allocated having the corresponding impact on the price ac-
cording to the conﬁguration.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Project Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Research Questions & Contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Reader’s Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
PPA Market Review
6
2.1
Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
PPA Market Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
PPA Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
PPA Contract Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
PPA Classiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
PPA Uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
PPA Risk Qualiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Problem Description
14
3.1
System Conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
System Participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
System Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
System Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Problem Formulation
18
4.1
Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Base Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2.1
Upper Level Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2.2
Lower Level Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.1
Variable Payment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.2
Speciﬁc Delivery Proﬁle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Numerical Analysis
27
5.1
Inputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Scenario Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Optimization Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Results & Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4.1
Fixed Payment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4.2
Variable Payment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
iii
==PAGE:6==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
5.4.3
Speciﬁc Delivery Proﬁle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion
43
7
Future Works
44
Abbreviations
45
Nomenclature
46
List of Figures
47
List of Tables
47
References
48
Appendix
51
iv
==PAGE:7==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
1
Introduction
This chapter outlines the project’s scope by introducing the topic and objectives. It states
the research questions elaborating on the corresponding contributions through the chosen
methodology.
1.1
Background
The utter need of decarbonisation of the energy industry has prompted a rapid growth rate
of the integration of Renewable Energy Systems (RES) expected to be from 37% in 2020 to
more than 60% by 2030 [1]. Similarly, justiﬁed by the proposed Pathway to Net Zero by 2050
[2], the penetration of RES is paramount, with special focus on solar and wind technologies.
These emerging technologies, due to their characteristics, are facing diﬃculties to adapt to
the current electricity market design. A market which is based on the merit order principle:
the ﬁrst sellers of electricity are the ones with low marginal costs, therefore, the cheapest
bids evolving to the most expensive. The market price is cleared one day in advance by the
last seller participating that meets the required demand [1].
The most integrated and cost-competitive RES, wind and solar, are non-dispatchable (or
non-plannable) generators, meaning they cannot be turned on or oﬀin order to comply with
the ﬂuctuating energy requirements [2]. The natural resource of energy, a non-controllable
factor, supposes an intermittent generation weather-dependent [3]. Moreover, as these sys-
tems are fulled by natural resources, its marginal costs are nearly zero, and therefore its
bidding strategy pushes the conventional generators, which are the ﬂexibility-providers, out
of the market. In brief, the current market design captures the RES as ﬁrst actuators pushing
both the price down according to the supply and demand curve, and conventional generators
out according to the merit order principle. Nonetheless, the mismatch between the forecasted
demand and estimated volume of production compromises the supply requirements and price
volatility. Thus, their participation in the market has prompted several measures packages
releases to re-design the market. The original design - predominantly based on dispatchable
energy systems - is incompatible to provide security of supply and ﬂexibility to the market
[4] at low cost when RES are involved.
In the recent years, price volatility has impacted the society to a considerable extent. The
exposure of the energy market design to external factors has compromised the stabiliza-
tion of the wholesale market price, also known as spot price, leading to unexpected and
unprecedented price ﬂuctuations. On one side, high prices caused from the combination of
the war between Russia and Ukraine and low wind speeds, among others, has prompted to
adapt measures for risk mitigation implementing initiatives as "RePowerEU" [5]. On the
other side, there is the opposite market behaviour: price cannabalisation. This concept is
known as the depressive eﬀect of intermittent, weather-driven electricity production on the
wholesale market price [6]. This is a consequence of (mostly temporary) high share of RES
with signiﬁcant cost-competitive strategies in comparison with traditional generators. The
adapted market dynamics leads to a strong reliance on RES which, as previously stated, is
1
==PAGE:8==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
unreliable for the uncontrollable dependencies, with a self-repercussion of curtailment costs
compromising the project ﬁnancing. In other words, the ﬂuctuating spot market price dis-
ables a controlled and manageable risk exposure of renewable energy projects, prompting
market participants to adopt alternative strategies to mitigate price and volume-related risks.
In response to the mentioned challenges, Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) have emerged
as a risk measure to the ﬂuctuating prices securing revenue streams and increasing the
possibilities for ﬁnancing [7] - seen from the seller perspective. Nevertheless, the energy
production from RES remains a uncertainty as well as the volatility of the wholesale market
clearing price. The spot price is seen as a reference for determining the PPA price, but
in the long term, is highly diﬃcult to predict. Therefore, an inaccurate estimation of such
value could potentially lead to ﬁnancial losses.
These two primary uncertainties signify
requiring balancing services or a threat for contract compliance. The diverse possibilities
of a PPA structure allow both participants to express their risk attitudes at the cost of
other parameters being impacted. All in all, risk allocation in renewable power purchase
agreements is crucial during the term deﬁnition process, as it allows parties to acknowledge
potential beneﬁts or losses based on their risk preferences.
1.2
Motivation
The amount of initiatives (Fitfor55 Package, RE100, RePowerEU...), regulatory frameworks
(revised Directive EU/2023/2413), and natural development process of renewable energy
technologies in the European context, enforces larger share penetration of RES in the energy
market. As a feasible alternative to promote investment and risk limitation in renewable
projects, PPAs have been highly exposed from the EU’s Renewable Energy Directive in [8]
highlighting the potential advancement of deployment of renewable electricity at a high pace.
Similarly, the European Commission [1] has shown strong interest and focus on long-term
market standards in order to decouple short-term price makers.
Despite the convenience of having a secured transaction in the long-term, it is still a mat-
ter of concern the envisioned administrative, technical and ﬁnancial barriers in numerous
PPA’s markets of the Union’s states [8]. Volume and price remain the main uncertainties
for operational and ﬁnancial reasons, and can result in high risk exposure for contract com-
pliance. On one side, the forecasting of volume which is conducted to deﬁne the terms of
the agreement can, in real time, diﬀer considerably. On the other side, even though a PPA
enables a higher share of debt share - better bankability of the project-, the volatility of the
short-term market closer to real-time operation, which is consider as benchmark price for
the cost of energy, can highly inﬂuence the expected revenues. All in all, it is envisioned a
"growing need for optimization under uncertainty in power system operations" [9, 10].
1.3
Project Objective
The objective of this MSc thesis is to gain a deep understanding about renewable power
purchase agreements, the risks associated to them, and the dependencies on the terms that
2
==PAGE:9==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
can address them. The potential advancement in the green energy transition through PPAs
motivates investment decisions on renewable energy projects, which an inaccurate assess-
ment on the terms of the agreement, can highly jeopardize the project economics. In order
to have an awareness of the potential threats of a PPA, it is paramount to identify the risks
and allocate them according to the risk exposure willing to take by each participant. All in
all, the objective of this paper is assess diﬀerent contract structures, and allocate the risks
according to the participant’s attitude. There is a greater focus on the seller’s perspective,
while also considering the oﬀtaker position.
1.4
Research Questions & Contributions
The focal point of this thesis is deﬁned by the following research questions that will answered
according to the stated contributions:
1. Why are PPAs understood as a risk measure for renewable energy systems
and what are their social and economical beneﬁts?
PPAs are conceived as risk mitigation measures. Nonetheless, the lack of literature about
them endangers the position of the players, specially for the inexperienced ones. A qualita-
tive and qualitative contribution about the PPA dynamics and analysis of the structure is
conducted. A market research provides an overview of the current situation, along with its
envisioned obstacles and potential beneﬁts for energy projects, all in the context of enhanc-
ing the green energy transition.
2. How can a PPA be standardized by using optimization to estimate the optimal
pricing scheme for all participants?
From the PPAs newly implementation in energy projects, the non-standardized negotiation
procedure might compromise their ﬁnancial model for lack of accuracy in the pricing estima-
tion. In order to prevent potential threats of the diﬀerent scheme variations, it is exposed
the pertinent aspects of the agreement to negotiate. Additionally, an optimization problem
in Julia has been developed, which simulates the interval of feasible price accounting for
all interested parties’ requirements. The case of study is a wind farm as the seller, and a
hydrogen plant as the buyer with the purpose of obtaining a price interval subject to nego-
tiation. In this model, the conceptual statements are applied, and the dynamics of the PPA
as interdependencies between contract terms are further assessed.
3. For diﬀerent contract structure variations, how can the envisioned risks be
allocated within the feasible PPA price range, and what is the impact on the
participants?
The uncertainties of RES and wholesale market price has a signiﬁcant impact on the contract
since it represents high degree of translated risks. In the optimization problem, the envi-
3
==PAGE:10==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
sioned risks are evaluated through the creation of scenarios of the identiﬁed uncertainties.
Correspondingly, an investigation is conducted for the optimal expected value of the price
interval as well as for the most restrictive scenario on a ﬁxed payment base case. Diﬀerent
variations on the contract structure are assessed as well as compared with the base case to
accommodate the limitations and risks for the contract variations. Moreover, focusing indi-
vidually on the PPA type level, an allocation of the risks is analysed providing the impact
on the contractual terms.
1.5
Methodology
A market screening is conducted to gain an understanding of the potential of renewable
PPAs, as well as to identify the possibilities from the participants perspective. Later, the
acquired concepts for addressing such negotiation are applied to a simulation model.
The chosen methodology is an optimization problem in Julia that provides the optimal inter-
val for the PPA price according to the transaction’s set-up having a focal point on achieving
economic viability of both parties - seller and buyer. Moreover, it addresses mainly the
price and volume uncertainties combined with the contract structure possibilities - delivery
scheme, payment structure among others -, addressing potential threats for contract com-
pliance. In order to manage the encountered uncertainties, the creation of scenarios allows
the model to assess the expect value, as well as the restrictive position to adopt.
With the objective of discussing practical results, a speciﬁc electricity delivery conﬁguration
has been assessed in the model that accounts for an oﬀshore wind farm located in the North
Sea onsite connected to a hydrogen plant in the Port of Esbjerg.
In brief, the optimal PPA terms of an agreement between an oﬀshore wind farm and a
hydrogen plant will be addressed through an optimization model. A simulation that provides
an estimation of the possibilities of the agreement for allocating the risk attitude of each
players taking all their requirements and limitations under consideration. Moreover, the
discussions will be conducted according to the ﬁndings and the knowledge gained from the
PPA market evaluation.
1.6
Reader’s Guide
Chapter 1 - Introduction - provides an idea of the topic addressed in this thesis as well as the
objective and the followed structure. It states the research questions to be answered, and the
chosen methodologies. Chapter 2 - PPA Market Review - delves into a qualitative analysis
of the PPA market. It puts into perspective its current penetration in the energy industry
emphasising in its potential and limitations. The PPA tool is studied investigating the possi-
ble varieties along with the ingrained risks. Chapter 3 - Problem Description - describes the
PPA conﬁguration of a real case, studying the relation between participants, and the impact
of their requirements. Further details on the conﬁguration dynamics are stated composing
the problem to simulate. Chapter 4 - Methodology - translates the problem description into
4
==PAGE:11==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
an optimization model explaining how the problem is limited by the participants require-
ments. Chapter 5 - Numerical Analysis - provides the inputs (ﬁnancial, operational and
technical), the methodology for addressing the inputs uncertainties, the results and its anal-
ysis, and the discussion. Chapter 6 - Conclusion - concludes with the thesis, and Chapter 7
- Future Works -, proposes how to expand the scope of work addressing the thesis limitations.
5
==PAGE:12==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
2
PPA Market Review
This chapter deﬁnes the PPA market status delving into its deﬁnition as well as the potential
beneﬁts and threats, and the correspondent associated risks for the diﬀerent schemes.
2.1
Context
Recently, several factors have highly impacted the electricity price dynamics in terms of
volatility and therefore, diﬃculties in predictability. The recent Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
and high intermittency of wind resource [11], along with other occurrences such as scalat-
ing inﬂation [12], has prompted sky-rocketing electricity prices in the European wholesale
electricity market as shown in Figure 1
Figure 1: Evolution of the lowest and the highest regional wholesale electricity prices in the
European day-ahead markets. Source: European Commission.
The EU reform on the market design fosters price stability whilst penetration of renewable
remains in surge at the time of phasing-out gas [4]. The European Commission has shown
special interest on future contracts for RES as a measure for reduction on price volatility
exposure and enhancement of market competitiveness ([4]) and as the major driver for the
deployment of a market based on non-fossil fuel producers. Despite the notorious emphasis
on Power Purchase Agreements’ rapid application and its implementation plan of action, by
facilitating and fastening their administrative procedure [13], its expansion is being slower
than expected [14].
2.2
PPA Market Size
Over the past years, the PPA market has experience a sharp expansion with an increase of
17% year by year. 2022 was prominent in the number of signed transactions even though the
total volume has decreased in comparison to 2021 due to a reduction of utility demand which
6
==PAGE:13==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
leans towards wind energy. Therefore, the number of solar PV agreements has increased.
Nevertheless, having a total capacity contracted in 2022 of 15.5 GW, the ﬁrst quarter of
2023 already experiences 4.6 GW so far [12]. Figure 2 visualizes the presented statements.
Figure 2: Yearly energy signed under a PPA in Europe. Source: S&P Global Commodity
Insights.
As shown above, the market expansion of PPA is rapidly growing with an observed obstacle
that remains in the settlement of the terms of such contracts. The lack of standardization
of such ﬁnancial instruments prompt PPAs to be deﬁned according to the ﬁrst applications.
To mitigate the envisioned limitations and provide a better overview of the presented tool
capabilities - potential and risks -, the following sections have been conducted.
2.3
PPA Deﬁnition
Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) are long term bi-lateral contractual agreements between
the electricity seller and buyer [15, 16]. The agreement comprises the deﬁned terms from
both perspectives on the price, volume and time duration of the delivery among others
[17, 18], being determined by the operational and ﬁnancial requirements. According to [15],
the usual period of time for such agreement is between 10 to 15 years, for which the terms
will be required.
This mechanism for energy trade is seen as an essential tool for managing the risks ingrained
in RES, and ﬁnancing of the project. As stated in [13], they enhance positive Financial In-
vestment Decisions (FIDs) alleviating the economic challenges. The anticipated beneﬁts for
both parties have prompted generators to seek such opportunities when developing projects,
while consumers to not only to ensure ﬁxed costs in the long term, but also to reduce the
carbon foot-print by ensuring clear energy consumption. The envisioned beneﬁts are pre-
sented as follows [19]:
For the sellers:
7
==PAGE:14==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
• Market participation in the long-term.
• Secured revenues under a speciﬁc price, and therefore, accurate economic evaluation.
• Better bankability opportunities for the project. Having secured revenues, ﬁnancial
institutions grant better conditions for loans.
• Business development due to the envisioned beneﬁts for consumers.
For the buyers:
• Price visibility in the long term and cost aﬀordability.
• Sustainability purposes.
Ensuring a clean source of electricity contributes to clean
transition and provides a recognition.
The substantial economic beneﬁts, apart for the sustainable advancements, turns this alter-
native as an attractive measure for the ﬁnancing of projects. Having a special focus on the
seller perspective, a PPA is seen as a ﬁnancial instrument creating a "fair" and risk-controlled
agreement for the sale of electricity [19]. The revenue streams are determined in the speci-
ﬁed period of time which enables better ﬁnancing possibilities [18]. The bankability of the
energy project can be supported from ﬁnancial institutions in diﬀerent ways, by utilizing tai-
lored debt, equity, credit guarantees, and ﬁnancial derivatives on power prices. Project debt
linked to PPAs promotes larger expansion in immature markets as well as standardization
terms and practices across markets. Moreover, European Investment Bank (EIB) would be
enforced to provide better conditions of debt against merchant risks [16].
In brief, Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) oﬀer numerous ﬁnancial beneﬁts, providing a
stable source of ﬁxed revenues throughout their speciﬁed timeframe. The ﬁnancial instru-
ments discussed, speciﬁcally project debt, contribute to the enhanced bankability of PPAs.
These mechanisms not only facilitate project ﬁnancing but also open avenues for higher debt
levels, making projects more attractive to ﬁnancial institutions. By leveraging these ﬁnancial
tools, PPAs become a viable and appealing option for both project developers and investors,
fostering the growth of sustainable energy initiatives.
Nevertheless, according to [16], it is envisaged several obstacles to its application: price risk
of competitive players, long construction times of large scale projects, creditworthiness for
bankability purposes, additionality to guarantee clean energy, lack of knowledge in diﬀerent
PPA markets with more or less standards for such agreement, hedging products, and last,
the complexity of negotiating a PPA that satisﬁes all party’s demands.
In this report, all the aforementioned barriers are contemplated and assessed in more or less
depth, following the relevance to accomplish a successful renewable power purchase agree-
ment according to the identiﬁed needs based on literature.
8
==PAGE:15==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
2.4
PPA Contract Structure
The vast amount of possible permutations of a Power Purchase Agreement burden the process
of negotiation including all contracting parties’ requirements. All terms of such agreement
can be discussed and concluded with the optimal conﬁguration that fulﬁlls the envisaged
requirements and addresses all needs. The parties entering into the contract have the ﬂex-
ibility to select the options they ﬁnd essential in creating a dependable supply or purchase
agreement. This process involves mutual understanding, allowing them to carefully assess
and balance their respective risks and opportunities. Signiﬁcantly, a substantial portion of
the risk allocation can be directly linked to the contractual structure [15].
When it comes to the deﬁnition of the speciﬁcations of the contract, there are several param-
eters that stipulate the business terms under which the electricity is exchanged. See listed
below the main and most relevant for this study:
• Duration of agreement: period of time for complying with the contractual terms.
• Volume: expected delivery capacity scheduled for a period of time.
• Price: energy price for the respective volume proﬁle.
• Liabilities and penalties: compensation and curtailment costs for non-compliance of
the contract terms - construction delays, supply and demand mismatch, among others.
Despite the large amount of signed deals shown in Figure 2, there is no benchmark price as
standardized index, which is subject to agree on the negotiation. Depending on the experi-
ence on PPAs of the negotiator, it can be evaluated accordingly looking after thei interests.
Some players follow multiple price estimation methodologies of institutions participating in
the market, although there is a concern of accounting for the risk exposure willing to take [15].
There are speciﬁc types of PPAs that deﬁne some features of the appropriate energy trade
arrangement, which can also be modiﬁed according to the interests of the participants.
2.4.1
PPA Classiﬁcation
The designation of a PPA can be deﬁned by several factors: Type, Direction, Delivery
Scheme, Payment Structure, and Generation, classiﬁcation observed in [15]. Neverthe-
less, the conducted assessment merely addresses the correlation between the type, delivery
and payment conﬁguration having ingrained a downstream direction, and generation from
renewable energy sources.
Firstly, the fundamental diﬀerentiation between the Types of PPAs is virtual and physical
agreements having Virtual PPAs (VPPA) as net clash ﬂow transactions, and Physical PPAs
(PPPAs) the physical delivery of electricity. Being PPPAs the focus of this work, it is under
study the speciﬁc terms of the delivery. The delivery can be oﬀ-site or on-site, meaning
through the public grid or particular infrastructure, correspondingly. When it is not feasible
9
==PAGE:16==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
to own and/or manage the transmission line, a utility company can support at a fee expense
providing services such as distribution and balancing.
Figure 3: Sub-types of PPAs and their relationships. Source:[15].
Secondly, within PPPA, oﬀtakers can be classiﬁed in corporate, utility or merchant. A corpo-
rate PPA, the most popular and object of study, is the one where the consumer is a company
or corporation. Merchant oﬀtakers refers to the service providers as intermediate parties be-
tween energy deliveries, and utility PPA when the demand is a utility company, in disregard
of the purpose of purchase. Notice in Figure 3 the dependencies of the above-explained PPA
schemes and the possible variations.
Thirdly, when it comes to Delivery Scheme, it can be diﬀerentiated in 3 arrangements:
• Pay-as-Produced: It is delivered as much as it is produced.
• Pay-as-Forecasted: It is delivered as much as it has been forecasted.
• Speciﬁc Delivery Proﬁle: It is agreed a speciﬁc proﬁle for the volume delivery.
Under all these schemes, it is mandatory to be covered by a Balancing Responsible Party
(BRP) which performs as an insurance in case of failure, and provides security of supply.
Last, the Payment Structure can be Fixed or Variable. A ﬁxed payment PPA requires a
determination of the unit of electricity price in the long term, whereas the variable payment
PPA it is subjected to changes throughout the lifetime of the contract. Both have advantages
and inconveniences, which are assessed in the following sections according to the identiﬁed
uncertainties.
2.4.2
PPA Uncertainties
All the above-stated dependencies are agreed trying to address the nature of renewable PPAs,
which have ingrained two main uncertainties in real time: Volume and Price.
10
==PAGE:17==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Volume
A major drawback for renewable energy production is the in the intermittency of natural
resource. The forecasting of energy production in the long term might lead to a mismatch
between supply and demand at the time of delivery resulting in a residual demand, either
positive or negative. As cited in [9], the likeliness of having a larger residual demand is
increasing due to the growing penetration of renewable, and therefore implying a danger in
the security of supply with the associated curtailment costs or, in contrary, energy dispatch.
There are a vast amount of energy forecasting methodologies such as the explored in [20,
21] - deterministic wind energy forecasting or multi-objective optimization of wind energy
forecasting techniques. Nevertheless, the "inherent limits on the ﬁdelity of numerical weather
prediction models" remain a hurdle [9]. The volume uncertainty highly impacts the plant
performance, and therefore, the balancing related costs. Even though such deal comprises a
BRP for production purposes, it also has an impact on the price, which cannot be prevented
in the terms settlement. As a measure to address it is the delivery scheme, which can allocate
the risk exposure of the producer and oﬀtaker of such uncertainty.
Price
As elaborated in the introduction, the wholesale market price is highly volatile, which cannot
be predicted for benchmarking of the PPA price. The increasing penetration of renewable,
and its low marginal costs [7], represent ﬂuctuations in the clearing price in the day-ahead
market due to its inﬂexible participation and eventual inaccurate forecast. Despite the hedg-
ing price risk measure a PPA represents - for having ﬁxed long-term incomes (seller) and
costs (buyer)-, there is a latent risk on the capture price, the diﬀerence between wholesale
market and PPA price, which can represent better business case for the seller when the PPA
price is higher i.e. the so-called price cannibalisation [15], or lower, which is the buyer who
miss the opportunity of beneﬁting from it.
The generation of electricity and price are highly correlated as investigated in [22], to the
extent that a PPA can be designed according to the acknowledged risk attitude from both
parties. According to the risk willing to take, the impact on the price can beneﬁt one or
another, depending on the size of the project, that can assume certain risks. The conceptual
implication on the price according to the risk acceptance from both parties is evaluated
further down in this section.
Others
Apart from the price and volume uncertainties, the determined pricing scheme for such
contract is also exposed to other external factors.
In the recent years, the interest rate
has experience spiking values that has directly aﬀected the energy projects ﬁnancing [23].
The determined PPA price does not payback the total costs, endangering the project to the
extent of it being cancelled. Moreover, the scarcity of supply change which highly rely on
other projects’ execution plan, can result in delays in the construction of successor projects
[24].
11
==PAGE:18==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
2.4.3
PPA Risk Qualiﬁcation
Understanding uncertainty as the lack of knowledge about a parameter to be assessed, risk
is the manner of quantifying the potential impact of the uncertainty in the outcome.
A qualiﬁcation of the PPA risks is exposed for the diﬀerent structures - delivery scheme and
payment structure -, and the result on the price according to industry’s insights.
Delivery Scheme
The volume proﬁle of energy delivery is a key factor in the negotiation of a PPA. In the case
of a renewable PPA, the prediction of the volume is highly diﬃcult to calculate resulting in
a mismatch between the supply and demand. Therefore, the diﬀerentiation between Pas-as-
produced and Pay-as-forecasted emphasises on which participant is taking the risk. Table 1
shows the comparison between both schemes and the consequent impact on the price.
Pay-as-produced
Speciﬁc delivery proﬁle
Pay-as-forecasted
Risk allocation
Seller
Variable
Buyer
Price change
Lower
[a,b]
Higher
Table 1: Risk qualiﬁcation on the PPA participants for the delivery scheme.
In pay-as-produced, the risk-taker is the demand by agreeing on consuming as much as it
is available, and ﬁnding other own-balancing services. In pay-as-forecasted, the seller is ex-
posed to higher risks due to its responsibility to meet the speciﬁed demand, risking the fact
of not being able to have enough available energy production.
It is rather challenging to quantify the impact on the price for both schemes. Nevertheless,
in the case of pay-as-forecasted, the granularity of the forecasting can make the price ﬂuc-
tuate under the risk on the seller. For instance, if it is to be agreed a delivery based on the
forecast in an hourly resolution based on day ahead, as it is closer to real time operation, the
risk is lower. Diﬀerently, based on a yearly resolution and the delivery according a annual
production estimation, the risk will be higher on the producer leading to higher price for
such transaction.
The speciﬁc delivery proﬁle is another set-up combining the previously-explained conﬁgu-
rations. To exemplify this alternative, a determined demand can be agreed to be delivered
lower that the total capacity of the producer. Correspondingly, the risk will de allocated ac-
cording to the speciﬁed terms, with the impact on the price also being subject to those terms.
In brief, the risk is strongly correlated with the price of the PPA. With the pay-as-produced
scheme the buyer adopts a risk-seeking attitude with lower prices, while with pay-as-forecasted,
the seller adopts a risk-averse attitude with higher prices. A speciﬁc proﬁle can provide ﬂex-
ibility according to the agreed terms.
12
==PAGE:19==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Payment Structure
Another key parameter in the negotiation of a PPA is the price, which can be ﬁxed or
variable.
When ﬁxed, a ﬂat price is agreed for the entire duration of the contract, contemplating
variable factors such us inﬂation. The ﬁxed price is estimated at the time of signing the deal
based on forecast of spot price for reference, and volume.
When a variable price is agreed, a more complex structure must be deﬁned due to the
numerous possible conﬁgurations. As an example, it can act as Contract for Diﬀerence,
which in comparison with the spot price, the diﬀerence has to be covered by one or another.
Moreover, It is important to note that the bankability of a PPA with variable price, as they
are not ﬁxed revenues from the producer perspective, implicate worse loan conditions such
as higher interest rates.
13
==PAGE:20==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
3
Problem Description
In this chapter, it is explained a speciﬁc system conﬁguration for the negotiation of a re-
newable PPA applied to a practical case. The conﬁguration of the system is explained and
dynamics elaborated, to be applied in an optimization problem.
3.1
System Conﬁguration
From its core deﬁnition, a Power Purchase Agreement is composed by a seller willing to sell
electricity to an interested party to consume a speciﬁc amount of electricity. The focus of
this study is to look into a Corporate PPA between a renewable energy producer and an
oﬀtaker for the long term period of 10 years "behind-the-meter". The ﬁrst approach of the
transaction is a physical delivery under a ﬁxed payment. In terms of the delivery scheme,
both pay-as-produced and pay-as-forecasted will be discussed. Moreover, some variations on
the base case terms - variable payment and speciﬁc delivery proﬁle - will be studied, as well
as its impact on the welfare of the participants.
In order to assess the dynamics of this type of transaction in a practical case, a conﬁguration
has been proposed according to the latest initiatives in a European context. The system
consists on an oﬀshore wind farm connected to a hydrogen plant through an oﬄine grid,
meaning no national utility involved. Figure 4 gives an overview of the connection of the
system, whose technical speciﬁcations are stated in section 5.
Figure 4: System conﬁguration for the PPA duration.
3.1.1
System Participants
Is it a matter of discussion the participants’ characteristics and perspectives which will be
essential for the determination of the contract terms. In this case, a Wind Farm (WF) is
the electricity deliverer and a Hydrogen Plant (HP) the consumer.
14
==PAGE:21==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Wind Farm
Nowadays, renewable PPAs are mainly happening among Wind and Solar technologies [16].
The technology development leading to a feasible LCOE enables these sort of agreements
ensuring ﬁnancial beneﬁts.
In this case, the chosen electricity generation type of the PPA is an oﬀshore wind farm,
meaning not only the producer, but also the seller of electricity. The signiﬁcant amount of
electricity to be delivered from a wind farm, speciﬁcally oﬀshore due to its high capacity
factor, enables an agreement with a hydrogen facility, whose electricity consumption is a key
factor.
Horns Rev 3 is a large scale bottom-ﬁxed oﬀshore wind farm located in the North Sea [25].
It has a total capacity of 407 MW. Its technical speciﬁcations have been considered in the
model since it represents an actual wind project with up-to-date technology development,
favorable Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) [26, 27], and economic viability [28].
Horns Rev 3 is honoured for powering around 425.000 Danish households, being the largest
oﬀshore wind farm in Denmark. With the new objectives and incentives on hydrogen pro-
duction in the European context, the potential of the site enable such signiﬁcant hydrogen
injection expected to be demanded in the following years.
Hydrogen Plant
As mentioned, the raising concern on increasing green hydrogen production facilities to en-
hance all its potential applications - heating, re-electriﬁcation, mobility, agriculture, industry,
and electricity market balancing purposes, motivates the study of ensuring clean electricity
as fuel for its production [29].
The pilot project for clean steel production - Hybrit - has been used for inspiration on tech-
nical speciﬁcations. It consist on 500 MW facility using alkaline electrolyzers [30] for the
hydrogen production. Although the purpose of this project is to produce steel, it has been
redirected for the pure production of hydrogen and its successor distribution through the
European pipeline. Its location is assumed to be based on the Port of Esbjerg, around 30
kms from Horns Rev 3 [28]. The Port of Esbjerg is known for its relevance among oil and
gas, which has adopted a sustainable startegy for the green transition [31]. Additionally, the
EU is developing a hydrogen pipeline "European Hydrogen Backbone" [32]. Therefore, the
Port of Esbjerg is a good connection with the European hydrogen pipeline, specially being
close to Germany which has a strong hydrogen strategy that no only relies on the domestic
production, but also on the its import [33].
As part of renewable PPAs, Guarantees of Origin - certiﬁcates of the source of electricity- are
issued to document clean electricity production providing sustainable value to the project.
Therefore, the combination of both enables large production of hydrogen electricity as well
15
==PAGE:22==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
as clean sources of electricity following the path to Net Zero Carbon by 2050.
3.1.2
System Dynamics
As mentioned, a PPA is considered a risk measure to address the uncertainty of the electric-
ity wholesale market price. Fixing a speciﬁc value for the long term enables security in the
economic valuation of a project. Nevertheless, agreeing such price for the long term (10-15
years) can also result in a risk, meaning the potential threat to sell electricity to a signiﬁ-
cantly lower price, or from the other side, buying for a higher price - having the spot price as
a reference. Therefore, it is paramount to assess all the impacting factor and its dependencies
that can eventually jeopardize the estimation of that price. On the other side, renewable
electricity sources come with the uncertain factor of volume. The variable production is a po-
tential threat to a deal that is based on a speciﬁc volume delivery in a speciﬁc period of time.
As for the practical case, the oﬀshore wind farm is oﬄine connected to the hydrogen plant
delivering all the produced electricity during the time duration of the PPA. Moreover, as a
manner of addressing the potential variability on production from the oﬀshore wind farm as
well as the ﬂuctuation of the electricity spot price, the hydrogen plant has been sized around
100 MW bigger, which will be connected to the grid. The hydrogen production will adopt a
strategy according to the spot price. It is designed to enable the purchase and production of
more hydrogen when low prices ﬁlling the gap of the remaining electricity capacity, and to
step out from the grid consumption, and solely consuming from the wind production, when
high spor prices. This way, the production of the hydrogen will be optimized beneﬁting from
the prices of electricity, both from the PPA deal and the grid.
The exposed conﬁguration has been though, not only for ratifying feasibility of PPAs with
renewable energy sources an green hydrogen production, but also to address the volume un-
certainty itself. This way it is ensured maximum hydrogen production to meet the forecasted
demand, and enable participation of renewable systems despite its natural challenges. More-
over, a limitation of the overall system is that the production and distribution of hydrogen
from the HP has been though as injecting the pipeline when available, and no Hydrogen
Purchase Agreement (HPA) is involved.
3.1.3
System Requirements
As below-mentioned, each contract player has speciﬁc characteristics to account for in the
deﬁnition of the terms, to ensure the maximum beneﬁts.
Producer Perspective
The producer perspective is further assessed in this report as it aims to achieve a viable
measure for economic feasibility, resulting in lower LCOE and overall larger penetration of
RES.
16
==PAGE:23==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
The primary aspect of a renewable energy project is the ﬁnancial model, therefore, having a
positive Financial Investment Decision (FID) is crucial for its development. This milestone
ensures the project is eligible to be payed back within its lifetime, and there are potential
economic beneﬁts. Such assessment is observed through the Net Present Value, and banka-
bility of the project.
• Net Present Value: Discounted cash ﬂows is the standard methodology to analyse
investment projects according to [34]. The costs and beneﬁts of the projects are dis-
counted to make them comparable throughout its lifetime. The Net Present Value
(NPV) is a central tool for investment analysis, which accounts for the value of the
project today. NPV is used in this case to assess which is the optimal pricing for elec-
tricity in order to make it positive. Therefore, this constraint is included and limits
the contract.
• Bankability: When an energy project is under a PPA, which means ﬁxed revenues
in the future and less uncertainty on the electricity price, the banks are eligible to
issue loans with better conditions: bigger amount of lent money, or equally, better
interest rates, according to the industry insights. Therefore, for a better bankability
of the project - normally understood as higher share of loan in a PPA -, a requirement
according to the price to ﬁx should comply with the expectancy of being able to pay
the loan back. A common indicator for such purpose is the Debt Service Coverage
Ratio (DSCR) that assesses according to the cash ﬂows, is the project is able to pay
the instalments in an annual basis.
Oﬀtaker Perspective
In this case, the oﬀtaker perspective is related to a green hydrogen plant. As the current
situation of the green hydrogen production remains under development and the price of green
hydrogen is expected to decrease accordingly, the Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH)
is known as a economic metric for ﬁnancial evaluation [35]. The applied limitation from the
oﬀtaker to ensure economic feasibility is that the LCOH is lower that the market price of
green hydrogen. Therefore, the beneﬁts of the HP will be positive.
17
==PAGE:24==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
4
Problem Formulation
In this chapter, the employed mathematical methodology is presented and explained, detail-
ing the correspondent formulation.
4.1
Context
PPAs being the new ﬁnancial tool require a feasible price which ensures economic viability
of the involved projects. An accurate estimation of the pricing scheme will enhance the
agreement beneﬁting both participants in the long term. However, the exposed uncertainties
of intermittency of volume and volatility of price, in addition to the lack of knowledge and
standardization, challenge the process. Previous studies have been conducted to estimate
a feasible price based on the LCOE formula as in [19, 36]. The limitation of this approach
is the lack of consideration of interacting factors amongst participants as well as of volume
and spot price uncertainties. Looking into the following concepts, the chosen methodology
is justiﬁed:
• A negotiation is a strategic discussion on a matter which is intended to achieve a
agreement between both parties [37].
• Game theory is the study of the strategic interaction among agents through mathe-
matical models [38].
• Nash equilibrium determines the best payoﬀfor the participants arriving to the com-
mon terms that no other strategy would provide a better outcome [39].
The negotiation of a renewable power purchase agreement is approached through game the-
ory, a theory that involves analysing the other player possible strategy to act correspond-
ingly reaching the nash equilibrium. The methodology to address such situation is through
optimization of both mathematical models - the seller’s and the buyer’s.
Mathematical
optimization is a tool that aims at tackling a speciﬁc problem based on deﬁned premises:
maximization or minimization of the problem being constraint by the system limitations.
This tool has been applied in the ﬁeld of PPAs as in [7, 18].
An optimization model has been design being composed of two problems:
• Upper Level Problem: The WF aims at maximizing the revenues from the price of
PPA during its timeline, while being limited by the HP cost measures limitations.
• Lower Level Problem: The HP aims at maximizing the proﬁts of the plant by
minimizing the cost of electricity. The problem is limited by the minimum feasible
price for the PPA that enhances economic feasibility of the buyer’s investment.
The obtained solution provides a range determined by both perspectives that is the feasible
price interval for negotiation, that according to the possible set-ups of PPAs, enables the
18
==PAGE:25==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
additional requirements of the participants, their risk attitude.
Both problems, modelled in Julia, are composed of the decision variables, objective function
and relevant constraints. 3 permutations for both problems have been conducted according
to the following formulation:
4.2
Base Case
The base case is the foundation of this assessment. The composition of this corporate PPA
structure is deﬁned by a ﬁxed payment structure, where all wind production is delivered to
the consumer.
4.2.1
Upper Level Problem
The Upper Level Problem is determined by the seller’s posture which aims to negotiate the
highest possible PPA price in order to maximize revenues. Nevertheless, the problem is
limited by the constraint of having a feasible Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH), lower
than the cost of hydrogen (at least). The following sections explain the problem formulation
for such level of the negotiation:
Decision Variables
The decision variables of the problem are:
• PPA price: P ppa
• Electricity demand of the hydrogen plant: Dt,s
The ﬁrst iteration of this problem is to acquire a ﬁxed P ppa that accounts for the price to be
agreed on the years concerning the duration of the PPA (T ppa) at the signature of the deal,
meaning including the inﬂation and other factors that can aﬀect the price in T ppa.
Moreover, Dt,s is the decision variable that addresses the electricity consumption strategy of
the hydrogen facility. The uncertain inputs (wind production and spot price) are modelled
by scenarios with an hourly, daily and yearly resolution for the entire lifetime of the system
(see the scenarios generation in section 5). Therefore, the electricity demand is obtained for
the indicated indexes. It represents the total consumption from the wind production and
grid, which is assessed according to each scenario of the spot price.
Objective Function
The objective function of the Upper Level Problem aims at maximizing the expected revenues
of the wind farm for its lifespan.
19
==PAGE:26==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Max
Scen
X
s=1
⇡s(RevenuesW(P ppa))
(1)
Equation 1 corresponds to the expected value of the objective of the problem. It is modelled
from an equally distributed probability per scenario.
RevenuesW(P ppa) =
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGenW
t,s +
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
P spot
t,s GenW
t,s
(2)
Disseminating Equation 1, Equation 2 indicates that the revenues once the PPA is concluded
do not include any decision variable, nor has an impact on P ppa. The reason to involve the
revenues from the grid is to observe how the diﬀerent scenarios, with their correspondent
probability, aﬀect the overall incomes of the energy system.
In contrary to the maximization of P ppa from the seller’s perspective, the buyer will limit the
price by ensuring the feasibility of its project. Therefore, the objective function is subject to
the constraints stated below. It is worth outlining the formulation of the constraints is per
scenario resulting in the most restrictive values. However, an analysis of the expected value
for the constraints is also conducted, following similarly the formulation of the expected
value of Equation 1.
• Constraint LCOH
Including Equation 3 limits the model that the P ppa is maximized being the Levelized
Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH) lower than the current market price for green hydrogen [40].
According to the system conﬁguration, part of the electricity consumption will come
from the grid, evaluating and sizing Dt,s to obtain the best strategy to optimize green
hydrogen production.
LCOH = DiscCostsH(P ppa, Dt,s)
DiscRevenuesH(Dt,s)
P H
0
8s 2 Scen
(3)
The LCOH can be split in discounted costs (Equation 4) and discounted revenues
(Equation 6).
DiscCostsH(P ppa, Dt,s) =
T Ltime
X
t=1
(CAPEXH + OPEXH
(1 + DiscRate)t
) + F d(P ppa, Dt,s)
(4)
20
==PAGE:27==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Equation 4 are the costs of investment, operation and maintenance, as well as the cost
of fuel Equation 29. This is a signiﬁcant factor since it represents an impact on the
cash ﬂows. Additionally, for the discounted calculation, the discount factor is applied.
F d(P ppa, Dt,s) =
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGent,s + (Dt,s −Gent,s)P spot
t,s
(1 + DiscRate)t
+
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
Gent,sP spot
t,s
(1 + DiscRate)t
(5)
The fuel cost depends on the lenght of the contract. On one side, while the PPA is in
place, the cost will com from the P ppa for the volume of the wind production plus the
adopted strategy from the grid. Moreover, once the contract is due, all demand will
come from the spot price (P spot
t,s ), while being more exposed to the wholesale price.
DiscRevenuesH(Dt,s) =
⌘HDt,s
(1 + DiscRate)t
(6)
Last, the discounted revenues are a function of the electricity demand, that combined
with the eﬃciency of the plant, ⌘H, provides the total hydrogen production.
• Constraint Min P ppa
Including Equation 7 enforces P ppa not to be negative.
P ppa ≥0
(7)
• Constraint Min & Max Dt,s
In regard to the strategy of the hydrogen plant electricity demand, there is a limitation
represented in Equation 8 on the value of Dt,s that cannot exceed the total plant
capacity, neither be negative.
0 Dt,s TotH 8t 2 T Ltime, 8s 2 Scen
(8)
• Constraint Dt,s
As explained in the system dynamics, the electricity demand will be the total of the
wind production in addition to the optimal consumption from the grid. Thus, Equa-
tion 9 will not allow Dt,s to obtained lower values than the wind production during
T ppa.
21
==PAGE:28==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
0 Dt,s −Gent,s 8t 2 T ppa, 8s 2 Scen
(9)
4.2.2
Lower Level Problem
On the opposite, the Lower Level Problem maximizes the proﬁts from the HP by minimizing
the cost of fuel - P ppa during the T ppa. The wind farm limits the problem by requiring a
minimum price for ensuring economic viability of the project. Apart from the PPA pricing
(P ppa), the electricity demand proﬁle of the HP (Dt,s) is optimized according to the price, to
evaluate how the hydrogen plant will behave in comparison with the Upper Level Problem
strategy. Therefore, the decision variables - P ppa and Dt,s -, are the same ones than in the
Upper Level Problem.
Objective Function
In Equation 10 the electricity costs are included throughout the whole lifetime of the system.
When the contract is expired, there is no decision on the P spot
t,s , but the assessment of the
generated scenarios according to the probability.
Max
Dt,sP ppa
Scen
X
s=1
⇡s(RevenuesH(Dt,s) −ElecCostsH(P ppa, Dt,s))
(10)
Equation 11 is a function of the electricity demand, which along the plant eﬃciency ⌘H and
the price of hydrogen P H
t , calculates the plant incomes.
RevenuesH(Dt,s) =
T Ltime
X
t=1
⌘HDt,sP H
t
(11)
As mentioned, the total electricity costs are included. On one side, the costs of electricity
during the PPA contract are deﬁned by the wind production for P ppa, and the remaining
obtained electricity demand for P spot
t,s . On the other side, once the contract is terminated,
the total electricity demand is at the cost of the wholesale market price.
ElecCostsH(P ppa, Dt,s) =
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGent,s + (Dt,s −Gent,s)P spot
t,s
+
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
Dt,sP spot
t,s
(12)
Regarding the constraints limiting the model, the following are included:
• Constraint Min P ppa
22
==PAGE:29==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
• Constraint Min & Max Dt,s
• Constraint Dt,s
• Constraint NPV
The NPV of the wind farm is assessed to be greater than 0, limiting the minimum
value of P ppa.
DiscCashFlowsW(P ppa) ≥0 8s 2 Scen
(13)
The NPV represent the discounted cash ﬂows, which can be translated to:
DiscCashFlowsW(P ppa) = DiscRevenuesW(P ppa) −DiscCostsW
(14)
−DiscTaxIncomeW(P ppa)
Similarly to the Upper Level Problem, the revenues (Equation 30) form the WF are
divided in the PPA pricing during T ppa, and the wholesale market price until the end
of lifetime.
DiscRevenuesW(P ppa) =
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGent,s
(1 + WACC)t +
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
P spot
t,s Gent,s
(1 + WACC)t
(15)
The project ﬁnancing is composed by equity and debt. In order to obtain the corre-
sponding cost of capital, the WACC is the accounted discount factor of private business
[41]. Therefore, it is calculated according to the ﬁnancial speciﬁcations of the project
ﬁnancing, and calculated according to Equation 16. Therefore all discounted cash ﬂows
are calculated through the WACC as the correct discount rate.
WACC = E
V ⇤Ce + D
V ⇤Cd ⇤(1 −CorpTax)
(16)
Similarly, it is applied to the discounted costs (Equation 17) and taxable incomes
(Equation 31).
DiscCostsW = CAPEXW +
T Ltime
X
t=1
OPEXWGent,s
(1 + WACC)t
(17)
23
==PAGE:30==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
The taxable incomes are the cashﬂows than can be taxable, which according to [34],
can be explained through Equation 31, being DepW the depreciation of the project
throughout the lifetime.
DiscTaxIncomeW(P ppa) = (
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGent,s
(1 + WACC)t +
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
P spot
t,s Gent,s
(1 + WACC)t
−
T Ltime
X
t=1
OPEXWGent,s
(1 + WACC)t −DepW)CorpTax
(18)
The depreciation of the project follows a straight line which is the total value of the
project divided in the number of operational years resulting in rdep.
DepW = CAPEXW ⇤rdep
(19)
• Constraint Bank
In order to ensure the bank loan is going to be paid back, the Debt Service Coverage
Ratio (DSCR) of each year has a minimum requirement [42].
DSCRW(P ppa) ≥DSCRmin 8t 2 T ppa, 8s 2 Scen
(20)
The problem is limited through Equation 20 requiring a P ppa which, along with the
wind production, enables enough Cash Flow Available for Debt Service (CAFDS) to
meet the bank demands per Yearly Instalments (YI). The yearly instalment is the
amount to pay back in a yearly basis [42].
DSCRW(P ppa) = CAFDSW(P ppa)
Y I
(21)
The Cash Flows for Debt Service (CFDS) are:
CAFDSW(P ppa) = RevenuesW(P ppa) −O&MCostsW
−PayableTaxW(P ppa)
(22)
24
==PAGE:31==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
The revenues and taxable payment correspond to the same cash ﬂows as in Equation 30
and Equation 31, correspondingly, without being discounted. In regard to O&M costs,
same applies to Equation 17 but without the initial investment. Last, YI is calculated
through the formula Equation 23 provided by [42].
Y I =
i
1 −(1 −i)T loan ⇤CAPEXW
(23)
When obtaining a loan from the bank, and T ppa is due before T loan, the minimum
requirement from the bank (DSCRmin) becomes more restrictive. This is a manner of
de-risking the exposure of the loan repayment compliance to the volatile P spot
t,s .
4.3
Variations
Variations have been implemented in the base study case model resulting in 2 additional
cases, with their correspondent impact on the decision parameters. Their speciﬁcations are
stated below.
4.3.1
Variable Payment
In case 2, instead of assessing a ﬁxed payment structure, meaning the same price for T ppa, a
variable P ppa
t
is observed in a yearly basis. The modiﬁcations in the model are the following:
• The decision variable for the PPA price is time dependent: P ppa
t
• Additional constraint in the Upper Level Problem:
RevenuesH(Dt,s) ≥O&CostsH(P ppa
t
) 8t 2 T ppa
(24)
Equation 24 ensures that the price for the cost of electricity is feasible according to
the market price of green hydrogen.
RevenuesH(Dt,s) = ⌘HDt,sP H
t
(25)
The revenues and operational and maintenance costs for such requirement are Equa-
tion 25 and Equation 26 correspondingly.
O&MCostsH(P ppa
t
) = OPEXH + F d(P ppa
t
)
(26)
25
==PAGE:32==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
4.3.2
Speciﬁc Delivery Proﬁle
A speciﬁc delivery proﬁle can be agreed in diﬀerent manners. In case 3, V ppa is included as a
parameter between 85 and 95%. It represents the percentage of the wind production volume
agreed on the PPA, selling the rest to the grid. The modiﬁcations from the base study case
are the following:
• Objective Function Upper Level Problem
RevenuesW(P ppa) =
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGenW
t,sV ppa + P spot
t,s GenW
t,s(1 −V ppa)
+
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
P spot
t,s GenW
t,s
(27)
• Objective Function Lower Level Problem
ElecCostsH(P ppa, Dt,s) =
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGent,sV ppa + (Dt,s −Gent,sV ppa)P spot
t,s
+
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
Dt,sP spot
t,s
(28)
• Constraint LCOH
The addition of the volume parameter in this constraints follow the same principle as
in the objective function of the Lower Level Problem.
• Constraint NPV & Bank
Similarly, V ppa is included in these constraints as stated for the Upper Level Problem.
26
==PAGE:33==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
5
Numerical Analysis
In this chapter, the inputs to the model are stated, the scenario generation explained, the
results reﬂected and analysed, and a discussion conducted.
5.1
Inputs
For the above-explained conﬁguration of the system, the inputs stated deﬁne the general a
characteristics of the system:
Lifetime (T Ltime)
25
Years
[43]
Discount Rate
8
%
[44]
Corporate Rate
22
%
[45]
Inﬂation Rate
" 2
%
[46]
Table 2: Inputs of the system.
In regards to each participant, the following inputs have been included in the model:
Wind Farm
The wind farm has been design according to an existing one (Horns Rev 3) which crossed
Construction Operational Date (COD) in December 2028 [47]. The wind farm inputs based
on [48, 49, 50, 51, 44] have been included according to Table 3.
Technical
Total Nominal Power
406.7
MW
No. of Turbines
49
Units
Wind Turbine Model
MHI Vestas Oﬀshore V164/8000
-
CAPEXW
922.346
MEur
OPEXW
16
Eur/MWh
Depreciation Rate (rdep)
4
%
Financial
Loan Duration (T loan)
15
Years
Share of Equity ( E
V )
15
%
Share of Debt ( D
V )
75
%
Cost of Equity (Ce)
10
%
Cost of Debt (Cd)
4
%
DSCRmin,ppa
1.2
-
DSCRmin,merch
1.4
-
Table 3: Inputs of the wind farm.
27
==PAGE:34==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
According to the sources, the WACC should be within the feasible range of [2.6,4.3%]. This
has served as data validation for the model.
Hydrogen Plant
The hydrogen plant has been sized according to a project that is being developed, which
has served as inspiration for the size and chosen technology. It refers to a project is Sweden
under the name Hybrit, an alkaline electrolyzer technology of 500 MW of capacity. The
model inputs for the hydrogen plant (Table 4) are obtained from [43, 30, 52].
Technical
Total Nominal Power
500
MW
Technology
Alkaline electrolyzer
-
CAPEXH
325.000
MEur
Fixed OPEXH
2% of CAPEX
Eur/Year
Hydrogen Production Rate (⌘H)
20
kg/MWh
Table 4: Inputs of the hydrogen plant.
As the green hydrogen price is expected to drop below 5 Eur/kg by 2030 [52], a linear
decrease from 8 to 4.5 Eur/kg is assumed until the end of the lifetime.
5.2
Scenario Generation
In decision making under uncertainty, the input data that is aﬀected by uncertainty is de-
scribed as stochastic process [10]. This process is known as a collection of dependent random
variables, which can be discrete or continuous. In optimization problems, uncertainties need
to be represented via scenarios, in order to represent the stochastic process [10].
To represent the stochastic nature of both uncertain inputs to the model, wind production
and spot price, the creation of scenarios for both parameters have followed the methodologies
explained below.
Wind Generation
The cause of the wind production intermittency is assigned to the unpredictable wind speeds
in an hourly basis. Once this data is gathered, the calculation of the correspondent wind
production relies on project-based factors: layout, wind turbine models and location, among
others.
For this case, historical wind speed values have been evaluated. An estimation on the wind
production based on the layout, wind technology and positioning, with an hourly resolution
has been conducted through a wind modelling software.
28
==PAGE:35==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Taking a year within this decade, the wind production proﬁle shown in Figure 5 has been
used as the baseline for the yearly production.
Figure 5: Wind production estimation based on historical data.
As the wind production proﬁle estimation is based solely on one year and its characteristics,
two permutations have been implemented:
• High wind production proﬁle: Increase by 10% of the baseline proﬁle.
• Low wind production proﬁle: Decrease by 10% of baseline proﬁle.
In order to comply with the technical limitations of the technology, the surpass of the high
wind production proﬁle above the maximum eﬃciency of the wind farm has been limited.
Later, a random combination of the three possible wind proﬁles (Low, Medium and High)
has been implemented for the plant’s lifetime through the Monte Carlo method. A technique
that simulates random variables providing estimates of deterministic quantities, commonly
implemented in integration and optimization [53]. This methodology has been applied for
similar purposed in [22] and [54]. Hence, the generated scenarios for the wind production
are shown in Figure 6
Figure 6: Scenarios W1, W2, W3.
The limitation of this practice is that the 3 proﬁles haven been shuﬄed being equally dis-
tributed among scenarios for the same year, but a random combination in the overall evolu-
tion.
29
==PAGE:36==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Spot Price
As previously explained, the spot price is subject to uncertainty due to the dependencies
on various factors that determines its value. The primary challenge in estimating wholesale
power prices lies on predicting the long term evolution due to the changing energy mix,
advancement of technologies and load balancing, among others.
The mean per year of the last 5 years of historical data for DK1, obtained from [55], have
been obtained to construct a spot price proﬁle.
The trends from one year to another,
outlined in Table 5, represent a price proﬁle through the observed timeline. The purpose is
to extrapolate these trends backwards from the starting year of 2023 applying it with hourly,
daily, and yearly resolution until the completion of the project lifespan.
2018-2019
2019-2020
2020-2022
2022-2023
Trend
0.874
0.648
3.01
0.405
Table 5: Averaged trends derived from successor years based on historical data for DK1.
Between the years 2020 and 2022, the market experienced spiking prices of the market dis-
turbing the usual dynamics and long term estimation. To adjust it to normal circumstances,
the average trend between 2020-2021 and 2021-2022 has been calculated, and applied as a
unique step. Subsequently, through the created spot price proﬁle for the plant’s lifetime,
several scenarios haven been created by including a growth rate contemplated in Table 6,
which reﬂect anticipated ﬂuctuations and trends in the market.
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Scenario D
Scenario E
Growth rate
-
" 10%
" 5%
# 5%
# 10%
Assumption
Baseline
Low RES
Slight increase
Slight decrease
High RES
Table 6: Growth rate in scenario generation for spot price.
[56] is a extended study conducting a estimation of electricity prices. It has been the source
of inspiration for the creation of a residual parameter that signiﬁes the potential volatility.
The Monte Carlo method, implemented in the mentioned study as well as in [7], has been
applied to generate random values as noise from a uniform distribution according to Table 7.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Volatility
[-5,5]
[-30,30]
Assumption
Low volatility
High volatility
Table 7: Volatility scenarios.
Last, according to [57], there is a cap in the price of 4000 Eur/MWh and -500 Eur/MWh.
30
==PAGE:37==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
The combination of the mentioned approaches generate 10 scenarios: A1, A2, B1, B2, C1,
C2, D1, D2, E1, E2 shown below.
(a) Hours in one day
(b) Days in one year
Figure 7: Averaged evolution of spot prices for one day and one year.
InFigure 7b Scenario A1 has been illustrated as representative of the repeating proﬁle across
scenarios, but with higher or lower values.
(a) Scenarios for spot price
(b) Yearly evolution for a speciﬁc hour and
day.
Figure 8: Averaged evolution of spot prices for the system’s lifespan.
Figure 8a is the averaged yearly evolution where an overall decrease of the spot price through-
out the years occurs. The data has been validated according to the incentives and expectancy
of larger share of RES in the market, and its consequent impact on the price.
Figure 8b has been represented in order to illustrate the added volatility parameter to the
diﬀerent trends creating ﬂuctuating prices.
31
==PAGE:38==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
5.3
Optimization Problem
Through Operational Research (OR), a scientiﬁc approach on decision making, the opti-
mization problems has been represented. This representation has the limitation that the
electricity demand of the HP (D) has been modelled as one ﬁxed value, instead of being
scenario and time-step based as in the base case. The modiﬁcation assigns to D the most
restrictive feasible value. The representation corresponds to a ﬁxed payment and full deliv-
ery volume of the wind farm production set-up. Figure 9 represents both problems and their
correspondent feasible areas.
(a) Feasible Space for the Lower Level Prob-
lem.
(b) Feasible Space for the Upper Level Prob-
lem.
Figure 9: Representation of the Optimization Problem of Lower and Upper Level Problem.
The non-negativity and maximum value for the decision variable D (as explained in Equa-
tion 8), are limiting both problems. For a given value of D, the spectrum of feasible values
for P ppa is going to be analysed. In the case of Figure 9a, the ﬁnancial requirements from
the wind farm are limiting a minimum value that will ensure in both cases, bankability and
proﬁtability of the wind farm project. Looking into this case, it can be noticed the optimal
value of the PPA is being determined by the bankability constraint (Equation 20). The NPV
constraint do not aﬀect the feasible area (in green) since the bankability limitation is more
restrictive. As above explained, the constraint from the bank is yearly-based, which most
limiting requirement will determine the minimum price. It may happen that in some years,
the minimum price for complying with the bankability constraint will be more relaxed that
the one required from the NPV constraint. The Upper Level Problem dynamics is to maxi-
mize revenues by minimizing costs, and as the PPA price determines the cost of electricity,
it is aimed to be minimized. Therefore, the optimal value will move towards the left side as
represented by the red dot.
On the other side, the Upper Level Problem feasible area (in blue) is limited by non-negativity
constraints of D and P ppa. In contrary, their correspondent maximum value is determined
by the maximum capacity of the HP, and the the maximum value of electricity for the du-
ration of the PPA that enables a LCOH lower than the price of hydrogen. As this problem
32
==PAGE:39==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
is seen from the producer perspective, it will aim at negotiating the highest price possible
that comply with all requirements - red dot in the right as the optimal solution.
Figure 10: Total feasible area of the problem.
Overall, combining both problems results in the feasible area for negotiation (given the
assumptions) where the PPA pricing scheme can be agreed between participants. The grey
area in Figure 10 is the negotiation spectrum.
5.4
Results & Analysis
In this section, the empirical results of the optimization problem are printed. The ﬁndings
are the foundation of the discussion about how the risk can allocated according to the struc-
ture of the PPA. It is explained how the risk attitude of both perspectives - buyer and seller’s
- impact the terms of the agreement.
The presented optimization problem is applied to 3 diﬀerent cases. Although there is a vast
amount of permutations on the PPA structure the main categories - delivery scheme and
payment structure-, are evaluated.
The obtained results are individually analysed, and later discussed as an overall. The P ppa
is they key parameter of discussion for all cases, but the electricity demand strategy is also
analysed in the base study case for representative scenarios of wind production and spot price.
As mentioned, the uncertainties of the model - volume and price - have been input in the
simulation as several scenarios which can mitigate the potential risks of inaccurate estimation
33
==PAGE:40==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
in the long term. In order to evaluate how the diversity of these scenarios impact the model,
two approaches have been taken:
• Expected: The model is simulated as the expected value of a uniform distribution of
the probability per scenario. Therefore, it obtains the optimal value for the equally-
probable scenarios study.
• Restrictive: The model is simulated per scenario obtaining the most restrictive solu-
tions for the correspondent critical scenario.
Moreover, for both analysis and all variations, a negotiation spectrum is analysed.
The
negotiation spectrum (σ) can be deﬁned as the feasible interval which deﬁnes the P ppa limits
while complying with all the problem’s requirements. The criteria for its assessment is:
Negotiation
Spectrum (σ)
criteria
Color
Red
Orange
Green
Meaning
<30
]30,50[
>50
Table 8: Criteria of negotiation spectrum.
Being Red critical, Orange intermediate, and Green extensive. This criteria is an assumption
based on the dispersion of historical PPA prices.
5.4.1
Fixed Payment
Corresponding to the section 3, the ﬁrst approach of the problem (base study case) is a ﬁxed
payment PPA where all the available volume of the WF is provided to the HP.
This problem aims at analysing the ﬁxed pricing scheme that would allow a successful con-
tract accounting for all players requirements. Therefore, including all limitations and both
players’ perspectives, a negotiation spectrum is obtained.
The obtained Pppa values for the restrictive and expected studies are presented in Table 9:
Lower Level Problem
P ppa
[Eur/MWh]
Upper Level Problem
P ppa
[Eur/MWh]
Negotiation
Spectrum (σ)
[Eur/MWh]
Expected
[68.84
,
251.82]
182.98
Restrictive
[109.57
,
151.67]
42.1
Table 9: Restrictive and expected studies: P ppa values and σ for base study case.
It can be noticed that in the case of the expected interval of feasible P ppa, there is a con-
straints relaxation in comparison with the restrictive scene. The negotiation spectrum is
34
==PAGE:41==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
approximately four times broader than when considering each scenario individually. Within
the restrictive study, the Lower Level Problem present higher prices due to NPV and banka-
bility prerequisites for extreme scenarios, which aﬀects the Upper Level Problem by lowering
the price for the performance of the LCOH constraint.
When it comes to the assessment of the electricity demand strategy from the HP (Dt,s), the
results have been obtained for the restrictive study for risk awareness. Four representative
scenarios have been chosen for the presentation of the decision variables, which corresponds
to Scenario 1,2,3 and 10 (see Appendix for scenario guide).
Dt,s is evaluated in an hourly resolution for all scenarios having 4 dimensions (Hours x Days
x Years x Scenarios). To represent the obtained optimal values and the inﬂuencing param-
eters, the following representations are provided on a yearly and scenario basis, calculated
using the mean per hours and days (left). Moreover, the distribution of the decision vari-
able in an hourly based can be observed (right). The Lower Level Problem is the object
of analysis, having the Upper Level Problem correspondent representations in the Appendix.
It is worth highlighting the surplus in the HP electricity capacity compared to the maximum
production of the wind farm. This surplus enables a strategy decision based on spot market
prices for selling electricity or merely relying on the total production from the wind farm.
Note that the ramp up and down constraints on the consumption have not been considered
due to ﬂexibility capabilities from the electrolyzers.
(a) Demand Variable Strategy.
(b) Demand Variable Distribution.
Figure 11: Restrictive study: Demand Variable in Upper Level Problem, Scenario 1 in Base
Study Case.
In Scenario 1, the spot price proﬁle corresponds to the baseline. It is observed a steady be-
haviour of the HP consumption due to low volatility on the price, having lower consumption
when spiking spot prices. The involvement in the PPA during the ﬁrst 10 years enhances
higher consumption when high P spot
t,s
versus when it relies entirely on the grid - see year
4 versus year 11. For the variable distribution, it can be noticed the impact on the plant
when it has entered a PPA. The plant is enforced to produced from the wind production, in
35
==PAGE:42==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
contrary than when buying from the grid. Upon the expiration of the PPA, either the plant
consumes its full capacity, or none, leading to instability.
(a) Demand Variable Strategy.
(b) Demand Variable Distribution.
Figure 12: Restrictive study: Demand Variable in Upper Level Problem, Scenario 2 in Base
Study Case.
In Scenario 2, there is a pronounced volatility on P spot
t,s . Consequently, the demand dynamics
minimizes the hydrogen production, specially when the PPA is concluded - it can be noticed
the frequency of the spot price being higher that the feasible PPA price. Nevertheless, during
that time, its participation is determined by the combination of wind production and grid
consumption when low prices. As an overall strategy, the consumption is not steady, not
providing the full value of the plant once the PPA has expired.
(a) Demand Variable Strategy
(b) Demand Variable Distribution
Figure 13: Restrictive study: Demand Variable in Upper Level Problem, Scenario 3 in Base
Study Case.
In Scenario 3, P spot
t,s
represents volatility but with a decreasing trend throughout the years,
linked to a lower frequency above the feasible P ppa than Scenario 2. The demand strategy
ﬂuctuation is directly correlated with the volatility of spot price, specially from year 10.
Previous to that, the wind production is the requirement of a minimum hydrogen production
when spiking spot prices. Last, the ﬂuctuation dynamics of the demand strategy are similar
throughout the years.
36
==PAGE:43==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
(a) Demand Variable Strategy
(b) Demand Variable Distribution
Figure 14: Restrictive study: Demand Variable in Upper Level Problem, Scenario 10 in Base
Study Case.
Scenario 10 is an advantageous picture from the HP perspective. The outcome are high P ppa
(justiﬁed by the restrictive study) and exponentially decreasing spot prices, which boost the
hydrogen production throughout the plant’s lifetime. It is observed that when high PPA
prices, the hydrogen production will adjust to the wind production agreed delivery. However,
when determining whether consumption is favorable, the plant opts not to consume. In year
3, there is a surge in P spot
t,s , and the hydrogen production is limited to the wind production
availability.
In conclusion, there is a consistent characteristic across scenarios: the electricity demand
strategy is signiﬁcantly dependent on the electricity price, and when not involved in a PPA,
its behaviour is directly correlated by the spot market volatility. The advantages of such
oﬀtaker participating in a PPA ensures a minimum operation at the time of having a feasible
price agreed for a speciﬁc period of time, limiting the exposure to ﬁnancial risks. Never-
theless, being involved in a renewable PPA acknowledges the uncertainty on the produced
volume. The risk attitude of the demand will determine the potential beneﬁts or losses, a
risk exposure that can be translated into price negotiation.
5.4.2
Variable Payment
The chosen permutation that corresponds to a variable payment (case 2) is a PPA price
that changes year by year for the set duration of the agreement, but agreed at the time of
signing the deal. This study has been conducted since it is interesting to observe how the
price requirements evolves according to time-dependent factors.
As for the hydrogen requirement -impacting the Upper Level Problem threshold price-, a
constraint has been added limiting the price in accordance to the evolution of the green
hydrogen market price (yearly-based).
From the Lower Level Problem perspective, the overall compliance with the NPV greater
that 0 do not require a speciﬁc distribution of the price throughout the years. Nevertheless,
37
==PAGE:44==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
the bankability constraint require a minimum price for paying back yearly instalments of the
debt loan.
The values have been obtained in Table 10 are for the restrictive study since it represent the
most risk averse situation.
Year
Lower Level Problem
P ppa
[Eur/MWh]
Upper Level Problem
P ppa
[Eur/MWh]
Negotiation
Spectrum
[Eur/MWh]
1
[153.70
,
153.70]
0,0
2
[172.01
,
172.01]
0,0
3
[121.48
,
121.48]
0,0
4
[134.61
,
134.69]
0,08
5
[71.43
,
131.90]
60,46
6
[71.78
,
146.88]
75,10
7
[106.05
,
110.21]
4,16
8
[72.50
,
117.33]
44,83
9
[72.86
,
114.47]
41,61
10
[73.24
,
123.73]
50,49
Table 10: Restrictive study: Optimal P ppa and σ for case 2.
The mentioned time-dependent factors are the generated scenarios as well as the green hy-
drogen market price.
Looking at the Lower Level Problem P ppa, there is no distinct trend but rather a generalized
decrease throughout the years in comparison with the initial years of the deal. A correlation
is observed when low P spot
t,s
across scenarios, high P ppa values occur (i.e year 7). This is
attributed to the chosen restrictive scenario which entails low wind production that, with
higher prices, will comply with the ﬁnancial constraints of the producer.
From the other perspective - maximization of the P ppa limited by the HP LCOH constraint-,
similar dynamics can be identiﬁed. As in relation to the green hydrogen market price inputs,
the expected decrease in the following years enforces the electricity costs to be correspond-
ingly lower to ensure economic viability. Nevertheless, year 6 presents an increase which
can be linked to lower prices from the wholesale market in combination with lower wind
production for the chosen scenario. The relaxation from the HP constraint is due to higher
consumption from the grid at low costs, higher production of hydrogen consequently, and
higher revenues that can aﬀord higher electricity prices from the PPA deal. Year 10 present
similar characteristics.
The widest negotiation spectrum occur in year 5, 6 and 10 related providing more possibili-
ties to deﬁne the contract according to other considerations. Medium-degree of freedom for
38
==PAGE:45==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
negotiation occur in year 8 and 9 allowing negotiation, and none on the remaining years. All
in all, high production of wind will push the Lower Level Problem P ppa down whereas low
prices of P spot
t,s , up.
Overall, the obtained values reﬂect the chosen restrictive scenario seen from both perspectives
highly exposing the PPA terms to the uncertainties ingrained in the system. Within the
obtained boundaries for the P ppa deﬁnition, the evolution of the price can be estimated
complying with the yearly requirements.
Fixed VS. Variable Payment
For the purpose of conducting a comparative analysis between ﬁxed and variable payment,
the Optimal Objective (OO) of the wind farm (Upper Level Problem objective function)
and hydrogen plant (Lower Level Problem objective function), is the matter of comparison.
Therefore, it is assessed a restrictive study of the Optimal Objective of each player.
Wind Farm
OO
[MEur]
Hydrogen
Plant OO
[MEur]
Fixed
Payment
3809.758
Fixed
Payment
5638.583
Variable
Payment
3476.168
Variable
Payment
5719.182
Table 11: Optimal objective for WF and HP in ﬁxed and variable payment structure.
In the ﬁrst instance, the wind farm, through the Upper Level Problem, aims at maximizing
its revenues. The calculated OO is composed by the P ppa applicable to the contract duration,
and the spot price, which is involved after the PPA has expired. It can be noticed that the
welfare is larger when ﬁxed payment by an increase of 8.76%.
Secondly, the hydrogen plant objective to maximize the beneﬁts depend on electricity costs
for the entire lifetime: for the PPA deal, P ppa for the wind production and P spot for the
decided remaining demand, and P spot for the entire D once the PPA is concluded. The ob-
tained results reﬂect that under a variable payment, the hydrogen plant will beneﬁt by 1.4%.
All in all, the assessment under a risk-averse case (per scenario simulation) provides an idea
of what are the potential beneﬁts on both parties when determining the payment struc-
ture. Signiﬁcant beneﬁts are observed under a ﬁxed payment for the wind farm, a higher
rate compared to when the hydrogen plant can boost its welfare under a variable payment
scheme. Overall, the ﬁxed payment provides better conditions since it is less exposed to the
uncertainties of the system (as explained in case 3), and involves larger beneﬁts.
39
==PAGE:46==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
5.4.3
Speciﬁc Delivery Proﬁle
The wide number of possibilities to deﬁne a speciﬁc delivery proﬁle enables an agreement
project-speciﬁc based on the needs. To analyze the impact on the welfare of both partic-
ipants, several setups are deﬁned with speciﬁc percentages of the volume dedicated to the
PPA, while the remaining portion is sold to the grid.
In this adjustment, the following values have been obtained for the expected (Table 12) and
restrictive studies (Table 13).
Expected
Lower Level Problem
P ppa
[Eur/MWh]
Upper Level Problem
P ppa
[Eur/MWh]
Negotiation
Spectrum (σ)
[Eur/MWh]
95%
[70.50
,
260.87]
190.37
90%
[72.34
,
270.93]
198.59
85%
[74.41
,
282.18]
207.77
Table 12: Expected study: Optimal P ppa and σ for case 3.
In both studies, the optimal value for P ppa increases at lower percentage of volume to provide
to the HP. This trend is attributed to the spot price scenarios, which present decreasing trend
in overall. This occurrence impacts the Lower Level Problem by requiring higher prices from
the PPA contract in order to fulﬁll the wind farm economic requirements. The competitive
pricing scheme from the spot market results in lower revenues from the remaining capacity
sold to the grid, which needs to be balanced. Therefore, the NPV and bankability constrains
will have a negative correlation with the decrease of the volume to agree for the PPA under
competitive P spot
t,s .
Having the HP requirements constraining the Upper Level Problem, from the other perspec-
tive, the hydrogen plant will beneﬁt from the spot prices potentially allowing the P ppa to
obtain a higher value.
Restrictive
Lower Level Problem
P ppa
[Eur/MWh]
Upper Level Problem
P ppa
[Eur/MWh]
Negotiation
Spectrum (σ)
[Eur/MWh]
95%
[112.79
,
153.47]
40.68
90%
[116.38
,
155.468]
39.09
85%
[120.39
,
157.7]
37.31
Table 13: Restrictive study: Optimal P ppa and σ for case 3.
Last, equivalently to the base study case, the interval for negotiation in the restrictive study
40
==PAGE:47==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
limits the problem having shorter bound to negotiate than in the expected.
In conclusion, in the overall context, the agreeable price could vary more in the expected
study than in the restrictive, a bound that is determined by the equal risk attitude of both. In
the restrictive study, a lower range for negotiation will come at the expense of risk limitation.
5.5
Discussion
After the conducted assessment, it can be identiﬁed what are the risk exposure of the evalu-
ated cases. The risk attitude of the participants can be allocated accordingly, arriving to the
optimal terms for both players. In other words, the terms of the agreement can be deﬁned
allocating the risks by deﬁning the P ppa correspondingly.
For the unpredictable wind production, the generation of scenarios diversify the possibility
of mismatch between the forecasted and real time electricity production. This approach
provides an estimation on the potential production in the long term. For the risk allocation
of this uncertainty, the negotiation spectrum is a manner to quantify the risk attitude of the
participants according to the inputs. The delivery scheme addresses the risk attitude of the
participants by agreeing on a pay-as-produced or pay-as-forecasted PPA:
A pay-as-produced PPA will mitigate the risk of not meeting a speciﬁc demand required by
the oﬀtaker, shifting the risk to the consumer. The accepted risk will impact the P ppa, which
will be determined within the boundaries of the negotiation spectrum calculated through an
estimation on the production. Hence, the price will move towards the left closer to the Lower
Level Problem limits. In contrary, when it is agreed a pay-as-forecasted delivery scheme of
the estimated volume, it is responsibility of the producer to meet the required demand. In
this case, the risk will be allocated in the producer at the expense of agreeing on a higher
P ppa. In consequence, the P ppa will move towards the right side of σ becoming a higher
price for the cost of electricity under the PPA. Both approaches can be applied for all cases
of study since they are based on the forecasted uncertainty to estimate the price, but an
additional aspect (who is taking the risk) will deﬁne the ﬁnal P ppa.
In case of the generated scenarios for P spot
t,s , there is an inversely correlated behaviour of
the P ppa. Thus, the impact of the wholesale market price on the determination of P ppa is
notable. The possibility of a PPA acting as a Contract for Diﬀerence (CfD) mitigates the
risk of mismatch between the wholesale market price since its diﬀerence will be covered by
the producer when P ppa is higher, and by the consumer when P ppa is lower. In this case,
the risks will be allocated in correlation to the wholesale market price, resulting in higher
exposure to the market.
The risk deriving from the uncertainties highly vary for both studies - expected and re-
strictive. The expected value of P ppa, obtained by the equally probable distribution of the
scenarios, provides wider negotiation range, while in the restrictive σ is narrower.
41
==PAGE:48==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
The methodologies implemented in the model have assessed diﬀerent variations on contract
structure in regard to delivery scheme, for full volume or speciﬁc delivery proﬁle, and pay-
ment structure, for ﬁxed and variable payment.
For all cases, the negotiation spectrum
provides a eligible bound for negotiation. Comparing the diﬀerent cases, it can be concluded
the following:
The combination of competitive P ppa and σ for the expected study in full available volume
delivered and ﬁxed payment out-stands for the optimal terms for negotiation. Nonetheless, it
is at the cost of being both participant exposed to critical scenarios to occur. When restric-
tive, there is buﬀer negotiation but with less competitive prices. The set-up deﬁned for the
variable payment case represents that when it is evaluated in a yearly basis, less ﬂexibility
there is in the deﬁnition of the contract, and lower beneﬁts on the welfare, barely positioned
in the HP. Last, the obtained values for the speciﬁc delivery proﬁle justiﬁes the potential
threat of being more and more exposed to the P spot
t,s , outlining the envisioned beneﬁts of PPAs.
All in all, the beneﬁts seen from both perspectives are stated below:
• From the wind energy producer perspective, the exposure to the volatile wholesale
market can be limited by the terms of the agreement, at the time of securing revenues
and enhancing better bankability opportunities.
• From the hydrogen plant perspective, it has been exposed that when it solely consumes
from the grid, the hydrogen production is highly dependant on its ﬂuctuating dynamics.
However, being involved in such contract ensures a feasible price for a period of time,
and in consequence, steady operation of the plant.
Last, and emphasizing the core purpose of this thesis, the signiﬁcant potential of Power Pur-
chase Agreements lies in the possibility to allocate risks amidst the uncertainties inherent in
the renewable production and electricity markets.
42
==PAGE:49==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
6
Conclusion
The envisioned uncertainties of renewable energy production and electricity market prices
can jeopardize the economic feasibility of energy projects. Power Purchase Agreements are
understood as a risk mitigation strategy due to the certainty on the energy trade conditions
for its duration, and therefore, an accurate economic evaluation prior to FID. Therefore,
entering a PPA not only secures the revenue streams and the ﬁnancing of the project, but
also enhances investment in renewable energy projects and green electricity consumption,
enabling the green energy transition.
Nonetheless, achieving the common terms of such transaction accounting for all player’s
requirements remains a challenge. The approach to reach a feasible negotiation space is de-
pendent on many factors, and due the vast amount of permutations of PPA types, it is highly
diﬃcult to quantify the potential opportunities of each conﬁguration. Problem optimization
enables the assessment and comparison of diﬀerent conﬁgurations allowing standardization
of the negotiation aspects.
Through the terms of such transaction applied to the model, it comes with relative ease to
allocate the risks derived from the envisioned uncertainties. The obtainment of the nego-
tiation spectrum allows to translate the risk attitude of each participant into the terms of
the agreement, while evaluating the impact on the price. All in all, this approach enables
the identiﬁcation of the optimal terms that satisfy with all participants’ quantitative and
qualitative requirements.
43
==PAGE:50==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
7
Future Works
In order to tackle the encountered limitations, it is exposed the proposed methodologies to
delve into for expanding the scope of this thesis.
The uncertainties included in the model have been assessed through the creation of scenarios,
a methodology rather implemented for such purpose. Nevertheless, the creation of scenarios
can follow diverse theories. Various methodologies are explored for the wind production in
the long-term, whereas the spot price is rather diﬃcult to predict later that months ahead.
A Fourier analysis has been implemented before with interesting results, which could be
implemented in this application.
Additionally, to tackle the uncertainties in optimization, risk measures can be investigated.
The Conditional Value at Risk is a known methodology within studies assessing the risks
associated with Power Purchase Agreements.
Last, countless possibilities of PPAs structures can be similarly assessed. Speciﬁcally, it is
rather under the industry consideration to ﬁx the demand variable, and input it to the model
estimating the correspondent price. Therefore, the producer should assess the balancing ser-
vice to cover potential mismatches in the estimated production.
44
==PAGE:51==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Abbreviations
BRP - Balancing Responsible Party
CFDS - Cash Flows for Debt Service
COD - Commercial Operation Date
DSCR - Debt Service Coverage Ratio
EIA - Environmental Impact Assessment
EIB - European Investment Bank
EU - European Union
FID - Financial Investment Decision
HP - Hydrogen Plant
LCOE - Levelized Cost of Energy
LCOH -Levelized Cost of Hydrogen
NPV - Net Present Value
OO - Optimal Objective
O&M - Operation and Maintenance
PPA - Power Purchase Agreement
RES - Renewable Energy System
WACC - Weighted Average Cost of Capital
WF - Wind Farm
45
==PAGE:52==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Nomenclature
T Ltime - Lifetime of the system
CorpT ax - Corporate tax
DiscRate - Discount rate
i - Interest rate
P ppa - PPA price
T ppa - PPA duration
P spot
t,s
- Price of the spot market
GenW
t,s - Wind energy generation
Dt,s - Demand of electricity from the hydrogen plant
T otH - Total capacity of the hydrogen plant
CAP EXW - Investment costs of the wind farm
OP EXW - Operational cost of the wind farm
DepW - Depreciation of the wind farm
rdep - Depreciation rate
T loan - Duration of the bank loan
E
V - Proportion of equity of the project bankability
D
V - Proportion of debt of the project bankability
Ce - Cost of equity
Cd - Cost of debt
Y I - Yearly Instalments
DSCRmin - Minimum Debt Service Coverage Ratio
CAP EXH - Investment costs of the hydrogen plant
OP EXH - Fixed operational cost of the hydrogen plant
F d - Fuel costs of the hydrogen plant
P H
t
- Price of hydrogen
⌘H - Hydrogen production rate
⇡s - Probability per scenario
46
==PAGE:53==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
List of Figures
1
Evolution of the lowest and the highest regional wholesale electricity prices in
the European day-ahead markets. Source: European Commission. . . . . . .
6
2
Yearly energy signed under a PPA in Europe. Source: S&P Global Commod-
ity Insights. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Sub-types of PPAs and their relationships. Source:[15]. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
System conﬁguration for the PPA duration.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Wind production estimation based on historical data. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Scenarios W1, W2, W3.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Averaged evolution of spot prices for one day and one year. . . . . . . . . . .
31
8
Averaged evolution of spot prices for the system’s lifespan. . . . . . . . . . .
31
9
Representation of the Optimization Problem of Lower and Upper Level Problem. 32
10
Total feasible area of the problem. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
11
Restrictive study: Demand Variable in Upper Level Problem, Scenario 1 in
Base Study Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
12
Restrictive study: Demand Variable in Upper Level Problem, Scenario 2 in
Base Study Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
13
Restrictive study: Demand Variable in Upper Level Problem, Scenario 3 in
Base Study Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
14
Restrictive study: Demand Variable in Upper Level Problem, Scenario 10 in
Base Study Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
List of Tables
1
Risk qualiﬁcation on the PPA participants for the delivery scheme.
. . . . .
12
2
Inputs of the system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Inputs of the wind farm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Inputs of the hydrogen plant.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Averaged trends derived from successor years based on historical data for DK1. 30
6
Growth rate in scenario generation for spot price. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Volatility scenarios. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Criteria of negotiation spectrum.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9
Restrictive and expected studies: P ppa values and σ for base study case. . . .
34
10
Restrictive study: Optimal P ppa and σ for case 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
11
Optimal objective for WF and HP in ﬁxed and variable payment structure. .
39
12
Expected study: Optimal P ppa and σ for case 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
13
Restrictive study: Optimal P ppa and σ for case 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
47
==PAGE:54==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
References
[1] European
Commission.
Electricty
market
design.
https://energy.
ec.europa.eu/topics/markets-and-consumers/market-legislation/
electricity-market-design_en.
[2] International Energy Agency IEA. Net zero by 2050 - a roadmap for the global energy
sector. 2021.
[3] Enel Green Power. The glossary of sustainable energy. https://www.enelgreenpower.
com/learning-hub/glossary.
[4] European Parliment. Eu electricity market design reform. 2023.
[5] European Commission. Communication from the commission to the european parlia-
ment, the european council, the council, the european economic and social committee
and the committee of the regions. repowereu plan. 2022.
[6] Cristian Stet. Seven trends that will shape european power purchase agreements path
to growth*. RaboResearch, 2022.
[7] Paolo Gabrielli Reyhaneh Aboutalebi Giovanni Sansavini.
Mitigating ﬁnancial risk
ofcorporate power purchase agreements via portfolio optimization. 2022.
[8] Oﬃcial Journal of the European Union.
Directive (eu) 2023/2413 of the european
parliament and of the council. 2023.
[9] Benjamin Rachunoka Andrea Staidb Jean-Paul Watsonc David L. WoodruďŹ. Assess-
ment of wind power scenario creation methods for stochastic power systems operations.
2020.
[10] Antonio J. Conejo Miguel Carrion Juan M. Morales. Decision Making Under Uncer-
tainty in Electricty Markets. Springer, June 2010.
[11] Serhan Cevik Keitaro Ninomiya.
Chasing the sun and catching the wind: Energy
transition and electricity prices in europe. International Monetary Fund, 2022.
[12] SP
Global
Commodity
Insigths.
European
ppa
market
con-
tinues
to
grow
in
the
ﬁrst
quarter
of
2023.
https://
www.spglobal.com/commodityinsights/en/ci/research-analysis/
european-ppa-market-continues-to-grow-in-the-first-quarter-2023.html.
[13] European Commission. Commission recommendation on speeding up permit-granting
procedures for renewable energy projects and facilitating power purchase agreements.
2022.
[14] European Commission.
Enabling framework for renewables.
https://energy.ec.
europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/enabling-framework-renewables_en.
48
==PAGE:55==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
[15] Syed Zohaib Ahmed. A short overview of european power purchase agreements. 2023.
[16] Baringa. Commercial power purchase agreements. 2022.
[17] PEXAPARK.
What is a ppa?
the guide to power purchase agreement.
https://
pexapark.com/solar-power-purchase-agreement-ppa/#ppa.
[18] Kristina Fedorova Tereza Abelova Michal Kvasnica. Dynamic power purchase agree-
ment. 2023.
[19] Luca Mendicino Daniele Menniti Anna Pinnarelli Nicola Sorrentino. Corporate power
purchase agreement: Formulation of the related levelized cost of energy and its appli-
cation to a real life case study. 2019.
[20] Hui Liu Chao Chen Xinwei Lv Xing Wu Min Liu. Deterministic wind energy forecasting:
A review of intelligent predictors and auxiliary methods. 2019.
[21] Hui Liu Ye Li Zhu Duan Chao Chen. A review on multi-objective optimization frame-
work in wind energy forecasting techniques and applications. 2020.
[22] Bo Tranberga Rasmus Thrane Hansend Leopoldo Cataniae. Managing volumetric risk
of long-term power purchase agreements. 2020.
[23] RECHARGE. Global news and intelligence for the Energy Transition. New york oﬀshore
wind ﬁrms seek up to 552023.
[24] RECHARGE. Global news and intelligence for the Energy Transition. Oﬀshore wind
build-out ’quarter lower than expected’ as cost squeeze bites. 2023.
[25] Energinet DK. Horns rev 3 oﬀshore wind farm. oﬀshore noise emission. 2014.
[26] Energinet DK. Horns rev 3 oﬀshore wind farm. air traﬃc. 2014.
[27] Energinet DK. Horns rev 3. technical project description for the large-scale oﬀshore
wind farm (400 mw) at horns rev 3. 2014.
[28] DNV. Dnv gl awards project certiﬁcate to vattenfallâs horns rev 3 oﬀshore wind farm.
https://www.dnv.com/news.
[29] Ramboll. Dnv gl awards project certiﬁcate to vattenfallâs horns rev 3 oﬀshore wind
farm. https://www.ramboll.com/net-zero-explorers/.
[30] Hybrit Fossil free fuel. Hybrit demonstration. https://www.hybritdevelopment.se/
en/hybrit-demonstration/.
[31] Port Esbjerg. Esbjerg port’s esg report. https://portesbjerg.dk/en/our-focus/
sustainable-initiatives.
[32] EH2B. European hydrogen backbone. implementation roadmap - cross border projects
and costs update. 2023.
49
==PAGE:56==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
[33] Center
for
Strategic
and
International
Studies
(CSIS).
Germanyâs
hydrogen
industrial
strategy.
https://www.csis.org/analysis/
germanys-hydrogen-industrial-strategy.
[34] 46205 Feasibility studies of energy projects (Lena Kitzing). Evaluating projects - basic
economic principles and methods. Course material. Technical University of Denmark
(DTU) , 2022.
[35] European Commission. Final report. cost of energy (lcoe). energy costs, taxes and the
impact of government interventions on investments. 2020.
[36] Maira Bruck Peter Sandborn. Pricing bundled renewable energy credits using a modiﬁed
lcoe for power purchase agreements. 2021.
[37] Rajeev Dhir.
Negotiation: Deﬁnition, stages, skills, and strategies.
https://www.
investopedia.com/terms/n/negotiation.asp, 2023.
[38] Don Ross. Game theory. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1997.
[39] James Chen. Game theory: Beyond the basics. https://www.investopedia.com.
[40] European Comission.
Cost of energy (lcoe). energy costs, taxes and the impact of
government intervetions on investments. 2020.
[41] 46205 Feasibility studies of energy projects (Lena Kitzing).
Discount rate.
Course
material. Technical University of Denmark (DTU) , 2022.
[42] 46202 Feasibility studies of energy projects (Lena Kitzing). Basic ﬁnancing considera-
tions. Course material. Technical University of Denmark (DTU) , 2022.
[43] Danish Energy Agency. Technology data for renewable fuels. 2023.
[44] Energy International Agency. The cost of capital in clean energy transitions. https:
//www.iea.org/articles/the-cost-of-capital-in-clean-energy-transitions.
[45] Trading Economics. Denmark corporate tax rate. https://tradingeconomics.com/
denmark/corporate-tax-rate, 2023.
[46] Euribor rates.eu. https://www.euribor-rates.eu/en/., urldate = , title = Euribor
Rates, 2024.
[47] Vattenfall. Horns rev 3. https://powerplants.vattenfall.com/horns-rev-3/.
[48] IRENA. Renewable power generation costs in 2022. 2022.
[49] 4C Oﬀhsore. Global oﬀshore map. https://map.4coffshore.com/offshorewind/.
[50] Wind Energy Market Intelligence The Wind Power.
Horns rev 3.
https://www.
thewindpower.net/windfarm_en_16854_horns-rev-3.php.
50
==PAGE:57==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
[51] Investopedia. Debt service coverage ratio. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d.
[52] IRENA. Making the breakthrough. green hydrogen policies and technology costs. 2021.
[53] A M Johansen. Monte carlo method. 2010.
[54] Ruili Liu Liuliu Peng Guoqing Huang Xuhong Zho Qingshan Yang Jifeng Cai. A monte
carlo simulation method for probabilistic evaluation of annual energy production of wind
farm considering wind ﬂow model and wake eﬀect. 2023.
[55] Energi
Data
Service.
Elspot
prices.
https://www.energidataservice.dk/
tso-electricity/Elspotprices.
[56] Paolo Gabrielli Moritz Wuthrich Steﬀem Blume Giovanni Sansavini. Data-driven mod-
eling for long-term electricity price forecasting. 2022.
[57] NordPool.
Curtailment,
price
thresholds
and
decoupling.
https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/trading/Day-ahead-trading/
Curtailment-price-thresholds-and-decoupling/.
51
==PAGE:58==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Appendix
Applications of green hydrogen
Speciﬁc Delivery Proﬁle - Problem formulation
• Constraint LCOH
F d(P ppa, Dt,s) =
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGent,sV ppa + (Dt,s −Gent,sV ppa)P spot
t,s
(1 + DiscRate)t
+
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
Gent,sP spot
t,s
(1 + DiscRate)t
(29)
• Constraint NPV & Bank
DiscRevenuesW(P ppa) =
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGent,sV ppa + P spot
t,s Gent,s(1 −V ppa)
(1 + WACC)t
+
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
P spot
t,s Gent,s
(1 + WACC)t
(30)
DiscTaxIncomeW(P ppa) = (
T ppa
X
t=1
P ppaGent,sV ppa + P spot
t,s Gent,s(1 −V ppa)
(1 + WACC)t
+
T Ltime
X
t=T ppa
P spot
t,s Gent,s
(1 + WACC)t −
T Ltime
X
t=1
OPEXW
t Gent,s
(1 + WACC)t −DepW)CorpTax
(31)
52
==PAGE:59==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
Scenario guide
Spot
Price
Trend
Spot
Price
Volatility
Wind
Production
Proﬁle
Scenario 1
A
1
W1
Scenario 2
B
1
W1
Scenario 3
C
1
W1
Scenario 4
D
1
W1
Scenario 5
E
1
W1
Scenario 6
A
2
W1
Scenario 7
B
2
W1
Scenario 8
C
2
W1
Scenario 9
D
2
W1
Scenario 10
E
2
W1
Scenario 11
A
1
W2
Scenario 12
B
1
W2
Scenario 13
C
1
W2
Scenario 14
D
1
W2
Scenario 15
E
1
W2
Scenario 16
A
2
W2
Scenario 17
B
2
W2
Scenario 18
C
2
W2
Scenario 19
D
2
W2
Scenario 20
E
2
W2
Scenario 21
A
1
W3
Scenario 22
B
1
W3
Scenario 23
C
1
W3
Scenario 24
D
1
W3
Scenario 25
E
1
W3
Scenario 26
A
2
W3
Scenario 27
B
2
W3
Scenario 28
C
2
W3
Scenario 29
D
2
W3
Scenario 30
E
2
W3
Demand strategy for full volume and ﬁxed payment - Restrictive study
53
==PAGE:60==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
54
==PAGE:61==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
(a) Lower Level
(b) Upper Level
(a) Lower Level
(b) Upper Level
(a) Lower Level
(b) Upper Level
55
==PAGE:62==
Risk allocation in renewable power purchase agreements
(a) Lower Level
(b) Upper Level
56
