==PAGE:1==
Production and Biophysical Characterization
of TDP­43
Master Thesis
Supervisors:
Professor Alexander Kai Büll
Postdoctoral Researcher Antonin Kunka
Author: Federica Saraceno, s213771
DTU Bioengineering
Protein Biophysics Core
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
Master Thesis
January, 2024
Author: Federica Saraceno
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Protein Biophysics Core, Søltofts Plads, Building 227, 2800 Kgs.
Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Protein Biophysics, Department
of Bioengineering, at Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, in partial fulfilment for the degree of Master
of Science in Engineering in Biotechnology.
Federica Saraceno ­ s213771
Signature
Date
ii
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
28/01/2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Neurodegenerative diseases represent a diverse set of disorders characterized by the gradual
decline of neuronal function in both the central and peripheral nervous systems. Amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, an adult­onset and ultimately fatal neurodegenerative disorder, is characterized
by cytoplasmic aggregation of the RNA­binding protein TDP­43. Ubiquitously present in cell nuclei,
TDP­43 plays a crucial role in mRNA transcription, processing, and translation.
The focus of this thesis has been set on the intrinsically disordered low­complexity domain of the
protein, TDP­16, which is believed to be instrumental in driving protein aggregation. First, the study
delves into the development and optimization of a protein purification protocol for the recovery of
soluble monomeric TDP­16 through affinity purification, dialysis and gel filtration.
The study then embarks on an extensive biophysical characterization of the self­assembly and
aggregation of TDP­16 through the application of a range of techniques such as FIDA, ThT fluo­
rescence spectroscopy and DLS. Chemical depolymerisation experiments provided insights into
the behavior of TDP­16 aggregates under various conditions, and led to the finding that guanidine
hydrochloride was higly effective in depolymerising TDP­16 aggregates. Additionally, experiments
revealed that chemical depolymerisation conducted at pH 7.4 effectively increased the soluble
protein fraction in the samples, with equilibrium being reached within three weeks of incubation.
In the last part of this thesis, optimal conditions for TDP­16 fibril formation were determined. Instru­
mental to this process was the resuspension of protein pellets in a buffer containing urea, followed
by dialysis against a buffer at pH 4.0 to eliminate trace of denaturant in the sample. Moreover, a
protein concentration equal to 84µM was found to be the optimal one for fibril formation. Compar­
ative stability assessments using isodesmic fitting of data obtained from chemical polymerisation
experiments suggest that both urea and guanidine hydrochloride are effective denaturants for the
depolymerisation of TDP­16 fibrils.
This work aims not only to contribute to the understanding of TDP­43 and its role in neurodegener­
ative diseases, but hopes to also serve as a comprehensive guide for future research in this area
of study.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
My heartfelt gratitude goes to Professor Alexander Kai Büll, for being a great supervisor and a true
source of inspiration. Thank you for introducing me to the world of intrinsically disordered proteins,
for allowing me the freedom to explore and work in my own way in the lab, and for providing
invaluable insights, especially when I felt lost in my research.
My most profound gratitude goes to Antonin Kunka, for the countless hours we have spent together
in the lab and his inexhaustible patience. But, most importantly, for being a very present mentor
while also allowing me the freedom to independently and creatively design my experiments. Your
dedication and commitment to research have been incredibly inspiring. You rock!
I would also like to thank Celia, Azad, Jacob, Wang, Lars, Sophie, Hossein, Christin, Rasmus,
Tom, Masoumeh and Louise, for the many laughs shared between one experiment and the other.
Sharing this journey with you has been a true joy.
A special acknowledgment goes to Gusztav, Bence and Emilie, who have been just the best study
companions during my years at DTU.
My gratitude also extends to Ali, Tushar, Tejasvi, Kamilia, Daniel, Paul, Natasha, Lucas, Kean, and
Kamal for making my time as a Master student truly memorable.
Thank you Pietro, for being my first friend here in Denmark, but also for being the best cook,
motivator and, most importantly, the best listener.
Thank you Veronica, for all the funny anecdotes, countless cups of tea, and for being by my side
every day during this intense journey. Thank you, not just for being the best roommate ever, but
for being my very first cheerleader.
A special thank you goes to Rron, whose influence has deeply transformed me. Thank you for
teaching me the valuable lesson that while dedication and giving your all in academics, projects
and work is essential, recognizing the importance of taking breaks is equally vital. Thank you for
being my best friend, before being my partner. And thank you for being so close to me in difficult
times, even though you are far away.
Thank you to Adriana, Chiara, Federica and Marta, my best friends since day one. Thank you for
not letting life and distance get in the way of our friendship, watching you grow into the people you
aspire to be warms my heart. And I just cannot wait to celebrate this achievement with you as soon
as possible.
Thank you to my nonni and my zii back in Italy, who don’t see me very often, but continuously
support me from afar while eagerly awaiting my return.
Thank you to my French family, for opening the doors to a complete stranger 7 years ago, treating
me like a daughter, and for being by my side ever since. I am so lucky to have you. I would also
like to thank my French grandma, Amatxi, who I have lost during the time I was working on my
thesis. Thank you for being the best example of unconditional love and kindness. This thesis is
dedicated to her.
Finally, a big, huge thank you to my mom, dad, and brother. Because if I was brave enough to
leave my home when I was so young, you were also brave enough to let me go. Thank you for
trusting me (and the process), for believing in me when I certainly did not, for silently and patiently
cheering for me while I was working hard to make my dreams come true. I love you with all my
heart.
iv
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
TDP­43 and its role in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Genetics, structure and cellular localization of TDP­43 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Aim, scope and structure of this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theoretical Background
7
2.1
Protein Self­Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Overview of techniques for the analysis of protein aggregation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Diffusion­based techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4
Microscopic Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Materials and Methods
17
3.1
Protein expression and purification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
TDP­16 aggregates characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results and Discussion
24
4.1
Purification of soluble monomeric TDP­16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Characterization of TDP­16 aggregates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Testing alternative depolymerisation agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.4
Chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates using Gnd­HCl
. . . . . . . . . . 35
4.5
Testing an alternative protocol for the production and characterization of TDP­16 fibrils 40
5
Conclusions
43
6
Future Directions
45
Bibliography
47
A Appendices
51
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
Pathophysiology of ALS: the formation of prion­like aggregates of TDP­43 disrupts
fundamental cellular pathways, thereby causing motor neuron degeneration, oxida­
tive stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, impairment of RNA processing, loss of
axonal transport, disruption of the neuromuscular junction and axon demyelination.
Picture drawn in BioRender inspired from [10].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Schematic of TDP­43 modular structure. The protein is characterized by a nuclear
localization sequence (NLS), two RNA recognition motifs (RRMs), a nuclear ex­
port sequence (NES) and a glycine­rich domain within which the majority of ALS­
associated genetic mutations are concentrated. Created in BioRender. . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Cryo­EM structure of TDP­43 LCD amyloid fibrils from [27], available on the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) under the accession code 7KWZ.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
Graphical representation of the amyloid fibril formation process illustrating the sig­
moidal aggregation curve segmented into three phases: nucleation, elongation and
saturation. In red, a representation of how the process would look like if preformed
seeds would be added in solution. Created in BioRender. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Jablonski diagram illustrating the process of fluorescence in a molecule. The di­
agram shows the absorption of a photon that excites a molecule from the ground
state (S0) to an excited state (S1), followed by non­radiative vibrational relaxation
within S1. The molecule then returns to a lower vibrational level of the ground state,
emitting a photon with less energy, observed as fluorescence. The energy gap be­
tween the absorption and emission peaks corresponds to the Stokes shift. Picture
inspired from [45].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Structure of Thioflavin T. Figure created on ChemDraw.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Visual representation of laminar flow in a capillary: central layers travel faster due
to reduced friction, whereas fluid layers into direct contact with the capillary walls do
not move at all due to the no­slip condition. This creates a velocity gradient from the
tube wall to the center, creating a parabolic velocity profile. Picture inspired from [58]. 14
2.5
Taylorgram depicting particle behavior in solution: the Gaussian distribution profile
for diffusive monomeric αSyn (Rh = 3.5 nm) is shown in blue, while the green spikes
represents the asymmetric signal of non­diffusive fluorescent nanoparticles (d = 200
nm). Picture inspired from [41], based on data experimentally obtained by the authors. 15
2.6
Fundamental components of AFM. A sharp tip attached to a cantilever is used to
probe the sample by moving horizontally across its surface. Deflections of the can­
tilever, amplified by a laser beam reflection, are detected by a split photodiode. A
feedback system then regulates the piezoelectric component, adjusting the distance
of the tip from the surface to maintain optimal tip­sample interaction. Figure taken
from [61]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.1
Analysis of chemical depolymerization data for TDP­16 aggregates: (left) Raw tay­
lorgram obtained for TDP­16 depolymerisation in 5M Gnd­HCl (protein concentra­
tion= 25µM), (middle) Quantification of monomer concentration in the sample by
integration of the area under the Gaussian peak from FIDA analysis, (right) Depoly­
merization curve obtained for aggregates depolymerisation in Gnd­HCl. . . . . . . . 21
vi
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:9==
4.1
SDS­PAGE analysis of TDP­16 affinity purification: gel obtained after loading the
samples containing TDP­16 collected after cells lysis (lanes 2 and 3) and affinity
purification with Ni­NTA resin (lanes 4 to 9). In the picture: L= Ladder; Lysis A/B
SN= supernatant collocted following addition of lysis buffers A and B to the cells
and centrifugation; SN= Supernatant; FT= Flow Through; Elution B= elution buffer
containing 50mM Tris­HCl, pH 8.0, 500mM NaCl, 8M urea and 500mM imidazole.
. 24
4.2
SEC chromatograms from the purification of TDP­16 at pH 6.0 in 20mM MES buffer
in the absence (top) and presence of 250mM KCl (bottom). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
SDS­PAGE analysis of TDP­16 SEC fractions: gel obtained after loading the frac­
tions containing TDP­16 from SEC (20mM MES, pH 6.0, 250 mM KCl). Individual
fractions correspond to those shown at the bottom of Figure 4.2. In lane 13, the pro­
tein sample before performing SEC, corresponding to the three fractions selected
after affinity purification. In the picture: L= Ladder; PS= Pre­SEC. . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
TDA conducted on the SEC fractions. On the left: results obtained when using
sample inserts on FIDA. On the right: comparison of the peaks obtained when using
sample inserts with standard capillary and with HS coating. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.5
Time­course analysis aggregation kinetics of TDP­16 SEC fractions D4, D3 and D2
with ThT. The plot shows averaged data from a triplicate measurement. . . . . . . . 28
4.6
AFM images of SEC Fraction D2 captured at 90µm (A) and 20µm (B and C). . . . . 28
4.7
Chemical depolymerisation of TDP16 aggregates with urea: A) Monomer concentra­
tions for depolymerisation samples measured by FIDA, following incubation periods
of 3 days and 7 days, B) Comparing fractions of soluble protein monomer obtained
for depolymerisation in urea in different pH conditions, C) ThT fluorescence signal for
TDP­16 aggregates depolymerisation at different pH. Fluorescence intensity scale
is very high as the gain was not adjusted to a 1000 prior to initiating the measurement. 30
4.8
Aggregates depolymerisation in Gnd­HCl: A) Comparison of amount of soluble TDP­
16 in urea at pH 7.4 and pH 6.0 and in Gnd­HCl at pH 6.0 following incubation periods
of 3 and 7 days, B) Comparing fractions of soluble protein for depolymerisation in
Gnd­HCl at pH 6.0 after incubation for 3 days and 15 days, C) Comparison of ThT
fluorescence signal intensities of samples incubated with urea and Gnd­HCl at pH
6.0.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.9
Taylorgrams showing the effect of different chemical compounds on TDP­16 aggre­
gates in solution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.10 Influence of different incubation temperatures on the chemical depolymerisation of
TDP­16: changes in the concentration of soluble monomer for protein depolymeri­
sation samples in Gnd­HCl after 7 days of incubation at 80◦C (A) and 37◦C (B). . . . 35
4.11 Chemical depolymerization of TDP­16 aggregates at different pHs and incubation
times for samples incubated at 37◦C. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.12 Isodesmic model fitting of chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates at dif­
ferent pHs: panels A, B and C depict the ratio of soluble protein to total protein in
depolymerisation samples across a range of Gnd­HCl concentrations at pH 4.0, pH
6.0 and pH 7.4, respectively. The black squares represent the experimental data
points obtained, the red line in each panel is the result of isodesmic model fitting
applied to the data, performed in Origin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.13 Comparison of chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates at pH 7.4 analyzed
through FIDA (black), DLS (orange) and ThT fluorescence analysis (blue). . . . . . . 38
4.14 Seeded TDP­16 aggregation, with depolymerisation samples with Gnd­HCl used as
seed and fraction D3 from SEC used as monomer: A) ThT fluorescence intensity
of seeded reactions, B) Comparison of ThT fluorescence between seeded and non­
seeded reactions, C) ThT fluorescence intensity across analyzed samples showing
the concentration­dependent effect of Gnd­HCl on the aggregation process. The
plot shows averaged data from a triplicate measurement.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
vii
==PAGE:10==
4.15 AFM images of TDP­16 fibrils at pH 4.0 captured at 20μm (A) and 10μm (B and C).
40
4.16 Fibrils depolymerisation at pH 4.0: A) monomer concentration in the samples against
the concentration of two denaturants tested, urea (orange) and guanidine hydrochlo­
ride (blue); B) and C) Isodesmic model fitting of chemical depolymerisation of TDP­
16 fibrils: the black squares represent the experimental data points obtained, the
red line in each panel is the result of isodesmic model fitting applied to the data.
. . 41
A.1 TDP­16 aggregates depolymerisation in urea: taylorgrams obtained after a 3­day
incubation period showing spikes corresponding to non­diffusive aggregates. . . . . 52
A.2 Fibrils depolymerisation at pH 4.0: taylorgram obtained for TDP­16 fibrils in 7M urea
showing spikes corresponding to the presence of non­diffusive aggregates in the
sample. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.3 DNA electrophoresis gel showing the results of Golden Gate assembly on TDP­43
(left) and TDP­16 (right) when expressed with various tags. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.4 SDS­PAGE analysis of the simultaneous screening for expression of TDP­16 and
TDP­43 with various tags: on the left, results of SDS­PAGE performed on cells
lysates before purification on a filter plate; on the right, results of SDS­PAGE per­
formed on the fractions recovered from affinity purification performed on a filtered
plate.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
viii
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
3.1
Affinity purification steps. Each step involved centrifugation of samples for 10 min­
utes at 4500xG and 15◦C, followed by collection of the supernatant in a clean Falcon
tube. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2
Method for FIDA analyses for TDP­16 aggregates depolymerisation. . . . . . . . . . 21
4.1
Protein concentration of TDP­16 SEC fractions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Parameters obtained for the isodesmic fit of depolymerisation data at different pHs.
37
4.3
Parameters obtained for the isodesmic fit of fibrils depolymerisation data at pH 4.0. . 42
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
ix
==PAGE:12==
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations
TDP­43
hnRNP
SGs
ALS
PD
FTD
AD
NTD
RRM
NLS
NES
CTD
LCD
LLPS
LB
IPTG
TDA
FIDA
Nano­DSF
AFM
ThT
NDDs
MND
sALS
fALS
C9orf72
TARDBP
SOD1
FUS
NfL
SEC
DLS
WT
Transactive response DNA­binding protein 43
Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
Stress granules
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Parkinson’s Sisease
Frontotemporal Dementia
Alzheimer’s Disease
N­terminal domain
RNA recognition motif
Nuclear localization signal
Nuclear export signal
C­terminal domain
Low complexity domain
Liquid­liquid phase separation
Lysogeny broth
Isopropyl β­d­1­thiogalactopyranoside
Taylor Dispersion Analysis
Flow­Induced Dispersion Analysis
Nano Differential Scanning Fluorimetry
Atomic Force Microscopy
Thioflavin T
Neurodegenerative Diseases
Motor Neuron Disease
Sporadic ALS
Familial ALS
Open reading frame on chromosome 9
TAR DNA­binding protein
Superoxide Dismutase type 1
FUsed in Sarcoma
Neurofilament Light chain
Size Exclusion Chromatography
Dynamic Light Scattering
Wild Type
x
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:13==
Gnd­HCl
DMSO
HFIP
Guanidine Hydrochloride
Dimethyl Sulfoxide
Hexafluoroisopropanol
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
xi
==PAGE:14==
xii
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:15==
1
Introduction
1.1
TDP­43 and its role in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Pathophysiology of the disease
Neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs) constitute a group of diverse neurological disorders that sig­
nificantly impact the lives of millions globally, involving the gradual deterioration of neurons in both
central and peripheral nervous systems [1].
Marked by progressive muscle weakness, atrophy, spasms, mobility impairment, and difficulties
in swallowing and breathing, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is an adult­onset and ultimately
fatal NDD [2]. Also known as Motor Neuron Disease (MND), or Lou Gehrig’s disease, this condition
results from the selective death of motor neurons in both the spinal cord and the brain [2, 3, 4].
With an annual occurrence of 2–3 cases per 100,000 individuals ­ which increases to 4–8 cases
per 100,000 individuals annually among those aged 45–75 years ­ the disease exhibits relentless
progression, leading to a mean life expectancy of 3–5 years after symptom onset, with respiratory
failure being the primary cause of death in most cases [5, 6]. Moreover, the disease shows a higher
prevalence in males than females, with a ratio of approximately 1.5:1, which can be attributed to
the more elevated occurrence of spinal­onset ALS in men [6].
ALS is believed to result from a complex interplay involving genetic and environmental factors, and
dysfunction associated with aging [5]. The vast majority of cases are sporadic (sALS), while only
around 10% represent a familial form of the disorder (fALS) [4].
Genetically, ALS has been linked to mutations in over 30 genes, with more than 70% of fALS at­
tributed to mutations in the genes C9orf72 (which stands for open reading frame on chromosome
9), TARDBP (coding for the protein TDP­43), SOD1 (coding for Superoxide Dismutase type 1) and
FUS (coding for protein FUSed in sarcoma) [6, 5]. Notably, mutations associated with fALS occur
in proteins involved in crucial pathways, including protein quality control and degradation, RNA
metabolism, protection against oxydative stress damage, and cytoskeletal and axonal transport
[5].
The most prevalent neuropathological signature of ALS is the cytoplasmic aggregation of TDP­
43, which is observed in over 95% of ALS cases (Figure 1.1) [5]. Under physiological conditions,
TDP­43 reversibly forms ribonucleoprotein condensates together with other RNA­binding proteins
[7]. These membrane­less cellular structures emerge via liquid­liquid phase separation (LLPS)
and play a crucial role in facilitating the long­distance transport of mRNA, as well as its local­
ized translation within dendrites and axons [7, 8]. These structures are essential for the precise
spatiotemporal regulation of gene expression, and for maintaining axonal integrity and synaptic
functionality within neurons [8]. Mutations in RNA­binding proteins involved in this process can
disrupt the strength and reversibility of their multivalent interactions, leading to abnormal phase
separation, which stands as a central mechanism in the cellular pathology of ALS [4, 9, 8].
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
1
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.1: Pathophysiology of ALS: the formation of prion­like aggregates of TDP­43 disrupts
fundamental cellular pathways, thereby causing motor neuron degeneration, oxidative stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction, impairment of RNA processing, loss of axonal transport, disruption of
the neuromuscular junction and axon demyelination. Picture drawn in BioRender inspired from
[10].
Pathological conditions thus lead to TDP­43 depletion in the nucleus and its cytoplasmic accu­
mulation in neuronal cells. Here, the protein undergoes specific post­translational modifications,
such as hyper­phosphorylation, ubiquitination and partial proteolysis, all of which ultimately foster
aberrant aggregation of TDP­43 and impair the protein’s delicate self­regulatory mechanism, con­
tributing to pathogenesis [11, 9].
Current state in the therapy of ALS
ALS is characterized by a wide range of clinical symptoms, making its diagnosis a challenging
task. Currently, the diagnosis relies on the identification of both upper and lower motor neuron
degeneration signs in individuals experiencing progressive muscle weakness without any other
alternative explanation [5, 12].
While there have been notable advancements in ALS research over the last two decades, trans­
lating this progress into effective treatments remains a slow process. Efforts to detect ALS in its
earliest stages has prompted the integration of various diagnostic methods, including:
• Neuroimaging techniques to detect structural alterations in the central nervous system that
2
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:17==
may mirror ALS symptoms. In ALS patients, typical findings are a reduced thickness of
the motor cortex and compromised structural integrity of the corticospinal tract and corpus
callosum [12];
• Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) often reveals decreased levels of N­acetylaspartate
or choline within the motor cortex, indicative of neuronal degeneration [12];
• Functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), when used in ALS patients during specific
tasks, typically reveals abnormal activation in certain brain regions. This is believed to reflect
the brain’s adaptive or compensatory mechanisms in response to neurodegeneration [12];
• Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), offers a non­invasive way to evaluate the health of
corticospinal motor neurons. This includes assessing motor threshold, motor evoked ampli­
tude, and central motor conduction time [12].
Furthermore, the detection and quantitative analysis of neurofilament light chain (NfL) and phos­
phorylated neurofilament heavy chain levels in cerebrospinal fluid is gaining attention as potential
marker of neuronal injury in ALS patients [12]. Higher concentrations of these neurofilaments in
CSF are positively correlated with accelerated disease progression, a consideration that is becom­
ing increasingly relevant in the planning of future clinical trials [12].
There are very few therapies targeting molecular determinants of ALS, and the current strategies
mostly focus on symptomatic treatment of the disease [13, 10]. For instance, anticholinergic drugs
find application in addressing hypersalivation, muscle relaxants are deployed to alleviate cramps,
dietary modifications, swallowing maneuvers and exercises have been employed as therapeutic
approach to dysphagia, and noninvasive ventilation is used to address respiratory failure [13, 10].
As of now, the only FDA approved medications for ALS treatment so far are Riluzole, Edaravone
and Sodium Phenylbutyrate/Taurursodiol [14]. These drugs primarily target oxidative stress and
excitotoxicity within the glutamate pathways, and offer only marginal improvement in the survival
rates of individuals diagnosed with the disease [14, 15].
As the mechanisms underlying the formation of protein aggregates and their cellular toxicity in ALS
patients are not yet clear, understanding the interplay between formation, stability and degradabil­
ity of TDP aggregates could lead to more specifically targeted strategies for ALS diagnosis and
treatment. This could, in turn, allow to tailor therapies for targeting this fatal neurodegenerative
disease, which currently lacks an established cure.
1.2
Genetics, structure and cellular localization of TDP­43
TDP­43, transactive response DNA­binding protein 43, is a complex nucleic acid­binding protein
with a pivotal role in RNA processing [16, 17]. Encoded by the TARDBP gene located on chromo­
some 1 [3], TDP­43 is a member of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) family
[16], and is abundantly and ubiquitously expressed in almost all tissues ­ including neurons of the
central nervous system [11].
Under physiological conditions, the protein predominantly resides within the nucleus in its solu­
ble and functional form [2], where it is engaged in a multitude of RNA metabolism pathways such
as pre­mRNA splicing, RNA transport, mRNA stability and miRNA processing [18], and shuttles
into the cytoplasm. The levels and cellular distribution of TDP­43 are tightly regulated through a
negative­feedback mechanism to maintain homoeostasis [18].
TDP­43 comprises 414 amino acids, and has a modular structure with four distinct domains (Figure
1.2). These include an N­terminal domain (NTD, residues 1­76) known for its capacity to trigger
the dimerization or oligomerization of the whole protein [11], followed by two centrally located RNA
recognition motifs (RRM1, residues 106­176; RRM2, residues 191­259) with a strong affinity for
UG­rich or TG­rich sequences in RNA and DNA, directing TDP­43 to pre­mRNAs and intronic sites
[19, 9]. Additionally, TDP­43 contains a nuclear localization signal (NLS, residues 82­98) and a
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
3
==PAGE:18==
nuclear export signal (NES, residues 239­250), enabling its movement between the nucleus and
the cytosol [9].
Last is the intrinsically disordered C­terminal domain (CTD, residues 274­414), also referred to as
the low­complexity domain (LCD), enriched in N, Q, S and G residues [19, 9, 17]. Many ALS­linked
mutations cluster in this domain, which is thought to be a critical driver of the aggregation process
underlying TDP­43 proteinopathies [9, 8].
In fact, TDP­43 can form membrane­less condensed liquid­like droplets by undergoing liquid­liquid
phase separation (LLPS), a process involving transient multivalent interactions among segments
within its intrinsically disordered region [17, 20]. Such a mechanism facilitates the cytoplasmic
storage of TDP­43 in stress granules (SG) under stressful conditions in neuronal cells [17].
Figure 1.2: Schematic of TDP­43 modular structure. The protein is characterized by a nuclear lo­
calization sequence (NLS), two RNA recognition motifs (RRMs), a nuclear export sequence (NES)
and a glycine­rich domain within which the majority of ALS­associated genetic mutations are con­
centrated. Created in BioRender.
TDP­43 proteinopathies exhibit prion­like features, including the ability to form and accumulate
protein aggregates that propagate from cell to cell through seed­dependent, self­templating mech­
anisms [20]. The isolated LCD of TDP­43 ­ along with several of its fragments ­ are prone to
spontaneous amyloid fibril formation [21]. This tendency is attributed to the presence of intrinsi­
cally disordered regions (IDRs) within this domain, which are devoid of stable tertiary structures
and capable of adopting a multitude of conformations [8].
Morphology and characteristics of TDP­43 LCD fibrils
Detailed structural characterization of TDP­43 LCD fibrils is the key for elucidating the relationship
between their structure and sequence in the process of fibril formation. The LCD of TDP­43 con­
sists of roughly 140 amino acid residues, and was previously thought to be the minimal region that
could induce TDP­43 aggregation as proposed by Cushman et al. [22].
Subsequent research has proved that smaller segments within the LCD might be responsible for
amyloidogenic aggregation. For example, Guo et al. identified segment 286–331 as sufficient
not only to form amyloid fibrils but also to induce neurotoxicity on primary cortical neurons [23].
Similarly, two papers from Jiang et al. pinpointed segment 311–360 are pivotal for the helix­to­β­
sheet transition through NMR and CD studies [24, 25]. Additionally, Mompean et al. recognized
sequence stretch 342–366 as the minimal segment capable of transitioning from a random coil to
a β­sheet structure [26].
These findings collectively suggest that multiple regions within the LCD can contribute to amyloid­
like aggregation, which highlights the complexity of TDP­43 aggregation mechanisms.
TDP­43 LCD fibrils have been shown to be able to form under several pH conditions. Atomic
Force Microscopy studies show that fibrils formed at neutral pH tend to clump, hindering detailed
morphological analysis [27]. In contrast, fibrils formed at lower pH (i.e., pH 4 and 6) are more
dispersed [27]. Under the AFM, fibrils exhibit two distinct morphologies, with both twisted and
non­twisted fibrils appearing in the picture. Twisted fibrils are left­handed with a helical rise of
4.73Åand a twist of −1.66◦, composed of a singular left­handed protofilament featuring subunits
stacked along its axis [27]. AFM images show a maximum height of 7.2 nm and periodicity of 49.0
4
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:19==
nm for twisted fibrils [27]. Conversely, non­twisted fibrils have an average height of 0.8­1.8 nm
[11].
The cryo­EM structure of amyloid formed from the entire TDP­43 low complexity domain is showed
in Figure 1.3. The structure reveals a tightly packed core characterized by 14 β­strands linked by
turns and loops [27]. The C­terminal region (residues 344–414) is characterized by a small number
of hydrophobic amino acids and features a largely planar structure with long β­strands engaged
in steric–zipper interactions [27, 28]. By contrast, the N­terminal region (residues 276–343) has a
high hydrophobic amino acid content and features short β­strands not involved in any steric–zipper
interactions [27]. Strands and turns are compactly arranged in various directions, enabling the tight
packing and burying of non­polar side chains, leading to a non­planar backbone conformation [27].
The non­planar backbone structure of TDP­43 LCD subunits leads to the formation of uneven sur­
faces at the ends of fibrils, characterized by ”grooves” consisting of exposed hydrophobic residues
thought to be involved in the recruitment of TDP­43 monomers and their prion­like conversion into
amyloids [27].
Figure 1.3: Cryo­EM structure of TDP­43 LCD amyloid fibrils from [27], available on the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) under the accession code 7KWZ.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
5
==PAGE:20==
1.3
Aim, scope and structure of this study
As part of of a larger project focused on examining the sequence determinants of TDP­43 amyloid
and LLPS, this thesis is dedicated to an in­depth investigation of the protein’s LCD domain, TDP­
16. The primary goal is to comprehensively characterize the protein, exploring the factors that
influence TDP aggregation and aggregate stability under different experimental conditions. This
ultimately seeks to shed light on to the intricate aggregation pathways of TDP­16, and to unravel
the relationship between the formation of aggregates and their stability.
The study is characterized by two main objectives.
First is to develop, optimize and rigorously test a purification protocol for both full­length TDP­43
and its truncated version, TDP­16, which includes the C­terminal low complexity domain. This step
is essential for ensuring the availability of pure protein samples for further analysis.
Secondly, the thesis seeks to characterize TDP­16 aggregates through chemical depolymerisa­
tion by using a wide range of biophysical techniques. This includes examining the thermodynamic
stability of TDP­16 aggregates and fibrils, investigating the kinetics of protein aggregation, and
ultimately assessing the propensity of the protein to undergo LLPS.
Now that TDP­43 has been briefly introduced to the reader, Chapter 2 will provide a theoretical
background on the nature of intrinsically disordered proteins, amyloid properties and aggregation
processes, and the principles of techniques used to study TDP­43 and its CTD, equipping the
reader with necessary insights to understand the experimental conditions and interpret the results.
In Chapter 3, the methodologies and preparatory steps involved in studying TDP­43 and its LCD are
thoroughly described. This covers the conditions under which protein expression and purification
were conducted, how TDP­16 fibrils were obtained, and the methods used when studying the
depolymerization and aggregation of the protein.
Central to the thesis, Chapter 4 is where the outcomes of the experiments performed are presented
and discussed in detail, allowing to situate the findings of this thesis within the broader context of
TDP­43 research.
Lastly, Chapter 5 summarizes the work and findings of the thesis and Chapter 6 proposes directions
for future studies to build upon the work done in this project.
6
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:21==
2
Theoretical Background
This chapter comprehensively examines the multifaceted aspects of intrinsically disordered pro­
teins and amyloids, alongside the complex mechanisms of liquid­liquid phase separation, but also
the principles behind the techniques that have been employed to study TDP­43, thereby preparing
the ground for the forthcoming experimental investigations.
2.1
Protein Self­Assembly
2.1.1
Protein Aggregation
In the process of protein synthesis, structure is inherently encoded in its DNA sequence and is
necessary for proteins function, according to the sequence­structure­function paradigm. To be­
come functional and stable, proteins must fold into a precise three­dimensional shape following a
complex folding process driven by hydrophobic effect, hydrogen bonds, ionic interactions, entropy,
van der Waals and other non­covalent interactions [29, 30]. In vivo, protein folding is often already
commenced during translation, and is facilitated by molecular chaperones [17].
However, there exists a distinct category of proteins, termed intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs)
or intrinsically disordered protein regions (IDPRs), that fall outside of the structure­function paradigm
[31]. In fact, unlike typical proteins, IDPs remain functional while being highly flexible and existing
in a wide spectrum of near­isoenergetic conformations, without a well­defined tertiary structure
[17, 31]. This flexibility allows them to develop localized secondary or tertiary structures when
they interact with other molecules [31]. As a result, IDPs can engage in a wide range of binding
modes, leading to the formation of various complexes which can significantly differ in their levels
of disorder and stoichiometry [31].
Amyloids are ordered self­assemblies of proteins that arise from either the specific misfolding of
proteins, the aggregation of proteins that are inherently disordered, or proteins that include both
ordered domains and IDRs [32, 30]. They arise from a structural transition to beta­sheet rich fibril­
lar aggregates characterized by diameters of 7­13 nm (as observed via EM or AFM) and varying
lenghts from 50 nm to several microns [17]. Amyloids can bind to organic dyes like Thioflavin­T
(ThT), Congo red (CR), or their derivatives, and show a distinctive cross­beta X­ray diffraction pat­
tern with reflections at 4.7 and 10 Å corresponding to the interstrand and intersheet spacing [17,
21]. Functional amyloids play beneficial roles across species, from bacteria to humans. Exam­
ples include silk production in spiders, utilizing intrinsically unstructured proteins to create different
types of silk, and Balbiani bodies, where functional amyloids are instrumental in keeping vertebrate
oocytes in a dormant state, or formation of functional amyloid structures from reactive melanin
precursors during melanogenesis by the transmembrane protein Pmel17 [32]. More importantly,
amyloids are also linked to severe neurodegenerative diseases, with the accumulation of amyloid
aggregates being their pathological hallmark.
Amyloid aggregation can be monitored using turbidity or ThT fluorescence during a time­course
experiment. The process typically exhibits sigmoidal kinetics in which three distinct phases can
be differentiated: an initial slow lag or nucleation phase, followed by a rapid growth or elongation
phase, and lastly a saturation phase (Figure 2.1) [17, 33].
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
7
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.1: Graphical representation of the amyloid fibril formation process illustrating the sig­
moidal aggregation curve segmented into three phases: nucleation, elongation and saturation. In
red, a representation of how the process would look like if preformed seeds would be added in
solution. Created in BioRender.
Initially, the formation of critical nuclei occurs, a process that is both thermodynamically and ki­
netically unfavorable and slow due to a high free­energy barrier. Upon formation of critical nuclei,
elongation, which is a more thermodynamically favorable process, leads to production of protofib­
rils, which subsequently convert into mature fibrils [17, 33, 34]. Given the highly dynamic nature of
amyloid systems, where monomers, oligomers and fibrils can coexist simultaneously, nucleation
and elongation processes can take place concurrently, albeit at different rates [30].
Furthermore, fibril amplification in amyloid systems can occur via two mechanisms: fragmentation,
and heterogeneous (secondary) nucleation. The second is induced by pre­existing amyloid fibrils
and involves autocatalytic secondary nucleation, resulting in exponential amplification of aggre­
gates [35, 36].
Additionally, the introduction of preformed seeds can significantly shorten the lag phase [34]. Amy­
loid proteins possess in fact the capability to self­template and propagate, a characteristic feature
that distinguishes them from amorphous aggregates [17].
2.1.2
Liquid­Liquid Phase Separation
Living cells exhibit a highly organized internal structure, which is essential for the precise control of
biological processes both spatially and temporally. Apart from the well­known membrane­bound
organelles present in cells, there exists a variety of membrane­less organelles (MLOs) that, despite
lacking a membrane, can still form distinct structures within the cell, effectively compartmentalizing
and enclosing specific molecules [37, 38]. Examples include nuclear formations like the nucleolus
and Cajal bodies, along with cytoplasmic entities such as P­bodies and SGs, all of which play roles
in diverse biological functions [37, 38].
MLOs formation is primarily driven by liquid­liquid phase separation (LLPS), a thermodynamic pro­
cess that reduces the free energy of a uniformly mixed system by leading to the spontaneous
condensation of molecular assemblies, including proteins and nucleic acids, into distinct phases
8
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:23==
with different compositions and densities [39, 37, 38]. Unlike their membrane­bound counterparts,
MLOs facilitate a dynamic interchange of biomolecules with their environment and possess the
capability to merge when they come into contact and re­dissolve upon dilution [39, 37].
Within cells, liquid­liquid phase separation (LLPS) serves multiple functions. Beyond being in­
strumental in organizing the intracellular environment, this process enhances interactions among
molecules that might otherwise only weakly interact by concentrating a specific set of molecules
into a condensed state [37, 38]. Additionally, LLPS can prevent off­target effects by isolating unnec­
essary factors [38]. This molecular condensation helps sequester factors not required for current
cellular needs, thereby avoiding any unintended interactions [38].
The propensity of a protein to undergo LLPS depends significantly on its amino acid composi­
tion: proteins found in intracellular condensates often contain low complexity domains and are
intrinsically disordered, which facilitate multivalent intermolecular interactions [37, 38]. Proteins
characterized by the presence of LCDs are typically enriched with specific amino acids ­ namely
glycine, serine, glutamine, proline, glutamic acid, lysine, and arginine — as well as aromatic amino
acids, like tyrosine and phenylalanine [38, 17]. The arrangement of these amino acids enables a
plethora of intermolecular interactions that promote the engagement of the protein in LLPS.
Yet, protein LLPS can occasionally trigger a shift from a liquid to a solid state, particularly when
proteins are highly concentrated locally in the dense phase, which can lead to aberrant protein
aggregation and lead to the formation of amyloid fibrils [37].
2.1.3
The interplay between stability and solubility of amyloids
Despite significant advances in unraveling the kinetics and mechanisms of amyloid fibril forma­
tion have been made over the past two decades, knowledge about their thermodynamic stability
remains comparatively limited [40]. Amyloid fibrils can form under conditions that would favour
destabilization of native state ­ such as the presence of denaturants or temperatures and pH vari­
ations [30]. This perception has led to the framing of amyloids as exceptionally thermodynamically
stable and irreversible structures, posing challenges in the accurate quantification of their absolute
stability, and has ultimately led researchers to focus on the kinetics rather than the thermodynam­
ics of amyloid fibril formation [30]. However, quantifying and understanding the thermodynamic
stability of amyloid fibrils under specific conditions could be instrumental in determining how effec­
tively these structures can be eliminated in vivo, especially in the context of pathological conditions
[40].
Thermodynamic stability is determined by the concentration of the different species present in a
sample when equilibrium is reached [41, 30]. In simple terms, in the context of studies focused
on amyloid fibrils, thermodynamic stability depends on the equilibrium between soluble monomers
and insoluble species in the sample [41]. However, soluble protein concentration in the sample is
often hard to quantify due to their very low levels, often in the nanomolar range [40, 30]. To address
this issue, chemical denaturation methods are employed with amyloid fibrils using denaturants like
urea, GndSCN, or GndHCl to analyse the soluble protein concentration as a function of denaturant
concentration in the sample [40, 30, 42, 43].
These experiments typically involve a physical separation of the aggregates from the monomers,
ensuring that most aggregated species are separated form the soluble ones, followed by a quan­
tification of the monomer concentration in the supernatant, providing a direct measurement of the
thermodynamic stability and solubility of the fibrils [30]. What is more, chemical depolymerization
experiments offer numerous advantages, such as simplicity and scalability [41]. In these exper­
iments, the concentration of soluble proteins can be determined directly after centrifugation or
through spectroscopic methods [41, 30]. Techniques like intrinsic fluorescence or ThT fluores­
cence and FIDA are commonly used for this purpose.
By adopting a linear model that correlates denaturant concentration with the free energy difference
∆G between monomeric and polymeric states — similar to assumptions made in protein unfolding
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
9
==PAGE:24==
experiments — it becomes possible to fit sigmoidal data of fibril depolymerization that allows for
the extrapolation of the ∆G and m­value in the absence of the denaturant [40, 30, 44, 42, 43].
The value of ∆G describes the stability of the fibrils, with high fibril stability meaning low soluble
protein concentration [44, 40, 41]. Meanwhile, the denaturant m­value has a strong correlation
with the extent of protein surface area exposed to the solvent during the unfolding process [44].
Thus, experimental data regarding the stability of amyloid fibrils can be interpreted using an isodesmic
polymerization model, assuming a constant equilibrium between monomers and aggregates of any
size [40, 30, 41]. This model simplifies the process by considering a single equilibrium constant for
the addition of a monomer to any species, including another monomer, but overlooks intermediate
species like oligomers or protofibrils, assuming their negligible equilibrium presence due to lower
stability [40, 41]. Despite its limitations, the isodesmic model has effectively been used to analyse
amyloid fibrils from various proteins [41]. More recently, a cooperative model acknowledging dis­
tinct nucleation and polymerization processes has been used for more accurate depolymerisation
analysis [40]. This model accounts for protein concentration effects on depolymerisation, offering
a more realistic approach.
10
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:25==
2.2
Overview of techniques for the analysis of protein aggregation
2.2.1
Light­based techniques
2.2.1.1
Fluorescence Spectroscopy
Fluorescence spectroscopy is employed for the qualitative and quantitative study of molecular
interactions and structures. The technique stands out for its high sensitivity and specificity, al­
lowing for detailed analysis with only small amounts of sample and without the need for additional
reagents. However, not all compounds have the ability to fluoresce naturally, which is why external
fluorescent tags and fluorescent dyes, such as ThT and Congo Red, can also be employed.
In the process of protein fluorescence, a photon, typically from ultraviolet light, excites a fluorophore
within the protein (Figure 2.2).
Figure 2.2: Jablonski diagram illustrating the process of fluorescence in a molecule. The diagram
shows the absorption of a photon that excites a molecule from the ground state (S0) to an excited
state (S1), followed by non­radiative vibrational relaxation within S1. The molecule then returns
to a lower vibrational level of the ground state, emitting a photon with less energy, observed as
fluorescence. The energy gap between the absorption and emission peaks corresponds to the
Stokes shift. Picture inspired from [45].
This absorption causes the fluorophore to transition from its ground state to an excited electronic
state with different vibrational levels [46]. Following this excitation, a rapid vibrational relaxation
allows the electrons to settle to the lowest energy level within the excited state. The process
concludes as the photon is released at a longer wavelength as the molecule returns to its ground
energy state [46]. The wavelength of the emitted light is always longer than that of the excitation
due to the energy lost during vibrational relaxation, an effect known as the Stokes Shift [46].
Intrinsic Protein Fluorescence
Fluorescence spectroscopy stands as a potent tool for reporting on the microenvironment of fluo­
rophores within biomolecules, thereby serving as a versatile probe for examining protein structure,
motion and rotation, along with protein interactions with different ligands. The non­destructive na­
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
11
==PAGE:26==
ture of this technique enables the study of protein folding, dynamics, assembly and interactions in
a dynamic context over time [45, 46].
The intrinsic fluorescence of proteins is attributable to the aromatic side chains of tryptophan (Trp),
tyrosine (Tyr) and phenylalanine (Phe), which absorb and emit light within the UV spectrum [45].
Their quantum yields, which represent the ratio of emitted photons to absorbed photons, are ap­
proximately equal to 0.2 for Trp, 0.14 for Tyr and 0.04 for Phe [45]. Moreover, the extinction
coefficients of these amino acids at their respective absorption maxima are about 5600 M−1 cm−1
for Trp ( λex = 280 nm), 1200 M−1 cm−1 for Trp ( λex = 274 nm), and 200 M−1 cm−1 for Phe ( λex
= 257 nm) [45].
Tryptophan exhibits the highest extinction coefficient among the three, and is characterized by a
highly sensitive fluorescence with regards to the local chemical environment of the protein, which
makes it extremely responsive to molecular interactions and surrounding conditions [45]. Conse­
quently, any alterations affecting the local environment of the tryptophan residues within a protein
will lead to a noticeable shift in the fluorescence spectrum of the latter, making it possible to ana­
lyze protein dynamics and interactions [45].
Extrinsic Fluorescence: ThT fluorescence as a probe to monitor protein aggregation
Thioflavin T (ThT) is a fluorescent dye widely used as a probe to monitor the formation of amyloid
fibrils in vitro and to examine the influence of several factors that could impact this process (Figure
2.3) [47, 48].
First used by Vassar and Culling in 1959 during histology studies, ThT was recognized as a marker
capable of specifically binding to amyloid deposits [49].
Upon binding to amyloid fibrils, the dye shows a significant shift in its excitation and emission max­
ima, which go from 385 nm to 450 nm and 445 nm to 482 nm, respectively [47, 48, 50]. This
characteristic makes it a highly sensitive marker for detecting amyloid fibril formation for both syn­
thetic and recombinant amyloidogenic proteins in a plate­reader setup, allowing for simultaneous
analysis of multiple samples under different conditions [48].
Figure 2.3: Structure of Thioflavin T. Figure created on ChemDraw.
In solution, ThT behaves as a molecular rotor: in its free state, rapid rotation of its benzylamine
and benzathiole rings around their shared carbon­carbon bond leads to low fluorescence, however,
when the dye is bound to amyloid fibrils, rotation is restricted, thereby preserving the excited state
of the molecule and significantly enhancing its fluorescence [50].
The ability of ThT to bind to amyloid fibrils in spite of their differences in amino acid sequences
implies that teh dye recognizes a common structural element in all of them [50, 47]. Given that
amyloid fibrils are commonly marked by a cross­β structure, it is this specific architecture that con­
stitutes the binding sites for ThT, enabling its specific shift in fluorescence upon binding [47].
However, the binding capacity of ThT to certain fibrils can be limited. For instance, highly charged
fibrils often show a reduced ability to bind ThT, likely due to their high electrostatic repulsion [50].
Additionally, ThT affinity tends to decrease in acidic environments, probably because of increased
electrostatic repulsion from a rise in positive charge on the dye [50].
Furthermore, ThT might also bind to non­fibrillar structures, raising concerns about its potential
cross­reactivity, as it has been observed that ThT can bind to hydrophobic pockets in non­fibrillar
12
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:27==
proteins as well [50].
2.2.1.2
Dynamic Light Scattering
Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) is a biophysical technique used for assessing the colloidal stability
of samples [51]. DLS can provide detailed information about mass, size uniformity and distribution
of molecules in solution [45]. Within a stable, temperature­controlled liquid environment, water
molecules engage in persistent movement, known as Brownian motion, which causes dissolved
solute molecules to be displaced, with smaller molecules moving more rapidly compared to larger
ones [52].
The scattering process confers random phases to scattered light, causing constructive or destruc­
tive interference from multiple particles, leading to varying constructive or destructive interference
when light from multiple particles combines [53]. Consequently, this leads to fluctuations in scat­
tering intensity due to Brownian motion over time [45, 53].
Also, as proteins are typically smaller than 1/20th of the wavelength of light used, no significant
angular dependence of the scattered intensity is detected, allowing measurements at a single
scattering angle [52, 45].
Upon irradiation with monochromatic visible light, particles scatter the light according to their re­
spective size, with larger particles scattering more light compared to smaller ones [52, 51]. By
fitting the fluctuations in light intensity measured over time, the size distribution of particles in so­
lution can be determined using the autocorrelation function, which measures how the scattering
intensity at one time point correlates with the intensity at another time point, shifted by a specific
delay time, τ [54, 52, 51].
The variations in scattering intensity are influenced by the diffusion velocity of molecules in the
solvent (D), which is directly linked to the molecular mass and the hydrodynamic radius (Rh) of the
particles in solution through the Stokes­Einstein equation [45, 54, 53]:
Rh =
kB · T
6 · π · η · D
in which Rh represents the average size of particles in the sample. Any variations in buffer condi­
tions, covalent modifications and interactions with other molecules affect its value [51].
DLS offers several advantages in sample analysis, as it does not require any labeling or specific
sample preparation, making it a non­invasive technique. It is compatible with a wide range of sol­
vent conditions, requiring only knowledge of the viscosity, composition and refractive index of the
solvent. It requires a small sample volume and enables measurements at various temperatures,
providing valuable data on the thermal stability of macromolecules [53].
The key drawback of this technique lies in the relationship between scattering intensity and par­
ticle diameter [55]. DLS is notably highly sensitive to even a small number of large particles or
aggregates within a sample. These larger species can dominate the scattering signal, leading to
a distortion in the perceived size distribution [55]. Additionally, any light­scattering contaminants
present in the sample can interfere with the measurements, leading to potentially misleading re­
sults [55].
2.3
Diffusion­based techniques
2.3.1
Flow Induced Dispersion Analysis
Microfluidic systems operating under laminar flow conditions are highly effective for acquiring in­
solution data regarding species size and binding affinities [56]. Flow­induced dispersion analysis
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
13
==PAGE:28==
(FIDA) is an innovative technique that brings together Taylor Dispersion Analysis (TDA) with flu­
orescence detection to detect changes in the hydrodynamic radius (Rh) of the indicator (e.g. the
protein of interest) as it interacts with the targeted analyte (e.g. a buffer containing a specific
compound) [56, 57]. This technique stands out for its rapid analysis time, minimal sample vol­
ume requirements and high selectivity [56]. Moreover, FIDA allows for parallel processing and the
integration of multiple advanced steps in one single operation [57].
By definition, laminar flow regime is characterized by low Reynolds number values (Re < 2000)
[56, 58, 41]. In this regime, the fluid travels in a sheet­like fashion with parallel layers without
turbulence, with the flow being dominated by viscosity rather than driven by inertia [41, 56]. The
flow results faster in the central layers and slower towards the outer layers near the capillary walls,
resulting in a parabolic flow velocity profile (Figure 2.4) [41, 56].
Figure 2.4: Visual representation of laminar flow in a capillary: central layers travel faster due
to reduced friction, whereas fluid layers into direct contact with the capillary walls do not move at
all due to the no­slip condition. This creates a velocity gradient from the tube wall to the center,
creating a parabolic velocity profile. Picture inspired from [58].
Operating under a laminar flow regime is crucial for ensuring predictable and uniform movement
of the fluid containing the target molecules, thereby minimizing unexpected forces and collisions
[58]. The mass transfer of the indicator in a given analyte at a given temperature is influenced by
indicator diffusivity, capillary dimensions and flow velocity, as described by equations 2.1 and 2.2:
τ = D · tR
a2
(2.1)
Pe = u · a
D
(2.2)
in which τ is the dimensionless characteristic diffusion time, D is the diffusion coefficient of the
indicator, tR is the average elution time, Pe is the Peclet number, a is the inner diameter of the
capillary, u is the flow velocity within the capillary [41, 56].
In the context of laminar flow, Taylor dispersion describes how particles disperse over time and
space, factoring in both their diffusion and movement along the flow direction [56, 57]. For τ >
1.4 and Pe > 69, Taylor dispersion conditions are met, thus axial dispersion within the capillary
can be disregarded and mass transfer across the various fluid layers is thought to occur predom­
inantly through radial diffusion, as described by a modified version of Fick’s 2nd Law of Diffusion
in equation 2.3:
14
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:29==
D = tR · a2
24 · σ2
(2.3)
in which σ2 and tR represent the variance and residence time of the peak registered, and a the
inner diameter of the capillary [41]. Lastly, the Stokes­Einstein equation allows to correlate particle
diffusion with Rh and temperature, like shown in equation 2.4:
Rh =
kB · T
6 · π · η · D
(2.4)
where Rh represents the hydrodynamic radius of particles in the sample, T is the absolute temper­
ature and kB is Boltzmann’s constant [59, 58]. This means that, by merely determining properties
such as viscosity and temperature of the solution examined, the diffusivity of molecules can be
translated into their hydrodynamic radius Rh, which provides valuable insights into protein and
particle sizes, complex formation and structural integrity, including the degree of unfolding [56].
In a laminar flow within a capillary, the time of peak appearance is directly proportional to the
viscosity of the sample [56, 57]. Small particles such as proteins diffuse between the flow layers
and follow the average flow velocity, resulting in a Gaussian distribution profile at the detection
point, and their diffusion coefficients and hydrodynamic radii are determined by mean of equations
2.3 and 2.4, respectively [41, 57].
On the other hand, larger particles like protein aggregates cannot diffuse between different flow
layers under the same conditions, as their mass transfer is primarily driven by convection, and
appear as asymmetrical spikes in Taylorgrams (Figure 2.5) [41, 56].
Figure 2.5: Taylorgram depicting particle behavior in solution: the Gaussian distribution profile for
diffusive monomeric αSyn (Rh = 3.5 nm) is shown in blue, while the green spikes represents the
asymmetric signal of non­diffusive fluorescent nanoparticles (d = 200 nm). Picture inspired from
[41], based on data experimentally obtained by the authors.
2.4
Microscopic Techniques
2.4.1
Atomic Force Microscopy
Over the past decade, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) has proven to be a particularly valuable
technique for investigating the structure and the aggregation process of amyloid fibrils, requiring
only minimal sample preparation and no need for staining or labeling [60, 61]. Atomic Force Mi­
croscopy (AFM) functions by meticulously scanning a sample with a sharp tip that is mounted on
a bendable cantilever (Figure 2.6) [60].
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
15
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.6: Fundamental components of AFM. A sharp tip attached to a cantilever is used to probe
the sample by moving horizontally across its surface. Deflections of the cantilever, amplified by
a laser beam reflection, are detected by a split photodiode. A feedback system then regulates
the piezoelectric component, adjusting the distance of the tip from the surface to maintain optimal
tip­sample interaction. Figure taken from [61].
The tip systematically scans the surface of the sample line by line, creating a detailed topograph­
ical map of its surface [61]. The cantilever senses the forces of interaction between the tip and
the sample surface through its deflections [60]. These deflections are captured by a laser that
reflects off the cantilever, directing it towards a position­sensitive photodiode [60]. Fluctuations in
the position of the laser spot on the photodiode are converted into an electrical signal, which is
then used in a feedback loop to control the force exerted by the AFM tip by adjusting the voltage
applied to a piezoelectric scanner [61].
AFM can be run in either static mode, where the tip comes in contact with the sample, or dynamic
(non­contact or tapping) modes, in which the AFM tip oscillates while scanning the surface of the
sample [60]. The behavior of the cantilever is described by Hooke’s law
F = k∙x
where F is the force on the cantilever, k its spring constant and x its deflection, and allows for the cal­
culation of the tip­sample interaction force and the subsequent construction of a three­dimensional
surface image based on the data obtained [60]. Information such as contour length, width, height
and periodicity of the fibrils in the sample can be extrapolated from the AFM picture, enabling an
in­depth analysis of their surface morphology by examining height profiles. These profiles are in
turn crucial for determining the arrangement of protofilaments in mature fibrils, provide insights into
the polymorphic characteristics of the fibrils [60].
16
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:31==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Protein expression and purification
The initial methodology employed for the expression and purification of both TDP­43 and TDP­16
is derived from the protocol outlined in the paper Structural dissection of amyloid aggregates of
TDP­43 and its C­terminal fragments TDP­35 and TDP­16 from Antoine Loquet’s laboratory (Bor­
deaux, France) [21].
3.1.1
Transformation and Expression
Both TDP­16 and TDP­43 constructs contain a hexa histidine­tag and TEV cleavage site. In a
sterile bench, 25µL of competent E. coli strain BL21DE3 gold pLysS cells were transformed using
1µL of the pET24­TDP vector. This was followed by a 30­minute incubation period on ice. Subse­
quently, the cells underwent heat shock for 10s at 42◦C on a thermomixer, and were then placed
back on ice for an additional 5 minutes. After this, 225µL of SOC medium at room temperature
were added to each sample, which were then incubated in a thermomixer at 37◦C with a stirring
speed of 300 rpm for 1 hour. Finally, the samples were spread onto LB agar plates supplemented
with kanamycin (FC=50µg/mL) and left in the incubator overnight at 37◦C.
The following day, a single colony was used to inoculate 10 mL LB media containing kanamycin
(FC=50µg/mL) as a selection marker. This tube was then placed in an incubator set at 37◦C with
a shaking speed of 200 rpm, and left to incubate overnight.
Subsequently, 1L of LB medium with 1 mL of kanamycin was inoculated using the pre­cultures that
had been incubated at 37◦C. The cell culture was then incubated again at 37◦C with a shaking
speed of 160 rpm until the OD600 reached a value of 0.8­1. To induce protein expression, 1 mL
of IPTG (FC=1mM) was added, and the culture was incubated at 37◦C for 4 hours at 160 rpm.
Following protein expression, cells were harvested by centrifuging for 30 minutes at 7000xG and
4◦C. The supernatant was discarded, and the cell pellets were resuspended in 40 mL of lysis buffer
A (25mM Tris­HCL, pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl). These resuspended pellets were then aliquoted into
50 mL Falcon tubes and stored at ­20◦C until the purification process was carried out.
3.1.2
Lysis
The frozen bacterial pellets in lysis buffer A were first thawed, and then supplemented with 0.5µL
of benzonase nuclease and 100µL of PMSF (FC=1mM). Following this, the cells were lysed using
a probe sonicator (30% amplitude, 15s ON/ 20s OFF, 2min 15s active sonication time).
Following sonication, the samples were centrifuged at 15000xG for 1 hour at 4◦C. The supernatant
was then discarded (after 20µL of sample were collected for SDS­PAGE), while the resulting pellet,
which contained the protein of interest, was resuspended in 10 mL of lysis buffer B (50 mM Tris­
HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 7M Gnd­HCl). The samples were then transferred to 15 mL Falcon
tubes and incubated overnight at 60◦C, 400 rpm on a thermomixer.
The next day, the cell lysate was sonicated again using a probe sonicator (30% amplitude, 10s
ON/ 20s OFF, 1min 30s active sonication time).
Following this second sonication, the samples were centrifuged at 30000xG for 10 minutes at
26◦C. At this stage, the pellet was discarded and the supernatant, containing the protein of inter­
est, was collected for further purification steps (20µL of this sample were collected for SDS­PAGE).
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
17
==PAGE:32==
3.1.3
Affinity Purification
Initially, 10 mL of Ni­NTA resin was pelleted by centrifugation at 500xG for 3 minutes, the storage
buffer was then carefully decanted. Subsequently, the resin was transferred into a 50 mL Falcon
tube and washed with equilibration buffer (50mM Tris­HCl, pH 8.0, 500mM NaCl, 8M urea, 20mM
imidazole). Once equilibrated, the resin and buffer mixture were aliquoted into two 50 mL Falcon
tubes in order to be able to purify both TDP­43 and TDP­16 simultaneously. The protein super­
natants obtained in Section 3.1.2 were then added to their respective tubes. The process of affinity
purification was carried out as follows:
Table 3.1: Affinity purification steps. Each step involved centrifugation of samples for 10 minutes
at 4500xG and 15◦C, followed by collection of the supernatant in a clean Falcon tube.
Step
Volume of Equilibration Buffer
Volume of Elution Buffer
Repetitions
Flow­through
­
­
1
Wash
25 mL
­
2
5% Elution Buffer
19 mL
1 mL
1
70% Elution Buffer
14 mL
6 mL
1
100% Elution Buffer
­
25 mL
1
20µL of sample were collected at each step of the purification process to be able to perform SDS­
PAGE later, to be able to assess the efficacy of the purification process.
3.1.4
SDS­PAGE Analysis
All the samples collected for SDS­PAGE were mixed in a 3:1 ratio with 4x Loading Buffer (8%
SDS, 40% glycerol, 250mM Tris­HCl, 0.08% bromophenol blue, 0.2M DTT). The samples were
then heated at 80◦C for 5 minutes in a thermoblock, and subsequently centrifuged at 10000xG for
1 minute. 7µL of each sample were loaded onto an SDS­PAGE gel (Mini­Protean TGX gel, 15
wells, 4­20% polyacrylamide gradient) along with 2µL of a pre­stained protein marker.
Electrophoresis was carried out in Tris­Glycine running buffer at a constant voltage of 150V for 30
minutes, or until the dye front was approximately 1cm away from the bottom of the gel. Following
electrophoresis, the gel was rinsed with dH2O and stained with Coomassie blue for 30 minutes on
a rocking table.
3.1.5
Protocol A ­ Dialysis and Gel Filtration
Fractions containing the protein of interest were extensively dialysed against 4 L of dialysis buffer
(10 mM HEPES­KOH, pH 7.4, 40 mM KCl) in a dialysis membrane (BioDesign Dialysis Tubing
D304 from Thermofisher Scientific, 3500 Da MWCO) overnight at room temperature, in a glass
beaker placed on a magnetic stirrer to maintain gentle mixing.
Following dialysis, the precipitated protein was carefully removed from the membrane and trans­
ferred into clean 50 mL Falcon tubes. These were then centrifuged for 1 hour at 4000xG at 4◦C.
The supernatant was subsequently discarded, retaining about 10 mL in the Falcon tube to re­
suspend the protein pellet formed at the bottom of the tube. The resuspended sample was then
aliquoted into clean 2 mL Eppendorf tubes and stored at ­20◦C.
The protein was then purified through Size Exclusion Chromatography. TDP­16 frozen protein
samples were thawed and then brought to a final volume of 1 mL by adding 20mM MES, pH
6.0, 6M Gnd­HCl. Subsequently, they were sonicated three times using a vial sonicator (100 %
amplitude, pulse: 1s ON/ 1s OFF, 2 min active sonication time).
SEC was carried out using a Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 column connected to AKTA pure
purification system (Cytiva, USA), operating at a flow rate of 0.75 mL/min, using different elution
18
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:33==
buffers to determine the most effective conditions for protein purification. Initially, the protein sam­
ple was eluted isocratically with 20mM MES buffer at pH 6.0. Subsequently, a secound round of
purification was performed using 20mM MES buffer at pH 6.0 with 250mM KCl. All SEC buffers
were previously filtered and degassed.
The proteins were collected in 96­well fractionation plates, with a fraction volume of 0.5 mL. Purity of
the fractions collected from the different purifications conducted was evaluated using SDS­PAGE,
as described in Section 3.1.4.
3.1.6
Protocol B ­ Dialysis against buffers at different pHs
This stage is where the protocol followed in the context of this project starts to diverge from the
one originally described in [21], exploring the aggregation of TDP­16 under different pH conditions
as outlined in [27] through a second round of dialysis. For this purpose, the following buffers were
prepared:
• 1 L of 20mM acetate buffer, pH 4.0
• 1 L of 20mM MES buffer, pH 6.0
• 1 L of 20mM HEPES­KOH buffer, pH 7.4
• 20 mL of 20mM acetate buffer, pH 4.0, 7M Gnd­HCl
• 20 mL of 20mM MES buffer, pH 6.0, 7M Gnd­HCl
• 20 mL of 20mM HEPES­KOH buffer, pH 7.4, 7M Gnd­HCl
After the protein aggregates in the dialysis pouch were resuspended and centrifuged, the contents
of the Falcon tubes were aliquoted into clean 2 mL Eppendorf tubes. These tubes were then
centrifuged for 30 minutes at 4◦C and 10000xG. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet
was resuspended in 1 mL of the buffers at varying pH values containing 7M Gnd­HCl.
The lids of the Eppendorf tubes were then cut and the tubes sealed with small, square­shaped
pieces of softened dialysis membrane, secured with rubber bands. The tubes were placed upside
down in polystyrene floaters and submerged into the corresponding pH buffer solutions, without
Gnd­HCl, in glass beakers. The samples underwent overnight dialysis at room temperature with
gentle stirring.
The following day, the protein aggregates were transferred into clean tubes and centrifuged for 30
minutes at 10000xG, 4◦C . After removing the supernatant, the samples were stored at ­20◦C.
3.1.6.1
Preparation of TDP­43 LCD fibrils
TDP­16 fibrils were prepared using a hybrid protocol adapted from both Capitini et al. [11] and Li
et al. [27].
Initially, TDP­16 purified via affinity chromatography under denaturing conditions, was dialyzed
overnight at room temperature against 4L of dialysis buffer (10mM HEPES­KOH, pH 7.4, 40mM
KCl) using a dialysis membrane with a 3500 Da MWCO. The sample was then divided into aliquots.
After centrifugation and removal of the supernatant, three pellet samples were resuspended in
500µL of buffers containing 20mM acetate buffer (pH 4.0, 8M urea, 20 mM MES buffer (pH 6.0,
8M urea), and 20 mM HEPES­KOH (pH 7.4, 8M urea), respectively. A second round of dialysis
was then performed against 1L of the corresponding buffers devoid of urea to eliminate traces of
the denaturant and other smaller components, thereby promoting aggregation.
Following dialysis, the samples were centrifuged, and the pellets resuspended in 25µL of their
corresponding pH buffers devoid of urea. The protein concentration was determined using a Nan­
odrop spectrophotometer.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
19
==PAGE:34==
Lastly, the samples were subjected to incubation with shaking at approximately 600 rpm for 2 hours
at 37◦C.
3.2
TDP­16 aggregates characterisation
3.2.1
Chemical depolymerization of TDP­16 aggregates
For chemical depolymerization experiments two denaturing agents, urea and guanidine hydrochlo­
ride (Gnd­HCl), were used to prepare a range of samples under different conditions. TDP­16,
initially purified through affinity chromatography under denaturing conditions (8M urea), was sub­
jected to two parallel preparation protocols.
For samples in urea, the frozen protein pellet was thawed and resuspended in 1 mL of a buffer
containing 50 mM Tris­HCl, pH 7.4, 150mM KCl, then were sonicated used a vial sonicator (2
min, 1s on/off cycle, 100% amplitude). A series of urea concentrations ranging from 0 to 8M were
prepared in the same buffer. TDP­16 depolymerization samples were prepared by diluting the
sonicated protein sample tenfold to each of the different buffers containing urea (mixing 6µL of
protein with 54µL of buffer, total sample volume 60µL, final protein concentration in the samples
was 5µM). Depolymerization samples were sonicated again three times under the same conditions
(2 minutes, 1s on/off cycle, 100% amplitude) and then left to incubate at room temperature.
For depolymerisation in Gnd­HCl, experiments were carried out under three distinct buffer con­
ditions. Sample buffers were prepared through serial dilutions of 20mM acetate buffer (pH 4.0),
MES buffer (pH 6.0), and HEPES­KOH buffer (pH 7.4) with Gnd­HCl concentrations varying from
7M to 0M. Three TDP­16 pellets obtained after performing dialysis against buffers at different pH
as explained in protocol B, were thawed and resuspended in 100µL of the corresponding buffers
containing 7M of Gnd­HCl and sonicated (2 minutes, 1s on/off cycle, 100% amplitude). Follow­
ing this, TDP­16 depolymerization samples were prepared for each pH by diluting the sonicated
protein sample tenfold in each of their corresponding Gnd­HCl­containing buffers (6µL of protein
mixed with 54µL of buffer, with a final sample volume of 60µL and a final protein concentration of
26µM in the samples).
FIDA and DLS measurements were consistently performed on the samples periodically after three
rounds sonication (2 min, 1s on/off cycle, 100% amplitude) and centrifugation (5 min at 16900 rcf)
of the samples, to monitor changes in the depolymerisation process and aggregates size.
Chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 fibrils
Following the preparation of a new batch of protein fibrils following the procedure previously out­
lined in 3.1.6.1, two sets of 12 sample buffers were prepared using a 20mM acetate buffer at pH
4.0, one with urea and the other with GndHCl, with denaturant concentrations varying from 0 to
7M.
In alignment with the previously described chemical depolymerization experiments, the protein
samples were prepared by diluting the fibrils tenfold in each of the 12 respective buffers containing
denaturants, by mixing 6µL of the protein solution with 54µL of each buffer (final concentration=
8.4µM).
The samples were then subjected to a two­week incubation period, during which they were shaken
at 600rpm and maintained at a temperature of 37◦C.
3.2.2
Testing different depolymerisation agents
To investigate the impact of various depolymerization agents compared to those of urea, stock
solutions of 100% DMSO, 5% acetic acid, 1% formic acid, 2% Triton X­100, 25% HFIP, 1M NaOH,
and 6M Gnd­HCl were prepared.
Two frozen TDP­16 protein pellets, which were first thawed and diluted with 1 mL of milliQ water,
20
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:35==
were vortexed, aliquoted into clean Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 16900 rcf to
separate the supernatant from the pellets. The supernatant was then carefully removed, and the
pellets were resuspended in 250µL of the various stock solutions containing the different depoly­
merization agents.
Once resuspended, protein samples underwent sonication and were transferred into a 96­well
plate for FIDA measurements, as outlined in Section 3.2.3.
3.2.3
FIDA experiments setup
6µL of each protein depolymerization sample and 20µL of the corresponding sample buffers were
pipetted in a 96­well plate.
During the measurement process, the temperature of both the sample trays and the capillary cham­
ber was maintained at 25◦C. The FIDA instrument (FidaBio, Denmark) featured a standard capillary
with an inner diameter of 75µm and a length of 1m. The specific instrument parameters employed
for this experiment are detailed in Table 3.2:
Table 3.2: Method for FIDA analyses for TDP­16 aggregates depolymerisation.
Inlet tray
Inlet vial
position
Pressure
(mbar)
Time (s)
Outlet
Measure
Comment
Tray 2
1
3500
60
Variable
No
1M NaOH rinse
Tray 2
2
3500
60
Variable
No
milliQ wash
Tray 1
Analite
3500
30
Variable
No
Buffer wash
Tray 1
Indicator
75
20
Variable
No
Indicator injection
Tray 1
Analyte
1500
120
Variable
Yes
Mobilisation with buffer
and measurement
For measurements conducted on samples incubated at temperatures other than 25◦C, the tem­
perature settings for both the sample trays and the capillary chamber were adjusted accordingly
in the method.
Figure 3.1: Analysis of chemical depolymerization data for TDP­16 aggregates: (left) Raw taylor­
gram obtained for TDP­16 depolymerisation in 5M Gnd­HCl (protein concentration= 25µM), (mid­
dle) Quantification of monomer concentration in the sample by integration of the area under the
Gaussian peak from FIDA analysis, (right) Depolymerization curve obtained for aggregates de­
polymerisation in Gnd­HCl.
Taylorgrams were analysed in Origin by plotting the fluorescence intensity of the various samples
over time (Figure 3.1). Monomer concentration in each sample was obtained by integrating the
area under the peaks in the taylorgrams using the Peak Analyser function available in Origin. A
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
21
==PAGE:36==
correction for the viscosity of Gnd­HCl was made, which affects the hydrodynamic radius of the
aggregates in solution, as per equation 2.4, and the area under the peak observed for each sample
(and thus the amount of soluble monomer). Normalization of the data was performed against the
maximum value for the area obtained during the measurements. Monomer concentrations were
then plotted against the denaturant concentrations. Isodesmic model fit was performed using the
software Origin through non­linear regression using Equation 3.1:
y =
2[M]tot exp
!
−∆G+m[D]
RT
"
+ 1 −
#
4[M]tot exp
!
−∆G+m[D]
RT
"
2[M]tot2 exp
!
−∆G+m[D]
RT
"2
(3.1)
In this equation, y represents the concentration of soluble protein over the total, [D] is the denat­
urant concentration, ∆G represents the Gibbs free energy (measured in kJ/mol), M denotes the
protein concentration in the sample (in this case, equal to 26µM), the m­value is a derived param­
eter that provides information on the cooperativity with the denaturant under the tested condition,
R is the universal gas constant (in J/K∙mol), T is the absolute temperature (in K, corresponding to
310.15 K for a temperature of 37°C).
3.2.4
ThT fluorescence measurements
ThT experiments were conducted using an Omega Fluorostar plate reader (BMG Labtech, Ger­
many). The assays were performed in 96­well black microplates with clear flat bottoms (Corning).
The excitation wavelength was set at 440 nm, and emission was monitored at 480 nm.
For kinetic experiments, fraction D3 obtained from SEC purification of TDP­16 was treated as the
putative protein monomer. Following sonication with a vial sonicator,(2 min, 1s on/off cycle, 100%
amplitude) and centrifugation (5 min at 16900 rcf) of the protein samples, and sonication of the
monomer from fraction D3 (protein concentration=0.9 mg/mL), sample preparation was carried out
on ice. For the seeded samples, 35µL of ThT buffer (20mM HEPES­KOH, pH 7.4, 83.3µM ThT)
were mixed with 10µL of seeds. Immediately before commencing the experiment, 5µL of the pro­
tein monomer were added to the solution. Control samples without seeds were also prepared by
combining 45µL of ThT buffer with 5µL of monomer.
The temperature was maintained at 37◦C in the microplate reader, and the experiment was con­
ducted over approximately 50 hours.
For ThT fluorescence measurements of chemical depolymerisation experiments, protein samples
were first sonicated using a vial sonicator (2 min, 1s on/off cycle, 100% amplitude) and then cen­
trifuged for 5 minutes at 16900 rcf, then 14µL of each sample were mixed with with 1µL of a 5mM
ThT stock solution in milliQ water. Fluorescence of the sample was monitored for 55 hours at 25◦C.
3.2.5
Dynamic Light Scattering
DLS experiments were conducted using the Prometheus Panta (NanoTemper Technologies, Mu­
nich, Germany). The instrument allows for isothermal scans, where a constant temperature is
maintained throughout the experiment to facilitate the collection of scattering data from samples
at a specific temperature.
DLS measurements were performed on TDP­16 depolymerisation samples after sonication and
centrifugation. Samples were transferred into the glass capillaries by taking advantage of capillar­
ity forces (approximately only 10µL of sample are required to fill each capillary). Once filled, the
capillaries were placed back onto their tray and sealed to prevent sample evaporation during the
experiment.
DLS laser power was set to 100%, the correlation time of each measurement was 5s, and data was
collected for 30 minutes at 37◦C. Following the completion of measurements, the cumulant radii
22
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:37==
and polydispersity were obtained using the cumulant fitting method implemented in the analysis
software implemented in the instrument.
3.2.6
AFM Analysis
For AFM analysis, the samples were prepared by depositing 15µL of the TDP­16 sample on a
clean mica sheet. This was followed by a 5­minute incubation time, after which the samples were
carefully rinsed with milli­Q water and then dried using a vacuum.
All AFM images were captured using the dynamic mode of a DriveAFM instrument (Nanosurf,
Switzerland). The specific cantilever utilized was the PPP­NCLAuD­10 (Nanosensors, Germany),
which operates at a resonant frequency of approximately 168kHz. The temperature of the can­
tilever was maintained at 26◦C. The setpoint was configured at 70%, while the Proportional Gain
(P­Gain) and Derivative Gain (D­Gain) set to 200, and the Integral Gain (I­Gain) adjusted to 1200.
Initially, images were acquired at a resolution of 180 nm/pixel and a scanning speed of 0.5 s/line.
This setup allowed for a rapid scanning of the sample. Once fibrils were identified, the imaging
parameters were adjusted to capture more defined images. The resolution was enhanced to either
20 nm/pixel or 10 nm/pixel, while maintaining the scanning speed at 0.5 s/line.
The raw data was processed using the open­access software Gwyddion and by removing the poly­
nomial background of the image, leveling the data, correcting horizontal scars and stretching the
color range to enhance contrast. To determine the height and pitch length, profiles along the body
of the fibrils were extracted using the built­in function of the software.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
23
==PAGE:38==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Purification of soluble monomeric TDP­16
The very first aim of this study was to develop, optimize and test a protocol for purifying TDP­16.
This section describes the outcomes and the challenges encountered during the purification pro­
cess, along with any modifications applied to the initially adopted protocol.
4.1.1
Affinity purification of TDP­16 in denaturing conditions
By exploiting the hexa­histidine tag present in the amino­terminus of the target protein, the affin­
ity purification of TDP­16 was conducted using Ni­NTA resin under denaturing conditions in the
presence of 8M urea. This approach was necessary as TDP­16 was predominantly found in an
insoluble form in inclusion bodies. The purity of the protein in the collected fractions was evaluated
through SDS­PAGE (Figure 4.1).
Figure 4.1: SDS­PAGE analysis of TDP­16 affinity purification: gel obtained after loading the
samples containing TDP­16 collected after cells lysis (lanes 2 and 3) and affinity purification with
Ni­NTA resin (lanes 4 to 9). In the picture: L= Ladder; Lysis A/B SN= supernatant collocted follow­
ing addition of lysis buffers A and B to the cells and centrifugation; SN= Supernatant; FT= Flow
Through; Elution B= elution buffer containing 50mM Tris­HCl, pH 8.0, 500mM NaCl, 8M urea and
500mM imidazole.
Samples taken from the two lysis steps exhibited many bands corresponding to the presence of
a wide range of impurities in solution. However, a thick, intense band at approximately 16kDa,
matching the molecular weight of TDP­16, was visible. Impurities were also visible in lane 4, in­
dicating the elution of most undesired species already at this stage of the purification process.
Despite this, a quite intense band for TDP­16 was still present in the flow through, revealing that
a significant amount of protein was not bound to the Ni­NTA resin beads, suggesting that higher
amount of resin should be used in the future when performing affinity purification.
Following the washing steps, bands indicative of impurities in the sample were still observed but
appeared to be very faint, indicating that most non­specifically bound proteins had been washed
away at this point, effectively isolating TDP­16.
Samples from fractions obtained after performing purification with gradually increasing percent­
ages of elution buffer showed that TDP­16 was mostly eluted from the Ni­NTA resin after applica­
tion of 5% elution buffer, as demonstrated by the clear thick band observed in lane 7. The intensity
24
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:39==
of the band slightly decreased in lane 8, when 70% of elution buffer was applied, and was barely
discernible for the step performed with 100% elution buffer.
The affinity purification process thus effectively separated the protein of interest from other impu­
rities in the sample, although the protocol could still be optimized to minimize protein loss in early
stages.
Since the sample from Wash 1 (lane 5) still displayed impurities, fractions corresponding to Wash
2, 5% and 70% elution buffer were chosen for further purification steps.
4.1.2
Size Exclusion Chromatography
Fractions containing the most pure TDP­16 were subsequently purified using SEC. Gel filtration
was performed under two distinct conditions to determine which one would facilitate elution of the
protein of interest in well­resolved peaks. Chromatograms from purifications performed in 20mM
MES buffer at pH 6.0, both with and without the addition of 250mM KCl, are depicted in Figure 4.2:
Figure 4.2: SEC chromatograms from the purification of TDP­16 at pH 6.0 in 20mM MES buffer
in the absence (top) and presence of 250mM KCl (bottom).
Neither condition proved ideal for achieving well­separated and sharp protein elution peaks. The
majority of the protein eluted at approximately 21 mL in the SEC conducted without KCl, and
around 21.5 mL in the one performed with KCl, which suggests the elution of a heterogeneous
sample comprising a mixture of species, rather than that of a pure protein monomer. Given that
fractions from SEC in the absence of KCl yielded lower concentrations (concentrations range 0.5­
0.7 mg/mL) compared to those with KCl (0.7­0.9 mg/mL), the use of KCl in SEC was preferred,
despite its inherent limitations. This decision was made even though the presence of salt might
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
25
==PAGE:40==
actually be considered undesirable, in view of the broadness of the peak eluted at 21.5 mL com­
pared to the sharper peak obtained without salt.
The elution peak of TDP­16 was observed to occur later than expected for a protein of its size. It
started eluting at approximately 21.5 mL, whereas proteins in the same molecular weight range
typically elute around 17­18 mL when using a Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 column [62]. This
might suggest that in the presence of KCl and residual Gnd­HCl in solution, the protein tends to
stick to the column and elute later than it should For all these reasons, additional investigations
focused on improving peak resolution and the purity of the protein should be conducted to achieve
more precise and effective protein isolation. For instance, many studies focused on the purification
of full length TDP­43 conducted SEC at pH 8.0 using a Superdex 75 16x600 column, as opposed
to the Superdex Increase [19]. Several papers report the purification of TDP­43 using reversed­
phase HPLC with a C4 column and acetonitrile gradient in water [20, 63, 64]. Often, KCl has been
used up to concentrations of 300mM, and additives like PEG 3350, DTT, CaCl2 or MgCl2, and
Triton X­100 have been included [9, 18, 3]. However, these additives could further complicate the
purification process as they would have to be removed from the final sample.
A potentially optimal approach for improving solubility and preventing aggregation and sticking dur­
ing the process might involve integration of a SUMO­tag or MBP­tag to the carboxyl­terminus of
TDP­16, coupled with a His­tag on the amino­terminus [28, 11].
4.1.3
Quality control and characterization of TDP­16 SEC fractions
To assess the quality and content of the eluted fractions, SDS­PAGE was conducted (Figure 4.3).
Analysis of fractions obtained from SEC at pH 6.0 in the presence of KCl reveals that initial fractions
corresponding to the void volume show no presence of TDP­16. However, fractions from 16.5 mL
to 21 mL contain very little amounts of TDP­16 and majority is indeed eluted between 21.5 ml and
23 ml (corresponding to fractions D4­D2, Figure 4.3). Absence of additional bands in the lanes
corresponding to these fractions suggests a high purity of the protein, indicating that the solution is
largely free of unwanted species. The intensity of these bands corresponds to the one of the initial
TDP­16 sample before the SEC run, implying that, albeit sticky, most of the protein was actually
eluted from the column, with negligible losses.
Figure 4.3: SDS­PAGE analysis of TDP­16 SEC fractions: gel obtained after loading the fractions
containing TDP­16 from SEC (20mM MES, pH 6.0, 250 mM KCl). Individual fractions correspond
to those shown at the bottom of Figure 4.2. In lane 13, the protein sample before performing SEC,
corresponding to the three fractions selected after affinity purification. In the picture: L= Ladder;
PS= Pre­SEC.
26
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:41==
The protein concentration of SEC fractions D4, D3 and D2 was measured through UV absorbance
with the Nanodrop (Table 4.1).
Table 4.1: Protein concentration of TDP­16 SEC fractions.
SEC with 20mM MES, pH 6.0, 250mM KCl
Extinction coefficient for TDP­16
1.190
Fractions
D4
D3
D2
mg/mL
0.703
0.974
0.515
/ext. coefficient
0.590
0.818
0.433
Volume of each fraction
0.5 mL
mg of protein
1.180
1.636
0.866
Total mg of protein recovered
3.682
4.1.4
Size analysis of SEC fraction using FIDA
To further examine the size of TDP­16 in the SEC fractions D4,D3 and D2, TDA was performed.
For this analysis, a small volume of 6 µL from each fraction was transferred into inserts. Samples
were then loaded into a capillary and mobilized using SEC buffer (20mM MES, pH 6.0, 250mM
KCl). TDA of the fractions using FIDA produced well­defined peaks for all three samples, with
fraction D3 exhibiting some additional spikes (Figure 4.4).
Figure 4.4: TDA conducted on the SEC fractions. On the left: results obtained when using sample
inserts on FIDA. On the right: comparison of the peaks obtained when using sample inserts with
standard capillary and with HS coating.
The taylograms obtained revealed a minor peak at approximately 0.2 minutes indicative of non­
diffusive protein oligomers or small aggregates, followed by a bigger peak at around 0.43 minutes
corresponding to the diffusive monomeric form of the protein. Notably, each peak was character­
ized by a long tailing shoulder at longer times, suggesting sticking of the samples to the capillary
walls. To address this issue, the capillary was treated with a high­sensitivity (HS) coating reagent
from Fida Biosystems. Subsequent analysis produced peaks that were almost identical to those
observed initially, showing reproducibility of the results. Despite this, the HS coating did not ef­
fectively mitigate sample retention within the capillary, as evidenced by the pronounced trailing
shoulders of the peaks.
4.1.5
Aggregation kinetics of isolated TDP­16
Subsequently, the aggregation of the fractions recovered from SEC was monitored by using ThT
fluorescence as a probe. This was done to evaluate whether the isolated fractions might be able
to form amyloids.
ThT fluorescence signal of the SEC fraction was evaluated over a period of approximately 83 hours.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
27
==PAGE:42==
Upon averaging the recorded signals for sample triplicates, it appeared that all three fractions ex­
hibited ThT positivity (Figure 4.5).
All fractions exhibited a similar pattern in the ThT assay, characterized initially by a prolonged lag
phase lasting about 20­30 hours. This phase was followed by a sigmoidal increase in fluorescence
intensity from 30 to 45 hours. Notably, after appearing to reach a plateau, the fluorescence signal
interestingly increased further between 60 and 80 hours. This suggests that, as time progressed,
there was an onset of protein aggregation, potentially giving rise to the formation of fibrillar struc­
tures in the samples.
Figure 4.5: Time­course analysis aggregation kinetics of TDP­16 SEC fractions D4, D3 and D2
with ThT. The plot shows averaged data from a triplicate measurement.
4.1.6
AFM analysis of isolated TDP­16
The characteristic shape of the ThT curves indicates that a nucleated­polymerization process is
occurring in the samples, a mechanism commonly associated with amyloid formation. To further
confirm this, fraction D2 (concentration= 31.5 µM) was chosen for AFM analysis to investigate the
morphology of the aggregates in the sample. The fraction was thus taken out after the aggregation
reaction, deposited on mica, and analyzed under the AFM (Figure 4.6).
Figure 4.6: AFM images of SEC Fraction D2 captured at 90µm (A) and 20µm (B and C).
AFM analysis of 5 regions of the sample scanned reveals the presence of heterogeneous aggre­
gates, none of which appears to be fibrillar.
28
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:43==
This could be attributed to the fact that fibrillar species might have been washed away during wash
of the sample with milliQ water, preventing them from adhering to the mica surface despite the
incubation period. Alternatively, the aggregates might consist of clumps of fibrils which could be
indicative of strong sample aggregation, resulting in the formation of dense clumps on the surface
of the mica sheet.
• TDP­16 was successfully purified through affinity purification, the presence of pure
TDP­16 in the fractions was confirmed by SDS­PAGE analysis. However, a
substantial amount of unbound TDP­16 was lost in early stages of purification,
suggesting a need to optimize the purification process;
• SEC was performed under different conditions, but none of them resulted ideal.
• Despite its drawbacks, SEC performed at pH 6.0 in the presence of KCl was
favored due to the resulting higher protein concentration of the fractions collected.
• TDP­16 was eluted later than expected, indicating potential sticking to the column.
Alternative approaches should be explored, such as integrating protein tags,
performing SEC under different pH conditions in the presence of other additives
and/or salt concentrations, and experimenting with different types of
chromatography columns;
• Taylorgrams obtained from TDA of SEC fractions D4,D3 and D2 displayed
well­defined peaks, which suggest the presence of monomeric TDP­16 in the
samples. However, additional spikes displayes in the Taylorgrams indicate the
presence of non­diffusive oligomers or aggregates within these fractions, too;
• ThT fluorescence analysis revealed that all SEC fractions showed ThT positivity,
indicating potential presence of fibrillar structures in the sample;
• AFM analysis provided insights into the morphology of TDP­16 aggregates in SEC
fraction D2, revealing the presence of heterogeneous aggregates but no clear
fibrillar structures. This could suggest either a loss of fibrillar species during
sample preparation or a tendency of the protein to form dense clumps of fibrils.
Findings from the various analyses conducted on TDP­16 collectively highlight the pres­
ence of heterogeneous aggregates in the sample, and a tendency towards amyloid for­
mation. However, the lack of distinct fibrillar structures suggests that the precise nature
and characteristics of these aggregates remain elusive. This underlines the necessity
for further detailed aggregates characterization to better understand their behavior and
properties.
Summary of Section 4.1
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
29
==PAGE:44==
4.2
Characterization of TDP­16 aggregates
Despite the intrinsically high aggregation propensity of the protein TDP­43, there is limited under­
standing regarding the thermodynamic stability and aggregation kinetics of these structures. This
section aims to characterize aggregates of TDP­16 across a wide range of conditions, employ­
ing a broad spectrum of biophysical and biochemical techniques including FIDA, DLS and ThT
fluorescence spectroscopy.
4.2.1
Chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates using urea
Chemical depolymerisation of protein aggregates serves a valuable qualitative method for assess­
ing their stability [41]. Thus, to assess the stability of TDP­16 aggregates under various conditions,
a series of depolymerisation experiments using chemical denaturants was carried out. Urea is a
widely recognized mild chemical denaturant in research and, in some instances, it has been found
to be more effective than Gnd­HCl in denaturing amyloid fibrils [40, 30].
In this study, a TDP­16 protein sample prepared according to Protocol A described in Chapter 3
was used. The protein sample was transferred in buffers prepared by performing a dilution series
of Buffer A (50mM Tris­HCl, pH 7.4, 150mM KCl) with urea concentrations ranging from 0M to 8M
(final TDP­16 concentration in the samples= 5µM) The depolymerisation samples were incubated
at room temperature (considered equal to 25◦C in this context). Initially, to determine the necessary
equilibration time for depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates, samples were incubated for periods
of 3 and 7 days. Following these, the quantification of monomers was performed using FIDA, which
primarily offers insights into the relative amount of soluble protein in the samples (Figure 4.7, A).
Figure 4.7: Chemical depolymerisation of TDP16 aggregates with urea: A) Monomer concentra­
tions for depolymerisation samples measured by FIDA, following incubation periods of 3 days and
7 days, B) Comparing fractions of soluble protein monomer obtained for depolymerisation in urea
in different pH conditions, C) ThT fluorescence signal for TDP­16 aggregates depolymerisation at
different pH. Fluorescence intensity scale is very high as the gain was not adjusted to a 1000 prior
to initiating the measurement.
In panel A, both datasets show similar trends, and it can be observed how, as the concentration of
urea increases, the fraction of soluble protein related to the amount of soluble protein in solution
also increases for both incubation times.
Taking into account noise present in the data, results from the 7­day incubation period do not show
a significant difference compared to those from the 3­day incubation. This suggests that equi­
librium might have been reached within this timeframe. Additionally, the lack of a clear sigmoidal
pattern in the fluorescence intensity might indicate that the conditions employed are not particularly
conducive to significant depolymerisation. To investigate the impact of external conditions on the
stability of aggregates, the experiment was replicated with depolymerisation samples in urea at pH
4.0, 5.0 and 6.0. Comparison of TDP­16 depolymerization data at various pH, as shown in Figure
4.7 (B), indicates that lower pH levels seem to favour depolymerisation, potentially due to improved
30
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:45==
dispersion and reduced clumping of the protein aggregates. Conversely, at pH 5.0 and 7.4, soluble
protein in the samples appears to be lower, which may imply a reduced efficacy of urea­induced
depolymerization under these conditions. Ultimately, pH 4.0 and 6.0 provide the most promising
results. Stability analyses have demonstrated that urea exhibits greater stability within a the pH
range of 4.0­8.0 at 25◦C, and its stability diminishes with an increase in temperature across all
pH levels [65]. Consequently, the efficacy of urea in depolymerising protein aggregates may be
impacted over extended periods under strong acidic or basic conditions. Additionally, evaluating
the influence of varying temperatures on the aggregates depolymerisation process would be prob­
lematic due to the reduced stability of urea at elevated temperatures. This factor consequently
restricts the scope of analytical procedures that can be applied to the protein.
In all taylorgrams obtained from measurements of the urea depolymerisation series, spikes cor­
responding to aggregates of TDP­16 were observed (Supplementary Figure A.1). This suggests
that these species likely form larger non­diffusive structures, a finding that aligns with observations
from AFM analysis. To further investigate this, after a 7­day incubation period, ThT fluorescence
intensity was measured for the four different sets of samples. After a 7­day incubation period, ThT
fluorescence intensity for the 4 different sets of samples was measured (see Figure 4.7, C). At pH
4.0, a higher fluorescence intensity was observed for lower urea concentrations, which could imply
that species in these samples might have a higher affinity for ThT, followed by a gradual decrease
in intensity for higher urea content in the samples. However, for the other pH conditions tested, the
fluorescence intensity of the signal exhibits considerable fluctuation, showing an initial increase for
denaturant concentrations between 0M and 3M, followed by a reduction in intensity for urea con­
centrations between 3M and 6M, and then increases once again at approximately 7M urea. As
the concentration of urea increases from 3M to 8M in the samples, a decrease in ThT fluores­
cence intensity is observed, coinciding with a higher concentration of soluble monomer. However,
the observed fluctuations in fluorescence within this range could be attributed to the presence of
amorphous aggregates or clumps that have not been effectively depolymerised by urea during the
incubation period. Overall, no clear pattern for fluorescence intensity in response to different urea
concentrations can be deducted form these results, which suggests that urea may not be the right
choice in chemical denaturant when it comes to TDP­16 aggregates depolymerisation.
Previous studies focused on the analysis of the thermodynamic stability of amyloids state that the
chemical depolymerisation process can also be triggered by more potent ionic denaturants like
guanidine hydrochloride (Gnd­HCl) [40, 42]. With this in mind, a new batch of depolymerisation
samples was prepared, with Gnd­HCl concentrations spanning from 0M to 8M, at pH 6.0. This
particular pH was selected based on the data presented in Figure 4.7 (B), which showed a higher
monomer content for samples in this condition with overall minimum fluctuations. In Figure 4.8
(A), a comparison is drawn between the amount of soluble protein in the samples treated with urea
and with Gnd­HCl. For depolymerisation with urea at pH 7.4, as previously mentioned, there is
little change in the concentration of soluble protein the range of denaturant concentrations for both
the 3­day and 7­day incubation times. The figure includes the dataset for samples treated with
urea at pH 6.0 (in blue in Figure 4.8, A). As previously discussed, there is a noticeable increase
in the fraction of soluble protein for this condition, confirming why this specific pH proves to be the
most suitable one for urea depolymerisation. What needs to be noted in the figure is that, after a
3­day incubation period in Gnd­HCl at pH 6.0, there is a discernible increase in the soluble protein
fraction in the sample correlating with increasing concentrations of Gnd­HCl in the samples. This
implies that Gnd­HCl is a more potent depolymerisation agent for TDP­16 aggregates under these
conditions.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
31
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.8: Aggregates depolymerisation in Gnd­HCl: A) Comparison of amount of soluble TDP­
16 in urea at pH 7.4 and pH 6.0 and in Gnd­HCl at pH 6.0 following incubation periods of 3 and
7 days, B) Comparing fractions of soluble protein for depolymerisation in Gnd­HCl at pH 6.0 after
incubation for 3 days and 15 days, C) Comparison of ThT fluorescence signal intensities of samples
incubated with urea and Gnd­HCl at pH 6.0.
Figure 4.8 (B) allows to compare the fraction of soluble TDP­16 for samples incubated for 3 and
15 days in Gnd­HCl. The measurements performed after 15 days show higher values, which
corroborates the stronger effect of Gnd­HCl on the depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates in
solution in contrast with what observed for urea, for which no significant changes were detected
between the two measurements.
Lastly, Figure 4.8 (C) depicts the ThT fluorescence intensities for TDP­16 samples after incubation
in both urea and GuHCl at pH 6.0. The fluorescence intensity appears to increase with higher
concentrations of GuHCl in the samples. This suggests that increasing GuHCl concentrations are
associated with either an augmented formation of structures to which ThT can bind, or an alter­
ation in the microenvironment of the fluorophores within the aggregates in solution, both of which
intensify the fluorescence signal. These observations suggest once again that Gnd­HCl is a more
potent depolymerising agent for TDP­16 aggregates. However, further measurements should be
performed on control samples consisting solely of Gnd­HCl and ThT, without any protein, to as­
certain whether the presence of guanidine alone can cause ThT to fluoresce. If the fluorescence
intensity increases regardless of the Gnd­HCl concentration, this would suggest that, at higher
denaturant concentration in the sample, it is not soluble monomer but rather the formation of ag­
gregates capable of interacting with ThT that is observed.
32
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:47==
• FIDA analysis of chemical depolymerisation samples revealed that higher urea
concentrations led to an increase in soluble protein, but there was no significant
difference between the results obtained for the 3­day and 7­day incubations,
indicating that equilibrium was likely reached within this timeframe;
• pH 4.0 and 6.0 appeared to facilitate depolymerization more effectively compared
to pH 5.0 and 7.4;
• ThT fluorescence analysis showed a high affinity for ThT at lower urea
concentrations in pH 4.0, suggesting some interaction with TDP­16 aggregates in
the samples. However, fluorescence intensity fluctuated significantly under other
pH conditions, leading to the overall conclusion that urea was not consistently
effective as a depolymerizing agent for TDP­16 aggregates;
• FIDA analysis results obtained from chemical depolymerisation with Gnd­HCl
demonstrated a noticeable increase in the amount of soluble protein in the
samples with higher concentrations of Gnd­HCl, highlighting the efficacy of
guanidine hydrochloride as a depolymerizing agent;
• ThT fluorescence increased with higher concentrations of Gnd­HCl, indicating
either formation of ThT­positive aggregates or changes in the fluorophore
microenvironment.
Summary of Section 4.2
4.3
Testing alternative depolymerisation agents
The possibility of using alternative chemical denaturants beyond urea and Gnd­HCl was also ex­
plored. Figure 4.9 shows the response of TDP­16 aggregates to 7 different chemical agents that
could potentially be applicable for depolymerisation studies.
Figure 4.9: Taylorgrams showing the effect of different chemical compounds on TDP­16 aggre­
gates in solution.
Irregularities in the shape of the taylorgrams can be attributed to large sample sticking and high
volatility of some of the solvents used, such as HFIP. Moreover, areas under the peak ­ i.e. the
amount of soluble protein ­ between samples in different solvents is not comparable, as organic
solvents can significantly alter the fluorescence efficiency of tryptophan residues within the protein.
Thus, the tested solvents were analysed based on the regularity of the peaks produced during FIDA
analysis and their ease of use.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
33
==PAGE:48==
The response to DMSO was characterized by a notably broad and irregular peak, with several
spikes indicative of non­diffusive particles within the sample. A similar pattern of spikes and a
broad, irregular peak over time were observed with 25% HFIP, which could be due to its high
volatility. In contrast, Triton X­100 and 1% formic acid predominantly exhibited a stable flat sig­
nal, interrupted only by a small irregular peak with some spikes in the sample treated with formic
acid. Among all the denaturants tested, only Gnd­HCl, 1M NaOH and 5% acetic acid produced
well­defined taylorgrams. However, as both NaOH and acetic acid showed some small spikes,
Gnd­HCl proved to be again the most optimal choice in terms of chemical denaturant, demonstrat­
ing a consistently regular peak without spikes, reflecting its robust denaturing capabilities.
• Some of the solvents tested, such as HFIP, were found to be excessively volatile
and challenging to handle during the experiments;
• The depolymerisation effect of some of these solvents appeared to be limited, as
evidenced by the presence of spikes in the taylorgrams, indicating the presence of
non­diffusive aggregates in the protein samples;
• Among the tested agents, Gnd­HCl emerged as the most effective depolymerizing
agent for TDP­16 aggregates, demonstrating regular peaks without spikes,
indicative of its robust denaturing capabilities.
Summary of Section 4.3
34
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:49==
4.4
Chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates using
Gnd­HCl
Having identified Gnd­HCl as the most effective depolymerization agent for aggregates of the pro­
tein of interest, subsequent experiments were conducted to explore how incubation temperature
and varying pH levels might impact the depolymerisation process of TDP­16 aggregates.
To prepare protein samples for these experiments, a two­step dialysis process was introduced.
Initially, TDP­16 was dialyzed in a 10mM HEPES­KOH buffer at pH 7.4 containing 40mM KCl. The
resulting protein aggregates were then resuspended in buffers containing 7M Gnd­HCl at various
pH levels (pH 4.0, 6.0, 7.4), without KCl. Subsequently, a second dialysis was performed against a
buffer at the same pH but devoid of Gnd­HCl. The reason behind dialyzing the protein in a buffer at
a specific pH, where the depolymerisation was intended to occur, was to determine if this prepara­
tory step could favorably influence the depolymerisation process.
For each pH, two sets of depolymerisation samples (protein concentration=26µM) were prepared
with Gnd­HCl concentrations ranging from 0M to 7M. One set of samples per pH was incubated
at 80◦C, while the other set was incubated at 37◦C, for a period of 7 days, after which FIDA mea­
surements were taken (Figure 4.10).
Figure 4.10: Influence of different incubation temperatures on the chemical depolymerisation of
TDP­16: changes in the concentration of soluble monomer for protein depolymerisation samples
in Gnd­HCl after 7 days of incubation at 80◦C (A) and 37◦C (B).
The depolymerisation process of TDP­16 becomes challenging to monitor with samples incubated
at 80◦C. Even minimal evaporation of the buffer solution in which the protein is dissolved leads
to immediate crystallization of the sample, making it impossible to conduct the planned measure­
ments. Crystallization also occurred on the FIDA plate during measurement, resulting in an incom­
plete dataset with numerous outliers as observed in Figure 4.10 (A).
On the other hand, samples incubated at 37◦C did not show any sign of evaporation or crys­
tallization, which facilitated sample handling and allowed for the necessary measurements to be
conducted over time. Data for incubation at this temperature are shown in Figure 4.10 (B) and
exhibit increasing amount of soluble protein for higher Gnd­HCl content in the samples, a trend
particularly pronounced at pH 7.4. While data at pH 4.0 appear to follow a similar pattern, the
lower monomer concentration values obtained for this pH suggest that, under the tested condi­
tions, aggregates might be less responsive to depolymerisation in this more acidic environment.
With this in mind, sample incubation at 80◦C was discontinued, and subsequent depolymerisation
experiments focused solely on samples incubated at 37◦C for different equilibration times (Figure
4.11).
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
35
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.11: Chemical depolymerization of TDP­16 aggregates at different pHs and incubation
times for samples incubated at 37◦C.
At pH 4.0, an increase in soluble protein concentration corresponding to higher Gnd­HCl concen­
trations in the samples is observed for both measurement periods. However, monomer concentra­
tions for week 3 are lower than those in week 1. This could imply that the rate of depolymerisation
may not be significantly influenced over time at this pH (Figure 4.11, A). For pH 6.0 (Figure 4.11, B),
the concentrations values are higher compared to pH 4.0. These values remain relatively stable
for lower concentrations of Gnd­HCl across both weeks. Yet, similar to the trend observed at pH
4.0, the data points from week 3 display lower values compared to week 1, suggesting a decrease
in depolymerisation efficacy over time. Lastly, the data for pH 7.4 (Figure 4.11, C) obtained during
weeks 1 and 3 show a consistent trend and follow a sigmoidal pattern. Soluble protein concen­
trations for both measurements are very similar, which might indicate that samples have reached
equilibrium within this time frame.
For quantitatively comparison of aggregate stability across varying pH, chemical depolymerization
data obtained through FIDA analysis were fitted to the isodesmic model using Equation 3.1 (Figure
4.12).
Figure 4.12: Isodesmic model fitting of chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates at differ­
ent pHs: panels A, B and C depict the ratio of soluble protein to total protein in depolymerisation
samples across a range of Gnd­HCl concentrations at pH 4.0, pH 6.0 and pH 7.4, respectively.
The black squares represent the experimental data points obtained, the red line in each panel is
the result of isodesmic model fitting applied to the data, performed in Origin.
Among the three conditions tested, pH 7.4 exhibits the highest initial soluble fraction of protein
aggregates. This fraction increases together with the concentration of Gnd­HCl in the samples,
36
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:51==
suggesting greater solubility of the protein at this pH even at lower denaturant concentrations. The
model fit, represented by the red line, aligns well with the experimental data across all pH levels,
with the most accurate fit observed at pH 7.4.
As shown in Table 4.2, the ∆G values, indicative of protein stability, are higher and relatively similar
at pH 4.0 and 6.0, but become more negative at pH 7.4, implying increased stability in this specific
condition. However, an error is always associated with determination of the ∆G value, given the
difficulties encountered in obtaining sample homogeneity, which complicates the precise calcula­
tion of the true value solely from fitting the data to this model. The ∆G value of TDP­16, calculated
to be ­38.6 kJ/mol, is more negative than that of wild type α­synuclein, which is reported to be
­30.1 kJ/mol according to FIDA analysis performed by Farzadfard et al. [41]. However, it is higher
than the ∆G value reported in the same study for PI3K­SH3, which is equal to ­59.8 kJ/mol. This
implies that the stability of TDP­16 protein aggregates falls between that of WT α­synuclein and
PI3K­SH3 fibrils. Furthermore, the m­value, which reflects the dependency of free energy on the
denaturant, is the highest at pH 7.4. This suggests increased cooperativity under this condition,
indicating a stronger response of protein stability to changes in denaturant concentration at pH 7.4.
Table 4.2: Parameters obtained for the isodesmic fit of depolymerisation data at different pHs.
pH 4.0
pH 6.0
pH 7.4
∆G (kJ/mol)
­31.8 ± 0.9
­31.9 ± 1.9
­38.6 ± 2.2
Cm (M)
13.01 ± 1.5
10.8 ± 2.4
9.1 ± 1.1
Protein Concentration (µM)
26
26
26
m (kJ/M mol)
­2.5 ± 0.4
­2.9 ± 0.8
­4.3 ± 0.7
Reduced Chi­Sqr
0.01
0.02
0.01
R­Square (COD)
0.95
0.83
0.96
Adj. R­Square
0.943
0.82
0.96
Given that chemical depolymerisation at pH 7.4 yielded the most promising results, complementary
ThT fluorescence analysis was performed to further explore whether these samples exhibit ThT
positivity. ThT fluorescence results reveal the highest intensity in samples with Gnd­HCl concen­
trations ranging from 0M to about 3M (Figure 4.13, A). This suggests the presence of assemblies
in solution to which ThT can effectively bind. As the concentration of Gnd­HCl increases, the
ThT fluorescence intensity decreases substantially, which could indicate the denaturation of such
species. In comparison to ThT analysis results presented in Figure 4.8 (C), the amplitude of the
signal in the current data is substantially higher. This increase may be attributed to higher protein
concentration in the samples, which has been changed from 5µM to 26µM. Similarly, in the present
analysis, samples with Gnd­HCl concentrations ranging from 0M to 3M show a significant increase
in ThT positivity. This elevation is higher than the one depicted in Figure 4.8, potentially due to
the altered experimental conditions that may have facilitated the formation of fibrillar species, as
well as the increased protein concentration in the samples. Furthermore, a slight increase in ThT
fluorescence is also observed in samples with Gnd­HCl concentrations between 5M and 7M. This
could suggest the formation of ThT­positive aggregates, however, to gain a more comprehensive
understanding of these findings, additional measurements with control samples devoid of protein
should be conducted.
To gain an overview over the size and distribution of the species in solution within the samples, DLS
analysis was conducted. Results from this measurement, however, present some inconsistencies
with the ones previously shown (refer to blue squares in Figure 4.13, B). Typically, in the presence
of higher Gnd­HCl content, larger aggregates are expected to depolymerise into smaller particles.
As mentioned in Section 2.2.1.2 of Chapter 2, upon irradiation, larger particles should scatter more
light than smaller ones during DLS measurements. Results for the depolymerisation samples
contradict this statement, as scattering for samples with higher concentrations of Gnd­HCl actually
increases. This could be due to several factors, such as heterogeneity of the samples which might
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
37
==PAGE:52==
still include minute amounts of very large aggregates which scatter a lot, or some other interactions
within the solution that affect particle size and light scattering properties.
Figure 4.13: Comparison of chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 aggregates at pH 7.4 analyzed
through FIDA (black), DLS (orange) and ThT fluorescence analysis (blue).
4.4.1
Aggregation kinetics of TDP­16 with depolymerisation samples
As discussed in the previous section, samples undergoing depolymerisation with Gnd­HCl con­
centrations ranging from 0M to 3M exhibit ThT positivity, which suggests that fibrillar aggregates
might be present in solution. Six samples from the depolymerisation series were thus chosen to
serve as seeds in order to explore whether interaction with fibrillar aggregates could trigger protein
aggregation over time. In the experiment, fraction D3 from SEC served as the protein monomer
source (Figure 4.14, A and B).
Figure 4.14: Seeded TDP­16 aggregation, with depolymerisation samples with Gnd­HCl used as
seed and fraction D3 from SEC used as monomer: A) ThT fluorescence intensity of seeded re­
actions, B) Comparison of ThT fluorescence between seeded and non­seeded reactions, C) ThT
fluorescence intensity across analyzed samples showing the concentration­dependent effect of
Gnd­HCl on the aggregation process. The plot shows averaged data from a triplicate measure­
ment.
The aggregation process is characterized by a dynamic interconversion of different entities within
the sample. Initially, the solution only contains soluble protein monomers, but the introduction of
seeds promotes formation of fibrillar species via their elongation. This is particularly visible in re­
actions containing seeds from samples with 0M, 0.44M and 2.5M Gnd­HCl, while curves for 1.77M
38
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:53==
and 3M Gnd­HCl still exhibited a short lag phase. The non­seeded reaction, instead, maintained a
flat signal. The aggregation process reaches a plateau more quickly with increasing seed content
in the sample: while the signal for the sample with no denaturant seems to be increasing, the one
for 0.44M started to reach a plateau, and the signal for the remaining samples quickly stabilized
after an initial increase in ThT fluorescence. Some inconsistencies in the ThT signal intensities are
also observed. For instance, the seeded reaction for 0.77M Gnd­HCl was expected to show higher
intensity, but instead exhibited a rather flat signal. Also, ThT fluorescence intensity was higher for
the sample in 0.44M Gnd­HCl than in the one with 0M Gnd­HCl. Such inconsistencies are also
highlighted in Figure 4.14 C, where the fluorescence intensity is the highest for 0.44M Gnd­HCl
and fluctuates a lot with increasing Gnd­HCl concentration in the sample. Ideally, the higher signal
should have been associated with the sample containing no denaturant, with a subsequent decline
in intensity at higher concentrations of guanidine. Thus, it can be concluded that addition of seeds
from 0­3M gnd­HCl leads to acceleration of monomer aggregation, suggesting that seeds are ac­
tually fibrillar. Furthermore, it appears that there is no direct correlation between the concentration
of the denaturant in which these seeds are found and the efficiency of seeding. This lack of a clear
dependency could be attributed to the heterogeneity of the sample.
Potential causes for these irregularities could originate from uneven samples mixing or pipetting
errors, leading to anomalous readings. Additionally, different aggregate structures can be present
simultaneously within the sample, thereby affecting the fluorescence signal. This can include a mix
of oligomers and fibrils, as well as different fibril polymorphs, each potentially having distinct prop­
erties and interactions with the dye, thus such heterogeneity can lead to variable ThT fluorescence
signals [30].
• Incubation at 80◦C was discontinued as it led to sample evaporation and
crystallization, severely compromising the outcome of the measurements. On the
other hand, samples incubated at 37◦C allowed for more consistent data
collection;
• FIDA measurements showed increasing soluble protein with higher Gnd­HCl
concentrations, particularly at pH 7.4, suggesting this as the optimal pH for
depolymerisation. Data from weeks 1 and 3 showed a consistent sigmoidal
pattern, with very similar soluble protein concentrations, suggesting that the
samples may have reached equilibrium within this time frame;
• The concentration of soluble protein was lower following a 3­week incubation at
pH 4.0 and 6.0, suggesting a decrease in the efficacy of the depolymerisation
process over time in these conditions;
• ∆G value extrapolated from the isodesmic fit of the FIDA data was found to be the
lowest at pH 7.4, suggesting higher stability of TDP­16 protein aggregates at this
pH;
• Higher ThT fluorescence intensity at lower Gnd­HCl concentrations suggested the
presence of fibrillar aggregates in these samples, with a decrease in fluorescence
at higher concentrations;
• DLS analysis results contradicted expectations, showing increased light scattering
with higher Gnd­HCl concentrations, possibly due to sample heterogeneity;
• When used as seeds, depolymerised TDP aggregates with low Gnd­HCl
concentration trigger aggregation of TDP­16 monomer, suggesting that fibrillar
structures are present in these samples;
• ThT fluorescence showed some inconsistencies, potentially due to sample
heterogeneity.
Summary of Section 4.4
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
39
==PAGE:54==
4.5
Testing an alternative protocol for the production and
characterization of TDP­16 fibrils
Attempts were made repeatedly to visualize fibrils under the AFM using protein pellets resus­
pended in Gnd­HCl as per Protocol A, aiming to confirm if ThT positivity shown in the analysis
previously reported correlated with the presence of fibrillar structures in the samples. However,
these attempts did not yield successful results. Consequently, a literature review was undertaken
to identify the necessary criteria and steps required to successfully produce fibrils.
TDP­16 fibrils were produced using a combined protocol derived from the procedures outlined by
Capitini et al. [11] and Li et al. [27], detailed in Section 3.1.6.1.
This allowed for the integration of several key steps: determination of a specific protein concentra­
tion essential for fibril formation, dialysis of the protein sample to remove any residual denaturant,
and resuspension of the protein pellet in buffers with varying pH levels to identify conditions that
enable the visualization of well­dispersed fibrils.
At pH 6.0 and 7.4, the samples did not yield fibrils that could be detected using AFM, only amor­
phous aggregates and clumps were observed. According to Li et al., this might be because fibrils
formed at pH 7.0 tend to clump together, precluding detailed morphological analysis [27]. The
paper also claims that this clumping tendency was reduced for fibrils prepared at pH 6.0, but visu­
alizing them was still quite hard. However, fibrils formed at pH 4.0 were much better dispersed, and
so was the case here. For the TDP­16 samples resuspended in buffer at pH 4.0, fibrillar structures
were discernible, as shown in Figure 4.15:
Figure 4.15: AFM images of TDP­16 fibrils at pH 4.0 captured at 20μm (A) and 10μm (B and C).
This suggests that the stronger denaturing properties of guanidine hydrochloride, coupled with its
ionic nature, may have impeded protein fibrillation. Conversely, the comparatively milder destabi­
lizing effect of urea appears to have been conducive to promoting fibril formation.
The optimal concentration for TDP­16 fibril formation was determined to be 84µM, and both the
resuspension of the sample in a urea­containing buffer followed by dialysis against buffer at pH 4.0,
and incubation with slow shaking, proved to be essential steps in the fibrillation process. Previous
attempts to produce fibrils with either lower or higher concentrations of TDP­16 in the samples did
not yield successful results. Under the AFM, either no fibrils were observed at all for lower protein
concentration, or, vice versa, only large clumps were detected, depending on the concentration
used. Examination of the samples revealed two distinct morphologies of TDP­16 fibrils, charac­
terized by both twisted and untwisted filament structures. Cross­sectional profile analyses along
the fibril axes indicated that the twisted filaments have an average height of 6nm, while straight
filaments are approximately 0.4nm in height, which is in accordance with data reported in literature
[27, 11].
A depolymerisation experiment to evaluate the stability of fibrils in the presence of increasing con­
40
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:55==
centrations of urea and guanidine hydrochloride was conducted. This involved the preparation of
a fresh batch of protein fibrils and, subsequently, the preparation of two sets of samples using a
20mM acetate buffer at pH 4.0 with varying concentrations of urea and Gnd­HCl ranging from 0
to 7M. These samples underwent a two­week incubation period with shaking, after which FIDA
measurements were taken.
Figure 4.16: Fibrils depolymerisation at pH 4.0: A) monomer concentration in the samples against
the concentration of two denaturants tested, urea (orange) and guanidine hydrochloride (blue); B)
and C) Isodesmic model fitting of chemical depolymerisation of TDP­16 fibrils: the black squares
represent the experimental data points obtained, the red line in each panel is the result of isodesmic
model fitting applied to the data.
Figure 4.16 A displays results from the depolymerisation experiment, highlighting the more pro­
nounced effect of guanidine hydrochloride on fibril depolymerisation compared to urea, as evi­
denced by consistently higher values for soluble protein present in samples treated with Gnd­HCl.
The plotted monomer concentration values show significant fluctuations.
This inconsistencies
might be partially due to evaporation from the FIDA measurement plate, which could have im­
pacted the sample injection and compromised the measurements. For future measurements, the
use of sample vials should probably be considered to address this issue.
For low urea concentrations, peak integration for quantification of soluble protein in the samples
could not be obtained as the taylorgrams from FIDA were highly irregular. Additionally, samples
containing urea showed the presence of spikes even at high denaturant concentration, suggesting
that non­diffusive species are still present in the samples in the presence of denaturant, and that
the sample is not completely depolymerised (Supplementary Figure A.1). Such issues were not
observed in samples containing Gnd­HCl, further emphasizing its strong denaturing effect on the
protein fibrils.
For both denaturants, a noticeable increase in the amount of soluble protein can be observed
starting from samples containing 3M denaturant. This observation aligns with the results previ­
ously seen in aggregates depolymerized in guanidine hydrochloride. However, in this context,
urea also emerges as an efficient denaturant. Both guanidine hydrochloride and urea can be con­
sidered effective depolymerisation agents for TDP­16 fibrils, as they act on different elements and
forces within the samples: Gnd­HCl, due to its ionic nature, is particularly effective in dissolving
larger aggregate clumps by influencing electrostatic forces. Meanwhile, urea proves to be an ef­
fective in disrupting hydrogen bonds within fibrillar structures in the samples. Therefore, it would be
interesting to further pursue these chemical depolymerization experiments on fibrils using both de­
naturants under the more controlled conditions derived from the current experiments. Additionally,
varying pH conditions could be explored to assess stability at different pH levels in future studies.
To quantitatively compare the stability parameters of TDP­16 fibrils at pH 4.0 with those of ag­
gregates of the same protein, as well as fibrils of WT α­synuclein and SH3, the chemical depoly­
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
41
==PAGE:56==
merization data obtained from FIDA analysis were fitted using Equation 3.1 (Figure 4.16, B and
C). The red line depicting the model fit shows good alignment with the experimental data for both
denaturants, with urea having the most precise fit. As detailed in Table 4.3, the ∆G value for the
depolymerization process in urea is higher compared to that with guanidine hydrochloride. This
suggests that urea may be a more effective denaturant for fibrils as opposed to larger, amorphous
aggregates. The ∆G values obtained for both denaturants for fibrils depolymerization are lower
than those observed for TDP­16 aggregates at pH 4.0. This indicates greater stability of fibrils
compared to aggregates under these specific conditions. However, it is important to note that the
determination of ∆G values for fibril depolymerization is subject to higher error, primarily due to
challenges in peak integration, particularly in the case of urea. Both ∆G values for TDP­16 fibrils
in urea and guanidine hydrochloride exceed that of WT α­synuclein [41]. However, these values
are still lower than the the one reported for SH3 amyloid fibrils, which corresponds to ­59.8 kJ/mol
[41].
The m­values presented in the table, reflecting the dependency of the free energy on the denatu­
rant, are notably higher for urea compared to guanidine hydrochloride, also when considering the
value obtained for aggregate depolymerization. This observation suggests a heigher level of coop­
erativity in the presence of urea, indicating a more significant response in protein stability relative
to changes in urea concentration in the samples.
Table 4.3: Parameters obtained for the isodesmic fit of fibrils depolymerisation data at pH 4.0.
Gnd­HCl
Urea
∆G (kJ/mol)
­36.3 ± 1.06
­48.7 ± 4.9
Cm (M)
16.6 ± 2.8
9.9 ± 1.5
Protein Concentration (µM)
8.4
8.4
m (kJ/M mol)
­2.2 ± 0.5
­4.9 ± 1.2
Reduced Chi­Sqr
0.02
0.01
R­Square (COD)
0.86
0.91
Adj. R­Square
0.84
0.90
• Optimal concentration for TDP­16 fibril formation has been determined to be equal
to 84µM. Key steps in the preparation process included resuspension of protein
pellet in urea­containing buffer, dialysis against buffer at pH 4.0, and incubation
with slow shaking;
• Fibrils observed in the samples show two distinc morphologies, with twisted
filaments having an average height of 6nm, and non­twisted filaments of 0.4nm, in
accordance with with literature data;
• Notable increase in soluble protein observed from 3M concentration of both
denaturants, highlighting the potential of both urea and Gnd­HCl as effective
depolymerization agents for TDP­16 fibrils;
• ∆G value for fibril depolymerization in urea was lower than those with guanidine
hydrochloride, suggesting greater effectiveness of urea as a denaturant for fibrils;
• TDP­16 fibrils seem to be more stable than α­synuclein fibrils, but less stable than
SH3 fibrils;
• Higher m­values for urea suggest a greater level of cooperativity and a more
significant response in protein stability to changes in urea concentration compared
to Gnd­HCl.
Summary of Section 4.4
42
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:57==
5
Conclusions
The protein TDP­43, known for its multifunctional role in mRNA transcription, processing and trans­
lation, possesses an intrinsically disordered low­complexity domain. This domain is believed to
promote protein aggregation, a process observed in numerous neurodegenerative diseases, in­
cluding ALS. As the exact processes that lead to protein aggregation and subsequent cellular
toxicity in ALS patients still remain largely undefined, gaining a comprehensive understanding of
the dynamics involved in their formation and thermodynamic stability is crucial.
Within the scope of a broader project that aims at exploring the sequence determinants of TDP­43
amyloid and LLPS, this study established and evaluated a protocol for the purification of soluble
monomeric TDP­16, highlighting several key findings and challenges. The purification process is
divided in several steps, and allows to separate the protein of interest from the cell lysate through
affinity purification, dialysis and gel filtration. Affinity purification under denaturing conditions was
instrumental to separate the protein from impurities present in the sample. SDS­PAGE analysis re­
vealed significant loss of TDP­16 during early purification stages, suggesting the need for protocol
optimization. Recovery of pure TDP­16 sample was achieved through SEC, although neither of
the tested conditions produced ideal sharp elution peaks, indicating potential issues with protein­
column interactions and suggesting the need for further optimization of this step.
Substantial effort was also dedicated to an in­depth biophysical characterization of TDP­16 aggre­
gates and fibrils. This includes a comprehensive evaluation of the thermodynamic stability of the
protein.
Chemical depolymerisation experiments allowed to shed light on the behaviour of TDP­16 ag­
gregates under different conditions and compare the effect of urea and Gnd­HCl as denaturants.
FIDA analysis revealed that higher concentrations of these chemicals increased the soluble pro­
tein fraction. However, urea was less effective as a depolymerising agent for TDP­16 aggregates
compared to Gnd­HCl. This was evident from both FIDA and ThT fluorescence analysis, which
consistently showed higher soluble monomer content in samples treated with guanidine hydrochlo­
ride, and an increase in fluorescence in correlation with higher Gnd­HCl concentrations, suggesting
its efficiency in breaking down aggregates.
The experiments also demonstrated that factors such as pH and temperature can significantly af­
fect the depolymerisation process. Sample incubation at 37◦C proved to be easier to perform and
allowed to gather reliable data, compared to higher incubation temperatures that led to sample
crystallization and evaporation, increasing the effort involved in data collection.
Both FIDA and ThT fluorescence analysis showed that higher concentrations of Gnd­HCl, par­
ticularly at pH 7.4, effectively increased the soluble protein fraction in the samples, which likely
reached equilibrium within an incubation period of three weeks. The ∆G values derived from
isodesmic model fitting of the FIDA data were lower at pH 7.4, suggesting higher stability of TDP­
16 aggregates at this pH. Furthermore, the presence of fibrillar aggregates in samples with low
denaturant concentrations is implied by the observation of increased ThT fluorescence intensity of
these samples. This is further supported by the fact that in aggregation experiments, seeds from
these samples were capable of triggering the aggregation of TDP­16 monomer.
However, both ThT fluorescence and DLS results displayed some inconsistencies with the data
obtained from FIDA measurements, likely due to samples heterogeneity that might still contain
some minor aggregates which affect both the fluorescence signal and the scattering signal.
Lastly, this study has provided pivotal insights into the determination of optimal conditions for fibril
formation and the critical steps in the preparation process. The optimal concentration for TDP­16
fibril formation was determined to be 84µM. This finding was crucial for the successful formation
of fibrils and represents a significant step in standardizing the conditions for further TDP­16 fibril
studies. The resuspension of the protein pellet in a buffer containing urea, followed by dialysis
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
43
==PAGE:58==
against a buffer at pH 4.0 to remove any residual denaturant, played a key role in the successful
formation of fibrils. AFM analysis of fibrils samples allowed for the distinction of different mor­
phologies, in accordance with literature. Comparative stability analysis of the parameters obtained
from the isodesmic fitting suggests that both urea and Gnd­HCl effectively depolymerise TDP­16
fibrils. Gnd­HCl is in fact particularly effective in dissolving larger aggregate clumps by influenc­
ing electrostatic forces, meanwhile urea disrupts hydrogen bonds within fibrillar structures in the
samples.
44
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:59==
6
Future Directions
The findings detailed in this thesis lay the groundwork for numerous potential avenues in subse­
quent research. In this concluding chapter, several promising leads that would benefit from further
research are highlighted for future exploration.
• A simultaneous screening process for the solubility of TDP­16 and TDP­43 when expressed
with various tags (including His­tag, His­GFP, His­MBP, His­Cherry, His­SUMO, His­TRX,
and His­EMM9) should be implemented. Preliminary attempts at this, involving Golden Gate
Assembly and expression, have been successful (Supplementary Figure A.3). However,
challenges were encountered in the affinity purification of cell lysates using a filter plate
with vacuum, hindering the recovery of the expressed proteins (Supplementary Figure A.4).
Therefore, protocol optimization is necessary to enable simultaneous screening of different
conditions and to identify those that enhance protein solubility;
• Finding optimal conditions for fibril formation sets the stage for developing a workflow to
assess fibril stability under various pH levels and in the presence of both urea and guanidine
hydrochloride;
• AFM analysis performed with a thinner cantilever tip could provide enhanced detail and allow
for a better distinction of the different morphologies of TDP­16 fibrils. Characterisation of
various fibril polymorphs in the samples would be an interesting area worth pursuing;
• Conducting circular dichroism experiments on TDP­16 fibril samples from the chemical de­
polymerisation studies could reveal changes in the secondary structure over time;
• Initiating biophysical and structural studies on disease­related variants of TDP­16 could yield
significant insights into their thermodynamic stability under various conditions. Additionally,
such studies could have the potential to shed light on the toxicity mechanisms of these vari­
ants, furthering the understanding of their role in disease pathology.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
45
==PAGE:60==
46
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
David M Wilson et al. “Hallmarks of neurodegenerative diseases”. eng. In: Cell 186.4 (2023),
pp. 693–714. issn: 10974172, 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.12.032.
[2]
Roberta Cascella et al. “Quantification of the Relative Contributions of Loss­offunction and
Gain­of­function Mechanisms in TAR DNA­binding Protein 43 (TDP­43) Proteinopathies”.
eng. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 291.37 (2016), pp. 19437–19448. issn: 1083351x,
00219258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.737726.
[3]
Mirella Vivoli Vega et al. “Isolation and characterization of soluble human full­length TDP­43
associated with neurodegeneration”. eng. In: Faseb Journal 33.10 (2019), pp. 10780–10793.
issn: 15306860, 08926638. doi: 10.1096/fj.201900474R.
[4]
Katarina Milicevic et al. “Emerging Roles for Phase Separation of RNA­Binding Proteins in
Cellular Pathology of ALS”. eng. In: Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 10 (2022),
p. 840256. issn: 2296634x. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.840256.
[5]
P. Masrori and P. Van Damme. “Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a clinical review”. eng. In:
European Journal of Neurology 27.10 (2020), pp. 1918–1929. issn: 14681331, 13515101.
doi: 10.1111/ene.14393.
[6]
Orla Hardiman. “Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis”. eng. In: Neurodegenerative Disorders (2011),
pp. 143–166. doi: 10.1007/978-1-84996-011-3_7.
[7]
Sonali S. Vishal et al. “Sequence Determinants of TDP­43 Ribonucleoprotein Condensate
Formation and Axonal Transport in Neurons”. eng. In: Frontiers in Cell and Developmental
Biology 10 (2022), p. 876893. issn: 2296634x. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.876893.
[8]
Aditi Naskar et al. “Phase separation and pathologic transitions of RNP condensates in neu­
rons: implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia and other neu­
rodegenerative disorders”. eng. In: Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience 16 (2023), p. 1242925.
issn: 16625099. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1242925.
[9]
Tommaso Staderini et al. “Biophysical characterization of full­length TAR DNA­binding pro­
tein (TDP­43) phase separation”. eng. In: Protein Science 31.12 (2022), e4509. issn: 1469896x,
09618368. doi: 10.1002/pro.4509.
[10]
Orla Hardiman et al. “Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis”. In: Nature reviews Disease primers 3.1
(2017), pp. 1–19.
[11]
Claudia Capitini et al. “Full­length TDP­43 and its C­terminal domain form filaments in vitro
having non­amyloid properties”. eng. In: Amyloid 28.1 (2021), pp. 56–65. issn: 17442818,
13506129. doi: 10.1080/13506129.2020.1826425.
[12]
Hristelina Ilieva, Mithila Vullaganti, and Justin Kwan. “Advances in molecular pathology, di­
agnosis, and treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis”. eng. In: Bmj 383.oct27 4 (2023),
bmj­2023–075037. issn: 17561833, 09598138, 09598146. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-075037.
[13]
Laura Tzeplaeff et al. “Current State and Future Directions in the Therapy of ALS”. eng. In:
Cells 12.11 (2023), p. 1523. issn: 20734409. doi: 10.3390/cells12111523.
[14]
Tereza Filipi et al. “Glial Cells—The Strategic Targets in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Treat­
ment”. und. In: Journal of Clinical Medicine 9.1 (2020), p. 261. issn: 20770383. doi: 10.3390/
jcm9010261.
[15]
Kim A. Staats and Ludo Van Den Bosch. “Excitotoxicity and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis”.
eng. In: Handbook of Neurotoxicity, Second Edition 3 (2023), pp. 1789–1802. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-031-15080-7_147.
[16]
Myungjin Jo et al. “The role of TDP­43 propagation in neurodegenerative diseases: inte­
grating insights from clinical and experimental studies”. eng. In: Experimental and Molecular
Medicine 52.10 (2020), pp. 1652–1662. issn: 20926413, 12263613. doi: 10.1038/s12276-
020-00513-7.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
47
==PAGE:62==
[17]
Krishnashenoy Padmabai and Jayakrishna Shenoy. “Structural characterization of amyloid
fibrils by solid­state NMR”. PhD thesis. Bordeaux, 2020.
[18]
Pedro Ervilha Pereira et al. “C­terminal frameshift variant of TDP­43 with pronounced aggregation­
propensity causes rimmed vacuole myopathy but not ALS/FTD”. eng. In: Acta Neuropatho­
logica 145.6 (2023), pp. 793–814. issn: 14320533, 00016322. doi: 10.1007/s00401- 023-
02565-1.
[19]
Gareth S.A. Wright et al. “Purification and Structural Characterization of Aggregation­Prone
Human TDP­43 Involved in Neurodegenerative Diseases”. und. In: Iscience 23.6 (2020),
p. 101159. issn: 25890042. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.101159.
[20]
W Michael Babinchak et al. “The role of liquid­liquid phase separation in aggregation of the
TDP­43 low­complexity domain”. eng. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 294.16 (2019),
pp. 6306–6317. issn: 1083351x, 00219258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.007222.
[21]
Jayakrishna Shenoy et al. “Structural dissection of amyloid aggregates of TDP­43 and its
C­terminal fragments TDP­35 and TDP­16”. eng. In: Febs Journal 287.12 (2020), pp. 2449–
2467. issn: 17424658, 1742464x. doi: 10.1111/febs.15159.
[22]
Mimi Cushman et al. “Prion­like disorders: Blurring the divide between transmissibility and
infectivity”. eng. In: Journal of Cell Science 123.8 (2010), pp. 1191–1201. issn: 00219533,
14779137. doi: 10.1242/jcs.051672.
[23]
Weirui Guo et al. “An ALS­associated mutation affecting TDP­43 enhances protein aggre­
gation, fibril formation and neurotoxicity”. eng. In: Nature Structural and Molecular Biology
18.7 (2011), pp. 822–831. issn: 15459993, 15459985. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2053.
[24]
Lei Lei Jiang et al. “Structural transformation of the amyloidogenic core region of TDP­43 pro­
tein initiates its aggregation and cytoplasmic inclusion”. eng. In: Journal of Biological Chem­
istry 288.27 (2013), pp. 19614–19624. issn: 1083351x, 00219258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.
463828.
[25]
Lei Lei Jiang et al. “Two mutations G335D and Q343R within the amyloidogenic core region
of TDP­43 influence its aggregation and inclusion formation”. eng. In: Scientific Reports 6.1
(2016), p. 23928. issn: 20452322. doi: 10.1038/srep23928.
[26]
Miguel Mompeán et al. “Structural characterization of the minimal segment of TDP­43 com­
petent for aggregation”. eng. In: Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 545 (2014), pp. 53–
62. issn: 10960384, 00039861. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.01.007.
[27]
Qiuye Li, W. Michael Babinchak, and Witold K. Surewicz. “Cryo­EM structure of amyloid fibrils
formed by the entire low complexity domain of TDP­43”. eng. In: Nature Communications
12.1 (2021), p. 1620. issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-21912-y.
[28]
Elizabeth L. Guenther et al. “Atomic structures of TDP­43 LCD segments and insights into
reversible or pathogenic aggregation”. eng. In: Nature Structural and Molecular Biology 25.6
(2018), pp. 463–471. issn: 15459985, 15459993. doi: 10.1038/s41594-018-0064-2.
[29]
Robert W. Newberry and Ronald T. Raines. “Secondary Forces in Protein Folding”. eng. In:
Acs Chemical Biology 14.8 (2019), pp. 1677–1686. issn: 15548937, 15548929. doi: 10.1021/
acschembio.9b00339.
[30]
Alexander K. Buell. “Stability matters, too – the thermodynamics of amyloid fibril formation”.
eng. In: Chemical Science 13.35 (2022), pp. 10177–10192. issn: 20416539, 20416520. doi:
10.1039/D1SC06782F.
[31]
Andreas Prestel et al. “Characterization of Dynamic IDP Complexes by NMR Spectroscopy”.
eng. In: Methods in Enzymology 611 (2018). Ed. by Elizabeth Rhoades, pp. 193–226. issn:
15577988, 00766879. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2018.08.026.
[32]
Anamika Avni et al. “Intrinsically disordered proteins in the formation of functional amyloids
from bacteria to humans”. eng. In: Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science
166 (2019), pp. 109–143. issn: 18780814, 18771173. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2019.05.005.
[33]
A. A. Kulikova, A. A. Makarov, and S. A. Kozin. “Roles of zinc ions and structural polymor­
phism of β­amyloid in the development of Alzheimer’s disease”. eng. In: Molecular Biology
49.2 (2015), pp. 217–230. issn: 16083245, 00268933. doi: 10.1134/S0026893315020065.
48
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:63==
[34]
Sathish Kumar and Jochen Walter. “Phosphorylation of amyloid beta (Aβ) peptides ­ a trigger
for formation of toxic aggregates in Alzheimer’s disease”. eng. In: Aging 3.8 (2011), pp. 803–
12. issn: 19454589. doi: 10.18632/aging.100362.
[35]
Alexander K. Buell. “The Nucleation of Protein Aggregates ­ From Crystals to Amyloid Fibrils”.
eng. In: International Review of Cell and Molecular Biology 329 (2017). Ed. by M Sandal,
pp. 187–226. issn: 19376448. doi: 10.1016/bs.ircmb.2016.08.014.
[36]
Saeid Hadi Alijanvand, Alessia Peduzzo, and Alexander K. Buell. “Secondary Nucleation and
the Conservation of Structural Characteristics of Amyloid Fibril Strains”. eng. In: Frontiers in
Molecular Biosciences 8 (2021), p. 669994. issn: 2296889x. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.669994.
[37]
Emil G.P. Stender et al. “Capillary flow experiments for thermodynamic and kinetic charac­
terization of protein liquid­liquid phase separation”. eng. In: Nature Communications 12.1
(2021), p. 7289. issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-27433-y.
[38]
Yongdae Shin and Clifford P. Brangwynne. “Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology
and disease”. eng. In: Science 357.6357 (2017), p. 1253. issn: 10959203, 00368075. doi:
10.1126/science.aaf4382.
[39]
Jenny L. Carey and Lin Guo. “Liquid­Liquid Phase Separation of TDP­43 and FUS in Phys­
iology and Pathology of Neurodegenerative Diseases”. eng. In: Frontiers in Molecular Bio­
sciences 9 (2022), p. 826719. issn: 2296889x. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.826719.
[40]
Alexander Buell and Nicola Vettore. “Thermodynamics of Amyloid Fibril Formation from
Chemical Depolymerization”. und. In: (2019). doi: 10.26434/chemrxiv.9632153.v1.
[41]
Farzadfard Azad et al. “Thermodynamic characterization of amyloid polymorphism by Taylor
dispersion analysis”. und. In: (2023). doi: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2023-41scv.
[42]
Takehiro Narimoto et al. “Conformational stability of amyloid fibrils of β2­ microglobulin probed
by guanidine­hydrochloride­induced unfolding”. eng. In: Febs Letters 576.3 (2004), pp. 313–
319. issn: 18733468, 00145793. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.09.024.
[43]
Andrew J. Baldwin et al. “Metastability of native proteins and the phenomenon of amyloid
formation”. eng. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 133.36 (2011), pp. 14160–
14163. issn: 15205126, 00027863. doi: 10.1021/ja2017703.
[44]
JK MYERS, CN PACE, and JM SCHOLTZ. “DENATURANT M­VALUES AND HEAT­CAPACITY
CHANGES ­ RELATION TO CHANGES IN ACCESSIBLE SURFACE­AREAS OF PRO­
TEIN UNFOLDING”. eng. In: Protein Science 4.10 (1995), pp. 2138–2148. issn: 1469896x,
09618368. doi: 10.1002/pro.5560041020.
[45]
Dagmar Klostermeier and Markus G. Rudolph. Biophysical chemistry. eng. CRC Press,
2018, pp. 1–770. isbn: 1315156911, 1482252236, 1482252244, 1482252252, 9781315156910,
9781482252231, 9781482252248, 9781482252255. doi: 10.1201/9781315156910.
[46]
Fábio Henrique dos Santos Rodrigues et al. “Applications of fluorescence spectroscopy
in protein conformational changes and intermolecular contacts”. eng. In: Bba Advances 3
(2023), p. 100091. issn: 26671603. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadva.2023.100091.
[47]
Christine Xue et al. “Thioflavin T as an amyloid dye: Fibril quantification, optimal concentra­
tion and effect on aggregation”. eng. In: Royal Society Open Science 4.1 (2017), p. 160696.
issn: 20545703. doi: 10.1098/rsos.160696.
[48]
Michael M. Wördehoff and Wolfgang Hoyer. “α­Synuclein Aggregation Monitored by Thioflavin
T Fluorescence Assay”. und. In: Bio­protocol 8.14 (2018). issn: 23318325. doi: 10.21769/
BioProtoc.2941.
[49]
P S VASSAR and C F CULLING. “Fluorescent stains, with special reference to amyloid and
connective tissues”. eng. In: Archives of Pathology 68 (1959), pp. 487–498. issn: 03630153.
[50]
Matthew Biancalana and Shohei Koide. “Molecular mechanism of Thioflavin­T binding to
amyloid fibrils”. eng. In: Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta ­ Proteins and Proteomics 1804.7
(2010), pp. 1405–1412. issn: 18782434, 00063002, 15709639, 18781454. doi: 10.1016/j.
bbapap.2010.04.001.
[51]
Dynamic Light Scattering. https://nanotempertech.com/dynamic-light-scattering/. Accessed:
2024­01­06.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
49
==PAGE:64==
[52]
Bernard Lorber et al. “Protein analysis by dynamic light scattering: Methods and techniques
for students”. eng. In: Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 40.6 (2012), pp. 372–
382. issn: 15393429, 14708175. doi: 10.1002/bmb.20644.
[53]
Serena Bernacchi. “Dynamic Light Scattering Analysis on RNA Associated to Proteins”. eng.
In: Methods in Molecular Biology 2113 (2020), pp. 31–39. issn: 19406029, 10643745. doi:
10.1007/978-1-0716-0278-2_4.
[54]
Dynamic Light Scattering. https://www.wyatt.com/library/theory/dynamic-light-scattering-
theory.html. Accessed: 2024­01­06.
[55]
Anthony Wishard and Bruce C. Gibb. “Dynamic light scattering–an all­purpose guide for the
supramolecular chemist”. eng. In: Supramolecular Chemistry 31.9 (2019), pp. 608–615. issn:
10290478, 10610278. doi: 10.1080/10610278.2019.1629438.
[56]
Daniel E. Otzen, Alexander Kai Büll, and Henrik Jensen. “Microfluidics and the quantification
of biomolecular interactions”. eng. In: Current Opinion in Structural Biology 70 (2021), pp. 8–
15. issn: 1879033x, 0959440x. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2021.02.006.
[57]
Nicklas N. Poulsen et al. “Flow induced dispersion analysis rapidly quantifies proteins in
human plasma samples”. eng. In: Analyst 140.13 (2015), pp. 4365–4369. issn: 13645528,
00032654. doi: 10.1039/c5an00697j.
[58]
Achieving Molecular Precision Through Laminar Flow. https://www.fidabio.com/technology/.
Accessed: 2024­01­06.
[59]
Morten E. Pedersen et al. “Protein Characterization in 3D: Size, Folding, and Functional
Assessment in a Unified Approach”. eng. In: Analytical Chemistry 91.8 (2019), pp. 4975–
4979. issn: 15206882, 00032700, 15204782. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b00537.
[60]
Jozef Adamcik and Raffaele Mezzenga. “Study of amyloid fibrils via atomic force microscopy”.
eng. In: Current Opinion in Colloid and Interface Science 17.6 (2012), pp. 369–376. issn:
18790399, 13590294. doi: 10.1016/j.cocis.2012.08.001.
[61]
M. Duman et al. “Atomic force microscopy”. eng. In: Comprehensive Biophysics 2 (2012),
pp. 111–143. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-374920-8.00213-7.
[62]
Superdex 200 Increase columns for size exclusion chromatography. https://cdn.cytivalifesciences.
com/api/public/content/digi-16542-pdf. Accessed: 2024­01­23.
[63]
Liangzhong Lim et al. “ALS­Causing Mutations Significantly Perturb the Self­Assembly and
Interaction with Nucleic Acid of the Intrinsically Disordered Prion­Like Domain of TDP­43”.
eng. In: Plos Biology 14.1 (2016). Ed. by Gregory A. Petsko, e1002338. issn: 15457885,
15449173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002338.
[64]
Hao Ru Li et al. “The physical forces mediating self­association and phase­separation in
the C­terminal domain of TDP­43”. eng. In: Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta ­ Proteins and
Proteomics 1866.2 (2018), pp. 214–223. issn: 18781454, 15709639. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.
2017.10.001.
[65]
Nattakan Panyachariwat and Hartwig Steckel. “Stability of urea in solution and pharmaceu­
tical preparations”. eng. In: Journal of Cosmetic Science 65.3 (2014), pp. 187–195. issn:
26895153, 15257886.
50
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendices
A.0.1
Appendix 1 ­ TDP­43 protein features
HIS­(TEV)­TDP 43W T :
MHHHHHHENLYFQGSEYIRVTEDENDEPIEIPSEDDGTVLLSTVTA
QFPGACGLRYRNPVSQCMRGVRLVEGILHAPDAGWGNLVYVV
NYPKDNKRKMDETDASSAVKVKRAVQKTSDLIVLGLPWKTTE
QDLKEYFSTFGEVLMVQVKKDLKTGHSKGFGFVRFTEYETQV
KVMSQRHMIDGRWCDCKLPNSKQSQDEPLRSRKVFVGRCTED
MTEDELREFFSQYGDVMDVFIPKPFRAFAFVTFADDQIAQSL
CGEDLIIKGISVHISNAEPKHNSNRQLERSGRFGGNPGGFGN
QGGFGNSRGGGAGLGNNQGSNMGGGMNFGAFSINPAMMAAAQ
AALQSSWGMMGMLASQQNQSGPSGNNQNQGNMQREPNQAFGS
GNNSYSGSNSGAAIGWGSASNAGSGSGFNGGFGSSMDSKSSGWGM
Number of amino acids: 427
Molecular weight: 46414.57
Theoretical pI: 6.14
Extinction coefficient (280 nm): 46785 M−1 cm−1
Abs 0.1% (=1 g/l): 1.008
A.0.2
Appendix 2 ­ TDP­16 protein features
HIS­(TEV)­TDP 16 (267­414):
MHHHHHHENLYFQGNRQLERSGRFGGNPGGFGNQGGFGNSRGGGAG
LGNNQGSNMGGGMNFGAFSINPAMMAAAQAALQSSWGMMGMLASQQNQ
SGPSGNNQNQGNMQREPNQAFGSGNNSYSGSNSGAAIGWGSASNAGSGSGFNGG
FGSSMDSKSSGWGM
Number of amino acids: 162
Molecular weight: 16370.50
Theoretical pI: 9.69
Extinction coefficient (280 nm): 19480 M−1 cm−1
Abs 0.1% (=1 g/l):1.190
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
51
==PAGE:66==
A.0.3
Appendix 3 ­ Supplementary Figures
Figure A.1: TDP­16 aggregates depolymerisation in urea: taylorgrams obtained after a 3­day
incubation period showing spikes corresponding to non­diffusive aggregates.
Figure A.2: Fibrils depolymerisation at pH 4.0: taylorgram obtained for TDP­16 fibrils in 7M urea
showing spikes corresponding to the presence of non­diffusive aggregates in the sample.
52
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.3: DNA electrophoresis gel showing the results of Golden Gate assembly on TDP­43
(left) and TDP­16 (right) when expressed with various tags.
Figure A.4: SDS­PAGE analysis of the simultaneous screening for expression of TDP­16 and
TDP­43 with various tags: on the left, results of SDS­PAGE performed on cells lysates before
purification on a filter plate; on the right, results of SDS­PAGE performed on the fractions recovered
from affinity purification performed on a filtered plate.
Production and Biophysical Characterization of TDP­43
53
==PAGE:68==
Neurodegenerative diseases represent a diverse set of disorders characterized by the gradual de­
cline of neuronal function in both the central and peripheral nervous systems. Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, an adult­onset and ultimately fatal neurodegenerative disorder, is characterized by cyto­
plasmic aggregation of the RNA­binding protein TDP­43. Ubiquitously present in cell nuclei, TDP­43
plays a crucial role in mRNA transcription, processing, and translation.
The focus of this thesis has been set on the intrinsically disordered low­complexity domain of the
protein, TDP­16, which is believed to be instrumental in driving protein aggregation. First, the study
delves into the development and optimization of a protein purification protocol for the recovery of
soluble monomeric TDP­16 through affinity purification, dialysis and gel filtration.
The study then embarks on an extensive biophysical characterization of the self­assembly and ag­
gregation of TDP­16 through the application of a range of techniques such as FIDA, ThT fluorescence
spectroscopy and DLS. Chemical depolymerisation experiments provided insights into the behavior
of TDP­16 aggregates under various conditions, and led to the finding that guanidine hydrochloride
was higly effective in depolymerising TDP­16 aggregates. Additionally, experiments revealed that
chemical depolymerisation conducted at pH 7.4 effectively increased the soluble protein fraction in
the samples, with equilibrium being reached within three weeks of incubation.
In the last part of this thesis, optimal conditions for TDP­16 fibril formation were determined. Instru­
mental to this process was the resuspension of protein pellets in a buffer containing urea, followed
by dialysis against a buffer at pH 4.0 to eliminate trace of denaturant in the sample. Moreover, a
protein concentration equal to 84µM was found to be the optimal one for fibril formation. Compar­
ative stability assessments using isodesmic fitting of data obtained from chemical polymerisation
experiments suggest that both urea and guanidine hydrochloride are effective denaturants for the
depolymerisation of TDP­16 fibrils.
This work aims not only to contribute to the understanding of TDP­43 and its role in neurodegener­
ative diseases, but hopes to also serve as a comprehensive guide for future research in this area of
study.
Technical University of Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 227
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk
