==PAGE:1==
Integrating design and systems science in
the roadmap towards a sustainable agri-food
system: a process model
Master thesis
28.01.2024
DTU Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Department of Design and Innovation
==PAGE:2==
Integrating design and systems science in the roadmap towards a sustainable agri­
food system: a process model
Master Thesis
January, 2024
By
Kamilė Vaitkutė
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Design and Innovation, Brovej, Building 118, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This master’s thesis explores the intersection of design and systems science, with the
primary objective of formulating a process model to address intricate systemic challenges
and guide towards equitable transformation within the system. The research method­
ology encompassed a systematic literature review of existing systemic design process
models in academic literature and action research, including interviews with experts and
a workshop to validate the derived process model’s applicability in promoting sustainable
transformation in the agri­food sector.
The process model serves as a guide for actors, aiding them in unfolding existing struc­
tures and systemic powers that contribute to the current problematic situation. It further
assists in exploring potential future scenarios and actionable pathways toward the devel­
opment of an ideal situation. Actors are encouraged to continuously reflect on the sys­
tem’s boundaries and the interventions they have introduced in the system. The model
extends the mental models of the actors, fosters learning about the system, and provides
a systemic approach for transformative action in the face of complex systemic challenges.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Igor Czermainski de Oliveira and
Daniela C. A. Pigosso.
Igor for his invaluable support, guidance, and belief in my research. His extensive knowl­
edge of the field served as a constant source of inspiration, guiding me along the way and
offering resources that I eagerly look forward to exploring in the future.
Daniela for her constructive feedback and encouragement, which played a vital role in
shaping this master’s thesis. Her insights were instrumental in developing a critical per­
spective during the process model development.
I would also like to express my appreciation to AgriFoodTure, with special thanks to
Anette Engelund Friis, the director of AgriFoodTure. Their collaboration, support, and
genuine interest in exploring alternative approaches to enhance the complex process of
achieving sustainability in the agri­food sector have been truly inspiring.
I am also grateful to those involved in developing the initial AgriFoodTure roadmap, as
well as those who attended the workshop and contributed to this research through the
investment of their time and the sharing of their perspectives.
Finally, I extend my gratitude to the systemic design experts Carolina, Bas, and Moein.
Their passionate sharing of the vision on systemic design, thoughtful reflections on their
work, and valuable feedback have strongly guided me throughout my process.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background on systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background on design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Systemic design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Systemic design process models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Methods
10
2.1
Systematic literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
Primary qualitative data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
Results
26
3.1
Systematic literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Action research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4
Analysis
36
4.1
Process models for systemic design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2
Background of the proposed process model stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.3
Proposed model prescription
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5
Discussion
70
6
Conclusions
76
A Appendix
85
iv
==PAGE:6==
Introduction
1.1
Background on systems
A natural starting point for this report is to delve into the concept of a system. The foun­
dation for this explanation is derived from the opening chapter of D. Meadows’ book,
”Thinking in Systems: A Primer” [1]. In her perspective, a system is defined as ”an inter­
connected set of elements that is coherently organized in a way that achieves something”.
Elements, interconnections and function or purpose are essential components of the sys­
tem. However, it’s crucial not to view the system merely as an aggregation of these
parts; systems are characterized by integrity, wholeness, and a specific behaviour aimed
at maintaining that integrity. Meadows states that posing the question of which elements
are most important is inherently an unsystematic question, as every element is significant.
Nevertheless, altering one or another would yield a significantly different impact within the
system [1].
Systems, however, can be seen as endless, due to all the elements being connected in
one way or another. The concept of boundaries becomes crucial to allow one to decide
what is included and excluded in the system that one is analysing [2]. In a way, setting
these boundaries in the system can be perceived as defining the system.
1.1.1
Systemic intervention/ transformation
Systemic Intervention
G. Midgley’s Systemic Intervention methodology is chosen in this research as a foundation
for analyzing to what extent the systems thinking approach is reflected within the inves­
tigated systemic design process models. In the upcoming few paragraphs, the Systemic
Intervention methodology will be defined in more detail and concepts from the method­
ology will be discussed to lay down the aspects to be considered in the process model
analysis.
The upcoming few paragraphs are based on the volume “Systemic Intervention: Philos­
ophy, Methodology, and Practice” by Gerald Midgley, from the “Contemporary Systems
Thinking” series, editor Robert L. Flood [2].
Intervention, Agent and Boundary Judgement.
1
==PAGE:7==
Systemic intervention is the methodology proposed by G. Midgley that merges systems’
ideas and the concept of intervention. Intervention is described as a “purposeful action by
a human agent to create change.” Before introducing the concept of intervention further, it
is important to mention that Midgley uses the term ‘agent’ to refer to an individual human
being or an interacting group (e.g., family, community) that has assigned purposes. The
group does not necessarily share the “purpose of the whole”, but can still be identified
as an agent if it can be perceived as moving towards one direction to realize a group’s
“dominant purpose”, despite the possible opposing views. The actions of the agent are
founded on the knowledge available to the agent (including perceptions, implicit under­
standings, unconscious motivations, behaviour habits, etc.). Hence, “action can be said
to be undertaken by an agent under the influence of the knowledge­generating system
in which s/he is embedded”. This knowledge­generating system can be defined through
boundary judgment. Boundary judgment is described later in this chapter.
Intervention and Observation
In his writing, G. Midgley presents the concept of intervention mostly by contrasting it
with the concept of observation. He cites other authors who state that an approach can
only be considered scientific if high­quality and independent observation is achieved [3],
meaning that the object of investigation is in no way impacted by the observer. Their de­
rived conclusion is that scientific observation can be controlled by eliminating the agent’s
intervention. However, G. Midgley suggests two arguments as to why independent ob­
servation is not attainable. Firstly, in the system’s view, everything in the universe is
interconnected, so what is observed cannot be independent of the observer. Secondly,
knowledge requires a knowledge­generating system giving rise to it, meaning every obser­
vation is influenced by the presence of the observer. To give an example, moral choices
will always be made regarding the object of investigation or the use of the study findings.
Additionally, observation involves interpretation ”mediated by conceptual and emotional
frameworks” and is expressed through the use of language (the topic of language is ex­
tensively discussed throughout the book. However, the crucial argument here is that it is
impossible for every word to have the same meaning to every person). G. Midgley not
only denies the possibility of independent observation but also argues that observation is
a form of intervention, an action purposefully undertaken by the agent to create change.
Boundary Critique
Returning to the fundamental idea that everything in the Universe is interconnected, the
decision on where to draw boundaries in the analysis becomes crucial. According to Midg­
ley G., when two groups engage in the process, the boundaries they set inevitably differ.
This difference creates a zone of marginalized elements, those excluded by the group with
a narrower boundary. Consequently, some stakeholders and issues may be stigmatized
within the systemic processes. The core idea of boundary critique is that the intimate
connection between boundary judgments and values exists, making it an ethical deci­
sion. Churchman W. C. [4] states that the more stakeholders the boundary includes, the
more inclusive and, therefore, ethical it becomes. However, it is acknowledged that sys­
tems thinking pursues the ideal of comprehensiveness but recognizes that it is unattain­
able. Midgley G., encourages actors to critically reflect on and make choices between
boundaries, and argues for challenging a consensus on boundaries by involving people
who may not be directly defined as affected or involved.
2
==PAGE:8==
Midgley G. emphasizes that the reflection on boundary judgments is an activity guided
by the use of theories and methods, crucial for understanding the ethical consequences
of various actions and the underlying ethical dimensions from which worldviews and per­
ceptions arise. Thus, in conclusion, he defines systemic intervention as purposeful
action by an agent to create change in relation to reflection on boundaries.
Transformation: Leverage points
The concept of Leverage Points was introduced by Meadows D. [5]. She posited that
twelve levels of interventions within a system exist, each exerting a significantly different
impact on the overall system. A change with a marginal effect involves altering constants,
parameters, or numbers (12th level), such as determining how much land should be de­
voted to biodiversity protection. Conversely, one of the most impactful levels of change
is the shift in the system’s paradigm (2nd level). This entails altering the shared ideas in
the minds of society, the deepest set of beliefs regarding how the world operates. For
instance, challenging the notion that economic growth is always beneficial.
Figure 1.1: Types of Leverage Points, proposed by D. Meadows. Source: [6]
1.1.2
Sustainable food systems
The UN Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) defined a sustainable food system that
”delivers food security and nutrition for all in such a way that the economic, social and
3
==PAGE:9==
environmental bases to generate food security and nutrition for future generations are
not compromised” [7]. The United Nations called for major changes in agriculture and
food systems and established Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which collectively
contribute to building a more sustainable, resilient, and equitable agri­food sector that
can meet the world’s food needs while preserving the environment and supporting the
livelihoods of farmers and rural communities [8]. Achieving the SDGs requires a trans­
formation of the global food system, making it not only more productive but also more
inclusive, particularly for poor and marginalized communities. This transformation should
prioritize environmental sustainability and resilience while ensuring healthy and nutritious
diets for everyone [7].
1.2
Background on design
1.2.1
Process models in design
The process model is a selected unit of analysis in this research. This section contains a
short description of the design process model(s).
The notion of a model is not novel. It is a natural human process to conceptualise internal
representations into more visual or tangible formulations. It could be illustrated by exam­
ples such as the Heliocentric universe model by Galileo or the Carnot model of the heat
engine. In the design field, before the formulation of design process models, it was con­
sidered that design ideas emerged somehow intuitively. Product concepts were thought
to change solely through changes in the product features or its production (e.g., the work
of Wögerbauer [9]). With the works of Kesselring (1942) [10], Leyer (1963) [11] and oth­
ers, the first indications of models defining the design process emerged. The attention
has shifted to handling the specific stages or steps of the design process itself [12].
Nowadays, the core general stages in the design process are often defined as analyse,
define, design, finalise, implement [13]. Alternative naming for the creative design pro­
cess can also be found in literature: the analysis of task, conceptual design, embodiment
design, and detailed design [14]. Other authors supplement these steps with two final
stages: Use and Closeout. Even if the titles of stages vary in the literature, the logic fol­
lowed is the same and has been consistent throughout decades and different areas of
design [13]. The comparisons of process models across disciplines [15] or composed
by different experts (e.g., academia, design studios) [13] also show that the majority of
processes follow the same process stage division.
Besides different stages, every process model has ”surrounding” components such as
input, output, stakeholders, tools, and principles/mindsets. These concepts are discussed
below.
Input
It is not common in the design literature to explicitly define the input to the design process.
However, relatively obvious resources such as expertise, available equipment, finances,
4
==PAGE:10==
or predefined requirements can be considered as inputs. The most prominent input is an
existing product, status, or paradigm that needs to be redesigned. According to obser­
vations in the literature, some designers approach their work from the perspective of the
initial status of the design object. Based on this, they tend to predetermine the intended
level of change in the design object and then choose the design activities accordingly [14].
This shows the importance of the initial input not only to the final output but also to the
design process itself.
In the same work, Howard J. T. and others compare numerous engineering design pro­
cess models and creative process models in cognitive psychology. A significant finding
among the models is the common need for information and the importance of its process­
ing in the initial process model phases. Later, the authors discuss that because of the
importance and lack of understanding of the role of information in the design process,
we must further explore the information sources as design inputs. Similarly, Takeda H.
presented knowledge as a premise in the iterative process of finding a design solution
and formulating requirements. In the case of ideal knowledge, it is possible to acquire a
solution instantly through defining an exhaustive list of specifications [16]. However, such
a case is not achievable in reality.
Output
In the field of engineering design practice, most types of models (e.g., problem­oriented,
solution­oriented) lead to clear outputs such as a new product, improvements in manu­
facturing, new service or other. When considering the General Design Theory, according
to Takeda H., the design process model runs until the design in development achieves all
pre­defined specifications [16]. This complete fulfilment of requirements could be consid­
ered a desired outcome. However, Takeda H. also states that no design is ever complete
and can always be improved, thus it is rather subjective. A number of researchers pro­
posed methods to classify different outcomes in design, which can also be assessed to
determine the level of novelty or creativity of the design outcomes [14].
Principles or mindsets
Inevitably, the design process model contains an inherent intention to guide a designer
towards a certain model of working. It could be framed as a principle or mindset that the
designer or stakeholders are expected to embody. An illustrative example could be taken
from the book “Design Thinking for Innovation”. The authors clearly state that Design
Thinking’s success depends on several principles, such as “innovation is made by humans
for humans”, “combining divergent and convergent thinking”, and “fail often and early”, just
to name a few [17].
Stakeholders
The designer and the object of design are pivotal in the design process [16]. Simultane­
ously, the design process is not executed in isolation. Different stakeholders are involved
in the design process at different stages, from users to other experts, such as engineer­
5
==PAGE:11==
ing, manufacturing, or marketing departments. However, analysis of numerous design
process models shows that they rarely represent the involvement of other disciplines [15].
Tools and Methods
Designers have consistently developed tools and techniques to support their design pro­
cesses. As outlined by the Danish Design Center, these tools often take on visual, intu­
itive, and even playful forms, like posters or boards, primarily used for fostering collabo­
ration. Moreover, they help teams in exploration or decision­making [18]. Various design
organizations, such as IDEO and Service Design Tools have created and shared their
design kits [19], [20]. This enables designers to enhance their sessions based on the
specific stage within the design process.
Assembling the design practice into simplified representative steps to formulate the pro­
cess model is beneficial. Process models allow to represent the design practices and
thus provide an opportunity for scientific testing of their claims [21]. Additionally, process
models are proven to be helpful in guiding novice designers in their first design projects
and their way of thinking in design [15]. However, studies show that experienced design­
ers demonstrate greater performance when they do not follow exact steps in the design
process [13].
1.3
Systemic design
Systems theory and design have long been interconnected, as evidenced by systems
thinker Ackoff R. A. (1993) [22], who defined systems thinking as a design process, and
Nelson H. (1994) [23], who viewed design as a systemic discipline. Although these per­
spectives were not necessarily adopted within their respective fields of science, they facil­
itated the exchange of knowledge and the exploration of each other’s methods and tech­
niques [24]. Systems thinking, seen as enabling the envisioning of the interaction and
workings of complex systems, and design thinking, considered to be more focused on the
outcome [25], appear to have joined forces due to their strengths in complexity compre­
hension and pragmatism, thus offering the opportunity to supplement one another.
This trend aligns with the observation that design has evolved to address problems in
complex social, environmental, and political issues [26]. In support of this evolution, sys­
temic design (SD) was separated from service design with the aim of addressing systemic
problems within advanced design domains: Organizational transformation (3.0) and So­
cial Transformation (4.0) [24]. Consequently, systemic design has become vital expertise
providing tools to tackle intricate scenarios practically while engaging stakeholders in ac­
tive collaboration [27]. Systemic Design is now considered applicable in challenges char­
acterized by “complexity, uniqueness, value conflict, and ambiguity over objectives” [28].
These complex challenges that we are facing are also referred to as wicked problems [29],
which the authors themselves define as “malignant”, “vicious”, “tricky”, and “aggressive”
(ibid., 160). Wicked problems are characterized as problems that are [30]:
6
==PAGE:12==
• Difficult to define, as everyone perceives them through different perspectives, making it
impossible to determine who is right or wrong.
• They have many interdependencies and are multi­causal, stemming from conflicting
goals or aims.
• There are no clear solutions, as interventions depend on the point of view, and the
true impact is challenging to trace. Rushing to ”fix” or ”solve” these problems can be
detrimental due to the possibility of making wrong assumptions.
• They are socially complex, involving changing behaviour and falling under the respon­
sibility of various organizations.
• Addressing them usually leads to unpredicted consequences due to the intricate rela­
tionships between elements in the system.
• They are often related to continuous policy failure.
• They are not stable; ironically, they evolve as one begins to address them.
According to Bijl­Brouwer van der M. [31], designerly practices are already evolving in
pursuit of creating change within the ambiguous and complex challenges that designers
are facing today. She identifies key differences observed in practice, highlighting how
systemic design distinguishes itself from conventional design practices [31]:
• Designers expand their natural tendency to explore the problem space to comprehend
the intricate connections of challenges within problem situations, doing so through map­
ping systems and utilizing other systems thinking tools.
• Designers navigate working with tensions between different stakeholders with conflicting
values as a result of shifting away from a user­centric focus to a broader system compre­
hension.
• Designers shift towards intervention designs of a systemic nature, focusing on building
human relationships and facilitating the transformation of mental models.
• The diverse nature of issues and interventions in the continuously evolving system re­
quires designers to commit to projects for long­term periods and build closer relationships
with involved stakeholders.
As evident, systemic design remains a dynamic and evolving field, continuously shaping
new methods, practices, and cultures through ongoing research [32]. The recognition of
systemic design as a field in the mainstream has grown through the annual Systemic De­
sign Symposium on Relating Systems Thinking and Design, organized by the Systemic
Design Association [33], throughout the past decade [34]. Universities involved in these
activities, as well as those with programs dedicated to systemic or systems­oriented de­
sign, such as the Oslo School of Architecture and Design, Ontario College of Art and
Design University in Toronto, and Politecnico di Torino in Italy, can also be considered
strong contributors to this development. However, concerns are arising about how to
proceed with the development within the field while maintaining its plurality and criticality
[34].
Numerous authors have contributed to guiding the development of the systemic design
7
==PAGE:13==
field by encouraging the monitoring and development of systemic design principles [31],
defining characteristics of the systemic design mindset, allowing exploration of the field
without the predominant mechanistic approach [28], or developing systemic design prin­
ciples that invite exploration of the methodological relationships between systems and
design theory [24].
In addition, Sevaldson B. [35] states that there is a misunderstanding in systemic design:
the assumption that systems theories or methodologies are applied to design. On the con­
trary, the two fields complement each other with the hope of fostering the emergence of
novel perspectives, theories, or processes. In his work ’What is Systemic Design? Prac­
tices Beyond Analyses and Modelling,’ to further support the emergence of the field, he
addresses core issues through eight points, clarifying what can and cannot be considered
systemic design. He shares his considerations by further describing SD characteristics
[35]:
Sevaldson B. asserts that modern ideas from systems thinking inspire systemic design
and that, as might be perceived, systems thinking does not solely rely on analytical pro­
cesses or hard data and logic.
Similarly to the earlier point in regards to complex issues, Sevaldson B. states that in
the context of wicked problems [29], the problem­solving mindset becomes obsolete [36]
as one solution in an interrelated system may create a problem elsewhere. With this
development, systemic design literature focuses on situations rather than problems.
He also addresses the large focus on topics of change and design within systems liter­
ature, emphasizing that the line between changing or designing systems is not precisely
clear.
He believes that systemic design is a praxeology (the science of human action [37]) due
to its comprehensive and ongoing exploration of skills, knowledge, and various elements
contributing to effective practices. Noteworthy contributors to this perspective include
Cross N. [38] and Dubberly H. [39]. The statement further underscores the significance
of reflection in action, as highlighted by Schon D. A. [40].
According to Sevaldson B., some perspectives regard design practice and design thinking
as inherently systemic activities. The utilization of visualizations for analyzing complex
data and the type of knowledge sharing facilitate a distinctive analysis that achieves new
levels of individual and team sense­making [41] [42], as well as sense­sharing [43]. This
approach leads to the adoption of co­design practices [44], [45].
Finally, systemic design is also ’questioning the divide between planning and execution’,
stating that the understanding will be reached that issues cannot be solved with a single
intervention and continuous systems change becomes a clear strategy of systemic de­
sign. The point also emphasizes the necessity of becoming accustomed to the idea that
interventions must be coordinated over time, as it may not be evident when the project
concludes [29].
The final point supports the systemic design principles of continuous adaptation and self­
organization, as found in the work of Lichtenstein B.B. and Plowman D.A. [46].
The
researchers emphasise the importance of encouraging the ongoing adaptation of sys­
tems while maintaining their intended purposes and objectives. This can be encouraged
through self­organization, in other words, agents that recombine themselves into work­
8
==PAGE:14==
ing arrangements, ultimately enhancing the functioning and performance of the complex
adaptive system [46].
In this emerging field of systemic design, researchers have identified three dominant ap­
proaches, as outlined by Bijl­Brouwer van der M. [47]:
1. Utilizing systemic approaches to inform design for systems through the use of systems
maps and network analysis [48];
2. Integrating design experience with systems theory to effect change within systems by
intervening at ’leverage points’. [49];
3. Engaging in continuous collective design processes from within the systems [50], [51];
1.4
Systemic design process models
While numerous systemic design frameworks and approaches have surfaced in the field,
they are not often formalized in scientific literature. The objective of this research was to
analyze, compare, and evaluate existing systemic design process models documented in
the scientific literature, resulting in the proposal of a new process model.
Building upon the preceding sections that defined boundary critique and transformation,
two principles were introduced to guide the assessment of existing process models and
facilitate the derivation of a new one:
The principle of Transformation: This involves acknowledging that the current system is
inadequate and unsustainable, and needs to change fundamentally. This entails altering
the mindset or worldviews that currently uphold the existing system.
The principle of Boundary Critique/Equity: This refers to a process that aims to en­
sure the greatest possible involvement of actors and their points of view, preventing the
marginalization of any issues and actors.
9
==PAGE:15==
Methods
2.1
Systematic literature review
The objective of this part of the research was to systematically review and analyse the
existing systemic design process models within the academic literature, to allow further
synthesis of characteristics and linkages between existing systemic design approaches.
This review focuses exclusively on academic literature found on the Scopus academic
database.
2.1.1
Data collection
Initial Research
The initial exploration of systemic design literature on the Scopus academic database
helped identify specific themes that frequently occurred in the found literature but did not
align with the scope of the research. For instance, numerous articles discussed computer
modelling solutions, which were considered inapplicable to the study’s scope as they did
not consider the processes led or experienced by humans, which is seen as essential
when discussing a systemic design process. Another example is the theme of product
manufacturing or optimization, which again focused on the work processes of machinery
or had a very narrow scope, covering the design of product(s) only. The latter can be
explained with reference to design domains that are relevant to systemic design. As Jones
H. P. argues in his work, the systemic design approach is situated in the advanced design
domains: Organizational transformation (3.0) and Social Transformation (4.0), whereas
the product design stage is considered to be a level lower [24].
These insights from the initial literature exploration on systemic design assisted in defining
the search thread for the Scopus database (Figure 2.1) and establishing the exclusion and
inclusion criteria for the research.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
This section describes the eligibility criteria for the later stage of the review of the retrieved
material published on the Scopus academic database.
10
==PAGE:16==
Inclusion
The included literature should:
1. Represent a model focusing on the process of design that is divided into a set
of actions. It should be highlighted that literature should not be limited to design
discipline, as systemic design adopts a transdisciplinary approach.
Exclusion
The literature is excluded if:
1. The process model does not lead to interventions that are systemic.
2. The process model is not intended to be executed by humans. For example, ma­
chines or computer systems could aid humans in the process, however, the process
should not be designed to be carried out by these tools;
3. The “systematic design” term is used among the keywords. Systematic design
is a discipline that focuses on a methodological, structured approach to defining
design phases for product improvement. Hence, it is an individual design approach
that is also distinct from systemic design.
Search Thread
In the search thread systemic design and systems­oriented design [52] are treated as
synonyms. Systems­oriented design is a part of the systemic design field and was pop­
ularized through the course by the same name at The Oslo School of Architecture and
Design. The term process model is inevitably included as it is the unit of research anal­
ysis. Finally, ”design methodology” is included because relevant theoretical ideas and
methods might be discussed at the different stages of the process defined in the litera­
ture. In other words, there is a possibility of derivation of process steps even if they are
not made explicit.
The reasons for excluding the terms in the Scopus search can be found in the paragraph
on Initial Research above or the Exclusion section.
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: Defined search thread in the Scopus database
Retrieved literature overview
The Scopus search provided 69 search results. The most common subject areas as­
signed to the literature were Engineering (32), Social Sciences (29), Computer Science
(18), Environmental Science (14), Business, Management and Accounting (12) and many
others. Most of the documents were articles (36) and conference papers (22). Single
publications occurred in years: 1984, 1995, 2003, 2006 and 2010 (these articles have
not passed the inclusion and exclusion criteria). Between 2011 to 2022 the publications
were more frequent, with most articles published in years between 2018 and 2022. This
characteristic substantiates the claim that systemic design is a new and emerging field.
Retrieved eligible literature
The abstracts of all 69 articles were analyzed. Articles were excluded based on an as­
sessment of the abstract, determining whether the study conformed to the predetermined
exclusion criteria. In instances where ambiguities arose concerning the satisfaction of the
inclusion criteria, the articles were retained for further comprehensive examination.
A total of 39 articles met at least one criterion of exclusion and were subsequently ex­
cluded from further analysis. Seventeen articles that appeared not to meet inclusion cri­
teria were further screened, and nine were excluded.
The second phase of our analysis involved a thorough examination of the remaining 21
articles to ascertain their adherence to the inclusion criteria. The articles were read fully.
Subsequently, six articles were discarded from the analysis for various reasons, such as a
lack of focus on the process or very specific coverage of algorithmic­based improvements
for information systems tools. Two articles were discarded due to the unavailability of an
English translation or the original text.
12
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.2: Literature search and evaluation for inclusion
13
==PAGE:19==
The included articles are presented in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: List of literature included in the analysis. A more extensive version can be found in the
appendix Table A.1
Nr.
Name given to describe the work
Author(s)
Year
Reference
1
Holistic Diagnosis (HD) (tool)
C. Battistoni, C. G. Nohra, S. Barbero
2019
[53]
2
SD Methodology*
C. Battistoni, C. G. Nohra, S. Barbero
2019
[53]
3
SD Methodology for CE
C.G. Nohra, A.Pereno, S. Barbero
2020
[27]
4
Systemic Design Principles
P. H. Jones
2014
[54]
5
SD for territorial enhancement (tools)
A. Pereno, S. Barbero
2021
[55]
6
SD Process Journey
S. Mendez­Fajardo, H. Boni, P. Vanegas, D.Sucozhanay
2020
[56]
7
SD Methodology (MEIO)
C. Castiglione, E. Fiore
2022
[57]
8
Giga Map (tools)
L. Blaasvaer, B. Sevaldson
2019
[58]
9
Cyber­ systemics
B. Walker­Munro
2020
[25]
10
SD application for program management
S. W. Hussaini, T. Vinnakota
2015
[59]
11
Design­driven approach to evaluation (DDE)
C. D. Norman
2021
[60]
12
SD Methodology Rural Development (RD)
S. Barbero, M. Bicocca
2018
[61]
13
SD Process (university course)
A. J. P. Jacoby, K. van Ael
2021
[62]
14
Design­driven conflict (DDC)
M. Nedaei, A. Jacoby
2023
[63]
*one article describes the systemic design process and the tool used in one of the process stages
Data collection
Information on numerous specific topics was collected throughout the literature and doc­
umented in one Excel workbook (Appendix Fig. A.3). The list of topics included:
• Methodology of research
• Process model description, steps, principles/mindsets, input, output, actors/stake­
holders, tools
• Visuals related to the process model
• Process model strengths or weaknesses
• Area of application
• Systemic Intervention (Reflection on Boundary)
• Reference to other process model (if applicable)
14
==PAGE:20==
2.1.2
Data analysis
General Information about the Process Models
Seven of the articles presented in Table 2.1, (2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11, 13, 14) provide process
models (at different levels of prescription), two of the articles (9, 12) describe the appli­
cation of the systemic design process (no explicit steps), three articles (1, 5, 8) present
systemic design tool(s) and finally, one article (4) defines systemic design principles.
Note that ”process model” will be used as a general term to define the systemic design
approach described in each analysed article, even though the level of process model
prescription differs among the literature.
More in­depth analysis of process model stages
To enhance the analysis of the process stages outlined in each process model found
in literature, the stage description, the tools employed in each stage, the objectives of
the stage, and the outcomes were mapped in a Miro board (Figure 2.3). Each row on
the board corresponds to an article in which the systemic design process is defined. The
order of the rows mirrors the arrangement in the table that lists the analyzed articles (Table
2.1). The columns represent the stages and their associated attributes. A consistent
color scheme: dark purple, light purple, light green, and dark green, has been employed
to highlight specific aspects of each stage. The dark purple cell serves as the stage
description, marking the beginning of a new stage. In the light purple cell, the tools utilized
in that stage are provided. Subsequently, the light green cells articulate the goal of the
stage. Finally, the fourth column is dedicated to the stage outcome (dark green). An
unpopulated cell indicates the absence of explicit information about the defined stages or
their respective attributes within the article.
This visual represents the different levels of available information within each analysed
article. This analysis allowed to understand the level or process model prescription.
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.3: Prescribed steps in each article (also tools, goal and the output applicable to each
step) were mapped in the Miro board
Selection of main models based on comprehensiveness and
adherence to the principles
The process models found in the literature were evaluated in two diverse ways based on
different sets of criteria.
In both assessments, the process models were evaluated based on their alignment with
the Equity/Boundary critique principle. This criterion is considered crucial due to its
ethical nature and the perceived absence of relevant considerations in the analyzed pro­
cess models.
The second criterion is the level of detail of step prescription found in the analysed
models. It can be assessed on how evident are the steps and how elaborate are their de­
scriptions. In other words, how easy it would be for an unfamiliar practitioner to reproduce
the same process.
The third criterion is based on one of the goals of this research: to derive a process model
for sustainable transformation and thus adherence to the principle of transformation.
Different levels of system change be derived from analysis of the expected/ experienced/
designed outcome of each process model.
In Table A.2 (appendix) the arguments and scores given for each of the criteria are ex­
plained in detail per each process model.
Below are two assessments of process models according to the aforementioned criteria.
The results are visualized on the two separate matrix diagrams Figure 2.4 and Figure 2.5.
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.4: Process Models evaluated in accordance to boundary critique and level of model
prescription
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.5: Process Models evaluated in accordance to boundary critique and level of leverage
points
Both analyses revealed that the process model yielding the best performance according to
the criteria was the Design­Driven Conflict (DDC) model, identified as number 14. Follow­
ing closely as the second best­performing process model was number 3, documented in
literature as the application of Systemic Design Methodology (SD Methodology) within the
RETRACE project, focusing on regions transitioning towards a circular economy. It is im­
portant to note that Systemic Design Methodology has been discussed in various articles,
each taking different formats, such as describing a tool, application, or the process model
itself. The connection between these articles, all representing the same process model
(SD Methodology), was visually depicted in the matrix diagrams by being connected by
grey lines.
These two process models were chosen as the primary models for further analysis. Be­
yond their standing as the top models, they complemented each other. The DDC model
was highly prescriptive but lacked validation through empirical research. On the other
hand, the elaboration of steps and related details in the literature concerning the SD
Methodology, while inferior to the DDC, had seen application in numerous cases and
projects over extended periods. For the rest of the report, these process models are
referred to as main process models.
18
==PAGE:24==
Description of the main process models
Process Model: Systemic Design Methodology
This approach was developed by the Department of Architecture and Design at the Poly­
technic University of Turin, in collaboration with the ZERI foundation [64], in the early
2000s. The initial idea was to elevate the field of eco­design towards the direction of the
Blue and Circular Economy. Over the years, the SD methodology has become a sig­
nificant approach in academia, European projects such as RETRACE [65], [27], and in
collaborations with the industry (e.g., Agrindustria Tecco s.r.l.).
At the forefront of this methodology is the Holistic Diagnosis (HD) tool enabling the collec­
tion of qualitative and quantitative data allowing analysis between all elements in the sys­
tem. It helps involved actors perceive the complexity of the system with the help of visual
tools (infographics, gigamaps, etc.) and stimulates them to think holistically. Ultimately, it
encourages a horizontal dialogue between stakeholders and fosters synergies between
different involved disciplines [53], [27]. Therefore SD methodology considers building re­
lationships as the main prerequisite for finding innovative and anticipatory solutions [53]
or fostering new sustainable and resilient economic models [27] within complex systems.
Both articles present the SD Methodology while one focuses on the description of the HD
tool (one of the stages of the methodology) [53], another describes the practical appli­
cation of the SD Methodology in the RETRACE project, investigating the opportunities
for local and regional policies to integrate circular economy strategies, through effective
utilization of the territory resources [27]. According to SD methodology, restructuring re­
sources and thus relationships between actors result in resilient, self­maintaining systems
[53]. While, ultimately, SD methodology aims to encourage a paradigm shift by guiding
toward this new way of co­existing [53].
Process Model: Design­Driven conflict
The Design­Driven conflict (DDC) is founded on the consideration that it is essential to ex­
amine and redefine various types of relationships in order to intervene and create change
within complex adaptive systems [66]. It focuses on controversies, such as conflict or
disagreements as usually avoided and challenging forms of social relationships. The
methodology proposes that actively “constructing” such controversies can lead to the
emergence of new order, for example, alternations in the distribution of power [67]. By
constructing the author refers to ‘the capability of the social system in aggregating a net­
work of adaptive agents” at the edge of chaos [68]. Hence, the Design­Driven Conflict
methodology explores how controversies allow the emergence of new realities by desta­
bilizing the underlying social structures and the systemic ways of constructing conflict and
disagreement through the creation of the network of interactive agents [69], [63].
In this regard, the Design­Driven Conflict methodology also claims to address the per­
ceived limitations of existing systemic design intervention. It contends that collaborative
and participatory frameworks of design seeking mutual agreements and similarities of
viewpoints fail to satisfy the requisite variety principle of systemic design [24]. This princi­
ple requires sufficient representation in terms of actor diversity [70]. Due lack of a strategic
and more critical approach for intervention means that designers together with stakehold­
ers are able to synthesize the knowledge about the system but might fail pragmatically,
in delivering a strategic intervention to acquire the ‘voices’ of marginalized or unforeseen
19
==PAGE:25==
groups and comprehend the foundational narrative of the context [71]. Design­Driven con­
flict goes beyond the existing systemic design methodologies by including contradictory
voices [63].
To further analyze the Design­Driven Conflicts (DDC) methodology in this study, the fol­
lowing paragraph will explain the reasons for the author’s focus on controversies, as de­
scribed in his theoretical work on DDC [69].
While transformations within the system unfold gradually [69], controversies can acceler­
ate this process [72]. It is tightly related to conflict, facilitating the transmission of ”knowl­
edge and wisdom” [73], [74], [75], [76]. This should not be understood solely as acquiring
information but as shaping a new reality within social systems through collective under­
standing and interactions [69]. The bridge between the transmission of knowledge and
that reality is a change in ”deep culture and values” [69]. In system dynamics, connec­
tions between deep culture and social change are considered focal points in the shifting of
mindsets and paradigms within social systems [77], [5]. The premise of this methodology
is that ”conflict(s) of agents” work as internal stimuli activating fundamental changes in
these deep cultures and values through the transmission of higher­order knowledge [69].
However, the success of this depends highly on the utilization of conflict. This can be
achieved through a ”constructive form of conflict” which this methodology guides through
[69].
In contrast to SD Methodology, DDC is the prescriptive methodology that lacks empirical
evaluation.
Comparison of the main and the rest of the process models
Two principal process models were systematically analyzed and mapped, aligning them
with their corresponding stages. The Design­Driven Conflict methodology was repre­
sented in dark purple at the top, while the Systemic Design Methodology was indicated in
dark green at the bottom. Subsequently, the remaining models underwent further analysis
and were positioned on canvas in proximity to one of the main process models based on
their similarity. Only elements present in the analyzed models but not found in the main
models were incorporated into the map. This approach was followed in gathering data on
inputs, outputs, actors/stakeholders, and principles/mindsets.
The resulting map facilitated a comparative examination of the two main process models in
terms of the stages they prescribe. Additionally, it provided insights into elements present
in other process models that might be absent in the main models. It is crucial to note
that this information was subject to critical assessment, considering the known inferior
evaluation of these models compared to the main models. The mapping can be seen in
Figure 2.6, or greater resolution in the appendix Figure A.4, and the data collected on
other process model components can be found in Table A.3 (appendix).
20
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.6: Comparison of the main process models and the rest of the process models
2.2
Primary qualitative data
2.2.1
Interviews with specialists
Three experts in the field of systemic design were interviewed online through the Microsoft
Teams application, with each interview lasting at least an hour. Two of these experts were
also the authors of the main process models analyzed in this study, bringing valuable
insights into their methodologies. The third expert is a member of the Expert Network
for Systemic Co­design (ESC), an eight­year­long project dedicated to exploring and ad­
vancing systemic co­design methods with the overarching goal of facilitating necessary
societal transitions [78]. Experts interviewed:
Carolina Giraldo Nohra, is a designer, researcher, and consultant specializing in Systemic
Design innovation processes. Currently works at Climate­KIC. Is the co­creator of the
Systemic Design methodology.
Moein Nedaei, a PhD student at the Universiteit Antwerpen in Design Sciences and author
of the Design­Driven Conflict methodology.
Bas van den Berg, an educational activist, researcher, futurist, and practitioner. He is a
21
==PAGE:27==
member of the Expert Network for Systemic Co­design.
The greater part of the interviews revolved around discussions on the methodologies de­
veloped by the authors and their practical experiences in applying them (if applicable). In
the final part of the conversations, the identified common stages within the methodologies
(at that time) were presented to the experts. They served as the foundational elements
of the process model in development. Furthermore, the principles of the process model:
Transformation, Equity, and Sustainability (at that time) were also introduced. The experts
were then prompted to share any relevant concepts, literature, theories, or other insights
that they believed would contribute to the ongoing development of the process model.
2.2.2
Interviews with AgriFoodTure roadmap developers
AgriFoodTure is a mission­driven partnership with a dedicated focus on accelerating the
green transition of the agri­food system in Denmark. The organization’s overarching am­
bition is to foster and lead collaboration across the entire value chain in this field [79]. The
AgriFoodTure naturally evolved from collaborative efforts in developing the ’Roadmap for
Sustainable Transformation of the Danish Agri­food System,’ which was published in May
2021 [80]. This document serves as a response to the ’Innovation Fund Denmark’s In­
nomission 3 call’ and stands as a collective achievement involving over 300 researchers
and experts from Danish universities and other academic institutions within the food sec­
tor.
In this project, semi­structured interviews were conducted with four key stakeholders en­
gaged in the development of the roadmap, aiming to gain deeper insights into how the
process of addressing such a complex challenge unfolded in practice.
2.2.3
Workshop
The workshop involved six participants: three AgriFoodTure representatives, one scien­
tist from the University of Copenhagen, and two representatives from Innovation Fund
Denmark. The workshop was divided into two parts. In the first, participants were asked
to map actors and their stakeholders, corresponding to stage 1 of the model at that time.
They were guided by specific questions: mapping stakeholders involved in the roadmap
development, mapping stakeholders not involved in the mapping development but con­
tributing to or hindering the implementation of the roadmap, and mapping stakeholders
that would bear the consequences of a successful or unsuccessful implementation of the
roadmap. The second exercise focused on mapping stakeholders according to different
types of power (stage 2 of the process model at that time). This involved identifying those
supporting or impeding the change in the system and recognizing actors with power over
others. Additionally, questions were posed regarding the origins of such power. To con­
clude, participants prioritized the actors they wished to invite in the process of revising the
roadmap.
22
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.7: The template given to workshop participants depicting different stages of the process
model at the time
The primary goals were to assess participants’ ability to reflect on the importance of invit­
ing a more diverse group of stakeholders than in the initial roadmap development and
to determine if these exercises could stimulate deeper discussions or conflicts within the
group, allowing the discussion to reach the value levels of the system.
In the second part of the workshop, the systemic design process model was presented.
Participants received a canvas depicting different stages of the process model and were
prompted to reflect on their relevance to their specific case. Surveys were distributed at
the end of the workshop. The survey contained these questions:
1. Is systemic design applicable in your case?
2. To what extent did this workshop contribute to the planning of the roadmap revision?
3. Your key takeaways?
4. What would you have done differently if you were conducting the workshop?
The overarching goal was to evaluate the applicability of the systemic design process
model to the AgriFoodTure case, specifically in the context of revising the AgriFoodTure
roadmap.
Figure 2.8: On the left: the trial workshop with students and young professionals. Practice before
the workshop with AgriFoodTure. To the right: workshop with AgriFoodTure and other stakehold­
ers from Innovation Fund Denmark and the University of Copenhagen.
23
==PAGE:29==
2.2.4
Coding of primary qualitative data
Interviews with SD experts
The expert interviews were recorded and simultaneously transcribed using the Microsoft
Teams application. Subsequently, the data underwent coding, where segments within the
transcript were labelled to categorize concepts, methods, theories, experiences, reflec­
tions, and other pertinent elements aligned with corresponding stages in the methodology.
The insights and practices shared by the experts were then visualized on the Miro board,
serving as inspiration for the iterative development of the process model (Figure 2.9).
Additionally, they played a crucial role in assessing the existing main process models.
Concepts or theories directly mentioned and relevant to the development of the process
model were separately listed and further investigated as part of the broader research pro­
cess.
Figure 2.9: Elements from interviews with the experts assigned and visualised to the correspond­
ing stages of the process model at the time of the research. Full­size table can be found in the
Appendix Fig.A.1
Interviews with AgriFoodTure roadmap developers
The interviews were recorded and transcribed in real­time using the Microsoft Teams ap­
plication. Similarly to the expert interviews, the data underwent coding to identify elements
relevant to the timeline and events of the roadmap development, as well as the positive
and negative experiences of the process, and aspects of collaboration.
AgriFoodTure workshop
Data collection occurred through continuous note­taking during the entire workshop and
via a survey distributed at the workshop’s conclusion. The notes were analyzed with a
focus on identifying phrases that indicated a deeper level of reflection or reflections on
24
==PAGE:30==
the existing process model.
25
==PAGE:31==
Results
3.1
Systematic literature review
Comparison of two main process models: Systemic Design
Methodology and Design­Driven Conflict
In this section, a more in­depth examination of various stages in systemic design process
models will be presented through a comparison of the stages in the main process models.
As mentioned earlier, the Systemic Design Methodology (SDM) has been discussed in
several analyzed academic papers. Therefore, the analysis of SDM encompasses works
providing a generic description of SDM [53], [27],[57], the paper where the detailed de­
scription of the Holistic Diagnosis method (the first stage of SDM) is presented [53], and
the application of SDM in the RETRACE project, examined in [27]. The analysis of the
Design­Driven Conflict (DDC) methodology includes the theoretical framework of DDC
[69] and the prescribed DDC methodology [63].
Figure 3.1 provides a visual representation of the stage comparison between the two
methodologies. The ”sections” represent the division for comparing the process models
in the subsequent analysis.
Figure 3.1: Comparison of two main process models. The stages aligned horizontally are consid­
ered comparable. Interpretation of the stages and iterations are interpreted by the author of this
report. Full resolution image can be found in Appendix Fig. A.2
26
==PAGE:32==
Section 1
Detailed information on the stage(s) description and outcomes can be found in the ap­
pendix Table A.4.
In both main process models the first stage(s) encompasses establishing an ini­
tial understanding of the system context, however, employing distinct approaches.
Notably, both methodologies put a strong focus on resources within the system.
The Holistic Diagnosis method is the first stage of the SD Methodology starting with the
system mapping. This entails an examination of material resource flows and the resulting
interplay of actors related to those resources. It includes the analysis of a broader context
such as geographical, demographic, and cultural factors. In essence, it encourages an
overview of the existing relationships between components and processes. This mapping
is conducted by researchers engaged in desk and field research. The information is ulti­
mately visualized in the gigamaps (a popular tool within systemic design [58] and a format
for presenting extensive quantitative and qualitative data). Finally, the map is presented
to other actors for sharing their perspectives.
In contrast, the DDC model, during the ”Context mapping” stage, focuses on mapping both
human and non­human actors to comprehend the resources available to them. In the sec­
ond stage, ”Analysis,” DDC enhances understanding by probing into the reasons for ex­
isting power dynamics within the system. It specifies power relationships between actors,
particularly those in conflict or marginalized. Additionally, the influences from neighbour­
ing systems and other factors, including historical and geographical elements are also
analysed in this stage.
The primary objective of both process models remains the same: to establish a compre­
hensive understanding of the system in question. Moreover, the DDC model takes an
extra step by delving into the underlying causes of the intricate power relationships in the
current system to identify relevant actors.
Interestingly, the mapping in SDM is conducted by researchers and is given to actors in
the end to hear other perspectives on the analysis. While it seems that the mapping is
conducted with actors within the DDC methodology ”discussion between actors that can
further facilitate the unfolding of the unknown side of the context” [69].
Section 2
Detailed information on the stage(s) description and outcomes can be found in the ap­
pendix Table A.5.
The fundamental concept that appears to be shared between the DDC stage ”Synthesis”
and the SDM stage ”Definition of problems and leverages for change” (or ”Good Practices
selection” as titled in the RETRACE project, where SDM was applied in a real­life setting)
is the identification of focal points for instigating change.
However, the methods employed in these stages are hardly comparable.
In the SDM Methodology, emphasis is placed on context analysis, stemming from the ini­
tial activity. Collaborating with participants, researchers analyze connections and impacts
27
==PAGE:33==
to identify potentialities and criticalities of future scenarios. Challenges are approached
as levers for change, shaping how the system can be designed and initiated. In the RE­
TRACE project, researchers also engage actors to share and select good policy practices,
scrutinizing their strengths and weaknesses. These findings contribute to the subsequent
design of a new system.
In the DDC methodology, methods such as storytelling are employed to comprehend the
challenges faced by actors in conflicts or disagreements. This stage is also dedicated
to transparent and inclusive discussions for marginalized actors, where hidden assump­
tions and unshared knowledge can be exchanged among participants. The objective is
to uncover commonalities within the system’s actors.
Hence, during the SDM process, the focus is on the components of the board sys­
tem, whereas in the DDC methodology, individual experiences and fundamental
perspectives are analyzed.
Section 3
Detailed information on the stage(s) description and outcomes can be found in the ap­
pendix Table A.6.
In this stage, intervention occurs in both process models, guiding the actors toward
an intended future.
The general description of SDM indicates that a new system is designed in this stage,
where new value is generated through resource utilization and relationship building. How­
ever, the application of SDM in the RETRACE project reveals a more guiding intervention
rather than a definitive one. The outcome of this stage is the formulation of regional ac­
tion plans presented as ”future­oriented visions,” identifying policy gaps and proposing
various possibilities for interventions for actors.
In the DDC process model, this stage is pivotal, serving as the methodology’s foundation,
where translation points are established. The translation aims to unite actors with conflict­
ing views or interests, facilitating the construction of an ideal network of allies. Through
multiple translation moments, the intention is to shift the learning paradigm of the context,
transitioning from one’s understanding of the situation to an ideal state. The responsibility
falls on the designer to create these passage points, offering alternatives for actors or
enabling them to explore new realities. The prescription defines this stage as an inter­
vention and prototyping phase in the conventional design process, wherein the designer
intervenes in the system through the use of artefacts, services, or other elements that
may require prototyping and testing. Translation is an opportunistic approach, never a
completed accomplishment; it may fail under certain conditions. In other words, the result
of translation is not an ultimate solution; instead, it establishes a condition or situation for
learning and adaptation in response to a problematic situation.
In comparison, the SDM methodology appears to afford more freedom for actors
to define their activities, whereas interventions in the DDC methodology are prede­
fined by a designer.
In addition, they both focus on fundamentally different goals. The SDM model aims
28
==PAGE:34==
to change the system by altering its elements and relationships, while the DDC method­
ology intends to bring about a change in worldviews or the mindsets of the actors, which
could be more closely related to altering the function or purpose of the system.
Section 4
Detailed information on the stage(s) description and outcomes can be found in the ap­
pendix Table A.7.
In this stage of the SDM process model, a preliminary evaluation of the interven­
tion(s) is conducted. This assessment may encompass economic, environmental, and
social factors. For instance, in the RETRACE project, the outcome was the determination
of success or the identification of total/partial failure factors in activity implementation.
Even though in the ”Translation” stage of the DDC methodology it is discussed that the
intervention for translation in the system creates opportunities for learning, there is no
exploration of how this learning could be evaluated. It might be viewed as a more natural
process within the system rather than as an analytical procedure.
Consequently, there is no apparent alignment between the SDM and DDC method­
ologies in this section.
Section 5
Detailed information on the stage(s) description and outcomes can be found in the ap­
pendix Table A.8.
In the final ”Scale­up” stage of the DDC methodology, exploration centers on how the new
allies and the acquired knowledge they now share can be scaled up within the broader
community. The proposal suggests that the design’s capacity to conceptualize and ide­
alize the future could contribute to utilizing the narrative, norms, and values emerging
in prior stages to construct an aspirational platform. It could be considered as design­
ing a catalyst for the further spread of new mindsets and worldviews within the broader
community.
The SDM methodology contains two final stages: ”Implementation” and ”Results Anal­
ysis and Feedback.” The goal during these stages is to implement successful interven­
tions/systems and ultimately measure whether they deliver the expected outcome: an
autopoietic system that fosters a paradigm shift. In the practical implementation of SDM,
the stage labelled ”Action Plan Implementation” appears to encompass both the ”Imple­
mentation” and ”Results Analysis and Feedback” stages of the SD methodology. It delves
into how the outcomes of initial interventions address, inform and support future activities
within the system. Described as an ”actionable and proactive” mindset of SD which inte­
grates with a foresight vision. This can be viewed as an iterative process, moving from
implementation to learning, and then to the ability to anticipate and modify future strate­
gies.
It could be concluded, that both methodologies envision a change in the system
occurring through a gradual learning process.
29
==PAGE:35==
The DDC attempts to accelerate the change process by targeting relevant actors (antag­
onistic or marginalized) and creating conditions for knowledge transmission within them.
That is how the paradigm shift is achieved within the group of allies in prior steps. Finally,
the goal of the methodology in its final stage is to foster conditions for the further spread
of these new ideas and worldviews. In SDM, the change within the system unfolds as
a gradual process where interventions inform subsequent interventions. This continuous
learning approach facilitates a deeper understanding of the system and enables modifi­
cations, ultimately guiding the system to become autopoietic—capable of independently
maintaining itself.
Systemic design process model components: principles/mind­
sets, stakeholders/actors, input, output, tools
In this section, a summary of the other process model components identified within pro­
cess models in academic literature will be presented. These components have been
gathered and categorized into four sections for a more systematic analysis. The seg­
mentation aligns with the process model assessment depicted in Figure 2.5, organized
according to their placement within the four quadrants of the matrix. The full description
of all the components can be found in the Table A.3 (appendix).
Principles/ Mindsets
An apparent pattern emerges from the principles or mindsets articulated within the top­
performing process models (found among QI, QII, and QIII). All these models encompass
the connectedness and relationships among stakeholders in the process, underscoring
the power of collaboration and co­creation. This could be concluded with the statement
in [61] ”The virtuous cooperation between the actors becomes the system itself.”
Stakeholders/Actors
Nearly all process models emphasise the significance of multidisciplinarity and advocate
for broadening the identification of stakeholders to enhance their diversity. However, only
the DDC process model addresses the involvement of marginalized actors, which aligns
directly with the boundary critique/equity principle. Additionally, emphasis is placed on
the involvement of stakeholders in the process and the integration of their ideas or per­
spectives. Notably, one process model [60] distinguishes itself by focusing on analyzing
users’ wants or preferences, aligning more closely with a user­centric design approach
rather than the systemic design approach.
Input
Within the two best­performing process models, the input to the process model, or the
starting point, is described as the ”problematic context” or ”given scenario.” This aligns
with the Sevaldson B. statement, emphasizing that in systemic design, the focus is on
situations rather than isolated problems [35]. Another model specifies the requirements
for the systemic design team, while one of the primary models (also among the best­
30
==PAGE:36==
performing) initiates the process with stakeholder identification and engagement. Explicit
mention of inputs in other analyzed scientific literature proved challenging to find, likely
due to the infrequent prescriptive nature of the analyzed models, which more often were
descriptions of project experiences.
Output
Diversity characterizes the outputs among all process models. For example, the highest­
ranked model claims to facilitate the mindset and paradigm shift at the end of the process.
The most frequently occurring theme among outputs relates to the establishment of re­
lationships between stakeholders and the improvement of levels of stakeholder cooper­
ation. Social or collective learning also emerges as a recurrent outcome of the systemic
design process.
Tools
The tools were not systematically analyzed and compared across all models. This deci­
sion was driven by a focus on the rationale behind the process stages and their outcomes,
rather than the means to achieve them. Additionally, tools identified within the stages of
process models were not specifically designed for the process or explicitly identified as
systemic design tools. Instead, they were often borrowed from other fields, such as de­
sign or transition sciences. While the relevance of these tools is not dismissed, a thorough
analysis was avoided until their use is justified, such as their applicability in the derived
process model.
3.2
Action research
Theories, literature or methods proposed by the systemic de­
sign experts
Carolina Giraldo Nohra
She perceived the Equity principle in relation to human relationships, the environment,
and the process of connecting these elements. She emphasized the need to avoid
making this principle too basic. Carolina also delved into stakeholder involvement, noting
that the Quadruple Helix model is often practical, however, it depends on the local territory
and one’s connections. Regarding the sustainability principle, she urged exploring the
value creation theory. Also in the interview, she referred to Mariana Mazzucato’s book
”Value of Everything” as a resource helping to avoid generalizing terms like ”circularity”
or ”sustainability”. Carolina also suggested looking into the Theory of Change, Portfolio
of Innovation approach, and MEL framework for implementation and learning stages
within the methodology, enabling project monitoring and long­term strategic planning.
Moein Nedaei
Moein focused on different systemic design approaches. He distinguished between ”system­
31
==PAGE:37==
oriented design” and ”design­oriented system”, with the former involving intervention at
various system levels and the latter being more strategic, focusing on the right actors,
space, or competency for intervention. Essentially, the focus is on the power to tran­
scend the paradigm. Both approaches, according to Moein, start with understanding the
existing system and identifying leverage points, after which they diverge.
Moein further discussed the concepts of transformation and transition, characterizing
one as providing a deep change and the other as ”more change”. He also mentioned
the concept of transformability as an attribute of social systems. He recommended
looking into the work of B. Walker on resiliency, adaptability, and transformability [81].
Additionally, Moein highlighted F. Avelino’s work on power dynamics, emphasizing its
relevance to sustainability, which might be interesting to this research.
Bas van den Berg
The expert initially recommended exploring transition design literature. Regarding the
sustainability principle, which was one of the principles at the time, Bas van den Berg
suggested ”easy” considerations such as Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the
Donut model, or Life Cycle Assessments (LCA). Regarding the equity principle, he
stressed the significance of understanding who/what are the various stakeholders in­
volved. They should be represented in the process, either through personas, employing
role­play with other actors, or directly inviting them to participate in the process. Bas van
den Berg underscored the importance of obtaining an overview of the mindsets and
worldviews of individuals involved in the system to foster transformative learning.
To illustrate, he proposed introducing a nano level when considering the traditional micro,
meso, macro perspectives. This nano level allows engagement with the individual’s
worldview. According to him, transition design tools can be instrumental in addressing
these aspects.
Almost all expert feedback was taken into consideration. The mentioned works and spe­
cific suggestions were thoroughly reviewed, supplemented by brief desk research on other
shared concepts or theories. The literature that appeared more closely aligned with the
existing process model concept at the time received greater attention. However, the Sus­
tainable Development Goals (SDGs), the Donut Model, or Life Cycle Assessments (LCAs)
were excluded due to presumed lack of relevance. Additionally, Mariana Mazzucato’s
book on the ”Value of Everything” was omitted due to time constraints. To what extent the
concepts were integrated in the process model design is explained in the section on the
background of the proposed process model stages (section 4.2).
The expert reflections and feedback were mapped against the stages of the systemic
design process in Figure 3.2, under the sections ”Practices proposed by experts for PM”
and ”Good practices employed by experts”.
How the previous roadmap process dealt with each aspect or
step of systemic design
The process through which the roadmap was developed bears little resemblance to a
systemic design process. As described by a participant in the workshops, ”this was a
highly political process”, where heads of universities gathered before the official call of
32
==PAGE:38==
the roadmap to determine the tracks and the overall direction. The participants faced the
challenging task of representing their own agendas, making it unlikely that comprehensive
considerations were given beyond their personal expertise and their field of science.
It is known that achieving consensus among the leading actors was challenging due to
conflicting interests. Power dynamics likely influenced decisions in the room, but the
opportunity to challenge underlying power structures was lost as the process unfolded
behind closed doors.
Consequently, it can be concluded that the roadmap primarily serves the interests of those
in the room. This stands in contrast to the bottom­up collaborative process proposed by
systemic design and the process model derived in this research. In addition, it strongly
opposes the equity considerations that are addressed in this research.
Regarding the practical development of the roadmap, it was mentioned that at least one
of the four tracks took a value chain approach, allowing for a ”more interdisciplinary per­
spective”. However, it is known that stakeholders outside of universities were not actively
involved in the process. The roadmap was developed solely by academia, aside from a
few editors from other public organizations. Other institutions were included only for the
update on the process, strategically to gain buy­in. However, the organizations in this
meeting were allowed to share ideas.
While an extraordinary number of researchers were invited to share their expertise, the
decision on what to include or exclude was made by the same small group of experts.
This led to many professionals feeling unacknowledged for their work.
Much of this criticism can be directed at the organization that initiated the roadmap, which,
according to research, allocated only a few months for a project of such complexity. This
top­down decision restricts the possibility of a thorough process involving multiple stake­
holders that requires thoughtful preparation, organization, and substantial time to conduct.
However, despite the time constraints, interviewees, while critical of the limited time, were
also positive about the amount of work produced. Some interviewees believed that the
results might have been similar even with more time.
The positive aspects of the roadmap in terms of systemic design include its long­term
vision “we wanted to make a roadmap that could be used for many years” and its role as
a guiding document. However, it is crucial for the roadmap to ensure that the proposed
directions are of a systemic nature.
The past roadmap development process was mapped against the stages of the systemic
design process in Figure 3.2, under the section ”Past process of the roadmap develop­
ment”.
Expectations for the next process of revising the AgriFoodTure
roadmap
The workshop provided a platform for participants to delve into the systemic design ap­
proach and the proposed process model. The central focus was to understand the appli­
cability of the process model to the agri­food sector. However, a key challenge emerged
when two participants could only attend the second part of the workshop, resulting in the
33
==PAGE:39==
restructuring of the agenda. Due to time constraints, the process model was presented in
a presentation format, limiting practical engagement with each stage for all participants.
Fortunately, the other four participants had briefly covered activities from the first two
stages of the process model earlier on. As a result, the understanding of different parts
of the process model heavily relied on practical experiences and the presenter’s ability to
convey complex concepts in a short time.
Furthermore, given the power dynamics in the room, there was a need to accommodate
participants updating each other on their progress, addressing the lack of recent collabo­
ration.
Overall, participants responded very positively to the systemic design approach and the
process model. Considerations for each stage of the process model are visually repre­
sented in Figure 3.2, section ”AgriFoodTure Workshop”, with further reflection available
in Appendix A.0.3. Participants found the ”Power Dynamics Analysis” and ”Envisioning”
stages crucial in revising the roadmap. One participant viewed the Power Dynamics activ­
ity as an opportunity to foster inclusivity and give individuals ”a voice.” Some participants
were familiar with and had practised the method of ”Theory of Change.” They were not
impacted and did not particularly agree with the criticism of it from the systemic design
perspective. In addition, they agreed with the importance of developing a learning culture,
with an invitation to cultivate it already offered from one organization to another during the
workshop.
Participants described the workshop as ”inspirational” and an ”eye­opener,” noting that
it sparked excellent discussions, input, and a new way of thinking, offering diverse per­
spectives. All participants considered the systemic design approach relevant to the Agri­
FoodTure case, with one answering ”maybe” to this question. Several participants also
requested materials from the workshop to be sent to them afterwards. While the pro­
cess generated space for new ideas, and participants expressed enthusiasm to explore
it further, there was insufficient time to plan concrete actions.
Finally, at the end of the workshop, one participant approached, stating, ”I used to work
with system designers, and I heard bits and pieces of this, but I think the way you put it
together made a lot of sense”.
34
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.2: Results from the action research
==PAGE:41==
Analysis
4.1
Process models for systemic design
4.1.1
Contrasting existing process models to the principles
and good practices recommended by specialists
Design­Driven Conflict process model
The process model is analyzed, taking into account the principles defined in this re­
search, systemic design principles defined by Jones H. P., the author’s own reflection,
gaps identified from other process models, learnings from interviews with systemic de­
sign experts, and expert feedback on the DDC process model available in the article
describing the DDC methodology [63].
Principle of Transformation
The DDC process strongly asserts its ability to adhere to the ”Transformation” principle.
The process model was strategically crafted to bring about a paradigm shift within the
existing system, which is considered one of the highest leverage points by Meadows
D. [5]. This model operates on the premise of identifying pathways to understand the
underlying mindsets or worldviews of the involved actors, aiming to subsequently alter
them. According to experts, comprehending these mindsets is a crucial prerequisite for
system transformation or initiating transformative learning.
However, it’s important to note that the creator of the DDC methodology has openly
acknowledged the challenge of establishing a space for individuals to engage in con­
versations about their fundamental values. Additionally, criticism from other experts
has been expressed towards the proclaimed goal of a paradigm shift. It is claimed to be
difficult to rely on or define within the time frame of a project.
36
==PAGE:42==
In response, alternative viewpoints have been proposed by various experts, suggesting
a focus on purposefulness in terms of both structural considerations and collaborative
aspects among intervening participants. Some have advocated for identifying sub­steps
that could serve as facilitators in the process towards achieving the goal of the paradigm
shift.
Principle of Equity
The DDC process model could be considered the most equitable among analyzed pro­
cess models, as it is the only model that delves into the identification of marginalized
groups, specifically individuals lacking power or those oppressed by others within the
existing system. However, the methodology description lacks sufficient data to explain
precisely how these groups can be identified or whether there is encouragement for their
inclusion in the process. Indeed, one expert emphasized the need for actors to have
more agency in the process.
While it may be perceived as the most inclusive process among the analyzed models,
a contradictory claim arose during the interview with the author: ”We don’t need people
or even non­actors. We only need narratives.” Consequently, the author mentioned ex­
perimenting with how this process could be supported by AI. The notion of excluding the
human element from the process might be seen as contradictory to making the process
diverse or inclusive, as it works against the cooperative nature of systemic design.
Hierarchical intervention
As stated by the author of the Design­Driven Conflict methodology, the creation of pas­
sage points, or pathways for changing mutually agreed concerns, is a highly hierarchical
and structural process. In this approach, the designer/researcher takes on the role of
mapping the context and translating those elements into narratives, providing actors
with a guide to establishing new alignments. The author acknowledges that this ap­
proach is somewhat ”stupid” and expresses difficulty in making it more “democratic”.
Furthermore, it contradicts the bottom­up approach in the systemic design field, where
interventions are ideally developed collaboratively within co­creative environments that
include diverse groups of actors.
Furthermore, one expert highlighted the importance of approaching systemic design
with epistemic humility, avoiding viewing the designer as someone who can alone fix
the issue.
Evaluation/ Lack of Feedback coordination
Compared to other process models found in systemic design literature, the DDC model
37
==PAGE:43==
skips a step of evaluation. Feedback coordination, as defined by Jones H. P. [24], is a
systemic design principle that emphasizes the importance of feedback loops in achiev­
ing the desired output and, ultimately, the desired effect. While the DDC acknowledges
that a desired shift in mental models may require multiple translation interventions, as
illustrated by the iteration loop in Figure 3.1, there is no mechanism for evaluating the
success of these translations. Moreover, success in the DDC model is dependent on
the success of facilitating the formation of allies, but there is no mechanism for under­
standing the negatives or positives of these processes to enable improvements.
Unlike other process models that evaluate interventions through different perspectives
of various contexts or actors, the DDC interventions are designed by the designer/re­
searcher without an attempt to consider them from a different point of view.
Power dynamics
The analysis of power within the system is a unique aspect of the methodology, particu­
larly relevant within the field of transition studies. According to one of the experts, it is a
crucial part of systemic design, yet unfortunately taboo concept in our society. This can
be attributed, in large part, to our cultural inclination toward consensus, due to which
we tend to avoid discussions on power. The DDC process model, however, challenges
this norm.
Usability
According to the experts, the DDC methodology has been perceived as highly complex
and may prove overwhelming for non­researchers, including practitioners or design stu­
dents. The extensive amount of time taken to analyze this process model for this re­
search reinforces this perspective. In a sense, this complexity makes the methodology
even more reliant on the facilitator or researcher, diminishing the power allocated to the
actors and limiting the opportunities for it to be used independently by practitioners.
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.1: Analysis of the Design­Driven Conflict process model
==PAGE:45==
Systemic Design Methodology process model
The process model is analyzed, taking into account the principles defined in this re­
search, systemic design principles defined by Jones H. P., the author’s own reflection,
gaps identified from other process models, learnings from interviews with systemic de­
sign experts, and strengths and weaknesses pointed out among articles on Systemic
Design methodology.
Principle of Transformation
One of the descriptions of the Systemic Design Methodology states that, ultimately, the
aim of the process is to achieve a paradigm shift [53]. This is defined as a desired
final outcome, but unlike the DDC methodology, it does not seem to prescribe strategic
actions allowing for the specific attainment of that level of complexity. According to
experts, understanding the underlying causes of the system is considered a prerequisite
for that level of transformation.
However, the SDM expert mentioned in the interview attempts to ”change people’s vi­
sions” in a participatory setting, as well as efforts to create ”vulnerability” within the
group. Importantly, these elements are not explicitly mentioned in the methodology lit­
erature. Moreover, it remains unclear how this knowledge would be applied. While one
might assume it could be used in designing the ideal system, in practice, interventions
in the system (in SDM) often target the levels of elements or relationships rather than
the mindsets of the actors.
The discussion in the methodology leans towards making the system self­maintaining
by changing the management of resources and relationships. This concept could be
associated with the power to self­organize the system structure, identified as one of the
highest leverage points according to Meadows D. However, it is still lower in priority
than changing the system goals or the mindsets and paradigms from which the system
evolves.
Principle of Equity
The prescriptive literature on Systemic Design Methodology only emphasizes the impor­
tance of multidisciplinarity. In the practical application of the SDM process, the focus is
on inviting the necessary stakeholders, however, solely based on the mutuality principle.
Unfortunately, there is no consideration given to stakeholders who might be marginal­
ized, underrepresented, or could bring unique perspectives, even though the context
involves policy­making, which is an outcome with significant societal implications.
Additionally, it is noteworthy that in the initial stages, the mapping of the system is carried
40
==PAGE:46==
out by a smaller group of researchers who define the system’s boundaries. However, it
is important to mention that this mapping is later opened for stakeholder feedback, thus
might be open for further inclusions of other issues or actors.
In conclusion, there is a noticeable absence of evidence indicating special or targeted
considerations aimed at making this process more equitable.
Intervention
Interventions proposed in the system appear to be broad, providing actors with the
agency to create their actions. It functions more as a guidance tool, in comparison to
the hierarchical intervention led by a researcher/designer in the DDC model. However,
this co­creation approach also grants more agency to the actors and promotes a com­
mon benefit by enabling them ”to think holistically and to overcome divisions between
different sectors and roles, pursuing shared objectives” [27].
Furthermore, it emphasizes the importance of involving all stakeholders not only in the
design of the main planning stages but also in each of the subsequent actions. Other­
wise, as observed in practice, achieving active participation from actors who were not
involved in the early stages would become challenging.
41
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.2: Analysis of the Systemic Design Methodology process model
==PAGE:48==
4.1.2
Other common gaps in the current models
Continuous Adaptation
Counting on the system to behave consistently after the intervention is a common error
in systemic design. Monitoring the system’s behaviour over time allows for maintaining
a system that thrives in a dynamic environment [24], [54], [82].
However, the DDC methodology does not explicitly discuss how, at the end of the pro­
cess, the effect on the system is expected to be monitored, measured, or evaluated to
determine if the created effect is desirable. The ”solution” is rather scaled­up and is left
without further iteration.
A similar weakness can be observed in the SDM. In interviews, the expert and co­author
of the SD methodology focused on its final stages, stating they were the weakest part of
the methodology. Her current experience in the field allows her to reflect on the pitfalls
in the prescribed process. She suggests methods such as the Theory of Change or the
MEL framework, which not only allow for monitoring but also facilitate communication
of intervention expectations to the clients. Which, she believes, is essential to be able
to take action in real life.
Being able to monitor system behaviour and creating opportunities for continuous adap­
tation would allow the system to maintain its preferred purpose and objectives [24].
Stakeholder diversity
The selection and involvement of stakeholders were discussed in the previous section.
The process models primarily focus on more obvious stakeholders relevant in the exist­
ing system. However, one expert also emphasized the inclusion of ”other stakeholders,”
such as future generations. In Ulrich’s terms, his Critical Heuristics methodology allows
for reflecting on system boundaries, involving those affected, including ”those who can­
not speak for themselves, such as future generations and non­human nature” [83]. The
incorporation of such considerations would significantly support the principle of Equity.
Idealization
Idealization stands out as a systemic design principle, revolving around the identification
of a desirable state and defining the conditions to achieve it [24]. Ackoff L. R. suggests
that the most effective way to shape the future is by constantly evolving the present, and
while guided by ultimate values, moving towards the ”ideal” [22]. Hence, idealization
serves as a “future­finding process” [24].
In the DDC model, the designer’s ability to idealize the future is discussed as a skill that
43
==PAGE:49==
can mobilize new narratives and norms, facilitating the scaling­up of a paradigm shift.
In the SDM application in the RETRACE project, the Regional Action Plans are referred
to as ”Future­oriented visions”. However, these process models do not detail specific
methods for envisioning or describing how the visions for the future are achieved. Ad­
ditionally, in the DDC model, the mindset shift aims to be achieved through moments
of translation, where the path is envisioned and designed by the designer. It raises the
question of whether one person can define ”the way” for all.
It is noteworthy that Walker B., in literature recommended by experts, suggests that
deliberate transformation involves exploring ways of living when the existing system
is unsustainable [81]. He advocates for scenario planning as a process to success­
fully navigate such futures, expanding imagination and opportunities, and focusing on
the plausibility of created scenarios [84]. Evaluating what is reasonable and probable
heavily depends on the knowledge actors possess at the time of design. During a con­
ference on designing for transition and transformation, Dorst K. expressed concern that
through ”futuring” people project their experiences. However, through the use of design­
erly methods and creativity, other possibilities can be comprehended and novel futures
imagined [85]. Hence, different forms of futuring are considered an essential part of the
transformation field.
Moreover, during the interviews, experts themselves highlighted the importance of the
theory of value creation or transition design, which incorporates ”co­created visions for
transition,” employing methods such as scenario development, future­casting, or spec­
ulative design [86].
In conclusion, even though idealization could be perceived as an important element
in systemic design or design for transformation, these existing process models lack
prescription regarding the envisioning of the future. Consequently, it is challenging to
determine how significant it was perceived by the process model authors themselves.
44
==PAGE:50==
1. System mapping
Goal: Mapping the context of a problematic
situation
Input: Complex problematic situation
Output: System map
Stakeholders: Actors of the system, a facilitator
Tools: Adapted multi-actor map
2. Power Dynamics Analysis
Goal: Analyze the power dynamics within the
system, uncover underlying mental models
supporting the existing problematic situation
Input: System map
Output: Underlying mental models supporting
the existing problematic situation, elements that
need to be changed, retained, or improved
Stakeholders: Actors of the system, a facilitator
Tools: Empirical questions by Avelino F., a custom
tool representing three sorts of power by Avelino
F., and the adapted Ice-berg model
3. Envisioning
Goal: Envision the future and define the visions
for transition
Input: Identified elements of the system that
need to be changed, retained, or improved
Output: Visions for transition
Stakeholders: Actors of the system, a
professional facilitator
Tools: Futures Literacy Laboratory technique
4. Ex-ante evaluation
Goal: Reflecting on the boundaries of the system
Input: Visions for transition
Output: Revised visions for transition
Stakeholders: Actors of the system
Tools: Critical Systems Heuristics
5. Adaptive Learning
Goal: Developing interventions and fostering
learning opportunities
Input: Revised visions for transition
Output: Interventions in the system and
opportunities for learning
Stakeholders: Causal loop diagrams expert(s),
actors of the system, a facilitator
Tools: Causal Loop Diagram, Leverage
analysis, Systemic Theories of Change
Derived process model
Identified elements of the
system that needs to be
eliminated, retained, or
improved
Visions for
transition
Refined visions
for transition
Intervention(s)
==PAGE:51==
4.2
Background of the proposed process model stages
This section marks the beginning of the presentation of the new process model, which
has been formulated based on the insights gathered during the research. Within this
section, the explanations behind the determination of the prescription for each stage of
the process model are presented. The subsequent section (Section 4.3) will provide
an in­depth description of each stage of the process model, covering aspects such as
goals, activities, inputs, outputs, stakeholders, and tools. Both sections are organized
according to the stages outlined in the derived process model
The process model was derived based on:
• initially defined principles of Transformation and Equity (Boundary critique);
• insights gained from the examination of process models found in academic litera­
ture, including process stages/steps and components (input, output, etc.);
• the evaluation of the main process models and their gaps and strengths identified;
• interviews with systemic design experts and their best practices;
• and additional literature that was explored following the feedback from systemic
design experts.
The primary goal of this research was to derive the process model intended for trans­
formative and equitable change in the system.
Note: All parties involved should be informed about the intention to investigate and de­
sign a fundamental shift in the systems. Agreement with the intention is not necessary,
as it may pose the risk of overlooking important stakeholders in the process, potentially
those with significant power and no desire to change.
The initial focus of the process model is to unveil the underlying worldviews of the actors
involved in the process, as this has been recognized as a crucial activity for enabling
transformation. During the initial two stages, ”System Mapping” and ”Power Dynam­
ics Analysis”, a space is established for stakeholders to delve into the depths of their
mindsets and challenge each other’s perspectives.
4.2.1
System mapping
The objective of the ”System Mapping” stage is to map the actors, their resources, and
the contextual environment of the current situation. This process facilitates an under­
standing of how stakeholders involved in the process perceive the existing situation.
46
==PAGE:52==
Furthermore, it serves as an artifact where stakeholders’ perspectives become visible
and can be challenged by other participants during the system mapping.
A significant aspect of the mapping process is dedicated to identifying resources and
their distribution among actors. The emphasis on resources is justified by their connec­
tions to power dynamics within systems. Power is linked to a stakeholder’s ability to
mobilize resources [87], [69]. The insights on resources will assist in the subsequent
stage of the process where power dynamics in the system will be analysed.
The DDC methodology suggests mapping actors using the multi­actor map model, ini­
tially proposed by Pestoff V. as the ’welfare mix’ [88] and later adopted by Avelino F.
[87]. In the DDC framework, the author proposes mapping to perceive the resources
stakeholders possess based on their roles and responsibilities within clusters. However,
in this process model, the tool is modified under the assumption that mere perception
is insufficient to support actor discussions.
The multi­actor diagram divides actor mapping into four sectors: Market, State, Com­
munity, and ’Third Sector’ (comprising NGOs, volunteers, etc.) [87]. The triangle rep­
resenting the multi­actor diagram is positioned at the center of the canvas (see canvas
Fig.4.4. In the map, an area for resources is added, visually presenting resources to all
participating actors. Moreover, visualizing resources has the potential to expose dispar­
ities in resource possession and power relations. For instance, in Western societies, the
State­market sectors tend to dominate [87], which is likely to be visible in the mapping.
That can serve as a visual prompt for actors’ reflection. (Note: Different characteristics
may be identified for applications in other locations.)
To encourage actors to broaden their perspectives beyond the four conventional sec­
tors, the canvas includes areas designated for ”other actors” and ”affected actors.” The
concept of affected actors is drawn from considerations by Ulrich W. [83], who devised
a set of questions to explore the system’s boundaries. The aim is for participating ac­
tors to pinpoint additional stakeholders who might become involved in the process in
the future or whose interests should be rightly considered.
In contrast to main process models like SD Methodology and Design­driven conflict,
where mappings are typically constructed based on field research, interviews, or desk
research, this process is carried out collaboratively with the actors. For the same rea­
son, it is not intended to achieve the same level of comprehensiveness as the gigamaps
commonly used in systemic design [58]. The mapping in this methodology serves the
purpose of fostering a dialogic discussion among actors and facilitating their under­
standing of the surrounding system. Furthermore, the mapping plays a crucial role in
uncovering elements that will support the ”Power Dynamics Analysis”, the subsequent
stage of the process model.
The activities are prescribed in the process model stage description in section 4.3.1.
47
==PAGE:53==
4.2.2
Power Dynamics Analysis
Importance of Power dynamics analysis
When delving into studies related to social change and innovation, a key focal point
is the examination of power dynamics among actors within the system. Despite the
numerous ways to understand and define power, one of the few consensuses among
theorists is that power relations undergo change when the social context is changing.
Therefore, ’changing power relations form an inevitable dimension of social change and
innovation’ [89]. Consequently, the transformation of social relations can be regarded
as the principal characteristic of change [90]. Hence, one of the primary objectives in
this stage is the mapping and comprehension of power dynamics with the ultimate
aim of modifying them later on.
Antagonistic and marginalized actors
As proposed in the DDC model, unveiling the controversies within the system (conflicts
or disagreements) and actively engaging with and ’constructing’ them in the process
can expedite the pace of change within the system. Controversies, often avoided and
overlooked as a form of social relations, play a crucial role in fostering critical discus­
sions among actors. ”Controversies facilitate the emergence of a new reality through
destabilizing underlying social structures” [69] (further details are available in the de­
scription of the Design­Driven Conflict process model in the section 2.1.2). To initiate
this discussion in this stage, our initial focus is on identifying antagonistic actors, those
engaged in conflicting relationships.
Lastly, it is crucial to identify actors who might be marginalized and excluded from the
process. Identifying actors oppressed by the power dynamics of others can serve as an
indicator of those who are potentially absent or underrepresented in the context.
Power dynamics analysis
The analysis of power involves examining its nature and its potential to either promote
or hinder change within the existing system. Avelino F. categorizes power into three
types: reinforcing, transformative, and innovative [91]. Understanding the type of
power actors exert within the system can provide insights into whether they contribute
to the existing problematic situation or possess the incentives and resources to alter the
system’s functioning.
48
==PAGE:54==
The acknowledgement that the complex problematic situation exists, allows familiar ac­
tors to identify and communicate these structures within the system. In addition, as
highlighted by an expert evaluating the DDC model, ”Ingredients such as resources,
actors, or power dynamics are available in almost every context. Hence, regardless
of the type of problem we are addressing, the method has the capacity to be used in
broader and different contexts” [63].
Three different types of power enable us to assess the overall landscape, revealing
who hinders or facilitates change in the system. However, in the methodology, it is also
important to identify antagonistic and marginalized actors.
Avelino F. has outlined seven distinct types of power contestations that describe various
approaches and notions of power among different theorists [89]. In this methodology,
our specific focus centers around the ’Quantity < > Quality’ contestation, within which
nine different power relations and dynamics can be mapped. Avelino F. has introduced
an empirical set of questions designed to systematically explore the role of power in
change and innovation from diverse perspectives (ibid.). Some of these questions are
incorporated into this process model, guiding participants to understand which actors
are in antagonistic relationships and identify those oppressed by others, a concept that
Avelino F. terms as ”one­sided dependency”.
Integration of iceberg model for further depth of analysis
Drawing from the workshop experience with Agrifoodture, it was observed that even
without extensive facilitation, actors were able to uncover underlying mental models
within the system. However, to ensure this depth of consideration in other participatory
settings, the canvas is expanded with elements from the Iceberg diagram [92]. Fre­
quently mentioned by experts as a tool enabling a deeper dive into underlying causes,
it is integrated as a prompt to foster these deeper discussions.
Exerting a form of power in the system or over others can be perceived as a behavioural
pattern (the 2nd layer in the iceberg diagram). Consequently, two deeper layers, ”System
Structure” and ”Mental Models” are incorporated, each accompanied by supporting
questions: ”What influences these patterns?” and ”What values, assumptions, beliefs
shape the system?”. The template can be seen in Fig. 4.5
Following these activities, the goal is to achieve a comprehensive understanding of the
system and foster extensive discussions that unveil the underlying mental models of the
system. Ultimately, the actors should collaboratively discuss what elements in the
system need to change and what aspects should be retained or improved.
The activities are prescribed in the process model stage description in section 4.3.2.
49
==PAGE:55==
4.2.3
Envisioning
When confronting wicked problems characterized by ambiguity, lack of ownership, and
no obvious pathways for change, it may seem that the existing state has reached a
stalemate. A similar sense of gloominess was experienced after the first two stages
in the workshop with AgriFoodTure, where participants, upon identifying the underlying
values of the system, felt powerless and ”doomed.”
Envisioning is considered a means to overcome this sense of incapacity. ”Visioning is
crucial; it creates spaces for discussion and debate about alternative futures and ways
of being, and it requires us to suspend disbelief and forget how things are now and
wonder about how things could be” [93]. The systemic design principle of idealization
and the power of envisioning, along with their significance in systemic design and design
for transformation, has been covered in the section of ”Idealization” 4.1.2.
Futures Literacy emerges as a practical method to avoid paralysis by exploring the fu­
ture, enabling individuals to examine the present with a different mindset, as proposed
in the Relating Systems Thinking and Design (RSD12) Symposium [94]. UNESCO rec­
ognizes Futures Literacy as one of the most important skills of the 21st century [95],
while Dorst K. highlights its potential to enhance creativity in the field of futuring [85].
Hence, the Futures Literacy Laboratory process, one of the techniques for working
with people’s anticipatory assumptions, is prescribed in this process model.
After collectively undergoing this process, actors will have formulated an image of the
future and a common vision that guides them towards the desired ideal. This can be
considered the purpose of the future system. According to the Purpose Finding sys­
temic design principle defined by Jones P., the purpose is not something to be identi­
fied; rather, it needs to be established through mutual agreement [24]. Even if the goals,
means, or ends of the system change, a system with a defined purpose will continue
moving in the same direction [96]. Furthermore, the unity, identity, and functioning of
the organization depend on the common pursuit of this purpose [97]. Therefore, defin­
ing this purpose, or in other words, a future vision that everyone is working towards, is
of crucial importance.
Additionally, sub­steps, or in the context of transition design, the visions for transition
on how to create that future should be established [86]. The elements of the system that
need to be changed, retained, or improved, identified in the previous stages, can serve
as a starting point for creating these visions. These visions for transition will provide the
means to evaluate the designed interventions against the desired future state [98].
”Embracing the uncertainty of the future allows you to take ownership of something that
is not yet there” [94]. The concept of ownership has been a recurring theme in the
process of developing the process model. One of the experts highlighted that in the
systemic design process, the concept of ownership needs to be rethought as it cannot
50
==PAGE:56==
solely rest in the hands of the designer. During the workshop with AgriFoodTure, par­
ticipants expressed concerns about the lack of ownership among actors in the mission
and the absence of a common goal as the reasons for stagnation in the process.
In this stage, these concerns may be overcome. Co­creating the vision of the future
together might foster unity among actors, and defining a common purpose could con­
tribute to the establishment of a coalition moving strongly together towards the same
ideal. Here, everyone has a role to play and a vision to realize.
The activities are prescribed in the process model stage description in section 4.3.3.
4.2.4
Ex­ante evaluation
To ensure that visions for transition are more equitable, it is essential to encourage the
exploration of system boundaries. In the practice of co­creating ideal service systems,
Midgley G. utilizes Critical Systems Heuristics to facilitate this process and enable the
exploration of potentially overlooked considerations. Critical Systems Heuristics, devel­
oped by Ulrich W., serves as a framework with twelve questions designed to provoke
thoughts and encourage reflection about the boundaries set in the system [83]. This
method is known to be used and understood by both professionals and common peo­
ple, as affirmed by Ulrich W. and demonstrated in practice by Midgley G. [99]. These
questions on how the future ought to be can be employed in this process to allow actors
to broaden their considerations, contemplate the potential inclusion of new actors, or
explore how the marginalization of actors or issues can be overcome.
As Meadows D. stated, in a world where the future is unforeseeable and the effects
one creates in the system are only temporary, individuals must ”expose their mental
models to the open air” [100]. Engaging in systemic intervention in relation to reflection
on boundaries is a way to expand one’s mental models. The mental flexibility to reframe
boundaries is an essential skill in designing for an ever­changing world.
The activities are prescribed in the process model stage description in section 4.3.4.
4.2.5
Adaptive Learning
Adaptive Implementation encompasses both implementation and learning. Interven­
tions in the system are seen as opportunities to generate knowledge that contributes
to building an understanding of the system and, in turn, altering our mental models.
Recognizing that a single intervention cannot fix the system and that tracking the inter­
vention’s impact becomes challenging within the ever­changing, dynamic system, the
primary objective is to learn how to support the continuous adaptation of the system
51
==PAGE:57==
while upholding the established purpose [82]. The overarching goal is to move the en­
tire system toward an improved state [22].
Some experts in the interviews and in the AgriFoodTure workshop strongly advocated
for the theory of change as a practice to understand the evolution of interventions. How­
ever, the theory of change is also under scrutiny for its linear nature, which fails to ad­
dress the challenges of complexity [101]. Despite existing criticism, some argue that
the theory’s limitations may be attributed to culture, values, and mindsets inherent in
our society and that the theory itself has been designed for systemic challenges, thus
its applicability should not be dismissed [102].
In response to criticism regarding linearity, the concept of Systemic Theories of Change
(SToC) was developed by merging leverage analysis and the theory of change. SToC
is based on the similarity of the causal structure of causal loop diagrams and theories
of change [101].
While one of the experts described the theory of change as ”a very didactical tool” in this
process model, the use of Systemic Theories of Change aims to offer practical tools to
actors for designing and managing change strategies.
Ultimately, the intention of this stage in the process model was to close the gap identi­
fied in the two main process models ­ the lack of strategies to support the continuous
adaptation of the systems. While Systemic Theories of Change (SToC) enable better
monitoring, management and evaluation of interventions, the tools or methods to learn
from them might still be insufficient in the field of systemic design.
The activities are prescribed in the process model stage description in section 4.3.5.
4.3
Proposed model prescription
4.3.1
System mapping
• Goal: Mapping the context of a problematic situation
• Input: Complex problematic situation
• Output: System map
• Stakeholders: A wide range of actors (ideally that are part of the system and
affected by the system), a facilitator (recommended)
• Tools: Adapted multi­actor map
The background explaining the design of this activity can be found in section 4.2.1.
52
==PAGE:58==
The process begins by introducing the actors to the complex problematic situation, likely
brought about by the client or a group of actors intending to solve the problem.
Participants can be encouraged to start the process by presenting their roles in the
context of the situation, avoiding delving too deeply into their understanding of the other
components. Following this, the mapping phase unfolds the complex situation, where
participants are allowed to further articulate their views on the system.
The first and second stages, ”System mapping” and ”Power dynamics analysis”, aim to
ignite discussion among participants, bringing to light the underlying mindsets or world­
views of the actors. Participants are not obliged to reach a consensus, instead, they are
encouraged to share their perspectives. The facilitator plays a crucial role in stimulating
discussion and ensuring the documentation of perceptions. Additionally, the facilita­
tor must balance actor participation, especially for those who may appear oppressed
and are less vocal. The facilitator may also assume the role of representing actors not
directly involved in the process.
The complex problematic situation is mapped on the canvas such as in Figure 4.4.
1. Identify and Map Resources:
Start by pinpointing and mapping the resources present in our complex situation. These
resources may encompass mental, monetary, artifactual, natural resources, materials,
laws, tasks, and other elements. Resources play a crucial role in the power dynamics
of our system, as the ability to mobilize them can be seen as the ”power” of the actor.
Mapping resources first sets the stage for defining actors later. Experience shows that
it’s challenging for participants to map resources after actors have already been identi­
fied.
2. Identify and Map Actors:
Now, shift to mapping the actors. The canvas is divided into five sections of actor types
to ease mapping: Market, State, Community, ’Third Sector’ (including NGOs, volun­
teers, etc.), and Other/Affected actors. The facilitator(s) should ensure that participants
consider not only those actively involved but also those affected by the situation. Partici­
pants may view this section as less important, as people in the room are often individuals
with more influence in the analyzed context.
3. Specify Relationships:
Simultaneously with mapping actors, specify relationships between different elements.
This includes relationships between actors and relationships between actors and re­
53
==PAGE:59==
sources. These connections define the overall performance of the system [22]. De­
scribe these connections between elements briefly—this isn’t a Causal Loop Diagram
(where identifying negative or positive polarities is common), but rather a practical way
to communicate and document relationships.
4. Expand with Broader Landscape:
Add elements to the Broader Landscape section.
Here, include factors like spatio­
temporal elements, political, geographical, cultural, social, industrial aspects, or any­
thing relevant to actors or their resources. (For instance, organic food as a resource
can be seen to grow due to trends of having a healthier diet).
5. Define Actionable Points:
Finally, articulate the phenomena in the system that you want to eliminate, change, or
retain. Participants should keep in mind that the goal is to move away from the exist­
ing problematic situation. Hence, elements to eliminate could be considered those that
sustain the current state, while elements to retain are the ones guiding the system to­
ward a new direction. Treat this as a conclusive action, creating a ”bank” of actionable
”directions” decided upon by the actors.
54
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.4: Sequence of activities in stage 1 of the process model
55
==PAGE:61==
4.3.2
Power Dynamics Analysis
• Goal: Analyse the power dynamics within the system, uncover underlying mental
models supporting the existing problematic situation
• Input: System map
• Output: Underlying mental models supporting the existing problematic situation
• Stakeholders: A wide range of actors (ideally that are part of the system and
affected by the system), a facilitator (recommended)
• Tools: Empirical questions by Avelino F. [89], a custom tool representing three
sorts of power by Avelino F. [91], and the adapted Ice­berg model [92]
The background explaining the design of this activity can be found in section 4.2.2.
The actors will likely alternate between the ”System Mapping” and ”Power Dynamics”
stages. Ideally, the stages can be conducted together or in a closely connected time
frame, as both mapping activities can inform each other. Hence, participants should
refer to the mapping of actors in the previous stage. Given our aim to transform the sys­
tem by substantially altering and improving the current problematic situation, we need
to identify actors working towards facilitating this process and those hindering it by at­
tempting to maintain the status quo.
1. Map Actors on the Power Wheel:
Initiate the process by mapping identified factors onto the ”power wheel” as in Fig.4.5.
Reinforcing power identifies actors working against change, while Innovative and Trans­
formative powers define those supporting change with unique fostering abilities. Explain
Avelino’s three power types (Reinforcing, Innovative, Transformative) to the participants.
Note that explanations of the terms should be tailored according to participants’ age and
expertise (or other considerations).
Here are the definitions proposed by Avelino F. [89]:
Reinforcing Power: Involves the ability to strengthen and perpetuate existing struc­
tures and institutions.
Innovative Power: Characterized by the capability to generate new resources, em­
powering actors to reduce reliance on established power structures.
Transformative Power: Pertains to the capacity of actors to challenge, modify, and
replace structures and institutions. This involves the development or renewal of le­
gal frameworks, physical infrastructure, economic paradigms, or religious ideologies.
It does not entail creating entirely novel entities but rather significantly challenging, al­
56
==PAGE:62==
tering, or replacing existing institutions by reconfiguring, transposing, and reinventing
specific elements.
2. Analyze Power Relationships:
Following the initial mapping, carefully analyze the power relationships between actors.
All relationships are important and should be mapped. However, it is crucial to facilitate
participants to recognize conflicts and potentially marginalized actors. To assist with
that identification, apply Avelino’s predefined questions [89]:
How and to what extent are different kinds of power exercised for/against change, by
and over whom?
How and to what extent are various resources mobilized for change?
What different types of resource­based power (e.g., ideological, economic, political) are
being exercised in processes of change, how, and by whom?
How do power relations/dynamics manifest in change (e.g., cooperation, competition,
co­existence, synergy, antagonism)?
3. Facilitate Power Dynamics Discussions:
The facilitator has a pivotal role in discussions. Pay special attention to actors in conflict,
encouraging them to share perspectives and challenge each other’s mindsets. Empha­
size actors with ”no power” (mapped in the centre of the canvas) or those overpowered
by other actors (according to the mapped relationships). Ensure their representation,
whether through involving them in active participation more proactively (if actors are in
the room) or taking up a role of the actor(s) (if actors are absent).
In addition, if essential actors identified within the conflicting and overpowered cate­
gories are not involved in the current process, it may be worthwhile to explore their
inclusion in upcoming stages.
4. Reflection on System Structure:
Transition to the ”System Structure” circle. Encourage actors to reflect on factors in­
fluencing actors’ behaviour. Given the challenge of articulating such aspects, the fa­
cilitator could prompt participants to share stories from their experiences. There are
several questions that allow provoking a deeper discussion without the facilitator taking
a stance. For example [103]:
57
==PAGE:63==
Thank you for sharing. Can you expand on this idea?
What does that mean?
What would the opposite of this look like?
Can this idea be defined only as good/bad?
Together, define the structures shaping actor behaviour for a deeper understanding.
5. Reflection on Mental Models:
Prompt participants to reflect on identified structures. What assumptions, beliefs, and
values do people hold about the system? What beliefs keep the system in place? Foster
the discussion among actors.
Additional prompting questions that would allow reaching the depth of this level of re­
flection and also relate to the dynamics of power:
Where does such power (of an actor) come from?
What motivates actors to adopt antagonistic behaviours?
Why do some actors depend on others, and how does this dependency impact the pro­
cess of change?
6. Define Actionable Points:
These steps lead participants through a systematic exploration of power dynamics within
the system, fostering meaningful insights. As in the previous activity, prompt participants
to determine what in the system needs to change and what could remain unchanged.
It is crucial to emphasize the level of ”Mental models” identified by participants. Chang­
ing the mental models of the system would bring about the most significant change,
aligning with the intended goal of the process model to facilitate transformation. Add
considerations to the ”bank” of ”actionable points.”
58
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.5: Sequence of activities in stage 1 of the process model
59
==PAGE:65==
4.3.3
Envisioning
• Goal: Envision the future and define the visions for transition
• Input: Identified elements of the system that needs to be changed, retained, or
improved
• Output: Visions for transition
• Stakeholders: A wide range of actors (ideally that are part of the system and
affected by the system), a professional facilitator (required to prepare in advance)
• Tools: Futures Literacy Laboratory technique [103], [104]
The background explaining the design of this activity can be found in section 4.2.3.
Out of all the stages, this one relies the most on the facilitator’s experience. Neverthe­
less, the Futures Literacy Laboratory technique, upon which this stage is built, offers
various resources to equip facilitators for the process [103], [104]. The technique aims
to engage with people’s anticipatory assumptions and reduce potential stagnation re­
sulting from addressing wicked issues and potential gloominess after identifying the
underlying causes of the existing problematic situation in the previous stages.
The process is founded on the Future Literacy Laboratory technique [104]. and has
been customized slightly to suit the current stage of the process model.
1. Introduction to the Methodology:
In the first stage, the facilitator introduces participants to the methodology and outlines
the day’s upcoming activities. Since participants have already progressed through the
initial two phases in the process model, they have acquired an understanding of the
existing problematic situation. However, a brief review of past activities, especially phe­
nomena of the system that actors identified for retention, improvement, or elimination,
could be conducted.
As preparation before the session, participants may be requested to choose an image
reflecting their vision of the future in 2050. This image, along with their thoughts or feel­
ings, can be shared as a warm­up and a reflection on past activities.
2. Imagining Desirable Futures:
During this session, participants envision a future for the year 2050. They have the
opportunity to articulate their visions, liberating their imagination from the constraints of
realism and expressing hopes, ideals, and aspirations.
The facilitator encourages participants to take a moment to reflect and discuss the future
60
==PAGE:66==
in the present tense. Participants write down their ideas, share them with the group, and
ultimately present their desirable future.
Here are examples of guiding questions, assuming the case relates to a desirable food
system in 2050:
• How would the media describe the current food system? What would the news head­
lines be?
• What and how do we consume?
• Which individuals, groups, and organizations sustain the system?
• What political, geopolitical, and economic forces shape the system?
• What social and technological changes influence the system?
• Which routines, ideas, or myths drive the system?
3. Imagining Probable Futures:
In this session, participants construct a likely scenario for 2050, outlining practical and
realistic expectations. The goal is to identify preconceptions and mental barriers.
Similar to the previous session, the facilitator encourages participants to pause, think,
and talk about the future in the present tense. The participants write down ideas, share
them, and present their probable future. The guiding questions from the previous ses­
sion can continue to guide this process.
4. Reframing the Future:
Before this session, the facilitator(s) prepares an alternative scenario for the system
in question, in 2050. Ideally, the scenario would be different than the ones already
analyzed in the past sessions, as it intends to challenge the anticipatory assumptions
of the participants.
At the beginning of the activity, the facilitator introduces the alternative scenario, urging
participants to envision an unforeseen future. The exercise aims to uncover potential
opportunities and obstacles often overlooked. Participants then imagine societies, lives,
and traditions based on this new reality, using the present tense.
Guiding questions for reframing the scenario include:
• How do people meet their basic needs in this unfamiliar scenario?
61
==PAGE:67==
• What surprises or concerns you about this scenario?
• Can you imagine news headlines for the reframed scenario?
Participants generate ideas individually, group them, and present their scenarios. Other
participants are encouraged to ask questions allowing the presenting actor to have a
deeper exploration of their scenario.
The session concludes with participants reflecting on how the reframed scenario alters
their understanding of the current system.
5. Framing the Future:
Encouraged by the facilitator, actors should utilize insights gained from the previous
activity to collaboratively frame the vision of an ideal future. This vision becomes the
overarching purpose toward which the actors will strive collectively.
While the purpose is intended to be grand and broad, participants should define sub­
steps or visions for transition. They can be considered as pathways leading toward
the ideal future. The previously identified elements of the complex problematic situation
that need to change, be improved, or be eliminated can serve as valuable input or
inspiration in developing these visions. These visions will inevitably be interrelated, tar­
geting the problematic complex system in question. However, they also create a chance
for actors to choose the pathway they believe they can contribute to the most. These
visions for transition will serve as benchmarks, allowing the evaluation of designed in­
terventions against the desired future state.
4.3.4
Ex­ante evaluation
• Goal: Reflecting on the boundaries of the system
• Input: Visions for transition
• Output: Revised visions for transition
• Stakeholders: A wide range of actors (ideally that are part of the system and
affected by the system)
• Tools: Critical Systems Heuristics [83]
The background explaining the design of this activity can be found in section 4.2.4.
As the visions for transition are developed, this step encourages participants to engage
in reflection by explicitly stating their judgments that uncover their understanding. This
involves utilizing a table of questions developed by Ulrich W. [83], [105]. The decision
62
==PAGE:68==
to incorporate these questions into the process is driven by three key reasons [105]:
1. Promoting Clarity on Internal Assumptions:
The questions serve as a structured framework for sense­making, by prompting partici­
pants to articulate their thoughts and judgments. By making their understanding explicit,
individuals can enhance clarity in communication and contribute to a more transparent
and holistic understanding of the relevant issues:
Values and motivations (how we perceive situations and attempt to improve them).
Power structures (what is identified as a problem and potential solutions)
The knowledge (what is an appropriate information, including experience and skills)
The moral foundation (expecting third parties (concerned stakeholders not directly in­
volved) to address the consequences of our actions or inactions in a given situation)
2. Unfolding multiple perspectives:
Ulrich W. suggests that misunderstandings often stem from diverse framings of situ­
ations, a concept known in systems science as using different reference systems. It
is possible that we’re not consciously aware of these differing perspectives, making it
challenging to systematically analyze and address them. Utilizing Ulrich’s questions
provides a systematic approach for participants to delve into various aspects of their
understanding.
3. Guiding Thoughtful Reflection:
The questions act as prompts that guide participants in thoughtfully reflecting on their
visions for transition. The key point is that no intervention will ever be suitable for every­
one. Therefore, it is essential to systematically consider what aspects our judgments
and designs might overlook and consistently evaluate them from different perspectives.
Ultimately it contributes to a more robust and well­informed decision­making process.
63
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.6: Critical Systems Heuristics Questions (Adapted from Ulrich 1996, p. 44) [105]
The template can serve as a platform for actors to express their answers by attaching
sticky notes to the available questions. Its purpose is to foster dialogue, establish align­
ments regarding visions for transformation, and challenge the mental boundaries that
shape our systems, potentially expanding them.
By encouraging participants to leave their responses in the form of sticky notes, the
template facilitates a dynamic exchange of perspectives. This interactive approach pro­
motes a shared understanding of assumptions, values, and motivations, leading to con­
structive discussions about the broader picture.
The aim is to stimulate conversations that transcend individual viewpoints, encouraging
participants to challenge and reassess their mental frameworks. Through this pro­
cess, the template becomes a boundary object for transformative discussions, paving
the way for a more comprehensive and inclusive vision of the systems in ques­
64
==PAGE:70==
tion.
4.3.5
Adaptive Learning
• Goal: Developing interventions and fostering learning opportunities
• Input: Revised visions for transition
• Output: Interventions in the system and opportunities for learning
• Stakeholders: Causal loop diagrams expert(s) (recommended), a wide range of
actors (ideally that are part of the system and affected by the system), a facilitator
(recommended)
• Tools: Causal Loop Diagram, Leverage analysis, Systemic Theories of Change
[101]
The background explaining the design of this activity can be found in section 4.2.5.
In this process, actors actively engage in analyzing the intricate relationships within each
vision for transition, aiming to formulate targeted interventions in the system in order to
learn more about the system.
1. Developing Causal Loop Diagrams:
The process begins by mapping causal loop diagrams of the existing problematic sit­
uation in relation to the proposed visions for transition. For example, if the vision is
to empower small organic farmers within the agri­food system, various elements such
as infrastructure, laws, incentives, and land should be considered and mapped. The
collaborative creation of causal loop diagrams allows actors to share knowledge and
enhance the comprehensiveness of the mapping process [106].
65
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.7: Example of the causal loop diagram. The example is taken from a fragment of the
causal loop diagram conducted in the workshop recorded in [106]
2. Selecting the Phenomenon:
Secondly, a phenomenon aligned with the vision must be selected within the causal loop
diagram. Assuming the same vision, the phenomenon could be ”Economic viability of
organic farming.” This phenomenon must align with the vision and will work as an input
for modelling.
3. Expert­Driven Modelling:
In this activity, an expert in causal loop diagrams is involved. They use input from the
co­development session of causal loop diagrams to create a computer model of the
causal loop diagram to conduct the leverage analysis. Following the steps outlined in
[101], through modelling, various aspects of the system represented in a causal loop
diagram are identified.
These aspects include the lists of:
Opportunities, which, if improved, have the potential to have the most positive impact
66
==PAGE:72==
on the whole system (potential high­leverage systemic interventions);
Leverage points, representing aspects that are easy to change and can create a change
in the system (levers to target with interventions);
Measurable indicators, offering ways to track systemic change (signals);
and barriers or bottlenecks hindering change.
The lists of found elements should be reviewed and assessed within the broader team
to remove impractical or unrealistic elements, which are likely to arise from computer
modelling.
4. Crafting Systemic Theories of Change
The list of these elements: opportunities, leverages, signals, and bottlenecks, assists
the team in creating systemic theories of change. These are the pathways between
potential interventions (opportunities) and the goal (phenomenon) identified in stage 2.
The path should be created to target the levers and signals while deliberately avoiding
the bottlenecks. This activity will require a lot of interpretation from the team as some
elements can be considered to have different system features, for instance, to be both
a leverage and a bottleneck.
Visualizing the results from the leverage analysis can also aid in the process.
Here’s an example of the visualized diagram for the systemic theory of change:
67
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.8: Diagram for the systemic theory of change. The example is taken from [101]
(Note: Every intervention intended for introduction into the system should be looped
back to the ”Ex­ante evaluation” stage (stage 4 of the process model) and assessed
accordingly. This ensures that interventions are rigorously evaluated before implemen­
tation, fostering a continuous and adaptive approach of the systemic design process.)
4.b) Resource­Conscious Exploration
Even if there are no resources to involve an expert to conduct the leverage point anal­
ysis and to extract elements for developing systemic theories of change, the activity of
exploring the system by creating the causal loop diagram is crucial. It allows for analyz­
ing the intricate relationships in the complex system and understanding the interrelation
between the different visions for transitions. Ultimately, it allows for a better decision­
making process.
Systemic theories of change (as well as causal loop diagrams) enable us to represent
the dynamics of systems, interpret their complexity, and formulate plans for improving
the system by understanding how changes connect to the main goals. This approach
allows us to predict what to expect and, consequently, learn from interventions and re­
flect on them.
5. Continuous Learning and Adaptation
68
==PAGE:74==
All coalitions of actors responsible for different visions in the system should agree on
regular points for reflection, also called learning cycles [107], with the purpose of ex­
changing knowledge and observations on emerging patterns of the system caused by
interventions. The reflection on the intervention is conducted against the intended vi­
sions for transition.
While mapping the systemic theories of change might have allowed determining what
can be expected with the intervention, it is even more relevant to gather information
about the patterns that emerged unexpectedly.
Actors from all tracks could share their learnings about emerging themes. These could
be done by sharing their observations and writing them down on the sticky notes in the
participatory session, and later using a method such as an affinity diagram to look for
overarching patterns among all future pathways.
Are there emerging patterns in the system that no one expected? How do they change
our understanding of the system? How does that influence future interventions? Have
the mental models of the actors changed? How do these learnings influence the vision
of the future in itself?
This continuous process of learning and adaptation is integral to systemic design
and the ability to create purposeful change in the complex system.
69
==PAGE:75==
Discussion
5.0.1
Limitations of the Field
The scientific literature on systemic design remains limited, with a scarcity of compre­
hensive systemic design process models. Many existing models lack sufficient detail
or prescription, often presenting only their application in real­life cases or reflections on
such applications. This deficiency results in a lack of explanation regarding the funda­
mental rationale behind the design of specific process stages which is fundamental in
understanding the process models.
The majority of scientific literature in this domain originates from the research group at
Politecnico di Torino, predominantly focusing on a singular systemic design approach
and associated strategies. The second most influential source of inspiration is systemic
design principles defined by Jones H. P. or even specific design stages proposed in his
work. Consequently, the current landscape of systemic design process models can be
perceived as lacking diversity, given its concentrated sources of influence. Furthermore,
a substantial portion of these models, including main process models (DDC and SDM),
resembles closely traditional design process stages. It could imply that it is one of the
“characteristics” that systemic design inherited from the broader design field.
Examining existing systemic design process models reveals a sometimes narrow per­
spective on integrating systems thinking. The consideration often focuses on the size
of the system, leading to a limited exploration of other dimensions of complexity, such
as system behaviour and its dynamic nature. Consequently, integration of systemic
thinking is often limited to the practical mapping of the system.
As an emergent field, systemic design offers a substantial amount of literature present­
ing varied perspectives that are often contradictory. The challenge lies in the lack of
alignment regarding the definition of systemic design. This divergence in viewpoints
makes it challenging to develop or evaluate methodologies, as identifying the correct
approaches becomes difficult due to the absence of clear consensus on what consti­
tutes right or wrong in systemic design.
70
==PAGE:76==
5.0.2
Limitations of the study
The systematic literature review was conducted by a single researcher, involving the
reading of abstracts for excluded literature once, and data collection was carried out after
a single reading of the articles. (This does not apply to the main process models, which
underwent thorough analysis.) To enhance the robustness of the study, a reevaluation of
excluded articles and a second round of analysis for included articles could be beneficial,
ensuring that no crucial process models or elements were overlooked.
The initial selection of process models for this study underwent an early review, evalu­
ating them against the boundary critique principle and the level of systems intervention,
specifically focusing on leverage points. To make the assessment more reliable, the de­
cisions made in this study could be reassessed, acknowledging the potential influence
of personal biases and individual interpretations of these two concepts. However, it is
important to note that the study presents these considerations transparently, allowing
for critical analysis. The impact of this assessment on the development of the process
model is substantial, as the most comprehensive models are selected for analysis, guid­
ing the derivation of the process model.
The research’s relevance could have been enhanced by exploring a broader range of
literature, particularly past proceedings of symposiums organized by the Systemic De­
sign Association where researchers in the systemic design field share their most recent
work, and grey literature covering numerous approaches and frameworks proposed by
systemic design practitioners. Additionally, the database search was confined to terms
like ”systemic design” and ”systems­oriented design,” overlooking related terms such
as systems/systemic innovation, systems­led design, design for complexity, or others.
While due to time constraints, the scope of this research was narrowed, expanding the
academic literature review to encompass these branches could enrich the exploration
of the convergence of systems and design sciences.
The recommendations on good practices proposed by systemic design experts did not
receive equal attention. Their relevance was assessed against the defined principles
and the state of the process model at the time. Some concepts were excluded based on
the researcher’s personal experience with frameworks, potentially overlooking propos­
als that could have enhanced the model. Therefore, a more comprehensive examina­
tion of these recommendations could have contributed to a more well­rounded process
model.
5.0.3
Limitations of the process model
The comparison of existing systemic design models in this research has likely been in­
fluenced by the researcher’s personal background in industrial and service design. This
71
==PAGE:77==
background directed the focus towards identifying patterns in the process models rele­
vant to design practice. It is essential to recognize that someone with a different back­
ground might have emphasized or compared different elements in the process models,
potentially enhancing the analysis and steering the derivation of the final process model
in a different direction.
A secondary objective of this research was to explore the feasibility of making the pro­
cess implementable by motivated groups independently, without the direct involvement
of design or research teams (while keeping in mind to maintain the quality of the process
model to be derived). This choice was driven by the perception that systemic design,
with its aim of solving complex societal challenges, cannot always rely on external par­
ties such as designers or research teams. This is especially relevant given the extended
time frames of projects impacted by interventions that may not yield immediate results
in complex systems. Therefore, the question arose: What if the process model en­
couraged motivated groups to take action independently? However, it is essential to
recognize that the expectations placed on these groups are demanding, as the success
of the process relies on participant engagement, their ability to reflect, and reaching
a level of consideration that addresses individual mental models and shared cognitive
frameworks.
This approach was practically tested in an AgriFoodTure workshop, intentionally offer­
ing relatively low levels of facilitation. Despite reaching discussions involving mental
models, there were instances where participants, even when facilitated, avoided less
comfortable topics. As a result, choices were made in the process model development,
recommending the involvement of a facilitator. Additionally, in the derived methodol­
ogy, specific questions were proposed to facilitate such discussions, and tools were
modified to foster deep conversations. However, further investigation into concepts that
could help to facilitate these discussions could be conducted. For example, the science
of facilitation, collaboration, group sense­making, and conflict resolution.
Furthermore, the discussion on the role of designers, primarily perceived as key facilita­
tors in systemic design, remains relevant. Questions arise about how to transition from
external facilitation to empowering organizations to independently undertake these roles
as projects extend over longer time frames. Alternatively, maybe the roles of designers
need to be rethought to bear more responsibility and commitment, enough to facilitate
such projects over extended durations.
However, in contrast to the main process models, the derived process model grants
significantly more agency to the involved actors and omits the role of the designer as a
researcher. Theoretically, the choice aligns with the collaborative mindset of systemic
design and the aspiration for fairness in co­creating a shared future. However, deter­
mining the feasibility of executing such projects continuously in a collaborative setting
requires empirical validation, which might expose a weakness in the derived process
model.
72
==PAGE:78==
The emphasis on relationship building within the system is evident among the principles
of systemic design process models found in academic literature. The derived process
model asserts that having a common purpose or goal in the system creates coalitions
of inherently motivated actors working toward the same goal. However, further analy­
sis into domains such as social network analysis, collaborative behaviour analysis, or
collaborative tools could enhance the investigation of this claim.
The model is constructed around encouraging constant reflective practice that chal­
lenges actors’ understanding of their choices, aiming to prevent potentially destructive
interventions in the system. However, assessing the effects in the system is challeng­
ing, if not impossible, and it is difficult to determine if shifts in mental models are always
positive. Hence, the model cannot guarantee prevention from choices that could cause
rebound effects within the system. Nevertheless, systemic design, along with this pro­
cess model, encourages monitoring and reflection, which might provide the opportunity
to identify negative ”design choices.”
The derived process model varies in the level of prescription among its stages, poten­
tially influenced by the fact that some stages are more ”designerly”, where pragmatic
methods familiar to the researcher are available. The final stage in the model is the
weakest in terms of prescription, as no concrete method exists to assure proper moni­
toring, evaluation, and learning from interventions introduced in the system (as already
discussed in the paragraph above). Scientific and grey literature present this as more
of a mental shift required for systemic designers to cope with the unknown and unex­
pected behaviour of the system and to develop a learning culture within the organization
or community. While this presents a limitation in the process model, there is an opportu­
nity for further research in the systemic design field to make this activity more practical
or tangible.
Finally, this process model can be considered generic, as discussed earlier in this re­
port, elements such as actors and power dynamics are present in every system, making
the process model valuable in a variety of cases. However, it is crucial to question if
such a level of intervention in the system is necessary due to the model’s principle of
transformation and the pursuit of a radical shift in the system. Additionally, the process
model relies on involving participants relevant to the specific problem situation; there­
fore, if there is no opportunity to involve such relevant actors to support the process,
other methods might be more suitable for that specific case.
Limitations of the Equity Approach
The process model is built on the idea of fostering equity, continuously advocating for
reflection on system boundaries and the inclusion of affected actors in the system. The
intention is to enrich the worldviews of participants and provide a choice to make the
73
==PAGE:79==
process more inclusive and diverse. However, it cannot guarantee that actors will make
the right choices. Furthermore, this perspective remains predominantly anthropocentric.
As highlighted by one expert, equity, in her view, involves exploring the relationships
between humans and between humans and the environment. To deepen our under­
standing, we must acknowledge our vulnerability when considering our relationship with
nature [108]. Delving into this interdependence could transform our perception of our
role as actors within the system, fostering truly transformative and equitable changes
not only towards humans but also towards other sentient beings and the environment.
Regarding equity, the process model could be criticized for being solely built on scientific
knowledge, which is often perceived as a phenomenon predominantly rooted in Western
culture. It has been criticized for its ethnocentrism, epistemic injustice, or lack of diver­
sity. To genuinely adhere to the principle of equity, this concept should be expanded
with knowledge from more diverse perspectives, including different fields of science,
practices outside the scientific discourse, or (scientific) literature from various cultures.
5.0.4
Design and Systemic Design
The most substantial difference between conventional design and systemic design lies
in their approach to the concept of a ”solution.” In traditional design processes, research,
development, and evaluation revolve around creating an optimal design aligned with es­
tablished requirements. Conversely, in systemic design, the focus shifts to comprehend­
ing the entire system and its intricate relationships, aiming to identify an optimal point for
intervention. Systemic design often advocates for small interventions or experiments to
facilitate learning about the system, leading to a deeper understanding. However, while
SD process models emphasize the importance of intervention, they often lack detailed
insights into the creation of these interventions. The literature on systemic design ac­
knowledges that defining an optimal intervention is likely impossible. Drawing from the
work of system thinkers such as Meadows D. or Midgley G., the concept of systemic
intervention emerges, encouraging actors to reflect on boundaries, thereby expanding
their mental models and inducing significant changes in the system. However, a cru­
cial question arises: can sparking new understanding and mindset shifts be achieved
more effectively through pragmatic, creative, participatory, and inherently ”designerly”
methods? Furthermore, how can we empower actors to act upon these changes in
mindsets? Is design a tool that can be leveraged to create avenues for spreading new
narratives or novel ways of acting?
In this context, I’d like to add a personal consideration that a process model may not be
the optimal intervention in the systemic design field. It can be viewed as a standardized
process built on predefined outcomes, potentially providing a false sense of comfort.
This type of mindset is desirable in Western culture, however, it may not necessarily
align with the complexity that one has to deal with when designing for complex systems
74
==PAGE:80==
or addressing wicked challenges. I believe that the design’s contribution to the systemic
design field could shift towards building skills and methods within communities, fostering
collective capabilities to navigate complexity, and the unknown, and engage in experi­
mentation, sense­making, adaptation, and the development of a learning culture. This
shift would likely better equip communities to create positive changes within the system.
5.0.5
Recommendations for the AgriFoodTure roadmap revi­
sion process
It’s essential to acknowledge that the roadmap was developed in the spring of 2021,
therefore, requesting interviewees to recollect the process at this point might not have
yielded the most accurate information. Additionally, stakeholders did not provide any
supplementary materials, such as meeting minutes or relevant presentations, to support
this research. Despite these limitations, below are several recommendations aimed at
refining the future revision of the roadmap.
To begin with, AgriFoodTure should adopt a significantly more inclusive approach, in­
volving a diverse group of actors in the process to counterbalance the previous top­
down approach. Mapping and exploring the broader system with a diverse stakeholder
group would bring to light additional themes that should be integrated into the roadmap,
going beyond the existing four tracks. Furthermore, a thorough analysis of the relation­
ship between the tracks and new themes is crucial. Currently, tracks display a tunnel
vision towards specific fields, existing independently rather than interconnectedly. Con­
sequently, activities in one track are likely to affect the other, and those effects are likely
to be overlooked.
In the context of the agri­food system, evident power dynamics exist within sectors and
within actors themselves. Ideally, these relationships should be brought to the surface
and addressed through a dialogical process and in­depth discussions involving con­
flicting parties and all relevant stakeholders. Decisions should not solely benefit the
powerful but should be chosen based on what is considered best for creating space to
deconstruct existing structures within the system, leading to overall openness for sys­
temic change.
While compliments were given for the roadmap’s ”guiding” nature, the goals could be en­
hanced. Instead of focusing solely on objectives that target the lowest level of leverage
points in the system, such as a decrease in CO2 emissions (involving changes in param­
eters or numbers), the proposed goals should also guide interventions that genuinely
transform society’s worldviews and perceptions. For instance, goals could encompass
shifts in attitudes toward diet, food production and consumption, and animal rights.
75
==PAGE:81==
Conclusions
This paper contributes to the research in the systemic design field by presenting an
overview of existing systemic design process models in scientific literature. It provides
a comprehensive comparative assessment, incorporating principles from systemic de­
sign and concepts of system science. The culmination of this effort is the development
of a new systemic design process model, effectively synthesizing existing academic
research into a cohesive body of knowledge.
The development of the process model drew insights from the analysis of systemic de­
sign process models present in scientific literature, incorporating practices and advice
from systemic design experts, and integrating elements from both design and systems
science. The primary objective of this new systemic design process model is to facilitate
an equitable transformation within complex systems.
Built upon the theory of leverage points, the process model proposes that the most
significant system changes occur when the paradigm within the system undergoes a
shift. Consequently, the model involves an examination of the prevailing worldviews,
perceptions, and norms that uphold the current system, along with identifying the sys­
temic powers that sustain this status quo. Actors within the system are prompted to un­
cover elements requiring change. The process actively engages participants in crafting
a new purpose for the future and envisioning a transitional journey towards this reimag­
ined system, intended to disrupt existing cognitive structures. Throughout this iterative
journey, actors’ worldviews are systematically challenged through interventions related
to boundaries and interventions within the system, fostering observation and learning
which deepen the understanding of the system and challenge existing perceptions.
Envisioned as an ongoing cycle, this process expects continuous changes in actors’
mindsets, along with adaptive learning, guiding the system slowly toward the desired
ideal state. In conclusion, this systemic design process model aims to make a mean­
ingful contribution to the ongoing discussion on systemic design approaches in complex
systems.
While the model is grounded in existing scientific knowledge, its validation has been
76
==PAGE:82==
limited to the presentation of the process model and the partial trial of two out of the five
process model stages with a team of experts dealing with a complex challenge. Although
the test yielded the expected outcomes, revealing positive feedback and generating
interest in the systemic design approach, this level of testing falls short of substantiating
the claim that the model is effective in practice. Consequently, further empirical testing
of the process model is essential.
Practitioners intending to implement the process model in real­world scenarios should
be aware that the success of this process model depends on active participation and
participants engaging in profound conversations and reflections. Therefore, robust fa­
cilitation can play a pivotal role in supporting the process and guiding actors in the in­
tended direction. However, it is crucial to acknowledge that, for the same reason, this
process may not be universally applicable, especially in cultures or more hierarchical
settings where individuals may be less inclined to open up, express their feelings, or
voice opinions in a communal setting.
77
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
D. H. Meadows. Thinking in Systems: A Primer. Chelsea Green Publishing, 2008, pp. 11–
19. ISBN: 978­1603580557.
[2]
G. Midgley. Systemic Intervention. Springer US, 2000, pp. 113–159. ISBN: 978­1­4613­
6885­4. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4615-4201-8.
[3]
K. R. Popper. The logic of scientific discovery. 1959.
[4]
C. W. Churchman. “Operations Research as a Profession”. In: Management Science
17.2 (1970), B37–B53.
[5]
D. Meadows. “Leverage Points: Places to Intervene in a System”. In: (1999).
[6]
Leverage Points: Places to Intervene in a System.
[7]
H. Nguyen. Sustainable food systems. 2018.
[8]
United Nations. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2023. Accessed on January
23, 2024. United Nations, 2023.
[9]
H. Wögerbauer. Die Technik des Konstruierens. 1943.
[10]
F. Kesselring. Die starke Konstruktion. 1942, pp. 749–752.
[11]
A. Leyer. Maschinenkonstruktionslehre. Heft 6 Spezielle Gestaltungslehre 4. Teil. 1963.
[12]
G. Pahl et al. Engineering Design. Springer London, 2007, pp. 10–13. ISBN: 978­1­
84628­318­5. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-84628-319-2.
[13]
T. Bobbe, J. Krzywinski, and C. Woelfel. “A Comparison Of Design Process Models From
Academic Theory And Professional Practice”. In: 2016.
[14]
T.J. Howard, S.J. Culley, and E. Dekoninck. “Describing the creative design process by
the integration of engineering design and cognitive psychology literature”. In: Design
Studies 29 (2 Mar. 2008), pp. 160–180. ISSN: 0142694X. DOI: 10.1016/j.destud.2008.
01.001.
[15]
K. Gericke and L. Blessing. “An Analysis of Design Process Models Across Disciplines”.
In: (2012).
[16]
H. Takeda et al. “Modeling Design Process”. In: (1990).
[17]
W. Brenner and F. Uebernickel. Design Thinking for Innovation. Springer International
Publishing, 2016, pp. 8–10. ISBN: 978­3­319­26098­3. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-26100-3.
[18]
Danish Design Center. https://ddc.dk/tools­and­methods/.
[19]
IDEO.ORG. www.designkit.org/methods.html.
[20]
Tools | Service Design Tools. URL: https://servicedesigntools.org/tools.
78
==PAGE:84==
[21]
P. E. Vermaas. “Design Theories, Models and Their Testing: On the Scientific Status of
Design Research”. In: An Anthology of Theories and Models of Design (2014), pp. 47–
66. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4471-6338-1_2.
[22]
R. L. Ackoff. “Idealized design: Creative corporate visioning”. In: Omega 21.4 (1993),
pp. 401–410. ISSN: 0305­0483. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-0483(93)90073-T.
[23]
H. Nelson. “The Necessity of Being ”Un­disciplined” and ”Out­of­Control”; Design Action
and Systems Thinking”. In: Performance Improvement Quarterly 7 (3 1994).
[24]
P. H. Jones. “Systemic Design Principles for Complex Social Systems”. In: Springer,
2014, pp. 91–128. DOI: 10.1007/978-4-431-54478-4_4.
[25]
B. Walker­Munro. “A case for the use of cyber­systemics to combat financial crime in
Australia”. In: Kybernetes 50 (11 Nov. 2021), pp. 3082–3105. ISSN: 0368­492X. DOI:
10.1108/K-09-2020-0581.
[26]
V. Papanek. Design For The Real World. 1972.
[27]
C. G. Nohra, A. Pereno, and S. Barbero. “Systemic Design for Policy­Making: Towards
the Next Circular Regions”. In: Sustainability 12 (11 June 2020). ISSN: 2071­1050. DOI:
10.3390/su12114494.
[28]
A. Ryan. “A Framework for Systemic Design”. In: FormAkademisk ­ forskningstidsskrift
for design og designdidaktikk 7 (4 Dec. 2014). ISSN: 1890­9515. DOI: 10.7577/formakademisk.
787.
[29]
H. W. J. Rittel and M. M. Webber. “Dilemmas in a general theory of planning”. In: Policy
Sciences 4 (2 June 1973), pp. 155–169. ISSN: 0032­2687. DOI: 10.1007/BF01405730.
[30]
Australian Public Service Comission. Tackling Wicked Problems: A Public Policy Per­
spective. 2007.
[31]
M. van der Bijl­Brouwer and B. Malcolm. “Systemic Design Principles in Social Inno­
vation: A Study of Expert Practices and Design Rationales”. In: She Ji: The Journal of
Design, Economics, and Innovation 6.3 (2020), pp. 386–407. ISSN: 2405­8726. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sheji.2020.06.001.
[32]
Systemic Design Labs at ETH Zürich. Advancing Systemic Design Methodology.
[33]
RSD | Systemic Design Symposium. URL: https://rsdsymposium.org/.
[34]
B. Sweeting and S. Sutherland. “Possibilities and Practices of Systemic Design: Ques­
tions for the next decade of Relating Systems Thinking and Design”. In: Proceedings of
Relating Systems Thinking and Design (2022).
[35]
B. Sevaldson. “What is Systemic Design? Practices Beyond Analyses and Modelling”.
In: Proceedings of Relating Systems Thinking and Design (2018).
[36]
J. W. Forrester. “Counterintuitive behavior of social systems”. In: Technological Fore­
casting and Social Change 3 (1971), pp. 1–22. ISSN: 0040­1625. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0040-1625(71)80001-X.
[37]
Libertarianism. Praxeology.
79
==PAGE:85==
[38]
N. Cross. “Design Research: A Disciplined Conversation”. In: Design Issues 15.2 (1999),
pp. 5–10. ISSN: 07479360, 15314790.
[39]
H. Dubberly. “A systems literacy manifesto”. In: Relating systems thinking and design
symposium 14 (Oct. 2014).
[40]
D. A. Schön. The Reflective Practitioner. Routledge, Mar. 2017. ISBN: 9781351883160.
DOI: 10.4324/9781315237473.
[41]
J. Kolko. “Abductive Thinking and Sensemaking: The Drivers of Design Synthesis”. In:
Design Issues 26 (1 Jan. 2010), pp. 15–28. ISSN: 0747­9360. DOI: 10.1162/desi.2010.
26.1.15.
[42]
K. E. Weick. Sensemaking in organizations. 1995.
[43]
B. Sevaldson. “Gigamaps: Their role as bridging artefacts and a new Sense Sharing
Model”. In: Sept. 2015.
[44]
M. Aguirre­Ulloa and A. Paulsen. “Co­designing with relationships in mind”. In: For­
mAkademisk ­ forskningstidsskrift for design og designdidaktikk 10 (1 Mar. 2017). ISSN:
1890­9515. DOI: 10.7577/formakademisk.1608.
[45]
S. Bødker et al. “Cooperative Design — perspectives on 20 years with ’the Scandinavian
IT Design Model”. In: (Jan. 2000).
[46]
B. Lichtenstein and D. Plowman. “The leadership of emergence: A complex systems
leadership theory of emergence at successive organizational levels”. In: Leadership Quar­
terly 20 (Aug. 2009), pp. 617–630. DOI: 10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.04.006.
[47]
M. van der Bijl­Brouwer and C. van Loon. “Designing Systems Mirrors”. 2023.
[48]
B. Sevaldson. “GIGA­Mapping: Visualisation for complexity and systems thinking in de­
sign”. In: 2011.
[49]
M. van der Bijl­Brouwer. “Service Designing for Human Relationships to Positively En­
able Social Systemic Change”. In: International Journal of Design (2022).
[50]
J. Vink et al. “Service Ecosystem Design: Propositions, Process Model, and Future Re­
search Agenda”. In: Journal of Service Research 24 (2 May 2021), pp. 168–186. ISSN:
1094­6705. DOI: 10.1177/1094670520952537.
[51]
L. Carvalho and P. Goodyear. “Design, learning networks and service innovation”. In:
Design Studies 55 (2018). Design Processes in Service Innovation, pp. 27–53. ISSN:
0142­694X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2017.09.003.
[52]
M. U. Hensel, B. Frostell, and B. Sevaldson. “Systems­oriented design and sustainabil­
ity”. In: 2010.
[53]
C. Battistoni, C. G. Nohra, and S. Barbero. “A Systemic Design Method to Approach
Future Complex Scenarios and Research Towards Sustainability: A Holistic Diagnosis
Tool”. In: Sustainability 2019, Vol. 11, Page 4458 11 (16 Aug. 2019). ISSN: 2071­1050.
DOI: 10.3390/SU11164458.
[54]
P. H. Jones. “Design research methods for systemic design: Perspectives from design
education and practice”. In: 58th Annual Meeting of the International Society for the Sys­
tems Sciences, ISSS 2014 (Jan. 2014).
80
==PAGE:86==
[55]
A. Pereno and S. Barbero. “Systemic design for territorial enhancement: An overview
on design tools supporting socio­technical system innovation”. In: Strategic Design Re­
search Journal 13 (Oct. 2020), pp. 113–136. DOI: 10.4013/sdrj.2020.132.02.
[56]
S. Méndez­Fajardo et al. “Improving sustainability of E­waste management through the
systemic design of solutions: the cases of Colombia and Ecuador”. In: Handbook of Elec­
tronic Waste Management. Ed. by M. N. V. Prasad, M. Vithanage, and A. Borthakur.
Butterworth­Heinemann, 2020, pp. 443–478. ISBN: 978­0­12­817030­4. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817030-4.00012-7.
[57]
C. Castiglione and E. Fiore. “Sustainable production networks: A design methodology
based on the cooperation among stakeholders”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 362
(2022), p. 132308. ISSN: 0959­6526. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.132308.
[58]
L. Blaasvaer and B. Sevaldson. “Educational planning for systems­oriented design: Ap­
plying systemic relationships to meta­mapping of Giga maps”. In: DS 95: Proceedings of
the 21st International Conference on Engineering and Product Design Education (E&PDE
2019), University of Strathclyde, Glasgow. 12th ­13th September 2019 (2019).
[59]
S. W. Hussaini and T. Vinnakota. “Application of systemic design thinking for program
management”. In: TENCON 2015 ­ 2015 IEEE Region 10 Conference. 2015, pp. 1–6.
DOI: 10.1109/TENCON.2015.7372931.
[60]
C. D. Norman. “Supporting systems transformation through design￿driven evaluation”.
In: New Directions for Evaluation 2021 (170 June 2021), pp. 149–158. ISSN: 1097­6736.
DOI: 10.1002/ev.20464.
[61]
S. Barbero and M. Bicocca. “Scalability in Systemic Design Approach for Rural Devel­
opment”. In: 2018, pp. 647–662. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-63007-6_40.
[62]
A. JP Jacoby and K. van Ael. “Bringing systemic design in the educational practice: The
case of gender equality in an academic context”. In: Proceedings of the Design Society
1 (2021), pp. 581–590. DOI: 10.1017/pds.2021.58.
[63]
M. Nedaei and A. Jacoby. “Design­Driven Conflicts: A Design­Oriented Methodology for
Mindset and Paradigm Shifts in Human Social Systems”. In: Systems 11.5 (2023). ISSN:
2079­8954. DOI: 10.3390/systems11050226.
[64]
Zeri. URL: http://www.zeri.org/.
[65]
RETRACE | Interreg Europe. URL: https://projects2014-2020.interregeurope.eu/retrace/.
[66]
P. M. Kappeler. “A framework for studying social complexity”. In: Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 73 (Jan. 2019). ISSN: 0340­5443. DOI: 10.1007/s00265-018-2601-8.
[67]
C. Staerklé, A. Clémence, and D. Spini. “Social Representations: A Normative and Dy­
namic Intergroup Approach”. In: Political Psychology 32 (5 Oct. 2011), pp. 759–768.
ISSN: 0162­895X. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9221.2011.00839.x.
[68]
R. Marion. “Complexity in Organizations: A Paradigm Shift”. In: Springer Berlin Heidel­
berg, pp. 247–269. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-31757-0_9.
[69]
M. Nedaei, A. Jacoby, and E. D. Bois. “Design­Driven Conflicts: Exploring the Contribu­
tion of Design for Constructing Social Controversies from a Theoretical Standpoint”. In:
Societies 12 (Oct. 2022), p. 137. DOI: 10.3390/soc12050137.
81
==PAGE:87==
[70]
E. Cuppen. “Diversity and constructive conflict in stakeholder dialogue: considerations
for design and methods”. In: Policy Sciences 45 (1 Mar. 2012), pp. 23–46. ISSN: 0032­
2687. DOI: 10.1007/s11077-011-9141-7.
[71]
S. Hussain, E. Sanders, and M. Steinert. “Participatory Design with Marginalized People
in Developing Countries: Challenges and Opportunities Experienced in a Field Study in
Cambodia”. In: International Journal of Design 6 (Aug. 2012), pp. 91–109.
[72]
P. L. Berger and T. Luckmann. The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the So­
ciology of Knowledge. New York: Anchor Books, 1966. ISBN: 978­0385058988.
[73]
E. Cuppen. “Diversity and constructive conflict in stakeholder dialogue: considerations
for design and methods”. In: Policy Sciences 45 (1 Mar. 2012), pp. 23–46. ISSN: 0032­
2687. DOI: 10.1007/s11077-011-9141-7.
[74]
E. Cuppen. “The value of social conflicts. Critiquing invited participation in energy projects”.
In: Energy Research Social Science 38 (2018), pp. 28–32. ISSN: 2214­6296. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2018.01.016.
[75]
L. A. Coser. “Social Conflict and the Theory of Social Change”. In: The British Journal of
Sociology 8 (3 Sept. 1957), pp. 197–207. ISSN: 00071315. DOI: 10.2307/586859.
[76]
A. Ligtvoet et al. “New future perspectives through constructive conflict: Exploring the
future of gas in the Netherlands”. In: Futures 78­79 (2016), pp. 19–33. ISSN: 0016­3287.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2016.03.008.
[77]
M. Kováts­Németh. “Dilemmas of Cultural Transmission”. In: Universal Journal of Edu­
cational Research 4 (7 July 2016), pp. 1698–1707. ISSN: 2332­3205. DOI: 10.13189/
ujer.2016.040723.
[78]
www.systemischcodesign.nl/en. Expertnetwork Systemic Co­design (ESC).
[79]
AGRIFOODTURE. URL: https://agrifoodture.com/about/.
[80]
J. Olesen, C. Rasmussen, and et al. Roadmap for Sustainable Transformation of the
Danish Agri­food System. 2021.
[81]
B. Walker et al. “Resilience, Adaptability and Transformability in Social­ecological Sys­
tems”. In: Ecology and Society 9 (2 2004), art5. ISSN: 1708­3087. DOI: 10.5751/ES-
00650-090205.
[82]
B. B. Lichtenstein and D. A. Plowman. “The leadership of emergence: A complex systems
leadership theory of emergence at successive organizational levels”. In: The Leadership
Quarterly 20.4 (2009), pp. 617–630. ISSN: 1048­9843. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
leaqua.2009.04.006.
[83]
W.Ulrich. “Critical heuristics of social systems design”. In: European Journal of Opera­
tional Research 31.3 (1987), pp. 276–283. ISSN: 0377­2217. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0377-2217(87)90036-1.
[84]
G. Peterson, G. Cumming, and S. Carpenter. “Scenario Planning: a Tool for Conservation
in an Uncertain World”. In: Conservation Biology 17 (Apr. 2003), pp. 358–366. DOI: 10.
1046/j.1523-1739.2003.01491.x.
82
==PAGE:88==
[85]
F. Coops. “Designing for transitions and transformations”. In: June 2022. DOI: 10.21606/
drs.2022.897.
[86]
The Transition Design Framework – Transition Design Seminar CMU. URL: https://
transitiondesignseminarcmu.net/the-transition-design-framework/#1607714812836-d1a9255a-
19eb.
[87]
F. Avelino and J. M. Wittmayer. “Shifting Power Relations in Sustainability Transitions:
A Multi­actor Perspective”. In: Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning 18.5 (2016),
pp. 628–649. DOI: 10.1080/1523908X.2015.1112259.
[88]
V. Pestoff. “Third Sector and Cooperative Services—An Alternative to Privatization”. In:
International Review of Education 38.5­6 (1992), pp. 463–477. DOI: 10.1007/BF01016352.
[89]
F. Avelino. “Theories of power and social change. Power contestations and their implica­
tions for research on social change and innovation”. In: Journal of Political Power 14.3
(2021), pp. 425–448. DOI: 10.1080/2158379X.2021.1875307.
[90]
D. Loorbach, N. Frantzeskaki, and F. Avelino. “Sustainability Transitions Research: Trans­
forming Science and Practice for Societal Change”. In: Annual Review of Environment
and Resources 42.1 (2017), pp. 599–626. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-environ-102014-021340.
[91]
F. Avelino. “Power in Sustainability Transitions: Analysing power and (dis)empowerment
in transformative change towards sustainability”. In: Environmental Policy and Gover­
nance 27 (6 Nov. 2017), pp. 505–520. ISSN: 1756­932X. DOI: 10.1002/eet.1777.
[92]
Systems Thinking Resources ­ The Donella Meadows Project. URL: https://donellameadows.
org/systems-thinking-resources/.
[93]
A. Dunne and F. Raby. Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2013. ISBN: 978­0­262­01871­3.
[94]
R. K. Zadeh and J. Marseille. “Futures Literacy and Systemic Co­design: Voyage to
2070”. In: PROCEEDINGS OF RELATING SYSTEMS THINKING AND DESIGN, RSD12
(2023).
[95]
UNESCO. https://www.unesco.org/en/futures­literacy.
[96]
R. L. Ackoff and F. E. Emery. On purposeful systems: An interdisciplinary analysis of
individual and social behavior as a system of purposeful events. 1972.
[97]
R. L. Ackoff. “Towards a System of Systems Concepts”. In: Management Science 17
(1971), pp. 661–671.
[98]
V. Margolin. “Design, the Future and the Human Spirit”. In: Design Issues 23.3 (2007),
pp. 4–15. ISSN: 07479360, 15314790.
[99]
G. Midgley. “Systemic Intervention for Public Health”. In: American Journal of Public
Health 96 (3 Mar. 2006), pp. 466–472. ISSN: 0090­0036. DOI: 10.2105/AJPH.2005.
067660.
[100]
Dancing With Systems ­ The Donella Meadows Project. URL: https://donellameadows.
org/archives/dancing-with-systems/.
83
==PAGE:89==
[101]
R. J. A. Murphy and P. Jones. “Towards Systemic Theories of Change: High￿Leverage
Strategies for Managing Wicked Problems”. In: Design Management Journal 16 (1 Oct.
2021), pp. 49–65. ISSN: 1942­5074. DOI: 10.1111/dmj.12068.
[102]
R. Abercrombie, K. Boswell, and R. Thomasoo. Thinking big: how to use theory of change
for systems change. Mar. 2018.
[103]
UNESCO and Prince Mohammad bin Fahd University (PMU). Futures Literacy Labora­
tory Playbook. 2023.
[104]
C. A. Palavicino et al. Futures Literacy Lab tool. 2023.
[105]
W. Ulrich and M. Reynolds. “Critical Systems Heuristics”. In: Springer London, 2010,
pp. 243–248. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-84882-809-4_6.
[106]
M. Zellner et al. “Exploring the Barriers to and Potential for Sustainable Transitions in Ur­
banndash;Rural Systems through Participatory Causal Loop Diagramming of the Food­
ndash;Energyndash;Water Nexus”. In: Land 12.3 (2023). DOI: 10.3390/land12030551.
[107]
A BCG Foundation Centre for Public Impact. Human Learning Systems: A practical guide
for the curious.
[108]
S. Waddock. “We Are All Stakeholders of Gaia: A Normative Perspective on Stakeholder
Thinking”. In: Organization Environment 24.2 (2011), pp. 192–212. ISSN: 10860266,
15527417.
84
==PAGE:90==
Appendix
85
==PAGE:91==
Table A.1: List of literature included in the analysis
Nr.
Given name
Article Title
Author(s)
Year
Reference
1
Holistic Diagnosis (HD) (tools)
A systemic design method to approach future complex scenarios and research towards sustainabil­
ity: A holistic diagnosis tool
C. Battistoni, C. G. Nohra, S. Barbero
2019
[53]
2
SD Methodology
A systemic design method to approach future complex scenarios and research towards sustainabil­
ity: A holistic diagnosis tool
C. Battistoni, C. G. Nohra, S. Barbero
2019
[53]
3
SD Methodology for CE
Systemic design for policy­making­ Towards the next circular regions
C.G. Nohra, A.Pereno, S. Barbero
2020
[27]
4
Systemic Design Principles
Design research methods for systemic design­ Perspectives from design education and practice
P. H. Jones
2014
[54]
5
SD for territorial enhancement (tools)
Systemic design for territorial enhancement­ An overview on design tools supporting socio­technical
system innovation
A. Pereno, S. Barbero
2021
[55]
6
SD Process Journey
Improving sustainability of E­waste management through the systemic design of solutions­ The
cases of Colombia and Ecuador
S. Mendez­Fajardo,
H. Boni,
P. Vanegas,
D.Sucozhanay
2020
[56]
7
SD Methodology (MEIO)
Sustainable production networks: A design methodology based on the cooperation among stake­
holders
C. Castiglione, E. Fiore
2022
[57]
8
Giga Map (tools)
Educational planning for systems­oriented design­ Applying systemic relationships to meta­mapping
of Giga maps
L. Blaasvaer, B. Sevaldson
2019
[58]
9
Cyber­ systemics
A case for the use of cyber­systemics to combat financial crime in Australia
B. Walker­Munro
2020
[25]
10
SD application for program management
Application of systemic design thinking for program management
S. W. Hussaini, T. Vinnakota
2015
[59]
11
Design­driven approach to evaluation
(DDE)
Supporting systems transformation through design­driven evaluation
C. D. Norman
2021
[60]
12
SD Methodology Rural Development
(RD)
Scalability in Systemic Design Approach for Rural Development
S. Barbero, M. Bicocca
2018
[61]
13
SD Process (university course)
Bringing systemic design in the educational practice­ The case of gender equality in an academic
context.pdf
A. J. P. Jacoby, K. van Ael
2021
[62]
14
Design­driven conflict (DDC)
Design­Driven Conflicts: A Design­Oriented Methodology for Mindset and Paradigm Shifts in Human
Social Systems
M. Nedaei, A. Jacoby
2023
[63]
==PAGE:92==
Table A.2: Scores given to each process model per criteria and explanation per each score
given
Nr.
Leverage point (12 – 1)
Level of prescription (0­10)
Boundary critique (0­10)
1
Synchronized dialogue between the
actors of the research (exchange of
knowledge (6))
The paper discusses SD tool (1)
Mentions that identification of the sys­
tem boundary and level of detail of anal­
ysis result depends on the system ob­
server (4)
2
Claims promotion of a paradigm shift
(2), however through a change of man­
agement of resources which could be
considered a (12), the leverage point
with the lowest impact.
While also
states activating new relationships be­
tween subjects, producing a general
wellness improvement in people, which
could be considered (2), a second high­
est leverage point.
In addition, the
end of the process steps states the re­
sult is an autopoietic system (4). How­
ever, the PM practically focuses on re­
source flows in the system (which could
be considered (12)).
Finally, it also
discusses new relationships between
subjects that produce a general well­
ness improvement in people, the clos­
est leverage point could be, if we as­
sume that improvement in people leads
to continuous positive change in the
system (4). The calculated average of
all values is (6).
The process is divided into clear steps;
however, the steps could have a more
extensive explanation.
(even though,
the article focused on one step of the
PM, hence described the tool) (5)
A lot of focus is on human relationships
and co­evolving together. Focus on hu­
mans as an integral part of the sys­
tem and an important stakeholder in the
process. However, does not reflect on
who should be involved. (1)
3
Ensuring that the system is autopoi­
etic, related to self­organization lever­
age point (4)
The process is divided into clear steps;
however, the steps are well­defined,
and include the description of chal­
lenges and activities as well as out­
comes. However, it is done by explain­
ing past project experience, not pre­
scribing specific steps. (7)
Stakeholder selection was based on
a mutuality perspective, identifying the
reasons why each stakeholder was im­
portant for the project, and, at the same
time, the benefits stakeholders could
gain from collaborating in the project
activities. This enabled gaining aware­
ness of the stakeholders’ points of inter­
est and ensuring an active and constant
involvement.
Reflection on reasons
and stakeholder involvement, including
the stakeholder perspective. No reflec­
tion on possible marginalised groups
(5)
4
Mentions policy and social system de­
sign (8)
The process is showcased but not dis­
cussed extensively. However, it is not
made explicit that it is an SD process
model (2)
Mentions normative planning and multi­
perspective engagement (2)
5
The multi­level approach to the design
of local systems; the knowledge of sys­
tem stakeholders and their involvement
in a co­creation process (designing for
exchange of knowledge (6))
The paper discusses SD tools (1)
The tool(s) include discussion or de­
scription regarding the processes that
actively involve stakeholders, a broad
identification of stakeholders that en­
sures a balanced and representative
group, and consider values, interests
possible risks of conflict and existing hi­
erarchies (5)
87
==PAGE:93==
6
Building a holistic policy (8, assumed
prevention of specific behaviour); re­
sults in collective knowledge, an in­
crease in the empowerment of the ac­
tors and higher levels of confidence be­
tween them (6, increase of knowledge
in the system) (8­6)
Very detailed prescriptive process. Ap­
plied in practice (9)
Mentions identifying relevant and sec­
ondary actors, but only involving the
first in the process; also require actor
involvement even though it is known
that actors’ interests and approaches
differ (4)
7
Promote
the
stakeholders’
engage­
ment and the cooperation between
decision­makers; provide each stake­
holder with the most pertinent infor­
mation; overcome the lack of quanti­
tative approaches for supporting self­
organised networks, (an increase of in­
formation, (6))
Utilizes existing SD process model and
improves it by introducing new tools.
Explain how tools improve the process.
The steps could be more elaborated.
(6)
Discusses a better information flow to­
wards stakeholders for better decision­
making. However, nothing relevant to
boundary critique is discussed. (0)
8
To build a deep understanding of the
system at hand and its environment
and wider landscape; to cater to sus­
tainability, life cycles, and circular econ­
omy issues; to serve deep creative
processes;
and to memorise large
amounts of information and insights
(12)
The paper discusses SD tool (1)
Mentioned as a tool to engage stake­
holders and non­stakeholders and as
a dialogic tool across silos and disci­
plines; (2)
9
Feedback of observation, information
and orientation guides the regulator
(6, increased knowledge); Relationship
management (helping to build relation­
ships e.g. between regulators and of­
fenders) (3, potentially changing the
goal of the law enforcement system) (6­
3)
States that the model should include
SD principles (by Jones, 2014) at ev­
ery level of the system, however, there
is no strategy discussed on how to do
it. Description of the process referring
to Jones only encompasses the Service
Design process but does not include
SD principles (4)
Placing human decision­making at the
centre of the framework and encour­
aging relationship management helps
to recognise the importance of these
rights to its population. It does not dis­
cuss the involvement and reasons of
stakeholders in the process, however,
there are ethical considerations regard­
ing the relationships and the rights of
individuals (3)
10
Successful program management; (12,
improvement in organisation, expected
change in the way resources are dis­
tributed) (12)
Includes design steps but does not pro­
vide an extensive description.
Steps
and actions relate more to design think­
ing than systemic design. Systemic De­
sign and Systems Thinking intersection
is not felt in the model, they are utilized
more separately (2)
Mentions involvement of numerous dif­
ferent actors. (2)
11
Ensures that learning is an outcome
through designed evaluation and con­
tinuous feedback;
guiding action in
human systems (6, tapping into new
sources of knowledge) (6)
The article does not discuss the steps
of the process, but more about what
you can achieve with the DDE ap­
proach (DDE tenets).
The steps can
be visible in the given example, how­
ever, it is not made explicit that the pro­
cess should be followed always though
the steps followed in the example.
I
also believe, there is little discussion on
HOW that goal could be achieved. (2)
Mentions
the
demarcation
of
the
boundary, involving the perspectives
(voices) of those involved in a system,
even the concept of equity.
Also,
always
discusses
the
involvement
of users’ needs and perspectives in
the design.
However, the discussion
on boundaries is not evident in the
example case, at least in terms of
ethics. (5)
12
The
virtuous
cooperation
between
the actors becomes the system itself
<..>relational network that, itself, allows
the creation of new productive activi­
ties (a reference to a self­organizing
system, 4) (4)
Application of SD model, steps not dis­
cussed (1)
Focuses largely on generating relation­
ships between stakeholders. Does not
discuss topics that are more relevant to
boundary critique (2)
88
==PAGE:94==
13
The outcome is a transition strategy;
there is a lot of discussion about stake­
holder involvement in the process,
however, it was not implemented prac­
tically. Part of the process is selecting a
leverage point and experimenting with
the opportunities.
(the process does
not promise a high leverage point, how­
ever, the opposite is also not made ex­
plicit. Taking a conservative approach
12­9) (12­9)
The steps were clear. However, did not
illustrate the PM perfectly as it was ap­
plied in the university course with lim­
ited time and resources (7)
Only discusses how different interven­
tions affect the existing system and
stakeholders involved. The concept is
common and does not go into a deeper
ethical discussion expected by bound­
ary critique (4)
14
Toward the ideal of a mindset and
paradigm shift in social systems; con­
structing social controversies and net­
works (2, claimed to work towards
a paradigm shift:
shedding light on
the unknown part of the system (e.g.,
mindset and paradigm) and bring more
meaningful changes from underlying
social structures) (2)
A very detailed prescriptive process
was described the most in detail among
all the articles. However, the PM is only
theoretical (9)
Mention the inclusion of marginalised
stakeholders, even inclusions of non­
human actors. However, it is not made
explicit if that includes, for example,
sentient beings (7)
89
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.1: Elements from interviews with the experts assigned and visualised to the corresponding stages of the process model at the time of the research
90
==PAGE:96==
Table A.3: Principles/mindsets, Stakeholders/Actors, Inputs and Outputs found among analysed process models. The process models are separated into four sections according
to process model assessment 2.5
QI.
QII.
QIII.
QIV.
Princi­
ples or
Mind­
sets
”Only through a deep connection between actors, one
can claim that the high ambition of a paradigm shift
can gradually change the deep narrative of the context”
[63].
”Relationship management is at the heart
of the application of cyber­systemics to
crime. This is because wicked problems
such as crime are inevitably “problems
of relationship” and a failure to solve them
because these relationships are devalued,
ignored or mistreated” [25], ”placing hu­
man decision­making at the centre of the
framework and encouraging relationship
management helps to recognise the im­
portance of these rights to its population”
[25]; ”The virtuous cooperation between
the actors becomes the system itself.”
[61]
”means of learning how to learn
through doing design and evalua­
tion together, which is a more sus­
tainable means to innovating.” [60];
”through co­creation reach the the
capacity to envisage creative and
desirable future scenarios to solve
existing problems” [55];
”Think beyond the traditional product and service so­
lutions and address the existing system as a dynamic
changing environment ”[62]; ”orchestrating the elements
of sustainability (triple bottom line), stakeholder’s under­
standings, interests, and motivations; with life cycle
processes, and address them from a cause­and­effect
way of thinking” [56]; ”approach based on stakehold­
ers’ engagement may effectively design and develop net­
works where trust among stakeholders must be devel­
oped” [57]; ”relationships generate the system, act lo­
cally, waste is a resource for another system, human
at the centre of the project, Autopoiesis: Self­producing
systems sustain themselves by reproducing automatically,
defining their own paths of action and coevolving together;”
[53];
Stake­
hold­
ers
or
Actors
”human (or purposeful agents) and non­human actors (or
persuasive agents), such as rules and regulations, tasks”,
focus on antagonistic and marginalised actors; [63]; ”se­
lection was based on a mutuality perspective, identifying
the reasons why each stakeholder was important for the
project and, at the same time, the benefits stakeholders
could gain from collaborating in the project activities.” [27]
”creating a doorway where designers, managing authori­
ties, and citizenship can effectively co­develop new policy
opportunities.” [27] ”activating the sphere of cooperation
between governments and the design research commu­
nity, the multi­stakeholder practice­led research becomes
a mutual learning instrument to generate partnerships and
policy development.” [27]
”Explicit identification of the needs,
wants, preferences, and roles of
various users interacting with the
program and the evaluation. Ensur­
ing that they are built into the de­
sign” [60]; The discussed tool(s) in­
clude discussion or description re­
garding the processes that actively in­
volve stakeholders, a broad identifi­
cation of stakeholders that ensures a
balanced and representative group,
consider values, interests possible
risks of conflict and existing hierar­
chies [55];
”The stakeholders were identified together with the per­
sonal dimensions or characteristics that could be used to
define them. These parameters were expressed in their
most extreme form in order to detect the extremities of
stakeholder dimensions” [62]; ”each actor will have dif­
ferent approaches and interests, but their integration is re­
quired”; Involves numerous actors from different positions,
experts, academia, NGO. [56]; ”multidisciplinarity is the
requirement of involving multiple experts in the working
team alongside the designers” [53]
Inputs
”approach is looking at a problematic context as the start­
ing point of the design process” [63]; ”The process starts
with determining whether intervening by challenging
the dominant mindset in a system is the right ap­
proach.” [63]; ”given scenario”; ”stakeholder engage­
ment process”; [27]
”starting from the definition of the problem and the def­
inition of the way to reach that desired outcome (as in
the regular design)” [62]; ”Initial design”; ”to lead a sys­
temic design process: the team should involve at least
three generic actors: approving the final design, bringing
in technical and logistic support, guiding the methodology”
[56]
Out­
puts
Social learning; New networks constructed (allies); ”Move­
ment toward the ideal of a mindset and paradigm shift in
social systems” [63]
”Relationship management (helping to
build relationships e.g. between regulators
and offenders)” [25];
”The revitalisation of the area, the primary
goal when trying to achieve social develop­
ment in a rural area, with the SD takes place
just from the relational network that, itself,
allows the creation of new productive ac­
tivities” [61]
”ensures that learning is an out­
come, regardless of what kind of
other impact the program generates”
[60]; ”development of a region is a
bottom up approach, creation though
joint work of different stakeholders”
[55];
”Transition startegy” [62]; Increase in collective knowledge;
A holistic policy solutionincrease in the empowerment of the
actors and higher levels of confidence between them. [56]
”promote the stakeholders’ engagement and
cooperation” [57]; ”SD’s main goal is to promote a paradigm
shift, thereby providing a new way to act with: A change in
the management of resources, improving production pro­
cesses through a continuous transformation of matter, and
to activate new relationships between subjects, producing
a general wellness improvement in people” [53];
91
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.2: Comparison of two main process models. The stages aligned horizontally are considered comparable. Interpretation of the stages and iterations
are interpreted by the author of this report.
92
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.3: Information collected from analysed articles on different topics was collected in one Excel sheet
==PAGE:99==
17PM. Mendez-​Fajardo S., Boni H., 
Vanegas P., Sucozhanay D. (2020)
SD journey
TL16
69PM. Nedaei M., Jacoby A. (2023)
Design-​driven conflict (DDC)
1. Context 
mapping
2. Analysis
3. Synthesis
4. Translation
Problematiz
ation
Interesseme
nt
Interesseme
nt
Mobilization
5. Scaling- up
1. Holistic Diagnosis
2. Definition of problems
 and leverages for change
3. Design of a system
4. Outcomes evaluation
5. Implementation
6PM. Battistoni C., Nohra G. C., Barbero S. (2019)
SD Methodology
9PM.  Nohra G. C., Pereno A., Barbero S (2020)
SD Methodology for CE
3. Regional Action Plans (RAP)
5. Action Plan implementation
4. Systemic Assessment of 
Policy Outcomes
31PM. Castiglione C., Fiore E. (2022)
SD Methodology (MEIO)
52AP. Barbero S., Bicocca M. (2018)
Reference to SD Approach. (Bistagnino 2011)
SD Methodology (RD)
1. Holistic Diagnosis
3. Design of a system
4. Study of the outcomes
5. Implementation
The method improves the quantitative data 
collection, conditioning and the processing 
activities by helping to consider all the 
involved resources.
PM14. Peter H. J. (2014)
Systemic Design Principles
In practice, social systems are not “designed” with a 
prescribed set of design methods or a toolkit. Since the 
social system is a social entity or service ultimately 
defined by its stakeholders, the methods and strategies 
adopted for systemic design must be accepted and 
understood by these stakeholders.
Evaluation of not 
only the system 
but the method 
of evaluation in 
itself
PM48. Norman D. C. (2021)
Design-​driven approach to evaluation (DDE)
role of evaluation in support of systems change is in the demarcation and establishment of the boundaries and 
identification of the perspectives (voices) of those involved in a system, particularly with attention to equity
DE recognises that purposes may 
change as contexts shift, new learning 
is gained, and that this learning can be 
used to support adaptive change in the 
system over time
PM40. Hussaini W. S., Vinnakota T. (2014)
SD application for program management
detailed stakeholder needs and 
expectations/ requirements 
with respect to the program are 
to be defined
 Benefits realization should be the iterative step at each stage of the methodology.
PM.39 Walker-​Munro B (2020)
Cyber- systemics
 leverage on the development and maintenance of a particular relationship or class of relationships, with monitoring permitting the regulator to understand how influence is 
created and transferred within the web of relationships
PM57. Jacoby JP A, Van Ael K. (2021)
SD Process (university course)
Guiding questions on who owns relevant 
knowledge and power to impact the 
local system. To understand the dynamics 
of the systems-​as-​is.
1. Understanding the system
model describes which interventions to 
perform starting from an overall value 
proposition one wishes to obtain on the 
long term. The process is driven by the explicit 
description of a desirable future.
 2. Developing the
 intervention model
Focus on 
added value
Intervention 
models
Enriching 
the 
intervention 
models
Design interventions for specific 
leverage points and to combine 
them into innovative concepts.
review the ideas in three ways:
1. from perspective of a user
2. finding paradoxical opposites
3. from perspective of different contexts
5.Feedback and 
implementation 
Stakeholders play a dominant part in implementation. Design should enable the 
team to understand the concepts, to work dynamically with the context-​related 
combinations of interventions and eventually, progress with implementing new actions or 
act on specific boundary conditions necessary to obtain change.
1. Understanding 
the system
Understand the current 
state and what has been 
done in the past.
2. The design of 
the problematic 
situation
Consensus among 
participants on the focal 
problem and identification 
of causes and effects.
3. Identification 
of structural 
causes
Actors reached a 
consensus on the 
most dependent 
and influencer facts
4. Participatory design of strategies
Designing potential strategies to achieve the 
strategic objectives, which emerged from the 
main elements: the existing national law and 
the structural causes of the focal problem.
Evaluate viability based on 
economic, legal, technical, 
and institutional points of 
view
Participants would navigate here 
from the past to the present until 
reaching the foundations for the 
desired future (2-4 steps)
Only through a deep connection between 
actors one can claim that the high 
ambition of a paradigm shift can gradually 
change the deep narrative of the context.
0. Evaluate 
the method 
choice
look with different lenses (economic, 
social, psychological, ecological) 
towards the added value they strive 
for on the individual, the organisation 
and societal level.
4. Create Program
1.
2.
3.
5. Benefits realization
Idealization
Appreciating Complexity
Purpose Finding
Requisite Variety
Boundary Framing
System Ordering
1. Holistic Diagnosis
2. Good Practices selection
6. Analysis of the results 
and feedback
Feedback coordination
Continuous adaptation
Continuous adaptation
Self-​Organization
Stakeholder Engagement 
Process
Figure A.4: Comparison of the main process models and the rest of the process models
==PAGE:100==
Output
information about the system visualised in the map 
that displays all the components of the system and 
relationships between them [6]
Output
Emphasize the critical aspects, as well as hidden 
potentialities
1. Context mapping
Output
2. Analysis	
Output
Obtaining knowledge from context. 
Key question in analysing the conflicts and actants of 
the system. Addressing the question requires 
awareness of the different realities (e.g. cultures). 
Discussion between actors that can further facilitate 
the unfolding of the unknown side of the context. 
Knowing each others positions allows to create the 
needed awareness for network construction.
Defining the context beyond objective variables.  
Acknowledging that context is not isolated and other 
systems might affect the system in question. External 
variables might shape the attributes of the context. 
Mapping the essential attributes of the context, such 
as the human or non-human actors and the 
spatiotemporal aspects of a problem.
For DDC, knowing how roles and responsibilities are 
distributed can ease the unfolding of the ‘invisible’ 
part of the context as well. In particular, resources 
that one has access to or can mobilize within the 
context.
Defining the underlying resources as well as actors 
who share (or do not share) these resources is a way 
to better understand the power dynamics in a specific 
context.
(c) the actors and actants
e.g. roles and responsibilities
(d) shared resources
e.g. the human, and monetary resources
Similar to context mapping, the focus is on 
antagonistic relationships and defining actors with 
contradictory voices as well as power relations 
between them.
In particular, the analysis elaborates on the 
underlying drivers for a problematic context, 
focusing on the external and internal drivers that 
push people toward an antagonistic form of 
relationships.
The step is about exploring the dynamics of power 
and how different actors exercise power. 
By categorizing the resources, one can illuminate how 
power is distributed and also facilitate mapping the 
contradictory voices, e.g., one with less access to 
resources.
In depth understanding of antagonists, relations 
between them and conditions of their existence. 
Also analysing spill overs from neighbouring systems.
e) the power relations
i.e. antagonistic actors
(f) the underlying causes e.g. historical and 
technological
Moreover, it can help to explore the following 
questions: 
where does such power come from, and which forces 
drive actors to behave as antagonistic actors?
Design-Driven Conflic Relevant Theory	
Stages as described in DDC Methodology
Systemic Design Methodology	
Holistic diagnosis
Holistic diagnosis: the first phase is based on a combination of desk and field research, which aims to investigate the given scenario from an economic, social and 
environmental aspect, considering the flow of energy and matter
PM6 in detail describes the HD process: 
1. Assessment of the Data Framework. Defining boundaries of the system.
2. Research. Desk and field research by designer
3. Collect. Organise data into the format established in Step 1. Allow actors to integrate feedback. Confrontation of ideas between all the actors of the 
multidisciplinary research team.
4. Visualize. Make information understandable to everyone to achieve productive and collaborative horizontal dialogue.
5. Interpretation of Complexity. A qualitative inductive method. Allow everyone to leave feedback. The process should not be overtaken by a designer. visualization 
allows all members of the multidisciplinary research team to have access to the same kind of information to elaborate further analysis of a complex scenario, 
integrating all feedback.
Application of (SDM) in RETRACE project
Holistic diagnosis
1. Regional framework: based on quantitative and qualitative data the visual mapping (infographics, schemas, gigamaps) were made by the systemic designers. 
2. Analysis of current policies: overview of policy state-of-the-art to underline the potential policy gaps that could inhibit transition to CE. Also, understanding of 
regional goals. 
3. Analysis of the principal economic and industrial sectors: analysed policy instruments and the context information, deliver potential synergies at a systemic level 
between different value chains or processes at a regional and interregional scale. This action enabled the peer reviews discussions around the regional data 
presented and generating a knowledge transfer to the other partner countries.
Table A.4: Comparison of the main process models stages. Section 1
==PAGE:101==
Definition of problems and leverages for change
Output
Definition of problems and leverages for change: begging with the framework defined in the holistic 
diagnosis, connections and impacts are analysed in order to identify potentialities and criticalities of future 
scenarios. The challenges are approached as leverages for change from which the system can be defined and 
initiated;
System is created based on relationships between processes and actors, optimizing the energy and material 
flows and valorising the waste as resources [6]; focuses on identifying the alternatives that is, sets of 
connections involving different stakeholders and processes, to create value from the resources discarded in 
the linear model by exploiting the opportunities offered by the territory 
Definition of new complex systems / challenges are 
approached as leverages for change from which the system 
can be defined and initiated 
Good Practices selection
Actors of each region discussed the good practices analyzing their strengths and weaknesses to transfer this 
knowledge to the partner countries and understand how to solve the identified policy gaps. The selected 
good practices were linked to foster local resources understood as territorial potentialities. These good 
practices were chosen based on the degree of transferability and inspiring perspective.
Analysis and selection of existing good practises
3. Synthesis
Output
Uses of boundary objects allow to create network when contradictions and differences among actors are at 
a high level. Boundry object can easen the transmission of knowledge and facilitate the transcendence of 
the social world among acotrs. Boundry object asset in finding communalities among actors. 
Focus is on involving diverse range of actors, and facilitate transparent discussion. Diversity, unbiased 
discussion between actors (e.g. inclusion of marginalized voices), allows to unfold more hidden assumption, 
unshared knowledge, and facilitates the translation. 'Thus, utilizing boundary objects, crossing the 
contradictory voices by using their commonalities, and creating a condition for making controversies (as a 
form of relationships) more participatory are the advantages of having a holistic viewpoint.'
Exploring the stories and narratives behind each actor with a focus on antagonistic relations. Narratives are 
powerful tools to convey messages within community. 
Mapping actors journey allow to understand the aspects of the problematic situation and to later cluster the 
communalities between actors.
It is important to understand the limitation of the actants to, e.g. lack of resources. 
Working with boundary objects to improve the power balance or highlight the commonalities or places to 
intervene, or building common sense for (re)building the narratives. It is a multifaced approach that can 
open possibilities for the mobilization of thoughts and opinions.
To map the commonalities, it is recommended to support actors to freely chose and reframe their own 
boundaries while uncapping the commonalities. 
(g) the individuals’ narratives i.e. antagonistic core stories (h) 
the commonalities
e.g. repositories, forms, and labels
We will utilize the commonalities in a meaningful way: to 
facilitate the translation process, which is essential for 
network construction.
Systemic Design Methodology	
Application of (SDM) in RETRACE project
Design-Driven Conflic Relevant Theory	
Stages as described in DDC Methodology
Table A.5: Comparison of the main process models stages. Section 2
==PAGE:102==
Design the system
Output
Design the system: a new production model is designed whose aims is to tend to zero emissions by optimizing 
energy and material flows and by valorising the waste as resources;
the new production model with the goal to obtain zero emissions, 
open system capable of creating value from part of the currently 
unexploited waste; A new system perspective is designed 
Regional Action Plans (RAP)
The RAP =  strategies described the regional priorities addressing a range of CE policy gaps. In addition, it 
includes planned measures and support actions for the implementation period (2018–2020) and beyond. 
These future-oriented vision actions are pointless if not followed by a real implementation.
The holistic diagnosis assessment of the regional context on regards the CE was essential to elaborate a RAP 
for each region. After matching the results of the holistic diagnosis and the experiences brought from the 
good practices, lead to the identification of six policy gaps common to the partner regions. These explore 
the fields of intervention that could be tackled to support a CE and focus on the several aspects that imply a 
transition to a CE in such regions. 
RAPs made visible the benefits of adopting systemic approaches in 
the transition towards a CE and providing a pathway with necessary 
steps needed to undertake with that purpose, including policy 
recommendations for the update of regional/national Smart 
Specialization strategies to the transition to more systemic 
approaches.
Another component to ensure a successful learning process is the 
involvement of all stakeholders as end-users of the RAP and at the 
same time consider them as key players on disseminating this 
knowledge about CE and SD among their networks.
4. Translation (Problematization, intersegment, enrolment, mobilization ) 
Output
Through these processes (making a controversy context interactive, and create a problem structuring 
approach) the contradiction between people can turn into a competitive form of engagement wherein people 
can not only learn from each other, but they can also utilize their thoughts and opinions through the exchange 
of their interests.'
'Our premise is that this should ideally lead to construction since, on one hand, it can provide a situation of 
social learning that gradually changes the predominant mindset and paradigm within the system (through 
a different moment of translation) and on the other hand, it can lead to the strength of the network being 
maintained with a long-term perspective.' 
Translation aims to bring actors together with conflicts of views or interest to facilitate the ideal of a (new) 
network of allies construction. Through multiple moments of translation the intention is to change the 
learning paradigm of the context. The literal meaning of translation refers to the ability to displace one’s 
opinion and thoughts from a prior context to an ideal situation [30].
For DDC, the translation process is the core of the methodology and is similar to the intervention strategies 
in conventional design methods.
Translation is an opportunistic approach, hence never a completed accomplishment, i.e., it may fail under 
certain conditions. In other words, similar to the outcomes of a design process, the result of a translation is 
not an ultimate solution; it rather creates a condition or a situation for learning and adaptation in response 
to a problematic situation [57]. Therefore, to translate, one must facilitate continuous learning and 
adaptation between different social worlds.
The objective of problematization is to facilitate the creation of new possibility spaces known as passage 
points, essential for exploring new realities. Through problematization, by providing new alternatives  
designer can change actors’ objectives and interests as well as the way they approach the problems.
To facilitate creating new possibilities, for example, a new system of affairs, designers need to create a 
convergence between actors, ideally based on their commonalities.
For the DDC methodology, the negotiation of interests (intersegments) along with the next three steps, 
enrolment and mobilization represent the prototyping phase in a design process
(I) the new passage points i.e. new core stories
(j) the network construction i.e. nominations & negotiations
Systemic Design Methodology	
Application of (SDM) in RETRACE project
Design-Driven Conflict Relevant Theory	
Stages as described in DDC Methodology
Table A.6: Comparison of the main process models stages. Section 3
==PAGE:103==
Outcomes evaluation
Output
Outcomes Evaluation: the assessment of the environmental, economic and social benefits belonging from 
the new production model;
Preliminary evaluation of the benefits given by the system at environmental, economic, and social level 
"Highlights of possible benefits and weaknesses [
An assessment of the environmental, economic and social benefits, 
implies a foresight vision on the CE strategies. 
Evaluation;"
Systemic Assessment of Policy Outcomes
The RAP was a strategic document in which these policy gaps have been approached through different 
actions. To understand their impact, and measure the effectiveness of each action, specific indicators were 
identified.
The analysis of the results achieved or disregarded by RAP actions highlighted the main factors that 
determined the success or the total/partial failure in their implementation.
The main factors that determined the success or the total/partial 
failure in their implementation
Systemic Design Methodology
Application of (SDM) in RETRACE project
Table A.7: Comparison of the main process models stages. Section 4
==PAGE:104==
Implementation
Output
Results analysis and feedback
Output
Implementation: apply the proposed designed system in the given context and consequent 
estimation of the new economic activities feasibility;
Once an alternative is selected because of its viability and feasibility, the stakeholders 
implement it.
However, also the implementation process should adopt a systemic approach to 
stakeholder engagement and activity development, based not only on the potential of the 
region, but also of the specific partners and stakeholders involved in a policy action.
Results analysis and feedback: assessment of the implemented system and 
ensuring to be autopoietic.
autopoietic system
SD’s main goal is to promote a paradigm shift, 
thereby providing a new way to act with: A change 
in the management of resources, improving 
production processes through a continuous 
transformation of matter, and to activate new 
relationships between subjects, producing a 
general wellness improvement in people. 
Action Plan implementation
Output
In the context of policy-making, it is permissible to conceive the implementation impacts to 
go beyond the end of the project (long time-frames). 
This process exposes the “actionable and proactive” mindset of the SD that combines with 
a foresight vision, can achieve concrete outcomes in the short term while addressing 
broader actions in the long term. From this point of view, SD ensures the introduction of 
policies were all participant actors can look after the development of the several actions on 
CE within a short, medium and long term, where the short and medium ones designed to 
support future implementations.
The case of RETRACE delivers an example of how short-term actions on wicked scenarios 
such as the linear economy framed in a holistic approach can deliver a more powerful 
impact on the long-term. This SD approaches on policy proofs that the transition to CE will 
require this kind of methodology as it considers the wicked problems that a transition to the 
CE can bring to European regions
there is an awareness that they cannot modify the current policy status. In this 
perspective, the nature of these short-term actions was from funding opportunities 
for sectors with potential in CE, training workshops on CE, or open reviews of the 
regional strategies. These actions aimed to encourage managing authorities into 
scale up these results into significant impacts on a medium- and long-term policy 
perspective. Therefore, this approach across partners regions, including the 
involvement of all regional actors as end-users can anticipate future strategies on 
the mid—long term horizon, addressing them with today’s changing drivers (e.g., 
research and innovation initiatives, technological development, active economic 
sectors with leading industries, key change-makers).
Emphasize the critical aspects, as well as hidden 
potentialities
5. Scaling-up
Output
"The last part is the scaling-up process, aiming to disseminate the results of the translation 
process. The outcomes of the translation, in particular, a new network of allies, new 
knowledge, and experience, have to be scaled up from a community level (the translation 
phase) to a broader social scale.
The core narrative of a new community must be gradually amplified in order to involve a 
broader community of actors. It is essential to use the knowledge and experience from the 
previous part as an input for the creation of a new narrative platform. Along the scale-up 
process, the design abilities such as conceptualization or future idealization can assist a 
social designer to mobilize the new narrative, norms, and values from the existing situation 
into a new system of affairs wherein there are more possibilities for mindset and paradigm 
shifts."
k) the narrative platform
 i.e. aspirational and 
gravitational (l) the new value 
set(s)
 i.e. mindset and paradigm shift
Systemic Design Methodology	
Application of (SDM) in RETRACE project
Design-Driven Conflict Relevant Theory	
Stages as described in DDC Methodology
Table A.8: Comparison of the main process models stages. Section 5
==PAGE:105==
A.0.1
Workshop Analysis
Please scroll one page down.
100
==PAGE:106==
Workshop  
  
Description and data collection 
The workshop involved six participants: three AgriFoodTure representatives, one scientist from the 
University of Copenhagen, and two representatives from Innovation Fund Denmark. 
The workshop was divided into two parts. In the first, participants were asked to map actors and their 
stakeholders, corresponding to step 1 of the model at that time. They were guided by specific questions: 
mapping stakeholders involved in the roadmap development, mapping stakeholders not involved in the 
mapping development but contributing to or hindering the implementation of the roadmap, and 
mapping stakeholders that would bear the consequences of a successful or unsuccessful 
implementation of the roadmap. 
The second exercise focused on mapping stakeholders according to different types of power. This 
involved identifying those supporting or impeding the change in the system and recognizing actors with 
power over others. Additionally, questions were posed regarding the origins of such power. To 
conclude, participants prioritized the actors they wished to invite in the process of revising the roadmap. 
  
The primary goals were to assess participants' ability to reflect on the importance of inviting a more 
diverse group of stakeholders than in the initial map development and to determine if these exercises 
could stimulate deeper discussions or conflicts within the group, allowing the discussion to reach the 
value levels of the system. 
  
In the second part of the workshop, the systemic design process model was presented. Participants 
received a canvas depicting different stages of the process model and were prompted to reflect on their 
relevance to their specific case. At the conclusion of the workshop, surveys were distributed, containing 
the following questions: 
  
1. Is systemic design applicable in your case? 
2. To what extent this workshop contributes to the planning of the roadmap revision? 
3. Your key takeaways? 
4. What would you have done differently if you were conducting the workshop? 
 
The overarching goal was to evaluate the applicability of the systemic design process model to the 
AgriFoodTure case, specifically in the context of revising the AgriFoodTure roadmap. 
 
Data collection occurred through continuous notetaking during the entire workshop and via a survey 
distributed at the workshop's conclusion. The notes were analyzed with a focus on identifying phrases 
that indicated a deeper level of reflection or reflections on the existing process model. 
 
 
  
101
==PAGE:107==
Evaluation: 
 
Evaluation of the first part of the workshop:  
P.1. Stakeholder mapping:  
The tensions were felt in the room as participants debated the individuals involved or believed to be 
involved in the initial development of the roadmap.  There was disagreement on whether to trust the 
written document or the participants' experiences. 
Expressions of frustration like “Can I call this bullsh*t?” and “I wasn't there, so I don't know” 
underscored the intensity of the discussion. 
Despite a prompt in the middle of the process, participants overlooked mapping the resources of actors. 
Deep reflections on actor mapping unfolded. Participants wondered if actors had begun working against 
each other, considering how this could be perceived as greenwashing by environmental organizations, 
given companies' roles as partners or board members in the process. When asked to map suffering 
actors, one participant deemed it too complex, labeling it a "wicked problem." 
The conversation shifted to an analysis of the system's values, exploring society's dependence on 
comfort and luxury, and the fear. All of them hindering change. The led to discussions about the 
potential end of humanity due to the climate crisis. One participant straightforwardly told another, "You 
really are showing your true face here." 
  
P.1. Power dynamic mapping:  
 
Participants engaged in a productive discussion on power relations within the system. For instance, they 
discussed companies consistently shift between powers to stay afloat in business, responding to 
pressure from consumers. Additionally, there was an acknowledgment that transformative power, 
especially within the government, could be considered failing.  
However, as the discussion delved into total control mechanisms like media, governments, and large 
conglomerates dictating the rest of the system, the atmosphere in the room turned gloomy towards the 
end. 
Ultimately, when asked about the origin of this power, all participants agreed that it stems from the 
system's dependence on money. 
  
P.1. Prioritization 
By the end of the first part of the workshop, participants reached an agreement that only the heads of 
the four main universities were involved in developing the roadmap, with professors from the 
department assisting in the writing. In contrast, the list of participants expanded by at least ten other 
actors that AgriFoodTure plans to involve in the upcoming process. This includes private foundations, 
102
==PAGE:108==
consumers, retail, green NGOs, C20, schools, pupils, and others. The exercises were deemed successful 
as participants decided to broaden the boundaries of the system they would be working with. 
Furthermore, during the final discussion at the end of the workshop, participants mentioned the need to 
involve even more stakeholders. To achieve this, they suggested using a Quadruple Helix model. This 
implies that the tools used at the beginning of the workshop might not have been/felt sufficient. 
 
P.2. Presentation of the process model and reflection on its applicability in the agri-food sector 
 
Reflection on the System model: 
  
System mapping 
Power Dynamics 
Analysis 
Envisioning 
Coalition Building 
Adaptive Learning 
  
Finds power 
dynamics very 
important and is 
curious about the 
extent to which 
that was included 
or is being 
included in the 
roadmap 
development or 
revision. 
  
AgriFoodTure is 
asked how they 
are going to start 
a discussion on 
power dynamics. 
  
A participant 
mentioned that 
power dynamics 
are very 
important to 
analyze. The 
participant 
expressed 
concern that it is a 
challenge to make 
stakeholders feel 
needed, and this 
exercise might 
Multiple 
participants 
stated that they 
need a clear 
"system goal." 
  
They discussed 
that the mission 
thinking they have 
at the moment is 
a long-term goal. 
  
Reflecting on the 
"Envisioning" 
stage, the director 
of AgriFoodTure 
said that they 
really need to 
incorporate this 
"scenario 
building" thinking, 
and they are 
going to do that. 
  
Another 
participant 
mentioned that, 
from experience, 
scenario thinking 
allows a switch in 
power dynamics. 
They discussed 
the need for 
better synergies 
between different 
missions 
(AgriFoodTure 
being one of 
them). 
  
Discussed that 
different 
organizations are 
working on the 
same thing 
separately, while 
there is a division 
of power and 
focus; "it is going 
to go nowhere." 
  
One participant 
said that once the 
system goal is 
agreed upon, 
when the 
preconditions to 
achieve it can be 
mapped, and 
those can be seen 
as "Enablers for 
change." Then, 
Participants were 
aware of and 
were practicing 
the Theory of 
Change, and they 
believed in this 
method. 
  
When discussing 
the perceived 
limitations of the 
linearity of the 
Theory of Change, 
one participant 
mentioned that 
she herself has 
created a circular 
theory of change. 
  
An Innovation 
Fund Denmark 
participant stated, 
regarding the 
learning culture, 
that they would 
like to see it as a 
long-term goal. 
AgriFoodTure can 
come to them to 
request needed 
competencies and 
103
==PAGE:109==
allow them to feel 
that they have "a 
voice." 
 
  
They all agreed 
that they need to 
agree on the 
system goal. They 
stated that one 
can only have a 
"strong mission" if 
one feels 
ownership, but 
there also needs 
to be someone 
leading. 
  
Reflecting on 
"envisioning," one 
participant said 
that they need a 
very short story 
that is easy to tell. 
They need a clear 
story about the 
system goal 
definition with 
the future. 
  
  
  
  
she said, you go 
to adaptive 
learning. 
to co-create what 
is meaningful for 
them. 
  
Other relevant comments from participants:  
In general, they stated that stakeholders should be involved in doing "some of these exercises."  
Someone mentioned that in the next roadmap, goals beyond the technological aspect should be 
included, such as "how we build a coalition" and "how we create a vision as goals." This addition would 
also aid in tracking success by specifying results, enablers for change, etc., which need to be integrated 
into the roadmap.  
A roadmap serves as a navigation tool where AgriFoodTure is elected to guide the partnership.  
We need to involve all stakeholders because everyone owns the idea/mission. 
“I used to work with system designers, and I heard bits and pieces of this, but I think the way you put 
it together made a lot of sense.”  
  
104
==PAGE:110==
Participants responses to the questions: 
  
5. Is systemic design applicable in your case? 
 
Two participants said, "definitely yes," while two said "yes," and one said “maybe”.  
The director of AgriFoodTure stated that it is highly relevant both in relation to updating the roadmap 
and in considering how they can work to achieve their objectives. 
Other points highlighted included the applicability of the bottom-up approach, the significance of 
continuous development, rethinking, evaluation, and working with a mission-oriented focus.  
One participant recommended integrating the concept of wicked problems into the roadmap.  
Additionally, another participant pointed out that some tools might are being implemented already 
without them realizing they have a specific name. 
 
6. To what extent this workshop contributed to the planning of the roadmap revision? 
  
Touched upon areas that they had not considered before and confirmed the expectation regarding the 
amount of work needed to update the roadmap. 
  
It sparked very productive discussions and provided a solid framework to build on. In particular, the part 
about envisioning the future is crucial. 
  
The workshop sparked excellent discussions, input, and a new way of thinking, offering varied 
perspectives and understanding. 
  
It was a valuable inspiration and made it clear how much preparation is necessary to engage the right 
stakeholders and gain meaningful insights. 
  
It was an eye-opener, providing great inspiration to approach complex problems.  
  
We had a good discussion earlier about stakeholders and the need to expand, build upon the "mission" 
approach, and widen the power base. I see many of the tools you brought as "lenses" that can be used 
to examine specific aspects of the mission, the roadmap, the timelines, potential opposing views, etc. 
  
 
7. Your key takeaways? 
  
There is no simple solution. It is a process where you work on different steps and go back and forth 
while learning along the way and implementing your learnings. 
  
105
==PAGE:111==
The role of envisioning the future is crucial for building a shared understanding of new system goals and 
the role of coalition building and adaptive learning. 
  
It is a process of continuous learning. Once you make a choice, you are deselecting other things, and 
that is necessary to achieve a clear goal. 
  
The complexity of their missions indicates that, to succeed, they need good preparation, a transparent 
process, and engagement with relevant stakeholders. 
  
Change within the mission is a complex task that can be approached in different ways. Inclusion is 
important. 
  
I believe we need more conflict at all levels of AgriFoodTure. As I mentioned at the meeting, I think we 
are currently expanding the mission, and we need to be vigilant in ensuring it grows in the right 
direction. Regarding the one slide you used to talk about positions of power, I noticed it as "the system 
goal" (please share your slides, by the way). I don’t think we are aligned on THE goal yet. 
  
  
8. What would you have done differently if you were conducting the workshop? 
  
Positive comments: 
• 
"Super great and very well planned." 
• 
"Super relevant." 
• 
"Very good workshop and presentation on systemic design, and the systemic process model was 
very interesting; also fostered a lot of interesting conversations." 
• 
"It gave us a great discussion on a subject with no solutions." 
Points for improvement: 
• 
More control of the discussion; in regard to the presentation, more examples and less text. 
• 
Advice to ask participants to think about some of the questions beforehand. 
• 
Suggestion that the presentation could have been done online before the workshop, allowing 
more time for active work. 
• 
A participant suggested that mapping the existing update process could surface existing ideas 
and show how the proposed process model could bring something new to the table. 
• 
One participant mentioned that a more stringent approach or focus on what the participant 
should get out of the discussion could have helped. Since there was a lack of focus, the 
discussion became the goal in itself, providing food for thought, but there was potential for a 
more tangible outcome. 
 
 
 
 
106
==PAGE:112==
Reflection on the workshop:  
  
The primary challenge arose when two key participants could only attend the second part of the 
workshop, necessitating a restructuring of the agenda. The central focus was to understand the 
applicability of the process model to the agri-food sector. Consequently, the last 1 hour and 45 minutes, 
when everyone was present, were dedicated to this crucial aspect. Due to time constraints, the process 
model was presented in a format that didn't allow all participants to practically engage with every stage. 
The other four participants had briefly covered the first two stages earlier in the workshop. As a result, 
their understanding heavily depended on the presentation's quality and the presenter's ability to convey 
complex concepts in a short time. This may explain why certain aspects of the methodology, where the 
description might not have been entirely clear (e.g., coalition building), received less attention during 
the reflection phase. 
 
Secondly, a delicate balance had to be maintained between reflecting on the process model and 
allowing participants to update each other on the project process, as the actors hadn't been closely 
collaborating in the past period. Dynamics of power were present, with AgriFoodTure (three 
participants) considered to own the project process. However, Innovation Fund Denmark (two 
participants, arriving late), was the entity initially initiating the call for agri-food sector roadmaps and 
currently funding the AgriFoodTure organization. For that reason, time had to be devoted to 
accommodating such discussions. 
 
Finally, having only one facilitator in the room responsible for both facilitating the session and gathering 
data posed a challenge. Additionally, there was an attempt to assess whether the participants, left to 
their own devices, could delve into deeper levels of discussion. This dual role and goal may have 
compromised the workshop's facilitation. As one participant pointed out, it seemed that the discussion 
became the goal in itself, whereas a more tangible outcome could have been achieved if participants 
were given more concrete direction. 
107
==PAGE:113==
A.0.2
Interviews with people involved in AgriFoodTure roadmap
development
Interviews with roadmap developers are not included in this file due to concerns
about sensitive information. They can be provided upon request to the assessors
of the report.
108
==PAGE:114==
A.0.3
Interviews with systemic design experts
Please scroll one page down.
109
==PAGE:115==
 
 
Interviews with systemic design experts 
 
Interviewee: Carolina Giraldo Nohra 
Date: 19.12.23 
 
00:00 
because it's your meeting. No, because I own the... Yeah. Okay, maybe I'll do it on my phone and then I'll just 
create the transcript. Okay? Sorry, a second. No, no, no, it's fine. Yeah. Okay. Yes. So, yeah, maybe I'll be 
sure to tell you what I'm doing if it's fine to kind of give this introduction to this meeting. So, yeah, I... Yeah. 
 
00:28 
So I am doing my master's right now. It's in my final stage of my master's program. I am doing it in the 
Technical University of Denmark. So it's a design and innovation program. And right now I'm looking into 
more, let's say facilitating this transformation towards sustainable future for different types of lenses, let's 
say rethinking business models or maybe rethinking policymaking and et cetera. 
 
00:57 
But I also really like different fields. So I am also doing some environmental sciences, something like 
environmental modeling, for instance, because I also am interested in the field of agriculture. So to kind of 
grasp a bit better what engineers are doing, I'm also doing some courses there and there. And for my master's 
thesis, I thought I want to explore the topic of systemic design, simply because we don't really do it at 
university, but it's something that I've been very interested into. 
 
01:26 
So yes, and right now my project is about comparing different systemic design methodologies that I found, 
and then trying to derive my own systemic design methodology and more for the purpose of kind of, yes, 
facilitating sustainable transformation in the field of agriculture. So I'm not sure where it's going yet, but why 
I'm talking to you is because 
 
01:55 
quite some methodologies among academic literature. And one of them is of course, systemic design 
methodology that you've been working with as well. I found it in many articles. So I thought I just need to 
contact someone who has experience working with it. So it's you and thank you again for joining me. I have, of 
course, a few questions prepared. I have a few direct questions, like very... 
 
02:22 
related to the methodology itself. I'm not sure if you're still working with it, if you remember it, but I will just try 
maybe to ask it. And of course, just anything you have to say, it's very valuable to me to just hear about your 
experience. So, yeah, so I don't know, maybe you can just start telling about what you're doing at the 
moment, because I'm not sure if you're even working with systemic design right now. 
 
Carolina: 
02:48 
No, I do. Thank you so much, Kamila. Thank you for this amazing introduction. It's very moving. And my work 
is running the internet. It has been like, yeah, like a lot of years working on this. I will give you a bit of my 
background and like why I finished like working in this field and so on. So originally, I'm an industrial designer. 
 
03:17 
and back in the day product designer and then I did a master's degree in the polytechnic of Iterino that it was 
at the time eco design and now it's only systemic design masters. Then of course I after university of course I 
decided I went into the research pathway but not necessarily related to university I worked with this friend. 
 
03:45 
NGOs and other like organizations that wanted to do, I don't know, sustainable transitions into cities, 
territories. And then for Things of Life, I ended up again, like working in European projects at the Politecnico 
related on how systemic design methodologies could support policymaking processes on circular economy. 
So on transitions to 
 
04:14 
sustainability could be in different fields. On that pathway, of course, I ended up in working at the university 
for seven years. Of course, developing my own PhD as well on how to apply dynamic design methodologies 
into circular cities and how these methodologies could support policymaking or create better circular city. 
 
04:44 
circular city, roadmaps and so on. So yes, for the last, I think a lot, like 2016, more or less, so it will be seven 
years, a year now. It will be that I have been working in, because before I was working simply in systemic 
design and this focus that you're talking about. 
 
05:12 
I was very much interested at the beginning, agricultural systems. And that was my main interest at the 
beginning, like my master thesis was focused on agriculture. But then you would take a lot all over the world, 
you would feel like. And now I'm more and more, I evolve more into the field of policy innovation and 
policymaking. 
 
05:41 
and how design mythologies can be used in policy labs and this kind of stuff. So after university, so two years 
ago, I came to work in ClimateKick. So ClimateKick, I don't know, it's a knowledge innovation community that 
is basically a big public finance by their finance and not finance, semi-finance, let's say. 
 
06:09 
the European Union and what PASClamatic does is that they have a model in which they do a bit of 
consultancy on systemic approaches for policies for climate change and we do and one of the services of the 
company it's the one that I am currently involved. 
 
06:36 
in one of the programs that is called the demonstrations where it's a consultancy program in which the the 
governments, let's say regions, countries say okay I would like to do my transition towards your work carbon 
economies but from a systems innovation point of view. So how could I like not do traditional environmental 
policy making but how can I approach I don't know 
 
07:05 
from a systemic point of view. So yes, I am still doing, I mean, I'm not anymore, let's say, in the theoretical 
point of view. I try to do still a bit of conferences and keep my way of it, I think, into academia, but now I'm 
more into full-on on practice. Like, I can say that in academia, you are allowed a bit to learn methodology 
what you're doing, and I can answer you a lot of questions 
 
07:34 
Some questions I hope. During my PhD, I did this work that you are doing right now where I basically assess 
like, yeah, five, six methodologies in systemic design that existed to understand or to compare the 
methodology that we have developed at the Politecnico and understand as well four cities, how that does 
look so. I did that work. 
 
08:01 
Now I'm more like, let's say into the implementation, dealing with governments on how they react, how 
difficult it is for them to implement such approaches. So I can tell you a lot like stories or right now just to give 
you a glimpse, I've been involved in in this kind of, let's say consultancy, like these kind of programs with the 
Slovenian government, with the Basque country, with Ireland. 
 
08:30 
All of them have components in agriculture. And yeah, so on, on, on, on our, and yeah, on our types of things, 
but I want to stop right now because I know that you maybe have questions that I can hear, I can be here 
telling you stories like for, for days.  
 
Kamile: 
No, but I think maybe it's also interesting if you, you know, because I will lead you to some directions with my 
questions, but if you really have. 
 
08:54 
things that you want to express and tell about that you think are important. I think you can just go on. 
Carolina, I really, yeah, 
 
Carolina: 
 
I don't know. Yeah, I know. No, but also, also depends on, I mean, because I have, I mean, from different 
fields, I have different stories to tell, but I don't know if you have like a, a particular, let's say field in which you 
want to, you're focusing, you're focusing in agricultural in general. 
 
09:23 
with value chains on use of land or I don't know local product or so on. Yeah, there's examples and things I 
can tell you. And also how and one of my interests at the moment is how to run policy processes or 
innovation processes into creating, for instance, a 
 
09:53 
policies or improve policies in the agricultural field. We are right now working in trying to understand what 
kind of policy challenges we want to upfront in for the Slovenian ecosystem, for instance. Before you, our 
call, I was organizing this workshop that we're going to run on early January on how to, on overviewing policy 
challenges of the policy. 
 
10:21 
Policy challenges in the agricultural field in Slovenia, how to overview them on how to, okay, if we have, let's 
say, and how, what is important in this kind of things is that people in government tend to think that 
everything is silver bullet. Like, oh my God, if we do a policy on everyone is vegan or everyone is, I don't know, 
organic, like that's the solution. When we talk about their approach to climatic and something that I forgot to 
mention. 
 
10:51 
we work in a portfolio of innovation approach. That is a bit different to what I used to do in the Polytechnico 
because when you do systemic design, you map and you can understand the different, let's say parts where 
you can activate the system. But with the component of thinking of portfolios, in my opinion, it really lands 
like what systemic design, I mean, systemic design allows you to do the overview. 
 
11:20 
But the portfolio approach is a way of implementation of solutions of what systemic design can provide. And 
what is a portfolio approach? And this is something that even when we talk to governments or people that is 
not, I mean, in the innovation areas, like look at you, like, what is this? You know, a portfolio approach, 
basically, it's your group of actions that allows you of 
 
11:50 
spectrum of actions that allows you to activate that value chain or that system. And what I mean by that, let's 
say that we do a portfolio of innovation for the built environment. We did a whole mapping of what the built 
environment sector means from industry, material flow, policy. Like you do a whole mapping of all of your 
components. But the portfolio approach allows you to understand that you need... 
 
12:18 
a portfolio of actions in order to really generate systemic changes. And portfolio means actions in education, 
actions in policy, actions in R&D, actions in financial architecture. For instance, one of the terms that when I 
came to work with climate right now, I've been using a lot that I didn't use before in academia on, OK, 
beautiful your innovation, but like. 
 
12:47 
how you're going to finance it. Like innovation without a financial component, like I'm really like learning a lot 
about that. Like innovation without finance, a financial thinking, it means nothing. And also we're trying to 
transition with governments on the model of innovation that they on project orientated. 
 
13:14 
And like that this is something where European Union sometimes fails. Because if you are financing 
innovations with only horizons or like five, three year project, okay, what, like, I don't know, we did a beautiful 
project, let's say in vertical agriculture in like rural Denmark and like the, yeah, beautiful 25 partners, we had 
a great time. And then after five years. 
 
13:44 
what happens, like, so how you can think in innovation in a long-term brand. So basically that's why the 
portfolio is really interesting because it is not only about talking about R&D, it is not only about awareness, 
it's not only about the money, it's about like you have to activate several actions in different levels at the 
same time. So this is, and this is what I think that this is. 
 
14:13 
of a deployment of what the systemic vision, systemic approach means. And one of these pillars that we are 
developing in, that I was mentioning before in Slovenia, is this policy-law pillar, where we are in each value 
chain that we are treating in Slovenia. In Slovenia, we are treating five value chains, mobility, agriculture, built 
environment, manufacturing and forestry. 
 
14:43 
By value chain, we're trying to understand, okay, what are the policy challenges? What, like in what levels, 
how, like, which, with what, with which one we can start doing policy implementation. So this is, I mean, it's a 
super complex project, but just to tell you how like that to deploy systemic approaches, you need like 
several, let's say, channels of implementation. 
 
15:12 
The other thing that is important and something that I think that is systemic design, I mean, you as a 
researcher, you can do your mapping, but also it like the institutional maturity or how your stakeholders are 
110
==PAGE:116==
opening up to be part of these processes. And I think that when I was doing research in the university, I, when 
you're doing research in the university, you're super protected because it's a research, you do your thing. 
 
15:41 
And like, if people doesn't buy it, like it's not your problem. At one end, you are in the consultant side where 
basically in order to have a contract, you have to have the buy in, that's another story. So that has been harsh 
because not, I mean, you can work this systemic design approaches, you can work them according to the 
level of... 
 
16:11 
I don't know if that determines institutional maturity or the maturity of the stakeholder to participate, to be 
participatory processes. And let me give you an example of that. For instance, when the Basque country is a 
super innovative area, like this region has like really like a whole, like, yeah. 
 
16:38 
very long story of collaborative governance process, of experimentation, of really being open to that. 
Whereas in my experience in Eastern European countries, no way, nobody moves there. They need 
permission from their boss to do everything. And they are not so open in participatory processes because 
culturally speaking, it's not. 
 
17:08 
I mean, it is not part of their institutional culture. So basically that is, so systemic design and also during my 
PhD, I experienced that a lot. Like the deployment of your methodology will always change depending on the 
cultural context and changing radical topic and then we can come back to my recent experiences. 
 
17:38 
When I did my PhD, my PhD was two case studies of post-industrial cities, where post-industrial precincts 
were basically circular economy, and strategies were going to be deployed. And I focused on Torino, in the 
post-industrial neighborhood, or Mirafioli, where was an abandoned post-industrial area. And I... 
 
18:03 
wanted to do a comparison with the Global South and I did a whole research on post-industrial pricing in 
South Africa. And it was quite interesting to see what the methodology could provide to each one of these 
concepts. And it is not always the same input, for instance, in 
 
18:31 
in Italy or like in Europe, the input of this methodology is pretty much like, okay, how, like in the context of 
Italy it was more like there was a lot happening on the ground, like citizen initiatives that were like already 
regenerating the neighborhood better than the own city and how like this could be integrated. 
 
19:01 
or like the big money that it was planning. In the case of South Africa was a bit different because they had like 
a big money already established but the population was super ignored, like the local initiative who were very 
silent, were not so supported. So it was really different inputs and so on. But just to tell you that these 
participatory processes that systemic design provide. 
 
19:32 
it changes radically from context to context and yeah I think that they like even if you're going to develop your 
own methodology it like the methodology is always iterate in my opinion it doesn't it's not a methodology that 
you could say there's a formula and it's perfect no. 
 
Kamile: 
 
19:56 
No, I know it's an ideal, you know, it doesn't exist, doesn't suit everyone in the same way. So I completely 
understand that part, but it's extremely interesting everything you're saying. I don't even know where to 
pinpoint, I'm just making a little bit of notes.  
 
Carolina: 
 
I have, okay, we can sit here for eight hours, I just know any stories, but I would like to also to address the 
points you're more interested or where like... 
 
20:26 
Also, if I admit the methodological level or even case studies to look at. No, but I think it's completely fine.  
 
Kamile: 
 
I think I'm learning a lot from your experience as well, which is good because my next question was literally 
about your experience. That's what you have been saying as well. I'm also wondering, like you said, you 
talked about different contexts, you know, like how the methodology has to change radically. I'm wondering. 
 
20:55 
How do you assure that you involve the people that are relevant when you are in different environments?  
 
Carolina: 
 
So basically in that one, I think that it's super key. I mean, and also because in certain contexts and also now 
working me, as you can hear, I'm from South America, I'm from Colombia. So I'm being for... 
 
21:23 
12, 13 years living in Europe and like, I'm always been a foreigner in most of my professional life in all of these 
contexts. So, and I'm very sensitive with having like a, also a colonialistic approach and say like, hey, I came 
here to tell you what to do. And of course you have heard this before, but like, it's like we are here to 
orchestrate the process, to facilitate the process. 
 
21:53 
And this is something that also designer as moderator designer, and this is something that is very important 
to bear in mind, first of all. So myself always not being, let's say a local anywhere. I think that the most 
important thing that you should have, it's somebody that it's your local partner that has, let's say, um, these, 
uh, authority to, to call up different partners. So for instance, and this is not only applied to my research, but. 
 
22:23 
most of the European projects and stuff, like having, I don't know, the municipality that backs you up and like, 
I don't know, calls the persons from, I don't know, the representative of the relevant NGOs or calls up the 
representative of the industry there. So when I did my PhD as well, for instance, I was, I arrived to an 
agreement with, first with the 
 
22:49 
South Africa was the environmental agency that was running the process for delivering this circular city 
roadmap for this precinct. So I told them I come here to support you and to and I would like to have to 
support your work and they put me in contact let's say with the community leaders they join me sometimes 
even in South Africa was most complicated because it even 
 
23:18 
a cultural thing that it was. Like yeah, you can, I mean, at the end of the story, you are always a stranger 
because to be able to work with a community, you need to be four or five years of living with them and then 
like, so you need always a facilitator, a partner that allows you, that knows this community or knows this 
context of, for instance, in the case. So I have been in the side of. 
 
23:47 
of municipality or agency that can provide me, help me with the network of relevant stakeholders that I need 
for interviews and stuff. In the case of climate, things are a bit different because we have a contract with the 
government, so the government is obliged to provide this for us. And like, it makes sense, like, because at the 
end of the story, we are a foreigner agency, like, what do you want? So, and this... 
 
24:14 
Being, let's say, the foreigner or the foreigner agency also brings an advantage because people doesn't have a 
cultural prejudices towards you. So basically, yes, I'm not from the... So when I was in Slovenia, I'm not from 
the government, I'm not... I don't know, let's put it in this way. I'm not North European, I'm not like... They 
cannot judge me for everything. I'm super extroverted, so... 
 
24:41 
I could like, like, like they could feel that, okay, this is a safe space where I can give my opinion. In South 
Africa happened the same. When they find out that I was white, but I was not, let's say European, they open 
up and like even the people in the agency were like super surprised because they feel like these black 
communities felt like a bit of a, like, yeah, like, like, like there was, they could not box me. So, okay, fine. 
 
25:09 
So I think that sometimes being an external person from, and it's not about being North European or 
whatever, even if you are external from the process, let's say that you want to analyze agricultural system in 
Norway or in Russia, I don't know, but sometimes being external allows you to have a more neutral view and 
like... 
 
25:36 
being collect data in a more, let's say, objective way. But running a process with communities, you have to 
have, if you want to, like, yeah, farmers, or farmers' organizations, or like somebody that is your hook, that 
basically has the credibility to the process, but you are the person that is going to orchestrate, let's say, the 
participatory sessions, or whatever you wanna do. 
 
26:06 
People, I mean, I'm not going to tell you that, oh my God, in all my sessions, people were super excited and 
super engaged. No, there's people that arrives to the session like why I'm here, this is a waste of my time. 
What is the time? This is crazy. This is like kumbaya. Like we are praying. Like this is like, imagine like civil 
servants that are... 
 
26:34 
been there for 30, 40, like my sessions are with the most boring people of the world, but I enjoy that the most 
passionate part of my job, I think. And that's why I think that even I am very, I'm a very innovative creative 
person. My work environment have been with people that is super boomers, super I don't want to change, I 
am squared, this is life. But that's what I find very interesting to be. 
 
27:03 
In South Africa was a bunch of white old men super squared about their visions about what innovation was. 
And I think that it was most challenging but also very interesting to challenge those visions. Because I mean, 
it doesn't make sense or at least to me to be talking about innovation with people that already does it. Like, 
yeah, like what's the point? 
 
27:32 
So yeah, so it is challenging. You have a lot of that say, in the years I think that our job is more like climate 
therapy, like we are doing therapy. You're doing therapy to your stakeholders basically all the time because 
they don't talk to each other. So systemic design really create those bridges, but to create those bridges, you 
have to generate vulnerability. And one of the... 
 
28:01 
that sometimes I advise my workshops and stuff. It's the test talk of Brenna Brown of vulnerability. Like, if you 
are not vulnerable in participatory processes and like, and I think people in certain government positions are 
afraid for failure. Like they think that if we do one workshop, like. 
 
28:30 
Like you have the magic solution there and that single solution has to work. And one of the things that it's 
important in any process that you're doing is that these processes are iterative trial and error. And like that's 
that we have to also reframe what we understand as results. Results are the process, not like a target, you 
know? 
 
28:59 
And this is something that it is very hard to show it to a client, an organization, because they are they're 
habituated or deployed and all of these horrible places that you need like a report with numbers and like, 
dude, that doesn't tell you anything. You have a report, beautiful report. But so one of and I will stop talking 
about things that I advise you a lot to. 
 
29:28 
is theory of change, of course. Read a lot about that because I think that that's one of the methods that can 
explain better how to a client, how you are going to deploy a systemic approach. 
 
29:45 
Theory of change. So, other thing that I think that it's worth to explore is a MELD framework, monitoring, 
evaluating and learning. How, yes, you do your systemic project, whatever, but what does monitoring, 
evaluating, learning mean in that project? Allows you to understand, okay, at the beginning, we are at the 
beginning, we start with hope that people in that town. 
 
30:13 
is going to start buying the, just to start buying from one vegetable a week, cropped locally. But we expect 
that in 10 years, we have a communal, I don't know, warehouse where everyone crops their own thing. But 
that allows you to understand or allows to show your client audience, whatever, how much it will take to 
implement. 
 
30:42 
that change and that one lately one client tell us when this SLoenian person in the agricultural ministry said, 
ah, it's so disappointing this process. It's been three months and I don't see the systemic change and I'm like 
price like this is yeah, so ideas things eh to have in mind. 
 
Kamile: 
31:11 
It's just amazing, you know, listening to you because I feel like you're doing my dream job. So it's like maybe 
one day it's gonna be me, you know? And I'm listening and I'm just being happy here, you know, thinking how 
someone is doing it, you know. It sounds so amazing. I mean, you're talking about your challenges, but I 
mean it's... 
 
31:31 
111
==PAGE:117==
It's just amazing that you're living that sort of reality. I'm very happy for you. I can imagine it's an interesting 
process down there.  
 
Carolina: 
Yeah. I mean, it's been in the front line. But also brings, I mean, when after so much time of this lady, like 
sometimes after one year of trying to explain to her what that it's a process, not a... 
 
31:58 
It's a journey that I'm in the nation that is a process now. When they start like changing their mind, it's like the 
most happy part of the process.  
 
Kamile: 
I have... I wrote so many questions, but maybe you mentioned that you constantly have to challenge the 
visions of the people. You talked about the, you know, white squared guys. Just maybe practically, how do 
you do it? 
 
32:26 
once you are there in the room.  
 
Carolina: 
So, yeah, and also this has to be, and believe me, I know that in, I don't know, you're Danish, right?  
Kamile: 
I'm actually Lithuanian. From Lithuania?  
 
Carolina: 
Oh, you're Lithuanian, okay. But in Denmark, I know that, but you're studying Denmark, of course. And also, 
basically, I know that in Denmark, I don't know if it's really something that you really see, but... 
 
32:55 
in the environment I've been, it's also something about gender as well is a difficulty because imagine like a 
young woman saying challenging the situation, no, like that's absolutely out of the question. So I have faced 
that gender part as well but I think that it depends on the sense of you, I mean 
 
33:19 
You can add, and back to the patronizing part, you cannot patronize, no, no, no, no, no, no, you are doing it 
wrong, I do it, because people will tell you I'm too busy, this is the way things are being done, and so on. So I 
think that one of the things, and this is another friend topic on the, do a bit of a hard, harsh deep listening with 
them, I think that you have to spend a lot of time with them. 
 
33:45 
first and understanding like their way of modus operandi and why they do things and like why they have this 
mentality so with this Stakeholders and even in South Africa. I and why is to South Africa because I've been I 
work before there I knew the culture a lot And you have to understand a bit where where they're coming from 
as well and why? They took these 
 
34:11 
normally this rush and like top-down decisions and why they don't, I mean, why they don't want to open their 
minds or open their time otherwise. So I think that there's no formula for confrontation, but also I think that, 
but also to, something that I also tried to understand is what is their understanding of innovation? And like, 
 
34:41 
Let me give you an example that it was quite interesting. So the Ministry of Public Administration in Slovenia 
had a super incredible program of innovativa, that it was innovation for public servants. So in theory, the 
theory of that program is that they train a lot of civil servants in innovation for governance. And I was, when I 
arrived and they told us, okay. 
 
35:07 
we inside the deep demo program, I want you to create with us a policy lab. And I was like, no, but these 
people already are doing the mega program who I am. So we, we assume that inside that ministry, people 
knew what was innovation. Like I can assume you have assumptions of that. So this is a learning for me. You 
never, you can never assume that people are in your same page. And. 
 
35:33 
Then when we start doing like the trainings or start doing participatory sessions on how to do a policy lab With 
this like they were screaming like they were like, oh my god You're crazy these tools with these people like 
and then they confess No carolina. We are like the the lead of the program told me I am in charge of 
delivering this program, but I have never taken the course 
 
36:03 
So, Camille, you know now how much lies are around there. So, just to tell you, like, how interesting I was, I 
didn't know if I wanted to cry, if I wanted to be happy, if I wanted, I was like, what a bullshit. You have an, like, 
you're the lead of the innovation program, but you have never taken the course because people in 
government, and this is a spoiler. 
 
36:32 
They are habituated, they think that everything is like a program management, like you are delivering. They are 
not using their brains. So this is something that it was really hard with us because they have never done an 
interview, they have never run proper, like let's do a participatory process. They were like, they were in panic. 
 
36:57 
Camille, I was asking like a paper for tomorrow. I was like, Karolina, an interview, I have never done that. This 
is horrible. How can I do it? And I was like, because you cannot only run programs. You have to also, I'm not 
asking you to be an expert moderator, but you have to be able to understand what it means to do innovation. 
Otherwise it's like you can have in your website. 
 
37:26 
we do systemic design methods, but if you don't understand, so this is the kind of thing that also, then you 
have this one, then you have the boomer, the boomer that tells you no innovation, it's doing, I don't know, 
like, classical urban regeneration, we're going to have fields of organic food or whatever. So. 
 
37:54 
like fancy words and like very top-down plans and like going to move millions, but without regarding. So when 
you tell them, okay, but what about the local community? You have to do also the right questions as well. 
Like how can you put them into the position in which they do self-reflection on what is happening? I think that 
when they, or what we try to do in workshops and exercise, 
 
38:24 
to put them into a position on reflecting on their resources. Like how, like, and also I think that the systemic 
design approaches or tools allows that people can see the system in a simplified way and have a 
conversation above it. And that I think that that's the powerful, the powerful of design, that you create tools 
where you can create a space for conversation, for moderation, where it is evident. 
 
38:54 
And this is something that is interesting because people sometimes think that, oh my God, they need 
capacity building in system design. They need capacity building in innovation. They need, no, no, no, no, no, 
no. It's more about learning by doing. How can you do the things they know? Because sometimes people, for 
instance, we want to talk people in public administration or could tell you 
 
39:20 
I know I can, I won't participate in the meeting with the agricultural ministry because I'm not an expert in 
agriculture. Do the other and I'm like, dude, I don't want you to be, I mean, people have to understand that 
policies and participatory process, you don't have to be an expert. You have to be able to observe process 
from your, and this is what I always say in the workshops, you are going to contemplate. 
 
39:49 
this project policy or whatever we're going to date. 
 
39:55 
incapacity from I'm a police person or I am a teacher or I am an expert in teeth. I only can tell you about teeth. 
I want I can I'm not able to talk about I just say about the a cow, chicken, whatever but how you put people 
are is that they will observe a process. 
 
40:21 
from their point of view and they don't feel, oh my God, like we need an expert to, and this is something that is 
very harmful in processes that people thinks that they need an expert to have a discussion. And like in 
systemic approaches, like the input of different stakeholders from their own view is very valuable. Because I 
don't know, we're talking about the average system, it's never the same. 
 
40:49 
the perspective of a cooperative from a, I don't know, industrial, super industrial farmer, from a consumer, a 
city consumer, a rural consumer. Like it is, I mean, it is not only about the technical part and square people 
tends to be in technicalities. And also one of the things that happens is that people tend to think that 
 
41:20 
policies or initiatives if they say this is a circular policy. What the heck? Like you have to be very specific on 
what kind of value chain or product you're targeting because if you don't, if you put it in, um, always like, this 
is a sustainability thing, like, like I used to work, I did work as well with agencies of Latin America where we 
did a course where they wanted to build up. 
 
41:49 
circular economy roadmaps for their agencies. These are innovation agencies that are dedicated for like 
supporting entrepreneurial activity in their own countries. And they want, and I was like, I think it's ridiculous 
that you call circular roadmap of you, you can't, you have to produce, it is a circular economy roadmap for 
textile entrepreneurs that are dedicated to natural fibers, why? Because when... 
 
42:18 
this circularity or environmental policies have to be designed, tailored to the territory, not to like a generic 
thing. Because if you talk about generic things, you're never going to get results. You cannot measure it. You 
cannot understand the progress. You cannot nothing. 
 
Kamile: 
42:39 
Completely agree with you. I mean, it's something that is not clear. Yeah, but again, maybe something like 
very also practical and that's maybe going towards more methodology as well. You say you encourage them 
to look for resources and then you also said that we have to look at the problem from their point of view. And 
I'm wondering how do you... 
 
43:07 
track that point of view, you know, again, like very practically in that collaborative setting, participatory 
setting. How do you.  
 
Carolina: 
It depends if you have a, I mean, because I don't know if you're going to have a session with them or you have 
an or via interview. So sometimes, of course, in more than a research point of view, I did a lot, I did lots of 
interviews, of course, with them and like 
 
43:36 
systematic interviews to understand, okay, like their context, where they're coming from, why they have this 
belief and so on. But also during the workshops, they are certain models that can help you to understand 
those beliefs that people have. So for instance, there is the iceberg model that we did a bunch of exercises 
with that. 
 
44:05 
to understand, okay, what is, I don't know, I can show you an example of that if you don't mind.  
 
Kamile: 
 
No, of course not. 
 
Carolina:  
 
For the built environment, we did one example so they could understand like how people tends to be a bit 
reductive in the sense of, my problem is that, I don't know, construction waste. And like, that's the issue. And 
that's it. 
 
44:33 
But when you give sometimes people time to think how deep is the issue? And I think that this, I don't know, 
maybe this could help you. Eh, this is a tool, this is one tool. I know I get it. There can be many, many tools. 
So, and also, Camille, I'm not married to any, like, even if I work with a methodology for many, many years, 
I'm not dogmatic. I'm not into the church of circularity. I think that you, you, I mean. 
 
45:03 
There's people that is very dogmatic and my methodology and what I did and academics are very in love with 
themselves and it's fine. But I think that the more you mix methodologies and learn from other approaches, it 
keeps you fresher than ever. So yeah, I won't go in details on the other stuff, but I wanted to show you this. 
We did this exercise to explain them a bit of what... 
 
45:31 
of the portfolio of climate change, I'll show you that, but I think this exercise is what a bit of, of, of, of, this 
allows the person to understand a bit the deepness of their critical. So if, and these icebergs, I don't know if 
you have done it before, events, patterns, underlying structures, whatever. So we did two exercises with the, 
this was an exercise run with the stakeholders of the 
 
46:00 
So basically we did it with two topics that we choose, that was the issue of reuse and repurpose and adapt 
buildings and demolition waste. And what I like about these exercises that allows you to go deeper and 
deeper and deeper. So what we know is an event when we are talking about reuse and adapt buildings, that 
they are abandoned public infrastructure. That's a fact, that is like, but if you wanted to take it. 
 
46:30 
112
==PAGE:118==
into a pattern, into a doctrine that there is, I mean, surrounded that problem, there's the gentrification 
emerging or there is as well the higher cost of renovation and repurposing. So like, okay, this is a doctrine. 
Then underlining structures, there are lack of policies and regulation that incentivates this kind of stuff. 
 
46:59 
Then you have mental models that you can say, what are the behaviors, the traditions? Renovate is really 
costly. It is less problematic to build something new. And what is our paradigm thought about these kinds of 
issues? New is always better. Point. And the same with this kind of exercise with demolition waste. So an 
event is that 
 
47:27 
public building, it's still using virgin materials or no demolition by disassembly. This is an event that is 
happening there. But if you go into the paradigm thought, it's like get grease, fast and cheap of devolution 
waste. So having all of these layers help to understand the participant on like, okay, certain kind of event. 
People normally think in events. 
 
47:55 
rarely like Talks about the paradigm because this is normally the obvious But but when you are thinking in this 
kind of instructors really allows you to to to think in a different way so so so so Yeah, that's one tool. Yeah 
interviews as well But also you can be I mean you can design as well. It depends on what you 
 
48:23 
want to get from them in the session in the sense of, I don't know if you want to design a session to 
understand, I don't know, the criticalities of, I don't know, the agricultural system. We did a session in which, 
like I have to rethink again, I mean, every, depending on the group of stakeholders, I design sessions in which 
I... 
 
48:53 
extract from them what I want. So for instance, in the agricultural session, we did like a whole, we had a table 
with retailers, cooperatives, farmers, like it was like even people were super surprised like that we did the 
session with such a diverse group and like they almost killed each other because they were each one has 
what to telling their criticality and even there's 
 
49:23 
between the stakeholders because cooperative and former can tell you we are being our problem is being 
drawn by the supermarket the mafia is horrible and the guy in the supermarket is there and it says no we have 
given you subsidies so and like it's very intense because each stakeholder has their own truth Yeah. So I think 
that it depends. I mean, 
 
49:51 
It depends on how you want to design the session and get... I always like... When you're designing a session 
where you want to know these things, you have to be always clear, what is in it for me? Like, why they should 
come here and spend this time with you? Like, why? What they are gaining from this process? Because 
people get frustrated and bored very quickly. Yeah. 
 
Kamile: 
50:20 
Okay, maybe I'll try to ask last question. I know it's eight minutes left, but...  
 
Carolina: 
No, no, no, it's fine. I know it's the end of the day, so don't worry. It's fine. 
 
Kamile: 
But I also want to... Maybe I'll ask a question, and maybe I'll hope we can jump still and I quickly show you 
what I work. And I don't know.  
 
Carolina: 
No, no, no, absolutely. I know that I have so many followers, so don't worry.  
 
Kamile: 
I was wondering, because you have so much experience and maybe that's going to be my way of looking at... 
 
50:48 
that methodology that you write about in your paper as well. But right now, if you talk about the systemic 
design methodology, so you know the one where you have holistic design tool, then potentialities and 
problems. So if you remember those steps, and right now you have all the experience that you have, like do 
you have any idea how you would change it? Or maybe, I don't know, what do you think, what's important to 
mention maybe? 
 
51:16 
crucial parts of each part in the methodology or you know what can be done differently.  
 
Carolina: 
 
Oh my god so many things you have to I have to rewrite my my thesis I will rewrite it again like believe me like 
this and even when I finished the PhD and I have never heard one PhD student that could tell you yeah like 
everyone will tell you if I can rewrite my PhD I will do it again like for 
 
51:45 
or because because you know what happens is that when you're starting a process you I think that people 
tend to put a lot of expectations and like maybe idealize certain part of the processes. And I also understood I 
think that a I think that what I like a lot about the process is the whole diagnosis, which I don't do much in this 
day. 
 
52:15 
because I don't know when you are doing consultancy, timing is very, very different from academic time. But I 
think that one of the things that I like a lot on that methodology is the part of the potentialities and challenges 
and opportunities and how to, one of the things that I try to still keep applying how to turn these challenges 
into an opportunity and how to not look at it, okay, there's this. 
 
52:42 
And this is why I chose post-industrial areas, because post-industrial areas are the shittiest place on earth to 
work. Like, it's polluted, nobody wants to live there, lots of social problems. And like, I feel like, wow, I don't 
want to do a project in the Netherlands. I really want to be in where basically is the hardest to do because 
there's where systemic change is really needed the most. 
 
53:13 
So I think that one of the things that is still not so, and this is what I mentioned to you before, not so that I will 
improve better is the last step on the feedback and results. Because at the time, but I could say it now 
because now I have more experience on it. Like when you're talking about 
 
53:40 
how you're going to monitor these results, how you're going to guarantee this feedback, how you are 
processing these learnings because in theory, this is coming, this time it has to be always in the loop. But this 
last step, I think I never give it a lot of thought and recently I think that it's really important to think about, 
okay, like how you are measuring a... 
 
54:09 
like it's not only doing the project but how you're also creating monitoring methods, evaluating methods, how 
some super professors or highly theoretical people of systemic design don't appreciate more, a lot theory of 
change but I do. I'm not saying that it's the perfect instrument. 
 
54:35 
But I think that it is a very didactical instrument in which you can tell how an action is evolving. So I think that 
one of the weakest points of systemic design methodologies in general is that one. 
 
55:03 
But I don't think, I mean, it's a weakness or not, because I think that the methodology in sense is to have an 
overview of the system and how to activate the system. I think that we, I never like get deep enough or okay, 
and then what? How you activate, I mean, because visualizing and like having this discussion is great. But 
when you have to activate really like the systemic change. 
 
55:32 
What about it? So, and my research personally, I know in every project that I did, because of course for doing 
systemic change, you require more time of course. You cannot do it in the InterRex project that lasts three or 
four years or two years, and not even in a PhD project. But the thing is like when you can then... 
 
56:00 
give policy recommendations and more or less understand what they, thanks to the systemic view, I don't 
know that they could include a more social perspective or a word perspective. They could include 
entrepreneurs here. Like you can understand what are the components, but also I think that it would be very 
interesting to understand, okay, how those recommendations evolve, like can be, can be activated over time 
even though it's a process that requires. 
 
56:30 
like systemic change requires 10 years or so.  
 
Kamile: 
Hmm. Yeah. Very interesting. I was also... Yeah, okay, I will not ask anymore because... 
 
Carolina: 
 No, no, no, no, no, no, no, go for it, go for it. Like, I know that I talk a lot, but don't worry. If you have another 
question, it's fine.  
 
Kamile: 
 
I was also wondering, because when I read your methodology, you know, I'm not entirely sure what is the act 
of the actor, what is the act of the designer. So... 
 
56:59 
I'm wondering if in each of the steps, how did you imagine, you know, what is the role of you as a designer 
exactly? And what is, where are you counting on the community? Let's say for instance, you know, the part 
where you designed the system, is it you deducting from, you know, what you learned for the previous steps? 
Or are you again inviting them in the process in designing it? I'm just curious about this, you know. 
 
57:27 
How in your head is that working? 
 
Carolina:  
 So basically when you are, I mean, the designer is the moderator, but you are also responsible to synthesize 
those opinions or those information. So let's say the mapping is done, but you can also provide your own 
conclusions because you can also give a bit of a spot at the same time. Then it's a bit of like a kind of a 
diamond. 
 
57:56 
process if you want to see it because then you do it, but you open up the process to your part. But I mean, you 
show them your mapping or your infographics or you can conduct a discussion like on on your finding and 
like, yeah, like this is I find the most critical parts of the system. I don't know, are the way but it's not only the 
way it's 
 
58:19 
Basically that there is no regulation, but also at the same time most of the food in this area is imported, not 
local. So the waste comes from elsewhere. I don't know. So you open up, but then again, there's the role of 
the designer as researcher. You are, I mean, it's where you, of course, you open up the process, but the 
synthesization of the information is done by you. 
 
58:47 
And also then apart from that, you can also start putting like, okay, I identify these challenges, these 
opportunities. And I think that if we're going to reframe, like according also to what I listened to, what was the 
most key, like relevant opportunities, that fed by the stakeholders or by the information I read, I think that, 
um, I don't know, I want to repurpose the system in this way with these activities and so on. So. 
 
59:16 
There's, I mean, the role of the designer as moderator, as researcher, as, I mean, you are moderating the 
information at the end of the day. Like, people are going to keep, you have to understand that people are, I 
mean, because you are the one who has the global overview, you can enrich, you are enriching the process. 
 
59:47 
provide their, I mean, their, they hold their own agenda. Like you have to understand that. So, so I think that 
you have to moderate those situations as well.  
 
Kamile:  
 
Yeah, for sure. Okay. Thank you. That's an amazing answer. I think it clarifies actually the whole idea and then 
you can kind of assume in which in each stage how the process. 
 
01:00:16 
the process goes. Yes, Karolina, can I show you what I'm working on? It's gonna be a very... Can I steal some 
few more minutes? Is it fine with you? Are you sure? Because... It's gonna be a very high level. I'm gonna... I 
didn't want to, you know, put all my stuff that I'm working on, but maybe I'm gonna let me... I will share my...  
 
01:00:46 
Where is it? 
 
01:00:48 
Tadadoom. Sorry. Just a sec. No, no, no. 
 
01:01:08 
Yes, can you see my screen now? Yes. Yeah, I cannot share the board with you, so I'm going to share my 
screen. Quickly, as I mentioned to you as well, I'm doing right now the research, you know, of comparing the 
different systemic design methodologies. And as I told you, I also found your work there and I'm comparing it 
at the moment. 
113
==PAGE:119==
 
01:01:38 
with different methodologies and kind of looking for gaps. But what I've seen between all these 
methodologies is that here there are some kind of relevant steps that I can see in most of them and I map 
them here. So let's say understand the system, existing system, identify points for leverage, change, design 
the new ideal system, establish relationships, evaluate, implement, learning and feedback. 
 
01:02:06 
So it's very generic right now. Of course there is more behind it. But the thing is that I kind of created a few 
principles that I wanna try to implement in that model. So I called one equity. I mean, it's kind of very broad, 
but it says that how do we ensure an appropriate involvement or representation of stakeholders or actors 
transformation? So how do we kind of look for that, you know, 
 
01:02:36 
more substantial shift in the end of the process. Not just, you know, kind of changing something very small, 
but actually kind of aim for how the methodology for like kind of a greater change. And then sustainability, of 
course, I know you already also talked about this, how people just use it very broadly. 
 
01:03:02 
But I also thought maybe I will get a feedback like you said, you know, like you cannot just throw a term like 
sustainability and expect people to do it, you know, how do we make it more specific? But since you're an 
expert in this field, I thought maybe you could if you would know. I mean, I already actually noted a lot of 
them, so I can already place some. But maybe you have an idea how these principles could be implemented 
in some of the steps here.  
 
01:03:31 
If you have any ideas, maybe you don't and it's also fine because... 
 
Carolina: 
No, no, no. I can also show you. Of course, our design method was well had. I remember the principles of the 
weight. 
 
01:03:56 
and the autopilot system, yeah, output input. 
 
01:04:25 
I read a lot on her, most of her books, Mariana Mazzucato, the value of everything it's called. And so that's 
why I don't call it anymore. And that's why when I told you about the circularity church and even the 
sustainability church, I think it's more about local value creation, because that's what systemic design 
intends. Because... 
 
01:04:53 
It is like people and I don't know if you're vegan, vegetarian or whatever, but it's people that I am vegan and 
I'm like, yeah, but you're eating like hundreds of soy bean grains. So when people, so basically I'm working in 
field of sustainability. I say like, no, I do local. Like I try to do local, of course, not being super dogmatic. 
 
01:05:21 
all the time, but yeah, let me just understand if I can, I can, I think that it's two seconds. 
 
01:05:40 
two seconds because I need to use our... Yeah, of course. Or our... It's here, it's here, it's here, it's here. Nice. 
Two seconds. I will, I will, I will, I will show you the screen, two seconds. 
 
01:05:58 
So, are you seeing my screen? Yes, I am. Okay, I think this is my PhD, but I wanted to show you these were the 
principles. This is like the output input, the output yes, it's not the center actually. So these are the principles 
of systemic design. I think that I like... 
 
01:06:27 
I like what you were talking about, the first one of equity, transformation and sustainability, right? Yeah. 
 
01:06:41 
Yeah, so equity I think that it's related to relations. I think that it is, I mean, for you, I mean, what you're trying 
to achieve, I think it's more, I'm sorry, I want to show you that one is if it was the same thing that I was 
thinking. I think that it, so are like the, like I like them, I like the sustainability. 
 
01:07:07 
Yes, but if you're talking about, okay, we're talking about human relationships, the environment, and like the 
processes that connect both of them, more or less, this is what you want to do. Yes, like just be careful not 
to, that they remain like a bit base, you know, like that you include of the stakeholders, but who, and also now 
you're understanding now that sometimes 
 
01:07:35 
as this that I mean you can recommend of course of course I always when I'm talking about holistic diagnosis 
and stakeholder mapping that you need the quadruple -helix but at the same time I like experience told us 
that sometimes that depends like like in the theory that's okay but also that depends on who are you're 
connected with so that's a lot of let's say 
 
01:08:02 
But yeah, I think that in principle, if you want to analyze through these four three principles, I think 
sustainability have a look at the value creation theory, where basically you have to, it's how like systemic 
approaches or like in economy, you don't look about sustainability, but you look about how you're creating 
local value. And this woman, of course, she centers a lot about the create, like the value of innovation. 
 
01:08:31 
And how, for instance, you can say, oh, I don't know, like innovation is being created, like how innovation is 
being created, but that innovation is being profited elsewhere. And this is a huge issue with the government, 
that governments finance innovation and then some private companies take it. 
 
01:08:58 
the territory is not being profited by that innovation. So yeah, that's it. But I don't know if I give you like a... I'm 
only creating more entropy and not providing answers. 
 
Kamile: 
No, no, no. I think it's perfect. 
 
01:09:18 
No, no, Carolina, thank you a lot. Thank you a lot, actually, for this conversation. I will for sure be listening to 
it again from my recording because I think it was just very inspiring, very interesting points. I think it was.  
 
Carolina: 
 
No, I hope it was. I know it's intense. I also, my mind thinks faster that I can speak. So that's why I'm always 
like dropping different anecdotes. But, and so you're finishing your PhD next year. 
 
Kamile: 
01:09:47 
No, I'm actually doing my masters and it's almost one month and a half. So it's very soon actually. 
 
Carolina: 
So you have to close your thesis like in January? Yeah, in the end of January. Ah, so in January? Okay. And 
then what you want to do? You want to stay in Denmark?  
 
 
 
 
 
Interviewee: Moein Nadaei 
Date: 18.12.23 
 
0:0:0.0 --> 0:0:2.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes, I'm obviously doing some research on my side. 
0:0:3.850 --> 0:0:11.440 
Kamile Vaitkute 
UM, but yes, maybe I'm gonna start shortly to tell you about why I called you in. 
0:0:11.450 --> 0:0:12.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Probably it's a good introduction. 
0:0:12.810 --> 0:0:24.490 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So, uh, I'm actually doing my masters right now in, in design and innovation at Danish Technical University, 
our Technical University of Denmark in both ways. 
0:0:24.840 --> 0:0:36.940 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And I'm doing in general what I'm interested in is kind of design for sustainability more in a sense of like 
rethinking business model is rethinking policy making and etcetera. 
0:0:36.950 --> 0:0:38.600 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So more like on a high level. 
0:0:39.420 --> 0:0:39.960 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:0:40.480 --> 0:0:45.590 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And I'm also doing a lot of courses and uh, more like applied engineering as well. 
0:0:45.600 --> 0:0:49.90 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So engineering modeling, environmental modeling and etcetera. 
0:0:49.100 --> 0:0:52.130 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And I have an interest in agriculture. Agriculture. 
0:0:52.340 --> 0:0:57.830 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So, but also for my master thesis, I really wanted to explore this new field of systemic design. 
0:0:57.840 --> 0:1:11.270 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So what I'm trying to do right now is to kind of look at the systemic design methodologies and see how can 
this be applied in the field of agriculture and for like sustainable transition in agriculture. 
0:1:11.620 --> 0:1:28.310 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So what I've been doing the past months was doing systematic literature review on the systemic design kind 
of methodologies or methodologies related to systemic design and actually your methodology that you've 
proposed or wrote about. 
0:1:28.320 --> 0:1:36.920 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So design driven conflict methodology is umm one of the my top scoring methodologies in my assessment. 
0:1:36.930 --> 0:1:46.360 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So your work has been crucial to me, and I've actually tried to analyze it quite a lot, and I thought maybe I can 
call, you know, to ask you just some general questions. 
0:1:46.370 --> 0:1:49.840 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I also have very specific tiny needy questions. 
0:1:49.850 --> 0:1:51.720 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm not sure how much you can recall. 
0:1:51.730 --> 0:1:54.440 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You know what you've wrote about and. 
0:1:54.560 --> 0:2:1.980 
Kamile Vaitkute 
114
==PAGE:120==
And I also thought maybe I'll use this opportunity to just maybe try to get some input as well on your point of 
view of what I've been working on. 
0:2:1.990 --> 0:2:7.350 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It's very also high level, but if there is time, I would be very interested to hear from you. 
0:2:7.400 --> 0:2:7.810 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So. 
0:2:8.120 --> 0:2:12.380 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So yeah, uh, I thought maybe you can just start by talking about your role. 
0:2:12.390 --> 0:2:14.910 
Kamile Vaitkute 
What are you working on and etcetera? 
0:2:15.860 --> 0:2:30.150 
Moein Nedaei 
Uh, very interesting actually A and and and and well, I'm also a PhD student at at University of Antwerp, and 
it's like, I'm almost at the end of my PhD trajectory. 
0:2:30.160 --> 0:2:56.780 
Moein Nedaei 
So it's like 4 years that I'm doing this research before that actually I was more into other field of design 
sciences and and more into system engineering and then little bit like change and moved from healthcare 
systems and and designing products and and and services for healthcare systems to actually thinking about 
what what what actual systems ought to be not what what actually is a system. 
0:2:56.790 --> 0:3:8.260 
Moein Nedaei 
So now I'm planning actually to have hopefully very soon my defense and and and and from 1st of January 
probably I'm not going to be in, in Belgium. 
0:3:8.270 --> 0:3:13.110 
Moein Nedaei 
I'm moving to actually Netherlands, where I'm going to start new position at Utrecht University. 
0:3:13.840 --> 0:3:14.0 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:3:14.720 --> 0:3:27.710 
Moein Nedaei 
And and as you see, my research is actually on on in general on systemic design as a as a research approach, 
but also as a design approach and an inside of the systemic design. 
0:3:27.720 --> 0:3:44.10 
Moein Nedaei 
I'm working on kind of theory of conflict as a as a means for acceleration of the change process inside of the 
higher order system system with multi actors and multi agents and that's actually the main. 
0:3:44.360 --> 0:3:55.120 
Moein Nedaei 
I mean scope or main focus of my research, but also through my research I realized that it is important to all 
to to to design your own methodology, not mine. 
0:3:55.130 --> 0:4:6.870 
Moein Nedaei 
It's kind of a methodology that can bring different mentality, different approach towards uh designerly ways 
of just not knowing what also doing in in complex systems. 
0:4:7.480 --> 0:4:33.100 
Moein Nedaei 
So yeah, that was about me and and I'm very happy that that find your research also kind of aligned to my 
research because it's interesting to see someone, uh who is a little bit also thinking about having 
methodological point of view towards using systemic design because it's really abstract and it's still at at 
level of principles and theories and this sort of thing. 
0:4:33.110 --> 0:4:58.170 
Moein Nedaei 
So it's very important to see that it's it can be also applicable and for that applicability, we really need that 
kind of methodology called mindset and and and and contribution and that will that was one of the intention 
that I was thinking about designing methodology and also very interesting that that's the someone else 
hopefully can contribute from a different point of view to this interesting field. 
0:4:59.60 --> 0:5:5.640 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, great to hear why conflict like how did you go into conflict? 
0:5:5.50 --> 0:5:7.70 
Moein Nedaei 
How did I ended with conflict? 
0:5:7.80 --> 0:5:51.820 
Moein Nedaei 
Very interesting question actually I don't know exactly how and what what happened, but the thing was that 
the question on the lying the conflict which which was about change so well, it's about a about the the power 
because we we're gonna change system and and from a systemic point of view we are thinking about 
changing the the underlying values of the systems, the values that that that in a sense shape that shared 
images or that kind of assumptions or that kind of deep mindset that people together see and and and they 
realize the most important part of the system. 
0:5:51.830 --> 0:6:1.310 
Moein Nedaei 
So that is not something easy to change and that is one of the most difficult attributes of social systems and 
and how to change it. 
0:6:1.570 --> 0:6:26.870 
Moein Nedaei 
I realized that because it comes from the relation between people, therefore the the incidents or the trigger to 
change that also should come from relationship between people and that's why I realized that conflict, if we 
see it as a form of relationship that can also provide the the possibility to change itself, you know, it's like a 
bit abstract, maybe on philosophical. 
0:6:26.880 --> 0:6:38.930 
Moein Nedaei 
But The thing is that one of the main aspects, one of the main critical point of social systems that make it 
compelling, complex is that first we as a human, we are complex. 
0:6:38.940 --> 0:6:39.200 
Moein Nedaei 
We are. 
0:6:39.210 --> 0:6:39.970 
Moein Nedaei 
We are uncertain. 
0:6:39.980 --> 0:6:44.70 
Moein Nedaei 
We have lots of kind of attributes that makes me and you and with other people different. 
0:6:44.80 --> 0:6:50.220 
Moein Nedaei 
And other thing is that relationships because there are hidden or I cannot see their relation between you. 
0:6:50.230 --> 0:6:55.180 
Moein Nedaei 
I can see the the the effects of relationship but I cannot see the relationship itself. 
0:6:55.650 --> 0:7:7.500 
Moein Nedaei 
I can be cooperative, collaborative and based on so many nice things, but also it can be based on conflict 
and and the thing was that I realized that when we talk about conflict, basically we talk about the form of 
relationships. 
0:7:7.990 --> 0:7:10.470 
Moein Nedaei 
So The thing is that I cannot. 
0:7:12.290 --> 0:7:14.180 
Moein Nedaei 
Let's say disagree with you. 
0:7:14.190 --> 0:7:48.710 
Moein Nedaei 
Unless I see that some something very important is under tension and then we with that kind of things, I 
realized that if we alittle bit play with conflict and utilize it as an instrument of the change, that change is a 
really impactful change and that change can provide possibility for the stabilization of the system, some 
power to transcend something which is very difficult to be transcended and and that's why I realized that the 
the conflict can be interesting instrument, something that can be applied for systemic change. 
0:7:51.250 --> 0:7:51.710 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:7:51.730 --> 0:7:53.670 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And where is that idea of conflict? 
0:7:53.680 --> 0:7:58.620 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Do you think is most noticeable or evident in your in your methodology? 
0:8:0.230 --> 0:8:1.270 
Moein Nedaei 
That's a actually. 
0:8:2.420 --> 0:8:6.90 
Moein Nedaei 
Uh, maybe not, because this is a methodology. 
0:8:6.100 --> 0:8:9.410 
Moein Nedaei 
OK, so I I cannot apply this is a this. 
0:8:9.420 --> 0:8:10.610 
Moein Nedaei 
This is a good question. 
0:8:10.820 --> 0:8:13.530 
Moein Nedaei 
If you say that I cannot see the conflict. 
0:8:13.540 --> 0:8:20.850 
Moein Nedaei 
If this is your question because I want to paraphrase it, I cannot see the the impact or the the power of 
conflict in all aspect of your methodology. 
0:8:21.420 --> 0:8:22.710 
Moein Nedaei 
So this is the right thing. 
115
==PAGE:121==
0:8:22.720 --> 0:8:27.500 
Moein Nedaei 
If you say something like that, but The thing is that a by. 
0:8:29.720 --> 0:8:53.330 
Moein Nedaei 
At least in part of the methodology I work on conflict and and that part was the part that that was the most 
crucial part of the methodology and for for approaching to that crucial point of view methodology, I really 
needed to have a methodology, different steps toward approaching to understanding who are the conflicts, 
what is the conflict and who are the antagonistic actors. 
0:8:53.660 --> 0:9:12.660 
Moein Nedaei 
And that's why I started from mapping the context, because it doesn't matter when you start mapping the 
context, you can find antagonistic better, but also you can find actors that they have collaboration or 
cooperation or access that they are in in, in the really nice alignment together, but without mapping the 
context. 
0:9:12.670 --> 0:9:20.110 
Moein Nedaei 
We, without understanding complexity of context and relationship between me and it, is impossible to to see 
the the antagonistic actors. 
0:9:20.120 --> 0:9:32.70 
Moein Nedaei 
So that's why maybe part of this methodology is not necessarily about conflict, but the intention was to 
approach or to to to move toward understanding who are the antagonistic actor and. 
0:9:32.130 --> 0:9:42.0 
Moein Nedaei 
And I think in I my methodology is like mapping the context on analizing the context and then finding the actor 
journeys. 
0:9:42.210 --> 0:9:55.860 
Moein Nedaei 
So when I start to map the context and then I moved toward analyzing the context over there, I I kind of start 
to based on the power relationship between actors I try to see OK, we do have synergistic relationship in the 
context. 
0:9:55.870 --> 0:10:5.520 
Moein Nedaei 
We do have neutral relationship between, but also we might have antagonism and that's why I need to map 
this this. And then when we realize, OK, these are the antagonist. 
0:10:5.580 --> 0:10:6.130 
Moein Nedaei 
Actors 
0:10:6.480 --> 0:10:10.690 
Moein Nedaei 
Then we can sort to synthesize and and and. 
0:10:10.700 --> 0:10:46.770 
Moein Nedaei 
By synthesizing I mean that to OK, these are the interconnected then see what are the incidences, what are 
the the the the the power, the the means the things that are underlying these incidences this this confince (?) 
and then they start to play with them and then synthesize them for the next one which is the most important 
part of this methodology methodology is translation so I actually and that's why maybe you cannot see the 
conflict in the whole methodology but definitely in in some parts of the methodology you can't see the 
conflict and that's why I I I call it design driven conflict that should be. 
0:10:46.220 --> 0:10:52.910 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, no, I definitely see the conflict in that part of the like where you find the antagonistic relationships. 
0:10:52.920 --> 0:11:4.30 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I I feel like that's where that's where I found it, but that was also thinking like practically do you do you try to 
kind of also create the conflict in a room or, you know, or more like? 
0:11:2.560 --> 0:11:4.570 
Moein Nedaei 
No, no, that was that. 
0:11:4.580 --> 0:11:16.570 
Moein Nedaei 
That was kind of misunderstanding that sometimes people when when kind of in the first expression of this 
methodology, they see that the thing that I'm trying to make conflict in order to useless. 
0:11:16.580 --> 0:11:16.990 
Moein Nedaei 
No. 
0:11:17.260 --> 0:11:27.670 
Moein Nedaei 
There's one important principle in social systems, and that principle is that conflict is part of the every human 
systems. 
0:11:27.960 --> 0:11:35.180 
Moein Nedaei 
So it's not my job and not any person job to make conflict because conflicts, conflicts are all always there. 
0:11:35.340 --> 0:11:40.180 
Moein Nedaei 
You cannot remove conflict from systems, and that's that's a very important principle. 
0:11:40.270 --> 0:11:42.20 
Moein Nedaei 
So I don't need to make conflict. 
0:11:42.70 --> 0:11:44.740 
Moein Nedaei 
No one don't need to make conflict conflicts order. 
0:11:44.870 --> 0:12:0.300 
Moein Nedaei 
We just need to and that's that's that's the responsibility of designer and systemic designer when they want 
to intervene to complexities to have the power to analyze, because system thinking is analytical thinking and 
when you mix it with design. 
0:12:0.410 --> 0:12:4.50 
Moein Nedaei 
So it is a kind of a designer with the power of an analytical thinking. 
0:12:4.60 --> 0:12:4.330 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes. 
0:12:4.600 --> 0:12:11.10 
Moein Nedaei 
So this power has to be utilized for understanding the conflicts, not for making the conflicts conflict. 
0:12:11.220 --> 0:12:19.330 
Moein Nedaei 
So if you use that conflict, that power, and then you start to map the context, definitely you can understand 
and you can see the conflict. 
0:12:19.340 --> 0:12:25.840 
Moein Nedaei 
I don't want to make conflict I think, and I think that's one of the most important and sometimes 
misunderstanding about this methodology. 
0:12:26.450 --> 0:12:26.760 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:12:26.770 --> 0:12:28.500 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Well, that's good because that's how I understood it. 
0:12:32.370 --> 0:12:32.610 
Moein Nedaei 
No. 
0:12:28.510 --> 0:12:33.350 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But I was like, is there like underlying thing that I'm missing you know, but that's good. 
0:12:34.140 --> 0:12:34.500 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:12:35.420 --> 0:12:36.430 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Why do you think? 
0:12:36.480 --> 0:12:37.470 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Why do you think it's? 
0:12:38.510 --> 0:12:43.330 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Why do you think it's most important to focus on the those antagonistic relationships? 
0:12:44.360 --> 0:12:46.960 
Moein Nedaei 
Ohh again, I think. Uh. 
0:12:48.980 --> 0:12:55.630 
Moein Nedaei 
Those antagonistic relationships are the the the form of the relationships that they have the power to 
transform systems. 
0:12:56.120 --> 0:12:56.970 
Moein Nedaei 
So why? 
0:12:56.980 --> 0:13:9.590 
Moein Nedaei 
Because, because again, when people are in, in, in, in contradiction with each other, normally The thing is 
that people, the human, doesn't want to suffer, OK? 
0:13:9.720 --> 0:13:16.510 
Moein Nedaei 
We don't want to why we should fight, why we should be disagree when we can be so agreement is much 
more easier than disagreement. 
0:13:16.520 --> 0:13:16.930 
Moein Nedaei 
OK. 
0:13:17.60 --> 0:13:30.150 
Moein Nedaei 
116
==PAGE:122==
So we when we start to make this agreement over, something's it basically means that there is something 
wrong and that's something that is very important for me that I want to take the risk and start to fight with you. 
0:14:4.0 --> 0:14:4.250 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:13:31.970 --> 0:14:14.130 
Moein Nedaei 
Or and then and then and then and then finding that reason that why I want to start fight with you and then 
make a relationship based on something that I disagree with you then helps you to realize what the hell is 
underlying system that I need to utilize it and and what is the most important part of the system and that's 
that's the that's the the power of conflict that at least give you that kind of light that kind of possibility to see 
systemic variables systemic elements that you really need to uh work with them instrument them for your 
process of the change. 
0:14:15.90 --> 0:14:16.790 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm, OK. 
0:14:19.560 --> 0:14:21.270 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Very interesting, by the way. 
0:14:22.20 --> 0:14:37.590 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Very interesting to hear that, umm, there's a lot of that discussion about the conflict and power dynamics and 
I was wondering, have you looked at other sources, other frameworks or methodologies that look into like the 
same similar ways of working? 
0:14:39.390 --> 0:14:49.660 
Moein Nedaei 
I think if I want to characterize them based on my kind of understandings, people who kind of their work are 
interesting in terms of the different point of view into a conflicts. 
0:14:49.750 --> 0:14:55.140 
Moein Nedaei 
One is Bruno Latour that that he introduced kind of antagonistic mapping. 
0:14:55.530 --> 0:15:12.0 
Moein Nedaei 
Another is that that that, that focal Michele Foucault, that that he's actually the main kind of idea of power 
dynamic comes from Foucault and Bourdier and this kind of this these people are actually the leading 
leading people. 
0:15:12.10 --> 0:15:30.390 
Moein Nedaei 
And then after those people, they are kind of the 2nd order researcher and 3rd order research and we we are 
kind of junior who are staring working to kind of be a researcher but but basically I think that kind of 
divergence in terms of like also there are people in Utrecht University Flor Avelino 
0:15:30.400 --> 0:15:32.360 
Moein Nedaei 
She's also working on power dynamics. 
0:15:32.670 --> 0:15:36.970 
Moein Nedaei 
So these people, they do have their own kind of point of view. 
0:15:37.30 --> 0:15:39.810 
Moein Nedaei 
Depends on how different their their background is. 
0:15:39.820 --> 0:15:45.330 
Moein Nedaei 
Like Latour is a philosopher, but also is kind of this a little bit sociologist, anthropologist. 
0:15:45.340 --> 0:15:47.330 
Moein Nedaei 
So he's looking. 
0:15:47.340 --> 0:15:58.680 
Moein Nedaei 
He he does a systems lens toward antagonistic actors, and that's why he talks antagonistic mapping and 
these kind of things comes from his study. 
0:15:59.540 --> 0:16:6.210 
Moein Nedaei 
So he believes in mapping them in, in seeing them as a interconnected set of elements inside of the systems. 
0:16:6.500 --> 0:16:11.270 
Moein Nedaei 
But someone like like Flor Avelino is also very interesting people. 
0:16:11.280 --> 0:16:12.850 
Moein Nedaei 
She's also working in sustainability. 
0:16:12.860 --> 0:16:15.910 
Moein Nedaei 
She might be interesting for you to also look at her study as well. 
0:16:16.280 --> 0:16:38.710 
Moein Nedaei 
She looks as conflict from the viewpoint of people like Faucault I think because she seat from the point, from 
power Dynamic point of view… and those people, they do have a little bit of, I think structural point of view 
because they basically looking for the the structure of conflict rather than the mapping of the conflict. 
0:16:38.720 --> 0:16:47.350 
Moein Nedaei 
And if you look at their kind of like a use for instance actor mapping my system based on their study, because 
that was really kind of structural voice. 
0:16:47.360 --> 0:16:53.10 
Moein Nedaei 
So it was like very systematic approach toward understanding conflict and then you have something 
systematic. 
0:16:53.20 --> 0:16:59.560 
Moein Nedaei 
It's good for analysis side part and that's why I use that kind of power dynamic  as a means for for conflict. 
0:16:59.650 --> 0:17:1.60 
Moein Nedaei 
So that was another possibility. 
0:17:2.350 --> 0:17:8.260 
Moein Nedaei 
And yeah, and then and then also very important person in in conflict studies. 
0:17:8.350 --> 0:17:10.0 
Moein Nedaei 
Who is also again based on Netherlands? 
0:17:10.10 --> 0:17:12.620 
Moein Nedaei 
It is Coupoun (?)  (not understandable) 
0:17:12.630 --> 0:17:18.380 
Moein Nedaei 
If I pronounce her first name and last name through the, so she's also very in conflict constructions. 
0:17:18.390 --> 0:17:27.960 
Moein Nedaei 
She also has really kind of a systematic point of view to work conflicts, but none of them basically are not 
designer and that's mine of kind of my my argument. 
0:17:27.970 --> 0:17:46.10 
Moein Nedaei 
So I will, I can argue in a sense that in design sciences we don't have that many people that they work on 
conflict and having that kind of pragmatic actionable, let's say, creative mindset about, OK, this is conflict, 
this is the map of conflict. 
0:17:46.80 --> 0:17:47.970 
Moein Nedaei 
Then what I should do with this? 
0:17:48.20 --> 0:17:50.230 
Moein Nedaei 
What is the action out of this conflict? 
0:17:50.240 --> 0:17:51.870 
Moein Nedaei 
This is the most important question. 
0:17:51.880 --> 0:17:54.320 
Moein Nedaei 
I think that designer should take take it. 
0:17:56.250 --> 0:17:57.160 
Moein Nedaei 
Very important. 
0:17:57.310 --> 0:18:2.0 
Moein Nedaei 
And so if I want to calculate the like, definitely Latour can be interesting. 
0:18:2.650 --> 0:18:5.220 
Moein Nedaei 
Michele Focault studies can be interesting. 
0:18:5.870 --> 0:18:14.930 
Moein Nedaei 
And then second order researchers, Eflich Coupon, Flora, coupon and also people like, yeah, follower of 
alien. 
0:18:15.260 --> 0:18:16.920 
Moein Nedaei 
These people are so very interesting. 
0:18:16.930 --> 0:18:18.720 
Moein Nedaei 
They do have interesting research. 
0:18:20.70 --> 0:18:22.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
That's that's very interesting to hear. 
0:18:23.370 --> 0:18:25.360 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I will for sure check the check them out. 
0:18:25.370 --> 0:18:25.530 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
117
==PAGE:123==
0:18:25.370 --> 0:18:27.760 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I think because it sounds very interesting. 
0:18:30.450 --> 0:18:32.740 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, it takes a little bit time sometimes. 
0:18:32.750 --> 0:18:33.670 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah. 
0:18:27.770 --> 0:18:34.900 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Of course I have to find time for that, but actually, OK, we can we can drown yourself. 
0:18:36.620 --> 0:18:38.140 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes, yes, yes. 
0:18:34.910 --> 0:18:46.60 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Very easily in this topic is you know they everyone has thought such a different point of view to look at them 
and I feel like every time you read something more and more interesting, you know like and so even. 
0:18:43.540 --> 0:18:46.290 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. 
0:18:46.760 --> 0:18:50.810 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But it's it's very nice if yeah, so. 
0:18:47.60 --> 0:18:54.370 
Moein Nedaei 
But but if you have a passion, and if you, if you're really interested about this kind of things, it's not going to be 
that difficult job, you know, because you enjoy it. 
0:18:54.380 --> 0:18:56.290 
Moein Nedaei 
So yes. 
0:18:55.120 --> 0:18:57.70 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, exactly. 
0:19:12.730 --> 0:19:13.40 
Moein Nedaei 
Mm-hmm. 
0:18:57.580 --> 0:19:16.240 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I was also thinking because I remember your methodology, who you also relate, you kind of give it as a 
recommendation to that could help you as far as I remember to look into power dynamics, yeah, through 
resources that actors kind of possess or have access to. 
0:19:16.810 --> 0:19:19.430 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How does this idea come come to you? 
0:19:19.230 --> 0:19:29.220 
Moein Nedaei 
Well, that was actually something I just built by myself and I I just put different different during my kind of 
reviews. 
0:19:29.230 --> 0:19:46.440 
Moein Nedaei 
I realized that this I realized that OK there is there is conflict and some people are talking about conflict as a 
vacuum, as a imbalanced in systems due to vacuum due to imbalances in system in terms of internal 
distribution of power conflicts or coming. 
0:19:46.450 --> 0:19:48.400 
Moein Nedaei 
So that was some kind of information. 
0:19:48.820 --> 0:19:49.30 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:19:49.420 --> 0:19:55.770 
Moein Nedaei 
And then and then, OK, I said that if these people are talking about this, so let's start reading about people 
who are talking about power dynamics. 
0:19:55.780 --> 0:19:59.790 
Moein Nedaei 
So I put conflict away and then a certain reading, what power dynamics? 
0:19:59.800 --> 0:20:18.180 
Moein Nedaei 
And then I realize that you have different form of power relationships and power definition of power of course 
is very kind of broad topic, but one of the interesting definitions particularly for designer is that it is the ability 
or the power to mobilize resources. 
0:20:19.220 --> 0:20:19.460 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:20:18.240 --> 0:20:25.370 
Moein Nedaei 
This and then I said that, OK, if this is ability to mobilize resources, then resources are the main problem 
here. 
0:20:25.700 --> 0:20:26.710 
Moein Nedaei 
So the capitals. 
0:20:26.720 --> 0:20:28.730 
Moein Nedaei 
And then I said OK, let's read. 
0:20:28.740 --> 0:20:29.790 
Moein Nedaei 
What are the resources? 
0:20:29.800 --> 0:20:35.310 
Moein Nedaei 
How many different phone resources we have and how can we actually categorized resources? 
0:20:35.520 --> 0:20:40.10 
Moein Nedaei 
And then I then I read something from Ackoff (not sure) studies. 
0:20:40.20 --> 0:20:44.210 
Moein Nedaei 
He's kind of system scientist and then and then I found it. 
0:20:44.280 --> 0:20:55.580 
Moein Nedaei 
This kind of interesting relationship between resources, power relationships, power dynamics, antagonistic 
actors, and these form of nice overlaps between these different. 
0:20:57.0 --> 0:20:57.250 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Mm-hmm. 
 
0:20:57.340 --> 0:20:58.600 
Moein Nedaei 
Uh, thanks. Yeah. 
0:20:59.340 --> 0:20:59.580 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:20:59.780 --> 0:21:0.810 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Do you have like any? 
0:21:0.820 --> 0:21:9.10 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I don't know how much you actually try to apply that in practice, but do you have any practical advice how 
you can help? 
0:21:9.20 --> 0:21:15.630 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Your actors to think of these things, let's say from resources to power dynamics. Umm. 
0:21:16.340 --> 0:21:34.570 
Moein Nedaei 
Well, I think we as a designers we we really need to kind of let's say visualize or or kind of leverage this 
abstract items for because people we have different people have different value systems. 
0:21:34.580 --> 0:21:36.840 
Moein Nedaei 
We have different practitioners, different colors. 
0:21:37.270 --> 0:21:45.770 
Moein Nedaei 
I'm talking about people, stakeholders that they are kind of people who are living, you know, you are not 
researcher, they are not experts. 
0:21:45.780 --> 0:21:46.220 
Moein Nedaei 
So. 
0:21:46.570 --> 0:21:52.500 
Moein Nedaei 
So they need to realize, and they need to see what do I mean with power dynamics? 
0:21:52.590 --> 0:21:54.540 
Moein Nedaei 
What do I mean with power relationships? 
0:21:54.590 --> 0:21:56.240 
Moein Nedaei 
What do I mean with resources? 
0:21:56.660 --> 0:21:56.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:21:56.390 --> 0:21:59.920 
Moein Nedaei 
How many resources are what kind of resources do we have? 
0:22:0.10 --> 0:22:1.620 
Moein Nedaei 
How different could be resources? 
118
==PAGE:124==
0:22:1.630 --> 0:22:3.480 
Moein Nedaei 
What is the relationship between these sources? 
0:22:3.490 --> 0:22:5.860 
Moein Nedaei 
So this form of things are very best. 
0:22:5.870 --> 0:22:6.220 
Moein Nedaei 
Noise. 
0:22:6.230 --> 0:22:8.110 
Moein Nedaei 
Abstract things, but also they can be. 
0:22:9.690 --> 0:22:23.500 
Moein Nedaei 
Kind of visualize or they can be, I don't know, kind of making them tangible or or mapping them in a in a really 
kind of structural way and then they can use it as a kind of instrument for learning and for exchange of 
information. 
0:22:24.130 --> 0:22:31.580 
Moein Nedaei 
That is important, I think in, in, in whole idea of system design and then design contribution for system 
design. 
0:22:31.590 --> 0:22:45.480 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that providing situations for dialogue so the whole listing is that we have to create the the situation, the 
context for dialogic design processes. 
0:22:46.250 --> 0:22:55.390 
Moein Nedaei 
We need to start communication and that communication needs things to bring people together and to 
translate different opinion and viewpoints. 
0:22:59.490 --> 0:22:59.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:22:56.470 --> 0:23:3.180 
Moein Nedaei 
And when I'm talking about, for example, my resources and and for instance, I'm talking about, I do have a 
knowledge resources. 
0:23:3.190 --> 0:23:7.690 
Moein Nedaei 
You do have also knowledge resources, but how different mind knowledge resources is compared with your 
knowledge? 
0:23:7.700 --> 0:23:9.160 
Moein Nedaei 
Resources where that does. 
0:23:9.310 --> 0:23:12.810 
Moein Nedaei 
Where does that come from and how different from the knowledge resources is? 
0:23:13.50 --> 0:23:14.240 
Moein Nedaei 
It's very abstract. 
0:23:14.370 --> 0:23:15.700 
Moein Nedaei 
You really need to know. 
0:23:15.710 --> 0:23:19.200 
Moein Nedaei 
I really need to show you actually what do I mean with the services. 
0:23:19.210 --> 0:23:20.460 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that based on experience? 
0:23:20.470 --> 0:23:21.820 
Moein Nedaei 
It's based on intuition. 
0:23:21.830 --> 0:23:24.720 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that based on for instance, for instance institutions? 
0:23:24.990 --> 0:23:29.330 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that comes from my own personal point of view, is is that something comes from my family? 
0:23:29.540 --> 0:23:30.810 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that vertical knowledge? 
0:23:30.820 --> 0:23:31.960 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that horizontal knowledge? 
0:23:31.970 --> 0:23:47.700 
Moein Nedaei 
So this sort of the there have a lot of things for, for, for making them understandable for people and then by 
by by that kind of let's say clearity then you facilitate that kind of dialogue with the people. 
0:23:49.100 --> 0:23:49.460 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:23:50.390 --> 0:23:53.450 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK, they're interesting again. 
0:23:55.380 --> 0:23:55.970 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:23:56.20 --> 0:24:0.730 
Kamile Vaitkute 
UM, so you kind of see it as a designer's role to facilitate this process. 
0:24:0.810 --> 0:24:3.880 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Like, it's inevitable that one has to be. 
0:24:15.420 --> 0:24:15.630 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:24:3.110 --> 0:24:21.260 
Moein Nedaei 
This is this is inevitable for designer to intervene from the process point of view and and from that point of 
view there are facilitator and as a facilitator they need means of facilitation and from the theoretical abstract 
point of view, this form of things are are kind of the theory or methods. 
0:24:21.270 --> 0:24:33.10 
Moein Nedaei 
But these methods and theory they need to be kind of a little bit leveraged or a little bit designed with the high 
fidelity in order to be utilized as a means for that this facilitation. 
0:24:34.140 --> 0:24:35.850 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, how do you? 
0:24:35.980 --> 0:24:44.20 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I don't know if you ever thought about it, but can you somehow avoid the biases of the designer in a room 
like? 
0:24:45.960 --> 0:24:46.180 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:24:43.930 --> 0:24:46.980 
Moein Nedaei 
Oh, that's that's a very difficult this is tough job actually. 
0:24:46.990 --> 0:24:49.200 
Moein Nedaei 
So well, I I can't. 
0:24:49.270 --> 0:24:53.980 
Moein Nedaei 
I mean, I myself also I received kind of energy. 
0:24:53.990 --> 0:24:57.480 
Moein Nedaei 
I also give energy from that that kind of every action has a reaction. 
0:24:57.490 --> 0:25:6.20 
Moein Nedaei 
So this form of things you always part of the situation and that's that's a nice topic for a research for a PhD, 
for a master. 
0:25:6.30 --> 0:25:12.890 
Moein Nedaei 
So this separately so but what I'm doing is that I'm just trying to be honest and transparent. 
0:25:13.900 --> 0:25:14.40 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:25:14.660 --> 0:25:28.330 
Moein Nedaei 
So that's that's the only thing that's the only strategy that I use in kind of hold my kind of PhD and research 
because it's important to be also honest and transparent when you want to disseminate something about 
your research. 
0:25:29.300 --> 0:25:36.390 
Moein Nedaei 
I tried to be if if there is limitation there is limitation, if I cannot do something, I cannot do something I can do 
something, I can do something. 
0:25:36.400 --> 0:25:41.710 
Moein Nedaei 
What I did, what I didn't do, so this form of a little bit transparency can decrease. 
0:25:41.720 --> 0:25:49.60 
Moein Nedaei 
I think the biases of designer and by transparency means that like a nice communication. 
119
==PAGE:125==
0:25:49.720 --> 0:25:51.610 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm, looking. 
0:25:52.60 --> 0:25:53.470 
Kamile Vaitkute 
That's a good point of view. 
0:25:53.560 --> 0:25:55.530 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I would say a fair one. 
0:25:56.100 --> 0:25:56.440 
Moein Nedaei 
Right, yeah. 
0:25:56.60 --> 0:26:10.250 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK, I'll move to another step you in the step of synthesis, yes, you discuss imagining that ideal future and you 
propose to do it through the tool of heroes journey. 
0:26:10.560 --> 0:26:15.910 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And there is also exploring new realities in the stage of problematization. 
0:26:15.990 --> 0:26:18.550 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I was wondering, how do these two compare? 
0:26:18.590 --> 0:26:24.690 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Like imagining the ideal future in the third step and also exploring new realities in the fourth step. Umm. 
0:26:25.140 --> 0:26:31.730 
Moein Nedaei 
Explore new new reality is something that in translation or I did I mention in synthesis, it's translation. 
0:26:29.530 --> 0:26:31.910 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes, exactly in translation, yeah. 
0:26:31.740 --> 0:26:31.930 
Moein Nedaei 
OK. 
0:26:31.940 --> 0:26:33.30 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, the The thing is that. 
0:26:35.130 --> 0:26:35.860 
Moein Nedaei 
Why? 
0:26:36.370 --> 0:26:40.500 
Moein Nedaei 
Well, translation is that kind of dialogic process. 
0:26:40.510 --> 0:26:40.880 
Moein Nedaei 
OK. 
0:26:40.970 --> 0:26:43.480 
Moein Nedaei 
So it's a dialogic for that thing. 
0:26:43.610 --> 0:26:46.940 
Moein Nedaei 
I realized that we need material and material for translation. 
0:26:46.950 --> 0:26:47.240 
Moein Nedaei 
Is. 
0:26:47.250 --> 0:26:54.920 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that kind of imagination that kind of narratives of existing context but not a normal narratives? 
0:26:54.990 --> 0:26:58.400 
Moein Nedaei 
OK, you don't need a kind of a I don't need your diary. 
0:26:58.410 --> 0:26:59.680 
Moein Nedaei 
I don't need someone that. 
0:26:59.690 --> 0:27:6.270 
Moein Nedaei 
That's something I think very, very in many in many situations particular system it design things are 
unnecessary thing. 
0:27:6.640 --> 0:27:10.570 
Moein Nedaei 
I don't need someone to see someone like for instance, a daily daily liar. 
0:27:10.580 --> 0:27:28.430 
Moein Nedaei 
I need particular and and kind of critical diary and that critical diary again comes from that kind of incidences 
underlying conflict and the whole point of actor journey is to to realize that critical diary of the people or the 
diary of the tension. 
0:27:28.720 --> 0:27:30.790 
Moein Nedaei 
The diary diary of the conflict. 
0:27:30.800 --> 0:27:34.760 
Moein Nedaei 
Diary of the disagreement what makes you angry? 
0:27:34.850 --> 0:27:39.260 
Moein Nedaei 
What makes you to be to to fear what makes you to to have hope? 
0:27:39.310 --> 0:27:45.140 
Moein Nedaei 
Your extreme feeling and your extreme not necessarily feeling feelings. 
0:27:45.150 --> 0:27:47.700 
Moein Nedaei 
Part of that you're extreme incidences. 
0:27:47.710 --> 0:28:5.450 
Moein Nedaei 
Your extreme triggers that push you to act as antagonistic if you put them together, then it can give you nice 
overview of the the elements that can shape your narratives as a person individually, but also as a group who 
they have conflict. 
0:28:5.500 --> 0:28:11.350 
Moein Nedaei 
And then that becomes for me, kind of the the the material for the next service translation. 
0:28:12.630 --> 0:28:13.280 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:28:14.10 --> 0:28:16.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And they just got this question while you were talking actually. 
0:28:17.20 --> 0:28:21.680 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But what if the antagonist is not in a room you know can? 
0:28:21.690 --> 0:28:24.300 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Can someone take a role of that person? 
0:28:24.310 --> 0:28:25.220 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Can someone assume? 
0:28:27.290 --> 0:28:27.990 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I yeah. 
0:28:27.200 --> 0:28:31.380 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, I mean that's that's also another nice question. 
0:28:31.600 --> 0:28:35.570 
Moein Nedaei 
But yes, uh, like, for instance in my. 
0:28:37.410 --> 0:28:53.260 
Moein Nedaei 
In my current study, I'm working on artificial intelligence, so I use the power of artificial intelligence as a 
software which is not a software which is also an actor can be part of the the the the collaborative session. 
0:29:7.390 --> 0:29:7.630 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:28:53.270 --> 0:29:12.920 
Moein Nedaei 
So in a situation that we cannot find the antagonistic or people are not able to to to examine or to show you 
the antagonistic side, then that agent as a nonhuman agent, let's say, can help you to play that role. 
0:29:13.830 --> 0:29:19.750 
Moein Nedaei 
And and we don't need like in a in a sense, we don't need people or even non actors. 
0:29:19.760 --> 0:29:22.190 
Moein Nedaei 
We only need narratives, and that's very important. 
0:29:23.70 --> 0:29:28.40 
Moein Nedaei 
You can put kind of your pen, your pencil and then start to give it narrative. 
0:29:30.40 --> 0:29:30.250 
Moein Nedaei 
Here. 
0:29:30.260 --> 0:29:31.90 
Moein Nedaei 
Wait, what? 
0:29:31.160 --> 0:29:33.690 
Moein Nedaei 
And that's narratives, actually, we need the narrative. 
120
==PAGE:126==
0:29:33.700 --> 0:29:37.650 
Moein Nedaei 
We don't need people we don't need even on human, and we need the narrative that we didn't. 
0:29:37.660 --> 0:29:38.10 
Moein Nedaei 
Narrative. 
0:29:38.20 --> 0:29:38.820 
Moein Nedaei 
We start to play. 
0:29:41.590 --> 0:29:45.520 
Moein Nedaei 
And you, as a designer, also can, in a sense, identify that narrative. 
0:29:46.550 --> 0:29:48.900 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm so  
0:29:48.900 --> 0:29:51.40 
Kamile Vaitkute 
The narrative is a very crucial part of this process. 
0:29:51.800 --> 0:29:57.870 
Moein Nedaei 
It's very crucial point and and still I'm also struggling a lot with with understanding the narratives. 
0:29:57.880 --> 0:29:58.370 
Moein Nedaei 
How deep? 
0:29:58.380 --> 0:30:0.290 
Moein Nedaei 
How different form of narratives are? 
0:30:0.360 --> 0:30:2.760 
Moein Nedaei 
And then that's sort of things are very interesting actually. 
0:30:4.470 --> 0:30:5.20 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:30:6.10 --> 0:30:8.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK, that's very interesting. 
0:30:11.350 --> 0:30:12.80 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:30:12.130 --> 0:30:13.890 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And now maybe move to another point. 
0:30:15.520 --> 0:30:19.50 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I was wondering if you could elaborate more on the passage points. 
0:30:19.410 --> 0:30:22.820 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, it's maybe as well as some like clarification. 
0:30:22.880 --> 0:30:25.570 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Who is responsible for creating them? 
0:30:25.650 --> 0:30:27.210 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh, how? 
0:30:27.220 --> 0:30:28.850 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How do we emerge, you know? 
0:30:29.550 --> 0:30:29.980 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:30:30.30 --> 0:30:47.820 
Moein Nedaei 
So the the the whole idea of passage points comes from Coloum (?) studies and before that comes from the 
Lotour (?) and and they have never discussed in their kind of studies about seeing the the passage points, 
which is part of the problematization. 
0:30:47.830 --> 0:30:51.320 
Moein Nedaei 
And for the Problematization is part of the translation as a instrument. 
0:30:52.130 --> 0:31:11.980 
Moein Nedaei 
So I try to instrument problematization and and passage points as a part of Problematization and with in with 
in the first kind of iteration of my research, I realized that this process is very let's say hierarchical, structural. 
0:31:12.300 --> 0:31:26.90 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, a top down process that me as a researcher, I try to define a passage point for the people who are part 
of the situation in order to follow a certain directions. 
0:31:26.140 --> 0:31:27.850 
Moein Nedaei 
So that's a stupid thing. 
0:31:27.860 --> 0:31:40.750 
Moein Nedaei 
In the first place, it is interesting because you really try to create a situation for alignment between people by 
deciding and by talking and by designing a new direction. 
0:31:41.320 --> 0:31:49.980 
Moein Nedaei 
But again, the elements of that directions comes from you as a researcher, because I'm the one who who is 
analyzing the context. 
0:31:49.990 --> 0:32:1.180 
Moein Nedaei 
I'm the one who is mapping the context and I'm the one who is translating these elements as a narrative to 
give them to what they have to follow and how they have to follow these steps in order to make new 
alignments. 
0:32:55.570 --> 0:32:55.850 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:33:6.280 --> 0:33:6.520 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:32:1.730 --> 0:33:33.810 
Moein Nedaei 
The That's that's really tough situation and and also COLUNING (?) her in his study also mentioned about this 
this problem that that we really need to also problematization toward this process of a designing new 
passage point, and that's why to a little bit see the I think whenever we as a researcher or trying to to do 
something scientifically is inevitable to avoid this kind of structural point of view and this kind of let's say 
dynamic of power between me as a researcher and between people who wants to be subject of this study but 
again I start to some kind of study that how to to to deal with this situation how to make sure that my 
approach is a little bit more democratic you know to see that the viewpoint of people people and the right in 
terms of designing the passage points and then I said that I I I ended with the idea of boundary objects and 
with the boundary objects I said that OK if people are thought to talk and if we as a designer give them the 
more possibilities at least more possibilities see not 100% of possibilities that we could have but at least 
more possibilities to little bit make that kind of process more flexible because that's very important very kind 
of let's say the course of this research is to design and to to to define that direction. 
0:33:33.820 --> 0:33:34.250 
Moein Nedaei 
OK. 
0:33:34.420 --> 0:33:45.470 
Moein Nedaei 
And that direction, I think could be more because again The thing is that, uh, democracy is a is a process of 
voting towards selecting something. 
0:33:45.480 --> 0:33:45.800 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:33:45.810 --> 0:33:47.140 
Moein Nedaei 
So it is something for many people. 
0:33:47.150 --> 0:33:50.530 
Moein Nedaei 
It's very appealing, but again this is a process. 
0:33:50.540 --> 0:33:52.130 
Moein Nedaei 
This is a thing that you have to do. 
0:33:52.140 --> 0:33:54.710 
Moein Nedaei 
So you have already make it more kind of. 
0:33:54.720 --> 0:33:58.20 
Moein Nedaei 
Not really democratic, so it's democracy is not really democratic. 
0:33:58.30 --> 0:34:2.570 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, because we you already created a sort of passage one for people. 
0:34:2.640 --> 0:34:3.550 
Moein Nedaei 
You have to go there. 
0:34:3.560 --> 0:34:5.870 
Moein Nedaei 
You have to participate in certain time. You have to. 
0:34:5.930 --> 0:34:18.490 
Moein Nedaei 
You have to vote for certain people, so every these kind of situations already decreased the possibility of 
people to show their own reality and that's why we need we are talking about the voice of people. 
0:34:18.740 --> 0:34:26.670 
Moein Nedaei 
So by by by let's say by creating a situation for defining different boundary objects and giving them more 
possibility in terms of boundary objects. 
121
==PAGE:127==
0:34:29.780 --> 0:34:30.80 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:34:26.680 --> 0:34:30.210 
Moein Nedaei 
I try to make it more democratic to at least. 
0:34:37.300 --> 0:34:37.430 
Kamile Vaitkute 
What? 
0:34:45.710 --> 0:34:45.900 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hello. 
0:36:28.210 --> 0:36:28.370 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hello. 
0:36:29.130 --> 0:36:29.520 
Moein Nedaei 
Hello. 
0:36:32.540 --> 0:36:33.140 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:36:35.240 --> 0:36:35.890 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I was worried. 
0:36:35.900 --> 0:36:37.80 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I was like, is, is he fine? 
0:36:37.290 --> 0:36:37.660 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Do you know? 
0:36:29.530 --> 0:36:39.590 
Moein Nedaei 
Sorry actually my my battery died so but I'm getting back no but just keep the recording. 
0:36:39.600 --> 0:36:42.140 
Moein Nedaei 
If you still recording, I think it is OK. 
0:36:41.730 --> 0:36:42.480 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I think it's still. 
0:36:42.590 --> 0:36:42.820 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:36:42.830 --> 0:36:43.320 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. OK. 
0:36:43.330 --> 0:36:43.580 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:36:43.140 --> 0:36:44.10 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. OK. 
0:36:44.80 --> 0:36:44.330 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:36:43.650 --> 0:36:44.710 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Thank you for asking. 
0:36:46.520 --> 0:36:47.570 
Kamile Vaitkute 
No, no, no problem. 
0:36:44.380 --> 0:36:48.140 
Moein Nedaei 
So yeah, sorry for that and yeah. 
0:36:52.30 --> 0:36:53.0 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
0:36:53.70 --> 0:36:53.630 
Moein Nedaei 
The boundary? 
0:36:47.640 --> 0:36:54.100 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, no, you were talking about the boundary objects or may actually people continue would be interesting. 
0:36:54.700 --> 0:36:55.370 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:36:55.440 --> 0:37:11.150 
Moein Nedaei 
So the whole idea is that that that that passage point is very kind of strict process and and it's very artificial in 
a sense to carry it alignment between people based on the, the the boundary objects. 
0:37:11.160 --> 0:37:24.850 
Moein Nedaei 
And I struggled a lot and I think a lot how to make it more democratic, how to provide situation for people to 
to, to talk and to to have a conversation over their basic values. 
0:37:24.860 --> 0:37:28.300 
Moein Nedaei 
And then for that I realized that it should be. 
0:37:28.510 --> 0:37:36.400 
Moein Nedaei 
Then again, designer can intervene with their creativity and then that creativity come could could comes from 
different possibilities. 
0:37:36.410 --> 0:37:44.990 
Moein Nedaei 
For one dear objects and The thing is that I don't know why, but designers normally see the boundary object 
from one or two viewpoints. 
0:37:45.540 --> 0:37:46.810 
Moein Nedaei 
See like for instance it's. 
0:37:46.820 --> 0:38:5.20 
Moein Nedaei 
It could be cards or it could be like some kind of creative materials, but The thing is that I try to extend that 
possibilities for boundary objects and one of the interesting points from my point of view in my research is 
that I realized that OK sometimes boundary objects could be based on something, but that we have. 
0:38:5.120 --> 0:38:8.530 
Moein Nedaei 
But sometimes that bonds you object could be based on something that we don't have. 
0:38:9.590 --> 0:38:9.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:38:9.420 --> 0:38:17.670 
Moein Nedaei 
Uh, so the whole idea of boundary object is to to to cross to create a situation for connection between 
people. 
0:38:42.590 --> 0:38:42.820 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:38:17.730 --> 0:38:52.670 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, I want to be connected with you and and that's that's so The thing is that in, in, in, in, in, in designing 
new passage points we are looking for points that if we put them together points between people that if we 
put them together then that can show people a road map towards something which is mutual and then that 
mutual is should be very important and should be based on the reward objects and that can help them to be 
kind of allies in a sense. 
0:38:52.680 --> 0:39:11.780 
Moein Nedaei 
After lots of discussion under your looks, so those points I realized that could be they could come from 
actually the the boundary objects and we as the designers were give them different possibilities for boundary 
object, not only based on what they have, but also based on what they don't have or what they desire. 
0:39:13.580 --> 0:39:13.840 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:39:13.470 --> 0:39:23.450 
Moein Nedaei 
Then can also provide, let's say a little bit futuristic, point of defining those points and then making the map of 
future direction. 
0:39:24.120 --> 0:39:26.950 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm could you give like a an example? 
0:39:27.910 --> 0:39:29.970 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Because I feel like it's still. Yeah. 
0:39:37.930 --> 0:39:38.130 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:39:26.480 --> 0:39:39.620 
Moein Nedaei 
Example, yeah, for it's very very easy example like like for instance me and you are here and both of us 
looking to to be graduated for graduation, we need a degree. 
0:39:39.630 --> 0:39:40.530 
Moein Nedaei 
We need a certificate. 
0:39:41.630 --> 0:39:42.30 
Moein Nedaei 
OK. 
122
==PAGE:128==
0:39:42.70 --> 0:39:43.320 
Moein Nedaei 
But you are two different people. 
0:39:43.330 --> 0:40:0.980 
Moein Nedaei 
We have lots of kind of situations and we do have lots of disagreements over the the many, many aspects, 
but at the certain point we need a situation to both of us being graduated and that situations which we don't 
have, which is certificate, can provide a means for connections. 
0:40:0.990 --> 0:40:2.440 
Moein Nedaei 
And that means again. 
0:40:2.450 --> 0:40:5.140 
Moein Nedaei 
For instance, could be to repository. 
0:40:5.600 --> 0:40:21.540 
Moein Nedaei 
You can go together in the library and start to read and the library could be a boundary object between two 
people that they feel that they don't have something, and that that idea of don't having something can bring 
them together to into the library. 
0:40:21.910 --> 0:40:51.710 
Moein Nedaei 
But while they're two people with two different kind of situations and the whole these kind of like creating 
these map of boundary objects like imagine having 10 libraries and each library has different intention in 
different objects, different kind of situations and different kinds of elements and then mapping those libraries 
together in order to give you and me as a two people with different opinion point of view to simply steps 
moving towards something which is kind of a idea for me and you. 
0:40:52.250 --> 0:40:52.560 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:40:52.460 --> 0:41:6.400 
Moein Nedaei 
So it's very again, I don't know if I could explain it in a nice way, but but yeah, it's very abstract and and you 
know in a different you can have your own kind of interpretation about what I'm saying here. 
0:41:6.840 --> 0:41:7.60 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:41:6.730 --> 0:41:15.680 
Moein Nedaei 
But what I'm saying here is is also use your creativity to to to identify what could be a means for alignment 
between people. 
0:41:16.130 --> 0:41:16.450 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:41:16.290 --> 0:41:25.540 
Moein Nedaei 
I I find it like the things that you don't have and I don't have, could be also another addition to bonded objects, 
but we do have like maps we do have like modular objects. 
0:41:25.550 --> 0:41:26.880 
Moein Nedaei 
We do have a standard forms. 
0:41:27.370 --> 0:41:36.440 
Moein Nedaei 
All of them are sort of boundary, but it's yeah, like for instance, this kind of the team Microsoft team as a 
means for meeting is a boundary object. Yeah. 
0:41:37.300 --> 0:41:37.730 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:41:38.540 --> 0:41:38.690 
Moein Nedaei 
So. 
0:41:38.330 --> 0:41:45.90 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm so but still I I feel like what I'm getting from you that the boundary objects are still created by designer. 
0:41:47.290 --> 0:41:48.860 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes, yes, yes. 
0:41:45.680 --> 0:41:48.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
The designer is the one responsible to to come up. 
0:41:48.870 --> 0:41:51.300 
Moein Nedaei 
People are not designing Microsoft team. 
0:41:51.690 --> 0:41:56.480 
Moein Nedaei 
This is designer that design a Microsoft team, but me and you are the people who have to use it. 
0:41:56.870 --> 0:42:5.580 
Moein Nedaei 
But but just imagine in a set of Microsoft Teams we could have different possibilities and variety of 
possibilities for disconnections. 
0:42:6.90 --> 0:42:6.390 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:42:6.470 --> 0:42:10.880 
Moein Nedaei 
Then then at least it could be more democratic, because now it's it's real obligatory. 
0:42:10.930 --> 0:42:14.460 
Moein Nedaei 
I really need to use it and also Internet and this kind of electricity. 
0:42:14.470 --> 0:42:17.770 
Moein Nedaei 
Whole disk bunch of things are very kind of obligatory for me. 
0:42:18.440 --> 0:42:18.760 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:42:18.530 --> 0:42:20.330 
Moein Nedaei 
Like I'm not in the power to choose them. 
0:42:21.250 --> 0:42:25.20 
Moein Nedaei 
We designer or the one who is designing this thing with this and this this things one. 
0:42:25.490 --> 0:42:33.0 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But then I'm also assuming that the step that between synthesis and problematization is a very big step in 
between. 
0:42:33.10 --> 0:42:37.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Designer has to come up with a lot of the boundary objects that you are talking about. 
0:42:37.810 --> 0:42:38.280 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, OK. 
0:42:38.60 --> 0:42:38.730 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes. 
0:42:42.540 --> 0:42:42.750 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:42:38.740 --> 0:42:44.730 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes, it's very big step is one of the limitation of this methodology and actually I recently work on it. 
0:42:44.790 --> 0:42:48.30 
Moein Nedaei 
I kind of in a in a simulation situation. 
0:43:3.620 --> 0:43:3.840 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:42:48.40 --> 0:43:7.770 
Moein Nedaei 
I implement this methodology certain kind with another iteration, because this methodology has also another 
iterations and that iteration has different kind of interactive tools and I've worked on that and I realized yes, 
skip from umm from from map mapping actors, the journey mapping to translation is a big step. 
0:43:8.670 --> 0:43:8.920 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:43:18.450 --> 0:43:18.690 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:43:9.750 --> 0:43:19.970 
Moein Nedaei 
And that needs a kind of a mediatory step, and that could be, uh, dividing translation into the different parts 
or dividing. 
0:43:19.980 --> 0:43:26.670 
Moein Nedaei 
I think actor journeys in different parts or making boundary objects a separate part of this methodology. 
0:43:36.280 --> 0:43:36.520 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:43:26.980 --> 0:43:45.40 
Moein Nedaei 
And then give them… people this possibility to be connected or no become like kind of knowing the problem 
like for instance there is a project and you want to intervene and then start to kind of start designing the 
boundary object before starting this kind of using the methodology can help you to to accelerate this 
process. 
0:43:45.50 --> 0:43:47.40 
Moein Nedaei 
Otherwise it takes a lot of time. 
123
==PAGE:129==
0:43:47.410 --> 0:43:50.10 
Moein Nedaei 
There's really kind of almost impossible. 
0:43:50.680 --> 0:43:51.310 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:43:51.730 --> 0:43:52.460 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:43:52.830 --> 0:43:58.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Well, it's it's it's just amazing to actually hear you talk about it because actually I read, I read your work a few 
times. 
0:43:58.810 --> 0:43:59.980 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I even like you can see here. 
0:44:0.30 --> 0:44:3.740 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I do sketches to like understand like different. 
0:44:3.750 --> 0:44:5.420 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You know papers or you cannot see it. 
0:44:5.500 --> 0:44:9.740 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So it's very nice to hear it from, you know, at first like hand opinion. 
0:44:10.70 --> 0:44:22.790 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I also, as I told you, I would like to maybe ask just to kind of also use an opportunity to have your knowledge 
here and if you're OK with that going to introduce a boundary object which is a Myro board here. 
0:44:22.970 --> 0:44:23.770 
Moein Nedaei 
OK, cool. Yes. 
0:44:23.450 --> 0:44:24.30 
Kamile Vaitkute 
That's right. 
0:44:24.230 --> 0:44:27.510 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm gonna try to integrate it into into this meeting. 
0:44:27.780 --> 0:44:30.280 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Let me just I hope it works. 
0:44:31.890 --> 0:44:35.900 
Kamile Vaitkute 
What I would like you to to ask you, of course, maybe we can also just say no. 
0:44:36.680 --> 0:44:36.820 
Moein Nedaei 
Hello. 
0:44:36.530 --> 0:44:37.640 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It's up to you. 
0:44:37.890 --> 0:44:38.210 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah. 
0:44:38.70 --> 0:44:40.250 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But umm, I'm gonna. 
0:44:40.260 --> 0:44:43.990 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes, let's see in bed the board and hope this works. Uh. 
0:44:45.900 --> 0:44:49.570 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh, this I actually never done this on teams. Umm. 
0:44:50.170 --> 0:44:51.420 
Moein Nedaei 
I can't see here. 
0:44:51.830 --> 0:44:51.990 
Kamile Vaitkute 
No. 
0:44:51.430 --> 0:44:54.140 
Moein Nedaei 
It will kind of new systemic design. 
0:44:55.150 --> 0:44:55.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes. 
0:44:55.870 --> 0:44:58.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Can ohh I'd buy ohh look. 
0:44:55.720 --> 0:45:0.330 
Moein Nedaei 
So there is a there should be, but they cannot click on it actually. 
0:45:0.760 --> 0:45:2.450 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Oh, I think I can click. 
0:45:2.780 --> 0:45:3.470 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Can see it. 
0:45:3.760 --> 0:45:4.350 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, like. 
0:45:3.30 --> 0:45:4.380 
Moein Nedaei 
Uh, yeah, I can see it. 
0:45:4.390 --> 0:45:4.930 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes, yes. 
0:45:5.930 --> 0:45:12.740 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I I did as a very broad level overview, it's it's so kind of because I knew when don't have a lot of time. 
0:45:13.10 --> 0:45:15.600 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But so I I can show you here. 
0:45:15.610 --> 0:45:17.240 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It's like a secret board here. 
0:45:22.30 --> 0:45:22.330 
Moein Nedaei 
Nice. 
0:45:17.290 --> 0:45:47.260 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm comparing different methodologies so as you can see it's your name here one of them, and right now I 
have two methodologies and I'm kind of like have them almost comparing and mapping kind of gaps between 
them and also what other methodologies, how we can fulfill the methodology that for instance you propose 
but also between these methodologies are kind of found these almost related steps and you can see here 
understand the existing system. 
0:45:47.330 --> 0:45:50.720 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It didn't defied points for leverage change design. 
0:45:50.730 --> 0:45:57.500 
Kamile Vaitkute 
The new ideal system established relationships, evaluate, implement learning and feedback. 
0:45:57.950 --> 0:45:58.150 
Moein Nedaei 
Yep. 
0:45:58.250 --> 0:46:10.10 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So these are sort of the steps I'm kind of seeing in common between them and for my methodology, I'm really 
looking into introducing this. 
0:46:10.520 --> 0:46:11.790 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You can see here free. 
0:46:12.780 --> 0:46:14.410 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I would call it them principles. 
0:46:14.420 --> 0:46:26.390 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, so let a principle of equity which I called like that, but basically is about ensuring an appropriate 
involvement or representation of different stakeholders. 
0:46:26.920 --> 0:46:29.670 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Another principle of transformation. 
0:46:29.680 --> 0:46:33.810 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So how we can create an actually substantial shift in the system? 
0:46:33.820 --> 0:46:35.320 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I think you're an expert of that. 
0:46:35.330 --> 0:46:40.590 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Talking about the paradigm shift, but how can we actually design for, you know, something like that? 
0:46:40.640 --> 0:46:53.500 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And then, of course, sustainability notes and extremely broad topic and everyone understands it's 
124
==PAGE:130==
completely differently, but that's something I'm also looking into, how can that transformation or change 
appear introducing? 
0:46:53.510 --> 0:46:54.100 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How can it? 
0:46:54.460 --> 0:46:57.820 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How can we try to make it sustainable throughout those steps? 
0:46:58.290 --> 0:47:2.500 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I'm not sure if you have input for that, but I wanted to ask. 
0:47:2.550 --> 0:47:6.420 
Kamile Vaitkute 
If you look at each step is there. 
0:47:6.470 --> 0:47:7.640 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Is there a principle? 
0:47:7.650 --> 0:47:9.600 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Are there furries ideas. 
0:47:9.610 --> 0:47:10.120 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh. 
0:47:10.210 --> 0:47:10.940 
Kamile Vaitkute 
From you know. 
0:47:13.760 --> 0:47:14.30 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:47:14.40 --> 0:47:16.260 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Like this or ohh. 
0:47:18.980 --> 0:47:19.820 
Kamile Vaitkute 
No. OK. 
0:47:10.540 --> 0:47:20.50 
Moein Nedaei 
Can you can you zoom zoom it a little bit more because it's it's very I don't I cannot see actually the the things 
because it's too far. 
0:47:20.60 --> 0:47:20.970 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes, I I can. 
0:47:20.980 --> 0:47:23.190 
Moein Nedaei 
I can see the whole board but I cannot see in detail. 
0:47:25.260 --> 0:47:25.430 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:47:23.270 --> 0:47:25.450 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Ohh not at all, because for me it's so so. 
0:47:25.440 --> 0:47:25.570 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:47:25.580 --> 0:47:25.690 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:47:25.700 --> 0:47:26.810 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I can zoom it. 
0:47:26.820 --> 0:47:27.190 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah. 
0:47:27.240 --> 0:47:27.870 
Moein Nedaei 
Now it's OK. 
0:47:27.510 --> 0:47:28.190 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:47:27.880 --> 0:47:28.520 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah. 
0:47:28.230 --> 0:47:29.390 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. Yes. 
0:47:30.780 --> 0:47:31.370 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes. 
0:47:31.570 --> 0:47:32.360 
Moein Nedaei 
So yeah. 
0:47:31.100 --> 0:47:46.750 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I would just, yeah, maybe you could have for each of these principle maybe no at some of the steps you 
would have some I know ideas or you know you you talked a lot about also different you know knowledge that 
you have from other authors as well. 
0:47:46.760 --> 0:47:59.590 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But any ideas that you have for the step regarding the principles that I don't know I could look into or 
something from your experience, you know, you already know, you know, uh could have given advice. 
0:48:1.110 --> 0:48:3.440 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I'm gonna give you a second to. 
0:48:3.380 --> 0:48:4.30 
Moein Nedaei 
I am. 
0:48:4.120 --> 0:48:8.960 
Moein Nedaei 
I can give you advice about the this kind of comparison that you started. 
0:48:9.500 --> 0:48:9.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Mm-hmm. 
0:48:9.540 --> 0:48:10.820 
Moein Nedaei 
So what? 
0:48:10.980 --> 0:48:16.530 
Moein Nedaei 
Because now in my recent my my my recent work also I kind of had this kind of categorization. 
0:48:22.430 --> 0:48:22.670 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:48:17.110 --> 0:48:31.910 
Moein Nedaei 
So The thing is that in systemic, based on my information, if someone wants to kind of categorize systemic 
design methodologies, they he or she can do it in two possible way. 
0:48:31.920 --> 0:48:36.20 
Moein Nedaei 
OK, so system oriented design  and design oriented system methodologies. 
0:48:36.630 --> 0:48:37.720 
Moein Nedaei 
System oriented design. 
0:48:45.50 --> 0:48:45.310 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:48:37.730 --> 0:48:54.690 
Moein Nedaei 
Are those methodologies that they take to account possibilities for intervention in multi layers OK so they 
identify leverage points, but then they start to talk about possibilities for intervention in different layers. 
0:48:55.540 --> 0:48:55.810 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:48:58.50 --> 0:49:3.650 
Moein Nedaei 
But the the design oriented one which is I think mine is more strategic. 
0:49:4.790 --> 0:49:5.100 
Moein Nedaei 
OK. 
0:49:4.710 --> 0:49:5.110 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:49:22.580 --> 0:49:22.870 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:49:5.340 --> 0:49:24.750 
Moein Nedaei 
And by strategic means that it's is as from beginning, it's looking for right actor, right place and right situations 
or kind of the the the competencies for intervention and by right means that the power to transcend the 
things that can provide more power to change. 
0:49:25.440 --> 0:49:37.430 
Moein Nedaei 
And from that point of view, is kind of it thinks about like like actors, like antagonistic actors like places that 
that they can provide the power to create more change. 
125
==PAGE:131==
0:49:39.50 --> 0:49:39.250 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So. 
0:49:38.880 --> 0:49:41.960 
Moein Nedaei 
And we're doing that. Yeah. 
0:49:41.970 --> 0:49:42.960 
Moein Nedaei 
So we're doing that. 
0:49:43.30 --> 0:49:48.230 
Moein Nedaei 
One of the limitations of this this perspective. 
0:49:48.240 --> 0:49:50.180 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that not all problematics? 
0:49:50.760 --> 0:50:1.600 
Moein Nedaei 
Not all situation with the problems can be applicable for this sort of viewpoint, because not all kind of 
sustainability related issues require significant change. 
0:50:2.590 --> 0:50:2.820 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:50:3.350 --> 0:50:13.0 
Moein Nedaei 
So as from like here when you start to understanding the existing system, which is very interesting, that kind 
of mapping the context, then you start to to identify leverage points. 
0:50:13.10 --> 0:50:13.560 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:50:14.0 --> 0:50:14.210 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:50:13.830 --> 0:50:19.280 
Moein Nedaei 
So as from there a little bit, this methodologies are going to different direction. 
0:50:20.950 --> 0:50:24.160 
Moein Nedaei 
The one who has multilayer approach. 
0:50:25.180 --> 0:50:35.990 
Moein Nedaei 
Uh start to has more possibilities for probably because they start to look at different layers and then start to 
see what are the different kind of strategies for intervention in different layers. 
0:50:36.140 --> 0:50:42.450 
Moein Nedaei 
But the one has design oriented approach tries to see to see to to what they agree. 
0:50:42.500 --> 0:50:44.190 
Moein Nedaei 
This is something related to me. 
0:50:44.260 --> 0:50:44.540 
Moein Nedaei 
Do I? 
0:50:44.550 --> 0:50:45.900 
Moein Nedaei 
Should I say yes or no? 
0:50:46.180 --> 0:50:48.620 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that something that I need paradigm shift? 
0:50:48.720 --> 0:50:51.30 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that something that I need to to or no? 
0:50:51.40 --> 0:51:1.400 
Moein Nedaei 
Is that something that I need to change that level of behaviors pattern also relation pattern of relations or no 
parameters or I don't know a standard (…) or this sort of things. 
0:51:2.0 --> 0:51:27.830 
Moein Nedaei 
It's very important to to add to see this method, at least mine a little bit different from the leverage points 
because mine is with that kind of I I kind of restricted the possibility for applicability of these methodologies 
because this is something for designing for changing the mindset and not all system and situations require 
changing the mindset then you have problem with your laptop. 
0:51:28.720 --> 0:51:41.620 
Moein Nedaei 
You don't know you are not going to, for instance, sell your laptop or I don't know, change the the, the, the, 
the software of your laptop, you know, but you start to maybe a little bit change it with some kind of small 
changes. 
0:51:48.900 --> 0:51:49.140 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:51:42.570 --> 0:51:56.210 
Moein Nedaei 
But sometimes The thing is that your laptop is for 10 years ago, so you really literally need paradigm shift and 
that's why this methodology is not applicable always and is more mostly applicable. 
0:51:56.220 --> 0:52:14.330 
Moein Nedaei 
Any situation that that, that, that, that the culture of the system is outmoded and you need transformation 
and transformation is is like transformation whereas versus a transition, one of them is looking at deep 
change and other looking at more change. 
0:52:14.900 --> 0:52:15.350 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Mm-hmm. 
0:52:16.310 --> 0:52:24.910 
Moein Nedaei 
And and with that you can also identify you can also see speed from a different, I think point of view. 
0:52:25.860 --> 0:52:26.210 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:52:27.880 --> 0:52:28.280 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:52:27.820 --> 0:52:28.760 
Moein Nedaei 
Doesn't make sense. 
0:52:28.890 --> 0:52:30.430 
Moein Nedaei 
Or is it only makes sense for me? 
0:52:29.510 --> 0:52:32.420 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It's no, it doesn't make sense. 
0:52:32.760 --> 0:52:32.900 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:52:32.430 --> 0:52:35.120 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Of course I of course I have to like, you know, digest. 
0:52:36.110 --> 0:52:36.290 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:52:35.130 --> 0:52:41.700 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I feel like everything that I've heard, and that's why probably it's nice why you have a recording as well, but I 
think it does make a lot of sense. 
0:52:41.910 --> 0:52:45.240 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I believe that's also why you have that note in your methodology. 
0:52:46.50 --> 0:52:46.700 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:52:46.820 --> 0:52:47.60 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:52:47.70 --> 0:52:47.220 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:52:47.230 --> 0:52:48.60 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
0:52:48.70 --> 0:52:49.280 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, exactly. 
0:52:45.310 --> 0:52:50.990 
Kamile Vaitkute 
No, in the beginning that it's a very important question to ask if yeah, yeah. 
0:52:49.290 --> 0:53:4.60 
Moein Nedaei 
And that's why I started that that in a situation because that's that's actually one of my concerns that that all 
everywhere people are so talking about resiliency, making making make system regenerative work on, on 
resiliency. 
0:53:4.70 --> 0:53:8.520 
Moein Nedaei 
I don't know this sort of noise and and good word which is, which is nice. 
0:53:8.530 --> 0:53:12.240 
Moein Nedaei 
Definitely, which is important, but not always. 
0:53:12.450 --> 0:53:17.450 
Moein Nedaei 
They are applicable beside resiliency beside Adoptability. 
126
==PAGE:132==
0:53:17.460 --> 0:53:21.170 
Moein Nedaei 
Transformability is also attribute of social systems. 
0:53:21.380 --> 0:53:37.900 
Moein Nedaei 
A good system is systems that knows how and when transform, because when the crisis is high, like 
pandemic situations, like a situation that people are exactly in the middle of war, the more transformability, 
the more trans. 
0:53:37.970 --> 0:53:58.380 
Moein Nedaei 
I mean the better that system has the capacity to transform, the higher the chance of that systems to our 
success and that's why many in during the pandemic what we want to give the example, it was really nice 
situations because countries as start to, umm, strictly kind of make their own boundaries. 
0:53:58.670 --> 0:54:9.700 
Moein Nedaei 
So you could see different nations how they react to our pandemic situations and how people of that society 
as a nation struggle with that situation in a different way. 
0:54:9.770 --> 0:54:12.920 
Moein Nedaei 
And what is the government strategies and policy? 
0:54:13.410 --> 0:54:21.960 
Moein Nedaei 
I believe those countries that they had more transform ability, they could react better even without those 
governmental situations or kind of reception. 
0:54:21.970 --> 0:54:23.780 
Moein Nedaei 
Why and where that comes from? 
0:54:23.790 --> 0:54:34.950 
Moein Nedaei 
Like for instance, one of the attribute of transformations diversity to the more diverse the society is, the 
better that society can transform in the time of crisis. 
0:54:35.60 --> 0:54:36.10 
Moein Nedaei 
This is one of the thing. 
0:54:36.560 --> 0:54:36.810 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:54:36.740 --> 0:54:42.20 
Moein Nedaei 
So then, then, then The thing is that do we need transformer to always? 
0:54:42.30 --> 0:54:42.440 
Moein Nedaei 
No. 
0:54:42.730 --> 0:54:44.500 
Moein Nedaei 
But is that transformer important? 
0:54:44.510 --> 0:54:44.620 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes. 
0:54:45.570 --> 0:54:45.890 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:54:45.650 --> 0:54:47.680 
Moein Nedaei 
And question is how to how to improve it? 
0:54:48.570 --> 0:55:6.770 
Moein Nedaei 
And by that question, I think we are little bit kind of divide or or kind of I divide my kind of pathway towards 
sustainability from those that they invest on resiliency invest on multilayer intervention invest on transition 
rather than transformation. 
0:55:7.640 --> 0:55:8.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm OK. 
0:55:10.910 --> 0:55:11.30 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:55:11.50 --> 0:55:12.220 
Kamile Vaitkute 
They're interesting as well. 
0:55:12.230 --> 0:55:18.930 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Do you have  a piece of work that I could also read up onto or that's everything comes up here? 
0:55:18.330 --> 0:55:21.910 
Moein Nedaei 
About about transformability I think. 
0:55:25.950 --> 0:55:26.140 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:55:23.840 --> 0:55:27.680 
Moein Nedaei 
Olsin (??)  uh and. 
0:55:32.870 --> 0:55:37.100 
Moein Nedaei 
And I I don't remember one of them again just recently. 
0:55:38.910 --> 0:55:39.220 
Moein Nedaei 
Uh. 
0:55:39.230 --> 0:55:39.680 
Moein Nedaei 
Yep. 
0:55:40.170 --> 0:55:41.440 
Moein Nedaei 
Brain brain. 
0:55:41.450 --> 0:55:48.960 
Moein Nedaei 
Walker  also has a very nice and important I think paper newspaper is resiliency, adaptability and 
transformability. 
0:55:48.970 --> 0:55:51.480 
Moein Nedaei 
Social, social, social, ecological system. 
0:55:51.490 --> 0:55:54.480 
Moein Nedaei 
So it's kind of paper LED bit. 
0:55:54.490 --> 0:56:0.380 
Moein Nedaei 
He touched upon the difference between resiliency, adaptability, and transformability. 
0:56:0.800 --> 0:56:1.80 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:56:0.650 --> 0:56:24.20 
Moein Nedaei 
And now, as from the right kind of learn that, OK, these things are there, but also transformability is 
important, but he didn't also discuss I think a lot about transport mobility and as from there also start to read 
about transformative by myself because it's not very common word like you can when you Google it, you can 
find thousands of literature about resiliency, adaptability and these sort of things. 
0:56:27.220 --> 0:56:27.440 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:56:29.610 --> 0:56:29.850 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:56:24.390 --> 0:56:31.60 
Moein Nedaei 
But very few about transform ability and I think it's very important, Yep. 
0:56:32.320 --> 0:56:32.870 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:56:32.940 --> 0:56:47.490 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh, it's very nice to talk to you, but I think the time is up and I don't want to hold you more because, I mean, 
you already gave me your time and actually a lot of knowledge, some a very excited and I'm very happy that I 
had a chance to talk with you. 
0:57:15.700 --> 0:57:17.550 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK, no. 
0:57:22.180 --> 0:57:23.30 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Into something? 
0:56:48.90 --> 0:57:23.680 
Moein Nedaei 
Same actually I'm also very happy and and I really also like your cold procedure and all this kind of interesting 
mappings things about these two methodology and very open and and I'm trying to be also following your 
work and your progress as well and feel free actually to to discuss or to talk about your progress your work 
and yeah I'm I'm very of course I'm very open to to communicate with you and to see how you gonna make it a 
a thesis yes. 
0:57:23.90 --> 0:57:26.750 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes, let's see how I can make it into something. 
0:57:27.470 --> 0:57:27.590 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah. 
0:57:26.760 --> 0:57:29.290 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes, yes, yes, I can. 
127
==PAGE:133==
0:57:29.300 --> 0:57:37.30 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Thank you very much and I'll I will hold you to that saying that you know I in case I I want the conversation, I 
can maybe try to contact you. 
0:57:37.200 --> 0:57:38.190 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes, yes, yes. 
0:57:37.40 --> 0:57:38.370 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It would be very interesting. 
0:57:38.440 --> 0:57:38.910 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:57:38.200 --> 0:57:39.380 
Moein Nedaei 
Keep in touch, of course. 
0:57:39.180 --> 0:57:39.650 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes. 
0:57:39.390 --> 0:57:40.410 
Moein Nedaei 
Yeah, yeah, yeah. 
0:57:40.460 --> 0:57:41.220 
Moein Nedaei 
Great to see you. 
0:57:40.380 --> 0:57:43.250 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes, thank you very much and good luck with your research as well. 
0:57:43.610 --> 0:57:44.550 
Moein Nedaei 
Thank you so much. 
0:57:44.560 --> 0:57:45.700 
Moein Nedaei 
Yes, yes, yes. 
0:57:45.990 --> 0:57:47.760 
Moein Nedaei 
Take care and enjoy your night. 
0:57:43.300 --> 0:57:48.150 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I heard you're about seven years. Bye. 
0:57:48.160 --> 0:57:48.560 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You too. 
0:57:48.130 --> 0:57:48.850 
Moein Nedaei 
Evening bye bye. 
0:57:49.310 --> 0:57:49.550 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Bye bye. 
0:57:53.900 --> 0:57:54.110 
Kamile Vaitkute 
He's. 
 
Interviewe: Bas van der Berg 
Date: 20.12.23 
0:0:0.0 --> 0:0:0.410 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh. 
0:0:0.770 --> 0:0:8.810 
Kamile Vaitkute 
While I'm doing it now and why I also invited you here, uh, so do you maybe need a break? 
0:0:11.860 --> 0:0:12.720 
Bas van den Berg 
No, it's OK. 
0:0:8.940 --> 0:0:16.40 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Actually, with your last meeting, but OK, because you're also looked tired. 
0:0:16.50 --> 0:0:18.520 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I feel also bad, you know. 
0:0:18.530 --> 0:0:20.620 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But OK, I'll just quickly start. 
0:0:20.160 --> 0:0:22.650 
Bas van den Berg 
Because that's no, it's it's. 
0:0:23.910 --> 0:0:24.370 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm fine. 
0:0:24.380 --> 0:0:28.910 
Bas van den Berg 
It was just one of those meetings where I'm just sitting there thinking why the **** am I here? 
0:0:33.280 --> 0:0:33.610 
Bas van den Berg 
So it's. 
0:0:31.0 --> 0:0:35.550 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I hope this one is not like that so yeah. 
0:0:35.880 --> 0:0:48.670 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But anyway, so quickly about myself, I actually studied the industrial design and bachelors in Netherlands 
and Eindhoven before and then I worked as a service designer for a few years. 
0:0:48.680 --> 0:0:52.830 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And then I moved to Denmark to do my masters in design and innovation. 
0:0:53.550 --> 0:0:53.780 
Bas van den Berg 
Right. 
0:0:53.400 --> 0:0:57.460 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And umm, I'm doing my masters right now. 
0:0:57.850 --> 0:1:7.140 
Kamile Vaitkute 
In general, I think what I'm I I've tried to do during my studies is to investigate more like how do we move 
towards this, you know, facilitating sustainable transitions. 
0:1:7.150 --> 0:1:8.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So rethinking business models? 
0:1:8.810 --> 0:1:17.780 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Rethinking policymaking, but they also did quite some engineering courses like pure engineering, like 
environmental modeling and life cycle assessments. 
0:1:17.790 --> 0:1:21.660 
Kamile Vaitkute 
No more like that to understand where the engineering science is behind it. 
0:1:22.220 --> 0:1:24.440 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And I I enjoy agriculture. 
0:1:24.450 --> 0:1:43.790 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So for my master thesis I I kind of wanted to explore this field of systemic design and right now I'm working on 
kind of, let's say deriving a systemic design methodology that I could apply for a sustainable transformation 
and agriculture agricultural field in Denmark. 
0:1:44.620 --> 0:1:44.760 
Bas van den Berg 
Cool. 
0:1:44.610 --> 0:1:50.730 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I mean, the model is supposed to be more like generic, but I'm kind of gonna be exploring how how it would fit 
that case. 
0:1:51.390 --> 0:1:51.920 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah, of course. 
0:1:51.620 --> 0:1:52.720 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh, why? 
0:1:52.730 --> 0:1:58.630 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm calling you is kind of, UM, because a lot of my work has to be based on the academic literature. 
0:1:58.640 --> 0:2:15.260 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I investigated quite some systemic design methodologies and I I watched your talk on the symposium 
during the symposium and a lot of thoughts in our resonated with me. 
0:2:15.270 --> 0:2:20.430 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I liked a lot of the ideas and I had those ideas as well, and I I couldn't find them in the literature. 
0:2:20.440 --> 0:2:24.220 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I was looking like I'm finding on the like, you know, academic paper. 
0:2:24.230 --> 0:2:26.640 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I thought I would be just nice to talk to you. 
0:2:27.650 --> 0:2:27.820 
Bas van den Berg 
Sure. 
0:2:26.650 --> 0:2:27.890 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You know it. 
0:2:27.900 --> 0:2:29.280 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Looking what are you up to? 
0:2:29.290 --> 0:2:29.580 
Kamile Vaitkute 
What? 
128
==PAGE:134==
0:2:29.590 --> 0:2:30.880 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How are you doing? 
0:2:30.890 --> 0:2:32.60 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How is your project going? 
0:2:32.70 --> 0:2:36.360 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And I think it's just a very, like, informal conversation about it. 
0:2:36.950 --> 0:2:37.70 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:2:36.690 --> 0:2:38.900 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So yeah, I don't know. 
0:2:38.910 --> 0:2:46.850 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I thought maybe you could just start by telling about your role about, you know, the systemic called design 
framework that you're working on and yeah. 
0:2:48.50 --> 0:2:48.730 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah, no worries. 
0:2:52.530 --> 0:2:53.440 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah, that's fine. 
0:2:53.450 --> 0:2:59.220 
Bas van den Berg 
So I'll just start from who I am and then I'll sort of get to where we're going. 
0:3:0.240 --> 0:3:1.790 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, so my name is boss. 
0:3:2.120 --> 0:3:8.230 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh boss from the mayor I currently serve as a assistant professor. 
0:3:8.400 --> 0:3:9.640 
Bas van den Berg 
I guess you would say in English. 
0:3:10.690 --> 0:3:20.0 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, and systemic code design and regenerative education, UM and actually come from the field of and this 
my PhD was in. 
0:3:20.10 --> 0:3:23.460 
Bas van den Berg 
That was in how to connect universities to transitions. 
0:3:24.370 --> 0:3:29.130 
Bas van den Berg 
So it was sort of at the intersection of educational sciences and transition studies. 
0:3:30.120 --> 0:3:37.750 
Bas van den Berg 
But before that I did a I have two bachelor degrees, so I'm in industrial engineering and chemical engineering. 
0:3:38.950 --> 0:3:42.480 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, and then a masters in governance actually. 
0:3:42.540 --> 0:3:48.230 
Bas van den Berg 
So I sort of switched from engineering through difference to educational transitions. 
0:3:49.370 --> 0:3:49.870 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:3:49.880 --> 0:3:52.240 
Bas van den Berg 
And the systemic code design group. 
0:3:52.850 --> 0:3:55.270 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, it's just over a year old now. 
0:3:55.820 --> 0:4:9.990 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, and it's through this particular subsidy, which is completely irrelevant for your Danish context, but that 
subsidy allows to creation of research groups that go across different universities. 
0:4:11.10 --> 0:4:18.450 
Bas van den Berg 
So we were able to bring together 5 different touch universities to try and develop what the systemic codes 
and what could it be? 
0:4:19.560 --> 0:4:20.200 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:4:20.280 --> 0:4:33.160 
Bas van den Berg 
And I think where we differ from the sort of mores, mainstream systemic design literature is that we take a 
broader view of what we mean when we discuss systemic. 
0:4:33.250 --> 0:4:34.690 
Bas van den Berg 
So the design part is not. 
0:4:34.820 --> 0:4:43.210 
Bas van den Berg 
I don't think it's anything special or different per se, but what you see a lot in systemic design is that it's sort of 
systems vary. 
0:4:45.60 --> 0:4:47.760 
Bas van den Berg 
You know a lot of mapping those types of things. 
0:4:48.240 --> 0:4:59.420 
Bas van den Berg 
Ohm, which is an important part of systemic according to us, but we also engage with the sort of more 
psychological heritage of the systemic literature. 
0:4:59.430 --> 0:5:3.230 
Bas van den Berg 
So, like systemic family system or family systems work. 
0:5:5.500 --> 0:5:13.690 
Bas van den Berg 
I personally prefer the term relational instead of systemic, but we also, for example, engage with stuff like 
intuition. 
0:5:14.360 --> 0:5:21.760 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, you know what is being said amongst stakeholders, including non human and nonliving stakeholders? 
0:5:22.390 --> 0:5:25.120 
Bas van den Berg 
And how does that relate simultaneously? 
0:5:25.130 --> 0:5:32.630 
Bas van den Berg 
How does that also relate to you know, those other sort of system levels that you see in transition studies and 
systemic design more formally? 
0:5:33.400 --> 0:5:33.620 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:5:34.870 --> 0:5:35.440 
Bas van den Berg 
A nurse. 
0:5:35.450 --> 0:5:37.310 
Bas van den Berg 
I think we don't have a framework yet. 
0:5:37.320 --> 0:5:43.620 
Bas van den Berg 
We're still working on it, but I think that sort of comes with a different set of assumptions. 
0:5:43.670 --> 0:5:48.10 
Bas van den Berg 
To some extent, the more epistemic humidity. 
0:5:48.770 --> 0:5:53.500 
Bas van den Berg 
We don't assume that this is designer can facilitate and fix something. 
0:5:55.40 --> 0:6:5.440 
Bas van den Berg 
Of course, facilitation skills are still existing, but we don't believe they can just come in and, you know, bring 
in this group of people together and then do a couple workshops and say, OK, now we're done. 
0:6:6.650 --> 0:6:13.960 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, so we're really looking at sort of large 12345 year engagements. 
0:6:14.450 --> 0:6:18.640 
Bas van den Berg 
UM as a where you use design nearly methods. 
0:6:18.770 --> 0:6:21.130 
Bas van den Berg 
You don't, and we're not sure yet if you need to be a designer. 
0:6:22.140 --> 0:6:25.910 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh to engage with systems work and that's coming. 
0:6:25.920 --> 0:6:39.50 
Bas van den Berg 
Range all the way from, you know, talking to an individual farming family all the way to bring together, you 
know, representatives of the farmers and the supermarkets and the government and. 
0:6:40.70 --> 0:6:41.280 
Bas van den Berg 
And everything in between. 
0:6:41.290 --> 0:6:43.20 
Bas van den Berg 
So yeah. 
0:6:45.670 --> 0:6:46.380 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:6:46.550 --> 0:6:47.320 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK, interesting. 
0:6:47.330 --> 0:6:48.200 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So who? 
0:6:48.250 --> 0:6:52.0 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Who do you see then as an owner of such project? 
0:6:52.70 --> 0:6:54.150 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm not sure if that's it, yeah. 
0:6:53.250 --> 0:6:55.680 
Bas van den Berg 
We don't, we don't. 
129
==PAGE:135==
0:6:56.250 --> 0:6:57.260 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You don't, OK? Mm-hmm. 
0:6:58.260 --> 0:6:58.670 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:6:58.680 --> 0:7:2.310 
Bas van den Berg 
And that's that makes it quite interesting. 
0:7:2.320 --> 0:7:9.420 
Bas van den Berg 
Because of, of course, in traditional sort of design work, it's usually you know you have a problem and then 
an owner and all of that. 
0:7:10.520 --> 0:7:11.30 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:7:11.380 --> 0:7:17.80 
Bas van den Berg 
Which I think when we're talking about sort of incremental innovations makes a lot of sense. 
0:7:17.710 --> 0:7:17.930 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:7:17.730 --> 0:7:22.980 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, you know when you're going from an iPhone 10 to an iPhone 11, that makes a little sense. 
0:7:24.280 --> 0:7:40.920 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, but when you're talking about something as complex as changing the agrifood system, which is quite 
obviously bad for the planet, the way it's designed now, you cannot talk. 
0:7:40.930 --> 0:7:44.490 
Bas van den Berg 
Or at least our perception is you cannot talk about ownership in the same way. 
0:7:45.670 --> 0:7:53.300 
Bas van den Berg 
So it may be the case that there were actors that are willing to step up and say actually we think the system is 
unhealthy and it needs to change. 
0:7:54.370 --> 0:7:54.700 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh. 
0:7:54.710 --> 0:7:58.390 
Bas van den Berg 
But ownership has such doesn't really play a part in that. 
0:7:58.790 --> 0:8:5.100 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, because no one, no one organization can just say yeah, this needs to change. 
0:8:5.110 --> 0:8:13.210 
Bas van den Berg 
Even the government in in democratic societies, even the government cannot just make those changes. 
0:8:13.220 --> 0:8:25.760 
Bas van den Berg 
I mean, we've seen it here with the whole, I don't know if you follow Dutch politics, but the whole nitrogen, uh 
issue in terms of farmers just blocking essentially blocking the country with tractors. 
0:8:27.250 --> 0:8:27.880 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:8:28.680 --> 0:8:31.210 
Bas van den Berg 
So yeah, ownership is very fluid. 
0:8:31.220 --> 0:8:38.850 
Bas van den Berg 
It's also one of the reasons why it's translations are so hard, because it's very easy to not do something if you 
don't see or feel ownership. 
0:8:39.300 --> 0:8:43.740 
Bas van den Berg 
That doesn't mean that there's no power, so that's a very important distinction. 
0:8:44.820 --> 0:8:47.450 
Bas van den Berg 
It also doesn't mean we don't see it at an individual. 
0:8:47.460 --> 0:8:51.630 
Bas van den Berg 
Consumer has much less power than a company like Nestle. 
0:8:53.580 --> 0:9:1.130 
Bas van den Berg 
We're an actor like the energy sector or the government, so of course there's there's still power. 
0:9:1.140 --> 0:9:7.230 
Bas van den Berg 
And would you know power, there's responsibility, but it's not owned by any single actor. 
0:9:7.240 --> 0:9:7.970 
Bas van den Berg 
So we yeah. 
0:9:12.790 --> 0:9:13.460 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:9:13.630 --> 0:9:17.260 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And who does lead the mindset? 
0:9:17.270 --> 0:9:19.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I feel like to embark on such a thing. 
0:9:19.870 --> 0:9:25.380 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You know you need to have a specific mindset, which I'm not sure can you expect from different 
stakeholders. 
0:9:25.390 --> 0:9:31.80 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I know whose role would be to state that you know part. 
0:9:31.830 --> 0:9:34.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm not sure if I'm making myself clear, yeah. 
0:9:33.980 --> 0:9:35.710 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah, yeah, I've seen. 
0:9:35.720 --> 0:9:39.240 
Bas van den Berg 
If I reinterpreted what what you're saying, it's a bit like. 
0:9:43.70 --> 0:9:49.780 
Bas van den Berg 
You know if if no one has explicit ownership, then everyone can step up in a way everyone can step forward. 
0:9:50.950 --> 0:9:59.160 
Bas van den Berg 
And I think that's also what we're seeing is that in each different situation, it's a different sort of part of society 
that's that's taking the lead. 
0:10:0.220 --> 0:10:2.930 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, those can be civil organizations. 
0:10:2.980 --> 0:10:10.580 
Bas van den Berg 
So for example, in our context, there may be the party for the animals, which is a national political party. 
0:10:12.100 --> 0:10:18.660 
Bas van den Berg 
It could be the farmers themselves or individual farms which we're seeing. 
0:10:18.670 --> 0:10:23.130 
Bas van den Berg 
Of course, we do have a small amount of like biodynamic organic permaculture forms. 
0:10:23.840 --> 0:10:28.610 
Bas van den Berg 
You could also be partially the consumers, so probably the most realistic answers. 
0:10:28.620 --> 0:10:34.500 
Bas van den Berg 
That's gonna be a couple of different people or clusters of people in, you know, those big societal groups. 
0:10:35.730 --> 0:10:57.300 
Bas van den Berg 
And one of the challenges that I think we face when working with such a system in design, new ways or not, is 
to try and identify those people where those clusters and see how we you can strengthen them, empower 
them or defend them, because you're gonna of course also design something that blocks something. 
0:10:59.870 --> 0:11:0.100 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:11:0.390 --> 0:11:1.620 
Bas van den Berg 
It's about creating new stuff. 
0:11:1.630 --> 0:11:3.420 
Bas van den Berg 
We can also be about destroying you. 
0:11:5.100 --> 0:11:9.600 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, I remember this quote from your from your speech as well. 
0:11:9.990 --> 0:11:10.750 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And UM. 
0:11:11.660 --> 0:11:21.640 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And so like, I'm kind of making the questions on a on the on on the go as you are talking, but I feel like you still 
need. 
0:11:21.120 --> 0:11:22.550 
Bas van den Berg 
What's up for the laggy? 
0:11:25.250 --> 0:11:28.370 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I feel like you also you need someone to. 
0:11:29.840 --> 0:11:36.30 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Do you agree or I mean that's also not the good way to formulate it, but like the thing, you need an overview of 
the whole system. 
0:11:42.730 --> 0:11:43.0 
Bas van den Berg 
Awesome. 
0:11:36.40 --> 0:11:43.430 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Then in the beginning, when you start the process or it's not the idea you start from in your kind of framework. 
0:11:44.650 --> 0:11:50.810 
Bas van den Berg 
I would say in general it's impossible to get an overview of the whole system, at least in the context of 
transitions. 
130
==PAGE:136==
0:11:51.940 --> 0:11:59.830 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, that being said, I do believe it helps to try and get as much of an overview as you can. 
0:12:1.240 --> 0:12:10.590 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, but I think it's really important that not just with an overview, but also with sort of identifying what the 
set of problems are. 
0:12:11.570 --> 0:12:12.30 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh. 
0:12:12.40 --> 0:12:15.80 
Bas van den Berg 
Identifying who the reasonable and and relevant stakeholders are. 
0:12:17.170 --> 0:12:19.970 
Bas van den Berg 
That you need points to start from, right? 
0:12:20.690 --> 0:12:20.810 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:12:21.80 --> 0:12:23.530 
Bas van den Berg 
But it's very important that you hold on to them. 
0:12:23.780 --> 0:12:26.300 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, without clamping onto them. 
0:12:28.450 --> 0:12:31.720 
Bas van den Berg 
And that is something that I see going wrong quite a bit. 
0:12:31.910 --> 0:12:36.100 
Bas van den Berg 
Even with designers sit down to sort of, you know, this is my focal point. 
0:12:36.110 --> 0:12:44.150 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm gonna iterate from there and it's always sort of this, this linear line, even though you have, you know that 
that squiggly thing that says this is the design process. 
0:12:45.30 --> 0:12:51.410 
Bas van den Berg 
If you actually look at how most people engage, it's much more linear process than what's actually presented 
there. 
0:12:52.810 --> 0:12:53.190 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:12:53.470 --> 0:12:55.620 
Bas van den Berg 
And I think that is a very fundamental skill. 
0:12:55.630 --> 0:13:18.510 
Bas van den Berg 
So how can we make you know, with reasonable judgments, big dose starting positions, starting people 
accepting that that's limited, just limited by our inability to see everything limited by our inability to know 
everything that that evolves and to stay true of what you encounter as you move forward. 
0:13:19.930 --> 0:13:35.200 
Bas van den Berg 
So not trying to fit as much as you can, I'll try to fit what you encounter after starting into what you've already 
done, but to see it as I go golfing process that may lead in different directions that you were going. 
0:13:36.670 --> 0:13:38.740 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, and that is a really difficult skill. 
0:13:39.580 --> 0:13:45.470 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm not just for designers, but for anyone to really do that and I just say that you're doing it. 
0:13:49.150 --> 0:13:50.800 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And how do you think you can do that? 
0:13:53.110 --> 0:13:56.800 
Bas van den Berg 
I think everybody has different ways of dealing with that. 
0:13:56.810 --> 0:14:0.80 
Bas van den Berg 
I think mindfulness and awareness are big elements of it. 
0:14:0.840 --> 0:14:1.80 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:14:1.840 --> 0:14:11.350 
Bas van den Berg 
And think developing some type of practice that allows you to reflect in a structured way and then maybe 
some type of mapping, but it doesn't have to be. 
0:14:11.400 --> 0:14:12.870 
Bas van den Berg 
It could be that you say every two weeks. 
0:14:12.880 --> 0:14:17.620 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm gonna recreate the map of what the system looks like. 
0:14:17.790 --> 0:14:24.420 
Bas van den Berg 
With what I know now and make changes based on that UM, to some extent. 
0:14:24.430 --> 0:14:31.450 
Bas van den Berg 
Also, just being courageous, especially in the face of dead ends and resistance. 
0:14:33.390 --> 0:14:38.660 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm those are the sort of elements making sure that you check your assumptions with others. 
0:14:39.600 --> 0:14:40.650 
Bas van den Berg 
Often frequently. 
0:14:42.500 --> 0:14:43.320 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:14:44.560 --> 0:14:50.240 
Bas van den Berg 
And with a diverse group of people, so not just, you know, all growers, so vegetables, but. 
0:14:52.390 --> 0:14:56.530 
Bas van den Berg 
I think those are the sort of elements that are really important and then still you will flock up. 
0:14:58.450 --> 0:14:59.340 
Bas van den Berg 
But that's OK. 
0:14:59.410 --> 0:15:0.300 
Bas van den Berg 
We're only humans. 
0:15:0.850 --> 0:15:1.430 
Bas van den Berg 
We do our best. 
0:15:2.490 --> 0:15:11.470 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm I also wonder because a few times you you mentioned that this is not gonna work, especially in terms 
of transition. 
0:15:12.290 --> 0:15:15.410 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh, what do you mean with that? Uh. 
0:15:16.210 --> 0:15:17.580 
Bas van den Berg 
Can you elaborate a little bit maybe? 
0:15:18.180 --> 0:15:29.940 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm yeah, I actually don't remember what exactly said, but you said like, uh, I've I've been, we cannot 
choose that path, especially when we are considering, you know that we are moving towards transition. 
0:15:30.450 --> 0:15:39.540 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I'm wondering like umm maybe what do you see as prerequisites to the transition in that sense? 
0:15:39.550 --> 0:15:42.440 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Because I feel like that's maybe what is hidden under your words. 
0:15:43.50 --> 0:15:44.370 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But I'm also not sure. 
0:15:45.620 --> 0:15:45.780 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:15:48.860 --> 0:15:52.530 
Bas van den Berg 
You know, honestly I'm not 100% sure. 
0:15:52.540 --> 0:15:55.280 
Bas van den Berg 
I don't think anyone is UM, they say they are. 
0:15:55.290 --> 0:15:55.900 
Bas van den Berg 
They're lying. 
0:16:1.70 --> 0:16:3.130 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm not sure if we are able to transition. 
0:16:4.240 --> 0:16:4.470 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:16:5.530 --> 0:16:6.230 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:16:6.720 --> 0:16:10.900 
Bas van den Berg 
Which sounds weird coming from someone who did a PhD in transition studies. 
0:16:12.360 --> 0:16:14.700 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, we'll let me. 
0:16:14.710 --> 0:16:16.520 
Bas van den Berg 
Let me let me maybe rephrase that. 
0:16:16.530 --> 0:16:18.80 
Bas van den Berg 
I think we can transition. 
0:16:18.90 --> 0:16:24.60 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm not sure we can transition consciously or that we can transition by design. 
131
==PAGE:137==
0:16:25.610 --> 0:16:36.20 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, I don't think that the transitions that have happened in the past, so the Internet, refrigeration 
electrification, whereby design umm. 
0:16:38.290 --> 0:16:51.670 
Bas van den Berg 
Actually, I think they were mostly happenstance and things spreading essentially, but when we was very 
different and that's why I'm I'm unsure as it with those transitions. 
0:16:52.200 --> 0:16:57.140 
Bas van den Berg 
There was, of course, something being left behind, but it was primarily an improvement in overall. 
0:16:58.860 --> 0:17:0.620 
Bas van den Berg 
Richness, wealth at cetera. 
0:17:4.290 --> 0:17:13.720 
Bas van den Berg 
And where's the transitions that are coming now that is a fundamental difference because that is not the 
case for a lot of people. 
0:17:13.790 --> 0:17:15.880 
Bas van den Berg 
So for example, we shouldn't follow the science. 
0:17:15.890 --> 0:17:22.190 
Bas van den Berg 
We should be like 98% vegan and then 2% animal based or something like that. 
0:17:23.650 --> 0:17:34.440 
Bas van den Berg 
If you're really, if you were really change the agrifood system to to encompass that, for most people, that 
would be a massive perceived loss in the quality of their life. 
0:17:36.220 --> 0:17:39.290 
Bas van den Berg 
Just ignoring animal rights and and all of that for a second? 
0:17:40.520 --> 0:17:41.80 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:17:41.450 --> 0:17:50.300 
Bas van den Berg 
And they're similar challenges going on with, you know, mobility, for example, much less flying, if any at all, 
etcetera, etcetera. 
0:17:51.40 --> 0:18:3.440 
Bas van den Berg 
So my own concern in that sense is primarily with a are we able to design transitions and my own answer right 
now would learn more towards no than yes. 
0:18:5.550 --> 0:18:15.30 
Bas van den Berg 
I think in the broader context of transitions that are going on, we can try our best to contribute, but we can 
never know for sure whether they were designed or not. 
0:18:16.590 --> 0:18:29.810 
Bas van den Berg 
And more fundamentally, I'm not sure if we are able to transition to transitions that are primarily going to be 
perceived losses for people unless there is no choice. 
0:18:30.940 --> 0:18:31.160 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:18:31.830 --> 0:18:39.390 
Bas van den Berg 
And by no choice, I mean something like the global fish stocks collapsing because the sea cannot support 
life anymore. 
0:18:40.550 --> 0:18:41.400 
Bas van den Berg 
Then yeah, of course. 
0:18:41.410 --> 0:18:43.730 
Bas van den Berg 
People will stop eating fish because it's no longer there. 
0:18:45.500 --> 0:19:2.400 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, and I'm on 100% unsure if we are wise enough as a species or we will be wise enough as a species to see 
that yes, we can continue down this path until there is no other option, but it will cost us much, much more 
than if we. 
0:19:3.970 --> 0:19:5.450 
Bas van den Berg 
Optimal from this direction. 
0:19:8.370 --> 0:19:13.210 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, that's also slightly depressing, I would say. 
0:19:15.50 --> 0:19:17.200 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, I. 
0:19:14.340 --> 0:19:20.210 
Bas van den Berg 
First, I mean in Full disclosure, I am medically depressed at the moment. 
0:19:20.220 --> 0:19:22.420 
Bas van den Berg 
So you may have to take what I say with a grain of salt. 
0:19:23.640 --> 0:19:29.210 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I I I I feel you regarding this topics as well so understandable. 
0:19:29.900 --> 0:19:31.860 
Bas van den Berg 
I based twice a week. 
0:19:31.870 --> 0:19:36.970 
Bas van den Berg 
Why am I not just living somewhere in the forest in Norway and just waiting this out so? 
0:19:40.500 --> 0:19:43.490 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You can always change, you know? Yeah. 
0:19:43.70 --> 0:19:47.760 
Bas van den Berg 
It's with that and there are also signs of, I think very positive signs. 
0:19:47.770 --> 0:19:59.50 
Bas van den Berg 
So if you look at, for example, the energy transition, at least in Europe and most like richer places, you know, 
solar and wind energy are now just by far the cheapest forms of energy. 
0:19:59.880 --> 0:20:0.100 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:20:0.690 --> 0:20:19.540 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, so I mean, that's gonna happen regardless of what politician now comes to power or I don't know if you 
have the same discussion and then mark, but like those stupid arguments about we call it horror horizon 
pollution, like pollution of the view. 
0:20:20.580 --> 0:20:21.710 
Bas van den Berg 
They're people are complaining. 
0:20:21.720 --> 0:20:24.510 
Bas van den Berg 
Well, I don't want to look at at windmills. 
0:20:24.920 --> 0:20:28.170 
Bas van den Berg 
It was like, well, I don't wanna live on a planet where we can't live. 
0:20:32.950 --> 0:20:33.170 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:20:29.100 --> 0:20:38.660 
Bas van den Berg 
It just seems like the stupidest argument against for any but energy is gonna change anyway, but I don't think 
food is gonna change as radically as quickly. 
0:20:39.820 --> 0:20:42.690 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, and also for disclosure, I'm a vegan. 
0:20:42.700 --> 0:20:47.580 
Bas van den Berg 
I've been for a very long time, so I really wish the agrifood system would change quite. 
0:20:47.990 --> 0:20:49.770 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, transformatively. 
0:20:51.190 --> 0:20:51.650 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:20:52.600 --> 0:20:59.10 
Bas van den Berg 
I would even go further and so I think honestly, the way we treat animals now is probably the biggest shame 
we have. 
0:21:0.310 --> 0:21:2.650 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, so far in this century as a species. 
0:21:3.650 --> 0:21:3.860 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:21:4.180 --> 0:21:10.550 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm but I I am also not delusional enough to think that's gonna change in the next at least decades. 
0:21:12.810 --> 0:21:13.400 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:21:13.630 --> 0:21:15.60 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, it's quite a big topic here. 
0:21:15.70 --> 0:21:21.960 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I think in Denmark, I mean, I'm not Danish myself, but what I'm hearing because we have a big pork export 
industry. 
0:21:22.510 --> 0:21:25.760 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So that's also what I've I've I've heard in my interviews. 
0:21:25.770 --> 0:21:34.120 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You know that the industry is very like if you talk about power dynamics at the top of it, you know and kind of 
deciding everything in there. 
0:21:34.660 --> 0:21:34.910 
Bas van den Berg 
Right. 
0:21:34.130 --> 0:21:44.60 
Kamile Vaitkute 
132
==PAGE:138==
So it's it's just, it doesn't sound like anyone can fight it that much, and people don't really didn't like kind of 
are almost proud of it. 
0:21:45.390 --> 0:21:45.680 
Bas van den Berg 
No. 
0:21:44.70 --> 0:21:52.490 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You know, so I'll a lot of a lot of mindset shifts that have to happen for things to change as well. Uh. 
0:21:51.320 --> 0:21:53.80 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah, that was very nice. 
0:21:53.90 --> 0:21:54.490 
Bas van den Berg 
In your name, you were not the English. 
0:21:54.940 --> 0:21:56.330 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And I'm from. 
0:21:56.340 --> 0:22:2.350 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm from Lithuania, so I heard quite some quite some people annoyed by the windmills here. 
0:22:2.460 --> 0:22:8.270 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm not sure if Danish are, but Lithuanians are still quite annoyed by the way the mills, in their view. 
0:22:8.280 --> 0:22:9.350 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So that's quite funny. 
0:22:9.170 --> 0:22:10.0 
Bas van den Berg 
I was missing. 
0:22:10.10 --> 0:22:10.980 
Bas van den Berg 
You were finish. 
0:22:11.460 --> 0:22:11.770 
Kamile Vaitkute 
What? 
0:22:12.0 --> 0:22:13.660 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It's no, no, no. 
0:22:11.290 --> 0:22:15.250 
Bas van den Berg 
I should have, but no, no, no. 
0:22:15.260 --> 0:22:18.840 
Bas van den Berg 
I apologize, Lithuanians very different than the anyway. 
0:22:18.850 --> 0:22:19.140 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:22:19.150 --> 0:22:19.840 
Bas van den Berg 
Sorry, go on. 
0:22:19.680 --> 0:22:20.910 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, no, no problem. 
0:22:21.180 --> 0:22:30.390 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I was wondering, uh, I'm assuming that you might be doing some like you testing, maybe some things that you 
are thinking of have. 
0:22:30.460 --> 0:22:32.510 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Do you have any learning so far or? 
0:22:34.490 --> 0:22:35.30 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:22:38.40 --> 0:22:39.60 
Bas van den Berg 
Well, yeah, but. 
0:22:41.100 --> 0:22:45.480 
Bas van den Berg 
It may just be easier if I just send the draft paper that we have. 
0:22:46.110 --> 0:22:46.710 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Ah, OK. 
0:22:49.130 --> 0:22:50.10 
Kamile Vaitkute 
That works for me. 
0:22:51.590 --> 0:22:54.650 
Bas van den Berg 
Let me just try and find that second. 
0:22:56.750 --> 0:22:57.820 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, yeah. 
0:22:57.870 --> 0:22:58.930 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm gonna try and find them. 
0:23:22.430 --> 0:23:22.880 
Bas van den Berg 
It's no. 
0:23:39.350 --> 0:23:40.150 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:23:40.210 --> 0:23:40.430 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:23:40.790 --> 0:23:44.30 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, why can't I find this? 
0:23:47.470 --> 0:23:48.120 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, yeah. 
0:23:48.130 --> 0:23:49.680 
Bas van den Berg 
Feel free to ask something else. 
0:23:49.690 --> 0:23:51.120 
Bas van den Berg 
Well, I'm just going to search her to. 
0:23:52.180 --> 0:23:52.490 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:23:53.750 --> 0:23:57.660 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK, what does L least important questions? 
0:23:57.670 --> 0:23:59.70 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So you don't get too distracted. 
0:24:0.280 --> 0:24:4.210 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And no, maybe you can a bit expand. 
0:24:4.260 --> 0:24:19.380 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I mean I you talked a bit about it during even this interview right now, but also during your talk on this 
symposium, but about incorporating the voices of minorities and non human uh, like spacious or actors. 
0:24:20.330 --> 0:24:20.490 
Bas van den Berg 
Yep. 
0:24:21.300 --> 0:24:22.700 
Kamile Vaitkute 
What are your current thoughts? 
0:24:22.710 --> 0:24:23.290 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Like how? 
0:24:23.300 --> 0:24:24.890 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How do you think of doing it? 
0:24:25.660 --> 0:24:27.170 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Is there some I don't know? 
0:24:27.240 --> 0:24:28.850 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh, theories that inspire you. 
0:24:30.140 --> 0:24:31.510 
Bas van den Berg 
What we don't do it enough yet. 
0:24:32.300 --> 0:24:36.440 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, especially the group itself is is. 
0:24:36.920 --> 0:24:39.880 
Bas van den Berg 
I mean, they're not all Dutch, so at least we've got that going. 
0:24:39.890 --> 0:24:41.160 
Bas van den Berg 
But we are all white. 
0:24:42.450 --> 0:24:42.730 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:24:43.310 --> 0:24:49.100 
Bas van den Berg 
All either highly educated, I think almost all with PhDs. Umm. 
0:24:51.560 --> 0:24:52.20 
Bas van den Berg 
When will we? 
0:25:2.450 --> 0:25:2.700 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:24:53.20 --> 0:25:19.100 
Bas van den Berg 
The projects that we do are not that though, like, for example, one of the big projects we're running now is in 
the red light district and Amsterdam, which has a very diverse crowd and there for example, uh, we also, you 
know, tried to incorporate actors like the canals and the streets and just to sort of see what happens if you 
bring those in as as actors. 
133
==PAGE:139==
0:25:19.390 --> 0:25:23.990 
Bas van den Berg 
Rights or just see calls for example, but that's still very much. 
0:25:24.60 --> 0:25:27.940 
Bas van den Berg 
You know, we're still very much learning about how to really do that. 
0:25:30.540 --> 0:25:40.760 
Bas van den Berg 
How to you know, work with people that that I have no access or haven't had, never had access to higher 
education. Uh. 
0:25:43.30 --> 0:25:46.0 
Bas van den Berg 
And also how to incorporate other voices? 
0:25:46.870 --> 0:25:51.570 
Bas van den Berg 
So we've done some small like experiments, stuff like there's this movement called ministers of the Future 
here. 
0:25:52.260 --> 0:25:52.570 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:25:53.300 --> 0:26:9.820 
Bas van den Berg 
So we've tried some of their methods with like bringing little boots from like a 5 year old girl like rain boots and 
burning them on an empty chair when we have sessions and just saying, well, what would you know, what 
would the future generation say or what would be their interest? 
0:26:11.40 --> 0:26:14.150 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, and stuff like, you know, 7 generational thinking. 
0:26:14.160 --> 0:26:20.880 
Bas van den Berg 
We've done some small experiments with that, but and the the most truthful answer is we don't know yet. 
0:26:22.690 --> 0:26:22.870 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:26:23.120 --> 0:26:24.770 
Bas van den Berg 
We're trying to, we're trying to figure it out. 
0:26:27.500 --> 0:26:31.200 
Bas van den Berg 
And then my own my own experiments are all within education. 
0:26:33.420 --> 0:26:42.620 
Bas van den Berg 
So there it's a little bit easier in that sense because the people, I mean the minority voices are mostly ignored 
in my contacts or those with the students themselves. 
0:26:42.630 --> 0:26:48.190 
Bas van den Berg 
So I just start with them so I don't do anything if students are not involved. 
0:26:50.40 --> 0:26:55.200 
Bas van den Berg 
But that extends through, not just research, but also, for example, designing of course. 
0:26:57.70 --> 0:27:6.340 
Bas van den Berg 
If someone asked me to help design a course I I will just flat out tell them if there's not at least two students 
on the team that get paid to be on the team, then no. 
0:27:7.490 --> 0:27:7.760 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:27:8.820 --> 0:27:15.710 
Bas van den Berg 
But that's a really small that's not the answer to sort of like how do we engage with this inclusive ways? 
0:27:17.90 --> 0:27:21.200 
Bas van den Berg 
And there's also still a question to what extent should we be inclusive? 
0:27:22.330 --> 0:27:26.40 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm at least most countries in Europe are not real. 
0:27:27.100 --> 0:27:31.380 
Bas van den Berg 
Sort of democracies in the sense of everybody's voice, matters as much. 
0:27:31.390 --> 0:27:32.660 
Bas van den Berg 
That's just not true. 
0:27:34.120 --> 0:27:40.440 
Bas van den Berg 
Of course everybody can vote, but then afterwards it's mostly still highly educated politicians that decide. 
0:27:41.340 --> 0:27:41.560 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:27:43.490 --> 0:27:49.330 
Bas van den Berg 
You know, to what extent is it also not just pragmatic when you're, you know, making decisions. 
0:27:52.270 --> 0:27:55.290 
Bas van den Berg 
So yeah, there's a lot of questions there that I don't have answers for. 
0:27:55.300 --> 0:27:55.550 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm sorry. 
0:27:56.340 --> 0:28:0.790 
Kamile Vaitkute 
No, I I mean I I probably know one has them  in the end. 
0:28:0.980 --> 0:28:3.30 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I I am swimming but. 
0:28:1.150 --> 0:28:22.40 
Bas van den Berg 
No, which are best to be as inclusive as we as we can slash C possibilities for uh and as at least some of our 
group has an active interest in uh, expanding some of our positionality. 
0:28:22.860 --> 0:28:23.80 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:28:23.780 --> 0:28:36.20 
Bas van den Berg 
So you know, I'll burp is reading like feminist methodologies or or queer methodologies or black 
methodologies or indigenous approaches to sciences? 
0:28:37.410 --> 0:28:47.110 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, so I would say we're sort of at that stage where where we see the importance we see the need we we 
try as much as we can and and we're actively engaging with. 
0:28:48.30 --> 0:28:53.60 
Bas van den Berg 
Moving beyond sort of the baggage which we carry. 
0:28:53.650 --> 0:28:53.870 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:28:54.740 --> 0:28:59.550 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, but we're we're not at the position where I would feel comfortable giving any. 
0:29:2.980 --> 0:29:4.640 
Bas van den Berg 
I'll forward the statements. 
0:29:4.650 --> 0:29:5.200 
Bas van den Berg 
Who are this? 
0:29:5.210 --> 0:29:5.880 
Bas van den Berg 
Is what you should do. 
0:29:7.110 --> 0:29:7.390 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:29:9.140 --> 0:29:9.440 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:29:10.10 --> 0:29:17.690 
Kamile Vaitkute 
UM umm, I understand and I I can also hear the struggle and but I also hear that you're trying a lot. 
0:29:17.700 --> 0:29:24.50 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So that's that's nice to hear because I don't really hear in many groups working on the things like that. 
0:29:25.310 --> 0:29:25.470 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:29:24.60 --> 0:29:28.910 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So at least in that sense, it's it is exciting. Hello. 
0:29:28.560 --> 0:29:41.210 
Bas van den Berg 
My my fear in life is to become one of those old white men who who would make all the jokes about so I I I we 
try our best to avoid that as much as possible. 
0:29:43.870 --> 0:29:44.720 
Kamile Vaitkute 
That's good. 
0:29:45.110 --> 0:29:49.330 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How do other people react when you try your, let's say bring the boots? 
0:29:49.410 --> 0:29:55.540 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Ask how do people that participate in the process react to surprise? 
0:29:54.630 --> 0:29:58.130 
Bas van den Berg 
I think in yeah, it really depends. 
0:29:58.140 --> 0:30:0.470 
Bas van den Berg 
Actually, you know experience. 
0:30:0.480 --> 0:30:2.290 
Bas van den Berg 
So what? 
0:30:3.740 --> 0:30:10.230 
Bas van den Berg 
So we are at University of Applied Sciences, so our connections with practice are very strong compared to 
most universities. 
0:30:10.240 --> 0:30:11.940 
Bas van den Berg 
We don't really have that sort of. 
134
==PAGE:140==
0:30:13.520 --> 0:30:16.430 
Bas van den Berg 
I've read our like this is a university. 
0:30:16.500 --> 0:30:24.380 
Bas van den Berg 
Most of our teaching also happens in community, and I think that's sort of like local communities side level. 
0:30:24.390 --> 0:30:25.820 
Bas van den Berg 
They respond very positively. 
0:30:26.690 --> 0:30:26.940 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:30:27.450 --> 0:30:31.530 
Bas van den Berg 
UM, where it becomes more difficult as with groups that are. 
0:30:33.840 --> 0:30:49.100 
Bas van den Berg 
I I'm not sure how to say that, but that sort of like while we're professionals, you know in suits and those types 
of people that really try to leave part of who they are behind the moment they enter, they're working life. 
0:30:49.980 --> 0:30:50.270 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:30:50.560 --> 0:30:52.590 
Bas van den Berg 
There are can be quite different. 
0:30:52.680 --> 0:30:54.140 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh people may walk away. 
0:30:55.720 --> 0:30:56.270 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh. 
0:30:56.960 --> 0:30:58.370 
Bas van den Berg 
It may also be and it's. 
0:30:58.620 --> 0:31:5.180 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm not sure because we haven't been able to do follow up with them, but I think if party may also be because 
it's too confrontational. 
0:31:7.520 --> 0:31:9.790 
Bas van den Berg 
Especially if you're working, I'd like an oil company. 
0:31:12.250 --> 0:31:16.90 
Bas van den Berg 
You know, having that sort of question of, well, what about your grandchildren? 
0:31:17.230 --> 0:31:22.290 
Bas van den Berg 
Ohh can be quite confrontational and then of course you get questions of why is it good or not. 
0:31:22.610 --> 0:31:24.650 
Bas van den Berg 
UMI would say yes. 
0:31:25.180 --> 0:31:28.880 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, that's not necessarily my job. 
0:31:28.890 --> 0:31:31.840 
Bas van den Berg 
Not to best people off or not to make them uncomfortable? 
0:31:32.840 --> 0:31:33.450 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:31:33.980 --> 0:31:35.200 
Bas van den Berg 
Especially when it's needed. 
0:31:37.670 --> 0:31:44.720 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, But there's avenues of ethical considerations there, and there's definitely some streams of ethics and 
research that would say no. 
0:31:44.730 --> 0:31:48.790 
Bas van den Berg 
Any research that harms someone uh, is inherently unethical. 
0:31:50.650 --> 0:31:58.240 
Bas van den Berg 
I'm just not a believer of that school of research, or at least my belief is if you really straight strictly adhere to 
that, you can no longer do research. 
0:32:3.310 --> 0:32:4.70 
Kamile Vaitkute 
That is point. 
0:32:5.970 --> 0:32:6.160 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:32:6.800 --> 0:32:7.120 
Bas van den Berg 
Thank you. 
0:32:8.20 --> 0:32:8.570 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Thank you. 
0:32:9.80 --> 0:32:9.880 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You are welcome. 
0:32:11.390 --> 0:32:13.960 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, OK uh. 
0:32:16.850 --> 0:32:17.720 
Kamile Vaitkute 
That's interesting. 
0:32:17.730 --> 0:32:21.440 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Do you work with like power dynamics or conflicts in general? 
0:32:21.550 --> 0:32:22.120 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh. 
0:32:22.170 --> 0:32:24.720 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Within your framework and. 
0:32:24.530 --> 0:32:26.120 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, more and more. 
0:32:27.10 --> 0:32:36.600 
Bas van den Berg 
So not yet to the level that I would say we've really doven into the literature and integrated it, but in practice 
we experience it a lot. 
0:32:37.230 --> 0:32:39.70 
Bas van den Berg 
And I think the importance of power. 
0:32:40.510 --> 0:32:44.310 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh is becoming more and more prevalent. 
0:32:44.520 --> 0:32:46.340 
Bas van den Berg 
Also, as a research topic in our group. 
0:32:48.900 --> 0:32:57.280 
Bas van den Berg 
And it's also a cultural sort of taboo that we don't really like talking about. 
0:32:57.290 --> 0:32:59.210 
Bas van den Berg 
Power does. 
0:32:59.220 --> 0:33:6.770 
Bas van den Berg 
Her culture is supposed to be based on consensus, but of course power still plays a huge role. Umm. 
0:33:10.280 --> 0:33:15.230 
Bas van den Berg 
And I think it's an under research rule in systemic change process or systemic design. 
0:33:17.530 --> 0:33:18.50 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:33:19.90 --> 0:33:25.440 
Bas van den Berg 
And it's also, it's also touched on the participation question because so you can bring 20 different 
stakeholders together. 
0:33:25.450 --> 0:33:32.270 
Bas van den Berg 
But if everybody knows it comes down to two stakeholders making up their mind, then are we really talking 
about participation or not? 
0:33:40.330 --> 0:33:42.60 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I'm just noting some things down. 
0:33:42.490 --> 0:33:42.630 
Bas van den Berg 
No. 
0:33:42.330 --> 0:33:42.830 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:33:43.360 --> 0:33:43.950 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:33:44.850 --> 0:33:46.300 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You're also saying uh, sorry. 
0:33:46.310 --> 0:33:49.580 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm gonna just jump to another question because I I kind of wanna ask it. 
0:33:51.250 --> 0:33:52.620 
Kamile Vaitkute 
You you mentioned. 
0:33:54.680 --> 0:33:55.30 
Bas van den Berg 
What's this? 
0:33:52.730 --> 0:33:57.420 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Sorry, I know it doesn't work exactly like that, but also the time is ticking. 
0:33:57.30 --> 0:33:58.160 
Bas van den Berg 
One second, sorry. 
0:33:58.610 --> 0:34:1.100 
Bas van den Berg 
Just don't say sorry when you have nothing to apologize for. 
135
==PAGE:141==
0:34:1.300 --> 0:34:2.0 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:34:6.970 --> 0:34:7.330 
Bas van den Berg 
Thank you. 
0:34:2.40 --> 0:34:11.360 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK, so I take it back and yeah, you mentioned that they're not searching for solutions in systemic design. 
0:34:11.870 --> 0:34:12.100 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:34:12.310 --> 0:34:20.570 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It's like a quote from your speech, and I'm just wondering, in your opinion, what do you think we are searching 
for? Umm. 
0:34:21.220 --> 0:34:21.390 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:34:22.400 --> 0:34:25.670 
Bas van den Berg 
So that's a good question or a good quote. 
0:34:25.960 --> 0:34:28.340 
Bas van den Berg 
And then I gave myself a compliment that feels a bit weird. 
0:34:29.790 --> 0:34:31.610 
Bas van den Berg 
No, the the question is good though so. 
0:34:33.390 --> 0:34:41.270 
Bas van den Berg 
We're not looking in for solutions in the sense that it's not a problem where we can go from A to B and it's 
fixed, right? 
0:34:41.280 --> 0:34:43.420 
Bas van den Berg 
So that's sort of like if I go back to the iPhone. 
0:34:44.210 --> 0:34:46.200 
Bas van den Berg 
UM battery life is an issue. 
0:34:46.210 --> 0:34:47.200 
Bas van den Berg 
We've got a new battery. 
0:34:47.210 --> 0:34:47.840 
Bas van den Berg 
It's fixed. 
0:34:48.210 --> 0:34:55.180 
Bas van den Berg 
You know, we're talking about complex transitions that are constantly shifting and dancing, and there's 
relationships. 
0:34:55.190 --> 0:34:56.890 
Bas van den Berg 
And yes, there are some type of equilibrium. 
0:34:59.140 --> 0:35:2.990 
Bas van den Berg 
But it's much more complex than just, you know, battery form. 
0:35:3.760 --> 0:35:16.390 
Bas van den Berg 
So what I think in that sense, what we're looking for is a understanding about those dynamics, umm and B, 
we're looking for potential configurations of their systems. 
0:35:17.540 --> 0:35:18.550 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, that may be. 
0:35:20.250 --> 0:35:29.980 
Bas van den Berg 
Not expressed yet, and they may be expressed sometimes, but that are more conducive to living within the 
sort of boundaries of what the planet can handle. 
0:35:32.770 --> 0:35:39.70 
Bas van den Berg 
And I think there is a powerful role for design to to play with that. 
0:35:39.220 --> 0:35:43.610 
Bas van den Berg 
So to say, this is sort of roughly speaking the equilibrium. 
0:35:43.620 --> 0:35:47.630 
Bas van den Berg 
Now this is sort of the field of possible configurations. 
0:35:48.700 --> 0:35:54.900 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, and within those fields, you know, these sort of sort of consequences if we would move more in those 
directions. 
0:35:56.0 --> 0:35:59.70 
Bas van den Berg 
I think design there can be a very powerful force. 
0:36:1.0 --> 0:36:7.920 
Bas van den Berg 
Not through designed to works, but to understand what directionality may be worth trying to pursue. 
0:36:10.370 --> 0:36:24.750 
Bas van den Berg 
And when you're doing that, I think the best thing you can find is new questions and not so much new 
solutions and maybe new ways of looking at the problem and maybe new, you know, follow up things to 
explore. 
0:36:28.110 --> 0:36:29.800 
Bas van den Berg 
That's fundamentally what we're looking at. 
0:36:29.810 --> 0:36:31.700 
Bas van den Berg 
Is is potential? 
0:36:31.830 --> 0:36:36.550 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah, I would say evolutionary bath waste at the system can can realistically follow. 
0:36:39.380 --> 0:36:47.350 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And do let's say in your thinking or your framework, do you at some point take action, then a few? 
0:36:48.650 --> 0:36:49.990 
Bas van den Berg 
Well, you're always taking action. 
0:36:50.580 --> 0:36:50.820 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:36:51.810 --> 0:36:53.340 
Bas van den Berg 
It's impossible not to take action. 
0:36:54.980 --> 0:36:55.450 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:36:55.900 --> 0:36:59.660 
Bas van den Berg 
I mean, even if you just lay in bed, you're still engaging with the system. 
0:37:1.100 --> 0:37:2.840 
Bas van den Berg 
But I guess that's not what you're asking. 
0:37:4.50 --> 0:37:5.80 
Kamile Vaitkute 
A purposeful action. 
0:37:6.510 --> 0:37:6.890 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:37:6.900 --> 0:37:13.360 
Bas van den Berg 
So and then I think is that sort of normative that mention, the answer is yes. 
0:37:13.510 --> 0:37:18.170 
Bas van den Berg 
Like we believe that we need to change certain systems. 
0:37:18.180 --> 0:37:27.110 
Bas van den Berg 
In our case, it's healthcare education and IT I think another thought is sure anymore, but they S grand 
education? 
0:37:28.80 --> 0:37:46.80 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, so that also assumes on our end that there is something wrong now that needs to change and when 
we're engaged with this work, we're trying to find, you know, alternative configurations, we will do our best to 
make those configurations the bath ways that we're moving towards. 
0:37:47.130 --> 0:37:47.420 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:37:46.910 --> 0:37:55.610 
Bas van den Berg 
So you're yourself engaging with purposeful actions, but you're also continuously acknowledging that your 
actions may move in a different direction. 
0:37:56.200 --> 0:37:59.60 
Bas van den Berg 
There are incomplete as is your knowledge of what's going on. 
0:38:0.480 --> 0:38:4.830 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, so to some extent you could say there are leap of faith. 
0:38:8.940 --> 0:38:15.540 
Bas van den Berg 
But I know most academics think that sounds not objective enough, but in the end is what we're doing 
anyway so. 
0:38:16.980 --> 0:38:17.360 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Hmm. 
0:38:19.670 --> 0:38:21.120 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. Umm. 
0:38:22.210 --> 0:38:24.640 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Thank you for your answers, uh. 
0:38:24.880 --> 0:38:30.620 
Kamile Vaitkute 
If if it's fine with you, could I show you one thing that I'm working on right now? 
0:38:31.730 --> 0:38:33.50 
Bas van den Berg 
That's not offensive, sure. 
0:38:34.590 --> 0:38:37.400 
Kamile Vaitkute 
If it's not offensive, why would it be? 
136
==PAGE:142==
0:38:39.120 --> 0:38:40.940 
Bas van den Berg 
I don't know what the hell you're going to show me. 
0:38:41.880 --> 0:38:43.930 
Kamile Vaitkute 
No, no, no. 
0:38:43.940 --> 0:38:46.730 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm gonna share a miro board if it's fine. 
0:38:46.370 --> 0:38:47.480 
Bas van den Berg 
OK. Yeah. 
0:38:46.880 --> 0:38:48.490 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, OK. Yeah. 
0:38:50.360 --> 0:38:53.710 
Kamile Vaitkute 
UM, yeah, as I told you. 
0:38:53.880 --> 0:38:57.280 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And it's it's quite basic. Umm. 
0:38:58.650 --> 0:38:59.110 
Bas van den Berg 
That's fine. 
0:38:59.120 --> 0:38:59.450 
Bas van den Berg 
So am I. 
0:39:1.320 --> 0:39:1.910 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh. 
0:39:1.920 --> 0:39:5.610 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And that's and that's why one of the reasons why I actually called you. 
0:39:5.660 --> 0:39:7.960 
Kamile Vaitkute 
As I said in the beginning, for for this meeting. 
0:39:8.300 --> 0:39:15.930 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm umm to kind of maybe uh, do you see it right now, actually? 
0:39:15.300 --> 0:39:17.80 
Bas van den Berg 
I am starting to get now, yeah. 
0:39:15.940 --> 0:39:18.0 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Maybe I'll not sure. 
0:39:18.10 --> 0:39:21.260 
Kamile Vaitkute 
There's a portable shared there's. Umm. 
0:39:23.120 --> 0:39:28.870 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Maybe I'll share this support because as a as a as a view, yes. 
0:39:29.500 --> 0:39:30.180 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Can you see it now? 
0:39:30.890 --> 0:39:31.10 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:39:31.730 --> 0:39:33.380 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, I moved it. 
0:39:44.460 --> 0:39:44.600 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:39:33.520 --> 0:39:48.0 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But umm, so as I told before I I looked into different systemic design methodologies that I could find on the 
academic literature and I'm a bit when I'm driving my own methodology. 
0:40:4.40 --> 0:40:4.260 
Bas van den Berg 
You know. 
0:39:48.10 --> 0:40:5.540 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I am kind of restricted, you know, towards what I found in the that literature, UM and the steps that I could 
identify that were sort of similar between each methods are here and you can see they're very line here, here 
and the bottom. 
0:40:5.930 --> 0:40:19.340 
Kamile Vaitkute 
It goes from understanding the system existing system, then defying points for leverage or change, designing 
the new ideal system and establishing relationships, evaluating, implementing learning and feedback. 
0:40:19.990 --> 0:40:34.410 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And from I'm kind of happy to use these steps to derive my own model in a way, but I also have some 
principles which are also, I would say quite quite generic, basic and also very broad. 
0:40:35.420 --> 0:40:42.70 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So for instance, equity kind of how do we ensure an appropriate involvement or presentation of 
stakeholders? 
0:40:42.80 --> 0:40:44.450 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So, and that's probably one of the main topics. 
0:40:44.460 --> 0:40:50.140 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I contacted you because I couldn't find it in any other models discussing that sort of things. 
0:40:50.740 --> 0:40:51.590 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Transformations. 
0:40:51.600 --> 0:40:55.320 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So yeah, how do we use to some? 
0:40:55.570 --> 0:41:23.920 
Kamile Vaitkute 
How do we move towards some sort of transition with the help of the framework of or the model that is not 
just no simple change or is, as you say, like problem solving tool, but it's actually something that moves 
towards changing the mindset and sustainability which is almost annoying me because I know how how 
broad the term is, how much it means to different people and how much it might not be possible with the 
understanding that are in the existing systemic design models. 
0:41:24.580 --> 0:41:33.300 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh to kind of design for it and my design for it is also wrong kind of statement but to to go towards it. 
0:41:33.390 --> 0:41:47.990 
Kamile Vaitkute 
But I was just thinking, maybe if you're a critical point of view and looking at these different steps, do you have 
some ideas or principles how how these three principles could be integrated at those steps? 
0:41:52.420 --> 0:41:52.620 
Bas van den Berg 
Mm-hmm. 
0:41:48.80 --> 0:41:55.710 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I mean, of course you mentioned already quite a lot during the talk, but maybe have some more, you know, 
thoughts right now. 
0:41:55.810 --> 0:41:58.180 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm not sure if you can see it properly, but. 
0:41:58.400 --> 0:41:59.900 
Bas van den Berg 
You know, I can see most of it now. 
0:42:1.770 --> 0:42:2.280 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:42:3.270 --> 0:42:7.610 
Bas van den Berg 
Well, I would first ask if you looked at the transition design literature. 
0:42:8.570 --> 0:42:12.210 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm, no, not really actually. Ohh. 
0:42:11.940 --> 0:42:18.430 
Bas van den Berg 
Is that I think be much more interesting then, at least, at least you'll find so far. 
0:42:18.440 --> 0:42:21.900 
Bas van den Berg 
So put some in the chat and then also in the paper I sent you there's quite a bit. 
0:42:22.610 --> 0:42:22.880 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Mm-hmm. 
0:42:23.170 --> 0:42:23.790 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:42:24.250 --> 0:42:31.930 
Bas van den Berg 
Well, I mean, yeah, if you have to follow this process, I mean there's obviously you know different ways that 
you could sort of integrate. 
0:42:32.580 --> 0:42:33.810 
Bas van den Berg 
For me, it's just the inability. 
0:42:38.930 --> 0:42:39.160 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:42:46.480 --> 0:42:46.730 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:42:33.820 --> 0:42:54.40 
Bas van den Berg 
The easiest thing would be either to link it to the SG's which have their own problems, or to the sort of donut 
model that the Stockholm Resilience Institute and the Gateway works use, because that at least you can say 
does this change that we're now working on, you know, contribute to being more within the doughnut or not? 
0:42:54.770 --> 0:42:55.0 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:42:54.820 --> 0:43:3.980 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, that's a very objective question, which you could just do LCS about if you wanted to, UM, equity. 
0:43:3.990 --> 0:43:11.250 
Bas van den Berg 
I think the most important thing is that you make sure that you know different stakeholders are involved and 
whether that's true personas or true. 
137
==PAGE:143==
0:43:12.250 --> 0:43:13.290 
Bas van den Berg 
Actually inviting them. 
0:43:14.920 --> 0:43:27.700 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm, you could even do it in the sort of role playing way where you create different characters or even sets 
of characters and have stakeholders enact them. 
0:43:28.210 --> 0:43:28.570 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:43:28.60 --> 0:43:35.790 
Bas van den Berg 
So you're good, will invite the farmer, but tell don't know you have to be the Ministry of Agriculture. 
0:43:36.310 --> 0:43:36.640 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:43:37.250 --> 0:43:39.910 
Bas van den Berg 
I don't know if there is one in Denmark, but whatever. 
0:43:41.140 --> 0:43:41.740 
Bas van den Berg 
Umm. 
0:43:42.590 --> 0:43:49.460 
Bas van den Berg 
And then transformation that I think is the most my niece is mostly connected to that sort of first step. 
0:43:50.850 --> 0:43:52.770 
Bas van den Berg 
Well, I mean it's in the first step. 
0:43:52.780 --> 0:44:7.750 
Bas van den Berg 
It's about what can you actually do to create transformative learning, but to be able to do that, it's very 
important that you get an A sort of an overview of what are the mindsets, world views, etcetera, that people 
actually have that allow the system to exist as it is now. 
0:44:7.760 --> 0:44:8.860 
Bas van den Berg 
There exist like it is now. 
0:44:10.220 --> 0:44:30.210 
Bas van den Berg 
UM, which you can do in understanding but but then I would if you take that sort of traditional uh micro 
missile micro level type model then I was just suggest adding nano as a level so you can also engage with that 
sort of worldview level where the individual person or something like that. 
0:44:36.110 --> 0:44:43.500 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, But yeah, I think in transition design especially, there's also quite a few good tools that can be used in this 
process. 
0:44:44.710 --> 0:44:45.100 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm. 
0:44:53.980 --> 0:44:54.590 
Kamile Vaitkute 
OK. 
0:44:57.470 --> 0:44:57.620 
Bas van den Berg 
Yeah. 
0:44:55.140 --> 0:44:58.890 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Bus do I see bus actually, yes. 
0:44:59.550 --> 0:45:0.670 
Bas van den Berg 
It's pretty good actually, yeah. 
0:45:1.210 --> 0:45:2.310 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, that's OK. 
0:45:3.730 --> 0:45:9.50 
Kamile Vaitkute 
UM, well thanks a lot, I would say thank you a lot. 
0:45:9.200 --> 0:45:20.790 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I think it it was very as expected, inspiring to hear your contemplations about the whole state of the art of the 
system we design and where you're moving with your team. 
0:45:22.600 --> 0:45:22.730 
Bas van den Berg 
But. 
0:45:21.470 --> 0:45:30.850 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Umm it's it's very interesting especially I think comparing to what I've read before in the literature to the guy I 
have this a bit I think yeah. 
0:45:30.860 --> 0:45:35.740 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Every thinking the system design in the in the it's in itself sort of perspective you know. 
0:45:35.970 --> 0:45:38.180 
Kamile Vaitkute 
So I really enjoyed it. 
0:45:39.550 --> 0:45:39.980 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yes, sorry. 
0:45:37.120 --> 0:45:42.160 
Bas van den Berg 
And so for me there, there's a lot of boring shared in there. 
0:45:43.540 --> 0:45:44.310 
Kamile Vaitkute 
There is. 
0:45:45.80 --> 0:45:48.190 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Uh, there's also a lot of interesting stuff. 
0:45:48.980 --> 0:45:50.180 
Kamile Vaitkute 
At the same time, I think. 
0:45:51.160 --> 0:45:51.770 
Bas van den Berg 
That's true. 
0:45:51.860 --> 0:45:57.430 
Bas van den Berg 
Well, anyway, it was a pleasure if any questions could pop up through free to send me an email. 
0:45:58.300 --> 0:46:1.820 
Bas van den Berg 
Be off till January, but happy holidays. 
0:46:2.580 --> 0:46:4.110 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah, I have all these to you too. 
0:46:4.120 --> 0:46:6.530 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And thanks a lot for your time and good luck with your team. 
0:46:6.540 --> 0:46:9.960 
Kamile Vaitkute 
I'm for sure gonna be following your your work later on. 
0:46:9.610 --> 0:46:11.260 
Bas van den Berg 
No good luck. 
0:46:11.270 --> 0:46:12.230 
Bas van den Berg 
I hope you do. 
0:46:12.240 --> 0:46:13.650 
Bas van den Berg 
Uh, your graduation well. 
0:46:14.160 --> 0:46:14.420 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Yeah. 
0:46:14.500 --> 0:46:15.290 
Kamile Vaitkute 
Thank you. 
0:46:15.870 --> 0:46:16.250 
Bas van den Berg 
Which out? 
0:46:15.920 --> 0:46:16.590 
Kamile Vaitkute 
And bye. 
 
138
==PAGE:144==
139
==PAGE:145==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
