==PAGE:1==
Functional Characterization of Tissues
by Deconvolution to Cell Level Gene
Expression
Søren Vestergren Sandgaard
Master Thesis
Supervisor: Lars Rønn Olsen
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Author
Søren Vestergren Sandgaard (s173686)
Supervisor
Lars Rønn Olsen (lronn@dtu.dk)
Project period: 28.08.2023 - 28.01.2024
ECTS points: 30
Education: Master’s of Science (MSc)
Class: Public
Edition: First
Research Group: Single Cell Omics
Section: Bioinformatics
Department: DTU Healthtech
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Preface
This thesis marks the end of a journey filled with challenges, new experiences, and learning
opportunities that have been incredibly rewarding. The thesis was written at the Technical
University of Denmark, in the Single Cell Omics research group which is part of the
Bionformatics section of DTU Healthtech.
This project was carried out to fulfill the requirements of my masters degree in Bioinfor-
matics and Systems Biology from DTU.
Throughout this journey, I have been supervised by Associate Professor Lars Rønn Olsen.
Søren Vestergren Sandgaard - s173686
Signature
Date
ii
28th of January, 2024
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Acknowledgements
I would like to extent my sincere gratitude towards all the people who have helped
me throughout the journey of writing this thesis. First and foremost to my supervisor,
Associate Professor Lars Rønn Olsen, who has provided me with academic insights, positive
encouragement, and a feeling that anything is possible. In addition, I would like to thank
the Single Cell Omics and Isoform Analysis research groups for inspiration at our joint
meetings.
Thank you to the other Master students who were writing their thesis alongside me, Mikkel
Swartz, Melissa Ensmenger, Christian Jacobsen, Caroline Uldahl Martensen, and Angeliki
Kallia Spentza. The discussions we have had, academic or not, have improved the final
outcome of this project, and made the journey far more enjoyable.
I extend my gratitude to Magnus Toxværd and Anders Bogh Jacobsen for their assistance
in proofreading.
Lastly, I would like to thank Christina Richelsen Schulz, not only for proofreading the
report but more importantly for looking out for my well-being throughout.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Abstract
Investigating cell type specific gene expression profiles, can be both a labour intensive
and expensive task. Therefore, to investigate the differential gene expression in a variety
of tissues, bulk expression is often used. However, as the cell type composition can vary
greatly between samples, some differences in biological function can be attributed to
changes in composition, rather than changes in gene expression.
This project has shown, that by using a regression based deconvolution approach on
bulk expression data, cell level gene expression profiles could be retrieved and analyzed.
Thereby granting insights into the behavior of single cell types, without the need for cell
type isolation.
The method was developed and applied to a synthetic RNA dataset with known cellular
compositions, showing remarkable strength in the capture of the original gene expression
profiles. Subsequently, the method was utilized to deconvolute the expression profiles of
platelets in patients with Myeloproliferative Neoplasms. Investigations of these expression
profiles by single-sample gene set enrichment analysis indicated increased platelet activation
and adhesion in patients with the disease compared to healthy individuals.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Transcriptomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deconvolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Myeloproliferative neoplasms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Materials and methods
14
3.1
Programming environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Deconvolution by linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Application to synthetic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Application to natural MPN data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
22
4.1
Data simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Application to synthetic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Application to natural MPN data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Discussion
31
5.1
Data quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Performance on synthetic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Biological insights in MPN disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Deconvolution model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Conclusion
40
7
Future perspectives
41
Bibliography
42
v
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Abbreviations
cDNA
Complementary DNA
CLP
Common Lymphoid Progenitor
CMP
Common Myeloid Progenitor
CPM
Counts per million
DC
Dendritic cells
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
ES
Enrichment score
ET
Essential thrombocythemia
GEP
Gene expression profile
GSEA
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
HD
Healthy Donor
HSC
Hematopoetic Stem Cells
MPN
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms
mRNA
Messenger RNA
NK
Natural killer cells
NKT
Natural killer T cells
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
PMF
Primary Myelofibrosis
PV
Polycythemia vera
RNA-seq
RNA sequencing
scRNA-seq
single cell RNA sequencing
ssGSEA
single sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
UMAP
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
vi
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Since the discovery of DNA, it has been an ambition for researchers to understand and
utilize the vast amounts of information that is stored in every cell of our body. One of the
very important fields of research is the study of the genes that are expressed in a tissue at
a specific time [1]. This genetic expression can then be used to infer biological function in
the sampled tissue [2]. This field is called transcriptomics.
When the first transcriptomic studies of humans were carried out, differences in expression
of specific cell types were poorly understood. Therefore the initial approach was to analyze
the active genes of an entire sample, also called the bulk expression. Unfortunately, most
samples from humans contain multiple different cell types, therefore, changes in genetic
expression cannot be attributed directly to a specific cell type. Additionally, a difference
in gene expression between two bulk expression samples, can be due to an actual change
in behavior of some cells, or it could be due to a difference in the cellular composition
of the samples. This issue can be avoided, by isolating each cell before investigating
its transcriptome. However, even though this single cell technology is possibly in high
throughput, it is often labour intensive and expensive [3]. Therefore, being able to extract
and analyze cell specific expression profiles from bulk samples is of high value to the field
of transcriptomics.
The purpose of this project is to explore the possibilities in extracting cell level gene
expression profiles from bulk samples of heterogeneous tissues. A model has been devised,
where linear regression is utilized on bulk samples with consideration of each samples cell
type composition. This project aims to develop and apply this model, firstly to synthetic
data with a known ground truth, and secondly on natural data from Myeloproliferative
Neoplasm (MPN) patients to gain biological insights into this disease.
1
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
The general idea behind the model, is that the abundance of a cell type will have a linear
relation to the genes expressed by this specific cell type when observed across multiple
samples with varying cell type compositions. Therefore, a multivariate linear regression
model can be built with the expression of a single gene as the predicted variable, and
the abundance of each cell type in the sample as the explanatory variables. From this
model, samples containing a single cell type can be predicted and used to infer biological
functions of this cell type.
The model outlined in this project, will enable researchers to investigate the biological
functions of specific cell types, without the need for expensive and complex cell type
isolation. Additionally, this model allows researchers to re-analyze already existing bulk
transcriptomic datasets and gain additional biological insights.
In order to better understand the type of data that the model is applied to, as well as
the theoretical foundation for the model to work, the theory utilized in this project will
be introduced in Chapter 2. Thereafter, the particular materials and methods for this
project will be explained before addressing the results of the analyses performed. Lastly,
the results and the strengths and weaknesses will be discussed.
1.1
Project objectives
This project aims to illustrate how cell type specific gene expression profiles can be
extracted from bulk transcriptomic data. This is done through several steps, initially
with a proof of concept on synthetic data with a known ground truth. Subsequently the
method is applied to a natural dataset of patients with MPN in order to acquire biological
insights into this disease.
The general steps of the project are listed below.
1. Synthesize bulk transcriptomic data with known cell type gene expression profiles.
2. Develop and validate regression based deconvolution method on synthetic data.
3. Apply the method to natural data to provide cell specific biological insights in
disease.
Research question
Is it possible to retrieve accurate cell level gene expression profiles from tissue level
expression data by a deconvolution method based on linear regression?
2
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Transcriptomics
To convert information from the genome of a cell to the proteins that encompass the entire
functionality of said cell, the central dogma is often referenced [4]. Here the genes of the
cell are stored in a DNA genome, which can be transcribed to strings of messenger RNA
(mRNA) that are utilized by the ribosomes to translate the information into proteins.
A large part of the genome is under heavy regulation, and as such, only a fraction of
the available genes are utilized by each cell at a specific time [5]. This regulation, and
the following changes in the cell structure and functionality, are what differentiate the
cells of multicellular organisms. Thus, all the different cell types of the body contain the
entirety of the genome, however, only a fraction of the genes are actively expressed by
each specific cell type. Furthermore, each cell type can typically be divided into multiple
subgroups, with the highest hierarchical member being called the parent population, and
the subgroups being called child populations.
The gene expression profile (GEP) of a cell can also be affected by external factors, such
as immune cells being activated by infections. These changes are rarely detectable by
DNA sequencing, as the genome does not change. Instead the translated proteins of the
cell (proteomics), or even the transcribed mRNA (transcriptomics), can be utilized to
investigate the changes that occur on a tissue specific level [6]. The latter of which, has
been utilized in this project.
Prior to analyzing the transcriptome of a sample, the sample needs to be prepared.
Firstly, the mRNA has to be isolated, after which it is often converted from RNA to
its complementary DNA (cDNA). This stabilizes the RNA, and allows for compatibility
3
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
with already existing DNA analysis technologies. This expression based cDNA can then
be quantified by microarray or DNA sequencing technologies, the former of which has
been used for decades, while the latter has gained popularity with the decreasing cost of
sequencing technologies.
Microarray analysis
The microarray technology was first described by Schena, M. et al. in 1995 [7], and it was
quickly developed to allow for the detection of mRNA molecules in a highly parallel fashion
targeting tens of thousands of genes at once [8]. The concept is based upon hybridization
between fluorescently labelled cDNA molecules, and oligonucleotide probes that are fixed
at known locations in an array, giving rise to the microarray name. After hybridization
the array is washed for unbound cDNA and the expression of each gene can be quantified
by measuring the fluorescence at each location of the array.
This method has allowed for the quantification of thousands of genes at once with high
specificity, where even rarely occurring variants can be distinguished. However, it does
require the preparation of the microarray with known oligonucleotide probes, therefore
novel transcripts are not detectable by this method [6]. Furthermore, the abundance signal
is highly subjected to noise in relation to microarray handling between samples [9].
RNA sequencing
Another method to analyze the transcriptome of a sample, is by utilizing high throughput
DNA sequencing technologies to read the specific sequences of the mRNA after cDNA
preparation [10]. In the early days of this method, it was often regarded as being very
expensive, which limited its applications. However, with the advent of high throughput
sequencing technologies the prices have decreased immensely. Of notable mention is the
second generation sequencing technologies such as Illumina HiSeq, that allow for the
sequencing of millions of short reads of less than 150bp at once, using a sequencing by
synthesis approach [11]. Secondly, nanopore sequencing technologies, also called third
generation sequencing, enable the sequencing of longer reads in the order of kilobases, by
passing each cDNA strand through miniscule pores in a membrane, and measuring the
changes in current across the membrane [12]. Furthermore, when sequencing multiple small
samples, multiplexing can be a way to keep costs low. By appending a sample-specific
barcode to each cDNA strand before sequencing, the samples can be seperated by these
4
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
barcodes in silico. The resulting output from this would be in FastQ format, detailing the
sequence and the quality of the read at each nucleotide. Good practice would then be
to trim the reads to a certain minimum quality, minimum length, and remove possible
sequencing adapters and multiplexing barcodes. The transcripts can then be mapped to
the original genome, where the depth of the mapping can be used as a measure to quantify
the expression of each gene.
Whole tissue sequencing
When sequencing the transcriptome of a multicellular organism, the simplest option is
to sequence the entire tissue sampled. This gives the average gene expression across the
tissue sampled, not considering the heterogenous expression profile of the different cells in
a multicellular sample. An example could be blood in its entirety, also called whole blood,
which contains immune cells, red blood cells (erythrocytes), and platelets. Therefore, by
sequencing a blood sample, changes in gene expression between samples can be observed,
but the cell type specific origin of said change is hard to identify. Furthermore, as the
cellular composition of samples can vary greatly, an observed increase or decrease in gene
expression could both be due to changes in a specific cell type expression profile, but it
could also originate from changes in the cellular composition. As such, an increase in one
cell type, would increase the observed expression for genes related to this cell type, and as
the number of transcripts sequenced is kept approximately constant, the genes related to
the other cell types would appear decreased in expression. This artifact can be corrected
for, if the cellular composition of the samples is known.
Blood as a model tissue
In the section above, whole blood is used as an example. This is a widely used tissue
for studies of the human immune system, as most immune cells are present in blood.
Additionally since blood is liquid, each sample consist of thoroughly mixed cells, thereby
removing any effect related to the spatial position of each cell type.
Cells in blood originate from the hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in the bone marrow.
The HSCs differentiate into either the common lymphoid progenitor (CLP) or the common
myeloid progenitor (CMP). The CMP cells further differentiate through other progenitor
cells to form platelets, erythrocytes, granulocytes, macrophages, monocytes, and dendritic
cells. On the other hand, the CLP cells differentiate into B cells, T cells and natural killer
5
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
(NK) cells. Each of these can additionally be distinguished. As such, the common term B
cells can be used to describe both the naive and memory B cell types. Likewise, T cells
are very often classed into either CD4+ or CD8+ T cells [13].
Single cell sequencing
When in need of a higher genetic resolution, and the separation of different cell types,
the technology of single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is of great use. This method-
ology was first described in 2009, making it a relatively new approach to analysing the
transcriptome of a tissue sample [3].
There are two general approaches to single cell sequencing: a low-throughput plate-based
approach such as Smart-seq2 [14], and a high throughput droplet-based approach such
as 10xChromium [15]. The method employed by Smart-seq2 has a very high specificity,
detecting even very rare transcripts, but the costs and time commitments are also higher,
and the total cell count achieved is much lower when compared to 10xChromium [16, 17].
The 10xChromium method works by dividing the tissue sample into single cells using an
oil emulsion with a single cell and a unique barcode in each droplet. The cells can then
be lysed, and the barcode applied to the RNA molecules before breaking the emulsion
and amplifying the transcripts by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) [15]. Each RNA
molecule can be barcoded to its cell of origin in this manner, and after sequencing the
entire sample, the resulting transcripts can be demultiplexed to reveal the cell specific
expression profiles. This is opposed to the Smart-seq2 method, that relies on separating
each cell into wells of a microtiter plate and treating each well independently.
Once the RNA transcripts have been obtained and mapped to the genes of the organism,
it will often be necessary to cluster the cells based on their gene expression. These
clusters can then be annotated to reveal the cell types present in the sample. As such,
the transcriptomes of each cell type can be obtained, which allows for a more detailed
analysis of the differentially expressed genes between cell types of blood samples.
However, this method does not come without its disadvantages. Firstly, separating each
sample to single cell level is very costly and time consuming [18]. Secondly, abundance
measurements are not as accurate in scRNA-seq as they are in bulk RNA sequencing [19].
Lastly, the post sequencing analysis can be quite comprehensive in the annotation of single
cell clusters based on their cell type, especially if a high resolution of cell types is desired
[20].
6
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Simulation of single cell data
The costs of initiating a single cell sequencing project can be quite daunting, and therefore
it is important to have an understanding of the data quantity and resolution necessary to
investigate the hypothesis at hand. For this, using previously created datasets can be a
beneficial way to estimate the amount of data required, and even develop and test the
bioinformatic methods of the project before committing to the expenditure of performing
scRNA-seq.
Another option to sourcing an already existing dataset is to generate a synthetic single
cell dataset by simulation. This enables the user to control many aspects of the resulting
scRNA dataset. Such data properties include, but are not limited to, gene intensity,
variability, cell type clustering, and even batch effects. By tailoring the dataset to fit
with a certain ground truth, novel bioinformatic methods can be tested against this
during development, thereby reducing the costs and time commitment associated with
development of single cell RNA bioinformatic tools.
Multiple tools exist with this exact goal in mind, each with their own strengths and
weaknesses. A large proportion of scRNA tools rely on statistical distributions to model
and simulate synthetic gene expression, unfortunately making the resulting datasets contain
artifacts from these distributions. Thus, unbiased benchmarking studies have proven to
be an important aid in selecting an effective simulator [21, 22]. Some tools enable de novo
simulation based on user specified parameters, while others rely on parameters defined
from existing datasets. One tool, where both of these options are available is SPARSim,
published by G. Baruzzo et al. in 2020 [23]. They utilized a Gamma-Multivariated
Hypergeometric model, and were able to closely mimic natural scRNA data, especially
the sparsity of single cell data was kept intact.
Another well performing model, described by D. Risso et al. in 2018 [24], is the ZINB-Wave
model that relies on a zero-inflated negative binomial distribution. This model was shown
to outperform SPARSim on data property simulation and biological signal retention by
a benchmarking study by Y. Cao et al. in 2021 [22]. However, the ZINB-Wave models
primary purpose was to reduce the dimensionality of already existing data, and it does
not scale very well.
In 2021, the scDesign2 scRNA simulator was published by T. Sun et al. [25]. This
model utilizes a selection of Poisson and negative binomial distributions, as well as
their zero-inflated counterparts and selects the distribution that best model each gene
independently. By utilizing this mixture of distribution they have been able to achieve
7
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
excellent performance that closely resemble the capabilities of ZINB-Wave, however with
better scalability, when benchmarked by H. Crowell et al. in 2023 [21].
Visualization of scRNA data by dimensionality reduction
Gene expression profiles for large single cell datasets can often be difficult to visualize in a
meaningful manner, as there are typically thousands of genes and cells to be analyzed.
Therefore visualizing and analyzing one gene at a time would take an incredible amount
of time and effort. Especially if the goal is to identify and annotate clusters of specific cell
types during the processing of an RNA sequencing analysis.
Instead, clusters are often identified by using dimensionality reduction approaches to
describe most of the variance in the dataset by very few variables. Arguably the most
utilized approach is the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [26].
This works by
transforming the variables of the dataset into an orthogonal basis determined by the
eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the dataset. From here, the variables that explain most of
the data variance are typically used for down stream analysis and visualization.
However, for visualization purposes, only two variables can be visualized at once in a two-
dimensional scatter plot, therefore similar clusters can be depicted on top of each other in
unfortunate cases where their variance is not caught by the first two principal components.
To avoid this, and achieve clusters with even better separation, the Uniform Manifold
Approximation and Projection (UMAP) method was created [27]. This is based on graph
theory, and utilizes the distance between points as a measure of similarity, before trying
to create a low dimensionality graph where these distances can be represented as closely
to the real data as possible. This is a highly iterative approach and can take a substantial
amount of time, therefore it is often run on the principal components from a PCA analysis
where the least explaining principal components can be left out of consideration in the
UMAP [28].
2.2
Deconvolution
Achieving cell type specific expression profiles from heterogenous tissues have proven to
be a difficult and expensive task. There are, however, in silico methods that can provide
information on which cell types are present in bulk samples. One useful metric for a series
of bulk samples is the composition of different cell types. This allows the researchers to
8
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
correct for changes in compositions. Without this correction, genes that seem differentially
expressed, may just be an artifact of changes in cell type composition and not actual
changes in gene regulation [29]. This phenomena has been illustrated in Figure 2.1. Here, it
is evident that, even though there is a significant difference of Gene 1 expression, the origin
of this difference is rooted in a changed cell type composition between the treatments, and
not necessarily in a changed expression of Gene 1.
Thus, in order to identify differentially expressed genes or gene signatures between cell
types in heterogeneous tissue samples, it is important to consider the cell type composition.
Figure 2.1: The effect of cell type composition on the overall gene expression seen
in bulk expression data. Using two synthetic bulk expression dataset modelled
with different compositions of three different cell types, and a constant expression
of Gene 1 for each cell type not affected by treatment. A: Cell type compositions
in 10 samples of treatment 1. B: Cell type composition in 10 samples of treatment
2 with an overweight of cell type X. C: Gene expression split by treatment, with
a p-value from a t-test of 9.8e −08 reported at the top of this figure.
Cell type proportion estimation
To estimate the cell type proportion of bulk samples, multiple different options are available.
Two of the widely used tools are CIBERSORT [30] and xCell [31] that utilize different
methods for their estimation of cell type compositions.
CIBERSORT employs a machine learning approach, utilizing a known signature gene
expression profile for each cell type. Thus, house keeping genes are not considered, as these
would be expressed irregardless of cell type. The idea behind CIBERSORT is to consider
9
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
m the heterogeneous sample, B the signature matrix, and f as a vector of unknown cell
type quantity, after which, the equation m = B × f is solved for f [30].
On the other hand, xCell utilizes single-sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (ssGSEA) in
order to calculate enrichment scores for each cell type in a mixture. The enrichment scores
are shifted to only contain positive enrichment scores before performing a transformation
bringing the enrichment scores into a linear relationship with the cellular composition.
Lastly, similar cell types may be enriched for similar gene sets, therefore a spill-over
compensation is employed to reduce the effects of this phenomena [31].
Deconvolution to gene expression profiles
To further extract cell type specific information from bulk samples, deconvolution can be
used to estimate full GEPs. The general approach found in literature for deconvolution of
GEPs is based on an assumption that the bulk RNA samples can be described as a product
of the cell type compositions and each cell type GEP [32, 33]. Thus, by fitting a linear
regression to the relationship between the abundance of a cell type, and the expression of
each gene, the cell type specific GEP can be estimated.
The simplest form of linear regression is implemented through the least squares method
that aims to solve Equation 2.1 for βi. This is done by finding the minimal error E,
calculated as the sum of squared residuals as seen in equation 2.2, between the model
prediction ˆY and the original dataset Y .
Y = β0 + β1 · X + ε
(2.1)
E =
n
X
i=1
(Yi −ˆYi)2
(2.2)
For this method to successfully approximate the pattern seen in the bulk RNA data, the
basic assumptions of linear regression must be met. Some of these requirements can be
achieved through transformation of the data, such as linearity.
1. Linearity: The relationship between independent variables and the dependent
variable is linear.
2. Homoscedasticity: The variance of residuals should not have correlation with the
independent variables.
10
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
3. Independence: The observations should be independent on each other.
The first and second of these criteria are not directly met by the raw expression scores
from microarray or RNA sequencing technologies. The abundance measures from these
technologies typically have to be transformed into logarithmic space [34]. Additionally, as
each sample from RNA sequencing can be considered a composition of the total number
of sequenced reads, samples are often normalized in regards to library size.
Recently, in 2019, the developers of CIBERSORT released an extension on their framework,
named CIBERSORTx [35]. Here, they utilize their previously estimated cell type compo-
sitions from the original CIBERSORT to deconvolute bulk RNA samples into cell type
specific GEP’s. The authors utilized a variation of linear regression called non-negative
linear regression. Here, the model is constrained in a way that the resulting coefficients
cannot be negative, as this would convey negative gene expression which is not biologically
possible. Furthermore, they used bootstrapping to estimate p-values for their deconvoluted
GEPs and filtered the GEP, by setting expression to zero for insignificant gene expression
where the specific gene is significantly expressed by another cell type [35].
2.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
The interpretation of GEPs can prove to be quite difficult, as the corresponding singular
peptides expressed by each gene often have very specific functions. This challenge is further
enhanced by the fact that proteins often work in conjunction. Therefore, the presence
of one protein cannot be directly converted to a biological function if the other proteins
required are missing. Thus, in order to effectively assess whether a specific biological
function is enriched in one data cohort compared to another, it is often necessary to
analyze the genes in functional gene sets. Furthermore, small seemingly insignificant
changes in gene expression for a group of genes, may prove to be significant if the entire
functional gene set is analyzed at once [36]. This issue was addressed with the introduction
of Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) by A. Subramaniana et al. in 2005 [2].
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis works by calculating an enrichment score for a gene set S,
by utilization of a list of differentially expressed genes L. Firstly, a raw enrichment score
is calculated by ranking L in relation to the differential expression level, and performing
a random walk through this list incrementing the enrichment score for genes in S, and
decrementing otherwise. Then, the significance levels for the enrichment scores can be
11
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
assessed by comparison to a null distribution. This null distribution is created by generating
1000 expression datasets by randomly rearranging the phenotypes of the original data,
and then calculating the corresponding enrichment scores. Then a nominal p-value can be
estimated, and corrected for multiple testing [2].
The original method requires a dataset that can be split dependent on two conditions. By
comparison of these conditions, a list of differentially expressed genes can be computed, e.g.
by DESeq2 [37] or Limma [38]. Alternative methods for GSEA have been introduced that
are applicable to single samples, such as the single-sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
(ssGSEA) first introduced by D. Barbie in 2009 [39]. The ssGSEA method ranks the genes,
not by differential expression compared to another sample, but by their specific expression
in each sample. Then, an enrichment score can be computed in a similar manner to the
original GSEA method, albeit using weights on the ranks in the gene sets to reduce the
effects of the tails of the distribution [39].
These methods enable the investigation of complete biological functions and pathways.
Furthermore, as the analyses are tailored to be run simultaneously for multiple gene
sets, this method enables the analyses of numerous gene expression profiles at once in a
biological context.
2.4
Myeloproliferative neoplasms
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPN) are a type of blood cancers in which an increased
level of blood cells from the myeloid lineage is produced by the bone marrow. MPN consists
of three primary diseases Essential Thrombocythemia (ET), Polycythemia Vera (PV),
and Primary Myelofibrosis (PMF), although some types of leukemia are also recognized
as MPN. The classification consisting of ET, PV, and PMF is also called Philadelphia-
negative MPNs [40], and these are the only types handled in this project. The diseases
carry similarities in regards to an overall increase in blood cell counts of erythrocytes and
platelets with the former being the primary cause of disease in PV, and the latter causing
ET. Primary myelofibrosis is characterized by the development of fibrosis in the bone
marrow. In all three types of MPN, an increased level of HSCs are observed in the blood
as well, with the highest count seen in PMF.
The primary cause of mortality in MPN is thrombosis, with around 20% of patients having
experienced thrombosis at the time of diagnosis [41]. In a study by M. Hultcrantz et al.
in 2012 [42], the life expectancy for people with MPN was analyzed over a time period
12
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
from 2001 to 2008. Here the authors found that the relative survival rate after 8 years,
compared to the general population, was 91% for ET, 84% for PV, and 48% for PMF.
The cancer is believed to be caused by a series of co-occurring somatic mutations, which
in turn lead to overproduction of blood cells [43]. One of the mutations believed to
significantly impact disease development and progression is JAK2 V617F, which has been
linked to progression from ET and PV to the more serious PMF [44, 45]. Additionally, the
MPL W515L/K mutation, as well as mutations in CALR have been linked to MPN [46].
In a general population study on 19.958 danish people, CALR and JAK2 V617F mutation
prevalence was assessed, and either mutation was found in 645 people (3.2%) [47]. Of the
mutation positive subpopulation, 16 people were already diagosed with MPN, while 80
undiagnosed people had elevated blood cell counts that met the criteria for MPN diagnosis
set by the World Health Organisation. Lastly, the authors of the study hypothesize that if
half of the 80 people with significantly increased blood cell counts, actually have MPN,
then there would be more than 10.000 people in Denmark with undiagnosed MPN [47].
Therefore, the need for extensive screening of MPN in the danish population is evident,
and a better understanding of this disease is essential.
One of the cell types significantly altered in MPN is platelets. In healthy individuals,
these cells act as part of hemostasis to avoid excessive bleeding after injury to a blood
vessel. In people with vascular diseases, platelets are often more active than they need to
be in order to heal damaged blood vessels [48]. Once a blood vessel has been damaged in
a healthy person, platelets activate, leading to the aggregation and adhesion to the site of
injury in order to stop the bleeding. If platelets are active, and therefore adhesive in cases
where there is no bleeding to stop, their cell to cell adhesion can lead to the formation of
thrombosis [49]. Therefore, the behavior of platelets is of interest in MPN, as thrombosis
is a significant risk factor for this disease.
13
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Materials and methods
3.1
Programming environment
All analyses for this project were carried out in R-4.3.1 [50]. Multiple packages were used,
as described below.
Package
Version
Description
tidyverse
2.0.0
General data manipulation and visualization [51].
xCell
1.1.0
Estimation of cell type enrichment scores from bulk expression data [52].
limma
3.56.2
Linear regression models and batch correction[53].
GSVA
1.50.1
Calculation of ssGSEA enrichment scores [54].
Seurat
4.4.0
Handling of single cell expression data [55].
scDesign2
0.1.0
Simulation of single cell expression data [56].
ggrepel
0.9.3
Expansion for ggplot2 ensuring no overlap of labels in figures [57].
ggpubr
0.6.0
Expansion for ggplot2 for calculating the statistical significance [58].
patchwork
1.1.3
Expansion for ggplot2 allowing for arrangement of multiple figures [59].
The DTU Healthtech cluster was utilized for all processes in order to provide adequate
computational power.
3.2
Deconvolution by linear regression
A method for deconvoluting bulk transcriptomic data was developed by utilizing linear
regression. The cell type proportions acted as the explanatory variables for the model,
upon which a linear regression was fitted to the predict the expression of each gene of the
dataset.
14
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
By modelling the bulk transcriptomic data as a response to the proportion of each cell
types of the dataset, it was possible to determine a slope coefficient for each cell type,
explaining the corresponding gene expression. An example of modelling the expression of
CD19 dependent on B cells, T cells, NK cells, and Monocytes can be seen in Equation 3.1.
CD19Bulk ∼β0 +
h
βT
βB
βNK
βMono
i
·


T
B
NK
Mono


+ ε,
(3.1)
where CD19Bulk is the bulk gene expression, βcell type is the slope coefficient for the corre-
sponding cell type, and each cell type is represented by its corresponding sample content.
The linear regression model was trained on all the available samples, and then used to
estimate the gene expression profile for each cell type. This was done by predicting the
gene expression of separate samples containing only one cell type per sample. This method
was then repeated for each gene in the dataset, in order to estimate cell type specific gene
expression profiles. In order to monitor the unexplained variance left in the dataset, the
residuals from the multivariate linear regression were appended to each cell type specific
GEPs. Continuing the example from Equation 3.1, the B cell contribution to the CD19
expression could be determined by predicting a gene expression of a sample with a B cell
proportion of 100% thereby removing the signal from the other cell types as illustrated in
Equation 3.2.
CD19B cells ∼β0 +
h
βT
βB
βNK
βMono
i
·


0
1
0
0


+ ε = β0 + βB + ε.
(3.2)
This approach for multivariate linear regression model-building was applied to two datasets.
Firstly to a synthetic dataset in order to assess performance against the known ground
truth. Secondly, the method was applied to the dataset of MPN patients in order to
showcase its performance and applicability to natural data.
15
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
3.3
Application to synthetic data
Synthetic data generation
As single cell RNA data is expensive to obtain and annotate, the data set for the regression
model was obtained by simulation based on an already annotated data set. The template
data comes from a study by Y. Hao, et al. [55] containing 161.764 cells with 20.729 genes,
annotated to contain 26 different cell types.
The template data was filtered to only contain 6 different cell types: B cells, CD4+ T
cells, CD8+ T cells, dendritic cells, monocytes, and natural killer cells. After this, the
data was split into a test subset and a training subset in order to avoid a training bias
when comparing the simulation data to the template data. The simulation was performed
only on the training data set using the scDesign2 scRNA simulation platform [25].
The simulated data was validated in similarity with the training and testing datasets by
comparing across gene mean, gene variance, and cell library size (Figure 4.4). Furthermore,
by subjecting each dataset to dimensionality reduction by PCA and UMAP, differences in
the multidimensional space could be analysed (Figure 4.2).
Once single cell RNA expression data had been obtained, the data could then be aggregated
by summation in accordance to known cell type compositions. Thereby creating a pseudo
bulk datatype which consisted of a mixture of different cell types. Thus, the expected
results from deconvolution were known and could be used for performance evaluation of
deconvolution method. This aggregation of single cell RNA was repeated with random, but
known, compositions of cell types, in order to capture the variance in cell type compositions
seen in natural bulk data. In total 160 different pseudo bulk samples were created in
this manner, by sampling each cell count from a uniform distribution and then applying
a compositional closure of 20.000 cells to ensure similar data sizes in each sample. The
samples were then summed with respect to cell type, in order to generate the ground truth
for comparison with the deconvoluted gene expression profiles. Lastly, this ground truth
expression matrix was summed to bulk tissue level, in order to generate 160 bulk RNA
sequencing samples for use in the deconvolution.
The deconvolution model evaluates GEPs for samples consisting of 100% of each cell type
to eliminate any compositional related noise in the data. Therefore, the the ground truth
expression matrix had to be corrected for cell type compositions in order to provide a
meaningful comparison to the deconvoluted samples. This was carried out by dividing
each ground truth GEP with its corresponding cell type fractions. Thus, each cell type
16
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
specific GEP of the ground truth matrix was represented with 100% of the specified cell
type.
Deconvolution of synthetic RNA sequencing data
The synthetic dataset was used to provide a proof of concept on the viability of this
method. The cell type distributions utilized for training the model, were the ground truth
distributions used to create the dataset, as xCell was not runable on the synthetic dataset.
Typically, RNA sequencing data would be normalized by counts per million reads (CPM)
to account for differences in library size, after which the data should be transformed the
data into logarithmic space. However, as the synthetic data of this project has been
created by aggregation of single cell expression levels, log normalization of the bulk data
would remove the linear correlation between the abundance of each cell type, and their
corresponding gene expression. Therefore no log normalization was performed on this
data, the effects of which are discussed in Section 5.2.
Multivariate linear regression models were trained for each gene of the bulk dataset using
the limma package in R. The model was then used to predict the gene expression profile
of each cell type for each sample. Thereby deconvoluting the samples to cell type level
gene expression.
The deconvoluted samples were then compared to the ground truth matrix, firstly by a
mean gene expression and variance of gene expression. Then a Pearson correlation test
was carried out for each gene and for each sample to determine how well the model could
replicate the original single cell data by deconvolution. The p-values from this test were
corrected for multiple testing by the Bonferroni method [60]. Lastly, the datasets were
compared in multidimensional space by utilization of PCA and UMAP transformations.
3.4
Application to natural MPN data
Bulk RNA expression for MPN
Microarray data for MPN was obtained as an aggregated dataset from multiple studies
[61, 62]. The combined dataset included 181 whole blood microarray bulk samples, each
containing the expression of 20.023 genes. Every sample had one of four disease states in
relation to MPN disease progression: Healthy doners (HD), essential thrombocythemia
17
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
(ET), polycythemia vera (PV), primary myelofibrosis (PMF). Furthermore, the dataset
also contained attributes for each sample in regards to the patients age and whether the
JAK2V617F mutation was present. However, for the healthy individuals that act as the
control samples, no age metadata was available.
Figure 3.1: Cell type enrichment scores obtained by applying xCell to 181 samples
of bulk expression data of patients with MPN. Scores are separated by disease
state (HD, ET, PV, PMF) as well as cell type.
The cell type compositions for the MPN dataset were obtained through the use of xCell, in
which case an enrichment score for each cell type was obtained and used as the independent
variables for the deconvolution. To exclude non-blood cells from the analysis, cell types
were specified based on those depicted in Figure 3.1. Thereby, the xCell spill-over algorithm
did not consider cell types that would not be expected in a blood sample, as this correction
could affect the enrichment scores of the present cells. Some cell types showed very
low or even zero enrichment across the samples. These include the dendritic cells (DC),
macrophages, mast cells, and monocytes. These cell types were not considered for the
deconvolution, as very small changes among these low scores could have a large impact on
the final deconvolution.
Then the MPN dataset was log2 transformed to ensure linearity. Lastly, the dataset was
batch corrected, as the data came from multiple original sources. This was done using the
limma R-package, considering the explanatory variables as the design matrix. As age was
not available for the healthy donors, no correction for the patient age was carried out.
18
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
The final pre-processed MPN dataset, contained 181 samples spread across four different
disease states. Ten cell types were considered sufficiently enriched for the use in regression
based deconvolution methods.
Deconvolution of MPN data
By utilizing the MPN dataset with bulk gene expression (GEPBulk) as well as the cell type
enrichment scores (ES) obtained from xCell, linear regression models could be designed and
used to deconvolute the dataset by cell type according to the method described in Section
3.2. Lastly, the deconvoluted GEPs were subjected to ssGSEA in order to investigate
specific changes in biological functions in the MPN disease. The workflow is visualized in
Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Flowchart depicting the workflow from a whole blood microarray
dataset for MPN patients to the final evaluation of the cell type specific biological
functions.
The deconvolution was carried out on the MPN dataset by utilization of the batch-corrected
samples, as well as the enrichment scores obtained through xCell. In addition to these
enrichment scores, the MPN dataset also contained metadata in regards to the type of
MPN disease. Therefore this discrete variable, and its interaction with each cell type, were
included in the regression model as well. Thus, the linear regression model was set up in
accordance with Equation 3.3.
GEPBulk ∼Disease + ES(cell type proportion) + Disease · ES(cell type proportion)
(3.3)
GEPBulk = β0 + βde · disease + βct · ES + βde:ct · ES · disease + ε
(3.4)
The coefficients from the linear regression could then be extracted in regards to intercept
(β0), disease (βde), cell type (βct), and the disease:cell type interaction (βde:ct) (Equation
19
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
3.4). After which, the cell type specific GEPs were obtained by predicting homogeneous
cell mixtures for each of the 10 cell types from xCell, and repeating this process for each
of the 4 disease states (HD, ET, PV, and PMF).
An example of this deconvolution, for B cell expression of CD19 in healthy donor samples
is depicted in Equation 3.5.
CD19B cell,HD = β0 + βHD + βB cell + βB cell:HD + ε.
(3.5)
The deconvolution to cell level gene expression was carried out in this manner, for all
20.023 genes across 10 cell types and 4 disease status revealing 40 different GEPs. The
remaining variance of the linear regression model was kept in the deconvoluted dataset by
appending the residuals of each disease type to its corresponding GEPs, thereby returning
to 181 data points for each cell type, and revealing a 20.023 x 1810 matrix for downstream
analysis.
For visualization purposes, this dataset was subjected to dimensionality reduction using
PCA to visualize the distances between each cell type, as well as the effect of disease to
the cell type clustering (Figure 4.9).
GSEA on deconvoluted platelet GEPs
The deconvoluted GEPs obtained from the MPN bulk expression data, were, as described
in Section 2.3, hard to interpret on a single gene level. Therefore gene set enrichment
analysis was utilized to look for enrichment of specific gene signatures in relation to the
MPN disease.
Specifically the gene signatures for platelets in MPN patients were analysed in-depth using
this method, as platelets have been shown to have increased adhesion in patients with
MPN [63]. Enrichment scores for two platelet-relevant gene sets were calculated using the
ssGSEA method available in the GSVA R package. The gene sets were obtained from
MSigDB [64].
• GOBP PLATELET ACTIVATION: A signature for platelet activation to differenti-
ate the activity level of platelets in the different disease states of MPN.
• GOBP CELL CELL ADHESION: A signature for adhesion between cells. This is
used to identify whether an increased platelet adhesion can be identified in MPN
samples.
20
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
The enrichment scores were compared across the dataset by the use of violin plots. Initially,
only differences between cell types were investigated with no regard to the disease state.
Following this, the dataset was filtered to only contain platelets, and disease specific
differences in enrichment were identified.
21
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Data simulation
The synthetic dataset was simulated using the scDesign2 R package. The likeness to
natural data was evaluated by comparing the synthetic data to its training set as well as a
testing set of the same size. This comparison was done in relation to gene mean, variance,
and library size (Figure 4.1).
Figure 4.1: Comparison of descriptive statistics in relation to the synthetic single
cell RNA sequencing dataset, its training dataset as well as separate testing
dataset not used for simulation. A) Mean gene expression. B) Variance of gene
expression. C) Cell library size calculated as the sum of all gene counts for each
cell.
The mean gene expression as well as the variance of gene expression appear to be very
similar when observed on a logarithmic y-axis. However, the cell library size appears to
22
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
have considerable differences between the training or testing, and the synthetic dataset.
This is likely due to the fact that scDesign2 does not explicitly model the library size, but
instead the library size is recovered as a part of the remaining gene expression simulation,
in which case scDesign2 performs quite well [25].
The cell type clustering was then compared by subjecting each dataset to a dimensionality
reduction by PCA and UMAP, as seen in Figure 4.2. From these plots, it is evident that,
even though the descriptive statistical parameters appear closely related, the synthetic
dataset fails to capture the complexity of the natural data. Especially the interfaces of
the different cell types appear to be lost in the simulation of synthetic single cell data. As
such, no connection between the CD8+ T cells and NK cells is observed in the UMAP
of the synthetic dataset, while it is present in both the training and the testing datasets
(Figure 4.2D-F). Likewise, the DC and monocyte clusters also appear to have no relation
to each other in the UMAP.
Figure 4.2: Scatterplot of the first two components following a dimensionality
reduction analysis by either Principal Component Analysis (PCA) or Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP). Subfigures A-C depict the
PCA representation of the training, testing, and synthetic data respectively.
Subfigures D-E depict the same data in a UMAP space instead.
23
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
The shape of each PCA cluster also appear to be very symmetrical, which is dissimilar
to the testing dataset, which contain two apparent clusters for both DC and for B cells.
These missing clusters in the synthetic data are likely due to the missing child-populations
in relation to each of the cell type clusters. The simulation was only performed with the
parent populations as groupings, therefore this lacking complexity makes sense. As the
purpose of the data is to develop a proof of concept for a regression-based deconvolution
method, this loss of complexity is deemed acceptable.
The differences of the UMAP Figures 4.2.D-F for the training and testing datasets are not
considered to be significant, as the UMAP dimensionality reduction is subject to a certain
degree of randomness.
Synthetic bulk RNA sequencing data was created by aggregating the synthetic single cell
data in accordance to randomly defined cell compositions. As seen in Figure 4.3, the cell
types were present in equal fractions, with a mean of 16.7% and a standard deviation of
9.4%.
Figure 4.3: Cell type distribution of the 160 synthetic bulk samples.
4.2
Application to synthetic data
The deconvoluted GEPs from the synthetic bulk RNA sequencing were evaluated by
comparison to the compositionality corrected ground truth matrix established in Section
3.3. Descriptive statistics of gene mean and gene variance were evaluated (Figure 4.4).
Here it is evident that the deconvoluted model has an elevated expression level.
24
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Figure 4.4: Descriptive statistics comparing deconvoluted gene expression. A)
Mean gene expression. B) Variance of gene expression.
In order to capture whether the complexity of the dataset has been captured through
the deconvolution, Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated, both gene-wise and
sample-wise. This showed very high correlation between the deconvoluted gene expression
and the ground truth gene expression (Figure 4.5). The vast majority of the genes were
significantly correlated by a Pearson correlation test, only 4 genes (AC007370.2, UPK3B,
PSPC1.AS2, and BX649632.1) of the 19.827 genes did not have a significant correlation
(p-value < 0.05) after correction for multiple testing. Calculating the same Pearson
correlation coefficient across the samples also showed highly correlated samples, with
all samples having correlation coefficients above 0.99 and the correlation tests revealing
significant correlation in all samples.
Figure 4.5: Pearson correlation coefficient for gene-wise comparison of deconvo-
luted gene expression dataset with the corresponding ground truth. The four
genes that does not have significant correlation following a Pearson correlation
test have been colored in red.
The four genes that were not significantly correlated were investigated by illustrating
the ground truth on the x-axis and the deconvoluted expression data on the y-axis of a
25
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
scatterplot for the two genes AC007370.2 and UPK3B (Figure 4.6). This shows a single
sample with a very high expression of these genes in the compositionality-corrected ground
truth dataset. Upon further investigation, this sample was simulated with almost no B
cell content (0.035%), and as the linear regression model cannot catch sample-sample
differences this single sample is not estimated correctly. By removing this sample before
performing correlation testing, all genes have significant correlation between the ground
truth and the deconvoluted datasets.
Figure 4.6: Deconvoluted gene expression vs ground truth gene expression for
genes A) AC007370.2 and B) UPK3B
In order to depict the similarity of the gene expression in the multidimensional space,
dimensionality reduction was used to reduce the GEP variance to two dimensions, firstly
by PCA (Figure 4.7) and then by UMAP (Figure 4.8).
The PCA dimensionality reduction shows that each cell type is clustered far away from
each other, and the difference between the ground truth and deconvolution is indiscernible
when viewing the entire PCA plot at once (Figure 4.7.A). By cropping and enlarging
each of the clusters, minor differences are noticed between the ground truth and the
deconvoluted samples (Figure 4.7.B). The B cells, DCs, and Monocytes appear to be
very similar, however, the deconvolution has not caught the most extreme samples here.
Whereas, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, and NK cells, contain a bit more dissimilarity,
with a different center position. This difference is likely due to the way residuals have
been used to obtain sample to sample variance. As the residuals cannot be differentiated
by cell type, the residual profile is the same for each cluster. This is also very visible by
the exact same shape and size of the 6 deconvolution clusters. Despite using a method
for sample to sample variance that is homogeneous across cell types, it appears to closely
reproduce the level of sample to sample variance present in the ground truth dataset.
26
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Figure 4.7: Principal Component Analysis (PCA) comparing the synthetic, cell
specific, gene expression profiles (GEPs) for the ground truth (blue) and the
deconvoluted GEPs (red). A) The full PCA plot showing the distances between
each sample cluster. B) Six crops of the full PCA, targetting each of the cell
types in the plot.
Figure 4.8: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) comparing
the synthetic cell specific gene expression profiles for the ground truth dataset
(blue) and the deconvoluted dataset (red).
27
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
UMAP dimensionality reduction was performed on both the ground truth GEP and the
deconvoluted GEP (Figure 4.8). These show very high similarity and showcase how cell
type specific signals have been recovered by utilizing the deconvolution method.
4.3
Application to natural MPN data
The deconvolution method was also applied to a microarray dataset of MPN patients.
Here, especially a gene signature for cell to cell adhesion and platelet activation were of
interest in the platelet GEPs. Deconvolution was carried out using the cell type enrichment
scores from xCell, which allowed for cell type specific GEPs to be analyzed. Certain cell
types, which would be expected to be present in blood, unfortunately had to be filtered
out as their scores from xCell were too low for a meaningful deconvolution to be performed
in consideration of these cells. Thus, the DC, macrophages, mast cells, and monocytes
were not considered, and the gene expression that is related to these cells, will be modelled
onto other cell types in the model.
Figure 4.9: Dimensionality reduction by PCA of deconvoluted gene expression
profiles for MPN patients across 10 cell types and 4 different disease states (HD:
Healthy donors, ET: Essential thrombocythemia, PV: Polycythemia vera, PMF:
Primary Myelofibrosis).
After performing the deconvolution, the separation of cell types was validated by a
dimensionality reduction using PCA (Figure 4.9). From this analysis, it is evident that
28
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
the deconvolution has revealed 4 clusters for each cell type, one for each of the disease
states. Furthermore it is also quite clear, that each cell type is modelled as having a very
specific GEP, and the interface between certain similar cell types is not caught very well
by the deconvolution model.
Gene set enrichment analysis
Single sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis was utilized to investigate whether certain
biological functions are up- or down-regulated in each of the clusters from the deconvolution.
Initially, the enrichment scores for GOBP PLATELET ACTIVATION were calculated,
which identified platelets as being enriched for this gene set, while the remainder of the cell
types did not show an increased enrichment for this gene set when compared to platelets
(Figure 4.10.A). In order to reduce visual complexity, disease states were not included in
this visualization, however the presence of sub-clusters in the data is evident.
Figure 4.10: Single sample gene set enrichment scores from deconvoluted MPN
transcriptomic data. A) Platelet activation (GOBP PLATELET ACTIVATION ).
B) Cell to cell adhesion (GOBP CELL CELL ADHESION )
Then, as platelets have been hypothesised to have increased cell to cell adhesion in MPN
patients, the gene set GOBP CELL CELL ADHESION was investigated as well (Figure
4.10.B). Here it can clearly be seen that platelets appear to be enriched for this gene
set, furthermore, natural killer T (NKT) cells also appear to be enriched for cell to cell
adhesion, in MPN patients. To analyze whether the cell to cell adhesion gene set is indeed
enriched in the platelets of MPN patients when compared to healthy donors, the data
was filtered to platelet GEPs, and the relation between platelet activation and cell to cell
adhesion was investigated (Figure 4.11.A). This visualizes that in patients with MPN,
29
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
platelets appear to be more active, than they are in the healthy donors. Additionally they
also appear to be enriched for cell to cell adhesion, which matches the hypothesis outlined
in Section 3.4. The MPN patients appear to have a similar level of platelet activation
among the different disease types, however, it appears the the ET and PV disease types
have an increased level of cell to cell adhesion in platelets.
Figure 4.11: Single sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) scores for
transcriptomic data related to myeloproliferative neoplasms, showing the relation
between platelet activation (GOBP PLATELET ACTIVATION ) and cell to cell
adhesion (GOBP CELL CELL ADHESION ). This showcases how the biological
signal in the bulk data can be isolated in platelets. A) Deconvoluted platelet
expression subjected to ssGSEA. B) Bulk expression subjected to ssGSEA.
By running ssGSEA on the original bulk microarray dataset, a difference in platelet
activation and cell to cell adhesion in relation to disease type is observed as well. This
difference could just as well be a result of different cell type compositions in the different
disease types (Figure 4.11.B). A very clear correlation between platelet activation and
cell to cell adhesion appear to be true for the bulk data, which is also noticeable in the
deconvoluted data. This makes a lot of biological sense, as the adhesive properties in
platelets are pronounced after activation.
30
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Data quality
In any bioinformatic study, the conclusions drawn are only as strong as the original
data. For this project, two primary sources of natural data were utilized, the bulk MPN
microarray data, and the scRNA-seq data. Additionally a synthetic data source was
created based upon the scRNA dataset, and used as a proof of concept.
Natural scRNA dataset
The scRNA data was externally prepared and annotated, thus, this work has proceeded
under the assumption that no issues are present within this dataset. Furthermore, as the
use for the dataset was to generate parameters for simulation of known heterogeneous bulk
samples, any bias which could lead to flawed biological conclusions were not considered of
importance.
Synthetic scRNA dataset
The synthetic dataset was generated by scRNA simulation, using 6 cell types from the
annotated scRNA data. This approach reduced the overall complexity of the data used for
proof of concept deconvolution, as the number of different cell types could be controlled,
and no unknown cell types were included. All cell type GEPs were simulated under the
assumption that the gene expression can be modelled by chosen statistical distributions.
The final synthetic scRNA dataset contained exactly 6 well defined clusters, with little
31
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
to none of the expected interfaces between similar cell types. This is excellent for model
building, as there is no demand for the deconvolution model to capture complex biological
interfaces, or subpopulations of each cell type. However, it is far from biologically accurate,
as the deconvolution model only has to capture the GEPs defined by the underlying
scDesign2 parameters. These issues in regards to synthetic data similarity to natural
data were deemed acceptable, as the dataset was only meant for use to provide a proof of
concept.
After data simulation, the dataset was pooled from its single cell level, firstly to a pseudo
bulk level used as a ground truth and secondly to a bulk level which could be used for
deconvolution. This approach does not consider any biases that may occur in scRNA-seq,
which would not be present in bulk RNA sequencing. For instance, scRNA-seq have been
shown to capture a less accurate portrayal of the transcript abundances, while being more
sensitive towards rare transcripts when compared to bulk level RNA sequencing [19]. Thus,
the synthetic bulk dataset was not expected to perfectly represent a natural bulk RNA
sequencing dataset.
In the ground truth data, unnaturally low cell type fraction data points revealed serious
issues when subjected to deconvolution. This is mostly believed to be an artifact of the
model trying to recreate cell type mixtures with 100% content of each cell type, which
in combination with the sparsity of single cell data is very difficult for low cell counts.
For instance, in the case shown in Figure 4.6, the sample contained a B cell fraction of
only 0.035% (7 out of 20.000 cells). When correcting the ground truth for the cell type
compositions, the GEP for B cells in this sample would only take 7 single B cells into
consideration, thus, the discrete nature and sparsity of scRNA-seq data, resulted in an
unreasonable representation of the sample at 100% B cell content. Therefore, discarding
this sample before evaluating the final model performance evaluation would be warranted.
MPN microarray dataset
The MPN microarray dataset has been sourced from multiple original studies [61, 62], and
has already lead to meaningful biological conclusions in various studies. The use of disease
status metadata has proven useful in regards to differentiating different MPN diseases in
this study. Lastly, the JAK2 mutation states were not considered, even though they were
a part of the data. This could be an interesting parameter to explore in future studies of
deconvolution.
32
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Due to the missing age specifications of the healthy donors of the dataset, no batch
correction in regards to age could be performed. Age has been found to have a significant
effect on gene expression in studies of animal models, however, finding similar variation
in gene expression explained by age in humans have proven quite difficult, with a very
large dependency on the tissue sampled [65, 66]. In a study by A. Vi˜nuela in 2018 [67],
the authors found other genetic effects to play a larger role in gene expression than aging,
thereby also concluding that modelling age from gene expression is still a very difficult
task.
However, considerations were made, on whether the ages of the healthy donors could be
estimated from their corresponding GEPs, but current methods for this estimation have
proven to have a wide margin of error in whole blood with a root-mean squared error of
∼10 years [68]. Furthermore, the genetic variation among people of similar age is quite
large as well. Therefore, batch correcting for this parameter was not considered to be of
major effect in this study and it was not performed.
5.2
Performance on synthetic data
In order to provide a proof of concept for this method of deconvoluting bulk samples
to cell level gene expression, the method was applied to a synthetic bulk dataset with
known cell type compositions for each sample. This revealed a stable method, capable of
reproducing cell level GEPs for a dataset with 160 heterogenous samples with varying cell
type compositions.
However, by visualizing the B cell content in relation to its primary cell marker gene, CD19,
for both the natural MPN microarray dataset with estimated cell type proportions and the
synthetic data with known cell type proportions, revealed significantly more noise in the
natural dataset (Figure 5.1). Therefore the transferability of the deconvolution method
needs to be validated, and a number of assumptions are made in regards to whether the
results from synthetic scRNA-seq data apply to natural microarray data.
1. The synthetic dataset is comparable to natural data for modelling purposes.
2. The accuracy and sensitivity differences between scRNA-seq and bulk RNA sequencing
do not significantly affect the aggregated bulk dataset.
3. The deconvolution method by linear regression can be used on RNA-seq and microarray
data interchangeably.
33
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
4. The cell type enrichment scores from xCell successfully approximate the true cell
type composition.
Figure 5.1: CD19 expression in relation to B cells content, for A) synthetic
RNA-sequencing data using the ground truth B cell content and B) natural
microarray expression data using xCell B cell enrichment score.
Data comparability to natural data
As described in Section 5.1, there are a number of issues in regards to obtaining a series
of natural bulk RNA sequencing datasets with varying and known cell compositions.
Therefore a synthetic single cell dataset was generated instead. This also enabled the
heterogeneous samples to contain pure cell type fractions, with no sub population fractions
to consider for the deconvolution model.
The scDesign2 package is regarded as one of the best performing simulation tools for
synthetic scRNA datasets, however, it still fails to capture the complexity of natural data
[21]. This failure to reconstruct the natural complexity of single cell data, is especially
evident in this study when viewing the UMAPs in Figure 4.2.D-F.
Despite the lacking complexity, synthetic RNA sequencing data is widely used in research
today and serves a variety of purposes. Synthetic RNA sequencing datasets consisting of
simple sampling from negative binomial distributions have proven useful in performance
assessment of differential expression analysis tools [69, 70]. On the opposite end of the
complexity scale, synthetic scRNA data have been used to benchmark performance of
data integration tools where the preservation of biological signals is of utmost importance
[71]. Therefore, it is believed that scRNA simulation tools have reached a point with high
similarity to natural RNA data.
34
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Furthermore, natural scRNA-seq datasets are still not fully equivalent to the true gene
expression present in the cells. In a sensitivity study on the plate-based sequencing method
CEL-seq, the true sensitivity of this protocol was estimated to be 10% [72, 73]. This
was done by comparison to a very accurate transcriptome obtained by single-molecule
fluorescence in situ hybridization [74]. A closer representation of the true expression levels
of the single cells could be obtained by using in silico tools for imputation of missing
values such as SAVER [75]. This was not pursued for this project.
Performance of scRNA-seq compared to bulk RNA sequencing
Single cell RNA sequencing technologies differ to bulk RNA sequencing in both the
accuracy of expression level and the sensitivity to rare transcripts, with scRNA-seq
having an increased sensitivity, and a reduced accuracy in comparison [19]. Thereby, the
aggregated synthetic bulk data, is expected to be less accurate and more sensitive than a
true synthetic bulk dataset would be. This is not regarded as an issue in this study, as
the presence of rare transcripts with low and often noisy expression levels would impart
additional complexity to the dataset, leading to an underestimation of model performance
in relation to a true bulk dataset.
Furthermore, in regards to the pre processing of the dataset before model building, a
bulk RNA sequencing dataset is typically subjected to a normalization by CPM to avoid
comparison of samples with different library sizes, subsequently the expression data is
often transformed into logarithmic space. However, as the synthetic dataset consists of
expression from aggregated single cells, this pre-processing step should be performed on
the single cell level [76]. Due to the time constraints in this project, this step was not
performed prior to the generation of the results outlined in this report. The effects of
this were briefly evaluated, and no discernible change in model performance was observed
using a traditional CPM normalization followed by log transformation. The step was also
performed using Seurat’s built in normalization step for scRNA-seq data, which improved
the model performance, however, it also removed approximately 68% of the genes in the
dataset due to zero expression in the aggregated sample. Therefore, whether the overall
performance boost related to Seurat’s log normalization, was due to better linearity or
just due to the absence of poorly expressed genes, was not investigated. The effects of the
log normalization step need to be investigated to further validate the performance of the
deconvolution model.
35
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
RNA sequencing vs microarray
As introduced in Section 2.1, microarray assays rely on known libraries of transcripts,
and measures their abundance through the fluorescence after cDNA probe to transcript
hybridization. This imparts some limitations, in which rare transcripts may not be part
of the assay, and the range of abundance detection is also lower than what is achievable
by RNA sequencing [77].
The former of which, has no effect on the deconvolution
model proposed in this study, as the genes are treated independently. The latter, can
impose problems for the model applicability to microarray datasets, in cases where the
gene expression is very noisy due to low expression, or reaching saturation thereby not
correlating to the true gene expression.
Estimation of cell type composition with xCell
Deconvolution by linear regression utilizing cell type proportions as the independent
variables, require the proportions to be obtained in a reasonable manner and that they
reflect the true compositionality of the bulk data as closely as possible. In the proof of
concept on synthetic data, the ground truth cell type proportions were used, which is not
obtainable for natural bulk datasets without additional experimental assays. Therefore,
the cell type proportions were estimated using xCell, which calculates enrichment scores
using ssGSEA. These cannot be assumed to perfectly fit the true composition, but they
have shown very promising results, with significant linear correlation on 13 out of 18
cell types when compared to flow cytometry based CyTOF immunoprofiling cell counts
[78]. This should be considered a source of noise, and as the model is incredibly reliant
on the cell type compositions being correct, this is believed to be the primary area of
improvement.
5.3
Biological insights in MPN disease
Deconvolution of bulk microarray data from 160 MPN patients and 21 healthy people,
revealed biological insights into how platelets act in people with this disease. It was
especially noted how platelets have an increased activity level in MPN compared to healthy
people. Furthermore, the cell to cell adhesion seemed slightly upregulated in MPN.
In this study, gene sets related to platelet activation and cell to cell adhesion, were
investigated for platelets in MPN patients. Each of these gene sets appear enriched
36
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
in comparison to healthy individuals. This difference in enrichment was also observed
in bulk data, however, as the bulk data is subject to variance in relation to cell type
compositions, the difference could just as well have originated from a varying concentration
of platelets in the healthy data cohort when compared to the samples from MPN cohort.
By deconvoluting the samples to cell level gene expression, this noise has been filtered
out, and it is possible to identify which cell types lead to this enrichment of biological
functions.
Other cell types
The validation of increased platelet activation and adhesion has shown the strength of the
model, and as seen in Figure 4.9 most cell types can be divided into 2 or more groups
dependent on the disease marker in the data. Therefore by utilizing the gene expression
profiles of other cell types, it would be possible to investigate multiple other hypotheses
for this disease.
Of special interest are the HSCs, which are typically present in large numbers in the blood
of MPN patients, whereas they are rarely observed in blood of healthy individuals, a
phenomena also seen in this data (Figure 3.1). The large abundance of these cells will
have an effect on bulk transcriptomic data, if the data is not corrected for the presence
of these cells. Without the correction, constitutive signals related to HSC, would appear
appear enriched in the bulk samples, even if the only change related to the disease is the
number of HSC in the blood. Utilizing the method outlined in this project, one could
extract the specific GEP for HSC in healthy people and MPN and analyze the differences
in gene expression.
5.4
Deconvolution model performance
The deconvolution method described in this study have shown promising results. However,
there are a few caveats in regards to model performance that need to be addressed, some
easily obtainable and others that require a greater effort. Of these, the assessment of
statistical power and significance levels is the most important.
37
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
Statistical power and significance levels
The model have shown promising results in separation of the gene expression levels to
different cell types. However, the heterogeneous tissues of the human body are often
very complex, and therefore a large amount of data is necessary to create meaningful
statistical analyses. For the synthetic data, 6 cell types were modelled on 160 data points
for each gene, while the application on MPN data, required separation into 10 cell types
dependent on one of 4 disease states. Thus, for the MPN data, 44 coefficients (4 related to
model intercept), were calculated. Therefore the risk of overfitting is quite high, especially
considering the healthy donors, where only 21 samples were available.
Furthermore, in order to illustrate the amount of unexplained variance after deconvolution,
the model residuals were appended to each of the deconvoluted cell type expressions. This
can give a false sense of security, as the continued statistical power for each cell type
appears to be preserved. However, the power has already been used to determine the
coefficients. Therefore, a more conservative approach would be to consider each cell type
cluster as a single point in regards to statistical power.
Lastly, having a measure of significance for the deconvoluted gene expression would be
beneficial for post deconvolution analyses. The authors of CIBERSORTx has solved this
by using bootstrapping to assess the significance of the coefficients for each cell type, and
set the expression level to zero for insignificant cell type if the expression was significantly
explained by a different cell type [35]. This approach could be a viable option to remove
insignificant results from the model presented in this study, however, efforts in this regard
were not attempted.
Model resolution
Each cell type can typically be divided into multiple child populations. As such, T cells
can be divided into CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, the former of which is often divided into
na¨ıve CD4+ and memory CD4+ T cells [13]. Therefore, the model performance can also
depend on the desired cell type resolution. Here, a higher resolution would allow for
a better distinction of more specialized cell types, while a lower resolution will provide
increased statistical power.
Considering the UMAP illustrations of the natural scRNA data used in this study (Figure
4.2.D & 4.2.E), blood cannot be explained solely by the parent populations, as lot of sub-
clustering is evident within each primary cluster. Nonetheless, a relatively low resolution
38
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
has been used in this model, in order to preserve statistical power and avoid overfitting. If
a larger bulk dataset was available, a higher cell type resolution would also be possible,
thereby allowing investigations into more specific cell types such as the differentiation
between naive and memory B cells.
Compositionality related constraints
One of the criteria for performing successful linear regression is that the variables used for
prediction follow a normal distribution. This criteria is not entirely met by the synthetic
dataset, as the variables are part of a composition, where the values have to be within
the range {0, 1}. The normal distribution would assume that the variables could be
negative, which is physically impossible for any part of a composition. This could be
solved by implementing a log-ratio transformation in order to bring the variables out of
the compositional space and into an euclidean space before training the linear regression
model [79]. This transformation could also be applied to the RNA sequencing expression
data, as each gene is part of a composition comprising the entire gene expression vector
[80]. The xCell tool treats each cell type enrichment score independently, furthermore,
each transcript is handled separately in microarray assays. Therefore, no compositionality
related issues are expected to be present in the application of the model on MPN data.
39
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this study, a method has been developed for deconvoluting cell level gene expression
from heterogeneous tissues sequenced in bulk. The deconvolution model relies on the
proportions of the different cell types in a sample as explanatory variables of a linear
regression. The coefficients of this regression can then be used to extract the cell level
gene expression.
Firstly, a synthetic transcriptomic dataset based on single cell expression was simulated
and evaluated. This dataset formed the foundation for a proof of concept deconvolution,
which showed a excellent capability in accurately portraying the cell level expression levels
when the true cell type composition were known.
Secondly, the model was applied to a microarray dataset for patients with Myeloproliferative
Neoplasms (MPN). Here, gene set enrichment analysis was utilized to investigate biological
functions in platelets, which showed that platelets have increased activity and adhesion in
people with this cancer. This result fits well with the increased risk of thrombosis known
for this disease.
This study has shown how deconvolution by linear regression can be used to investigate
cell type specific behavior in a cheap and effective manner that does not rely on single cell
sequencing.
40
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 7
Future perspectives
The deconvolution model shows great potential, and can, in its current state, be used to
provide numerous biological insights, many of which are not investigated in this study.
Significant improvements can also be implemented in the model, which would allow for
more accurate results.
By deconvoluting the bulk MPN data and visualizing this by PCA, disease related clustering
was observed for almost all cell types. Thus, changes in the GEPs are expected for these
cell types. In this project, platelets were the only cell type investigated. By investigating
the other cell types of this project, important biological insights into the MPN disease
could be found. This could be of great interest to researchers of this disease, allowing for
generation of new hypotheses, or further validation of previous studies.
To improve the model, the primary reason for uncertainty arise due to the estimation of
cell type compositions. The method currently relies on predefined gene sets in xCell to
estimate cell type proportions. By utilizing small scale studies on purified cell cultures in
relation to the specific samples of a study, one could possibly define specific gene signatures
that better match the expression profiles of the samples, thereby increasing the accuracy
of the deconvolution. This addition to the method would have to be repeated in each
individual study based on deconvolution.
The current state of the method does not consider any statistical significance of the
coefficients obtained through linear regression. This is a necessary step to take, in order
to avoid conclusions obtained on a poor statistical foundation. Lastly, the method should
be benchmarked in relation to other approaches for cell type gene expression such as
CIBERSORTx.
41
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
D. Yadav, A. Tanveer, N. Malviya, and S. Yadav. “Overview and Principles of
Bioengineering: The Drivers of Omics Technologies”. Omics Technologies and Bio-
engineering: Towards Improving Quality of Life 1 (2018), 3.
[2]
A. Subramanian, P. Tamayo, V. K. Mootha, S. Mukherjee, B. L. Ebert, M. A. Gillette,
A. Paulovich, S. L. Pomeroy, T. R. Golub, E. S. Lander, and J. P. Mesirov. “Gene
set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide
expression profiles”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 102 (2005), 15545.
[3]
F. Tang, C. Barbacioru, Y. Wang, E. Nordman, C. Lee, N. Xu, X. Wang, J. Bodeau,
B. B. Tuch, A. Siddiqui, K. Lao, and A. Surani. “mRNA-Seq whole-transcriptome
analysis of a single cell”. Nature Methods 6 (2009), 377.
[4]
F. H. C. Crick. “On protein synthesis”. Symposia of the Society for Experimental
Biology 12 (1958), 138.
[5]
L. Fagerberg et al. “Analysis of the human tissue-specific expression by genome-
wide integration of transcriptomics and antibody-based proteomics”. Molecular and
Cellular Proteomics 13 (2014), 397.
[6]
D. Skerrett-Byrne Anthony, C. Jiang Chen, B. Nixon, H. Hondermarck, b. A. Ralph
Bradshaw, and P. D. Stahl. “Transcriptomics”. Encyclopedia of Cell Biology 6 (2023),
160.
[7]
M. Schena, D. Shalon, R. W. Davis, and P. O. Brown. “Quantitative monitoring
of gene expression patterns with a complementary DNA microarray”. Science 270
(1995).
[8]
D. J. Lockhart, H. Dong, M. C. Byrne, M. T. Follettie, M. V. Gallo, M. S. Chee, M.
Mittmann, C. Wang, M. Kobayashi, H. Horton, and E. L. Brown. “Expression moni-
toring by hybridization to high-density oligonucleotide arrays”. Nature Biotechnology
14 (1996), 1675.
[9]
R. Jaksik, M. Iwanaszko, J. Rzeszowska-Wolny, and M. Kimmel. “Microarray exper-
iments and factors which affect their reliability”. Biology Direct 10 (2015).
[10]
R. Stark, M. Grzelak, and J. Hadfield. “RNA sequencing: the teenage years”. Nature
Reviews Genetics 20 (2019), 631.
42
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
[11]
HiSeq 3000/HiSeq 4000 Specifications. https://emea.illumina.com/systems/
sequencing-platforms/hiseq-3000-4000/specifications.html. (Online; ac-
cessed 22-01-2024). 2024.
[12]
H. Bayley. “Nanopore Sequencing: From Imagination to Reality”. Clinical Chemistry
61 (2015), 25.
[13]
K. Murphy, and C. Weaver. Janeway’s Immunobiology. 9th editio. Taylor & Francis
Group, 2017.
[14]
S. Picelli, ˚A. K. Bj¨orklund, O. R. Faridani, S. Sagasser, G. Winberg, and R. Sandberg.
“Smart-seq2 for sensitive full-length transcriptome profiling in single cells”. Nature
Methods 2013 10:11 10 (2013), 1096.
[15]
G. X. Zheng et al. “Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single cells”.
Nature Communications 2017 8:1 8 (2017), 1.
[16]
J. Ding et al. “Systematic comparison of single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-sequencing
methods”. Nature Biotechnology 38 (2020), 737.
[17]
X. Wang, Y. He, Q. Zhang, X. Ren, and Z. Zhang. “Direct Comparative Analyses of
10X Genomics Chromium and Smart-seq2”. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics
19 (2021), 253.
[18]
C. Ziegenhain, B. Vieth, S. Parekh, B. Reinius, A. Guillaumet-Adkins, M. Smets,
H. Leonhardt, H. Heyn, I. Hellmann, and W. Enard. “Comparative Analysis of
Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Methods”. Molecular Cell 65 (2017), 631.
[19]
V. Svensson, K. Nath Natarajan, L.-H. Ly, R. J. Miragaia, C. Labalette, I. C.
Macaulay, A. Cvejic, and S. A. Teichmann. “Power analysis of single-cell RNA-
sequencing experiments”. Nature Methods 14 (2017), 381.
[20]
M. Su et al. “Data analysis guidelines for single-cell RNA-seq in biomedical studies
and clinical applications”. Military Medical Research 2022 9:1 9 (2022), 1.
[21]
H. L. Crowell, S. X. Morillo Leonardo, C. Soneson, and M. D. Robinson. “Built
on sand: The shaky foundations of simulating single-cell RNA sequencing data”.
Genome Biology 24 (2023).
[22]
Y. Cao, P. Yang, and J. Y. H. Yang. “A benchmark study of simulation methods for
single-cell RNA sequencing data”. Nature Communications 12 (2021).
[23]
G. Baruzzo, I. Patuzzi, and B. Di Camillo. “SPARSim single cell: a count data
simulator for scRNA-seq data”. Bioinformatics 36 (2020), 1468.
[24]
D. Risso, F. Perraudeau, S. Gribkova, and S. Dudoit. “A general and flexible method
for signal extraction from single-cell RNA-seq data”. Nature Communications 284
(2018), 1.
43
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
[25]
T. Sun, D. Song, W. V. Li, and J. J. Li. “Publisher Correction: scDesign2: a
transparent simulator that generates high-fidelity single-cell gene expression count
data with gene correlations captured”. Genome Biology 22 (2021), 1.
[26]
K. Pearson. “On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space”. The
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 2
(1901), 559.
[27]
L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville. “UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation
and Projection for Dimension Reduction” (2018).
[28]
Y. Hao, T. Stuart, M. H. Kowalski, S. Choudhary, P. Hoffman, A. Hartman, A. Srivas-
tava, G. Molla, S. Madad, C. Fernandez-Granda, and R. Satija. “Dictionary learning
for integrative, multimodal and scalable single-cell analysis”. Nature Biotechnology
2023 (2023), 1.
[29]
C. P. Shannon, C. X. Yang, and S. J. Tebbutt. “A Bloody Primer: Analysis of
RNA-Seq from Tissue Admixtures”. Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.)
1712 (2018), 175.
[30]
A. M. Newman, C. L. Liu, M. R. Green, A. J. Gentles, W. Feng, Y. Xu, C. D. Hoang,
M. Diehn, and A. A. Alizadeh. “Robust enumeration of cell subsets from tissue
expression profiles”. Nature Methods 2015 12:5 12 (2015), 453.
[31]
D. Aran, Z. Hu, and A. J. Butte. “xCell: Digitally portraying the tissue cellular
heterogeneity landscape”. Genome Biology 18 (2017), 1.
[32]
S. S. Shen-Orr, and R. Gaujoux. “Computational deconvolution: extracting cell type-
specific information from heterogeneous samples”. Current Opinion in Immunology
25 (2013), 571.
[33]
A. Kuhn, D. Thu, H. J. Waldvogel, R. L. Faull, and R. Luthi-Carter. “Population-
specific expression analysis (PSEA) reveals molecular changes in diseased brain”.
Nature Methods 2011 8:11 8 (2011), 945.
[34]
W. Li, Y. J. Suh, and J. Zhang. “Does logarithm transformation of microarray
data affect ranking order of differentially expressed genes?” Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology - Proceedings (2006),
6593.
[35]
A. M. Newman, C. B. Steen, C. L. Liu, A. J. Gentles, A. A. Chaudhuri, F. Scherer,
M. S. Khodadoust, M. S. Esfahani, B. A. Luca, D. Steiner, M. Diehn, and A. A.
Alizadeh. “Determining cell type abundance and expression from bulk tissues with
digital cytometry”. Nature Biotechnology 2019 37:7 37 (2019), 773.
[36]
V. K. Mootha et al. “PGC-1α-responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation
are coordinately downregulated in human diabetes”. Nature Genetics 2003 34:3 34
(2003), 267.
44
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
[37]
M. I. Love, W. Huber, and S. Anders. “Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2”. Genome Biology 15 (2014), 550.
[38]
M. E. Ritchie, B. Phipson, D. Wu, Y. Hu, C. W. Law, W. Shi, and G. K. Smyth.
“limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray
studies”. Nucleic Acids Research 43 (2015).
[39]
D. A. Barbie et al. “Systematic RNA interference reveals that oncogenic KRAS-driven
cancers require TBK1”. Nature 2009 462:7269 462 (2009), 108.
[40]
D. A. Arber, A. Orazi, R. Hasserjian, J. Thiele, M. J. Borowitz, M. M. Le Beau,
C. D. Bloomfield, M. Cazzola, and J. W. Vardiman. “The 2016 revision to the World
Health Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia”. Blood
127 (2016), 2391.
[41]
T. Rungjirajittranon, W. Owattanapanich, P. Ungprasert, N. Siritanaratkul, and
T. Ruchutrakool. “A systematic review and meta-analysis of the prevalence of
thrombosis and bleeding at diagnosis of Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative
neoplasms”. BMC Cancer 19 (2019), 1.
[42]
M. Hultcrantz, S. Y. Kristinsson, T. M. Andersson, O. Landgren, S. Eloranta, ˚A. R.
Derolf, P. W. Dickman, and M. Bj¨orkholm. “Patterns of Survival Among Patients
With Myeloproliferative Neoplasms Diagnosed in Sweden From 1973 to 2008: A
Population-Based Study”. Journal of Clinical Oncology 30 (2012), 2995.
[43]
G. Greenfield, M. F. McMullin, and K. Mills. “Molecular pathogenesis of the myelo-
proliferative neoplasms”. Journal of Hematology & Oncology 2021 14:1 14 (2021),
1.
[44]
S. Malak, M. Labopin, C. Saint-Martin, C. Bellanne-Chantelot, and A. Najman.
“Long term follow up of 93 families with myeloproliferative neoplasms: life expectancy
and implications of JAK2V617F in the occurrence of complications”. Blood Cells,
Molecules, and Diseases 49 (2012), 170.
[45]
E. J. Baxter, L. M. Scott, P. J. Campbell, C. East, N. Fourouclas, S. Swanton, G. S.
Vassiliou, A. J. Bench, E. M. Boyd, N. Curtin, M. A. Scott, W. N. Erber, and A. R.
Green. “Acquired mutation of the tyrosine kinase JAK2 in human myeloproliferative
disorders”. The Lancet 365 (2005), 1054.
[46]
S. Hermouet, E. Bigot-Corbel, and B. Gardie. “Pathogenesis of Myeloprolifera-
tive Neoplasms: Role and Mechanisms of Chronic Inflammation”. Mediators of
Inflammation 2015 (2015).
[47]
S. Cordua, L. Kjaer, V. Skov, N. Pallisgaard, H. C. Hasselbalch, and C. Ellervik.
“Prevalence and phenotypes of JAK2 V617F and calreticulin mutations in a Danish
general population”. Blood 134 (2019), 469.
[48]
M. T. Rondina, A. S. Weyrich, and G. A. Zimmerman. “Platelets as Cellular Effectors
of Inflammation in Vascular Diseases”. Circulation research 112 (2013), 1506.
45
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
[49]
D. Varga-Szabo, I. Pleines, and B. Nieswandt. “Cell Adhesion Mechanisms in
Platelets”. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 28 (2008), 403.
[50]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. 2023.
[51]
H. Wickham et al. “Welcome to the tidyverse”. Journal of Open Source Software 4
(2019), 1686.
[52]
D. Aran, Z. Hu, and A. J. Butte. xCell: Cell type enrichment analysis. R package
version 1.1.0. 2023.
[53]
M. E. Ritchie, B. Phipson, D. Wu, Y. Hu, C. W. Law, W. Shi, and G. K. Smyth.
“limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray
studies”. Nucleic Acids Research 43 (2015), e47.
[54]
S. H¨anzelmann, R. Castelo, and J. Guinney. “GSVA: gene set variation analysis for
microarray and RNA-Seq data”. BMC Bioinformatics 14 (2013), 7.
[55]
Y. Hao et al. “Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell data”. Cell 184 (2021),
3573.
[56]
T. Sun. scDesign2: scDesign2: A statistical simulator for scRNA-seq data with gene
correlation captured. R package version 0.1.0. 2023.
[57]
K. Slowikowski. ggrepel: Automatically Position Non-Overlapping Text Labels with
’ggplot2’. R package version 0.9.3. 2023.
[58]
A. Kassambara. ggpubr: ’ggplot2’ Based Publication Ready Plots. R package version
0.6.0. 2023.
[59]
T. L. Pedersen. patchwork: The Composer of Plots. R package version 1.1.3. 2023.
[60]
J. P. Newnham, S. F. Evans, A. M. Con, F. J. Stanley, and L. I. Landau. “Multiple
significance tests: the Bonferroni method”. BMJ 310 (1995), 887.
[61]
H. C. Hasselbalch, V. Skov, T. S. Larsen, M. Thomassen, C. H. Riley, M. K.
Jensen, O. W. Bjerrum, and T. A. Kruse. “High expression of carcinoembryonic
antigen-related cell adhesion molecule (CEACAM) 6 and 8 in primary myelofibrosis”.
Leukemia Research 35 (2011), 1330.
[62]
V. Skov, T. S. Larsen, M. Thomassen, C. H. Riley, M. K. Jensen, O. W. Bjer-
rum, T. A. Kruse, and H. C. Hasselbalch. “Whole-blood transcriptional profiling of
interferon-inducible genes identifies highly upregulated IFI27 in primary myelofibro-
sis”. European Journal of Haematology 87 (2011), 54.
[63]
A. Vignoli, P. van der Meijden, M. Marchetti, C. Giaccherini, S. Tessarolo, F.
Swieringa, H. t. Cate, G. Finazzi, A. Rambaldi, J. Heemskerk, and A. Falanga.
“Increased Platelet Thrombus Formation Under Flow Condition In Myeloproliferative
Neoplasms (MPN)”. Blood 122 (2013), 33.
46
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
[64]
GSEA — MSigDB — Browse Human Gene Sets. https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/
gsea/msigdb/human/genesets.jsp. (Online; accessed 11-01-2024). 2024.
[65]
A. Vi˜nuela, L. B. Snoek, J. A. Riksen, and J. E. Kammenga. “Genome-wide gene
expression regulation as a function of genotype and age in C. elegans”. Genome
Research 20 (2010), 929.
[66]
R. Yamamoto, R. Chung, J. M. Vazquez, H. Sheng, P. L. Steinberg, N. M. Ioannidis,
and P. H. Sudmant. “Tissue-specific impacts of aging and genetics on gene expression
patterns in humans”. Nature Communications 2022 13:1 13 (2022), 1.
[67]
A. Vi˜nuela, A. A. Brown, A. Buil, P. C. Tsai, M. N. Davies, J. T. Bell, E. T.
Dermitzakis, T. D. Spector, and K. S. Small. “Age-dependent changes in mean
and variance of gene expression across tissues in a twin cohort”. Human Molecular
Genetics 27 (2018), 732.
[68]
F. Wang, J. Yang, H. Lin, Q. Li, Z. Ye, Q. Lu, L. Chen, Z. Tu, and G. Tian.
“Improved Human Age Prediction by Using Gene Expression Profiles From Multiple
Tissues”. Frontiers in Genetics 11 (2020), 1025.
[69]
J. A. Robles, S. E. Qureshi, S. J. Stephen, S. R. Wilson, C. J. Burden, and J. M.
Taylor. “Efficient experimental design and analysis strategies for the detection of
differential expression using RNA-Sequencing”. BMC Genomics 13 (2012).
[70]
C. Soneson, and M. Delorenzi. “A comparison of methods for differential expression
analysis of RNA-seq data” (2013).
[71]
M. D. Luecken, M. B¨uttner, K. Chaichoompu, A. Danese, M. Interlandi, M. F.
Mueller, D. C. Strobl, L. Zappia, M. Dugas, M. Colom´e-Tatch´e, and F. J. Theis.
“Benchmarking atlas-level data integration in single-cell genomics”. Nature Methods
2021 19:1 19 (2021), 41.
[72]
T. Hashimshony, F. Wagner, N. Sher, and I. Yanai. “CEL-Seq: Single-Cell RNA-Seq
by Multiplexed Linear Amplification”. Cell Reports 2 (2012), 666.
[73]
D. Gr¨un, L. Kester, and A. Van Oudenaarden. “Validation of noise models for
single-cell transcriptomics”. Nature Methods 2014 11:6 11 (2014), 637.
[74]
A. Raj, P. van den Bogaard, S. A. Rifkin, A. van Oudenaarden, and S. Tyagi.
“Imaging individual mRNA molecules using multiple singly labeled probes”. Nature
Methods 2008 5:10 5 (2008), 877.
[75]
M. Huang, J. Wang, E. Torre, H. Dueck, S. Shaffer, R. Bonasio, J. I. Murray, A. Raj,
M. Li, and N. R. Zhang. “SAVER: gene expression recovery for single-cell RNA
sequencing”. Nature Methods (2018).
[76]
C. Hafemeister, and R. Satija. “Normalization and variance stabilization of single-cell
RNA-seq data using regularized negative binomial regression”. Genome Biology 20
(2019), 1.
47
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis
Winter 2024
[77]
S. Zhao, W. P. Fung-Leung, A. Bittner, K. Ngo, and X. Liu. “Comparison of RNA-
Seq and Microarray in Transcriptome Profiling of Activated T Cells”. PLoS ONE 9
(2014), 78644.
[78]
D. Aran. “Cell-type enrichment analysis of bulk transcriptomes using xcell”. Methods
in Molecular Biology 2120 (2020), 263.
[79]
J. Yoo, Z. Sun, M. Greenacre, Q. Ma, D. Chung, and Y. M. Kim. “A guideline for
the statistical analysis of compositional data in immunology”. Communications for
Statistical Applications and Methods 29 (2022), 453.
[80]
T. P. Quinn, I. Erb, G. Gloor, C. Notredame, M. F. Richardson, and T. M. Crowley.
“A field guide for the compositional analysis of any-omics data”. GigaScience 8
(2019), 1.
48
