==PAGE:1==
Representation learning for 
functional clustering of antibodies
Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning – Department of Health Technology
Master’s Thesis – MScEng in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
Oxford Protein informatics group – Oxford Department of Statistics
Christian Peder Jacobsen
 
==PAGE:2==
Representation learning for functional clustering of antibodies
Machine learning approaches for clustering antibodies based on their function
Master’s Thesis - MScEng in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
February 4th 2024
By: Christian Peder Jacobsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over ﬁve months at the section of Bioinformatics, Department of
Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration with the Oxford
Protein Informatics Group, Department of Statistics, Oxford, in partial fulﬁlment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology.
Christian Peder Jacobsen, s165476
Bioinformatics and Sytems Biology
==PAGE:4==
Preface and acknowledgements
Supervisors
Morten Nielsen, Group leader, Professor, Department of Health Technology, DTU
Magnus Høie, PhD, Department of Health Technology, DTU
Charlotte Deane, Group leader, Professor, Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
Lewis Chinery, PhD, Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
The research and ﬁndings documented in this thesis represent a collaborative effort between the
Immunoinformatics and Machine Learning group at the Technical University of Denmark, led by
Professor Morten Nielsen, and the Oxford Protein Informatics Group (OPIG), led by Professor
Charlotte Deane. This work was undertaken from September 4th, 2023, to February 4th, 2024,
in partial fulﬁlment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc in Bioinformatics and
Systems Biology.
I wish to extend my gratitude to all my project supervisors for their exceptional mentorship and
support. Their continued support and insight have meant that the experience of writing my master’s
thesis has been great. Special thanks to Charlotte for the opportunity to visit the Oxford Protein
Informatics Group, an experience that introduced me to many incredibly talented and welcoming
individuals. In this regard, I also want to thank Lewis for his support during my time in Oxford, both
for the invaluable academic guidance and for helping me join both social and academic activities in
the group. Additionally, I am grateful to the members of both OPIG and the Immunoinformatics and
Machine Learning group for allowing me to participate in weekly group meetings, journal clubs,
and data presentations. These engagements have been fantastic opportunities to learn more about
research within the ﬁeld of Immunoinformatics.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The function of an antibody is linked to the epitope it binds; thus, accurate computational clustering
of antibodies based on their preferred epitopes is a critical step in understanding immunology and in
the design of new antibody therapeutics. Traditional clustering methods, using sequence or structural
identity, separately fail to incorporate key characteristics of the complementarity-determining regions
(CDR) that determine the antibodies’ binding capabilities. For instance, sequence-based methods
cannot recognize antibodies with low sequence identities that share similar binding site geometries.
Conversely, structural-similarity-based methods fail to capture the biophysical properties of amino
acids in the CDRs.
Inspired by recent advances in representation learning, this thesis aimed to create a representa-
tion of predicted antibody structures that combined the structural and biophysical features of the
CDRs, thereby enhancing the functional clustering of antibodies. This study ﬁrst examined different
contrastive learning strategies for training graph-neural networks (GNNs) to obtain such a repre-
sentation space. However, the resulting representations did not signiﬁcantly outperform traditional
methods in the functional clustering of antibodies. This was likely due to challenges in capturing the
complex nature of antibody functions and the limitations associated with a dataset only consisting
of predicted antibody structures. However, by combining the residue-embeddings derived from
self-supervised models, AbLang and AntiFold a representation space was generated, which enabled
superior clustering of antibodies based on their preferred epitopes, neutralization scores, and binding
properties compared to sequence and structural-based methods across three different datasets. This
study highlights the advantages of leveraging representations obtained from self-supervised models
in the computational clustering of antibodies, offering insights into how these models alleviate issues
associated with developing new antibody-based therapeutics.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
What are antibodies, and what determines their binding capabilities? . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Why is functional clustering of antibodies important? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background and Theoretical framework
5
2.1
What is deep learning, and how do you train neural networks?
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
What is representatiaon learning? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
What is contrastive learning? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
What is a Graph-neural network? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Materials and Methods
12
3.1
The paired OAS structure database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
Sequence redundancy ﬁltering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Predicting Antibody structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Structural quality ﬁltering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
SARS CoV-2 epitope group and neutrilization dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
Deﬁning epitope groups from mutataional escape proﬁles . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.2
SARS-Cov2 variant neutrilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Structural similarity by RMSD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Biophysical similarity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
FoldSeek
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Spearmans correlation coefﬁcient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8
Model architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8.1
Constructing graphs from protein structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8.2
Graph neural network as feature encoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.8.3
Projection head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.9
Training the model architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.9.1
Training the model using contrastive learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.9.2
Hyperparameter optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.10 Stochastic augmentatations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.11 CDR-BLOSUM45 matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.12 AbLang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.12.1 Inducing mutations using AbLang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:7==
3.13 AntiFold and ESM-IF1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.13.1 Inducing mutations using AntiFold and ESM-IF1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.14 K-nearest-neighbours for functional clustering of antibodies
. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.14.1 Performance metrics for functional clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.15 Immune repertoires for TargetT and TargetI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.15.1 SPR binding competition assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results
29
4.1
Including biophysical properties might improve functional clustering . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Semi-supervised contrastive learning for predicted antibody structures . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Capturing structural similarity using semi-supervised contrastive learning .
31
4.2.2
Clustering antibodies based on their preferred epitope using semi-supervised
contrastive learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Unsupervised contrastive learning with stochastic augmentations for functional
clustering of antibodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Unsupervised contrastive learning with data-driven augmentataions . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Functional clustering antibodies using latent representations from protein language
and inverse folding models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5.1
Clustering performance on external datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Discussion
58
5.1
Clustering antibodies based on their function is critical for improving drug discovery 58
5.2
Generating positive pairs based on structural similarity fails to cluster antibodies by
function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3
Stochastic graph augmentations perform better at clustering antibodies based on
their function but are still outperformed by baseline models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.4
Data-driven augmentations did not improve functional clustering but slightly in-
creased the structural information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.5
Representations derived from self-supervised models improved functional clustering
of antibodies and contain signiﬁcantly more structural information compared to
baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Conclusion
66
7
Further work
68
8
Supplementary materials
78
==PAGE:8==
9
Supplementary ﬁgures
78
9.1
Justiﬁcaiton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
10 Supplementary tables
88
10.1 Semi-supervised . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
10.2 Stochastic augmentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
10.3 Datadriven . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
What are antibodies, and what determines their binding capabilities?
Antibodies, also known as immunoglobulins, are specialized proteins that play a critical role in the
immune system’s ability to recognize and neutralize pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and other
foreign substances. Antibodies are distinguished by their ability to speciﬁcally bind to a speciﬁc
site, referred to as the epitope, on the surface of a target molecule, referred to as the antigen. Upon
binding to the antigen, the antibody neutralizes the foreign molecule and facilitates its degradation,
thus playing a vital role in the immune response.
Structurally, an antibody is a Y-shaped protein consisting of two identical heavy chains and light
chain pairs. The sites responsible for binding the antigen are found at the end of the two arms. They
are formed by the combination of Complementarity-Determining Regions (CDRs) found in the
"variable regions" of the heavy and light chains. Thus, both the heavy and light chains contribute
to the antigen-binding speciﬁcity of the antibody. Each variable region contains three CDR loops -
HCDR1, HCDR2, and HCDR3 for the heavy chain and LCDR1, LCDR2, and LCDR3 for the light
chain. The interaction between the antibody and its antigen is highly determined by the structural and
biophysical characteristics of the amino acids found in these CDR regions [1]. Thus, to understand
which antibodies bind to their target, it is crucial to characterize the CDR regions of antibodies.
Historically, it has been shown that ﬁve of the six CDRs usually adopt a limited range of structural
forms known as "canonical classes". Conversely, the HCDR3 loop — being the exception — exhibits
a greater structural diversity and has been found to play a more critical role in the binding interaction
[1, 2, 3]. However, more recently, it has been found that canonical classes, to a degree, determine the
variability of the HCDR3 loop [4, 5, 6]. Thus, to characterize the binding properties of antibodies, it
is likely crucial to consider all six CDR loops. Apart from the CDR regions, the variable regions
of the heavy and light chains also comprise framework regions. These regions provide structural
support for the CDRs, maintaining the overall shape and stability of the antigen-binding site. While
the framework regions are less variable than the CDRs, they exhibit some diversity, contributing to
the overall variability of antibodies [7]. Thus, the CDRs of antibodies have diverse biophysical and
structural compositions, enabling them to target a wide range of antigens with high speciﬁcity [8].
1.2
Why is functional clustering of antibodies important?
The function of an antibody is intrinsically linked to which epitope it binds. Thus, characterizing
which epitopes antibodies target is critical for understanding the immune response and identifying
how the immune response might differ between individuals [9, 10, 11]. Furthermore, as antibodies
1
==PAGE:10==
have emerged as a major class of therapeutic agents, it is critical to characterize their preferred
epitopes during drug discovery, to identify new therapeutics that bind to desired regions of target
molecules. As of 2020, 79 FDA-approved antibody therapeutics have been developed, with 570
therapeutics in clinical trials used to treat numerous diseases, including cancer, multiple sclerosis,
and Psoriasis [12].
During the therapeutic antibody development workﬂow, large antibody repertoires comprising
several thousand distinct antibodies are typically retrieved from immunized animals. However,
due to experimental costs and time restrictions, only a few are usually selected from the larger
library as lead candidates [12, 13]. When selecting these lead candidates, it is crucial to ensure
high variability in the selected antibodies as they represent the entire antibody library produced
through the immunization process. Thus, selecting antibodies that target different epitopes is critical
[14, 15, 16]. Different methods can be used to experimentally determine the epitope of an antibody.
One of the most precise methods is resolving the structure of the antibody-antigen complex, often
achieved through X-ray diffraction. Although this technique allows for the identiﬁcation of the
exact binding sites on the antigen, the resource-intensive nature of the methods makes it infeasible
for high numbers of antibodies [17, 18, 19]. Alternatively, epitope binning experiments, such as
competition assays, can be used to identify which antibodies that can simultaneously bind to the
target protein. If antibodies can bind simultaneously, they bind to different regions of the target
molecule. However, as pairwise comparisons are required for competition assays, the experimental
load grows approximately quadratically n2 with the number of antibodies (n) to be evaluated. This
makes competition assays unfeasible for the larger libraries generated during therapeutic antibody
development. Additionally, competition assays only offer low-resolution estimates of the epitopes as
these assays cannot distinguish between antibodies that bind to the same site and those that bind to
distinct sites but overlap sterically [20, 21, 22, 19].
Thus, accurate prior computational clustering of antibodies into functional groups that engage the
same epitope can reduce the number of experiments or, given a high performance, even remove
the need for experimental epitope determination entirely, thereby saving experimental costs and
resources. Currently, most computational epitope proﬁling strategies group antibodies based on
sequence similarity, with the most widely used method being clonotyping. Clonotyping attempts
to link antibodies that originate from the same progenitor B-cell into a group [23, 24]. Although
grouping antibodies by their clonotypes varies across the literature, the following requirements are
commonly used: The antibodies should share the same V and J genes, match in CDRH3 length, and
share a sequence identity above 80% in the CDRH3. The rationale behind this deﬁnition lies in the
2
==PAGE:11==
two main processes of antibody development: VDJ recombination during B-cell development and
afﬁnity maturation through somatic hypermutation following antigen exposure.
VDJ recombination occurs during B-cell development, which is the cell responsible for producing
antibodies, and involves rearranging Variable (V), Diversity (D), and Joining (J) gene segments
to create a unique antibody variable region. Antibodies sharing the same V and J genes likely
thus originate from the same B-cell progenitor. Furthermore, as CDR3 lengths are to some degree
determined during VD(J) recombination, antibodies with the same CDR3 length often originate from
the same progenitor [25, 23, 24]. After encountering an antigen from a bacteria or virus, B-cells
undergo a process called somatic hypermutations, where mutations are introduced primarily in the
CDR regions to enhance antibody-antigen afﬁnity, referred to as afﬁnity maturation [26]. While
somatic hypermutation diversiﬁes antibodies from the same B-cell, signiﬁcant sequence similarity
suggests a shared lineage and possibly similar antigen speciﬁcity. Typically, clonal clustering is
highly accurate, with antibodies in a cluster often targeting the same epitope.
However, it has been found that clonotyping makes assumptions that do not align with reality,
making the strategy less effective for capturing the full diversity of antibodies that target the same
epitope [19]. First, clonotyping assumes antibodies targeting a given epitope must originate from
the same progenitor B cell lineage and thus have a shared genetic origin. This has, however, been
shown not to be the case. Antibodies from different lineages and with highly dissimilar sequences
have been shown to adopt similar binding site geometry and bind the same epitope [27, 28, 19, 29,
30, 31]. Furthermore, the requirement of a length-matched CDR3 region also results in decreased
performance as it has been shown that insertions and deletions can occur during afﬁnity maturation
through somatic hypermutations and that antibodies with differing CDR lengths can exhibit similar
binding site geometries [32]. These assumptions and pitfalls are especially critical when picking
lead candidates during therapeutic antibody development, as selecting lead candidates from different
clonotypes might result in a signiﬁcant overestimation of the diversity in the lead candidates.
In contrast, in recent years, de novo protein structure prediction software like Alphafold2 and
AbodyBuilder2 has enabled fast predictions of high-quality protein structures and leveraging these
structures has resulted in an increased ability to characterize general proteins based on their function.
This includes characterizing protein-ligand interactions, mutational effects on stability and binding
afﬁnity prediction [33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38]. Likewise, utilizing structural similarity measures between
predicted structures of antibodies has resulted in an increased ability to cluster antibodies based
on their preferred epitopes compared to sequence-based methods like clonotyping [19, 31, 39].
These strategies measure the structural similarity between the CDR regions of the antibodies. Thus,
the increase in performance is likely due to the identiﬁcation of sequence dis-similar proteins
3
==PAGE:12==
that fold into similar binding site geometry [19]. However, methods that use structural similarity
to identify antibodies that bind to the same epitope also make assumptions that can inﬂuence
their performance. For example, structural similarity measures like the root-mean-squared-distance
(RMSD) fail to incorporate information about the biophysical features of the amino acids found in the
CDR region [19]. Thus, this measure assumes that the CDR loops with similar structural geometries
do not exhibit differences in biophysical properties, such as charge or hydropathy. However, during
this project, it will be shown that antibodies with similar CDR geometries can, in fact, exhibit
signiﬁcant differences in their biophysical features. This is a signiﬁcant shortcoming as the binding
characteristics of antibodies, including preferred epitope or binding afﬁnity, likely are determined by
a combination of the structural and biophysical features of the CDR regions [1, 19, 31]. Furthermore,
classical RMSD metrics cannot compare antibodies with mismatched CDR lengths and thus assume
that antibodies with differing CDR lengths cannot fold into similar binding site geometries, which is
untrue [40].
1.3
Structure of the thesis
Inspired by recent advancements in representation learning and protein structure prediction, this
thesis aimed to create a mathematical representation of predicted antibody structures that effectively
capture both the structural and biophysical features of the CDR regions, thereby enhancing the
functional clustering of antibodies. These representations were generated using different represen-
tation learning strategies and included training graph-neural network (GNN) architectures using a
representation learning technique called contrastive learning, described in detail in Section 2.3 and
by using representation derived from "self-supervised" models.
Initially, the project aimed to establish whether the similarity between predicted antibody structures
captured the biophysical similarities of the amino acids in the CDR regions. This was done to identify
whether explicitly incorporating the biophysical features of the CDR residues would increase the
functional clustering of antibodies. Subsequently, the project aimed to generate a representation
space that effectively combined structural and biophysical characteristics by training GNNs using
three different contrastive learning strategies. The quality of the representations generated was
quantiﬁed by the ability to cluster antibodies based on their preferred epitopes as well as their ability
to capture structural similarity. Lastly, the project explored whether representations derived from
pre-trained self-supervised models, including the antibody-speciﬁc large protein language model
AbLang and the inverse-folding model AntiFold, could be used to obtain representations which
effectively clustered antibodies based on their function. These representations derived from AbLang
and AntiFold were validated in their ability to capture structural information as well as clustering
4
==PAGE:13==
antibodies based on their preferred epitopes, neutralization scores, and binding properties across
three different datasets.
2
Background and Theoretical framework
2.1
What is deep learning, and how do you train neural networks?
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning that focuses on utilizing neural network architectures
to extract high-level features from an input observation. These neural network architectures are
composed of interconnected nodes or neurons, each designed to receive a vector of input features,
x 2 Rd . These neurons then process the input by applying a set of learnable weights, w 2 Rd, and
adding a bias term, b 2 R [41]. The weighted input and bias terms are then summed and subjected
to a non-linear transformation function, denoted by s, resulting in the activation of the neuron, as
shown below.
n(x) = s
!
wTx+b
"
(1)
A neural network is then constructed by stacking multiple layers of nodes such that each node in a
given layer connects to nodes in subsequent layers, each connection marked by a speciﬁc weight.
These networks, when comprising numerous stacked layers, are termed "deep" neural networks.
By combining the computations of several layers of neurons, the neural networks can extract
increasingly high-level features from the input data. An illustration of a simple neural network can
be seen illustrated below [41].
5
==PAGE:14==
(a)
Figure 1: Illustration of a neural network architecture consisting of an input layer, two hidden layers and an
output layer. Here, each circle represents nodes connected to the remaining nodes by their associated weight
illustrated with the lines.
In the classical supervised learning setting, the internal parameters (weights and biases) of the
network are selected by training the neural network to map the input features x to an output y by
minimizing the prediction errors through a process called "training". During training, the adjustments
of the model parameters are guided by a loss function, which quantiﬁes the difference between the
network’s predictions and the actual target values. Common loss functions include the mean-squared
error (MSE) for regression tasks and cross-entropy loss for classiﬁcation tasks. To minimize the loss
function and thus the prediction error, the model updates its internal parameters using an optimization
algorithm such as gradient descent. Gradient descent calculates the gradient of the loss function
with respect to the internal parameters, which indicates the direction in which the parameters should
be adjusted to maximise the loss. Thus, by walking opposite the gradient direction, the algorithm
effectively minimizes the loss [41].
However, computing the gradient of the loss function with respect to the model parameters becomes
infeasible for larger datasets. To address this, a process known as stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
is used, where gradients are instead computed on a smaller subsample of the data referred to as
a "minibatch". This reduces computational demands and introduces noise to the training process,
which helps the model avoid local minima. The loss gradient is thus calculated for all small batches
of the dataset until the entire dataset has been covered, referred to as an epoch. During training,
several epochs are often completed until the SGD algorithm reaches a minimum [41].
6
==PAGE:15==
The goal of deep learning in the supervised setting is thus to identify the best set of model parameters
(weights and biases) and model complexity (number of nodes and layers) that results in the best-
performing model for predicting the output labels. However, a key challenge in training neural
networks is "overﬁtting", where the model learns the training data too well, including its noise and
outliers. This often results in the model being unable to generalize outside the dataset it has been
trained on. This problem is referred to as the bias-variance trade-off. Here, high bias refers to a
model being too simplistic and, therefore, unable to capture the underlying pattern of the data, and
high variance refers to the model being overly complex and thus overﬁtting to the input data by
capturing too much noise. To identify which model architecture performs the best, a strategy called
cross-validation is employed. This strategy involves dividing the dataset into training and validation
sets. Here, the model is trained to minimize the loss function on the training dataset and then applied
to the validation dataset to ensure that the parameter updates generalize to observations outside the
training dataset [41, 42].
2.2
What is representatiaon learning?
In machine learning, representation learning refers to the process of training mathematical models to
identify meaningful patterns from raw input data and mapping the information into a representation to
capture abstract and high-level features that can be used for downstream tasks [43]. The mathematical
models typically utilized in representation learning often consist of neural network architecture,
which can capture intricate patterns and features within large and complex datasets. Training these
models to learn powerful representations of the input data has historically been done using the
supervised learning approach (Section 2.1) [44, 43].
In the context of antibodies, these representations could be obtained by training a neural network
architecture to predict the binding afﬁnity given the protein sequence of an antibody. The resulting
representation captured by the neural network would likely include high-level features about the
antibody, particularly those inﬂuencing binding afﬁnity, such as the biophysical characteristics of
the CDR regions. However, these supervised methods are heavily dependent on the availability and
quality of human-labelled data, for which there is a signiﬁcant lag with respect to antibodies [45].
Thus, it is infeasible to train a supervised model with publicly available data to obtain a representation
of antibodies to compare antibodies based on their biophysical and structural properties.
Other newer approaches to representation learning include ’self-supervised’ learning, which aims to
learn useful representations of the input data without human-generated labels. This is achieved by
designing "pretext tasks", which generates a pseudo-label ˆy from parts of the input data itself [46, 44,
47, 48]. These methods have been highly successful in the context of Natural-Language-processing
7
==PAGE:16==
(NLP), resulting in one of the key methods in training large language models like ChaGPT [49]. In
the context of NLP tasks, the neural network architectures are trained in a self-supervised manner,
predicting pseudo-labels generated by masking words in large datasets of sentences. By predicting
the missing words, the model learns contextual relationships and semantic nuances, which results
in powerful representations of words and sentences which can be extracted from the trained neural
network [46, 47, 48]. Likewise, these “self-supervised” strategies have also been highly successful in
the context of protein biology, resulting in the development of large protein language models (pLM)
such as ESM-2, where instead of predicting missing words in sentences, the goal is to predict missing
amino-acids in large datasets of protein sequences [50]. The idea is that to predict missing residues
across millions of protein sequences, the neural network architecture needs to learn representations
of protein sequences that reﬂect aspects of the underlying biological evolutionary constraints of the
amino acids [50]. The representations obtained from large language models like ESM-2 have resulted
in state-of-the-art performance in down-streams tasks related to general proteins, including mutation
stability prediction and structure prediction, indicating that the models are extracting high-level
features which relate to both the structural and biophysical aspects of the protein sequences [50, 51].
This process is called "transfer learning", where a pre-trained model obtained from a large dataset
like ESM-2 is later ﬁne-tuned for a speciﬁc task like predicting the effect of a mutation on protein
stability [52]. However, the pre-trained model can also be used in the context of "zero-shot" learning,
which aims to generalize the representations obtained from larger models to make predictions
about features of observations the model was not trained on. In the context of proteins, this could
be clustering protein sequences using the representations from ESM-2 models or capturing the
functional effects of sequence mutations by comparing the changes in the representations [50, 53].
2.3
What is contrastive learning?
Contrastive learning is a new approach to representation learning that has enhanced the ability to
obtain powerful representations of the input data that capture abstract and high-level features. Unlike
supervised and self-supervised methods that attempt to map inputs to (pseudo-)labels, contrastive
learning learns by differentiating between ’similar’ and ’dissimilar’ observations [44, 54]. Thus,
instead of learning a signal from individual observations one at a time, i.e. updating the model weights
and biases with respect to missing residues in one sequence, contrastive learning learns by comparing
multiple different samples at once and thus theoretically learns more robust representations [44].
The goal of contrastive learning is very simple: the representation of “similar” samples, referred to
as positive pairs, should be mapped close together in the representation space, while “dissimilar”
samples, referred to as negative pairs, should be further away. Thus, by contrasting between samples
8
==PAGE:17==
of positive and negative pairs, the representations obtained from the model directly reﬂect the
features the model has learned to distinguish between them. The key to an effective contrastive
learning task is thus to design the positive and negative pairs such that the resulting representation
space reﬂects the features that are related to the downstream tasks [44, 54, 55].
While various strategies have historically been employed to identify positive and negative pairs in
contrastive learning, often relying on engineered or human-generated labels, the SimCLR model
obtained state-of-the-art performances clustering images based on the input labels without the need
for human-generated labels during training [55]. SimCLR trained the neural network encoder model
by deﬁning the positive pairs as random augmentation of input images and the negative pairs as
all other images in the dataset. The augmented images were generated using random geometric
transformations of the input images, including random cropping or ﬂipping of the images, as
well as colour distortion and Gaussian noise. This approach was found to perform as well as a
supervised approach in clustering images by labels given enough parameters and training data. Thus,
it was shown that positive pairs could be deﬁned based on random augmentation of the input data,
resulting in extremely informative representations [55]. Still, it was found that the performance
of the representation space was highly inﬂuenced by the quality of the image augmentations used
during training.
Inspired by these results, the MolCLR model trained a graph-neural network encoder using an
unsupervised contrastive learning approach. Here, the positive pairs of input molecule graphs were
generated by randomly masking atoms, bonds, or even entire subgraphs. In MolCLR, negative pairs
were generated as all other molecules in the dataset. Using the representation obtained from the
resulting encoder model, downstream predictions of molecular properties, including solubility and
molecule function prediction, obtained state-of-the-art performances [56]. Likewise, unsupervised
contrastive learning has also been applied in the context of protein structures. Here, it was found
that training a model by deﬁning the positive pair through random subgraphs of the input protein
structures and negative pairs as all other observations in the dataset, resulted in state-of-the-art
performance in predicting protein folds and enzyme reactions [57].
Shared between the models described above is that they all optimized the model parameters of the
neural network encoder using the Normalized Temperature-Scaled Cross-Entropy (NT-Xent) loss
function, shown below [55].
L (zi,zj) = −log
exp
!
sim
!
zi,zj
"
/t
"
Â2N
k=1 1[k6=i] exp(sim(zi,zk)/t)
(2)
9
==PAGE:18==
The NT-Xent loss function is designed to maximize the cosine similarity for positive pairs (obser-
vation zi and zj) while minimizing it for negative pairs (observation zi and zk). In the numerator,
the loss function exponentially transforms the cosine similarity between two observations from the
positive pair adjusted by a temperature hyperparameter t. In the denominator, the NT-Xent loss
function quantiﬁes the exponentially transformed cosine similarity between the negative pairs, which
is summed over all pairs of negative observations (zi,zk). Here, zk represents all other observations
in the mini-batch, including their positive pair, hence summing over 2N. As the ratio between the
similarity of the positive and negative pairs are log-transformed and inversely scaled, a lower loss
function will indicate that the similarity of the positive pairs is high, while the similarity of the
negative pairs is low.
The contrastive learning approach thus involves three key components: 1) Identifying positive and
negative pairs, which deﬁnes the features of the representations space, which can be deﬁned by
random augmentations. 2) a feature encoder used to obtain a high-level representation of the input
data, which includes neural network architectures. 3 ) A contrastive loss function that attempts to
minimize the distance between positive pairs while maximizing the distance between the negative
pairs in the representation space.
2.4
What is a Graph-neural network?
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) represent a generalization of the neural network architectures
described in section 2.1 to the context of graph-input data and will, in this project, be used as the
feature extractor of input protein graphs.
A graph is a data structure composed of nodes and edges, forming a network that effectively
represents complex relational and structural information. Mathematically, a graph G is denoted as
G = (V,E), where V represents the set of nodes and E denotes the edges that connect them. Each
node in the graph typically has an associated feature vector that encapsulates speciﬁc information
about that node. Similarly, the edges linking the nodes can also possess features. These node and
edge features are conventionally represented as matrices, X for node features and E for edge features,
allowing for encoding the graph structure and relational attributes.
Unlike traditional neural networks, graph-neural networks (GNNs) must account for the unique
features of graphs to obtain meaningful representations of the input data. First, GNNs must handle
the varying shapes, sizes, and connections that graphs can have. Second, the GNNs must handle
the isomorphic nature of graphs, meaning that graphs might be structurally similar despite having
different input representations, and third, the graph must be permutation invariant, meaning that the
10
==PAGE:19==
output should be unaffected by the order of the nodes. One of the most popular forms of graph-neural
networks is the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN). GCNs generalize the concept of convolutions
from grid data, like images, to graph-structured data by applying the concept of message passing.
The message-passing concept refers to the process where each node in the graph updates its state
based on the information received from its neighbouring nodes. Using this approach allows the
model to capture both local and global structural features of the graph. Information from the graph
is aggregated at each GCN convolution using the following equation.
X0 = s
⇣
ˆD−1/2 ˆA ˆD−1/2XQ
⌘
(3)
Here, bA denotes the adjacency matrix with inserted self-loops, which represents the set of edges that
connect the nodes in the graph and was calculated by using the following expression.
bA = A+I 2 RNxN
(4)
Thus, Ai, j = 1 indicates a connection between node i and j in the graph and Ai,i = 1. ˆD denotes the
diagonal degree matrix, which is used to normalise the activation of each node by the number of its
connections, calculated using the following expression.
ˆDii = Â
j=0
ˆAi j 2 RNxN
(5)
Lastly, Q 2 RMxF denotes the learnable parameter matrix where F is the desired embedding dimen-
sion of the nodes, and M is the dimension of the feature vector X. Equation 10 thus describes how
the updated node features X0 are calculated by aggregating the node-feature information X with the
neighbours using a normalized adjacency matrix which is then multiplied onto a learnable parameter
matrix and fed through a non-linear transformation s.
During training, the GCN layer is thus trained to capture high-level and abstract features of the
graphs by updating the learnable parameters Q with respect to the gradient of the loss function.
These GCN layers can then be stacked, enabling the model to incorporate an increasingly broader
neighbourhood context and capture more high-level features. In this setup, the updated node feature
matrix from previous layers is fed into the next. The embeddings from the K-th GCN layer thus
aggregate information from nodes K neighbours away. The output of the GCN is thus an updated
node feature vector X0
K 2 RN⇥F, reﬂecting local and global structural features extracted by sending
messages through the graph.
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
The paired OAS structure database
The OAS database is a collection of paired antibody sequences derived from 80 different studies
covering diverse organisms with different immune states, including patients immunized with SARS-
Cov2, Cytomegalovirus, as well as healthy individuals [58]. From the OAS database, a set of 1.5
million unique human heavy and light chain paired antibody sequences were derived with associated
metadata labels, including the speciﬁc B-cell type from which the antibody originated, the disease
condition of the subject, and the originating study.
3.1.1
Sequence redundancy ﬁltering
The roughly 1.5 million paired antibody sequences were then redundancy ﬁltered by clustering
antibodies with sequence-similar CDR regions using the cascaded clustering algorithm implemented
in the MMseqs2 (Many-against-Many sequence searching) easy-clustering tool [59]. In this setup,
the 6 CDR regions (HCDR1, HCDR2, HCDR3, LCDR1, LCDR2, LCDR3) of each antibody were
isolated from the variable region of the antibodies by using the IMGT numbering scheme. The
IMGT numbering scheme provides a standardized delimitation of the framework regions and the
CDRs based on the alignment of several V-gene amino acid sequences [60]. These isolated CDR
regions were then concatenated and separated by a "-" delimiter. Non-redundant sequences were then
determined as the number of cluster representatives derived from MMseqs2 [59]. When clustering
sequences using the MMseq2 package, sequences are aligned by an optimized k-mer-based alignment
strategy that uses 2 input variables, including the minimum sequence identity for two antibodies
to be considered in the same cluster and the coverage, which describes the percentage of the CDR
region that needs to be aligned. The minimum sequence identity was set to 80%, and coverage was
set to 100%, while only identical K-mer matches were allowed. The threshold of 80% was deﬁned
to maintain as much structural diversity as possible. This resulted in a database containing 582,154
unique paired sequences.
3.2
Predicting Antibody structures
The antibody structures of the 582,154 non-redundant paired antibody sequences were then predicted
using the antibody-speciﬁc structure prediction model AbodyBuilder2 [33]. The AbodyBuilder2
leverages deep-learning graph-neural network architectures to predict the geometry of the CDR and
framework regions directly from the amino-acid sequence. In order to predict antibody structures,
the ABodyBuilder2 model employs an ensemble of four deep-learning models that were trained
12
==PAGE:21==
independently. The architecture of each model is similar to the structure module in the AlphaFold-
multimer model, consisting of 4 Invariant Point Attention layers, which are used to pool the
information along a protein structure graph [34, 33].
As AbodyBuilder2 is an ensemble of four models, four different antibody structures are initially
calculated. To select the best one, each of the four structures is aligned, and the model closest to the
overall average structure is selected. The model closest to the average model is then passed through
the molecular dynamics simulation software OpenMM using an energy minimisation procedure
to prevent steric clashes, incorrect peptide bond lengths, or cis-peptide bonds resulting in the ﬁnal
predicted antibody model [33, 61].
3.2.1
Structural quality ﬁltering
Along with the predicted antibody structures, AbodyBuilder2 also returns the predicted conﬁdence
scores for each amino acid in the protein sequence. These conﬁdence scores are calculated by
evaluating the variation for each amino acid using the four models returned from the ensemble.
The idea is that if the four predicted structures disagree in a region, then the ﬁnal prediction for
this region is likely incorrect. This strategy was useful in ﬁltering out low-quality scores [33]. To
only maintain high-quality predicted antibody structures, antibodies with low-conﬁdence scores
were thus removed. First, an average conﬁdence score was calculated for the CDR region of each
observation in the dataset. Then, structures with lower conﬁdence than the median were removed
from the dataset. Thus, half of the dataset was removed to ensure that only high-quality structures
were retained, resulting in 291,077 structures.
Furthermore, a sub-sample of 10.000 predicted structures was isolated by choosing the most common
CDR-lengths annotated using the IMGT numbering scheme. This dataset acted as a proxy of the
entire dataset and was used to minimize the memory requirements of the different analyses. Unless
otherwise stated, this dataset was used to train the models.
3.3
SARS CoV-2 epitope group and neutrilization dataset
The SARS-Cov2 dataset contained 3051 antibodies derived from human antibody repertoires of
patients induced by SARS-Cov2 Omicron variants BA.1, BA.2, and BA.5 infections. The antibodies
were isolated by pooling blood mononuclear cells and enriching for the antigen-speciﬁc memory
B-cells. Memory-B cells were isolated by ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) by conﬁrming
binding to the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the SPIKE protein as well as the CD27+/IgM-/IgD-
13
==PAGE:22==
memory B-cell markers. The enriched cells were then subjected to single-cell V(D)J sequencing to
determine the B-cell receptor sequences, which are the antibody sequences [62, 63].
Like the redundancy ﬁltering described in section 3.1.1, the sequence of the 3051 antibodies was
redundancy ﬁltered using the 6 concatenated CDR sequences followed by MMseqs clustering with a
minimum sequence identity of 80% and a coverage of 100% which resulted in a dataset of 2485
non-redundant antibodies.
3.3.1
Deﬁning epitope groups from mutataional escape proﬁles
To identify which antibodies bound to the same epitope of the RBD domain of the Spike protein, the
3051 antibodies were clustered into 12 different epitope groups based on escape mutation proﬁles.
The escape mutation proﬁles were determined by doing a high-throughput Deep Mutational Scanning
(DMS) experiment in which different RBD variants were created by PCR-based mutagenesis based
on the Wuhan-Hu-1 RBD sequence. The RBD-mutant libraries were then ﬁrst transformed into a S.
cerevisiae strain and enriched for properly folded proteins identiﬁed by ACE2 binding, which is
the natural target of the Spike protein. The properly folded proteins were then used for subsequent
mutation escape proﬁling [62, 63]. The escape scores of each RDB variant generated through the
DMS experiment were calculated using the equation below.
Variant escape score = F ·
⇣
nX, ab
Nab
⌘
⇣
nX,re f
Nre f
⌘
(6)
Here, F is a scaling factor used to normalize the scores between 0 and 1, and n is the number of
detected barcodes, which is a DNA identiﬁer of the RBD variant X, while N is the total barcodes in
the experiment. Barcodes are then identiﬁed in a post-selected antibodies (ab) sample and a reference
(ref) sample. The escape scores of each mutation were then calculated by ﬁtting an epistasis model.
This involved an analysis of how combinations of mutations in the RBD domain affected the ability
of the antibody to bind that variant [64, 65].
Epitope groups were then identiﬁed using an escape score matrix AN,M, where N was the number of
antibodies, and M was the number of "informative" sites on the RBD of the SPIKE protein, selected
by using mutation sites with at least six escaped antibodies. Each matrix entry thus represented the
escape score for mutation m against antibody n. Antibody dissimilarity was then calculated using
Pearson correlation on the escape scores. The epitope groups were determined by converting the
escape matrix into an N×6 feature matrix through multidimensional scaling (MDS) based on the
14
==PAGE:23==
dissimilarity metric and performing unsupervised k-medoids clustering in this 6-dimensional space
[65].
3.3.2
SARS-Cov2 variant neutrilization
To determine the neutralization ability of the 3051 antibodies against 7 different SARS-Cov2
variants a pseudotyped virus assay was performed. In this experiment, the different variants D614G,
BA.1, BA.2, BA.2.75, BA.5, BQ.1.1, and XBB were inserted into a pcDNA3.1 vector, which was
transfected into 293T cells using Lipofectamine 3000. The cells were subsequently infected with a
Vesicular Stomatitis Virus (VSV) with an inserted expression cassette for ﬁreﬂy luciferase. Upon
incubation, the 293T cells will start to produce VSV virus particles, which have one of the seven
Spike variants and are referred to as the called the pseudotyped viruses [62, 66].
Antibodies were then serially diluted and incubated with the pseudotyped viruses in 96 well plates.
Subsequently, cells susceptible to infection by the pseudotyped virus were added to the 96 well plates.
After incubation, the luciferase enzyme substrate was added to the wells. Thus, light production
indicated viral infection since the virus carries a gene for luciferase protein, and only infected
cells will produce the enzyme. To quantify how well the antibodies neutralized the pseudovirus
models, the IC50 values were then calculated. The IC50 score was deﬁned by the concentration of
an antibody at which the viral infection was reduced by 50%, indicated by luminescence intensity at
different dilution concentrations in the 96 well plates [62, 63].
3.4
Structural similarity by RMSD
The structural similarity between antibodies was determined by calculating the root-mean-squared-
difference (RMSD) metric between the CDR regions of the antibodies. As a meaningful RMSD score
can only be obtained when antibodies of the same CDR length are compared, the RMSD measures
were limited to antibodies with identical IMGT annotations in the CDR region. As previously
described, the IMGT-numbering scheme provides a standardized numbering system for identifying
the CDR and framework regions of antibody sequences [60].
The RMSD calculation starts by aligning the framework regions of the antibody structures by
minimizing the distance between the amino acids’ heavy atoms (N, Ca, C, and O), utilizing the
Kabsch algorithm [67]. This process begins with the formation of two (Nx4x3) matrices, named
Pframework and Qframework, representing the coordinates of heavy atoms in the framework regions
in antibody P and Q. For alignment, one set of atoms Qframework was ﬁrst translated to the second
Pframework such that the two coordinate systems share the same centre. This was achieved by
15
==PAGE:24==
subtracting the centre of Pframework from Q framework. The Kabsch algorithm then calculates the
rotation matrix that optimally aligns the centred Pframework and Q framework matrices [67]. Using the
resulting rotation matrix and the translation matrix, the coordinates of the heavy atoms of the CDR
regions of antibody QCDR can be aligned to the PCDR such that the framework are aligned. Finally,
the RMSD value was computed by ﬁnding the root of the mean squared differences between the
coordinates of the IMGT numbered amino-acids QCDR and PCDR matrices.
3.5
Biophysical similarity analysis
To evaluate the biophysical similarity of antibody CDR regions, two distinct metrics were used:
the absolute difference in net charge and the absolute difference in the average hydropathy scores.
Calculating the net charge differences starts by extracting the CDR regions using the IMGT num-
bering scheme. Charge scores for positive (H: 0.1, R: 1.0, K: 1.0) and negative (D: -1.0, E: -1.0)
amino acids were then mapped onto the residues of the CDR sequences. The net charge of each
CDR region was then determined by summing the charges of these amino acids. The absolute
difference in these net charges was then computed between the CDR regions, where larger scores
indicate greater differences. Likewise, to assess the similarity of hydropathy, the CDR regions were
ﬁrst separated using the IMGT numbering scheme. Then, each amino acid of the CDR region was
annotated with a hydropathy score using the Kyte-Doolittle scale [68]. The average hydropathy
score for the six CDR regions was then calculated. Here, a positive score indicated that the CDR
regions were hydrophobic, while a negative score indicated that the CDR regions were hydrophilic.
The similarity in hydropathy between different antibodies was then quantiﬁed by calculating the
absolute difference in their average hydropathy scores.
3.6
FoldSeek
The FoldSeek method was tested on a dataset of 2,485 antibody structures from the Epitope
mutational escape dataset to determine its ability to identify structurally similar antibodies. Using a
structural alphabet ’3Di state’ encoded by a vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE)
model, the method discretizes the predicted antibody structures into a 3di-alphabet based on the
local environment of amino acids [69]. The discretized structures were then aligned by using the 3Di
alphabet and a pre-trained 3Di substitution matrix using a double-diagonal k-mer-based preﬁlter and
gapless alignment preﬁlter modules from MMseqs2. High-scoring hits are then aligned locally using
a 3Di substitution matrix or globally using TM-align, resulting in a structural similarity score. To
assess the ability of FoldSeek to identify structurally similar antibodies, a database of the discretized
representations of the 2,485 antibody structures was created. Then, each structure was aligned to the
16
==PAGE:25==
database, resulting in over 6 million comparisons and similarity scores. To determine the accuracy
of FoldSeek’s alignment scores, we compared them to the standard Root Mean Square Deviation
(RMSD) measure, as detailed in section 3.4.
3.7
Spearmans correlation coefﬁcient
The Spearman’s Correlation Coefﬁcient (SCC) is a statistical measure used to evaluate the strength
and direction of a monotonic relationship between two ranked variables. This coefﬁcient ranges
from -1 to 1, where -1 indicates a perfect inverse ranked correlation, and 1 signiﬁes a perfect
positive correlation. To assess the statistical signiﬁcance of the observed correlation, a p-value can
be calculated by determining the test statistic, represented by the following equation.
tobs = SCC ·
r
n−2
1−SCC2
(7)
In the expression above, n represents the number of observations and tobs is the test statistic. This
statistic approximates the distribution of a Student’s t-test with n−2 degrees of freedom, assuming
the null hypothesis that no correlation is observed between the variables. By comparing the test
statistic against this t-distribution, a p-value is obtained.
3.8
Model architecture
3.8.1
Constructing graphs from protein structures
The graphs of the predicted antibody structures were constructed based on the coordinates of the
amino acids in the CDR regions of the antibodies, which were isolated from the structures using the
IMGT annotations. The graphs of the CDR regions were represented by three matrices, including
the node feature matrix X, the adjacency matrix A and the edge-feature matrix E.
The node feature matrix X was constructed by one-hot encoding the amino acids from the protein
sequence of the antibody, meaning that X 2 RNx20 where N is the number of amino acids in the
protein sequence. The adjacency matrix A represented which nodes in the feature matrix were
connected in the protein graph and were constructed using the following condition.
Ai,j =
8
<
:
1
if d(xi,xj) < 10Å
0
else
(8)
Here, Aij is the element of the adjacency matrix corresponding to the pair of nodes i and j. The
function d(i, j) represents the Euclidean distance between the alpha carbons of the amino acid
17
==PAGE:26==
residues corresponding to nodes i and j, measured in Ångströms (Å). To decrease computational
complexity, only the 30 closest neighbours of each node were considered. The edge feature matrix
E represented the distances between each pair of connected nodes. This matrix was constructed
by applying a Radial basis function transformation to the distances between the nodes and aimed
to capture the relative spatial relationships between amino acid residues. Additionally, to mitigate
biases in the predicted structures, gaussian noise with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 0.02
Å was introduced to the atomic coordinates.
Ei, j =
8
<
:
exp
⇣
−d(i, j)2
2·s2
⌘
if Ai,j = 1
0
else
(9)
Here, s represents a scaling factor which transforms the raw distances into a feature space. The
scaling factor was chosen based on the average distance between all nodes derived from the OAS
database’s protein structures, which was 7.2 Å.
3.8.2
Graph neural network as feature encoders
The encoder model used to derive high-level features from the input protein graphs used a GNN
architecture built using a series of GCN layers, described in section 2.4. However, instead of using
equation 10, the network replaced the adjacency matrix A with the edge-feature matrix E described
in section 3.8.1. This, way the updated node-feature matrix X0 incorporated information about the
relative spatial relationships between residues in the CDR region by scaling the message-passing by
the distance between the residues, as shown below
X0 = s
⇣
ˆD−1/2 ˆE ˆD−1/2XQ
⌘
2 RNxZ
(10)
Here, bE 2 RNxN denotes the edge-feature matrix with inserted self-loops, bD 2 RNxN denotes the
diagonal degree matrix which normalizes the activations, X 2 RNx20 denotes the feature matrix of
one-hot encoded amino acids and Q 2 RFxH denotes the learnable parameters for one GCN layer in
the network which will be used to extract feature from the graphs.
To obtain a graph-level representation from the updated node feature matrix X0
K 2 RNxH derived
from a series of K connected GCN layers the node feature matrix was aggregated into a ﬁxed-size
global representation by using pooling operations, including mean and max pooling. These methods
calculate the average and the maximum node embeddings, respectively. Subsequently, the mean and
max-pooled representations were concatenated to obtain the representation for the graph. Thus, the
18
==PAGE:27==
resulting graph representation will h 2 R1x2F will be a representation of the learned aggregation of
neighbouring nodes.
3.8.3
Projection head
During contrastive learning, the graph-level representation h, obtained by pooling the updated
node feature matrix X0, was mapped into a ﬁnal embedding space where the contrastive loss was
calculated. This was achieved by using non-linear MLP layers using the following calculation.
z = s
!
QTh
"
2 R1xZ
(11)
Here, Q 2 R2HxZ denotes a set of learnable parameters which was multiplied onto the global graph
representation h and s denotes a non-linear transformation which in this project was the TanH
transformation. The number of GCN and projection layers used to encode the protein graphs differed
for each model and was selected using a Bayesian parameter optimization strategy described in
section 3.9.2. However, an illustration of the general architecture of the model can be seen in Figure
2
(a)
Figure 2: Illustration of a GNN architecture showing information ﬂow. The input graph passes through an
encoder layer e() consisting of GCN layers that execute graph convolutions, producing a matrix with N amino
acids and F features. For a graph-level representation, mean and max-pooling were applied, followed by L
non-linear projection layers into the ﬁnal embedding.
3.9
Training the model architectures
3.9.1
Training the model using contrastive learning
During contrastive learning, the GNN encoder models were exclusively trained on predicted antibody
structures derived from the OAS database. These antibody structures were split into a training,
validation and test dataset using an 80/10/10 percentage split for cross-validation. To update the
model parameters of the GNN encoder models, the NT-Xent loss function was used, shown in
19
==PAGE:28==
equation 2, which attempts to maximize the cosine similarity between positive pairs and minimize
the cosine similarity between negative pairs. The deﬁnition of the positive pairs differed between each
contrastive learning setup. In Section 4.2, the positive pairs were deﬁned based on the antibodies
with the most structurally similar CDR regions measured by RMSD (Section 3.4). In Section
4.3, the positive pairs were generated as randomly augmented protein graphs using stochastic
graph augmentations, including node-dropping, edge-dropping, node-mutations and edge-noise as
described in section 3.10. Lastly, in Section 4.4, the positive pairs were deﬁned based on predicted
structures of mutated protein sequences generated with a CDR-corrected BLOSUM-matrix, the
large-language model AbLang and the inverse folding model AntiFold. Still, across all trained
models, the negative pairs were deﬁned based on all other observations in the minibatches. Based on
the deﬁned positive and negative pairs, the NT-Xent loss function was calculated, and the model
parameters were updated using the ADAM optimization strategy. In short, the ADAM optimization
strategy updates model parameters by calculating the gradient of the loss function with respect to the
parameters. Then, each parameter is adjusted based on an adaptive learning rate, which is determined
by computing the moving average and variance of the past gradients [70].
To prevent overﬁtting during the training process, an early-stopping mechanism was implemented,
the criteria of which varied depending on the model being trained. Speciﬁcally, in section 4.2, the
early-stopping criterion was based on the correlation between the distance in the representation space
and the RMSD between antibody structures from the validation dataset. Here, if the correlation either
decreased or showed minimal improvement for ﬁve consecutive epochs, the training was stopped. In
section 4.3 and 4.4, the early-stopping criteria were based on the ability of the representation space
to continuously improve the clustering of antibodies based on their preferred epitopes measured by
accuracy, precision and recall.
3.9.2
Hyperparameter optimization
Bayesian parameter optimisation was used to optimize hyperparameters for the encoder models,
including the node embedding dimensions, the number of GCN and projection layers, learning
rates and batch sizes. This method uses Bayesian statistics to identify the set of hyperparameters,
resulting in the best-performing model. The method starts by creating a Gaussian Process (GP),
which aims to predict the network performance for different hyperparameter selections p(y|q),
with y being the performance metric we want to maximise and q being the set of hyperparameters
(GCN-layers, projection layers, etc.) [71]. The GP was then deﬁned based on a covariance function
called a kernel, which attempts to model the correlation between the performance of different
hyperparameters. In this project, the RBF kernel was used due to its effectiveness in capturing
20
==PAGE:29==
smooth variations in the modelled function [71]. This GP serves two purposes: it predicts the
performance of untested hyperparameters and assesses the uncertainty of these predictions. The
"Expected Improvement" function was then used to determine which hyperparameter to test based
on the expected improvement given the current best observation [71]. The selected hyperparameters
were then used to train a new instance of the graph-neural network, following which the actual
performance was measured. This observed performance was then fed back into the GP, updating
its understanding of how the hyperparameters inﬂuence the performance. Over time, this iterative
process converges towards the optimal set of hyperparameters.
In the process of identifying the hyperparameters resulting in the highest-performing model, a
GP was trained on 50 sets of hyperparameters, attempting to maximize the chosen performance
measure. In section 4.2, the GP attempted to maximize the correlation between the distance in
the representation space and the RMSD between antibody structures from the validation dataset
measured by SCC. In Section 4.3 and Section 4.4, the GP attempted to maximize the average of
accuracy, precision and recall during clustering of antibodies based on their preferred epitope in the
SARS-CoV2 validation dataset.
3.10
Stochastic augmentatations
Five different strategies were used to generate random alternative views of the protein graphs,
including node mutations, node dropping, weighted-edge dropping, edge noise and sub-graphs
inspired by previous graph augmentation strategies [72, 56, 57].
The node mutations were generated by ﬁrst selecting the number of mutations the resulting aug-
mented graph should have nm. Then, by selecting a random position in the node feature matrix Xi, the
one-hot encoded amino acid was changed to another by using the substitution probabilities derived
from the BLOSUM45 matrix. Here, self-hits were permitted, meaning that some mutations result in
no change. Likewise, the node-dropping augmentations were performed by randomly dropping a
number between 0 and nd nodes from the protein graph, and thus, a row in the feature matrix was
removed along with its associated edges.
Weighted-edge dropping was performed by ﬁrst selecting a percentage of the edges ped that should
be removed from the graph. Based on ped, a percentage of the edges in the adjacency matrix were
selected by random selection. Then, a random number was extracted from a uniform distribution
between 0 and 1 for each position selected. If the random number was bigger than the associated
weight in the E matrix, the edge was dropped from the adjacency matrix and edge-weight matrix.
The edge weight was thus used to scale the probability of the edge being dropped. The scaling
21
==PAGE:30==
ensured that key edges were not dropped as often. The edge-noise augmentation added Gaussian
noise with mean 0 and standard deviation 0.05 to a percentage of the edges pen.
Lastly, sub-graphs were generated by random walking through the graph with walk-length l, starting
from a random position in the CDR region, using the second-order random walk algorithm from
Node2Vec [73].
Hyperparameters associated with the random augmentation thus include the number of mutated
nodes nm, the number of dropped nodes nd, the percentage of the dropped weights ped, the percentage
of edges with added noise pen and the random walk length l, which were all selected during Bayesian
parameter optimization.
3.11
CDR-BLOSUM45 matrix
To induce mutations that result in CDR regions with similar biophysical properties, an antibody-
speciﬁc variant of the BLOSUM45 matrix was developed. The BLOSUM matrix is a 20x20 matrix
that indicates the log-odds scores for all amino acid substitutions derived from a dataset of aligned
protein sequences and calculated based on the formula shown below [74].
s(a,b) = 1
l log pab
fa fb
(12)
Here, pab is the probability that amino-acid a is substituted for b in the database of aligned protein
sequences, fa and fb are their background frequencies, and l is a scaling factor set to 0.15 [74].
To obtain an antibody-speciﬁc mutation matrix, the BLOSUM matrix was reverse-engineered by
focusing on substitutions within the CDR region of antibodies. Thus, by isolating pab from the
log-odds equation shown above, the substitution probabilities can be estimated using the following
equation.
pab = fa fb exp(s(a,b)·l)
(13)
Here, the log-odds ratio score s(a,b) was derived from the BLOSUM45 matrix and the frequencies fa,
fb were based on the amino acid frequencies found in the approximately 291,077 CDR regions of the
OAS database described in section 3.1.1. Thus, a new 20x20 matrix was created with the probability
of switching one amino to another, calculated based on the log-odds ratio from the BLOSUM45
matrix and the background distribution of the amino-acids in CDR regions of antibodies, shown in
ﬁgure 3. To ensure that the probabilities summed to 1, each row of the matrix was normalized with
respect to the sum of the probabilities.
22
==PAGE:31==
(a)
Figure 3: Amino acid frequencies in the CDR regions of the 291,077 paired antibody sequences derived from
the non-redundant OAS database
To induce mutations using the CDR-corrected BLOSUM matrix, a random position in the protein se-
quence was ﬁrst selected. A random amino acid was then picked based on the probability distribution
from the corrected BLOSUM of the amino acid currently at that position.
3.12
AbLang
To obtain high-level representations of antibody sequences and induce mutations yielding biophys-
ically similar antibodies, the large protein language model AbLang was used [75]. AbLang uses
a transformer architecture inspired by the roBERTa model with 12 transformer encoder layers,
capturing the evolutionary constraints of amino acids and their interactions with surrounding amino
acids in the protein sequence [76]. Like similar protein-language models, AbLang is trained using
a self-supervised strategy to predict masked and switched residues on a large dataset of known
antibody protein sequences derived from the OAS database [75, 58]. Two different AbLang models
were trained. One model was trained for the heavy chain of the antibody using a dataset consisting
of 14,126,724 sequences, while the other was trained on 187,068 light chains. The AbLang model
consists of two modules: AbRep, the transformer module that creates the representations from the
antibody sequences, and AbHead, which uses a series of dense layers to map the representations
to predict the likelihood of each amino acid at each position. The AbRep module thus outputs the
23
==PAGE:32==
residue embedding of each amino acid in the context of the protein sequence, which consists of an
Nx768 matrix where N is the number of amino acids used to embed the protein sequences, while
AbHead outputs an Nx20 likelihood representation of each amino-acid.
3.12.1
Inducing mutations using AbLang
To induce mutations in the antibody sequences, the Nx20 likelihood representation from the AbHead
module was used. These likelihoods were ﬁrst converted into probabilities which was achieved by
using a softmax transformation applied to each position in the antibody sequence chain using the
formula below.
s(ai) =
eai
Â20
j=1 eaj
(14)
Here, ai denotes the likelihood of amino acid i, and the denominator is the sum of the exponentiated
likelihoods of all 20 amino acids at a given position. A mutation was then induced by ﬁrst picking a
position in the Nx20 probability matrix to mutate. To bias the mutations towards positions where
multiple different amino acids could occur, a normalized "variation score" for each position was
calculated. This was done by using the Shannon entropy score, which measures the uniformity of
the distribution at each position and can be seen below [77].
Hp = −
20
Â
i=1
s(ai)logs(ai)
(15)
Here, Hp denotes the Shannon entropy score for position p, and s(ai) is the probability of amino
acid i at the position. A higher entropy score suggests a position where multiple different amino
acids could be present. These Shannon entropy scores were normalized using another softmax
transformation, converting the variation score at each position into a probability. A position in the
Nx20 probability matrix was then selected, weighted by the variation scores. At the chosen position,
a new amino acid was selected based on the probability distribution of amino acids.
3.13
AntiFold and ESM-IF1
The inverse-folding model AntiFold was used to obtain high-level representations of antibody
structures and induce mutations that result in structurally similar antibodies [78]. The AntiFold
model is based on a self-supervised inverse-folding model trained to predict which sequences fold
into a desired structure. This is achieved by predicting masked amino acids given the 3D coordinates
of the backbone atoms of the protein structure.
24
==PAGE:33==
AntiFold is based on the general protein inverse-folding model ESM-IF1 but ﬁne-tuned on antibody
structures [79, 78]. The ESM-1f model has a hybrid model architecture leveraging both Graph neural
networks and transformer architectures [79]. Speciﬁcally, the ESM-IF1 uses 8 GVP-GNN (Graph
Neural Network Geometric Vector Perceptron) layers, 8 Transformer encoder layers and 8 decoder
layers. The GVP-GNN layers capture rotation-equivariant and translation-invariant structural features
from an input graph derived from the protein structures. These structural features are then passed
into the transformer architecture, which uses attention to learn high-level features of the structures,
which are then mapped to amino-acid predictions through the decoder layers. The general protein
ESM-IF1 inverse-folding model is trained to predict the amino-acid sequences on 16 thousand
experimentally solved CATH structures and 12 million predicted structures from the UniRef50
dataset using AlphaFold2 [79, 34].
Based on the ESM-IF1 model, the AntiFold model ﬁne-tuned the ESM-IF1 model on predicted and
solved antibody structures. Fine-tuning from the general protein inverse folding model ESM-IF1
enabled AntiFold to beneﬁt from existing knowledge learned by ESM-IF1. AntiFold was ﬁne-tuned
on 2,074 experimentally solved antibody structures derived from the SabDab database [80], and
147,458 predicted antibody structures derived from the OAS database, which were predicted using
AbodyBuilder2 [58, 33]. To avoid losing the information obtained from the ESM-IF1, layer-wise
learning rate decay was used to minimize the changes in the starting layers during [78]. The residue
embedding of the AntiFold model was obtained by passing the predicted structure of an antibody
into the AntiFold model and extracting the embeddings from the transformer layer, resulting in an
Nx512 matrix.
3.13.1
Inducing mutations using AntiFold and ESM-IF1
Using AntiFold, mutations were induced by passing the predicted structure into the model, which
returns an Nx20 matrix containing the predicted likelihood of the amino acids conditioned on the
coordinates of the backbone. Using these predicted likelihoods, mutations were induced using a
similar strategy as described in section 3.13.1, where the probabilities were ﬁrst calculated by
applying the soft-max function to the likelihood scores and picking the position to mutate based
on the normalized variation score. The mutations were then induced by weighting each amino acid
based on the probability distribution of the position.
3.14
K-nearest-neighbours for functional clustering of antibodies
To assess the clustering performance of the representations derived from the contrastive learning
setups, AbLang and AntiFold, against traditional strategies, including sequence and structural-based
25
==PAGE:34==
similarities, a leave-one-out K-Nearest-Neighbors (KNN) strategy was employed. In this strategy,
each antibody in a dataset was excluded and then annotated with the functional label (e.g., "Epitope
group," "IC50," "Binding capabilities") of the nearest antibody in terms of similarity.
Sequence similarity between antibody pairs was calculated as the hamming distance between the
IMGT-numbered amino acids in the CDR regions. This allowed for antibodies of different CDR
lengths as IMGT positions not shared between two antibodies were ﬁlled with a "-".
For structural similarity, the excluded antibody was annotated with the label of the structurally
most similar antibody, determined by the RMSD metric described in Section 3.4. Here, the distance
between antibodies of differing CDR lengths cannot be quantiﬁed, and thus, if no antibody shares
the same length as the antibody left out, no annotation will be made. In the case of representation
spaces derived from models trained via contrastive learning, the annotation was based on the highest
cosine similarity in representation space. Lastly, using the AbLang and AntiFold embeddings, the
closest antibody was deﬁned based on the Euclidian distance between the antibody representations.
3.14.1
Performance metrics for functional clustering
Based on the leave-one-out KNN approach, a list of predicted classes ˆy was generated, and to assess
how well the strategy performed in predicting y, four different evaluation metrics were calculated
due to the datasets often having a class imbalance, including accuracy, recall, precision and the
F1-score. To calculate these metrics, we want to obtain the number of True-positive, True-negative,
False-positive and False-negative predictions.
Since some datasets have multiple classes, each class was analyzed separately. For example, for a
list of predicted epitope groups (A, A, B, B, C), the list was split into three binary lists: (1, 1, 0, 0, 0)
for A, (0, 0, 1, 1, 0) for B, and (0, 0, 0, 0, 1) for C. Here, TP refers to the instances where an omitted
antibody was correctly identiﬁed with its epitope group. TN refers to cases where an antibody of a
different class was correctly not identiﬁed as the class under evaluation. FP represents the instances
where an antibody of a different class was incorrectly identiﬁed as the class being evaluated. Lastly,
FN accounts for the times an antibody of the evaluated class was misclassiﬁed into another class.
Using the summed TP, TN, FP and FN, the accuracy measure was calculated based on the following
equation.
accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(16)
For the remaining three metrics, precision, recall and the F1-score, the score was calculated separately
for each class and then averaged based on the number of observations in each class to obtain the
ﬁnal metrics. The precision scores were calculated using the following equation and represent the
26
==PAGE:35==
percentage of negative classes correctly identiﬁed as negative.
precision =
TP
TP + FP
(17)
The recall score represents the percentage of the correctly labelled positive class and is calculated
using the following equation.
recall =
TP
TP + FN
(18)
Lastly, the F1-score combines the precision and recall scores using their harmonic mean, and thus,
maximizing the F1 score implies simultaneously maximizing both precision and recall. The F1-score
is highly useful in the setting of a dataset with a class imbalance, as the TN is not considered. Thus
ensuring that the model can’t achieve high performance by only predicting the majority class.
F1 = 2· precision·recall
precision+recall
(19)
3.15
Immune repertoires for TargetT and TargetI
Due to conﬁdentiality constraints with the data sourced from Symphogen, speciﬁc details of the
experimental setup for generating antibodies targeting TargetT and TargetI cannot be disclosed.
Consequently, a general description that broadly outlines how the data was generated will be made
to ensure adherence to data-sharing agreements.
Both the TargetI and TargetT datasets were derived from human-like antibody repertoires developed
by immunizing individuals with either the TargetT or TargetI proteins. The paired antibody sequences
were then sequenced using a derivative of the single-cell V(D)J sequencing technology. The dataset
derived from TargetT consisted of multiple different immunization rounds, and thus, the original
dataset consisted of 15,624 paired antibody sequences. In contrast, the TargetI dataset only consisted
of 3,324 antibodies. Both libraries had annotated binding to the target molecule "TargetT" or
"TargetI" determined using an ELISA experiment [81].
Like the OAS-database (Section 3.1.1) and the SARS-Cov2 (Section 3.3), the sequences from both
immunization libraries were redundancy ﬁltered using the 6 concatenated CDR sequences followed
by MMseqs clustering with a minimum sequence identity of 80% and a coverage of 100% resulting
in 2268 antibodies binding the TargetT and 478 antibodies targeting TargetI.
27
==PAGE:36==
3.15.1
SPR binding competition assay
Epitope groups for 139 antibodies targeting the molecule TargetT were determined based on a
binding competition assay using the SPR Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) technology. The 139
antibodies were ﬁrst selected from the "TargetT" immunization library based on their ability to
bind the target molecule while maintaining as much diversity as possible. This was achieved by
selecting antibodies from different clonotypes. The 139 antibodies were then classiﬁed into 18
different epitope groups based on a binding competition assay using. The SPR technology measures
changes in the mass of biomolecules immobilized on a metal ﬁlm. This is achieved by measuring
the refractive index of the metal ﬁlm changes, resulting in a change in the reﬂection angle of light.
The SPR binding competition assay was performed by initially selecting 17 antibodies to immobilize
on an SPR sensor chip. These 17 antibodies were selected from the 139 antibodies based on differing
clonotypes to approximate the entire variability of the library. Secondly, "TargetT", the antigen, was
introduced to each sensor chip. Upon binding of TargetT to the 17 antibodies immobilized on the
chip, a second antibody from the panel of 139 was introduced. If the addition of the second antibody
resulted in a change of the mass measured by the reﬂection angle of light, it suggested that the two
antibodies recognized distinct epitopes on the antigen. Conversely, if the second antibody failed to
bind, it indicated overlapping or identical epitopes.
Based on these pairwise-competition assays, a AN,M matrix where N is 139, and M is 17 was
constructed. Thus, each row in the matrix corresponds to the SPR score against each of the 17 anchor
antibodies. Based on these scores, the epitope groups were created by clustering the 139 antibodies
by pairwise correlations, resulting in 18 unique epitope groups.
28
==PAGE:37==
4
Results
4.1
Including biophysical properties might improve functional clustering
Clustering antibodies based on their predicted CDR geometry has shown an improved ability to
group antibodies according to their preferred epitopes [19, 31]. However, currently deﬁned structural
similarity measures, like root-means-squared-difference (RMSD), fail to incorporate the biophysical
features of the amino acids they compare. As antibodies with similar CDR geometries might
exhibit different biophysical characteristics like charge and hydropathy, this might result in less
accurate clustering of antibodies. To identify whether structurally similar antibodies can exhibit
different biophysical features, structures of 2485 antibodies from the SARS-Cov2 dataset were
predicted using AbodyBuilder2 described in section 3.2.1 [33]. Based on these predicted structures,
a pairwise RMSD distance matrix was calculated for all length-matched antibodies in the dataset.
These structural similarity scores were then compared to charge and hydropathy similarity scores
calculated as described in section 3.5. The Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcient (SCC) between the
structural and charge similarity was found to be 0.11, while the SCC score between structural and
hydropathy similarity was found to be 0.16 across 26.0000 comparisons and can be seen visualized
in Figure 4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Correlation analysis between structural and biophysical similarity. Each point represents a compari-
son between two antibodies from the SARS-CoV2 dataset. The colour of the point represents whether the two
antibodies were found to bind the same epitope of the Spike protein. The grey line found at RMSD: 1.25 Å
visualizes the RMSD threshold used to cluster antibody structures based on their preferred epitope deﬁned by
Spoendlin et al. [19]. a) The x-axis shows the RMSD score between the antibodies’ CDR regions, and the
y-axis shows the absolute difference in the net-charge, with an associated SCC: 0.11 b) The x-axis shows
the RMSD score between the antibodies’ CDR regions, and the y-axis shows the absolute difference in the
average hydropathy, with an associated SCC: 0.16
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4 shows that antibodies with similar predicted CDR geometries can exhibit different biophys-
ical features like net-charge and average hydropathy scores. Interestingly, Figure 4.a also provides
evidence that antibodies with large differences in their net charge often bind different epitopes
despite the RMSD score being below the threshold deﬁned to cluster antibodies based on their
preferred epitope by Spoendlin et al. (1.25Å) [19]. This implies that structural similarity may not
fully capture the biophysical properties of the amino acids in the CDR regions and that incorporating
these features could improve the clustering of antibodies by their preferred epitopes. In addition
to being unable to capture the biophysical properties of the CDR regions, classical RMSD metrics
are also unable to quantify the structural similarity between antibodies with mismatched CDR
lengths. This is quite a signiﬁcant shortcoming as antibodies with differing CDR lengths can exhibit
similar CDR geometries [40]. Furthermore, calculating the pairwise structural similarities for large
antibody libraries is computationally expensive and thus unfeasible for larger libraries. To overcome
these limitations, strategies like FoldSeek[69] have been developed, which utilizes structurally
informed tokens to align protein structures, described in section 3.6. This allows for fast structural
comparisons even between proteins of different lengths. However, when evaluating the predicted
alignment scores obtained from FoldSeek with classical RMSD, a weak correlation of SCC 0.12
was found for 20.000 comparisons between antibodies derived from the SARS-Cov2 dataset. These
results indicate that FoldSeek was ineffective in identifying structurally similar antibodies, which
are shown in Supplementary Figure 1.
These results suggest the need for an alternative to RMSD that combines structural and biophysical
characteristics of the CDR regions, enhancing functional clustering antibodies regardless of CDR
lengths.
4.2
Semi-supervised contrastive learning for predicted antibody structures
To address these issues, this thesis aimed to generate a representation space of predicted antibody
structures that captures both the biophysical and structural features to improve the functional
clustering of antibodies. Inspired by recent approaches in contrastive learning for training graph-
neural networks (GNNs) to capture high-level features of proteins and small molecules, the goal was
to create this representation space using contrastive learning [57, 82, 72]. In contrastive learning, the
goal of the model is to obtain a representation space that minimizes the distance between similar
data pairs, referred to as ”positive pairs” while maximizing the distance between dissimilar referred
to as “negative pairs”. The quality and the features extracted by the model thus directly reﬂect the
relationship between the annotated positive and negative pairs.
30
==PAGE:39==
4.2.1
Capturing structural similarity using semi-supervised contrastive learning
To conﬁrm that a meaningful representation space can be created by using the predicted structures
of antibodies using a contrastive learning approach, a proof-of-concept model was ﬁrst created using
a "semi-supervised" approach. Here, the goal was to obtain a representation space that clustered
structurally similar antibody antibodies together. To achieve this, a GNN model was trained using
a dataset of 10,000 predicted antibody structures from the OAS database, described in section 3.2.
These 10.000 predicted antibody structures were then split into three subsets: a training, a validation,
and a test dataset using an 80/10/10 percentage split. Then, a "positive" observation was annotated for
each structure in the training dataset by selecting the antibody with the most similar CDR geometry,
measured by RMSD. Using the contrastive loss function NT-Xent (eq. 2), the model parameters
were updated by minimizing the distance between the positive observations while maximizing the
distance to all other observations in the minibatch, visualized in Figure 5, described in detail in
section 2.3.
(a)
Figure 5: For each observation in the dataset, a positive observation was annotated by identifying the closest
structural hit measured by RMSD. Both antibody structures were then encoded into two representations, z,
using the graph-neural-network encoder and projection head. Then, the distance between the representations
of the structurally similar antibodies was minimized while maximizing the distance between representations
from different proteins from the minibatch using the NT-Xent loss function.
By contrasting between structurally similar antibodies ("positive pairs") and random antibodies found
in the minibatch ("negative pairs"), the GNN model would theoretically learn the features of antibody
31
==PAGE:40==
graphs that indicate structural similarity. To quantify the structural information in the representation
space during training, the GNN encoder model was applied to the set of 1.000 antibodies from the
validation dataset to evaluate the correlation between the distance in the representation space and the
structural similarity measured by RMSD.
Hyperparameters of the GNN encoder, including the number of GCN layers, projection layers, the
embedding sizes, and the t score were determined by using a Bayesian parameter optimization
strategy, described in section 3.9.2. This strategy uses a Gaussian Process to ﬁt a predictive model to
identify the optimal set of hyperparameters most likely to yield the highest correlation between the
distance in the representation space and RMSD for the validation dataset. To identify the impact of
these hyperparameter choices, the correlation between the distance in the representation space and
RMSD during training was visualized for the last 10 hyperparameter conﬁgurations tested through
the Bayesian optimization process visualized in 6.a.
32
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6: a) SCC between distance in the representation space and RMSD for observations in the validation
dataset during the training of 10 out of 50 model conﬁgurations selected via Bayesian optimization. b)
Correlation between distance in the representation space and RMSD for the model selected by Bayesian
parameter optimization, with associated SCC: 0.55 (p-value « 0.05) c) MDS analysis on the representations
of the test dataset, with colour coding indicating total CDR length (red: 49, blue: 48, green: 47, orange: 46,
purple: 45). d) Boxplot of SCC correlations between distance in representation space and RMSD compared to
sequence similarity, based on 100 bootstrapped samples from the test set, each with 800 observations
Figure 6.a shows that all models exhibited an increased SCC between the distance in the repre-
sentation space and RMSD compared to the untrained models shown at epoch 0. This suggests
that all models were, to some extent, able to learn structural similarity using contrastive learning.
Furthermore, the somewhat stable performance across the 10 hyperparameter selections with SCC
ranging between 0.50 and 0.56 indicated that the number of GCN or linear layers did not signiﬁcantly
affect performance. However, it was found that the t-scaling factor in the NT-Xent loss function
was critical, as models with t > 0.01 struggled to learn structural similarity as indicated by the 3
33
==PAGE:42==
runs with t-scalling factor >0.01 shown in Supplementary Figure 2. The hyperparameters of the
best-performing model are in Supplementary Table 5.
The GNN model obtained from the Bayesian parameter optimization strategy was then applied to
the 1000 predicted structures from the test dataset to evaluate the correlation between the distance in
the representation space and the structural similarity measured by RMSD. For a set of approximately
200,000 structural comparisons restricted to length-matched antibodies, the SCC was found to be
0.55 (p-value « 0.01), with a sample of 1000 comparisons visualized in Figure 6.b. Comparatively,
the correlation between the sequence similarity and structural similarity measured by RMSD, an
SCC score of 0.49, was found, indicating a 6% increase when using the representation space of
the GNN. To assess signiﬁcance, 100 boot-strapped samples were retrieved from the test set with a
length of 800 to determine how often the representation space outperformed sequence similarity.
Here, the representation space had a higher SCC correlation than sequence similarity 100% of the
time. This indicated that the representation space contained signiﬁcantly more structural information
than sequence similarity, with the boot-strapped samples visualized in Supplementary Figure 6.d.
To assess how well the contrastive model performed compared to a more traditional supervised
learning method, a control model was generated with the same encoding architecture as the best-
performing architecture summarized in Table 5. However, instead of optimizing the model parameters
using the NT-Xent loss function, the model was trained using a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss
function to predict the actual RMSD scores between the two graphs. This was done using a network
architecture inspired by the Siamese-twin network architectures and can be seen visualized in
Supplementary Figure 3.a [83]. Interestingly, it was found that the predicted RMSD scores for the
200.000 pairwise structural comparisons showed a similar correlation with the actual RMSD, with
an SCC of 0.56, compared to the distance in the representation space obtained using semi-supervised
contrastive learning, visualized in Supplementary Figure 3.b and 3.c.
To visualize how the representation space of the model trained using contrastive learning distributed
the antibody structures in the test set, a Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) analysis was performed
on the pairwise cosine-distance matrix, as shown in Figure 6.d. Here two main sub-clusters were
found in the test set, approximately arranged by antibody lengths. Surprisingly, these clusters formed
without the model being trained to differentiate structures based on length but rather by minimizing
the distance between positive pairs. The two main clusters were not attributed to species differences,
as only human antibodies from the OAS database were used. Additional MDS analyses on the
pairwise RMSD and sequence-distance matrices for length-matched antibodies likewise revealed
two major clusters forming. This was found for all CDR lengths, indicating that the dataset generally
forms two main clusters. These two main subclusters were also observed in the representation
34
==PAGE:43==
space obtained from the supervised model; however, here, the antibodies were not clustered by their
lengths, as shown in Figure 3.
Lastly, to validate that the GNN model, in fact, learned to pull structurally similar antibodies together
by aggregating information along the protein graphs, a control model was trained by randomly
shufﬂing the edges of both antibodies in the positive pairs. The model was thus essentially trained to
minimize the distance between two antibodies with randomized amino-acid coordinates. Surprisingly,
the correlation between the distance in the embedding space and structural similarity did increase
from epoch 0 on the validation dataset, as shown in Supplementary Figure 9. However, the correlation
reached a plateau of around SCC 0.33, thus much lower than the SCC of 0.56 previously observed.
This indicates that the model did learn to aggregate information along the graph, effectively using
the predicted structure to obtain a stronger correlation with RMSD.
4.2.2
Clustering antibodies based on their preferred epitope using semi-supervised con-
trastive learning
Still, the goal of the project was to develop a representation space that clustered functionally similar
antibodies based on shared structural and biophysical features rather than capturing structural
similarity. Thus, to evaluate whether the representation space obtained from the GNN encoder
clustered antibodies according to their preferred epitopes, a dataset of 2485 non-redundant anti-
SARS-CoV2 antibodies was used. Each of the 2485 antibodies was annotated with an "epitope
group" based on the epitope they engage on the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the Spike protein
determined by a mutation escape proﬁling experiment described in section 3.3.1. The distribution of
the number of antibodies in each epitope group can be seen visualized in Figure 7.a.
35
==PAGE:44==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: a) Class distribution of epitope groups for the 2485 antibodies from the SARS-Cov2 dataset
deﬁned from epitope mutational escape dataset. b) Performance measures - accuracy, precision and recall - for
leave-one-out K-nearest-neighbours predictions of epitope groups for SARS-CoV2 dataset based on distance
in representation space.
The dataset of the 2485 antibodies was then split into two datasets: a validation and a test dataset,
using a 50/50 split and stratifying the split based on the annotated epitopes. The model obtained by
training to minimize the distance between structurally similar proteins from section 4.2.1 was then
applied to both datasets.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the representation space in clustering antibodies according to their
preferred epitopes, a leave-one-out K-nearest-neighbors (KNN) approach was employed. In this
method, each antibody in the dataset assessed (validation or test) was sequentially removed and
treated as a test case. The predicted epitope group of the test case was then determined by identifying
the epitope group of the nearest antibody in the remaining dataset based on their similarity in the
representation space, quantiﬁed by the cosine distance. This results in a set of predicted epitope
groups ("C", "A", "C"...) and a set of true epitope groups ("C", "A", "D2"...). Based on these
multi-class predictions, three performance metrics, including accuracy, precision and recall, were
calculated by treating each epitope group as a binary classiﬁcation problem and averaging the
performance of each class. This strategy is described in detail in section 3.14. The three different
performance metrics were used due to the dataset exhibiting a class imbalance, as shown in Figure
7.a. The performance measures obtained on the validation dataset during training of the GNN model
can be seen visualized in Figure 7 b. When the trained GNN model was applied to the test set of the
SARS-CoV2 dataset, the representation space yielded an accuracy score of 0.40, a precision score
of 0.35, a recall score of 0.34, and an F1 score of 0.34. For comparison, three baseline models were
created, including the classical sequence and structural-based similarity methods. The performance
36
==PAGE:45==
of these KNN models on the test set can be seen summarised in Table 1, and confusion matrices for
the sequence and structural-based methods can be seen in Supplementary Figure 10.
Random
Sequence similarity
Structural similarity*
Semi-supervised
Accuracy
0.115
0.47
0.47
0.40
Precision
0.08
0.46
0.42
0.35
Recall
0.08
0.40
0.41
0.34
F1-score
0.08
0.43
0.41
0.34
Table 1: Performance measures - accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score - for leave-one-out K-nearest-
neighbour approach where predicted epitopes were annotated with the closest hit by sequence or structural
similarity. For comparison, a random model with shufﬂed performance was used as a control. * Structural
similarity could only predict an epitope for 1082/1243 antibodies due to not all antibodies having a length-
matched CDR region.
As shown in Table 1, both the sequence- and structural-based similarity baseline strategies outper-
formed the representation space in clustering antibodies based on their preferred epitope in the
SARS-CoV2 test set. Additionally, although sequence similarity showed accuracy and recall scores
similar to the structural similarity model, a notable increase in the precision score was observed,
indicating that sequence similarity performs better in correctly identifying antibodies that bind to the
same epitope group. However, this might be caused by structural similarity measures being limited
to only comparing antibodies with the same IMGT annotations within the CDR region. Thus, if an
antibody has no observation with identical IMGT annotation with the CDR region, the antibody
will not get any annotated match. For the test set, the structural similarity-based method could only
predict labels for 1081 antibodies out of 1243.
These results suggested that although the representation space obtained from the GNN model
trained using contrastive learning contained more structural information than sequence similarity, as
indicated by Figure 6, the representation space did not outperform baseline methods in clustering
antibodies based on their preferred epitope.
4.3
Unsupervised contrastive learning with stochastic augmentations for
functional clustering of antibodies
Recent advances in contrastive learning, referred to as unsupervised contrastive learning, deﬁne
positive pairs based on randomly augmented versions of the input data and have demonstrated
state-of-the-art performance in instance discrimination tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, enzyme
class prediction, molecule function prediction, and protein fold predictions [57, 82, 72, 56, 55].
The idea behind unsupervised contrastive learning, in the context of protein graphs, is to generate
37
==PAGE:46==
random alternate views of the input graph, which are structurally similar to the original observation
but signiﬁcantly different from the remaining part of the dataset. By pulling graphs that only differ
slightly by their nodes and edges together while pushing graphs that are signiﬁcantly different apart,
the network would theoretically be able to learn to distinguish between structurally and biophysically
similar proteins. Inspired by this approach, four different graph augmentation strategies were used to
generate random alternate views of the antibody protein graphs, including node dropping, weighted
edge-dropping, edge noise, and node mutations, described in section 3.10.
To train the GNN encoder model, the set of 10.000 predicted antibody structures from the OAS
database was ﬁrst split into a training, validation and test set by using an 80/10/10 percentage split
using the same splits as in 4.2. During training, random augmented versions were generated for
the training data, and the model parameters were updated by minimizing the distance between the
original view and the augmented views using the workﬂow illustrated in Figure 8.
(a)
Figure 8: For each antibody in the training dataset, a positive pair was created by making a new graph
using stochastic graph augmentations, including node-dropping, edge-dropping, mutate-node and edge-noise.
Both graphs were then encoded into two representations using the graph-neural network and projection head
encoders. Using the NT-Xent loss function, the cosine-similarity between the representation of the positive
pair was maximized, while the cosine-similarity to all other observations in the minibatch was minimized.
38
==PAGE:47==
To obtain the representation space with the highest performance in clustering functionally similar
antibodies together, the hyperparameters of the GNN encoder were selected using a Bayesian
parameter optimization strategy by maximising the average of the accuracy, precision, and recall
scores obtained by the leave-one-out KNN approach on the SARS-Cov2 validation dataset. These
hyperparameters include t, batch size, learning rate, and model architecture (Number of GCN
and projection layers) as well as the hyper-parameters related to the stochastic augmentations,
including the number of dropped nodes, probability of edge-dropping, number of mutated nodes,
and % of perturbed edges. The hyperparameters of the best-performing model are summarized
in Supplementary Table 2. The performance measures - accuracy, precision, and recall - for the
resulting representation space calculated on the SARS-Cov2 validation dataset can be seen visualized
in Figure 9.a during the training of the model. For comparison, the representation space obtained by
minimizing the distance between structurally similar proteins from section 4.2 was shown. As shown
in Figure 9.a, the GNN model trained using unsupervised contrastive learning obtains an embedding
space that increasingly distinguishes between antibodies based on their preferred epitopes during
training and shows an increased performance compared to the model taught to minimize the distance
between structurally similar antibodies on the validation dataset. Likewise, the representation
obtained by using unsupervised contrastive learning showed a better performance in clustering
antibodies based on their preferred epitopes on the test set with an associated accuracy of 0.48,
precision of 0.43, recall of 0.42 and F1-score of 0.42. Still, the highest-performing representation
space found during the Bayesian parameter optimization strategy had nearly identical performance
to that of the sequence similarity baseline, which achieved an accuracy of 0.48, precision of 0.47,
recall of 0.41 and F1-score of 0.44 on the test dataset.
39
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9: a) Performance metrics — accuracy, precision, and recall — for the representation space in the
leave-one-out KNN predictions of preferred epitopes on the SARS-CoV2 validation dataset for the model
selected during Bayesian parameter optimization. b) SCC between distance in the representation space and
RMSD during the training of two models: one trained using stochastic augmentations ("unsupervised")
and the other trained with the closest structural hit from section 4.2("semi-supervised"). c) Performance
metrics — accuracy, precision, and recall — in the leave-one-out KNN predictions of preferred epitopes for
representation space obtained from a model trained with either 10,000 or nearly 290,000 observations. d)
Performance metrics — accuracy, precision, and recall — of the representation space for the leave-one-out
KNN predictions of preferred epitopes trained using various augmentation techniques: node augmentations,
edge augmentations, subgraph augmentations, or a combination of all augmentations.
This might be attributed to the representation space created using stochastic augmentations containing
no structural information. This was quantiﬁed by applying the GCN model to the 1,000 antibodies
from the validation split of the OAS database and assessing the correlation between the distance in
the embedding space and the RMSD measure for length-matched antibodies. As shown in Figure
9.b, the SCC between the distance in the embedding space and the RMSD-scores of the antibodies
40
==PAGE:49==
in the validation dataset decreased during training, which contrasts the structural "semi-supervised"
strategy trained in section 4.2. Additionally, the SCC between the embedding space and the RMSD
scores of the antibodies in the test set showed a correlation of 0.1. As the "semi-supervised" strategy
was effectively trained to minimize the distance between structurally similar antibodies, it was
unsurprising that the model trained using the unsupervised strategy performed worse. However, as
indicated by Figure 9.b, it was clear that the model lost structural information during training. To
verify that this was not caused by the model being trained on too few observations, the GNN was
re-trained on a dataset of approximately 290,000 predicted antibody structures derived from the OAS
database with the performance of the models visualized in Figure 9.c. Here, no notable increase in
the accuracy, precision and recall scores on the validation dataset was observed. Likewise, there was
no notable increase in performance on the test set with an associated accuracy of 0.49, precision of
0.45, recall of 0.43 and F1-score of 0.44 compared to the baseline model using sequence similarity.
The results of the trained model are summarized in Table 2.
Sequence similarity
Structural similarity*
Semi-supervised
Stochastic 10K
Stochastic 290K
Accuracy
0.47
0.47
0.40
0.48
0.49
Precision
0.46
0.42
0.35
0.43
0.45
Recall
0.40
0.41
0.34
0.42
0.43
F1-score
0.43
0.41
0.34
0.42
0.44
Table 2: Performance measures accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score for the leave-one-out KNN approach,
where predicted epitopes were annotated with the closest hit in the representation space of the models trained
using stochastic augmentations either trained 10K or 290K observations. For comparison, baseline models,
including random shufﬂing, sequence and structural similarity, were used for the test dataset. Likewise, the
representation space from the semi-supervised approach from section 4.2 was shown. * Structural similarity
could only predict an epitope for 1082/1243 antibodies due to not all antibodies having a length-matched
CDR region.
As the model performance of the unsupervised contrastive learning strategy seemed to create an
embedding space with no structural information, it was hypothesized that this might be caused by
the GNN model essentially learning a signal derivative of node similarity. This would be evident
if the model’s accuracy depended solely on the node augmentations while not being inﬂuenced by
edge augmentations, representing the structural changes between the antibody graphs. To investigate
this, a GNN model was re-trained only using either node augmentations or edge augmentations to
generate alternate views of the anchor protein graphs and was compared to the performance when
using all augmentations. Additionally, other graph-augmentation techniques, such as sub-graphs,
which have previously been shown to result in embedding spaces where functionally similar proteins
are clustered together, were used [72, 57]. The results can be seen summarized in Figure 9.d. Here,
it was evident that only the node augmentations increased the KNN’s ability to predict preferred
41
==PAGE:50==
epitopes, suggesting that the GNN representation space likely reﬂected node similarity rather than
combining the structural and biophysical information.
Furthermore, to verify that the decreased structural information was not a result of the positive pairs
being deﬁned based on a combination of real graph structure and augmented graph structures, a
second contrastive loss setup was attempted. In this setup, the positive pairs were deﬁned based
on two random augmentations of the same graph with the training setup shown in Supplementary
Figure 11.a. However, using this strategy, the representation obtained from the encoder performed
worse in clustering antibodies based on their preferred epitope, as shown in Supplementary Figures
11.b and 11.c. Still, structural information slightly increased during training, however, with the
correlation not increasing above 0.2.
These results indicated that training a GNN model using stochastic augmentations of the graphs
was unsuccessful in creating an embedding space that effectively combined the information from
sequence and structural similarity to increase the functional clustering of antibodies compared to
traditional strategies.
4.4
Unsupervised contrastive learning with data-driven augmentataions
The inability of the GCN model trained using unsupervised contrastive learning to capture structural
and biophysical features from the graphs might be attributed to the stochastic augmentations resulting
in non-real graph structures. Instead, it was hypothesized that creating positive pairs by mutating the
protein sequences of the input data from the OAS database to create new non-redundant sequences
and subsequently predicting the structures using AbodyBuilder2 would result in biophysically and
structurally similar antibodies. In order to obtain a meaningful representation space, the mutations
applied to the input data should thus result in antibodies with similar biophysical features and CDR
geometries. Three different strategies were applied to induce mutations. First, a CDR-corrected
BLOSUM45 matrix was created by normalizing the substitution probabilities from the BLOSUM45
matrix by the background frequencies of the amino-acid in the CDR regions of the OAS database
and is described in section 3.11 [74]. Secondly, the antibody-speciﬁc large language model AbLang
was used, which is trained to predict missing residues in antibody sequences from the OAS database,
described in section 3.12 [75]. Third, the antibody-speciﬁc inverse-folding model AntiFold was
used, which is trained to predict amino acids based on the coordinates of the backbone structures of
antibodies, described in section 3.13 [78].
Using these mutation strategies, new antibody variants were generated by iteratively mutating
positions in the protein sequence using each position’s amino acid distribution, given by either
42
==PAGE:51==
AbLang, Antifold or BLOSUM visualized in Figure 10 until the hamming distance between the
original and the mutated variant was above 20% (9-10 mutations). This was done to ensure that the
model could not easily distinguish between augmented antibodies and the remaining part of the
dataset, which was redundancy ﬁltered using a 20% hamming distance threshold.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 10: Logo-plot of proposed amino acids for antibody "0qs4w" derived from the OAS database. The
primary x-axis is the position in the antibody sequence denoted with the IMGT-numbering scheme, while the
secondary x-axis is the amino acid currently found at the position. The y-axis is the probability of each amino
acid calculated from each strategy. The colours of the amino acids denote their biophysical properties: acidic
(red), basic (blue), hydrophobic (black), neutral (green), and polar (purple). a) CDR-corrected BLOSUM45
matrix B) AbLang c) AntiFold.
43
==PAGE:52==
The mutations suggested by AbLang and AntiFold models, as shown in Figure 10.b and 10.c, mainly
occur in the CDR3 regions of the heavy and light chains found at positions 105-117 in the IMGT
numbering scheme. This contrasts the CDR-BLOSUM45 matrix, which only considers the amino
acid at the position.
To verify whether the suggested mutations result in structurally similar CDR regions, one mutational
variant was generated for each of the 10.000 antibodies in the OAS database. Then, the RMSD
between the CDR regions of the mutated variants and the original was compared between the three
strategies. For comparison, the RMSD distribution derived from the closest structural hits found in
section 4.2 was also visualized, along with the distribution of all pair-wise RMSD scores acting as
background. All 5 RMSD distributions can be seen visualized in Figure 11.
(a)
(b)
Figure 11: Distrobution of RMSD between original and mutated variants generated using CDR-corrected
BLOSUM45, AbLang and AntiFold compared to the background distribution of all pairwise RMSD scores
from the OAS as well as all of the closest structural hits. a) Histogram of RMSD scores, x-axis indicating
RMSD and y-axis indicating the distribution b) Box-plot of RMSD distributions.
As indicated by Figure 11, all three mutation strategies generate antibody variants that are more
similar to the anchor observations compared to the background distribution of all pairwise RMSD
comparisons from the OAS database. The median RMSD scores between the original and mutated
variants were 1.05Å for AbLang, 1.02Å for BLOSUM and 0.97Å for Antifold. Comparetively, the
median RMSD between the anchor and the background distribution was 1.6Å. Still, none of the three
methods had an RMSD score lower than the RMSD between the anchor and the closest structural
hit, with a median of 0.69 Å. Since the mutated variants are generally more similar to the anchor
observation than a randomly selected background set of antibodies, this could imply that if the model
learns to minimize the distance between the original and mutated variants, it might generalize to
44
==PAGE:53==
structurally similar antibodies, outside the training dataset resulting in a representation space where
structurally similar antibodies are clustered together.
Thus, a GNN model was trained to minimize the distance between the original and mutated variants
generated by BLOSUM, AbLang or AntiFold. In this setup, the 10.000 antibodies of the OAS
database were split into three datasets: a training, validation, and test dataset using the same splits as
in section 4.2 and 4.3. Then, the GNN econder model was trained to minimize the distance between
the original and mutated variants in the training dataset. Model hyperparameters were selected using
Bayesian parameter optimization to maximize the average of the accuracy, precision, and recall
scores obtained by the leave-one-out KNN approach on the SARS-Cov2 validation dataset. The
KNN performance for the representation space from the GNN model selected during Bayesian
parameter optimisation can be seen during training visualized in Figure 12 (a-c), compared to the
representation space obtained using stochastic augmentations.
45
==PAGE:54==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 12: a) Accuracy b) Recall c) Precision of representation space in the leave-one-out KNN predictions
of preferred epitopes on SARS-CoV2 validation dataset for models trained using the mutated variants from
CDR-corrected BLOSUM45 ("BLOSUM"), AbLang("AbLang") and AntiFold("AntiFold") compared to the
performance of the model trained using stochastic augmentations ("Stochastic"). d) SCC between distance in
the representation space and RMSD during the training of models trained using the three mutated variants
compared to the model trained using stochastic augmentations ("unsupervised") and the other trained with the
closest structural hit ("semi-supervised").
Figure 12 (a-c) shows that the highest-performing model on the validation dataset used mutational
variants proposed by AntiFold, obtaining the best performance after 7 epochs, with an associated
accuracy of 0.49, precision of 0.43 and recall of 0.41 on the validation dataset. Still, the performance
was only slightly higher than the representation space created using the stochastic augmentations or
mutations proposed by AbLang or BLOSUM. The performance of all three representation spaces
on the test set of the SARS-Cov2 dataset can be seen summarized in Table 3 compared to baseline
models.
46
==PAGE:55==
Sequence
Structure*
AbLang
AntiFold
BLOSUM
Stochastic
Accuracy
0.47
0.47
0.48
0.49
0.48
0.48
Precision
0.46
0.42
0.43
0.44
0.40
0.43
Recall
0.40
0.41
0.41
0.42
0.38
0.42
F1-score
0.43
0.41
0.42
0.43
0.39
0.42
Table 3: Performance measures accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score for the leave-one-out K-nearest-
neighbour approach, where predicted epitopes were annotated with the closest hit in the representation space
of the models trained using the mutated variants of the BLOSUM45, AntiFold, or Ablang methods. For
comparison, a random model with shufﬂed performance was used as a control, and sequence or structural
similarity was used for the test dataset. * Structural similarity could only predict an epitope for 1082/1243
antibodies due to not all antibodies having a length-matched CDR region.
As shown in Table 3, the highest-performing representation space was obtained using the AntiFold
mutations; however, the sequence-similarity baseline model still had the highest performance in
clustering antibodies based on their preferred epitope quantiﬁed by the F1-score. Furthermore,
although the mutational variants created using AbLang, AntiFold, and BLOSUM generally had a
high structural similarity to the original antibodies, the signal the model learned to pull the positive
observations together did not result in an embeddings-space that effectively captured structural
similarity compared to the semi-supervised contrastive learning strategy trained in section 4.2.
This might be caused by some mutated variants having an RMSD score above the median of the
background distribution, as shown in Figure 11.b. These "low-quality" mutated variants might have
caused the low correlation between the distance in the representation space and the RMSD, as the
GNN model was learning to pull structurally different antibodies together. Thus introducing noise
into the representation space. This might also have decreased the performance of the representation
space in clustering functionally similar antibodies together. Thus, to attempt to minimize noise,
mutated variants with an RMSD score higher than the maximum observed in the distribution of
closest hits were excluded (see Figure 11.b). The GNN model was thus re-trained on mutated
variants with RMSD scores below 1.01 Å to the anchor observations for all three strategies. Using
these "high-quality" mutated variants, no notable increase in the accuracy, precision or recall scores
of the resulting representation space was observed, despite the correlation between the distance
in the representation space and RMSD scores slightly increasing across all models, as shown in
Supplementary ﬁgure 12.
Altogether, these results indicate that despite using mutated variants created by large protein language
models and inverse folding models, which are structurally similar while still non-redundant in
sequence, it did not improve the performance of the representation spaces in clustering functionally
similar antibodies and capturing structural similarity.
47
==PAGE:56==
4.5
Functional clustering antibodies using latent representations from protein
language and inverse folding models
As indicated by section 4.3 and 4.4, training a GNN model using contrastive learning, either
generating augmented views of the original graph with stochastic or data-driven augmentation,
did not result in an embedding space where functionally similar antibodies are clustered together
with notably higher performances compared to traditional baseline strategies. To assess whether
other more traditional self-supervised approaches can be used to derive meaningful representations
improving the clustering of antibodies based on their preferred epitope, the antibody-speciﬁc large
language model AbLang and inverse-folding model AntiFold models were investigated.
Although these models are trained using self-supervised "pretext" tasks that are not directly relevant
for clustering antibodies based on functionality, the latent representation derived from these models
may contain information related to the biophysical or structural characteristics of the amino acids [51,
50]. However, since both models provide residue-level embeddings, comparing the representations
of antibodies with different CDR lengths was not feasible. To overcome this, a length-independent
representation of the antibodies was obtained by summing the residue embeddings of amino acids in
the 6-CDR regions (HCDR1, HCDR2, HCDR3, LCDR1, LCDR2, LCDR3) and concatenating them,
as depicted in Figure 13. By using sums rather than averages, the representation implicitly encoded
the length of the CDR regions by the magnitude of the vector.
48
==PAGE:57==
(a)
Figure 13: The illustration shows how the residue embeddings concatenated into a length-independent
representation for either Heavy or Light chains of an antibody. Each column visualizes the residue embedding
of a single amino acid, with different coloured sections indicating the CDR regions. The embeddings of
the CDR regions are ﬁrst extracted using the IMGT-numbering scheme. For each CDR, the embeddings are
summed to form a length-independent representation. Finally, these CDR representations are concatenated in
the order of CDR1-CDR2-CDR3 to yield the overall chain representation. To obtain an antibody representation,
the CDR1-CDR2-CDR3 representations of the heavy and light chains are concatenated
To assess whether the representations obtained from the AbLang or AntiFold models contained
structural information, the correlation between the Euclidian distance in the representation spaces of
AntiFold and AbLang was compared to the RMSD scores for the approximately 200.000 length-
matched antibody pairs from the OAS database. For comparison, this correlation was also calculated
using the representation obtained from the general protein inverse-folding model ESM-IF1[79].
Here, it was found that the distance in the AntiFold embeddings had an SCC correlation of 0.69 with
the RMSD measures, while the AbLang representation distances had an SCC correlation of 0.54, and
ESM-1 had an SCC of 0.57. Thus, the AntiFold representations generally contained more structural
information than both AbLang and ESM-IF1 representations. To identify whether the differences in
structural correlations were signiﬁcant, 100 boot-strapped samples were derived from the 10,000
predicted antibody structures of the OAS database to identify how often AntiFold outperformed the
ESM-1f and AbLang models. Here, it was found that the AntiFold representations outperformed all
three methods 100% of the time, with the results being summarised in 14.b. Interestingly, it was
also found that if the residue-embeddings derived from the AntiFold model were averaged rather
than summed using the strategy visualized in Figure 13, the correlation between the distance in
49
==PAGE:58==
the embedding space and the RMSD scores decreased by almost 11% as shown in Figure ??.b. To
visualize the correlation between the distance in the AntiFold embedding space and the RMSD
scores for length-matched antibodies, a sample of 1000 comparisons can be seen and visualized in
Supplementary Figure 13.
Additionally, a t-SNE visualization of the AntﬁFold embeddings of the entire OAS database can be
seen in Figure 14.a to assess how antibodies of differing lengths were distributed.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 14: A) t-SNE visualization of the length-independent AntiFold representations of the OAS database
with colour coding indicating total CDR length (red: 49, blue: 48, green: 47, orange: 46, purple: 45). B)
Boxplot of SCC correlations between distance in the representation obtained from Ablang and AntiFold
compared to sequence similarity and a length-independent representation derived from averaging the AntiFold
residue-embeddings. The SCC was calculated for 100 boot-strapped samples, each with a length of 10,000. c)
Close AntiFold Embedding different CDR lengths, d) Different AntiFold Embedding different CDR lengths,
Interestingly, multiple clusters of antibodies were formed in Figure 14.a, with each cluster having
a "gradient" of CDR-lengths where the antibodies with similar lengths were clustered closest. To
50
==PAGE:59==
identify whether the AntiFold representations could be used to compare antibodies of differing CDR
lengths, an example antibody 0je1k with a total CDR length of 43 was assessed. First, 2 antibodies
with different CDR lengths (length mismatch of 1) but similar AntiFold representations were identi-
ﬁed. Both had a distance of approximately 32 in the AntiFold representation space, corresponding
to an RMSD of 0.5 Å as indicated by Supplementary Figure 13. A structural comparison between
0je1k and the two antibodies with mismatched CDR lengths can be seen visualized in 14.c.
Comparatively, two antibodies with a length mismatch of 1 as well as dissimilar AntiFold repre-
sentations of approximately 70, corresponding to an RMSD of approximately 2.5 Å indicated by
Supplementary Figure 13, can be seen visualized in 14.d. Comparing the structural similarity of
the antibodies visualized in Figure 14.c and Figure 14.d, it was evident that the antibodies with
differing CDR lengths but similar AntiFold representations exhibited almost identical CDR region
geometries. On the other hand, antibodies with different AntiFold representations and CDR lengths
display differing CDR geometries. These results might suggest that the AntiFold embeddings allow
for structural comparisons between antibodies of differing lengths, which cannot be quantiﬁed using
traditional structural comparison methods like RMSD.
To further investigate whether the representations derived from the AbLang and AntiFold models
can be used to cluster antibodies based on their preferred epitopes, the 2485 antibodies from the anti-
SARS Cov2 epitope mutation escape dataset were passed through both the AbLang and AntiFold
models to obtain a length-independent representation of their CDR regions. To visualize how the
two representation spaces distribute the antibodies from the dataset, a t-SNE visualization of both
the AbLang and Antifold, as well as the concatenated representation of both models, can be seen
visualized in Figure 15.
51
==PAGE:60==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 15: t-SNE visualization of the length-independent representations of the 6xCDR regions of the
2485 antibodies derived from the SARS-CoV2 dataset with colour coding the annotated epitope groups. a)
Visualization of AbLang representations b) AntiFold representations c) The concatenated representations
derived from the AbLang and AntiFold models
Figure 15.a and 15.b shows that the AntiFold and AbLang models generally distribute the antibodies
differently. This was most obvious in the bigger cluster of antibodies binding the F1 epitope found
at coordinates in (55,-15) in Figure 15.a where the same cluster of antibodies generally seem to
be distinctly different from the remaining part of the dataset. In contrast, 15.b indicates that the
antibodies are clustered together with multiple different antibodies binding different epitopes seen
at the coordinates (-40,-20). Furthermore, 15.c indicates that the concatenated embedding space
generally creates several small subclusters that seem distinctly different from the remaining dataset.
To quantitatively evaluate the performance of the AbLang, AntiFold and concatenated AbLang-
Antifold embedding spaces in clustering functionally similar antibodies, the leave-one-out KNN
52
==PAGE:61==
approach was employed on the entire anti-SARS Cov2 dataset. Thus, each antibody was annotated
with the epitope group of the closest hit measured by the Euclidian distance. The performance,
measured using accuracy, precision, recall and the F1-score, can be seen summarized for the three
representataion spaces, along with baseline models using sequence and structural similarity in Table
8.
Sequence
Structure*
AbLang
AntiFold
AbLang-AntiFold
Accuracy
0.48
0.48
0.53
0.50
0.57
Precision
0.47
0.42
0.50
0.46
0.52
Recall
0.41
0.41
0.49
0.45
0.51
F1-score
0.44
0.41
0.49
0.45
0.51
Table 4: Performance measures accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score for the leave-one-out KNN pre-
dictions for 2485 antibodies from the SARS-CoV2 dataset with annotated epitope groups. Epitope groups
were predicted based on the closest hit in the length-independent representations space derived from the
AbLang and AntiFold residue-embeddings along with the concatenated representations "AbLang-AntiFold".
For comparison, a random model with shufﬂed labels was used as a control, as well as sequence or structural
similarity. * Structural similarity could only predict an epitope for 2147/2485 antibodies due to not all
antibodies having a length-matched CDR region.
Table 8 shows that the highest-performing representation for functional clustering of antibodies
used the concatenated representation obtained from the AbLang and AntiFold models. To determine
whether this performance increase was signiﬁcant compared to the next-best strategy, which used
the AbLang representation, 100 boot-strapped samples were generated from the SARS-Cov2 dataset
of length 2000. A KNN model was subsequently ﬁt to each of the 100 samples to identify how often
the AbLang-Antifold representations outperformed the AbLang representations.
Here, it was found that the AbLang-Antifold representations outperformed the AbLang representa-
tions 100/100 times for accuracy, 97/100 times for recall, 98/100 times for precision and 97/100
times for the F1-score indicating that the AbLang-Antifold encodings performed signiﬁcantly better
than only using the AbLang encodings. Additionally, the same boot-strapping strategy was applied
to assess whether the AbLang-Antifold representations signiﬁcantly outperformed the sequence and
structural-based similarity baselines. Here, it was found that the AbLang-Antifold representations
outperformed both sequence and similarity methods 100% of the time across all three measures,
with the performance of the boot-strapped samples being summarised in Figure 16.
53
==PAGE:62==
(a)
Figure 16: Boxplot of performance measures accuracy, precision, recall and F1 scores calculated based on
100 bootstrapped samples from the SARS-CoV2 dataset, each with 2485 observations. Predictions of epitope
groups were performed using the leave-one-out K-nearest-neighbour representations space derived from the
AbLang and AntiFold residue-embeddings along with the concatenated representations "AbLang-AntiFold".
For comparison, a random model with shufﬂed labels was used as a control, as well as sequence or structural
similarity. For the boot-strapped samples, "self-hits" were not allowed. The x-axis indicates the different
performance measures, and each box is coloured based on the representations used in the KNN predictions
Thus, combining the residue-embeddings obtained from the large protein language model AbLang
and the inverse-folding model, AntiFold resulted in a representation-space that allowed for an
increased functional clustering of antibodies based on the preferred epitopes compared to traditional
comparisons like sequence and structural-based similarity methods. Additionally, it was found that
the inverse-folding representations captured more structural information compared to the protein
language model AbLang, sequence-similarity, and a general-purpose inverse-folding model ESM-
IF1. Lastly, the length-independent representation of AntiFold allowed for comparisons of structural
similarity across different CDR lengths, which contrasts alternative approaches like FoldSeek, which,
in section 4.1, was found not to capture structural similarity for antibody structures.
4.5.1
Clustering performance on external datasets
The representations derived from the AbLang and AntiFold models were then applied across three
distinct datasets and tasks to further conﬁrm the increased ability to cluster functionally similar
antibodies.
54
==PAGE:63==
First, to assess the ability of the AbLang-AntiFold representations to cluster antibodies with similar
neutralization efﬁciencies, the dataset of 2485 antibodies targeting SARS-CoV-2 was used. In
addition to the annotated epitope groups used in previous sections, the 2485 antibodies also had
associated neutralization scores. These neutralization scores were calculated for 7 different SARS-
CoV-2 variants (D614G, BA.1, BA.2, BA.2.75, BA.5, BQ.1.1, XBB) indicated by log10-transformed
IC50 values (µg/mL) determined by a pseudovirus infection model described in section 3.3.2. Using
the AbLang-AntiFold representations, the neutralization scores were annotated using a leave-one-out
KNN approach. This involved annotating each antibody with the neutralization score of its closest
hit. The ability of the representations to cluster antibodies based on their ability to neutralize the
SARS-Cov2 variants was then assessed by calculating the mean squared error (MSE) between the
predicted and actual log10(IC50) scores. Here, a lower MSE score indicates that the model tends
to cluster antibodies with similar neutralization scores together. For comparison, a leave-one-out
KNN approach was also used with sequence similarity and the AntiFold and AbLang representations
separately. Lastly, a control model was implemented using the annotated epitope groups from the
mutational escape proﬁle experiment described in section 3.3.1. In this approach, the log10(IC50)
scores were predicted by averaging the log10(IC50) scores of all antibodies within the same epitope
group. This was done to assess how much the epitope group determined the neutralization score.
The MSE scores for each of the strategies can be seen summarised in Table 5, and the distribution
of the log-10 transformed IC50 scores for each target can be seen summarised in Supplementary
Figure 14.
Random
Sequence
AbLang
AntiFold
AbLang-AntiFold
Epitope group
D614G
3.658
2.15
1.858
2.128
1.842
0.765
BA.1
2.222
1.605
1.339
1.513
1.312
0.829
BA.2
2.648
1.605
1.339
1.513
1.310
0.830
BA.2.75
2.51
1.505
1.332
1.516
1.310
0.791
BA.5
1.325
0.971
0.907
0.914
0.881
0.472
BQ.1.1
0.308
0.251
0.218
0.236
0.217
0.136
XBB
0.2618
0.217
0.209
0.221
0.204
0.126
Table 5: Mean-squared error (MSE) between predicted and actual log-transformed IC50 values (µg/µM)
from a pseudovirus neutralization assay. Predictions were based on the leave-one-out KNN approach, using
sequence or structural similarity, as well as distances in representation spaces from the AbLang and AntiFold
models, including their combined representation space. For comparison, random IC50 values were annotated
by shufﬂing the IC50 values in the dataset and an "Epitope group" positive control, where log10(IC50) values
are averaged for antibodies in the same epitope group as the omitted one, necessitating experimental epitope
identiﬁcation, were compared.
Table 5 shows that the computational clustering technique with the lowest MSE scores between
predicted and actual log10-transformed IC50 scores across all 7 SARS-Cov2 variants used the
55
==PAGE:64==
concatenated representations of the AbLang and AntiFold models. The only strategy that performed
better than the AbLang-AntiFold representation space was the control model "Epitope group", which
required experimental determination of the eptiope group. This suggests that the IC50 scores were
largely determined by the epitope to which the antibody bound. It was, therefore, unsurprising
that the highest performing model, excluding the "Epitope group" control strategy, utilized the
AbLang-AntiFold representation space as it was previously found to have the highest performance
in clustering antibodies based on their epitope groups, as shown in Table 8.
To further investigate if the representation space clustered antibodies based on their binding capa-
bilities, 2268 antibodies annotated with their ability to bind an immune-oncology target protein,
referred to as "TargetT", were used, described in section 3.15. This dataset had a class imbalance
with 1950 non-binders and 318 binders. Using a leave-one-out KNN approach, the antibodies were
annotated with their predicted binding ability. The results for the AbLang, AntiFold and concatenated
AbLang-Antifold representations can be seen summarized in Table 6 compared to the sequence and
structural similarity baseline models.
Random
Sequence
Structure*
AbLang
AntiFold
AbLang-AntiFold
Accuracy
0.76
0.84
0.81
0.79
0.82
0.83
Precision
0.13
0.41
0.35
0.37
0.36
0.40
Recall
0.13
0.21
0.36
0.37
0.40
0.42
F1-score
0.13
0.28
0.35
0.37
0.38
0.41
Table 6: Performance measures accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score for the leave-one-out KNN predic-
tions for 2268 antibodies targeting the protein "TargetT" with associated binding annotations from an ELISA
experiment. Binding capabilities (0 or 1) were predicted based on the closest hit in the length-independent
representations space derived from the AbLang and AntiFold residue-embeddings along with the concatenated
representations "AbLang-AntiFold". For comparison, a random model with shufﬂed labels was used as a
control, as well as sequence or structural similarity measures. *Structural similarity could only predict binding
for 1662/2268 antibodies due to not all antibodies having a length-matched CDR region
Table 6 shows that the model with the highest F1-score utilized the AbLang-AntiFold representation,
demonstrating superior performance in clustering antibodies based on their ability to bind the "Tar-
getT" protein in the class imbalanced dataset. Interstingly, the sequence-similarity-based clustering
achieved a precision score comparable to that of the AbLang-AntiFold representation space. Still,
the recall score of the sequence-based method is notably lower. This suggested that antibodies that
bind to TargetT were more likely to be in close proximity to other antibodies that also bind TargetT
in the AbLang-AntiFold embedding space, compared to sequence similarity. Conversely, the similar
precision scores indicated that non-binders have an equal probability of being in close proximity to
a binder when using either sequence similarity or the AbLang-AntiFold embeddings.
56
==PAGE:65==
These ﬁndings were found to be consistent with a set of 478 antibodies annotated with their ability to
bind an immune-oncology target protein, referred to as "TargetI". This dataset had a class imbalance
with 396 non-binders and 82 binders. The KNN performance measures for the AbLang, AntiFold
and concatenated AbLang-Antifold representations, along with the baseline models, can be seen
summarized in Table 6.
Random
Sequence
Structure*
AbLang
AntiFold
AbLang-AntiFold
Accuracy
0.73
0.80
0.75
0.78
0.75
0.79
Precision
0.21
0.36
0.32
0.36
0.33
0.40
Recall
0.21
0.15
0.40
0.39
0.42
0.46
F1-score
0.21
0.21
0.36
0.37
0.37
0.43
Table 7: Performance measures accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score for the leave-one-out KNN predic-
tions for 478 antibodies targeting the protein "TargetI" with associated binding annotations from an ELISA
experiment. Binding capabilities (0 or 1) were predicted based on the closest hit in the length-independent
representations space derived from the AbLang and AntiFold residue-embeddings along with the concatenated
representations "AbLang-AntiFold". For comparison, a random model with shufﬂed labels was used as a
control, as well as sequence or structural similarity measures. *Structural similarity could only predict binding
for 215/478 antibodies due to not all antibodies having a length-matched CDR region
Table 7 showed that the model with the highest F1-score used the AbLang-AntiFold representation
space, with an almost 20% increase compared to sequence-based methods and a 6% increase
compared to the AbLang model used separately. For TargetI, it was also observed that sequence-
based methods (sequence, AbLang) often had higher precision scores than structure-based methods
(structure, AntiFold). Conversely, structure-based methods often had higher recall scores compared
to sequence-based methods. As AbLang-AntiFold likely combines the structural information from
AntiFold and sequence-based information from AbLang, this might increase the ability of the
AbLang-AntiFold representation space.
The last dataset used to validate the AbLang-AntiFold representations used a subset of 139 antibodies
that bound the "TargetT" protein with annotated epitope groups derived from a binding competition
assay, described in section 3.15. The distribution of the number of antibodies found in each epitope
group can be seen visualized in Supplementary Figure 15. The performance measures of the
leave-one-out KNN predictions of the epitope groups for the AbLang, AntiFold, concatenated
AbLang-Antifold embeddings, as well as sequence and structural similarity, are shown in Table 8.
57
==PAGE:66==
Random
Sequence
Structure*
AbLang
AntiFold
AbLang-AntiFold
Accuracy
0.12
0.38
0.50
0.39
0.34
0.41
Precision
0.07
0.21
0.30
0.26
0.23
0.28
Recall
0.07
0.23
0.34
0.27
0.22
0.29
F1-score
0.07
0.22
0.32
0.26
0.22
0.28
Table 8: Performance measures accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score for the leave-one-out KNN pre-
dictions for 139 antibodies targeting the protein "TargetT" with annotated epitope groups from competition
assay. Epitope groups were predicted based on the closest hit in the length-independent representations space
derived from the AbLang and AntiFold residue-embeddings along with the concatenated representations
"AbLang-AntiFold". For comparison, a random model with shufﬂed labels was used as a control, as well
as sequence or structural similarity. *Structural similarity could only predict the epitope group for 58/139
antibodies due to not all antibodies having a length-matched CDR region
Table 8 revealed that the KNN approach, using structural similarity, was the most effective model for
clustering antibodies based on the epitope groups. However, due to its limitation of only comparing
antibodies with length-matched CDRs, it could only annotate 42% (58/139) of the antibodies, given
the high variability of CDR lengths in the dataset. The second highest performing KNN model
used the concatenated embedding space of the AbLang and AntiFold models, which outperformed
sequence similarity with a 6% increase in the F1-score and 2% increase compared to using the
AbLang model separately.
Altogether, these results indicated that using the concatenated AbLang-AntiFold embedding space
consistently improves the clustering of antibodies with respect to their function in three different
tasks, including the neutralization of SARS-Cov2, binding of two different immune-oncology target
proteins as well as improved performance in clustering antibodies based on epitope groups targeting
both Sars-Cov2 and immune-oncology targets proteins. These results highlight the robustness and
versatility of the concatenated AbLang-AntiFold embedding space in facilitating the clustering of
antibodies based on their functionality.
5
Discussion
5.1
Clustering antibodies based on their function is critical for improving
drug discovery
Grouping antibodies based on their ability to bind a speciﬁc epitope is crucial for understanding
immunology and developing new protein therapies [9, 10, 11, 13]. Traditionally, this has been
done through time-consuming and costly experimental methods like co-crystalization and bind-
ing competition assays, which are unfeasible for large antibody libraries often generated during
58
==PAGE:67==
therapeutic development [20, 21, 12, 13, 19]. Thus, prior computational clustering of antibodies
into functional categories could signiﬁcantly reduce the number of experiments that need to be
carried out or even remove the need for them entirely. Still, traditional methods clustering methods
rely on sequence or structural-based methods, which fail to incorporate key characteristics of the
complementarity-determining regions (CDR) that determine the antibodies’ binding capabilities
[19].
Inspired by recent advancements in representation learning and protein structure prediction, this
thesis aimed to create a mathematical representation of predicted antibody structures that effectively
capture the structural and biophysical features of the CDR regions. This was done to enhance the
clustering of antibodies based on their function. These representations were generated by training
a graph-neural network (GNN) architecture using three different contrastive learning approaches
as well as deriving high-level features from pre-trained self-supervised models, including the large
protein language models AbLang and the inverse-folding model AntiFold.
5.2
Generating positive pairs based on structural similarity fails to cluster
antibodies by function
When training a GNN model to extract high-level features from antibody structures using contrastive
learning, the goal of the model is to minimize the distance between similar data pairs, referred
to as ”positive pairs”, while maximizing the distance between dissimilar “negative pairs” in the
representation space. The quality and the features extracted by the model thus directly reﬂect the
relationship between the annotated positive and negative pairs [44, 54]. A proof-of-concept model
was initially developed to conﬁrm that training on predicted antibody structures could yield a
meaningful representation space. This model aimed to demonstrate that the relationship between
positive pairs was directly reﬂected in the resulting representation space.
The ﬁrst model, trained on 10,000 predicted antibody structures from the OAS database, aimed to
cluster antibodies based on structural similarity, using RMSD for deﬁning positive pairs [58]. The
quality of the resulting representation space was then evaluated by assessing the correlation between
the distance in the representation space and structural similarity measured by RMSD. Across 200,000
structural comparisons from a test set showed that the model’s representation space had an SCC
correlation of 0.55 with RMSD, outperforming sequence similarity with an associated SCC of
0.49 based on the hamming distance between IGMT-numbered protein sequences. Interestingly, the
representation space performed equally well as a GNN model with an identical architecture trained
using a supervised learning approach to predict the RMSD score. !!These results indicate that despite
59
==PAGE:68==
not explicitly being told the RMSD score, the model could re-construct the “structural similarity”
space by contrasting samples of positive and negative observations. Additionally, it was found that
the representation space obtained from the contrastive learning model clustered antibodies with
similar lengths closest, which was not the case for the embedding space obtained from the supervised
approach. This might be caused by the supervised approach multiplying the representation of the
two input graphs obtained from the GNN encoder before predicting the RMSD score. Consequently,
the embedding space produced in the supervised setting might not represent RMSD directly but
rather a derivative space where antibody multiplication facilitates RMSD capture.
Despite the contrastive model performing as well as a supervised model in capturing structural
similarity, both models only had a modest 7% increase in the correlation with structural similarity
compared to sequence similarity. This was surprising, especially for the GNN model trained with
the supervised learning approach, as the model only needed to learn an identity function for
the edge-feature matrix, which was implicitly given by the activation of the neighbouring nodes.
Comparatively, it has previously been found that predicting protein structural alignment scores like
the TM-alignment score has been quite successful given an embedding of two input proteins, thus
without explicit structural information [84, 50]. This contrast in performance may be either attributed
to the somewhat small dataset used to train the GNN models or the model architecture being unable
to capture structural similarity from the input graphs, which generalizes to structures outside the
training dataset.
Although the representation space obtained from contrastive learning captured structural similarity
to some extent, it did not outperform traditional sequence or structure-based methods in clustering
functionally similar antibodies. This was quantiﬁed by a leave-one-out KNN approach on a test
split of 1243 antibodies of the SARS-Cov2 dataset with annotated epitope groups derived from
an epitope mutational escape experiment. Here, the representation space achieved an F1-score of
0.34, compared to 0.43 for sequence similarity and 0.41 for structural similarity. The relatively low
performance of the model can likely be attributed to two main factors. First, the model encodes less
structural information compared to the conventional use of RMSD and likely does not encode the
biophysical features of amino acids in the CDR region. Second, the model has only been trained
on a subset of the most common CDR lengths from the OAS database, which likely inﬂuences
performance, considering the sensitivity of the representation space to variations in CDR lengths.
Still, deﬁning positive pairs based on structural similarity did result in a representation space that
encoded more structural information than sequence similarity. This performance was conditioned on
the structure of the graphs, as shufﬂing the edges resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in performance,
indicating that meaningful representation space was derived from the predicted protein graphs.
60
==PAGE:69==
5.3
Stochastic graph augmentations perform better at clustering antibodies
based on their function but are still outperformed by baseline models
A second GNN model, inspired by MolCLR and previous protein unsupervised contrastive learning
models, was trained by deﬁning positive pairs based on random alternate views of predicted antibody
structures [56, 57, 82, 72]. This approach used four stochastic augmentations: node dropping,
weighted edge-dropping, edge perturbations, and node mutations to create positive pairs. The
resulting representations were validated by their ability to cluster the test set of SARS-CoV-2
antibodies based on their preferred epitopes and the correlation with RMSD scores. Here, the
representations achieved an F1-score of 0.42, surpassing the model trained on structural similarity
(F1-score of 0.34) but not exceeding baseline models based on sequence or structural similarity
(F1-scores of 0.43 and 0.41, respectively). Furthermore, it was found that the representation space
did not contain any structural information, as the correlation between the distance in the embedding
space and structural similarity decreased during training.
To determine if the low performance of the representation space was a result of insufﬁcient data, a
common issue in contrastive learning, the dataset was expanded from 10 thousand to approximately
300 thousand predicted structures [44, 55, 72]. However, this signiﬁcant increase in the dataset size
did not yield a notable improvement in clustering functionally similar antibodies or in capturing
structural similarity. Instead, these low performances were likely due to the representation space
reﬂecting a signal derivative of sequence similarity rather than capturing high-level features of the
antibody graphs. This was investigated through an experiment where the model was only trained
on positive pairs generated using only node or edge augmentations. Here, it was found that model
performance relied solely on the node augmentations to obtain an embedding space that clustered
antibodies based on their preferred epitopes. With this in mind, the low correlation with structural
similarity was surprising as the SCC between structural and sequence similarity was found to be
0.49. Lastly, to assess if deﬁning positive pairs as two random alternate views of the same input
graph would enhance the GNN model’s performance, inspired by SimCLR and MolCLR, the model
was retrained using this approach [56, 55]. However, re-deﬁning the positive pairs using this strategy
resulted in a decrease in the performance with respect to epitope clustering but a slight increase
in the correlation with structural similarity. These low performances were quite surprising, as
training GNNs using unsupervised contrastive learning approaches has resulted in state-of-the-art
performances for several different instance discrimination tasks for proteins and small molecules
[55, 56, 72, 57].
These low performances might be attributed to the complex nature of the task and the quality of the
dataset used in this study. For instance, there is likely a notable structural and biophysical difference
61
==PAGE:70==
when differentiating between proteins based on their enzymatic functions. These differences are
likely related to the evolutionary constraints of the protein domains necessary for speciﬁc enzy-
matic functions [85, 86]. This contrasts with CDR loops of antibodies, where there are limited
co-evolutionary constraints, with CDR regions exhibiting similar geometries and biophysical features
[87, 88, 19]. Consequently, randomly augmenting an enzyme typically results in a structure still
resembling the original enzyme, whereas augmenting a CDR region of an antibody might lead to a
drastically different structure. This difference challenges the model’s ability to learn generalizable
features from the input data, potentially resulting in the model being forced to learn signals like node
similarity to minimize the loss function. Furthermore, this study was limited to training the GNN
models using predicted structures generated by the structure prediction tool AbodyBuilder2. Notably,
this tool exhibits its weakest predictive performance in modelling the HCDR3 loop, which is likely
critical for epitope determination, with an associated average RMSD of 2.81Å [33]. For comparison,
AlphaFold2 obtained an all-atom RMSD of 1.5Å on the CASP14 dataset [34]. The noise in the
predicted structures of AbodyBuilder2 might thus hinder the model’s ability to identify a signal that
generalizes across antibodies, especially when identifying similarities in the CDR regions. Despite
its limitations, AbodyBuilder2 has, however, been effective in previous studies, where clustering
antibodies by their predicted CDR geometries enhanced epitope-based clustering [19, 31].
5.4
Data-driven augmentations did not improve functional clustering but
slightly increased the structural information
To prevent non-biological protein graphs, positive pairs were instead generated by mutating the
protein sequence derived from the OAS database into new non-redundant sequences. The structures
of these mutated sequences were then predicted using the AbodyBuilder2 model [33]. Mutations
were proposed through three methods: a CDR-corrected BLOSUM matrix, the large language model
AbLang and the inverse folding model AntiFold[74, 75, 78]. By analysing the structural similarity
between the mutated variants and the original "wild-type" proteins, it was found that the mutations
yielded predicted structures that were closer to the original proteins than a background distribution of
all pairwise RMSD comparisons in the OAS database. Surprisingly, the BLOSUM matrix mutations
performed as well as the deep-learning approaches, despite only considering amino acid background
frequencies and the BLOSUM45 matrix. Comparatively, both AntiFold and AbLang models have
been trained on larger databases of antibodies, including the OAS database.
The high structural similarity between the original and mutated variants implies that the model might
learn to minimize the distance between structurally and functionally similar antibodies during a
contrastive learning approach. However, the representation space obtained from training a GNN
62
==PAGE:71==
using the mutated versions from either the BLOSUM-matrix, AbLang or AntiFold models did not
show an increased performance in clustering antibodies based on their preferred epitopes from the
SARS-Cov2 database compared to baseline models or previous models trained using stochastic
augmentations.
Furthermore, only the representation space obtained from training with AntiFold mutations contained
more structural information after training compared to an untrained network. This was unexpected
since the mutation from all three strategies demonstrated a similar RMSD-similarity distribution. It
implies that the amino acids proposed by AntiFold might carry more structural information than
those suggested by BLOSUM and AbLang despite having similar predicted structural similarities
by AbodyBuilder2. This could be caused by AntiFold focusing its mutations on regions crucial
for structural integrity, more so than AbLang or BLOSUM, resulting in the model obtaining more
structural information from the nodes. This might also explain why re-training on mutated variants
with RMSD scores below 1.01Å to the original observations for all three strategies, thereby mim-
icking the distribution of the closest structural hits, did not improve the model’s ability to learn
structural similarity during training. The signal the model learns when comparing structurally similar
antibodies together is likely thus not related to the structure of the graph but rather the evolutionary
constraints of which amino acids are likely to fold into the same loop geometries. This, to some
degree, also explains the somewhat low performance of the representation space trained on positive
pairs deﬁned from the closest structural hit.
Thus, training a GNN model using contrastive learning strategies was unsuccessful in creating a
representation space where the biophysical and structural characteristics of the amino acids in the
CDR region were effectively combined to increase the functional clustering of antibodies. This
was most likely caused by multiple issues, including the inability to generate positive pairs that
effectively encoded functional differences through contrasting with negative pairs. Furthermore, the
dataset used to train the models was limited to a database of predicted antibody structures where the
predictive quality of the most important CDR loop (HCDR3) might be too low to learn meaningful
relationships between the structural comparisons of antibodies.
Although various model architectures were explored, such as self-attention neuron pooling and
TOP-K pooling, these attempts yielded no performance improvements. However, using a GNN
architecture that explicitly encodes edge features in the ﬁnal embedding might improve the model’s
ability to identify structural similarities. By doing so, the model would rely less on learning implicit
structural similarity from node features and instead directly utilize the edge features. This could
include architectures such as the Geometric Vector Perceptron architecture or the Equivariant Graph
Neural Networks, which explicitly update structural features based on the structural and biophysical
63
==PAGE:72==
features of the surrounding neighbours [89, 90]. Furthermore, these networks are rotation equivariant,
which might result in the model being able to learn more complex geometric relationships between
functionally similar antibodies.
Likewise, including more complex amino-acid features during the graph construction, like using
residue embeddings from the AbLang or AntiFold, might increase the performance of the model,
as using informative node features often increases model performance [57, 84, 50]. However, as
demonstrated by this project, the positive pairs generated through stochastic or data-driven graph
augmentations did not achieve a representation space that encodes functional features effectively.
Consequently, the inclusion of these high-level features might not lead to a substantial increase in
performance but instead potentially introduce meaningless noise to the features.
Lastly, the model performance might be improved by changing the deﬁnition of the negative pair. In
this study, negative pairs were formed by comparing antibodies within the same minibatch, creating
"soft" negatives that might introduce noise to the gradient during training due to inherent similarities
among some antibodies. Instead, identifying "hard" negatives, which are antibodies less likely to
share biophysical and structural features, could enhance the quality of the representation space.
This might be achieved using the lowest likelihood scores derived from the AbLang, AntiFold, or
BLOSUM models with RMSD metrics for length-matched antibodies.
5.5
Representations derived from self-supervised models improved functional
clustering of antibodies and contain signiﬁcantly more structural infor-
mation compared to baselines
To assess the effectiveness of models trained with self-supervised "pre-text" tasks in capturing the
biophysical and structural characteristics of antibodies, representation generated by the AbLang and
AntiFold models was examined. This was achieved by generating a length-independent representation
of the CDR regions by summing the residue embeddings of the amino acids within the six CDR
regions. The embedding for each CDR region was subsequently concatenated.
To ﬁrst identify whether the representations contained structural information, the correlation between
the Euclidian distance in the representation spaces was compared to the RMSD score for almost
200.000 antibody pairs from the OAS database. Here, it was found that the AntiFold representations
contained signiﬁcantly more structural information compared to sequence-similarity, and the AbLang
model with associated SCC values of 0.69, 0.49, and 0.55, respectively. Interestingly, it was found
that calculating the mean across the CDR region rather than the sums resulted in a signiﬁcant
decrease in the structural information of the AntiFold representations, suggesting that the magnitude
64
==PAGE:73==
of the activations played a crucial role in capturing the structural information. Furthermore, it was
found that the length-independent representations of AntiFold could identify structural similarity
across length-mismatched CDR regions. These results suggest that although not trained for structural
similarity prediction, the AntiFold model implicitly learns how to differentiate between protein
structures during its pre-text task.
Furthermore, it was discovered that the concatenated representations from the AbLang and AntiFold
models consistently outperformed traditional sequence or structural similarity-based methods in
clustering antibodies based on their function. This was validated across three different datasets and
tasks, including binding, neutralization, and preferred epitope prediction, quantiﬁed using leave-one-
out KNN approaches. In the task of clustering antibodies based on their ability to bind a given target
protein, the AbLang-AntiFold representation space outperformed all methods tested.
For the dataset of 2268 antibodies with annotated binding scores against TargetT, the AbLang-
AntiFold space achieved an F1-score of 41% - surpassing sequence similarity with an increase in
13% and structural similarity with an increase of 7%. Likewise, for the 478 antibodies targeting
protein TargetI, the AbLang-AntiFold space achieved an F1-score of 43%, outperforming sequence
similarity by 22% and structural similarity by 7%. These results were unsurprising as previous large
language models have shown increased predictive performance in classifying binding capabilities of
antibodies [91]. However, up until now, it has not been shown that the representation space can be
directly used to cluster antibodies based on their binding capabilities. Interestingly, by evaluating
the F1-score, it was found that structural similarity methods generally outperformed sequence-based
methods when clustering antibodies based on their ability to bind the target proteins, especially
for the "recall" score indicating the percentage of the positive observations the model captures.
For TargetT, it was found that the AntiFold representations space had a 3% increase in the recall
score compared to AbLang the representations and a 19% increase in the recall score compared
to sequence similarity. Still, both sequences were similar, and AbLang had a higher precession
score than AntiFold. The same pattern was found for the TargetI proteins. These results indicate that
antibodies that bind to the target of interest often have similar binding-site geometries.
For the epitope group predictions, the AbLang-AntiFold likewise consistently outperformed all other
tested strategies. For the 2485 antibodies with annotated epitope groups targeting SARS-Cov2, the
concatenated AbLang-AntiFold representation space obtained an F1-score of 0.51% outperforming
sequence similarity with an 8% increase in the F1-score. Likewise, a 9% increase in the F1-Score
was observed compared to structural-based similarity clustering. In a binding competition assay
for 139 antibodies targeting an immune-oncology receptor protein "TargetT," the concatenated
AbLang-AntiFold representation space obtained an F1-score of 0.28%, which was a 5% increase
65
==PAGE:74==
in the F1 score compared to sequence-based methods. However, in this dataset, the structural
similarity-based method had the highest performance measures for clustering antibodies based on
their preferred epitopes. Still, this strategy only predicted the epitope groups for 42% of the dataset,
as it was restricted to length-matched comparisons. During the epitope clustering experiments, it
was generally found that the second highest-performing model was the AbLang representation
space, which previously was found to contain less structural information than AntiFold. This
indicated that the AbLang representations contained a different signal than structural similarity,
which helped cluster antibodies based on their preferred epitopes. Moreover, the effectiveness of
the concatenated representations suggested that the representations for each model have learned
different complementary signals from the antibodies, each contributing to the functional clustering.
Lastly, it was found that the AbLang-AntiFold representation space consistently outperformed all
other tested methods in clustering antibodies with similar neutralization scores across 7 different
SARS-Cov2 variants (D614G, BA.1, BA.2, BA.2.75, BA.5, BQ.1.1, XBB) determined by a pseudo-
virus neutralization experiment. The only method with more accurate clustering than the AbLang-
AntiFold representation space was the “Epitope group” predictions, which require experimental
classiﬁcation of epitope groups of the antibodies. These results suggested that the neutralization
score antibodies towards the SARS-Cov2 variants were largely determined by the epitope to which
the antibody bound, which matched previous ﬁndings [62, 63]. Therefore, it was unsurprising that the
highest performing model, excluding the "Epitope group" control strategy, utilized the concatenated
embedding space of AntiFold and AbLang as this representation space was found to have the highest
performance in clustering antibodies based on their epitope groups.
Altogether, these results demonstrate the considerable potential of representations derived from self-
supervised models like AbLang and AntiFold in the functional clustering of antibodies. By encoding
biophysical and structural features, these models surpass traditional sequence or structure-based
methods, showcasing superior ability in accurately clustering antibodies by epitopes, neutralization
scores, and binding properties. This advancement could provide deeper insights into the underlying
diversity of larger antibody libraries and can alleviate critical issues related to the development of
new antibody-based therapeutics.
6
Conclusion
This project aimed to develop a powerful representation of predicted antibodies that combined the
biophysical and structural characteristics of the CDR regions to enhance the functional clustering
of antibodies. Inspired by recent advances in contrastive learning, GNN model encoders were
66
==PAGE:75==
trained using three different contrastive learning strategies. First, a model was trained using a semi-
supervised strategy in which the GNN model aimed to minimize the distance between structurally
similar antibodies using a contrastive loss. Although this model outperformed supervised methods in
structural similarity predictions, it did not improve the functional clustering of antibodies compared
to baseline methods. Secondly, a stochastic approach was used to generate alternate views of the
input graphs, which the model attempted to minimize the distance between using a contrastive
loss. Although this strategy outperformed the semi-supervised approach in functional clustering of
antibodies, it did not outperform the baseline models. Lastly, a data-driven approach was used to
generate alternate views by inducing sequence mutations with BLOSUM, AbLang and AntiFold,
resulting in structurally similar CDR regions. However, none of the resulting representations spaced
outperformed baseline sequence or structural-based clustering methods. The low performances
of the representation spaces obtained from the GNN models were likely attributed to the positive
pairs, critical for effective contrastive learning, not reﬂecting the functional relationships between
antibodies. Furthermore, the dataset used to train the models was limited by a dataset of predicted
antibody structures from a model that showed the lowest predictive quality in the HCDR3 loop
critical for the function of the antibody.
However, combining the residue-embeddings derived from self-supervised models, AbLang and
AntiFold, into a length-independent representation resulted in enhanced clustering of antibodies
based on their function. Speciﬁcally, in a dataset of 2485 antibodies targeting SARS-CoV-2, the
representations achieved better clustering by the preferred epitopes on the Spike and by their neutral-
ization ability against seven different SARS-CoV-2 strains. Likewise, the combined representation
space also showed an improved clustering of antibodies based on their binding capabilities on two
separate immune-oncology receptor proteins, "TargetI" and "TargeT", with 479 and 2268 obser-
vations, respectively. Lastly, the representation space was also found to improve the clustering of
antibodies based on their preferred epitope on TargetT.
These performance increases across several different tasks, and datasets can likely be attributed to the
models capturing structural and biophysical characteristics of the CDRs region. This highlights the
advantages of using representations derived from self-supervised deep-learning models in clustering
antibodies based on their function. Using these representations likely gives better insights into the
underlying diversity of large antibody libraries supporting therapeutic antibody development.
67
==PAGE:76==
7
Further work
Further work includes showing that the trend of functional clustering of antibodies is not limited
to the datasets used in this study. Furthermore, this study primarily focused on functional clusters
of antibodies using a KNN approach, as it offered a straightforward way to directly assess and
compare how much information is stored in the sequence and predicted structures of antibodies.
However, to use these representations for clustering antibodies without prior knowledge about the
antibodies in the dataset, a global threshold and clustering algorithm need to be deﬁned for the
use of functional clustering of antibodies. Additionally, considering that the embeddings from the
AntiFold and AbLang models represent antibodies in a space susceptible to noise, a novel approach
using contrastive learning could be explored. This would involve artiﬁcially generating “augmented”
antibodies by introducing controlled noise into the antibody representations obtained from these
self-supervised models. Such an approach could simulate variations in antibody features, potentially
leading to the discovery of new antibodies with similar or enhanced functionalities. Furthermore,
these ﬁndings suggest that combining the embeddings derived self-supervised models with different
pretext tasks like protein language models and inverse folding models will pick up on different
signals. Combining the features of these models might result in an increased functional clustering of
not only antibodies but also other protein classes.
References
[1]
Inbal Sela-Culang, Vered Kunik, and Yanay Ofran. “The Structural Basis of Antibody-Antigen
Recognition”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 4 (2013). ISSN: 1664-3224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.
2013.00302. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2013.00302.
[2]
Wing Ki Wong, Jinwoo Leem, and Charlotte M. Deane. “Comparative Analysis of the CDR
Loops of Antigen Receptors”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 10 (Oct. 2019). ISSN: 1664-3224.
DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02454. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2019.
02454.
[3]
Bissan Al-Lazikani, Arthur M Lesk, and Cyrus Chothia. “Standard conformations for the
canonical structures of immunoglobulins 1 1Edited by I. A. Wilson”. In: Journal of Molecular
Biology 273.4 (Nov. 1997), pp. 927–948. ISSN: 0022-2836. DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1354.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jmbi.1997.1354.
[4]
Yuko Tsuchiya and Kenji Mizuguchi. “The diversity of <scp>H</scp>3 loops determines
the antigen-binding tendencies of antibody <scp>CDR</scp> loops”. In: Protein Science
68
==PAGE:77==
25.4 (Jan. 2016), pp. 815–825. ISSN: 1469-896X. DOI: 10.1002/pro.2874. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1002/pro.2874.
[5]
Bora Guloglu and Charlotte M. Deane. “Speciﬁc attributes of the VL domain inﬂuence both
the structure and structural variability of CDR-H3 through steric effects”. In: Frontiers in
Immunology 14 (July 2023). ISSN: 1664-3224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1223802. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1223802.
[6]
David B. Jaffe et al. “Functional antibodies exhibit light chain coherence”. In: Nature 611.7935
(Oct. 2022), pp. 352–357. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-05371-z. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05371-z.
[7]
Alexey Teplyakov et al. “Structural diversity in a human antibody germline library”. In:
mAbs 8.6 (May 2016), pp. 1045–1063. ISSN: 1942-0870. DOI: 10.1080/19420862.2016.
1190060. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19420862.2016.1190060.
[8]
Inbal Sela-Culang, Vered Kunik, and Yanay Ofran. “The Structural Basis of Antibody-Antigen
Recognition”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 4 (2013). ISSN: 1664-3224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.
2013.00302. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2013.00302.
[9]
Konstantinos Tsioris et al. “Neutralizing antibodies against West Nile virus identiﬁed directly
from human B cells by single-cell analysis and next generation sequencing”. In: Integrative
Biology 7.12 (2015), pp. 1587–1597. ISSN: 1757-9708. DOI: 10.1039/c5ib00169b. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C5IB00169B.
[10]
R. J. M. Bashford-Rogers et al. “Analysis of the B cell receptor repertoire in six immune-
mediated diseases”. In: Nature 574.7776 (Sept. 2019), pp. 122–126. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI:
10.1038/s41586-019-1595-3. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-
1595-3.
[11]
Bryan Briney et al. “Commonality despite exceptional diversity in the baseline human
antibody repertoire”. In: Nature 566.7744 (Jan. 2019), pp. 393–397. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI:
10.1038/s41586-019-0879-y. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-
0879-y.
[12]
Ruei-Min Lu et al. “Development of therapeutic antibodies for the treatment of diseases”. In:
Journal of Biomedical Science 27.1 (Jan. 2020). ISSN: 1423-0127. DOI: 10.1186/s12929-
019-0592-z. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z.
[13]
Brian Kelley. “Developing therapeutic monoclonal antibodies at pandemic pace”. In: Nature
Biotechnology 38.5 (Apr. 2020), pp. 540–545. ISSN: 1546-1696. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-
020-0512-5. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0512-5.
69
==PAGE:78==
[14]
Ruei-Min Lu et al. “Development of therapeutic antibodies for the treatment of diseases”. In:
Journal of Biomedical Science 27.1 (Jan. 2020). ISSN: 1423-0127. DOI: 10.1186/s12929-
019-0592-z. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12929-019-0592-z.
[15]
Zeng Wang et al. “Development of therapeutic antibodies for the treatment of diseases”. In:
Molecular Biomedicine 3.1 (Nov. 2022). ISSN: 2662-8651. DOI: 10.1186/s43556-022-
00100-4. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s43556-022-00100-4.
[16]
Marianne Brüggemann et al. “Human Antibody Production in Transgenic Animals”. In:
Archivum Immunologiae et Therapiae Experimentalis 63.2 (Dec. 2014), pp. 101–108. ISSN:
1661-4917. DOI: 10.1007/s00005-014-0322-x. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00005-014-0322-x.
[17]
Irene M. Francino-Urdaniz and Timothy A. Whitehead. “An overview of methods for the
structural and functional mapping of epitopes recognized by anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies”.
In: RSC Chemical Biology 2.6 (2021), pp. 1580–1589. ISSN: 2633-0679. DOI: 10.1039/
d1cb00169h. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/d1cb00169h.
[18]
Johan Nilvebrant and Johan Rockberg. “An Introduction to Epitope Mapping”. In: Methods
in Molecular Biology. Springer New York, 2018, pp. 1–10. ISBN: 9781493978410. DOI:
10.1007/978-1-4939-7841-0_1. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-
7841-0_1.
[19]
Fabian C. Spoendlin et al. “Improved computational epitope proﬁling using structural models
identiﬁes a broader diversity of antibodies that bind to the same epitope”. In: Frontiers in
Molecular Biosciences 10 (Sept. 2023). ISSN: 2296-889X. DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.
1237621. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2023.1237621.
[20]
Yasmina N. Abdiche et al. “Exploring blocking assays using Octet, ProteOn, and Biacore
biosensors”. In: Analytical Biochemistry 386.2 (Mar. 2009), pp. 172–180. ISSN: 0003-2697.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2008.11.038. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ab.2008.
11.038.
[21]
Yasmina Noubia Abdiche et al. “High-Throughput Epitope Binning Assays on Label-Free
Array-Based Biosensors Can Yield Exquisite Epitope Discrimination That Facilitates the
Selection of Monoclonal Antibodies with Functional Activity”. In: PLoS ONE 9.3 (Mar. 2014).
Ed. by Stefan Dübel, e92451. ISSN: 1932-6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092451.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092451.
[22]
Yasmina Noubia Abdiche et al. “Antibodies Targeting Closely Adjacent or Minimally Over-
lapping Epitopes Can Displace One Another”. In: PLOS ONE 12.1 (Jan. 2017). Ed. by
Nicholas J Mantis, e0169535. ISSN: 1932-6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169535.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0169535.
70
==PAGE:79==
[23]
Victor Greiff et al. “Bioinformatic and Statistical Analysis of Adaptive Immune Repertoires”.
In: Trends in Immunology 36.11 (Nov. 2015), pp. 738–749. ISSN: 1471-4906. DOI: 10.1016/
j.it.2015.09.006. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.it.2015.09.006.
[24]
Laura López-Santibáñez-Jácome, S. Eréndira Avendaño-Vázquez, and Carlos Fabián Flores-
Jasso. “The Pipeline Repertoire for Ig-Seq Analysis”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 10 (Apr.
2019). ISSN: 1664-3224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00899. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.3389/fimmu.2019.00899.
[25]
David B. Roth. “V(D)J Recombination: Mechanism, Errors, and Fidelity”. In: Microbiology
Spectrum 2.6 (Nov. 2014). Ed. by Martin Gellert and Nancy Craig. ISSN: 2165-0497. DOI:
10.1128/microbiolspec.mdna3-0041-2014. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/
microbiolspec.MDNA3-0041-2014.
[26]
Javier M. Di Noia and Michael S. Neuberger. “Molecular Mechanisms of Antibody Somatic
Hypermutation”. In: Annual Review of Biochemistry 76.1 (June 2007), pp. 1–22. ISSN: 1545-
4509. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.biochem.76.061705.090740. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1146/annurev.biochem.76.061705.090740.
[27]
Johannes F. Scheid et al. “Sequence and Structural Convergence of Broad and Potent HIV
Antibodies That Mimic CD4 Binding”. In: Science 333.6049 (Sept. 2011), pp. 1633–1637.
ISSN: 1095-9203. DOI: 10.1126/science.1207227. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1126/science.1207227.
[28]
M. Gordon Joyce et al. “Vaccine-Induced Antibodies that Neutralize Group 1 and Group
2 Inﬂuenza A Viruses”. In: Cell 166.3 (July 2016), pp. 609–623. ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI:
10.1016/j.cell.2016.06.043. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.
06.043.
[29]
Pramila Rijal et al. “Therapeutic Monoclonal Antibodies for Ebola Virus Infection Derived
from Vaccinated Humans”. In: Cell Reports 27.1 (Apr. 2019), 172–186.e7. ISSN: 2211-1247.
DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.03.020. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
celrep.2019.03.020.
[30]
Sarah A. Robinson et al. “Epitope proﬁling using computational structural modelling demon-
strated on coronavirus-binding antibodies”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 17.12 (Dec.
2021). Ed. by Franca Fraternali, e1009675. ISSN: 1553-7358. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1009675. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009675.
[31]
Wing Ki Wong et al. “Ab-Ligity: identifying sequence-dissimilar antibodies that bind to the
same epitope”. In: mAbs 13.1 (Jan. 2021). ISSN: 1942-0870. DOI: 10.1080/19420862.2021.
1873478. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19420862.2021.1873478.
71
==PAGE:80==
[32]
Cosimo Lupo et al. “Learning the statistics and landscape of somatic mutation-induced
insertions and deletions in antibodies”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 18.6 (June 2022). Ed.
by Andrew J. Yates, e1010167. ISSN: 1553-7358. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010167.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010167.
[33]
Brennan Abanades et al. “ImmuneBuilder: Deep-Learning models for predicting the structures
of immune proteins”. In: Communications Biology 6.1 (May 2023). ISSN: 2399-3642. DOI:
10.1038/s42003-023-04927-7. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42003-023-
04927-7.
[34]
John Jumper et al. “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold”. In: Nature
596.7873 (July 2021), pp. 583–589. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2.
[35]
Niels Banhos Danneskiold-Samsøe et al. “AlphaFold2 enables accurate deorphanization of
ligands to single-pass receptors”. In: (Mar. 2023). DOI: 10.1101/2023.03.16.531341.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.16.531341.
[36]
Douglas V. Laurents. “AlphaFold 2 and NMR Spectroscopy: Partners to Understand Protein
Structure, Dynamics and Function”. In: Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences 9 (May 2022).
ISSN: 2296-889X. DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.906437. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
3389/fmolb.2022.906437.
[37]
Marina A. Pak et al. “Using AlphaFold to predict the impact of single mutations on protein
stability and function”. In: PLOS ONE 18.3 (Mar. 2023). Ed. by Nediljko Budisa, e0282689.
ISSN: 1932-6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0282689. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0282689.
[38]
Liwei Chang and Alberto Perez. “Ranking Peptide Binders by Afﬁnity with AlphaFold**”.
In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition 62.7 (Jan. 2023). ISSN: 1521-3773. DOI: 10.
1002/anie.202213362. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/anie.202213362.
[39]
Daniel R. Ripoll, Sidhartha Chaudhury, and Anders Wallqvist. “Using the antibody-antigen
binding interface to train image-based deep neural networks for antibody-epitope classiﬁ-
cation”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 17.3 (Mar. 2021). Ed. by Charlotte M. Deane,
e1008864. ISSN: 1553-7358. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008864. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008864.
[40]
Jaroslaw Nowak et al. “Length-independent structural similarities enrich the antibody CDR
canonical class model”. In: mAbs 8.4 (Mar. 2016), pp. 751–760. ISSN: 1942-0870. DOI:
10.1080/19420862.2016.1158370. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19420862.
2016.1158370.
72
==PAGE:81==
[41]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http : / / www .
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[42]
Mikhail Belkin et al. “Reconciling modern machine-learning practice and the classical
bias–variance trade-off”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116.32 (July
2019), pp. 15849–15854. ISSN: 1091-6490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1903070116. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1903070116.
[43]
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation Learning: A Review
and New Perspectives. 2012. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1206.5538. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1206.5538.
[44]
Phuc H. Le-Khac, Graham Healy, and Alan F. Smeaton. “Contrastive Representation Learning:
A Framework and Review”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 193907–193934. ISSN: 2169-3536.
DOI: 10.1109/access.2020.3031549. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.
2020.3031549.
[45]
Alissa M. Hummer et al. “Investigating the Volume and Diversity of Data Needed for Gen-
eralizable Antibody-Antigen G Prediction”. In: (May 2023). DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.17.
541222. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2023.05.17.541222.
[46]
Veenu Rani et al. “Self-supervised Learning: A Succinct Review”. In: Archives of Compu-
tational Methods in Engineering 30.4 (Jan. 2023), pp. 2761–2775. ISSN: 1886-1784. DOI:
10.1007/s11831-023-09884-2. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11831-023-
09884-2.
[47]
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. “Making Pre-trained Language Models Better
Few-shot Learners”. In: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021. DOI:
10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.295. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.
acl-long.295.
[48]
Zhengxiang Shi et al. Rethinking Semi-supervised Learning with Language Models. 2023.
DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2305.13002. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13002.
[49]
Yiheng Liu et al. “Summary of ChatGPT-Related Research and Perspective Towards the
Future of Large Language Models”. In: (2023). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2304.01852. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.01852.
[50]
Zeming Lin et al. “Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a
language model”. In: Science 379.6637 (Mar. 2023), pp. 1123–1130. ISSN: 1095-9203. DOI:
10.1126/science.ade2574. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.ade2574.
73
==PAGE:82==
[51]
Joshua Meier et al. “Language models enable zero-shot prediction of the effects of mutations
on protein function”. In: (July 2021). DOI: 10.1101/2021.07.09.450648. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.09.450648.
[52]
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, Søren Hauberg, and Wouter Boomsma. “Learning meaningful rep-
resentations of protein sequences”. In: Nature Communications 13.1 (Apr. 2022). ISSN:
2041-1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-29443-w. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-022-29443-w.
[53]
Joshua Meier et al. “Language models enable zero-shot prediction of the effects of mutations
on protein function”. In: (July 2021). DOI: 10.1101/2021.07.09.450648. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.09.450648.
[54]
Ashish Jaiswal et al. “A Survey on Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning”. In: Technologies
9.1 (Dec. 2020), p. 2. ISSN: 2227-7080. DOI: 10 . 3390 / technologies9010002. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/technologies9010002.
[55]
Ting Chen et al. “A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations”.
In: (2020). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2002.05709. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.
05709.
[56]
Yuyang Wang et al. “Molecular contrastive learning of representations via graph neural
networks”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 4.3 (Mar. 2022), pp. 279–287. ISSN: 2522-5839.
DOI: 10.1038/s42256-022-00447-x. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42256-
022-00447-x.
[57]
Pedro Hermosilla and Timo Ropinski. “Contrastive Representation Learning for 3D Protein
Structures”. In: (2022). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2205.15675. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2205.15675.
[58]
Tobias H. Olsen, Fergus Boyles, and Charlotte M. Deane. “Observed Antibody Space: A di-
verse database of cleaned, annotated, and translated unpaired and paired antibody sequences”.
In: Protein Science 31.1 (Oct. 2021), pp. 141–146. ISSN: 1469-896X. DOI: 10.1002/pro.
4205. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pro.4205.
[59]
Martin Steinegger and Johannes Söding. “MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence
searching for the analysis of massive data sets”. In: Nature Biotechnology 35.11 (Oct. 2017),
pp. 1026–1028. ISSN: 1546-1696. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3988. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/nbt.3988.
[60]
Mathieu Dondelinger et al. “Understanding the Signiﬁcance and Implications of Antibody
Numbering and Antigen-Binding Surface/Residue Deﬁnition”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 9
(Oct. 2018). ISSN: 1664-3224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02278. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.02278.
74
==PAGE:83==
[61]
Peter Eastman et al. “OpenMM 7: Rapid development of high performance algorithms for
molecular dynamics”. In: PLOS Computational Biology 13.7 (July 2017). Ed. by Robert
Gentleman, e1005659. ISSN: 1553-7358. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005659. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005659.
[62]
Yunlong Cao et al. “Imprinted SARS-CoV-2 humoral immunity induces convergent Omicron
RBD evolution”. In: Nature (Dec. 2022). ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-022-
05644-7. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05644-7.
[63]
Yunlong Cao et al. “Omicron escapes the majority of existing SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing
antibodies”. In: Nature 602.7898 (Dec. 2021), pp. 657–663. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/
s41586-021-04385-3. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04385-3.
[64]
Jakub Otwinowski, David M. McCandlish, and Joshua B. Plotkin. “Inferring the shape of
global epistasis”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115.32 (July 2018).
ISSN: 1091-6490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1804015115. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.1804015115.
[65]
Tyler N. Starr et al. “Deep Mutational Scanning of SARS-CoV-2 Receptor Binding Domain
Reveals Constraints on Folding and ACE2 Binding”. In: Cell 182.5 (Sept. 2020), 1295–
1310.e20. ISSN: 0092-8674. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.012. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.012.
[66]
Jianhui Nie et al. “Quantiﬁcation of SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody by a pseudotyped
virus-based assay”. In: Nature Protocols 15.11 (Sept. 2020), pp. 3699–3715. ISSN: 1750-2799.
DOI: 10.1038/s41596-020-0394-5. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41596-020-
0394-5.
[67]
W. Kabsch. “A solution for the best rotation to relate two sets of vectors”. In: Acta Crys-
tallographica Section A 32.5 (Sept. 1976), pp. 922–923. ISSN: 0567-7394. DOI: 10.1107/
s0567739476001873. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1107/S0567739476001873.
[68]
Jack Kyte and Russell F. Doolittle. “A simple method for displaying the hydropathic character
of a protein”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 157.1 (May 1982), pp. 105–132. ISSN: 0022-
2836. DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(82)90515-0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
0022-2836(82)90515-0.
[69]
Michel van Kempen et al. “Fast and accurate protein structure search with Foldseek”. In:
Nature Biotechnology (May 2023). ISSN: 1546-1696. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-023-01773-0.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01773-0.
[70]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. 2014. DOI:
10.48550/ARXIV.1412.6980. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
75
==PAGE:84==
[71]
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P. Adams. Practical Bayesian Optimization of
Machine Learning Algorithms. 2012. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1206.2944. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1206.2944.
[72]
Yuning You et al. “Graph Contrastive Learning with Augmentations”. In: (2020). DOI: 10.
48550/ARXIV.2010.13902. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.13902.
[73]
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. “node2vec: Scalable Feature Learning for Networks”.
In: (2016). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.1607.00653. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.
00653.
[74]
Sean R Eddy. “Where did the BLOSUM62 alignment score matrix come from?” In: Nature
Biotechnology 22.8 (Aug. 2004), pp. 1035–1036. ISSN: 1546-1696. DOI: 10.1038/nbt0804-
1035. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nbt0804-1035.
[75]
Tobias H Olsen, Iain H Moal, and Charlotte M Deane. “AbLang: an antibody language
model for completing antibody sequences”. In: Bioinformatics Advances 2.1 (Jan. 2022).
Ed. by Thomas Lengauer. ISSN: 2635-0041. DOI: 10.1093/bioadv/vbac046. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioadv/vbac046.
[76]
Yinhan Liu et al. RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach. 2019. DOI:
10.48550/ARXIV.1907.11692. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692.
[77]
Paulo Saraiva. “On Shannon entropy and its applications”. In: Kuwait Journal of Science 50.3
(July 2023), pp. 194–199. ISSN: 2307-4108. DOI: 10.1016/j.kjs.2023.05.004. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.kjs.2023.05.004.
[78]
Magnus Høie et al. “AntiFold: Improved antibody structure design using inverse folding”.
In: NeurIPS 2023 Generative AI and Biology (GenBio) Workshop. 2023. URL: https://
openreview.net/forum?id=bxZMKHtlL6.
[79]
Chloe Hsu et al. “Learning inverse folding from millions of predicted structures”. In: (Apr.
2022). DOI: 10.1101/2022.04.10.487779. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2022.
04.10.487779.
[80]
Constantin Schneider, Matthew I J Raybould, and Charlotte M Deane. “SAbDab in the
age of biotherapeutics: updates including SAbDab-nano, the nanobody structure tracker”.
In: Nucleic Acids Research 50.D1 (Nov. 2021), pp. D1368–D1372. ISSN: 1362-4962. DOI:
10.1093/nar/gkab1050. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1050.
[81]
Linda Onyeka Anagu and Nana Efua Andoh. “Chapter 4 - Vaccine development: from the
laboratory to the ﬁeld”. In: Vaccinology and Methods in Vaccine Research. Ed. by Rebecca
Ashﬁeld et al. Developments in Immunology. Academic Press, 2022, pp. 95–131. ISBN: 978-
0-323-91146-7. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-91146-7.00011-1. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780323911467000111.
76
==PAGE:85==
[82]
Zuobai Zhang et al. “Protein Representation Learning by Geometric Structure Pretraining”.
In: (2022). DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2203.06125. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.
06125.
[83]
Gustavo H. de Rosa and João Paulo Papa. “Learning to weight similarity measures with
Siamese networks: a case study on optimum-path forest”. In: Optimum-Path Forest. Elsevier,
2022, pp. 155–173. DOI: 10 . 1016 / b978 - 0 - 12 - 822688 - 9 . 00015 - 3. URL: http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822688-9.00015-3.
[84]
Tymor Hamamsy et al. “Protein remote homology detection and structural alignment using
deep learning”. In: Nature Biotechnology (Sept. 2023). ISSN: 1546-1696. DOI: 10.1038/
s41587-023-01917-2. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01917-2.
[85]
Rahu Sikander et al. “Identiﬁcation of Enzymes-speciﬁc Protein Domain Based on DDE, and
Convolutional Neural Network”. In: Frontiers in Genetics 12 (Nov. 2021). ISSN: 1664-8021.
DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.759384. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.
759384.
[86]
Torgeir R. Hvidsten et al. “A Comprehensive Analysis of the Structure-Function Relationship
in Proteins Based on Local Structure Similarity”. In: PLoS ONE 4.7 (July 2009). Ed. by
Joel L. Sussman, e6266. ISSN: 1932-6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006266. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0006266.
[87]
Francis Gaudreault, Christopher R. Corbeil, and Traian Sulea. “Enhanced antibody-antigen
structure prediction from molecular docking using AlphaFold2”. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 13.1
(Sept. 2023). ISSN: 2045-2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-42090-5. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-42090-5.
[88]
Arjun K. Mishra and Roy A. Mariuzza. “Insights into the Structural Basis of Antibody Afﬁnity
Maturation from Next-Generation Sequencing”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 9 (Feb. 2018).
ISSN: 1664-3224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00117. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
3389/fimmu.2018.00117.
[89]
Bowen Jing et al. Learning from Protein Structure with Geometric Vector Perceptrons. 2020.
DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2009.01411. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.01411.
[90]
Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural
Networks. 2021. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2102.09844. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2102.09844.
[91]
Sarah M. Burbach and Bryan Briney. Improving antibody language models with native pairing.
2023. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2308.14300. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.14300.
77
==PAGE:86==
8
Supplementary materials
9
Supplementary ﬁgures
9.1
Justiﬁcaiton
(a)
Figure 1: Correlation analysis between a sample of 1000 predicted structural similarity measures from
FoldSeek and the RMSD measures calculated between length-matched antibodies for antibodies derived from
the OAS database.
Semi-supervised
(a)
Figure 2: Correlation between distance in the representation space and RMSD quantiﬁed using SCC during
the training of three models with a t-scaling factor above >0.01 resulting in the model being unable to learn.
78
==PAGE:87==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3: a) Visualization of supervised training pipeline. Two random length-matched antibodies from the
training split of the OAS database with an associated RMSD score are selected. These antibodies are then
passed through a shared GNN encoder followed by a linear layer projection. Subsequently, the projections are
combined using element-wise multiplication. The ﬁnal embedding obtained is mapped to an RMSD score
using an MLP with a ReLU activation function. b) Correlation between the predicted and actual RMSD
scores for the test set obtained from the model trained using supervised learning. c) SCC between predicted
and actual RMSD scores on the validation dataset during training compared to the SCC between distance in
representation space and RMSD for the model trained using the contrastive approach. d) MDS analysis on the
representations of the test dataset, with colour coding indicating total CDR length (red: 49, blue: 48, green:
47, orange: 46, purple: 45).
79
==PAGE:88==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Multi-Dimensional scaling (MDS) analysis on the pairwise distance-matrix for antibodies with a
total CDR length of 44 calculated using a) Structural similarity measured by RMSD b) Sequence similarity
was calculated using the hamming distance between IMGT-numbered CDR regions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Multi-Dimensional scaling (MDS) analysis on the pairwise distance-matrix for antibodies with a
total CDR length of 46 calculated using a) Structural similarity measured by RMSD b) Sequence similarity
was calculated using the hamming distance between IMGT-numbered CDR regions.
80
==PAGE:89==
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Multi-Dimensional scaling (MDS) analysis on the pairwise distance-matrix for antibodies with a
total CDR length of 47 calculated using a) Structural similarity measured by RMSD b) Sequence similarity
calculated using the hamming distance between IMGT-numbered CDR regions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: Multi-Dimensional scaling (MDS) analysis on the pairwise distance-matrix for antibodies with a
total CDR length of 48 calculated using a) Structural similarity measured by RMSD b) Sequence similarity
calculated using the hamming distance between IMGT-numbered CDR regions.
81
==PAGE:90==
(a)
(b)
Figure 8: Multi-Dimensional scaling (MDS) analysis on the pairwise distance-matrix for antibodies with a
total CDR length of 49 calculated using a) Structural similarity measured by RMSD b) Sequence-similarity
was calculated using the hamming distance between IMGT-numbered CDR regions.
(a)
Figure 9: SCC between distance in the representation space and RMSD during the training of models
trained using contrastive learning with stochastic augmentations ("unsupervised"), the closest structural hit
("semi-supervised"),the closest structural hit with shufﬂed edges ("Shufﬂed") compared to a model trained
using supervised learning to predict RMSD ("Supervised").
82
==PAGE:91==
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: Confusion matrix of epitope group predictions using leave-one-out KNN with similarity measured
by a) Structural similarity measured by RMSD b) Sequence similarity calculated using the hamming distance
between IMGT-numbered CDR regions.
83
==PAGE:92==
Appendix 3 - Stochastic
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 11: a) A positive pair was created for each antibody in the training dataset by making two new
graphs using stochastic graph augmentations, including node-dropping, edge-dropping, mutate-node and
edge-noise. Both graphs were then encoded into two representations using the graph-neural network and
projection head encoders. Using the NT-Xent loss function, the cosine-similarity between the representation
of the positive pair was maximized while the cosine-similarity to all other observations in the minibatch was
minimized. b) Performance metrics — accuracy, precision, and recall — for the representation space of the
GNN encoder model trained with stochastic augmentations using the approach in Figure 8 ("Stochastic")
and the GNN trained to minimize the distance between two augmented graphs shown in a. c) SCC between
distance in the representation space and RMSD during the training of models with contrastive learning with
stochastic augmentations as shown in Figure 8 ("unsupervised"), stochastic augmentations as shown a 8
("Unsupervised (SimCLR)") and a GNN trained by minimizing the distance between the closest structural hit
("semi-supervised"), compared to a model trained using supervised learning to predict RMSD ("Supervised").
84
==PAGE:93==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 12: a) Accuracy b) Recall c) Precision of representation space in the leave-one-out KNN predictions
of preferred epitopes for a model trained using the three "High-quality" mutated variants from CDR-corrected
BLOSUM45 ("BLOSUM"), AbLang ("AbLang") and AntiFold ("AntiFold") with 3685, 3616, 4307 obser-
vations respectively. For comparison the performance of the model trained using stochastic augmentations
("Stochastic"). d) SCC between distance in the representation space and RMSD during the training of models
trained using the three mutated variants compared to the model trained using stochastic augmentations
("unsupervised") and the other trained with the closest structural hit ("semi-supervised").
85
==PAGE:94==
(a)
Figure 13: Correlation between distance in the embedding-space of length-independent AntiFold representa-
tions for 1000 pairwise comparisons for length-matched antibodies from the OAS database.
86
==PAGE:95==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 14: Log10 transformed IC50 values derived from the pseudovirus neutralization experiment for the
SARS-Cov2 strains a) D614G, b) BA.1, c) BA.2, d) BA.2.75, e) BA.5, f) BQ.1.1, g) XBB .
87
==PAGE:96==
(a)
Figure 15: Distrobution of the epitope groups derived from competition assay for 139 antibodies targeting
"TargetT".
10
Supplementary tables
10.1
Semi-supervised
Parameter
Range
Optimized parameter
t
[0.0005, 0.05]
0.0075
GCN-layers
[1, 6]
5
Linear-layers
[1, 6]
2
Embedding-size
[126, 516]
516
Learning-rate
[10−5, 10−2]
10−4
Batch-size
[50, 400]
400
Table 1: Optimal set of model hyperparameters identiﬁed by Bayesian parameter optimization, demonstrating
the highest correlation between distance in the representation space and RMSD.
88
==PAGE:97==
10.2
Stochastic augmentations
Parameter
Range
Optimized parameter
t
[0.0005, 0.05]
0.0069
GCN-layers
[1, 6]
4
Linear-layers
[1, 6]
3
Embedding-size
[126, 516]
480
Learning-rate
[10−5, 10−2]
10−4
Batch-size
[50, 400]
400
nm
[0, 50]
16
nd
[0, 10]
5
ped
[0, 1]
0.3
pen
[0, 1]
0.2
Table 2: Optimal set of model hyperparameters identiﬁed by Bayesian parameter optimization, demonstrating
the highest leave-one-out KNN performance measured by the average accuracy, precision and recall scores
on the SARS-CoV2 validation dataset. The model was trained using positive pairs deﬁned by stochastic
augmentations. nm is the number mutations, nd is the number of nodes dropped, ped is the percentage of edges
dropped and pen is the percentage edges with noise added
10.3
Datadriven
Parameter
Range
Optimized parameter
t
[0.0005, 0.05]
0.007
GCN-layers
[1, 6]
5
Linear-layers
[1, 6]
3
Embedding-size
[126, 516]
500
Learning-rate
[10−5, 10−2]
10−4
Batch-size
[50, 400]
380
Table 3: Optimal set of model hyperparameters identiﬁed by Bayesian parameter optimization, demonstrating
the highest leave-one-out KNN performance measured by the average accuracy, precision and recall scores
on the SARS-CoV2 validation dataset using positive pairs deﬁned based on BLOSUM45 generated mutated
variants.
89
==PAGE:98==
Parameter
Range
Optimized parameter
t
[0.0005, 0.05]
0.0068
GCN-layers
[1, 6]
4
Linear-layers
[1, 6]
3
Embedding-size
[126, 516]
460
Learning-rate
[10−5, 10−2]
10−4
Batch-size
[50, 400]
360
Table 4: Optimal set of model hyperparameters identiﬁed by Bayesian parameter optimization, demonstrating
the highest leave-one-out KNN performance measured by the average accuracy, precision and recall scores on
the SARS-CoV2 validation dataset using positive pairs deﬁned based on AbLang generated mutated variants.
Parameter
Range
Optimized parameter
t
[0.0005, 0.05]
0.0074
GCN-layers
[1, 6]
5
Linear-layers
[1, 6]
3
Embedding-size
[126, 516]
460
Learning-rate
[10−5, 10−2]
10−4
Batch-size
[50, 400]
400
Table 5: Optimal set of model hyperparameters identiﬁed by Bayesian parameter optimization, demonstrating
the highest leave-one-out KNN performance measured by the average accuracy, precision and recall scores on
the SARS-CoV2 validation dataset using positive pairs deﬁned based on AntiFold generated mutated variants.
90
