==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Dynamic Modeling, Simulation, and Validation of
Molten Salt Reactors
Luke Labrie-Cleary (s213878)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The project herein implements a reduced model to simulate the dynamics of molten salt reactors. First,
results for similar work on the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) are replicated using a delay
differential equation solver, JiTCDDE. A Python API, msrDynamics is written to interface to JiTCDDE in
order to increase overall accessibility to the dynamic model as a tool, and to support more robust
model-building and analysis. This API is implemented for the MSRE and found to agree well with
existing results and experimental data. The same type of reduced model is then applied to the lesser-
studied Aircraft Reactor Experiment (ARE), which preceded the MSRE by about 10 years. Agreement
with experimental data for the ARE is, at first, mixed. However, significant data collection issues are
discussed in the experimental report. These issues resulted in much potentially valuable data being
discarded, and calls into question the validity of the existing data. Nevertheless, detailed analysis of the
surviving data allows for discrepancies to be uncovered, and a fairly coherent model to be developed,
with relatively few changes to the parameters.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in
Engineering in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, February 18, 2024
Luke Labrie-Cleary (s213878)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This work would not be possible without the guidance and insight of my supervisor, Tobias Ritschel,
Assistant Professor at DTU. His expertise in mathematical modeling, dynamical systems and control
theory, not to mention his enthusiasm for advanced nuclear technology, was helpful at every step, and
amounts to an invaluable contribution to the project.
I would also like to thank Aslak Stubsgaard, co-supervisor for this project, my supervisor for my
student job at Copenhagen Atomics for the last two years, and an academic and personal mentor. It
was actually Aslak who thought of the idea for this project, after reading the work of Singh et al. [30].
As a theoretical physicist and leader in the field of MSR technology, his expertise has been essential
in guiding the scope and aims of the project, keeping me up to date with the latest literature, and
providing introductions to other experts in the field.
A special thanks as well to Visura Pathirna, an expert in dynamic modeling of molten salt reactors.
He provided valuable guidance, particularly with respect to the nuances of the nodal modelling approach.
I would like to thank John Jørgensen, professor at DTU. John was my professor for a scientific
computing course, and I have him to thank for providing an introduction to Tobias.
This thesis was completed in collaboration with Copenhagen Atomics. As such, I would be remiss
not to express my gratitude to both DTU and the company for providing immense support to me in
the form of educational resources, professional experience, and access to bright minds.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Nuclear Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Reactor Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Molten Salt Reactors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Motivation & Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Neutron Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Heat Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Thermal Feedback
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Model
17
3.1
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
MSRE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
ARE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
API
33
4.1
Backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
MSRE
40
5.1
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Simulation Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
ARE
50
6.1
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.2
Simulation Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7
Discussion
74
7.1
MSRE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.2
ARE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.3
Possible Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8
Conclusion
77
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
A
Theory
78
A.1 Reactor Period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.2 Linearized Point Kinetics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
B
API
80
B.1
Duﬀing Oscillator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
B.2
Node Object
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C
MSRE Model
84
C.1 Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
C.2 Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
D
ARE Model
91
D.1 Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
D.2 Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
D.3 Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
Bibliography
109
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Nuclear Energy
Enrico Fermi’s announcement in 1942 that the oblong-spherical pile of graphite blocks laced with
60-pound uranium-oxide cans, nicknamed the ”Chicago Pile”, had become a self-sustaining nuclear
reaction heralded a new chapter in the history of man and energy; the nuclear age. The cans, consisting
of natural uranium, contained small amounts of the uranium isotope U235 which has a particular aﬀinity
for absorbing neutrons. The absorption excites the nucleus into a highly unstable state which causes
the atom to split or ”fission”. A fission event releases energy and, more importantly for Fermi at the
time, more neutrons. If on average one of these neutrons causes another fission event before escaping
the configuration or being absorbed by another atom, the reaction is self-sustaining. Under scrupulous
direction from Fermi, working underneath the University of Chicago’s football stadium, then abandoned
due to the war, the world’s first nuclear reactor became operational [13].
From an energy perspective, a fission event is violent. Resultant fission products fly apart at energies
on the order of 200 MeV [32]. For comparison, one molecule of natural gas or methane (CH4), when
burned, releases roughly 10 eV [9]. One fission event is thus 20 million times more energetic than the
combustion of one methane molecule. The magnitude of this energy density was the key promise of
nuclear energy in the mind of scientists like Fermi, and remains unmatched in the energy sector today.
Most of the energy from a fission event is in the form of kinetic energy of the fission products, which is
then deposited as heat in the surrounding material as the nuclei fly apart and collide with other atoms
[32]. The essential concept of a power-generating nuclear reactor is to extract this heat, and convert it
to electricity.
Today, just over seventy years after Fermi’s breakthrough at the Chicago Pile at the time of writing,
nuclear energy is a mature industry, comprising around 10% of global electricity generation [26]. A
modern reactor is a sophisticated system requiring specialized materials, highly trained personnel, and
a comprehensive safety apparatus. A single reactor typically offers around 1 GW of nameplate capacity
with thermal eﬀiciency comparable to that of a coal or natural gas plant, which is around 33% [18, 27].
There are several different commercial reactor designs in operation today, the most common of which
are pressurized water reactors (PWRs) and boiling water reactors (BWRs) [32]. These reactor types,
often collectively termed ”conventional reactors”, are based on light water reactor (LWR) technology.1
1.2
Reactor Design
Despite the development of reactor technology since the Chicago Pile, the core design concept in com-
mercial reactors has not significantly changed; solid fuel is assembled together with other requisite
materials and safety systems in order to safely maintain a chain reaction while extracting heat to pro-
duce electricity. The reactors mentioned above largely fall under what is considered to be the second
generation of nuclear reactors, the designs of which were finalized in the 1960s-1990s. Improvements
have been made in subsequent reactor designs maturing in the 1990-2015 period, particularly with
respect to passive safety features. These reactors are generally considered to be among the third gen-
eration of reactor design. [32]. In January of 2000, the US Department of Energy (DOE) convened
government representatives from the nine different countries. This group constituted the original mem-
bers of what would become the Generation IV International Forum (GIF); a cooperative international
1For more detail on the different reactor designs see Chapter 7 of Stacey (2018, p. 247).
==PAGE:9==
1.3 Molten Salt Reactors
2
initiative supporting the research and development of the next generation of reactor designs. Below is
a statement of purpose from the 2006 GIF charter:
The development of concepts for one or more Generation IV nuclear energy systems that
can be licensed, constructed, and operated in a manner that will provide a competitively
priced and reliable supply of energy to the country where such systems are deployed, while
satisfactorily addressing nuclear safety, waste, proliferation, and public perception concerns
[6].
In their 2006 ”Technology Roadmap”, the GIF outlines specific goals, timelines, as well as what
they deemed to be the most promising advanced reactor designs. Six different reactor concepts were
advanced as the most promising candidates for the next generation of nuclear energy.
Molten salt
reactors, the focus of the project herein, are among the six concepts recognized.2
1.3
Molten Salt Reactors
In a typical molten salt reactor (MSR), fissile fuel is dissolved in a molten fluoride salt. Fission in
the circulating fuel salt creates heat, which can be transferred to a secondary molten salt coolant loop
from which the heat can be used to generate electricity. The molten salt reactor concept offers several
distinct advantages over conventional reactors. Some of the most compelling include:
• Large negative temperature coeﬀicient of reactivity (α), i.e. an increase in temperature causes
a commensurate reduction in reactivity. Because the fuel is a fluid, thermal expansion pushes
the hotter fluid out of the core as it is heated, reducing the density of fuel within the core which
reduces the probability of fissioning nuclei to induce other fission events, and thereby reducing
the reactivity. This results in an effective, and completely passive regulation mechanism. The
negative temperature feedback is an important feature of the dynamic models herein, and will be
discussed in more detail.
• Continuous fission product removal. A typical LWR fuel cycle extracts around only 1% of the
energy content in the uranium fuel. Of the mined uranium, about 3% is lost in the enrichment
process3, and about 96% of the energy content remains in the fuel assemblies when they are
removed from the reactor and treated as waste [32, p. 234]. As the reactor operates, transmutation,
fission, and decay processes alter the composition of the fuel such that it can no longer sustain
a chain reaction.
This is due in part to the natural reduction of the primary fissile isotopes
as the reactor operates.
However, much more detrimental to the life-cycle of the fuel is the
buildup of fission products in the fuel, particularly Xenon-135 and Samarium-1494, which have
large neutron-capture cross sections, i.e. a high aﬀinity for absorbing neutrons, thus reducing
the neutrons available to induce fission and thereby reducing overall reactivity [32, p. 206]. In a
conventional reactor, these fission products remain cladded within the solid fuel. In a molten salt
reactor however, they circulate with the fuel and can in principle be removed continuously during
operation, greatly increasing the fuel utilization and neutron economy.
• Higher operating temperature (∼700◦C) results in higher thermal eﬀiciency.5. An MSR can reach
eﬀiciencies of ∼44%, compared with ∼33% for conventional reactors. [10, p. 8]
• High melting point of fluoride salts allows MSRs to operate at atmospheric pressure, reducing risk
of pressure vessel failure, and thus eliminating the need for large containment facilities.
2For more detail on the other GIF technology recommendations see ”A Technology Roadmap for Generation IV
Nuclear Energy Systems (2002)” [1].
3In the enrichment process, while the desired product is enriched uranium (with a higher fraction of U-235), the
byproduct is ”tails” or ”depleted uranium,” which has a lower fraction of U-235 than the natural uranium.
4Commonly known as ”neutron poisons”
5Recall Carnot’s relation for an ideal heat engine; eﬀiciency η = 1 −TH
TC
==PAGE:10==
1.4 Motivation & Problem Statement
3
• Lower pressure and higher heat capacity fuel enable compact design, which could enable mass
production [10, p. 8]
• Potential to use waste from current LWRs as startup fuel [10, p. 8]. Such a reactor is sometimes
referred to as a “waste-burner”.
• Reduced capital cost combined with a Thorium fuel cycle could in principle result in energy
production cheaper than that of coal.
Hargraves [14] argues that energy cost from Thorium
molten salt reactors could be < $0.03/kWh, compared to ∼$0.06/kWh for coal.
Molten salt reactors thus offer a scalable source of safe, high-density energy at low cost.6
Though the GIF’s identification of the MSR among the most promising designs for the fourth
generation of reactors has greatly renewed interest in the field, MSR research began as early as 1950
at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) in Tennessee.
Under the auspices of the recently
established Atomic Enegry Comission (AEC), ORNL initiated the Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion (ANP)
project, the goal of which was to investigate the possibility of nuclear powered aircraft [8]. Scientists at
ORNL realized that the high power density and inherent stability of a molten salt reactor would be the
best choice for aircraft nuclear propulsion. Efforts of the ANP projet culminated in the Aircraft Reactor
Experiment (ARE), during which they built and operated a 2 MW molten salt reactor. The duration
of the experiment was only a handful of weeks, but it was successful in demonstrating the feasibility
and high stability of a molten salt reactor. The ANP project was eventually abandoned, but interest
in molten salt reactors at ORNL continued through the 1960s. At the time, global uranium reserves
were estimated to be quite limited. Their stability and high fuel eﬀiciency were thus not attractive
in the context of commercial scalability of nuclear energy. MSR research at ORNL culminated in the
Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE), a commercial-scale reactor that operated for several years.
As Uranium proved to be more common than previously estimated, further research was abandoned
and the experimental results faded into obscurity.
Interest in the MSRE was revitalized following
declassification of several ORNL MSR experiments, along with the aforementioned recommendations
from the GIF.
1.4
Motivation & Problem Statement
Given the renewed interest in molten salt reactors (MSRs), it is important to refresh and expand
on the understanding of their design and behavior. Computational models enable us to explore the
behavior of complicated dynamical systems, like that of a molten salt reactor, in order to inform design
processes and analyze safety and stability characteristics. By creating an accurate and reliable dynamic
model, this project will provide insights into transient behaviors, feedback mechanisms, and can inform
control strategies, which are paramount for the successful deployment and operation of MSRs in the
future energy landscape. Ultimately, through this project, I aim to contribute to the safe and informed
development of MSRs, ensuring they fulfill their potential as a scalable, eﬀicient, and sustainable energy
source for the future.
The goal of the project herein is to implement, test and expand upon a dynamical modelling tech-
nique initially implemented by scientists at ORNL during the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE).
An important step will be to write an open-source tool for more accessible, transparent and robust im-
plementations of this type of dynamic model in Python. To validate the eﬀicacy of the tool, as well
as the modeling approach, the goals are to reproduce the results generated using MATLAB Simulink
for the MSRE from Singh et al. [30], and to implement a similar model for the lesser studied Aircraft
Reactor Experiment (ARE).
Such results will make accessible, and lend credence to, a tractable and robust modeling technique
that could be vital to the adequate operational safety, licensing and design of a burgeoning energy
technology.
6For more detail on the advantages of MSRs, as well as current commercial designs, see Dolan [10]
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
The final form of the model is a set of coupled differential equations describing the neutron and pre-
cursor populations, and the temperature of component masses. This chapter provides the theoretical
framework through which these equations are derived. Chapter 2.1 introduces the neutron transport
equation. Successive approximations lead to the point-kinetic equations. Chapter 2.2 discusses the
thermodynamic phenomena considered, and Chapter 2.3 presents the treatment temperature-reactivity
feedback.
2.1
Neutron Dynamics
Recall that fission events are caused by neutrons, and in turn release more neutrons, sustaining the
reaction and generating power in the form of heat. The neutron dynamics are therefore a key variable
for modeling reactor behavior. Highly accurate treatment of neutron dynamics can be achieved with
neutron transport theory. Successive approximations can be made to transport theory in order to arrive
at the point kinetics equations. Chapter 2.1.1 introduces the neutron transport equation. Chapter 2.1.2
describes the diffusion approximation to the transport equation, which allows for the final point-kinetics
approximation in Chapter 2.1.3.
2.1.1
Neutron Transport
The behavior of neutrons in a medium can be described by the neutron transport equation below [24,
p. 920].
1
v
∂ϕ
∂t + Ω· ∇ϕ + Σt(r, E)ϕ(r, Ω, E, t) =
Z
4π
Z ∞
0
{Σs(E′ →E, Ω′ →Ω)ϕ(r, E′, Ω′, t)} dE′dΩ′ + S (r, E, Ω, t)
(2.1)
Originally derived from the kinetic theory of gasses, the neutron transport equation is a balance equation,
and can be derived solely from the principle of particle conservation. The first term on the left-hand
side represents the change in the angular neutron flux ϕ, which is related to the angular neutron density
n by
ϕ(r, E, Ω, t) = v · n(r, E, Ω, t)
(2.2)
where r, E, Ωand t represent position, energy, solid angle direction and time respectively. Note, the
neutron flux ϕ is a scalar quantity defined as the number of neutrons passing through one square
centimeter per unit time, and thus has units ( neutrons
m2·s
).
It therefore essentially describes the total
number of neutrons on a control surface, which is exactly what is needed for determining relevant
reaction rates when multiplied by macroscopic cross-sections [24, p. 471-472].
The macroscopic cross-section, Σ, of a given material represents the probability of a given interaction
per meter travelled by a neutron, where σ has units of area1. Multiplying σ by the number density of
atoms N in the material yields the macroscopic cross section characteristic to that material, i.e.
Σ = Nσ
(2.3)
For example Σa would represent the total absorption probability per meter, such that Σadx would give
the probability of absorption along the path dx in a given material.2
1Typically expressed in barns; 1 barn = 1e−28m2
2For a derivation of the macroscopic cross-section from fist-principles, see Lee [22, p.
28-29].
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
5
The second term represents the net outflow or “leakage rate” of neutrons from the control volume,
and the third term represents possible particle interactions, such as scattering or absorption, which
could give neutrons a different energy and direction in the former, and eliminate it entirely in the latter,
and is thus referred to as the “removal rate”. The first term on the right-hand side is the “scattering
kernel”, and considers the scattering of neutrons of energy E′ with direction Ω′ into energy E and
direction Ω.
Lastly, the second term on the right-hand side represents external sources of neutron
production [24]. It is in this term that the production from fission would be included.3 In summation:
change in ϕ
z}|{
1
v
∂ϕ
∂t
+
Gain/Loss from motion + leakage
z                                }|                                {
Ω· ∇ϕ + Σt(r, E)ϕ(r, Ω, E, t) =
Gain from scattering
z                                                                 }|                                                                 {
Z
4π
Z ∞
0
{Σs(E′ →E, Ω′ →Ω)ϕ(r, E′, Ω′, t)} dE′dΩ′ +
External source/sinks
z        }|        {
S (r, E, Ω, t)
The transport equation is very accurate, but diﬀicult to solve for a number of reasons.
Firstly, as
expressed above, ϕ(r, E, Ω, t) is the primary unknown, which is a function of seven variables: r = (x, y, z),E,
and Ω= (θ, φ), Ωbeing the solid angle in spherical coordinates.4 Solving thus requires a solution as
a function of all seven variables.
This is particularly diﬀicult for the cross-sections, whose energy
dependence spans several orders of magnitude, ∼1eV to 10Mev, and contain large, narrow resonance
peaks [24, p.
181]. Figure 2.1 shows the energy dependence of the fission cross sections of a few of
the fissile isotopes. The prominent resonance peaks are visible in the lower energy ranges. Secondly,
derivatives are both spatial and temporal, meaning that it represents a partial differential equation,
and therefore generally more diﬀicult to solve. Lastly and most crucially, the equation contains both
derivatives and integrals, and thus belongs to a a class of differential equations known as “integro-
differential” equations, which are very diﬀicult to solve explcitly. Only approximate solutions under
certain conditions are known [24, p. 919-926].
2.1.2
The Diffusion Approximation
In Chapter 2.1.2.1, the diffusion approximation is invoked to eliminate angular (Ω) dependence from
the transport equation. In Chapter 2.1.2.2, delayed neutrons are considered within the diffusion ap-
proximation.
2.1.2.1
Without Delayed Neutrons
The neutron current, J, is a vector describing the magnitude of the neutron flux in the direction of J.
It can therefore be expressed as [24, p. 946]
J(r, E, Ω, t) = Ω· ϕ(r, E, Ω, t)
(2.4)
This relationship is therefore nonlinear with respect to Ω.
If however, it is assumed that the flux,
ϕ(r, E, Ω, t), depends only weakly on the direction Ω, then it can be said that ϕ possesses linear anisotropy
[24, p.
926]. This is to say that there exists a linear relationship between the angular neutron flux ϕ,
and the neutron current J. Assuming linear anisotropy, the directional dependence of ϕ, namely that
of Ω, can be integrated out of (2.1) to achieve an equation of the form [24, p. 928]
1
v
∂ϕ
∂t + ∇· J + Σa(r)ϕ(r, t) = S (r, t)
(2.5)
This requires an expansion of the angular flux in terms of spherical harmonics [22, p.
88], the details
of which are not discussed here.5 If it is then assumed that the neutron current J is proportional to the
negative gradient of the angular flux ϕ, i.e.
J = −D∇ϕ
(2.6)
3For more detail on neutron transport theorey, as well as a first-principle derivation, see Chapter 22 of Masterson [24,
p.
911].
4For more detail on solid angle, see Masterson [24, p.
914-15]
5For a detailed derivation of the diffusion approximation from transport theory, see Chapter 4, Section IV of Duderstadt
and Hamilton [11, p.
124].
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
6
Figure 2.1:
Fission Cross-Section Energy Dependence for U233(red), U235(green), P239(blue), and
P241(light green), Masterson [24, p. 181]
where D is the constant of proportionality known as the diffusion coeﬀicient, (2.5) becomes
1
v
∂ϕ
∂t −D∇2ϕ + Σa(r)ϕ(r, t) = S (r, t)
(2.7)
which is equivalent to the time-dependent neutron diffusion equation. It can be written more explicitly
in terms of fission and absorption cross sections as [24, p. 489]
1
v
∂ϕ
∂t = D∇2ϕ +

νΣf −Σa

ϕ(r, t) + S (r, t)
(2.8)
where ν is the average number of neutrons released per fission event. Note, (2.6) is simply a statement
of Fick’s Law of Diffusion [24, p.
477]. First correctly formulated by Adolf Fick in 1855 to describe
the flow of gas across a fluid membrane, it was later generalized to describe the flow of uncharged
particles in any medium; gas in air, dyes or solvents in water, and later neutrons in a nuclear reactor
[24, p. 474-475]. In essence, (2.6) states that uncharged particles in an area with some density will, on
average, tend to move in the direction of areas with lower density until a diffusive equilibrium is reached.
Figure 2.2 shows a one-dimensional illustration of Fick’s Law. In effect, invoking Fick’s law ignores the
directional dependence of ϕ that may result from effects like anisotropic scattering or inhomogeneous
material distribution, and instead considers it to behave purely stochastically, as a gas spreads in air.
Equation (2.8) therefore expresses the change in the neutron flux, now both scalar and isotropic, with
contributions from the ”leakage” term D∇2ϕ, which describes motion of neutrons in and out of the
control volume as a diffusion process, the ”reaction rate”

νΣf −Σa

ϕ(r, t), which describes the total of
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
7
x
ϕ
Jx(x)
dϕ
dx > 0 →Jx < 0
Jx(x)
dϕ
dx < 0 →Jx > 0
Figure 2.2: Fick’s Law in 1-D
neutron production (via fission) and destruction (via absorption), and the external source term, i.e.
change in flux
z}|{
1
v
∂ϕ
∂t
=
Leakage (diffusion)
z}|{
D∇2ϕ
+
production
z               }|               {

νΣf −Σa

ϕ(r, t) +
external source
z}|{
S (r, t)
(2.9)
Recall that ϕ is a scalar quantity expressing the number of neutrons passing through a control surface
per unit time. This is why the production term can be written simply as the product of ϕ and the
reaction cross sections Σf and Σa.
2.1.2.2
With Delayed Neutrons
The models implemented in the project herein focus primarily on the time-dependent behavior of the
reactors in question, and specifically on transient responses within seconds and minutes of a given
perturbation. Implicit in the above diffusion approximation are several key assumptions including;
1. The angular flux ϕ depends only weakly on the direction, Ω
2. There is no spacial dependence in the diffusion coeﬀicient D
3. All neutrons produced at time t are produced immediately
The first two tend to be accurate for thermal neutrons and for neutrons outside of the vicinity of strong
neutron absorbers (e.g. control rods), emitters (e.g. fissile material), or at sharp material boundaries,
around which the neutron transport equation may be needed to achieve desired accuracy [24, p.
912].
The last however, is not adequate when describing the transient behavior of a reactor on the desired
timescales on the order of seconds and minutes. This is due to the fact that some neutrons produced at
time t are not coming directly from fission events, but indirectly through the radioactive decay of the
different fission products. 6
Recall, the population of a given fission product N(t), can be described by the radioactive decay law
[24, p. 295]
N(t) = N0e−λt
(2.10)
where N0 is the starting population, and λ is the decay constant. The half-life of a radioisotope, T1/2, is
the time required for this population to decay to half of the initial population. It is a notable feature
6A “fission product” simply refers to the fission fragments after they have slowed down and acquired free electrons
[24, p.
649].
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
8
of exponential decay that half-life depends only on the decay constant λ, i.e.
T1/2 = ln(2)
λ
(2.11)
For this reason, delayed neutron precursors are grouped by the magnitude of their respective decay
constants, or equivalently, by their half-lives. For more detail on the radioactive decay and half-life, see
sections 6.28-6.35 of Masterson [24, p. 294-304].
Neutrons released directly from a fission event are released on the order of 10−10 seconds after the
fission process begins, which from the perspective of a reactor operation, is effectively instantaneous.
These are thus referred to as ”prompt” neutrons. Those released from the fission product decay are
released anywhere from tens of milliseconds to over a minute after the fission event, averaging around
13-20 seconds [24, p.
649-650]. These are referred to as ”delayed neutrons”, and the fission products
from which they are released, as ”delayed neutron precursors”. Figure 2.3 illustrates decay chain for
Br87, a fission product, with the associated half-life at each stage. Note, the decay of Kr87 into Kr86
Figure 2.3: Br87 Decay Chain, Lee [22, p. 183]
releases a neutron with T1/2 = 0.1ms. This is negligible compared to that of the decay of Br87 into Kr87,
which happens with a half-life of 59s. It is therefore the latter which governs the timescale at which Br87
as a fission product contributes neutrons to the system [22, p.
183]. By extension therefore, insofar
as the delayed neutrons are needed to maintain criticality, the timescale of delayed neutron production
determines the timescale of the system dynamics.7
Though they typically represent a small fraction of the total neutrons produced per fission (on the
order of 0.001%), the timescale on which they are produced is many (∼11) orders of magnitude larger
than that of the prompt neutrons [22, p.
183]. Therefore, without delayed neutrons, any non-zero
reactivity feedback, would be amplified more quickly than any control mechanism could react.8. It is
therefore vital to the description of the transient behavior of a reactor to account for delayed neutrons.
To account for the effects of delayed neutrons in the diffusion equation, the source terms are parti-
tioned to distinguish between prompt and delayed sources. S (r, t) is then expressed as
S (r, t) = S p(r, t) + S d(r, t)
(2.12)
7A system in a “prompt-critical” state, is sustained on prompt neutrons alone, and is therefore highly unstable.
8This is explained in more detail in Appendix A.1
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
9
where S p(r, t) represents prompt neutrons introduced by an external source and S d(r, t) represents de-
layed neutrons produced at time t. From (2.10), we have
C(t) = e−λt
(2.13)
where C(t) now represents the precursor concentration, i.e. C(t) = N(t)/N0. The change in the precursor
concentration, dCi(t)
dt , can therefore be expressed as
dC(t)
dt
= −λe−λt = −λC(t)
(2.14)
The negative sign reflects that the precursor concentration is decreasing with time due to decay, which,
in turn, contributes positively to the neutron population at the same rate. The delayed neutron source
term, S d(r, t), can therefore be written as
S d(r, t) = λC(r, t)
(2.15)
With uranium fuel, there are around 66 different delayed neutron precursors, each of which can
be further subdivided into around 20 decay chains, each with their own decay constants, and delayed
neutron yields. To account for these dynamics, the 20 different decay chains are typically collapsed into
groups of six or eight groups with averaged decay constants. Most time-dependent reactor behavior can
be represented using these groups [24, p. 649]. (2.15) therefore becomes
S d(r, t) =
n
X
i=1
λiCi(r, t)
(2.16)
where λi is the averaged decay constant, and Ci the concentration, of the ith precursor group, and n
is the number of precursor groups used for the given model. The models in this project will use six
precursor groups.
The other source term in (2.8) is vΣ f , which represents neutrons produced from fission events. This
term is now reduced using what is referred to as the delayed neutron fraction, β. The delayed neutron
fraction is expressed as the percentage of delayed neutrons produced on average from fission events9.
The fission source term thus becomes (1−β)vΣ f ϕ(r), and the time-dependent neutron diffusion equation,
(2.8), becomes
1
v
∂ϕ
∂t = D∇2ϕ + (1 −β)vΣf ϕ(r, t) −Σaϕ(r, t) + S (r, t)
(2.17)
where S (r, t) is partitioned as described by (2.12). This now represents the time-dependent neutron
diffusion equation including delayed neutrons [24, p. 648].
2.1.3
Point Kinetics Approximation
Point kinetics offers a further approximation to the above diffusion approximation (with delayed neu-
trons) which will reduce the dynamics to a system of ordinary differential equations. This is achieved
firstly by ignoring the space-time coupling of the neutron flux distribution, and subsequently ignoring
its shape altogether. What is left is a time-dependent, global description of the neutron population.
Mathematically speaking, the kinetics are now described a by a single scalar value; a point in phase
space. For this global description it is necessary introduce global measures to describe the neutron
population; namely the effective multiplication factor kef f and reactivity ρ.
9It can be equivalently described as the number of delayed neutrons that are produced from the fission of 100 atoms
of the fissile fuel [24, p. 648]
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
10
2.1.3.1
The Effective Multiplication Factor & Reactivity
The effective multiplication factor is a general way of quantifying how the neutron population might
change with time. As described previously, a reactor in an exactly critical state is characterized by
each fission event causing, on average, exactly one more fission event from the neutrons released from a
given fission event. This is to say that, on average, for every neutron lost, there is exactly one neutron
introduced, thus maintaining a stable neutron population. Intuitively, for an exactly critical reactor,
Neutrons produced = Neutrons lost
(2.18)
for every generation of neutrons produced. The effective multiplication factor simply takes the ratio of
these quantities, i.e.
kef f = Neutrons produced
Neutrons lost
(2.19)
and thus if production exceeds loss, kef f > 1 and the neutron population is increasing, similarly if loss
exceeds production, kef f < 1 and the neutron population is decreasing. When ke f f = 1, the reactor
is critical and the neutron population is stable.
It can also be expressed in terms of macroscopic
cross-sections as
kef f = Σp
Σl
(2.20)
where Σp is the macroscopic cross-section for production, e.g. via fission, and Σl is the macroscopic
cross-section for loss, e.g.
absorption or leakage.
For example, in a reactor where the only source
of neutrons are prompt neutrons from fission, and there is no leakage, only absorption, ke f f could be
expressed as
ke f f = νΣf
Σa
(2.21)
The reactivity, ρ, is related to kef f by [24, p. 405]
ρ = kef f −1
kef f
(2.22)
and therefore essentially expresses the deviation from criticality. This, as will be seen, is useful when
describing the global dynamics of the neutron population. Thus when a reactor is perfectly critical,
kef f = 1 and ρ = 0. If kef f > 1, then ρ > 0, and conversely if ke f f < 1, then ρ < 0. Similarly if neutron
loss begins to exceed production from fission, ρ < 0. Note, under the same assumptions as for (2.21),
reactivity ρ would become
ρ = νΣf −Σa
νΣ f
(2.23)
The term in the numerator, νΣf −Σa, can be seen as the net production rate, whereas νΣf is the
production rate via fission. Reactivity can therefore be interpreted equivalently as the ratio of net
neutron production, to the production from fission alone [24, p. 405].
Note, ρ is a dimensionless number that characterizes the time-dependent behavior of the neutron
population as a whole. As such, it can be used to characterize a range of phenomena that might affect
this behavior. Effects that positively or negatively influence reactivity can be described respectively
as a positive or negative reactivity “insertion”. For example, the withdrawal of a neutron-absorbing
control mechanism, by reducing the macroscopic absorption cross-section, Σa, for neutrons in the core,
would be considered a positive reactivity insertion.10
To reiterate, both ρ and kef f are global metrics, and not reflective of any internal variation within the
core. These global metrics allow for a more tractable form for describing the time-dependent behavior
of a reactor using point kinetics.
10To know the magnitude of such a reactivity insertion, necessarily requires a priori knowledge of the effect of the
control rod withdrawal on kef f . This is called “rod worth”, and needs to be experimentally determined.
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
11
2.1.3.2
Point-Kinetics Equations
For smaller reactivity changes, the time-dependent behavior of the neutron flux profile of a reactor core
tends to be only loosely coupled to the spacial distribution, and therefore a global approximation of
the neutron flux can be reasonably accurate. The average distance a neutron travels between emission
and reabsorption is referred to as the diffusion length L.11 In general, if ϕ(r, t) varies rapidly, i.e. on the
order of milliseconds, then neutrons emitted at a given time t, do not have time to appreciably influence
the shape of the neutron flux at time t +∆t farther than a few diffusion lengths from the site of emission.
Given that the dimensions of a typical power reactor are on the order of hundreds of diffusion lengths,
local flux variations due to dynamic changes in the system, e.g. reactivity insertion, are only loosely
coupled to the global flux profile [24, p. 656]. The angular neutron flux can therefore be approximated
by
ϕ(r, t) = ψ(r)η(t)
(2.24)
which is to say that if the spacial profile, ψ(r), is known at a time t, its shape can then be assumed to
remain constant at later times, with magnitude linearly scaled by η(t), see Figure 2.4 for an illustration
of such behavior in one dimension.
The blue and red dashed line represent ϕ(r, t + dt) for positive
reactivity and negative reactivity respectively. This is known as the point kinetics approximation [24,
r
ϕ(r)
ρ = 0
dϕ
dt , ρ > 0
dϕ
dt , ρ < 0
Figure 2.4: Time-Dependent Behavior of ϕ(r) Under the Point Kinetics Approximation
p. 656]. Inserting the point kinetics approximation, (2.24), into the time-dependent diffusion equation
with delayed neutrons, (2.17), yields
1
vϕ(r)dϕ
dt = Dϕ(t)∇2ϕ(r) +

1 −β)vΣf −Σa

ϕ(r)ϕ(t) + ϕ(r)S p(t) +
n
X
i=1
λiϕ(r)Ci(t)
(2.25)
Note, the point-kinetics approximation, (2.24), was applied to the source term, (2.12), such that S (r, t)
becomes ϕ(r)S (t). Finally, as the goal is to achieve a global, time-dependent description (reducing the
reactor domain to a point), we ignore all spacial dependence of the neutron flux ϕ, i.e. ∇2ϕ = 0. (2.25)
then becomes
1
v
dϕ
dt =

(1 −β)νΣf −Σa

ϕ(t) + S p(t) +
n
X
i=1
λiCi(t)
(2.26)
11For more information on diffusion length, see Section 11.17 of Masterson [24, p.
495].
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
12
The dynamics of the precursor concentrations, Ci(t), are described by the balance equation
dCi(t)
dt
= βiνΣ f ϕ(t) −λiCi(t)
(2.27)
where the first term is simply the complement of the fission production term in (2.26), i.e. the delayed
neutron fraction, and the second term is the complement of the delayed neutron source term in (2.26).
With (2.26) and (2.27), the global dynamics of the neutron population are now described by two coupled
ordinary differential equations. They can be expressed equivalently in terms of the neutron number
density (2.3), n, and reactivity (2.23), ρ, as [22, p. 185]
dn(t)
dt
= ρ(t) −β
Λ
n(t) +
n
X
i=1
λiCi(t)
dCi(t)
dt
= βi
Λn(t) −λiCi(t)
(2.28)
where Λ is the prompt neutron lifetime, which is the amount of time on average it takes for a prompt
neutron to slow down and cause a fission. The derivation of (2.28) follows that of Lee [22, p.
184-
185]. Note, S p(t) is dropped from the above formulation, as it represents an external source of prompt
neutrons, not associated with fission processes, and is often not included unless explicitly relevant. This
formulation offers a tractable form to model the neutron dynamics and is reasonably accurate for the
timescales and reactivities considered.
2.1.3.3
Modified Point Kinetics Equations for MSRs
Implicit in the above formulation is the assumption that the fuel is stationary. This is true of most
conventional reactors and therefore rarely bears mentioning. In a molten salt reactor, where fuel is
circulating, the equations require modification to account for the loss of delayed neutron precursors
from fuel flowing out of the core, and conversely the introduction of delayed neutron precursors from
fuel flowing into the core. These two cannot be assumed equivalent, even in equilibrium, as a certain
amount of precursor decay, and thus neutron loss, will occur during the transit of the fuel from exit
to entry. The equations discussed below to account for the circulation are of the form proposed by
Ball and Kerlin [3, p.
57], shown in Figure 2.5 shows them as originally printed. This formulation
assumes no spatial dependence in precursor concentration, i.e. the fluid in the core is well-mixed. The
differential loss of precursors during some time ∆t, ∆Ci(t)out, can then be expressed as
∆Ci(t)out = ∆t
τc
Ci(t)
(2.29)
where τc represents the time required for a the fuel to flow through the core. The left-hand term, ∆t/τc,
essentially represents the fraction of the fluid initially considered to flow out of the core during time ∆t.
The loss due to outflow can therefore be approximated as
dCi(t)out
dt
= Ci(t)
τc
(2.30)
The inflow term, Ci(t)in, is simply the outflow term at time t −τl reduced by exponential decay during
transit time of the external loop, where τl is the time required for the fuel to circulate through the
external loop. It can therefore be expressed as
dCi(t)in
dt
= Ci(t −τl)
τc
e−λiτl
(2.31)
where Ci(t−τl)
τc
is simply the outflow, (2.30) at time t −τ, and e−λit is the decay, (2.13), applied to the
outflow during transit time τl. The modified precursor equations therefore become
dCi(t)
dt
= βi
Λn(t) −λiCi(t) −Ci(t)
τc
+ Ci(t −τl)e−λiτl
τc
(2.32)
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Neutron Dynamics
13
rrate of change] 
of precursor 
- 
population in J -  
I 
core 
where 
inate 
formation] 
of - becay 
rate of ] 
-in core 
in core 
reentry by precursors 
core ZL seconds ago 
to a fraction 
of their previous 
rate 
B! = total delayed-neutron fraction for ith precursor group, 
T 
= core holdup time, sec, 
T 
= loop holdup time, sec. 
1 
C 
L 
Figure 2.5: Precursor Equations from Ball and Kerlin [3, p. 57]
The equation for neutron density from (2.28) remains unchanged. Figure 2.6 illustrates a schematic of
the precursor inflow and outflow with relevant terms.
Notably, the introduction of the inflow and outflow terms requires the equilibrium reactivity, ρ, to
be nonzero. Section 2.1.3.1 introduces the concept of reactivity and what it means in the context of
point kinetics. To reiterate, reactivity can be thought of (by (2.22)) as the deviation of the system from
criticality, or, by (2.23), the ratio of net prompt neutron production (production minus loss) to prompt
neutron production, (νΣf −Σa)/νΣf , and is thus zero for a conventional reactor in equilibrium. Without
this intuition, this is still apparent from the equilibrium of the conventional point kinetic equations,
(2.28), found by setting both expressions equal to zero which yields
ρ0 = 0
(2.33)
Adding the inflow and outflow terms to the equations governing precursor concentration however, and
applying the same technique, yields
ρ0 = β −
n
X
i=1
βi
1 +
1
λiτc (1 −e−λiτl)
(2.34)
which indicates that ρ0 for a circulating fuel reactor is nonzero and positive. Intuitively, this arises from
the fact that the precursors created from prompt fission are exiting the core, but are not being replaced
at the same rate due to decay along the external loop during time τl. Therefore a positive reactivity
needs to be maintained to account for the difference.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Heat Transfer
14
Core
Outflow
Inflow
Delay
Figure 2.6: Schematic of Delayed Neutron Precursor Flow
2.2
Heat Transfer
The energy from fission is released primarily in the form of heat.
Additionally, the effects of heat
generation, along with its distribution and dynamics are coupled to the neutron dynamics in important
ways. Namely, thermal feedback is a key component of the dynamics of molten salt reactors, and thus
crucial in modelling their time-dependent behavior. The thermodynamics of the models implemented
in the project herein account for three effects; internal generation (from fission or energy deposition
from particle collisions), heat transfer between the material and its surroundings, known as convective
heat transfer, and heat transfer by mass flow between components, i.e. advection.
2.2.1
Internal Generation
Internal heat generation in the fuel comes from the power generated in the reactor via fission processes.
If it is assumed that reactor power is directly proportional to the neutron density12, the internal heat
generation can be expressed as
˙Qint(t) = dUint
dt
= P0
n(t)
n0
(2.35)
where ˙Qint is the change in internal energy, Uint, due to internal heat generation, P0 is the nominal
power of the reactor, and n0 is the neutron flux at nominal power. (2.35) essentially assumes a linear
relationship between fractional change in neutron density, and the fractional change in resultant power
from fission processes.
It can be equivalently expressed in terms of temperature by dividing by the product of the mass, m,
of the body considered and its specific heat capacity, C, i.e.
T = Q
mC
(2.36)
and therefore (2.35) becomes
˙Tint(t) = dTint
dt
= P0
mC
n(t)
n0
(2.37)
12This is the assumption in Singh et al. [30] and will be adopted for the models in the project herein
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Thermal Feedback
15
2.2.2
Convective Heat Transfer
Convective heat transfer is considered at the interface of materials in contact, particularly that of a
solid body and a fluid, e.g. at the inner interface of the molten salt fuel and the fuel tubes, or that of
the coolant and the coolant tubes. The heat transferred at this interface is described by Newton’s Law
of Cooling, which for a body in contact with a fluid, can be expressed as [15, p. 10]
˙Q f = dU f
dt
= hA(Tb −T f )
(2.38)
where ˙Q f is the change in internal energy U f for the fluid. The essential principle is that conduction
between a solid wall and a boundary layer of a fluid will cause a density gradient in the fluid, and thus
induce convection. The energy transferred is therefore proportional to the difference in temperature
(T f −Tb), as it is conduction that provides the necessary gradient to induce convection, and the area,
A, of the interface between the body and the fluid. The transfer rate will of course also depend on the
velocity of the fluid, as well as its thermal properties, i.e. specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity,
etc., however these effects are typically folded into the coeﬀicient h, known as the convective heat-
transfer coeﬀicient.13 It is possible to come up with analytical expressions for h, but it is typically
determined experimentally for complex systems [15, p.
10-11].14 Note, (2.38) is expressed in terms of
energy (Joules) per second, i.e. watts. By (2.36), it becomes
˙T f = dT f
dt =
hA
mfC f
(Tb −T f )
(2.39)
2.2.3
Advection
While convective heat transfer handles the heat flow between materials within nodes, advection will
handle the heat flow between nodes. From Holman [15, p.
279], we have the energy balance at point
b for bulk-temperature difference between points a and b in a pipe flow as
˙Qb = dUb
dt
= ˙mC(Ta −Tb)
(2.40)
where ˙m is the mass flow rate between points a and b in units of kg/s. Note, (2.40) could be expressed
in terms of the total convective heat transfer between a and b with
˙Qb = dUb
dt
= hA(Ta −Tb)av
(2.41)
where (Tw −Tb)av represents the average difference in temperature between the wall and the fluid along
the length of the tube between a and b [15, p. 280], and is therefore essentially an aggregate measure
of convective heat transfer between two points. As such it will be used to represent heat flow between
nodes, where convective heat transfer between materials is not explicitly modeled. By (2.36), it can be
equivalently expressed as
˙Tb = dTb
dt = ˙m
mb
(Ta −Tb)
(2.42)
2.3
Thermal Feedback
The primary mechanism of the negative temperature-reactivity feedback in a molten salt reactor is the
fuel density. Increased reactivity increases the temperature of the fuel salt via fission processes. As a
13h is sometimes referred to as the ”film conductance”, as the heat transfer is occurring at the stationary boundary
layer between the solid body and the flowing fluid [15].
14For more detail on convective heat transfer see Sections 1.3 and 6.1 of Holman [15].
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Thermal Feedback
16
result, the fuel expands, reducing its density and thereby reducing reactivity. Recall from (2.3) that the
macroscopic cross-section, including that for fission, is directly proportional to the number density of
the atoms in the material. Internal generation and thermal feedback are therefore the primary points
of coupling between reactivity and temperature in the model herein, where increased reactivity leads
to increased temperature due to internal generation, which in turn results in reduced reactivity due to
thermal feedback, and thus a stable system.
There are several other mechanisms of thermal feedback, such as thermal expansion of materials or
thermal dependence of macroscopic cross sections15, but for simplicity, thermal feedbacks in the model
herein are assumed to be linearly proportional to the difference in temperature from equilibrium. If
for example, the fuel temperature increased or decreased from some equilibrium fuel temperature T0 to
some temperature T f , the reactivity feedback ρfb would be proportional T f −T0, i.e.
ρfb = α f (T f −T0)
(2.43)
where α is the temperature reactivity coeﬀicient for the fuel, and feedbacks with other materials are
ignored. For negative temperature-reactivity feedback, αf < 0, and an increase in temperature would
essentially induce a negative reactivity insertion.16
15This is known as “Doppler broadening”
16See Chapter 2.1.3.1 for background on reactivity.
==PAGE:24==
3
Model
A molten salt reactor is essentially a thermo-hydraulic system whereby heat is generated from fission in
the fuel salt during core transit, then extracted through the core coolant and external heat exchangers.
The essential effects of the time-dependent behavior of the reactor are therefore governed by the neutron
kinetics and fluid-to-fluid heat exchange.
Chapter 3.1 presents the model structure.
Chapter 3.2
provides the model equations to be passed to the numerical solver. Chapters 3.3 and 3.4 explain how
the model structure is applied to the MSRE and ARE respectively.
3.1
Structure
The proposed model is a distributed-parameter, nodal or ”lumped” model, of the form implemented in
Singh et al. [30] and others. This approach was developed by E.R. Mann at ORNL to approximate heat
transfer between circulating fluids [2]. Figure 3.1(a) shows a section of a counter-flow heat exchanger
and Figure 3.1(b) shows its lumped approximation as proposed by Mann. The assumptions of this
model are as follows:
“
• Fluid transport in each stream is represented by a “two well-stirred tanks in series”
approximation.
• The heat capacity of the shell is zero.
• The conductivity of the tube in the direction of flow is infinite.
• Heat transfer between the tube and a fluid is proportional to the difference between
the tube temperature and the mean temperature of the fluid in the inlet “tank”.
” Ball [2, p. 7]
As explained by Steffy and Wood [35, p. 4] “The term ‘lump‘ as used in mathematical modeling refers
to a segment of a physical system that is considered to have constant properties throughout and which
interacts with its surroundings through only those properties”. These lumps, hereafter referred to as
nodes, are used to approximate the thermal dynamics of system components. Each node represents
the mass of its associated material. For a fluid, this essentially implies a “well-stirred“ fluid mass with
homogeneous temperature [3, p. 12]. Similarly for a solid, the node represents the total mass of the
material at homogeneous temperature. Each node thus consists of a differential equation describing
heat flow, governed by parameters such as node mass, specific heat capacity, convective heat transfer
coeﬀicients, etc. The general and applied form of the heat flow equation for a given node is given in
(3.8) and (3.9) respectively.
Mann’s model was implemented for the MSRE initially by Ball and Kerlin [3] for theoretical dynamic
and stability analysis of the MSRE. Figure 3.2 illustrates the described approach for the MSRE core,
where fuel was in direct contact with the graphite moderator.
Note, since there was no secondary
coolant for the MSRE, there are no secondary fluid nodes.
The temperature dynamics of a node at time t depend on state variables at time t, but may also
depend on the state of other nodes at some previous time time t −τ. For example, in Figure 3.2, the
value of TF1,IN at time t, might depend on the value of the heat exchanger outlet node at some prior
time, t −τ, where τ is the transit time between the heat exchanger outlet node and the core inlet
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Equations
18
(a) Fluid-to-Fluid Heat Exchanger
'2 (OUT)"
WELL-STIRRED TANK (TYPICAL) -^
(HOLDUP TIME = '2*/2)
(b) Lumped Model of Fluid-to-Fluid Heat Exchanger
Figure 3.1: Mann’s Model for a Counterflow Heat-Exchanger, Ball [2, p. 6-7]
node described. The model is therefore expressed as a system of nonlinear coupled, delay differential
equations.1 In Chapter 3.2, a general form for the system is proposed, and equations are derived to be
solved subject to this general form. Chapters 3.3 and 3.4 discuss the model as applied to the MSRE
and ARE respectively.
3.2
Equations
Chapter 3.2.1 introduces the general form of the equations that is passed to the solver. Chapters 3.2.2
and 3.3.3 cover how the neutron kinetic and heat flow equations are defined within this general form.
1The nonlinearity arises from the temperature feedback, see Chapter 3.2.2.
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Equations
19
Figure 3.2: E.R. Mann’s Lumped Model Diagram for the MSRE Core, Ball and Kerlin [3, p. 11]
3.2.1
General Form
The system of coupled nonlinear delay differential equations describing the reactor can be generally
expressed as the system which satisfies
˙x(t) = f(x(t), z(t), u(t), d(t))
(3.1)
where the ith entry of the vector ˙x(t) contains the right-hand side function of the ith state variable, the
derivative f(x(t), z(t), u(t), d(t)) is a function of x(t), the vector containing the value of each state variable
at time t
x(t) =

x1(t)
x2(t)
...
xn(t)

(3.2)
z(t), a vector whose jth entry contains the required values of jth at time t −τ j on which other state
variables may depend, where τi is the relevant delay time
z(t) =

z1(t −τ1)
z2(t −τ2)
...
zn(t −τk)

(3.3)
and u(t) and d(t), which similarly represent control input and disturbance respectively.
A variable
zj(t −τj), would be required, for example, in the case of advective heat flow between components, where
an inlet node temperature of a component at time t, Tin(t), depends on the outlet node temperature of
another component at a previous time t −τ, Tout(t −τ).
The goal is to achieve a system of the form described above suitable for a numerical solver.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Equations
20
3.2.2
Point-Kinetics
The fractional change in neutron population is described by the modified point-kinetic equations, rewrit-
ten below.
dn(t)
dt
= ρ(t) −β
Λ
n(t) + S p(t) +
n
X
i=1
λiCi(t)
dCi(t)
dt
= βi
Λn(t) −λiCi(t) −Ci(t)
τc
+ Ci(t −τl)e−λiτl
τc
(3.4)
Delayed neutron precursors will be approximated with six precursor groups and associated decay con-
stants.
Outside of the reactivity required for equilibrium operation of a circulating fuel reactor, (2.34), the
contributions to reactivity considered are feedback, ρfb, and external input, ρext. In our modified point
kinetics equations, (3.4), ρ can therefore be expanded as
ρ(t) = ρ0(t) + ρfb(t) + ρext(t)
(3.5)
To attain a suitable form for ρ(t) as a state variable, the derivative of (3.5) is taken, which yields
dρ(t)
dt
= d
dt

ρ0 + ρfb(t) + ρext(t)

= dρ fb
dt
+ dρext
dt
(3.6)
which by (2.43), if considering only fuel temperature-reactivity feedback, and in the absence of any
external insertions, yields
dρ(t)
dt
= dρfb(t)
dt
= α f
dT f
dt
(3.7)
Note, in the first term in the equation for n(t), (3.4), ρ(t) is multiplied by n(t). By (3.5) therefore, the
system is nonlinear in the presence of feedback.
With (3.4) and (3.6), the point kinetics and reactivity equations are all in differential form, and thus
suitable to be added to the system for a numerical solver.
3.2.3
Heat Flow
Three thermal effects are cosidered; internal generation due to fission, convective heat transfer, and
advection. Heat flow is coupled to the point kinetics via the internal generation term, (2.35). Heat flow
will be modeled by assigning nodes to the different masses of the system components, with equations
for these phenomena governing the temperature of each node.
Consider for example, a molten salt reactor core, whereby fuel flows through metal tubes which
are in direct contact with a coolant, flowing in the opposite direction. Figure 3.3 illustrates a simple
construction of such a system using a nodal approach. Arrows represent coupling via convective heat
transfer or advection. This basic structure will serve as a starting point for construction of components
for the MSRE and ARE systems. Each fluid node represents half of the mass of its associated fluid. A
tube node represents the mass of the tubes, which mediates the heat transfer between the two fluids.
To describe the temperature dynamics of a node, the three thermal effects presented in the previous
chapter are considered, i.e.
dTi
dt =
 dTi
dt
!
internal
+
 dTi
dt
!
convective
+
 dTi
dt
!
advective
(3.8)
where Ti is the temperature of the ith node. For example, applying the heat flow equations defined in
Chapter 2.2, namely (2.37), (2.39) and (2.42), the dynamics of the fuel inlet temperature, T f1, in the
sample model above, can be described as
dT fin
dt (t) =
P0
mfC f n0
n(t)
|         {z         }
internal
+ hA ft
mfC f
(Tt(t) −T f1(t))
|                    {z                    }
convective
+ ˙m
m f
(T fhx(t −τhx→c) −T f1(t))
|                              {z                              }
advective
(3.9)
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Equations
21
Fuel 1
Fuel Tubes:
Fuel 2
Coolant 2
Coolant 1
Heat Exchanger
Delay
Heat Exchanger
Delay
Figure 3.3: Core System Nodes
where mf is the mass considered in the inlet node, hA ft is the product of the convective heat transfer
coeﬀicient between the fuel and the tubes, hft, and the total are over which they are in contact, A ft. The
ORNL documents often report this quantity as a single value hA, and will hereafter be reported as such,
and may be used interchangeably with a “heat transfer coeﬀicient”. T fin is the temperature of influent
fuel from the heat exchanger. As such
dT f1
dt (t) is coupled to the other nodes in the core system at time t,
as well as the source node for the fuel, T fin, at some time t −τhx→c, where τhx→c is the time required for
the fuel to flow from the the heat exchanger outlet node to the core inlet node. Heat exchanger systems
are essentially the same as that used for the core shown in Figure 3.3. The primary difference is that
there is no internal generation term in heat exchanger fuel nodes.2
With the point kinetics and heat flow equations in hand, the system is complete, and can be expressed
in the general form of (3.1). For example, a system involving the core component shown in Figure 3.3,
2Fission processes in this type of reactor require a ”moderator” material to slow down the neutrons, which will only
be present in the core system.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 MSRE
22
could be defined as

dn
dt
dC1
dt
...
dC6
dt
dρ
dt
dT f1
dt
...

|{z}
˙x(t)
=

ρ(t)−β
Λ n(t) + S p(t) + Pn
i=1 λiCi(t)
β1
Λ n(t) −λ1C1(t) −C1(t)
τc
+ C1(t−τl)e−λ1τl
τc
...
β6
Λ n(t) −λ6C6(t) −C6(t)
τc
+ C6(t−τl)e−λ6τl
τc
dρ fb
dt + dρext
dt
P0
mf C f n0 n(t) + hA ft
mf C f (Tt(t) −T f1(t)) +
˙m
mf (T fhx(t −τhx→c) −T f1(t))
...

|                                                                               {z                                                                               }
f(x(t),z(t),u(t),d(t))
(3.10)
with
z(t) =

C1(t −τl)
C2(t −τl)
...
C6(t −τl)
T fhx(t −τhx→c)
...

(3.11)
The procedure outlined above is applied to all system components in order to generate a system of the
form defined in (3.1). This approach provides an intuitive and scalable approach to modeling complex
systems and delay dynamics. The aggregation of the system dynamics into nodes allows for geometrical
and fluid dynamical complexities to be folded into a tractable system suitable for a numerical delay
differential equation (DDE) solver.
3.3
MSRE
3.3.1 describes the structure of the nodal model. 3.3.2 summarizes the parameters used for the subsystem
nodes, with references to ORNL reports.
3.3.1
Structure
The MSRE consisted of the core, where the fuel salt was in direct contact with the moderator material
(graphite). The salt was cooled by a fluid-to-fluid heat exchanger, with the secondary fluid cooled by a
radiator to atmosphere. Figure 3.4 illustrates the flow of the primary and secondary loop for the MSRE.
Singh et al. [30], with the approach described above in Chapter 3.1, structure the system as illustrated
in Figure 3.5(a). Their Simulink model is shown in Figure 3.5(b). Note, the core nodes are structured
as shown in Figure 3.2. The heat exchanger nodes are essentially two units of Mann’s model (Figure
3.1(b)) placed in series. This is likely to capture the benefit of counter-flow. As explained by Ball [2, p.
7], when there is only one solid node, the relative direction of flow of the primary and secondary fluids
is essentially ignored, as the solid node will be at the same temperature for all nodes during transit.
This model, using parameters compiled by Singh et al. [30] from ORNL experimental reports, is
reconstructed using msrDynamics.
The code for a full implementation is provided in Appendix C.2.
Parameters are summarized in the following section. In Chapter 5, this model is implemented in order
to study the dynamics and validate the eﬀicacy of the API.
==PAGE:30==
3.4 ARE
23
Figure 3.4: MSRE Flow Diagram, Kerlin, Ball, and Steffy [16]
3.3.2
Parameters
The core, heat exchanger, and radiator neutron kinetic and heat transfer parameters are given in Tables
3.6, 3.7 and 3.8 respectively.
Note, the heat transfer coeﬀicients for the radiator hArpn and hArsn depend
on the nominal power P (see parameters.py line 185). This based on analysis in Section 2.7 of Spinelli [31,
p. 40-47], to resolve discrepancies between heat removal capacity based on reported temperatures, and
those estimated by component geometry and measured heat transfer coeﬀicients. Essentially, this uses
P to force the heat transfer coeﬀicient at the radiator to dispense with exactly P MW of power. Delays
between components are given in Table 3.9. Values derived from this data, like the calculation of ρ0
by (2.34), conversion of volumetric flow to mass flow, geometry calculations, etc. are not shown in the
tables, but can be found in the parameters file, msre/parameters.py, for the MSRE. See C.1. Additionally,
the source of the parameters are provided mostly in the comments of the MATLAB code written by
Singh et al. [30].
3.4
ARE
3.4.1 describes the structure of the nodal model. 3.4.2 summarizes the parameters used for the subsystem
nodes, with references to ORNL reports and other sources.
3.4.1
Model Structure
The ARE core system consists of two separate loops; one for the fuel and the other for the moderator
coolant. Each is cooled by two fluid-to-helium heat exchangers in parallel. The helium for each loop
is then cooled by secondary helium-to-water heat exchangers in series with the fluid-to-helium heat
exchangers. Figure 3.10 shows a simplified schematic of the described system as provided by the ORNL
technical report ORNL-1845. Note, the fuel (right-side) and coolant (left-side) core loops are shown with
a single heat exchanger for both the fluid-to-helium and helium-to-water heat exchangers. In reality,
the loops were more complex, as described above. Figure 3.11 illustrates a flow schematic detailing
the parallel fuel and coolant heat exchangers, as well as the different helium loops on each side. A
detailed schematic of the nodal model construction is shown in Figure 3.12. This system structure can
be verified by the process instrumentation map found in the experimental report, ORNL-1845 [8, p.
11]. The area of the map pertaining to the fuel and coolant loops are shown in Figures 3.13(a) and
3.13(b) respectively. On the right of the fuel circuit, there are the parallel fuel-helium heat exchangers,
with helium-water heat-exchangers in between on a single helium loop. On the left side of the coolant
circuit, each sodium-helium heat exchanger has a helium-water heat exchanger, each on independent
helium loop.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 ARE
24
(a) MSRE Nodal Model
(b) MSRE Nodal Model in Simulink
Figure 3.5: MSRE Model, Singh et al. [30]
For consistency and simplicity, the core component and all heat exchanger components are imple-
mented using the same approach; two primary flow nodes connected by tubes to two secondary flow
nodes. In Chapter 4, it is shown that the choice of the nodal structure for the system components
determines the implicit approximations of the nodal model.
Using the approach described in Chapter 3.1, the ARE model is constructed with msrDynamics using
parameters from ORNL reports. A full implementation is provided in Appendix D.2. Parameters are
summarized in the following section. In Chapter 4, the dynamics are studied and results are compared
to results from experimental reports.
==PAGE:32==
3.4 ARE
25
Table 3.6: MSRE Parameters: Core, compiled by Singh et al. [30]
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
τl
16.73
s
External loop transit
ORNL-TM-0728
τc
8.46
s
Core transit
ORNL-TM-0728
P
1.0, 8.0
MW
Nominal Power: Low, High
ORNL-TM-1070, p.2
Λ
2.400 × 10−4
-
Mean generation time
ORNL-TM-1070, p.15 U235
λ1
1.240e-02
-
Group 1 decay constant
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
λ2
3.05e-02
-
Group 2 decay constant
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
λ3
1.11e-01
-
Group 3 decay constant
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
λ4
3.01e-01
-
Group 4 decay constant
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
λ5
1.140e+00
-
Group 5 decay constant
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
λ6
3.014e+00
-
Group 6 decay constant
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
β1
2.23e-04
-
Group 1 fraction
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
β2
1.457e-03
-
Group 2 fraction
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
β3
1.307e-03
-
Group 3 fraction
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
β4
2.628e-03
-
Group 4 fraction
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
β5
7.66e-04
-
Group 5 fraction
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
β6
2.30e-04
-
Group 6 fraction
Steffy and Wood [35, p. 3]
a f
-8.71e-05
(°C−1)
Fuel feedback coeﬀicient
ORNL-TM-1647, p.3
ag
-6.66e-05
(°C−1)
Graphite feedback coeﬀicient
ORNL-TM-1647, p.3
˙V f
7.5708e-02
m3/s
Fuel volume flow rate
ORNL-TM-0728, p.12
ρ f
2.14647e+03
kg/m3
Fuel salt density
ORNL-TM-0728, p.8
ρg
1.860E3
kg/m3
Graphite density
ORNL-3812 p.77, ORNL-TM-0728 p.87
scp f
1.9665e-03
MJ/kg-°C
Specific heat capacity of fuel salt
ORNL-TM-0728, p.8
scpg
1.773e-03
MJ/kg-°C
Graphite specific heat capacity
ORNL-TM-1647 p.3
kg
0.07
-
Fractional generation, graphite
ORNL-TM-0728 p.9
k f
0.93
-
Fractional generation, fuel
ORNL-TM-0728 p.9
T fin0
6.3222e+02
°C
Initial fuel inlet temperature
ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
T f20
6.5727e+02
°C
Initial fuel outlet temperature
ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
hA fg
3.6e-02
MW/°C
Fuel-graphite heat transfer coeﬀicient
ORNL-TM-1647 p.3
Table 3.7: MSRE Parameters: Heat Exchanger
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
˙Vs
5.36e-02
m3/s
Coolant volume flow rate
ORNL-TM-0728 p.164
ρs
1.92e+03
kg/m3
Coolant salt density
ORNL-TM-0728 p.8
ρtube
8.77E+03
kg/m3
Density of INOR-8
ORNL-TM-0728 p.20
scps
2.39E-03
MJ/(kg-°C)
Specific heat capacity of coolant
ORNL-TM-0728 p.8
scpt
5.77E-04
MJ/(kg-°C)
Specific heat capacity of tubes
ORNL-TM-0728 p.20
Tsin0
5.79E+02
°C
Initial coolant inlet temperature
ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
Ts40
5.79E+02
°C
Initial coolant outlet temperature
ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
hAp
6.48E-01
MW/°C
Fuel-tube heat transfer coeﬀicient
ORNL-TM-1647 p.3
hAs
3.06E-01
MW/°C
Tube-coolant heat transfer coeﬀicient
ORNL-TM-1647 p.3
3.4.2
Parameters
Compilation of parameters for the ARE model was a more significant task for a number of reasons.
Unlike the MSRE, this type of model (to the author’s knowledge) has not previously been implemented
for the ARE. The MSRE model in comparison was implemented by Steffy and Wood [35] during the
experiment itself, and Singh et al. [30] for further analysis of the model and extrapolation to safety
scenarios. A good deal of prior work therefore exists in the literature for reference and comparison.
Additionally, while Singh et al. [30] discuss certain diﬀiculties choosing the correct parameters from the
==PAGE:33==
3.4 ARE
26
Table 3.8: MSRE Parameters: Radiator
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
˙Vrs
94.389
m3/s
Air volume flow rate
ORNL-TM-0728 p.296
ρair
1.1237
kg/m3
Air density
REFPROP (310K and 0.1MPa)
scprp
1.0085E-3
MJ/(kg-°C)
Coolant specific heat capacity
ORNL-TM-0728 p.8
Trpin
5.933E+02
°C
Initial temperature of radiator node
ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
Trp0
148.9
°C
Initial temperature of radiator plate
ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
Trsin
37.78
°C
Air inlet temperature
ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
Trs0
148.9
°C
Air exit temperature
ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
hArpn
2.1e-03
MW/°C
Coolant-tube heat transfer coeﬀicient
Polimi Thesis,[31]
hArsn
1.7e-02
MW/°C
Tube-air heat transfer coeﬀicient
Polimi Thesis,[31]
Table 3.9: MSRE Parameters: Delays
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
τhx→c
8.67
s
Heat-exchanger to core transit
TDAMSRE p.6
τc→hx
3.77
s
Core to heat-exchanger transit
TDAMSRE p.6
τhx→r
4.71
s
Heat-exchanger to radiator transit
TDAMSRE p.6
τr→hx
8.24
s
Radiator to heat-exchanger transit
TDAMSRE p.6
Figure 3.10: ARE System, Cottrell et al. [8, p. 4]
many experiments recorded during the MSRE’s roughly four-year lifetime, the opposite is true of the
ARE. The experiment ran for roughly two weeks. Available operational data from the experiment is
therefore limited to one report, ORNL-1845, Cottrell et al. [8]. Additional design data is available in a
handful of other ORNL reports. Consequently, more granular data on relevant dimensions associated
with the model’s thermodynamics, e.g. the mass of tubes, fuel and coolant in the core, the wedded area
of the coolant and the coolant tubes, the mass of the tubes in the core, etc., need to be calculated from
available design data. These calculations are streamlined by drawing a CAD model based on ARE design
documents. The CAD model is discussed in the following section. These measurements combined with
available data from the report, are combined to construct the nodal model for the ARE. Tables 3.14,
3.15, 3.16, 3.17 and 3.18 show relevant parameters for the core, as well as the fuel-helium, helium-water
(fuel-side), coolant-helium, and helium-water (coolant side) heat exchangers respectively. Table 3.19
lists the transit delays.
Determination of convective heat transfer coeﬀicients required calculation
of varying complexity depending on available data. The source column includes relevant lines of are/
parameters.py, provided in Appendix D.1, where calculation of hA and reference to documentation can
==PAGE:34==
3.4 ARE
27
Core
Fuel-Helium HX
Helium-Water HX
Helium-Water HX
Fuel-Helium HX
Back to core
Coolant-Helium HX
Helium-Water HX
Coolant-Helium HX
Helium-Water HX
Back to core
Fuel
Coolant
Helium
Figure 3.11: ARE Fuel and Coolant Flow Schematic
be found. If data was not available in the ORNL documentation for the ARE, it was either measured
from the CAD model (see following section), inferred, or in the case of prompt neutron lifetime and
fractional precursor group concentrations, the βi terms, assumed to be the same as the MSRE.
Agreement between the actual heat removal capacity based on calculated coeﬀicients and the re-
ported temperatures is poor, as will be seen in Chapter 5.2.
Therefore, a similar method to that
implemented by Spinelli [31, p.
40-47] will be employed to resolve the steady-state discrepancy. This
is discussed further in Chapter 5.2.
3.4.3
CAD Model
A detailed CAD model is drawn of the ARE core based on ORNL design documentation. A write-up of
the design can be found in Labrie-Cleary [21] with references to relevant ORNL documentation for the
different core components. The CAD model is useful for complex design measurements, especially for
calculation of material interface areas for convective heat transfer coeﬀicients and volume calculations
of complex geometries in order to determine node masses. Additionally, as will be seen in Chapter 5, it
allows for Monte-Carlo simulation of neutronics using OpenMC, an open-source particle transport software.
Figure 3.20 shows a cross-sectional view of the CAD model as drawn in OnShape. The full CAD model
can be viewed at Labrie-Cleary [20]. OnShape includes tools for measurements of surface areas and
volumes of any part defined in the model, allowing for the complex measurements needed for the model.
Additionally, a python package, CAD_to_OpenMC, an open-source tool-chain for generating surface meshes
of CAD geometry, enables OpenMC to run neutron transport on the CAD-defined geometry. Results are
discussed in Chapter 5.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 ARE
28
Moderator
Coolant
Coolant
Tubes
Fuel
Fuel
Fuel
Helium
Tubes
Fuel
Helium
Helium
Water
Tubes
Helium
Water
Fuel
Helium
Tubes
Fuel
Helium
Helium
Water
Tubes
Helium
Water
Water
Helium
Tubes
Water
Helium
Helium
Coolant
Tubes
Helium
Coolant
Coolant
Helium
Tubes
Coolant
Helium
Helium
Water
Tubes
Helium
Water
Ambient
Dumped
Dumped
Ambient
Ambient
Dumped
Figure 3.12: ARE Nodal Model
==PAGE:36==
3.4 ARE
29
(a) ARE Fuel Circuit
(b) ARE Coolant Circuit
Figure 3.13: ARE Fuel & Coolant Loops, Cottrell et al. [8, p. 11]
==PAGE:37==
3.4 ARE
30
Table 3.14: ARE Parameters: Core
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
P
2.12
MW
Nominal power
ORNL-1845 pg. 185
βt
2.12
MW
Delayed neutron fraction
ORNL-1845 pg. 150
a f
−1.176 × 10−4
1/°K
Fuel thermal feedback
ORNL-1845 p. 115
ab
2.044 × 10−5
1/°K
Beryllium thermal feedback
ORNL-1845 p. 115
ac
−1.0432 × 10−4
1/°K
Coolant thermal feedback
ORNL-1845 p. 115
˙Vf
2.9007 × 10−3
m3/s
Core fuel flow rate
ORNL-1845 pg. 120
˙Vc
9.5877 × 10−3
m3/s
Core coolant flow rate
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
ρinconel
8500
kg/m3
Inconel density
ORNL-1845 p. 113
ρh
0.167
kg/m3
Helium density
ORNL-1845 p. 113
ρm
2750
kg/m3
Moderator density
ORNL-1845 p. 113
ρc
0.1514
kg/m3
Coolant density
ORNL-1845 p. 113
scp f
1.08824 × 10−3
MJ/(kg*°K)
Specific heat capacity of fuel salt
ORNL-1845 p. 113
scpt
0.4237 × 10−3
MJ/(kg*°K)
Specific heat capacity of Inconel 600
ORNL-1845 p. 113
scpc
1.2558 × 10−3
MJ/(kg*°K)
Specific heat capacity of coolant
ORNL-1845 p. 113
scph
5.2156 × 10−3
MJ/(kg*°K)
Specific heat capacity of helium
ORNL-1845 p. 113
scpm
2.0144 × 10−3
MJ/(kg*°K)
Specific heat capacity of moderator
ORNL-1845 p. 113
T favg
1584.15
°K
Average fuel temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 58
Tcf10
1482.15
°K
Core fuel inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 120
Tcf20
1795.15
°K
Core fuel outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 120
Tcc10
1499.15
°K
Core coolant inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Tcc20
1608.15
°K
Core coolant outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
hA ft
2.52e-02
MW/°K
Fuel-tube heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 219-245
hAtc
1.46e-02
MW/°K
Coolant-tube heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 252-255
hAcm
9.22e-03
MW/°K
Coolant-moderator heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 257-261
Table 3.15: ARE Parameters: Fuel-Helium Heat Exchanger
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
Tc f10
1060.96
°K
Fuel inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Tc f20
894.26
°K
Fuel outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Tch10
355.37
°K
Helium inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Tch20
599.82
°K
Helium outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
hA ft
6.09e-03
MW/°K
Fuel-tube heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 298-302
hAth
1.43e-03
MW/°K
Tube-helium heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 308-314
Table 3.16: ARE Parameters: Helium-Water Heat Exchanger, Fuel Side
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
Th10
599.82
°K
Helium inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Th20
355.37
°K
Helium outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Tw10
289.26
°K
Water inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Tw20
324.26
°K
Water outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
hAht
4.73e-03
MW/°K
Helium-tube heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 353-360
hAtw
3.44e-01
MW/°K
Tube-water heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 362-368
==PAGE:38==
3.4 ARE
31
Table 3.17: ARE Parameters: Coolant-Helium Heat Exchanger
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
Tc10
941.48
°K
Coolant inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Tc20
869.26
°K
Coolant outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Th10
349.82
°K
Helium inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 122
Th20
822.04
°K
Helium outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 122
hAct
1.03e-02
MW/°K
Coolant-tube heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 406-410
hAth
4.49e-04
MW/°K
Tube-helium heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 412-418
Table 3.18: ARE Parameters: Helium-Water Heat Exchanger, Coolant Side
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
Th10
822.04
°K
Helium inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 122
Th20
349.81
°K
Helium outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 122
Tw10
294.26
°K
Water inlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
Tw20
310.93
°K
Water outlet initial temperature
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
hAht
4.75e-04
MW/°K
Helium-tube heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 451-458
hAtw
8.94e-02
MW/°K
Tube-water heat transfer coeﬀicient
parameters.py, lines 464-471
Table 3.19: ARE Parameters: Delays
Parameter
Value
Unit
Description
Source
τl
47
s
Fuel loop transit time
ORNL-1845 p.93
τc
8.3
s
Core transit time
ORNL-1845 p.120
τc→hx
23.5
s
Core to heat-exchanger transit
τl/2
τhx→c
23.5
s
Heat-exchanger to core transit
τl/2
==PAGE:39==
3.4 ARE
32
Figure 3.20: ARE CAD Model
==PAGE:40==
4
API
Singh et al. [30] use Simulink, a MATLAB-based a graphical user interface (GUI) for constructing
coupled systems, to construct a nodal model (as described in the previous chapter) for the MSRE.
The Simulink framework offers a range of built-in MATLAB solvers, but handles delay differentials
rather crudely; by storing past solution states and linearly interpolating between past timesteps when
needed. A Python API, msrDynamics1, is written to replace the Simulink GUI. This incorporates more
sophisticated delay handling, and makes the models easier to write and modify. Furthermore, a Python
implementation is more broadly accessible and transparent, and as such, it more verifiable, reproducible
and extendable.
4.1
Backend
As a backend, msrDynamics uses JiTCDDE2, a Python library that implements just-in-time (JIT) compilation
for delay differential equations. The essence of JIT compilation is that source code is compiled into a
lower level executable at runtime. As such, JiTCDDE compiles the system and integrator defined in Python
into a C executable. Rather than solving directly in Python, the C executable is callable from Python
and performs the integration, thus offering a significant performance improvement against a direct
Python implementation. Runtime performance is similar to that of a MATLAB dde23 implementation.
JiTCDDE integrates using the Shampine-Thompson method [29], which is capable of solving equations
of the general form for the MSR models expressed in (3.1). At each step, the Shampine-Thompson
method integrates adaptively using a 3(2) (Bogacki-Shampine, [4]) pair. The state and its derivative
are stored at each step. Previous states required at time t, i.e. z(t) defined in (3.3), are obtained with
a cubic Hermite interpolation of the past states in z j, evaluated at the time needed, t −τj, using the
stored past values. For more detail on Hermite interpolation, see Chapter 3.4 of Burden and Faires [5,
p. 136-144].
Note, MATLAB’s dde23 also uses the Shampine-Thompson method. However dde23 is not incorpo-
rated into Simulink solvers, which for a given delay term z j, use a simple linear interpolation at the
nearest state to t = t −τj. The msrDynamics API therefore allows for more sophisticated delay handling
than can be achieved in Simulink. This is particularly important for a nonlinear system, where solutions
can be highly sensitive to initial conditions, and therefore increased numerical precision is valuable.
To demonstrate, consider a system of the form
¨x + δ˙x + αx + βx3 = γ cos(ωt)
(4.1)
otherwise known as a Duﬀing oscillator.
A duﬀing oscillator describes a damped, driven harmonic
oscillator for which nonlinear contributions to the restoring force become significant. Korsch, Jodl, and
Hartmann [17] write “The duﬀing oscillator is one of the prototype systems of nonlinear dynamics.” As
such, it appears across several nonlinear phenomena. This could for example be applied to a pendulum
undergoing large swings, in which case the small angle approximation, sin(θ) = θ, no longer holds and
further terms of the series expansion, sin(θ) ≈θ −θ3
3! + θ5
5! + . . ., are needed.3
1See github.com/lukelabrie/msrDynamics
2See jitcdde.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
3For more detail on Duﬀing oscillators, see Chapter 8 of Korsch, Jodl, and Hartmann [17, p.
157]
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Backend
34
The first-order system can be written as
˙x = y
˙y = −δy −αx −βx3 + γ cos(ωt)
(4.2)
to which a delay term τ can be added arbitrarily as
˙x = y
˙y = −δy(t −τ) −αx −βx3 + γ cos(ωt)
(4.3)
Figure 4.1 shows (4.2) as solved by Simulink and JiTCDDE with and without a delay term, with all solver
settings and system parameters held constant. A significant divergence of the solutions, starting around
Figure 4.1: Simulink vs JiTCDDE: Duﬀing oscillator with and without delay, atol=1e-10, rtol=1e-5
t = 30s, becomes visible in the presence of a delay term. Figure 4.2 shows the same results in the 20
seconds following those of Fiugre 4.1. Within this interval, the periodic behavior of x as predicted
by Simulink is now almost entirely out of phase with that of JiTCDDE. The above results highlight the
importance of accurate delay handling for nonlinear systems, particularly in the context of safety and
stability analysis. More detail on this implementation is given in Appendix B.1.
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Design
35
Figure 4.2: Simulink vs JiTCDDE: Duﬀing oscillator with and without delay, atol=1e-10, rtol=1e-5
4.2
Design
JiTCDDE, the msrDynamics backend, uses symbolic expressions to express the system, which is then compiled
in a suitable form into the C executable with the help of SymEngine.4 Instantiation of state variable objects
are implicit in the equation declarations. For example, the Duﬀing Oscillator system described above,
(4.2), can be solved directly in JiTCDDE with
1 from jitcdde import y, t, jitcdde
2 import symengine as se
3 import numpy as np
4
5 # parameters
6 delta = 0.3
7 alpha = -1.0
8 beta = 1.0
9 gamma = 0.3
10 omega = 1.2
11 tau = 1.0
# delay
12
13 # Duffing Oscillator
14 dxdt = y(1)
15 dydt = -delta*y(1,t-tau) - alpha*y(0) - beta*y(0)**3 + gamma*se.cos(omega*t)
16
17 # initialize integrator
4For more detail on SymEngine, see Sympy vs SymEngine on jitcde-common.readthedocs.io
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Design
36
18 DDE = jitcdde([dxdt,
19
dydt])
20
21 # initial conditions
22 DDE.constant_past([0.0,
23
0.0])
24
25 # integrate
26 T = np.arange(0,100,0.1)
27 solution = [DDE.integrate(time) for time in T]
The primary advantage of an implementation directly in JiTCDDE is its direct correspondence to the
equations. For the Duﬀing Oscillator implementation shown above, direct implementation in JiTCDDE
is simple and readable. There are only two state variables, position y(0) and velocity y(1), and they
maintain correspondence to (4.2). To express a delay dependence, they even maintain correspondence
to the general form expressed in (3.1), i.e. to access y1(t −τ), which would be z1 in (3.1), one simply
invokes syntax of the form y(1,t-tau).
The baseline implementations of the MSRE and ARE have 22 and 54 state variables respectively.
Building and modifying these systems directly in JiTCDDE therefore becomes cumbersome for a number
of reasons. As form of the equation governing the thermodynamics of any node, (3.8), is essentially the
same for every other node, this leads to mass redundancy in their expression. Additionally, since state
variables are referenced by hard-coded indices, it falls on the user to keep track of them. This becomes
particularly cumbersome when the system is modified, for example, by adding nodes.
To address these diﬀiculties, and more generally, to propose an accessible and extendable tool for
dynamic modelling of MSRs, the msrDynamics API is written. It consists of two primary classes contained
in objects.py5; the Node and System classes. The Node class stores parameters relevant to a given state
variable along with its initial value, and provides methods to define its dynamics. Below are the class
declaration and initializer.
1 class Node:
2
def __init__(self,
3
m: float = 0.0,
4
scp: float = 0.0,
5
W: float = 0.0,
6
y0: float = 0.0) -> None:
7
self.m = m
# mass (kg)
8
self.scp = scp
# specific heat capacity (J/(kg*°K))
9
self.W = W
# mass flow rate (kg/s)
10
self.y0 = y0
# initial temperature (°K)
11
self.dTdt_advective = 0.0
# sym. expression for advective heat flow (°K/s)
12
self.dTdt_internal = 0.0
# sym. expression for internal heat generation (°K/s)
13
self.dTdt_convective = 0.0 # sym. expression for convective heat flow (°K/s)
14
self.dndt = 0.0
# sym. expression for dn/dt (n = neutron population)
15
self.dcdt = 0.0
# sym. expression for dc/dt (c = precursor concentration)
16
self.drdt = 0.0
# sym. expression for dr/dt (r = reactivity)
17
self.y = None
# JiTCDDE state variable object, to be assigned by System
18
self.y_out = []
# solution data, to be populated by System
For the sake of brevity here, the method definitions are left out, but are given in Appendix B.2. Each
is named consistently with its associated dynamics. For example, to define the advective heat flow,
fuel.dTdt_advective, for a fuel node, the Node class provides the method fuel.set_dTdt_advective().
The System class handles operations and parameters that require global knowledge of the system,
like proper indexing of JiTCDDE state variables, handling external input, setting up the integrator and
generating solutions. Below is the System class definition.
5See github.com/LukeLabrie/msrDynamics
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Design
37
1 class System:
2
'''
3
Stores and operates on the system defined by a set of nodes
4
'''
5
def __init__(self, nodes = None, dydt = None, y0 = None) -> None:
6
self.n_nodes = 0
7
8
# avoids using mutable objects as default arguments, which causes a memory leak
9
if not nodes:
10
self.nodes = []
11
if not dydt:
12
self.dydt = []
13
if not y0:
14
self.y0 = []
15
16
self.input = None
17
self.integrator = None
18
19
def add_input(self, input_func, T):
20
'''
21
adds an input function of time to the integrator
22
'''
23
spline = CubicHermiteSpline(n=1)
24
spline.from_function(input_func, times_of_interest = T)
25
self.input = spline
26
return input(0)
27
28
def _finalize(self):
29
'''
30
initiates and returns JiTCDDE integrator
31
'''
32
if (self.integrator):
33
self.integrator = None
34
if (self.input):
35
self.dydt = [n.dTdt_advective + n.dTdt_convective + n.dTdt_internal + n.dndt +
n.drdt + n.dcdt for n in self.nodes]
36
self.y0 = [n.y0 for n in self.nodes]
37
DDE = jitcdde_input(self.dydt,self.input)
38
DDE.constant_past(self.y0)
39
self.integrator = DDE
40
else:
41
self.dydt = [n.dTdt_advective + n.dTdt_convective + n.dTdt_internal + n.dndt +
n.drdt + n.dcdt for n in self.nodes]
42
self.y0 = [n.y0 for n in self.nodes]
43
DDE = jitcdde(self.dydt)
44
DDE.constant_past(self.y0)
45
self.integrator = DDE
46
47
def add_nodes(self, new_nodes: list):
48
'''
49
Assigns state variable object y(), with unique index for each node
50
'''
51
index = self.n_nodes
52
for n in new_nodes:
53
n.y = lambda tau=None, i = index: y(i, tau) if tau is not None else y(i)
54
n.index = index
55
self.nodes.append(n)
56
self.n_nodes += 1
57
index += 1
58
59
def get_dydt(self):
60
'''
61
returns rhs equations of the system
62
'''
63
return [n.dydt() for n in self.nodes]
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Usage
38
64
65
def solve(self, T: list):
66
'''
67
solves system and returns np.array() with solution matrix
68
'''
69
# clear data
70
for n in self.nodes:
71
if (n.y_out.any()):
72
n.y_out = []
73
74
# set integrator
75
self._finalize()
76
77
# solution
78
y = []
79
80
# integrate
81
for t_x in T:
82
y.append(self.integrator.integrate(t_x))
83
84
# populate node objects with solutions
85
for s in enumerate(self.nodes):
86
s[1].y_out = np.array([state[s[0]] for state in y])
87
88
return np.array(y)
The add_nodes() method handles the indexing for JiTCDDE. The finalize() method populates each node
with its dynamics, to be defined by the user using the relevant methods provided by Node, and instantiates
an integrator unique to the system.
4.3
Usage
As described in the previous section, the msrDynamics API employs an object-oriented approach where
parameters and dynamics relevant to a node are stored in the Node class, while global system charac-
teristics and the integrator object are handled by the System class. For example, the system shown in
Figure 3.3 could be solved first by instantiating Node objects, with relevant parameters, for each node.
1 # import parameters and msrDynamics objects
2 from parameters import *
3 from msrDynamics.objects import Node, System
4
5 T_f_in =
Node(m = m_f_in,
# mass
6
c = scp_f,
# specific heat capacity
7
y0 = T0_f_in, # initial value
8
W = W_f, )
# mass flow
9 T_f_out = Node(m = m_f_out, c = scp_f, y0 = T0_f_out, W = W_f, )
10 T_c_in =
Node(m = m_c_in,
c = scp_c, y0 = T0_c_in,
W = W_c)
11 T_c_out = Node(m = m_c_out, c = scp_c, y0 = T0_c_out, W = W_c,)
12 T_t =
Node(m = m_t,
c = scp_t, y0 = T0_t)
Nodes then need to be added to the System instance representing the system, which handles the indexing
required for reference to other state variables in JiTCDDE, and therefore requires global knowledge of all
nodes.
1 # instantiate System instance and add nodes
2 core = System()
3 core.add_nodes([T_f_in,T_f_out,T_c_in,T_c_out,T_t])
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Usage
39
Once nodes are added to the System object, the dynamics can be defined using methods of the Node
object like set_dTdt_bulkFlow and set_dTdt_convective
1 # fuel bulk flow
2 T_f_in.set_dTdt_bulkFlow(source = 500)
3 T_f_out.set_dTdt_bulkFlow(source = T_f_in.y())
4
5 # fuel convective heat transfer
6 T_f_in.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_t.y()], hA = hA_ft)
7 T_f_out.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_t.y()], hA = hA_ft_c)
8
9 # tubes convective heat transfer
10 T_t.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_f_in.y(), T_f_out.y(), T_c_in.y(), T_c_out.y()],
11
hA = [hA_ft,hA_ft,hA_tc,hA_tc])
12
13 # coolant bulk flow
14 T_c_in.set_dTdt_bulkFlow(source = 250)
15 T_c_out.set_dTdt_bulkFlow(source = T_c_in.y())
16
17 # coolant convective heat transfer
18 T_c_in.set_dTdt_convective(source = T_t.y(), hA = hA_tc)
19 T_c_out.set_dTdt_convective(source = T_t.y(), hA = hA_tc)
These methods will set up symbolic expressions in the appropriate form for the backend. Note, the
source terms for the bulk flow dynamics in T_f_in and T_f_out are constant in this example, but the API
allows for these to be other state variables. For example, if the source term for the bulk flow for the
fuel inlet were the fuel outlet of some heat exchanger, T_f_hx_out, the bulk flow term for T_f_in could be
defined as follows
1 T_f_in.set_dTdt_bulkFlow(source = T_f_hx_out.y(t-tau_hx_c))
where tau_hx_c represents τhx→c, i.e. the transit time of the fuel between the heat exchanger outlet node
and the core inlet node. The solution can be generated by calling the solve() method of the System class,
which will integrate the solution on a given time grid.
1 import numpy as np
2 T = np.linspace(0,100,0.01)
3 sol = core.solve(T)
Note, if internal generation terms are included in the above system , this would introduce eight additional
nodes; one for the neutron population, six for the precursors and one for the reactivity. For the sake of
brevity therefore, internal generation is left out in the above description of the API.
==PAGE:47==
5
MSRE
The MSRE system is constructed in msrDynamics as described in Chapter 3.2. Figure 3.5 shows the nodal
construction. See Appendix C.2 for a reference implementation. Chapter 5.1.1 compares results to
those of Singh et al. [30] as well as ORNL experimental data to validate the solver. In Chapter 5.2, the
behavior and characteristics of the simulation are studied.
5.1
Validation
5.1.1
Solver Comparison
Figure 5.1 shows the initial MSRE implementation in msrDynamics, as solid lines, against that of Singh
et al. [30], as dashed lines. As the solvers agree very closely, dashed lines are not visible. Figure 5.2
Figure 5.1: MSRE: Initial msrDynamics implementation vs Singh et al. [30] SIMULINK, U-235 Fuel
shows the absolute error, |ϵ| = |Tm −Ts|, where Tm is the solution as calculated by msrDynamics and Ts is
that as calculated by Simulink, for each state variable. Absolute errors are bounded within |ϵ| = O(10−2)
during a transient, and behave well during a steady state, i.e. in the absence of transient behavior,
solutions seem to converge steadily with time. By t = 1000s, |ϵ| = O(10−6).
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Validation
41
Figure 5.2: MSRE: Initial msrDynamics implementation vs Singh et al. [30] SIMULINK, absolute error
5.1.2
Step Reactivity Insertions
As discussed in Chapter 2.1.3.1, reactivity is a dimensionless quantity that characterizes the time-
dependent behavior of the neutron population. A positive or negative reactivity insertion is an input to
the system that positively or negatively affects the reactivity. The reactivity insertions discussed below
were achieved experimentally by the withdrawal of control rods. Since the control rods have a known
relationship to the reactivity1, the resultant reactivity insertion from a control rod movement can be
quantified.
Figure 5.3 shows the computed and actual power response of the MSRE to three different step
reactivity insertions (measured in pcm)2, at three different power levels. Experimental data comes from
Steffy [34, p.
8-11]. Results agree with those achieved by Singh et al. [30]. Absolute agreement with
ORNL data is mixed, however qualitative behavior is consistent. At low power, response to reactivity
input is slower and smoother, with a damped oscillatory profile.
At higher power, the oscillatory
behavior is strongly damped. This will be discussed further in the simulation study (Chapter 5.2). The
1MW case undershoots the ORNL data, while the 8MW overshoots it significantly. This is discussed in
detail in Singh et al. [30]. In summary, increased discretization of the core with the lumped model, i.e.
increased “nodalization” [30, p.
185], leads to better agreement. This involves expanding the nodal
structure shown in Figure 3.2 to include nine different regions, with parameters reflecting the spatial
profile of internal generation and flow speeds. As the goal here is only to validate the solver, and the
one-region implementation already agrees closely with the Simulink model, the nine-region model was
not implemented.
1This is referred to as ”rod worth”, and is empirically determined for a given reactor and rod design.
2The unit pcm is commonly used in nuclear engineering, and stands for per cent mille and represents a unit of reactivity
of 1/100000
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Validation
42
(a) 1MW, 13.9 pcm
(b) 5MW, 19.6 pcm
(c) 8MW, 24.8 pcm
Figure 5.3: MSRE Computed vs Actual Response to Step Reactivity Insertions, U-233 Fuel
5.1.3
Frequency Response
The response of a system to periodic input is an important measurement with respect to stability
characteristics and control strategy. It is useful for model validation, particularly in a reduced model,
as it can determine whether complex time-dependent, transient behavior is being captured, and it can
also help characterize safety and stability by identifying resonances.
Experimental frequency response data was generated at ORNL using pseudo-random binary and
pseudo-random ternary sequences to encode square-wave reactivity input. The frequency spectrum of a
square wave includes a wide range of frequencies. Input of this form therefore equivalent to input of all of
these frequencies at once, which means that response to a broad range of frequencies can be determined
from a single test. The sequences are not purely random. Their autocorrelation functions contain a
certain periodicity, which is useful for distinguishing the input signal from noise. Figure 5.4 shows the
input from pseudo-random binary and ternary sequences (top), their associated autocorrelation function
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Validation
43
(middle), and power spectral density (PSD) plots (bottom). For pure white noise, the autocorrelation
W•68*•W•— ■38*J
-(M.DdiU YpDpBTT(T
"
06

 
T 
L 
Y 
o 
N
 
NT 
NL
sPSb PMt(bSbMs
t-((b.rsP-M sPSb
y(bQcbMtu A4W•m™389 3■m62•
(a) Pseudo-random Binary Sequence Input
-(M.DdiU YpDpBT(
" 
z 
"
3
0k6

 
T 
L 
Y 
o 
N
 
NT 
NL
sPSb PMt(bSbMs

 
T 
L 
Y 
o 
N
 
NT 
NL
t-((b.rsP-M sPSb
-
 
=
S)I

t t M
=
»




M C_
 
C
C_=_6
=
)6 C = 6 )_

 
T 
L 
Y 
o 
N
 
NT 
NL
y(bQcbMtu A4W•m™389 3■m62•K
(b) Pseudo-random Ternary Sequence Input
Figure 5.4: Pseudo-random Input for MSRE Frequency Response, Steffy [33, p. 15-19]
function would peak at t = 0 and be zero elsewhere, i.e. each point is correlated only with itself and
not with any past or future points. The PSD distribution of white noise is uniform, i.e. containing
all frequencies at equal power [33, p.
16]. The pseudo-random sequences achieve a suﬀiciently broad
frequency distribution, while maintaining predictable auto-correlation. Response data was processed
using appropriate algorithms, some of which used cross-correlations to make use of the known auto-
correlation properties of the input signal in order to generate a more accurate estimate of the response
[33, p.
35]. Theoretical response was calculated using the transfer function of the system, linearized
about its equilibrium [16, p. 124].
Luckily, a computational model is not subject to the same practical constraints, and the response
can be generated more directly. To calculate frequency response of the MSRE system as implemented
in msrDynamics, a periodic reactivity input is defined with a small (1pcm) amplitude, compared to the
reactivities associated with the step-insertions, or fuel feedback. Response data is then generated for a
broad range of frequencies. Such a small perturbation should be well approximated by a linear response.
As such, the frequency of the output is assumed to be the same as that of the input, a known property
of linear time-invariant systems, and the magnitude and phase shift for a given frequency are calculated
directly with appropriate peak-finding algorithms.
Figure 5.5 shows the magnitude and phase shift of the MSRE system’s response to periodic reactivity
input as calculated with msrDynamics, and compared to ORNL experimental and theoretical results.
Agreement experiment is generally good for the experiments at 5MW and 8MW. The data for the
1MW experiment is noisy, due to a flaw in the technique identified after the fact, and corrected for
subsequent experiments [35, p.
14-19]. The response of the msrDynamics model undershoots theory at
lower frequencies and overshoots it at higher frequencies. This is likely due to the increased nodalization
of the model on which the transfer functions were based on to generate the theoretical repsonse. This is
consistent with the behavior of the step-reactivity insertions, where the reduced model over-estimated
the power response compared to that of the expanded model. Peaks in the magnitude indicate resonance,
and occur at lower input frequency at lower power; around 0.03rad/s at 1MW, and around 0.15rad/s at
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Simulation Study
44
(a) Frequency Response at 1MW
(b) Frequency Response at 5MW
(c) Frequency Response at 8MW
Figure 5.5: MSRE: Response to Periodic Reactivity Input
5MW and 8MW. This is consistent with the observed transient behavior at low power (Figure 5.3(a)),
where frequency of oscillatory behavior was lower.
Dips in both the magnitude and phase of the response are visible at 5MW and 8MW. This is associ-
ated with fuel re-circulation, whereby the negative reactivity contribution from control rod movement
is compounded by hot fuel from the initial transient completing the external loop and re-entering the
core [35, p. 17-21]. Sluggish dynamics prevent this effect at low power. This will be discussed further
in Chapter 5.1.2. The phase responds similarly to any driven harmonic oscillator, whereby lag at low
frequency is governed by the system’s inertia, in this case, thermal inertia. The input is then essentially
in phase at resonance. At higher frequency, the input is faster than the inertia can respond, and the
phase lags the input.
Response to both periodic and step reactivity insertion of the model implemented with msrDynamics
agree closely with those of Singh et al. [30], and generally agree with those of ORNL, with deviations
mostly due to the higher level of nodalization in the ORNL model.
5.2
Simulation Study
The goal of this section is to characterize the behavior and stability of the MSRE model, and explain
some of the behavior presented in the previous section.
To demonstrate general system behavior, Figure 5.6 shows solution generated following a positive
and negative reactivity 24pcm insertions at t = 0. Solid lines and dashed lines correspond to negative
and positive reactivity insertions at t = 0 respectively. Note, these insertions are achieved by setting
the initial value of reactivity, ρ(0), to a value less than ρ0, eq. (2.34), for a negative insertion, and
conversely ρ(0) > ρ0 for a positive insertion. Mathematically therefore, the initial value condition on ρ
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Simulation Study
45
represents an impulse, or delta-function input, i.e. it is an instantaneous condition at t = 0 rather than
a sustained input. This is atypical under the operating conditions of a reactor, but it demonstrates
the general behavior of the system under a transient. Recall by eq. (2.37) that n is a direct proxy
Figure 5.6: MSRE Dynamics Following 24pcm Reactivity Impulse
for power; multiplying n by the nominal power P0 would give instantaneous power. From the plots
of n it can be observed that the power jump from the positive insertion is tempered by the negative
temperature-reactivity feedback until an equilibrium is reached. Similarly, the power dip from negative
insertion decreases temperature, thereby increasing reactivity and power until an equilibrium is reached.
Notably, these equilibria are not the same, due to the nonlinearity of the model.
The step reactivity insertions shown in Figure 5.6, show damped, sluggish oscillatory behavior at
low power, and heavily damped oscillatory behavior, with faster dynamics at high power. Oscillatory
behavior can be attributed to the form of thermal feedback, (2.43), which acts as a kind of restoring
force to an equilibrium. Since flow rates and heat capacities are assumed the same at all power levels,
which results from the previous section prove to be an adequate assumption, the rapidity of restoration
to equilibrium at higher power eliminates the oscillatory behavior.
Figure 5.7 shows the model response to a 40pcm step reactivity insertion at several different power
levels using the baseline nonlinear model, as well a model with point-kinetics linearized about the equi-
librium state.3 As described, oscillatory behavior is strongly damped at higher power. Two additional
features of the MSRE dynamics are also apparent. Firstly, the fractional response, ∆P
P is significantly
higher at lower power. At 0.2MW, peak response reaches ∼1500% of baseline power. The fluid vol-
umes represent a large portion of the specific heat capacity of the system. Therefore at low power,
temperature changes are slower, and consequently, feedback response is weaker. This effect highlights
3A nonlinear system ˙x = f(x) near a hyperbolic equilibrium point x0 can be approximated by ˙x = Jx −x0 where J is the
Jacobian matrix of the system evaluated at x0, Df(x0) [28, p.
119]. This is known as the Hartman-Grobman Theorem.
For more detail on this linearization with respect to the model systems, see Appendix A.2.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Simulation Study
46
Figure 5.7: MSRE Response to 40pcm Step Reactivity Insertion
the importance of the nonlinear effects at low power. At higher power, where fractional response is on
the order of 30-40% of baseline, the linear equations are a reasonable approximation. At low power
however, with a fractional response on the order of ∼150-1000%, the nonlinear term ρ(t)n(t) becomes
increasingly important, and error against the linear model grows substantially [35, p. 8-10].
Secondly, there is a transient plateau that appears in the response at higher power. This a product
of the delay dynamics. Consider a positive step reactivity insertion and a resultant increase in reactivity,
and thereby temperature and power. At high power, the feedback response is strong and rapid, due
to the larger temperature differentials, and the system is brought back down to a new equilibrium, at
a higher power, following the insertion. The response is suﬀiciently rapid, to have settled at this new
equilibrium before the hot fuel from the initial transient has re-entered the core. When this occurs, the
increased temperature results in further negative feedback, disrupting the temporary equilibrium that
was reached purely from the feedback effects. Figure 5.8 shows that when τhx→c, the delay between the
==PAGE:54==
5.2 Simulation Study
47
heat exchanger and the core, is increased, the transient plateau is commensurately extended. Vertical
(a) 40pcm Step Insertion, scpg = 1.7e−3MJ/(kg · K), 10MW
(b) 40pcm Step Insertion, 10MW, scpg = 1.7e−5MJ/(kg · K), 10MW
Figure 5.8: MSRE Response to Step Reactivity Input with Different Delays
dashed lines represent the total external transit time of hte fuel, from outlet to inlet. The disruption of
the plateau immediately follows the elapsed transit time, consistent with expectation. Note, when τ is
extended, it is apparent that the power response has not quite reached an equilibrium. This is due to
the large moderator mass, which slows down the system dynamics as it heats and cools. Figure 5.8(b),
is the same model, where the moderator (graphite) specific heat capacity, scpg, is arbitrarily reduced,
to demonstrate that the departure from equilibrium in the plateau in Figure 5.8(a), is only due to the
large thermal mass of the moderator, rather than any lingering reactivity effects.
Chapter 5.1.1.3 discusses the response of the system, as implemented in msrDynamics, to periodic
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Simulation Study
48
reactivity input. Results generally agree with those of Singh et al. [30], as well as theory and experiment.
At 1MW, the magnitude of the response is higher across all frequencies, consistent with the results of
the step reactivity responses; higher fractional response at lower power. All three power levels show
prominent peaks at the natural frequency of the system. At higher power, a distinct dip is seen near
the peak. This can be explained by the fuel circulation. Consider the periodic input created by the
raising and lowering of a control rod. The initial raising of the control rod increases reactivity and
temperature, sending hot fuel out into the external loop. If the hot fuel enters during the raising phase,
i.e. positive input, the hot fuel feedback dampens the positive input, attenuating the magnitude of the
response. Figure 5.9 shows the frequency response of the MSRE model at two different values for the
total fuel circuit time τ = τl+τc; one (top) at baseline, and the other (bottom) doubled, i.e. τ = 2(τl+τc).
Green vertical dashed lines represent input frequency corresponding to a period equal to this fuel circuit
time, i.e. f = 2π/τ. As expected, increasing the circulation time, increases the input period associated
Figure 5.9: MSRE Frequency Response, Resonant Peaks and Dips Due to Fuel Circulation, msrDynamics
==PAGE:56==
5.2 Simulation Study
49
with the dip, and the dip occurs at or near when the input period is equal to total fuel circuit time.
Essentially, if the sign of the input at t = t −τ is the same as that at time t, feedback is attenuated, as
positive input at t = t −τ results in negative temperature feedback at time t, and vice versa. By the
same reasoning, if the input frequency is reduced such that the change in the input at time t −τ, is the
opposite of that at time t, the equivalent of a minus 180-degree phase shift, a positive compounding
effect would be expected. This is shown by the orange vertical dashed line at f = 2π/(2τ), where we see
a magnitude peak.
Notably, there appears to be a damped periodic behavior to these peaks and dips, following the
initial two indicated in Figure 5.9. Presumably, this is the same effect as the initial peak and dip, at
higher harmonics.
==PAGE:57==
6
ARE
The ARE model is constructed in msrDynamics as described in Chapter 3.4, and shown in Figure 3.12. A
full reference implementation is given in Appendix D.2.
6.1
Validation
This section attempts to validate the ARE model against experimental data. As discussed in Chapter
3.4.2, available data is scant compared to that of the MSRE. Additionally, significant issues in data
collection were noted after decommissioning, particularly with respect to the core fuel temperature
sensors. Attempts to correct the data were made by correlation with secondary sensors, as described in
Appendix K of Cottrell et al. [8, pg. 180]. As a result of these issues however, Cottrell et al. [8, pg. 182]
writes, “...much potentially useful data had to be discarded because the exact times of the readings were
not known or the data were taken before equilibrium conditions were established.” Notably, no time
series coolant temperature data are available, only a stead-state readings and certain measurements
during the coolant feedback calculation are available. Helium temperature data is missing altogether.
Nevertheless, certain data of interest survive that can be used to validate the model insofar as the
available data are available and accurate.
6.1.1
Steady-State Analysis
This section compares the equilibrium state as calculated by msrDynamics to experimental values. The
basis of the experimental values is the 25-hour “Xenon run”, experiment H-11 in Cottrell et al. [8], a
sustained run with the reactor at constant power and equilibrium temperature. The available data
consists of fuel and coolant temperature differentials across the core, which can be combined with flow
rates to calculate extracted power (see (6.5)), and reactor power, measured from neutron flux in the
core or from heat extraction. Table 6.1 summarizes the available equilibrium data. Note the slight
discrepancy between reactor power from core neutron flux and that from heat extraction. This may be
attributable to the heat loss from the instrumentation cooling system, which Cottrell et al. [8, p. 184]
estimate to be around 1% of generated heat, which would resolve the discrepancy very closely; 2.12MW
minus 1% of 2.12 MW ≈2.10 MW. As the msrDynamics model does not account for instrumentation
cooling, and it was largely ignored in the ORNL analyses, reactor power from neutron flux is used for
all subsequent analyses.
Table 6.1: ARE: Equilibrium Measurements from 25-Hour Xenon Run, Cottrell et al. [8]
Variable
Measurement, ORNL-1845
Reference
Fuel Inlet Temperature
927.0◦K
p. 120
Fuel Outlet Temperature
1101◦K
p. 120
Coolant Inlet Temperature
1226◦K
p. 120
Coolant Outlet Temperature
1335◦K
p. 120
Reactor Power, from Neutron Flux
2.12 MW
p. 186
Fuel Heat Extraction
1.52 MW
p. 120
Coolant Heat Extraction
0.577 MW
p. 120
Reactor Power, from Heat Extraction
2.10 MW
p. 186
==PAGE:58==
6.1 Validation
51
Using parameters as given in Chapter 3.4.2 and the nodal structure shown in Figure 3.12, results are
generated for negative and positive reactivity pulse inputs at t = 0, in order to examine the equilibrium.
Figure 6.2 shows the results for each state variable, where solid and dashed lines represent negative and
positive reactivity pulses respectively. The self-stabilizing behavior following reactivity input appears
to be stronger than that of the MSRE, with transient behavior effectively stabilized by t = 100s. This is
expected due to the stronger negative temperature-reactivity coeﬀicient for the ARE. Additionally, the
dynamics are more complex, showing rich behavior before reaching equilibrium. This is also expected,
due to the added complexity of the ARE system compared to that of the MSRE, with two circulating
core fluids, each with a separate configuration of secondary heat exchangers.
Immediately apparent is a discrepancy between the steady-state power as computed with msrDynamics
, which is around 1.62 MW, and that reported by ORNL, 2.12 MW [8, p.
186].
Examining the
temperature profiles highlights also highlights certain discrepancies.
Figure 6.3 shows the fuel and
coolant temperatures across the core following the positive reactivity pulse, and the resultant (from
(6.5)) power extraction in each, experimental measurements.
Table 6.4 summarizes the computed
temperature differences across the core compared to those recorded in ORNL-1845 [8, p. 121]. There is
significant discrepancy in the temperature profiles, particularly for that of the coolant. Ultimately, the
steady-state power and temperature profile results from a balance between generation via fission and
disposal via the heat exchangers. There is significantly more uncertainty in the latter than the former,
and will thus be the primary point of analysis for the purpose of equilibrium validation. Notably, as
will be seen in the simulation study, feedback effects are only very loosely coupled to equilibrium power,
but are more important for transient behavior.
6.1.1.1
Heat Transfer Coeﬀicients: Overall
The heat transfer coeﬀicients for the heat exchangers, given in tables 3.14-3.18, come largely from a
thermodynamic and heat analysis, ORNL-1535 (Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23]), performed in 1953
(two years prior to operation) and based on a combination of analytical calculations and design data.
Figure 6.5 shows the values for the fuel-helium heat exchange, as given by Lubarsky and Greenstreet
[23, p.
47]. “Liquid” here refers to the fuel. Where hA is the product of the convective heat transfer
coeﬀicient and the wedded area at the interface of a material, the quantity, 1/hA, can be thought of as
the thermal “resistance” to heat transfer through that material. It can therefore be added in series to
find the thermal resistance between two materials, the inverse of which gives the effective heat transfer
coeﬀicient, hA between the two materials [15, p.
28].1. The heat transfer coeﬀicient between the fuel
and the tubes, hA ft, can therefore be calculated with
1
hA ft
=
1
hA f
+ 1
hAt
(6.1)
Using values from Figure 6.5, this gives hA ft = 0.006 MW/◦C, as given in Table 3.15. Coeﬀicients for
the tube-helium interface, as well as analogous coeﬀicients in the coolant side heat exchangers are all
calculated in this way.
1For more on steady-state conduction in one dimension, see Chapter 2 of Holman [15]
Table 6.4: ARE: Temperatures across core & Fractional Heat Extraction
Source
∆T Across Core (◦K)
Fractional Power Extraction
Fuel, msrDynamics
146
0.80
Fuel, ORNL-1845
173
0.72
Coolant, msrDynamics
32.1
0.19
Coolant, ORNL-1845
61
0.27
==PAGE:59==
6.1 Validation
52
Figure 6.2: ARE: Response to reactivity pulse at t = 0. Solid lines correspond to negative pulse,
dashed lines correspond to a positive pulse.
==PAGE:60==
6.1 Validation
53
Figure 6.3: ARE: Fuel and Coolant Temperatures & Fractional Heat Extraction


 
  






   


 


Figure 6.5: Fuel-Helium Heat Exchanger, Heat Transfer Coeﬀicients, Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23,
p. 47]
In a counterflow heat exchanger, the heat flow between two fluids, “hot” and “cold”, can be described
by [15, p. 533-535]2
qhot−>cold = hAhot−>cold · ∆Tm
(6.2)
where ∆Tm is the the log mean temperature difference (LMTD), defined as [15, p. 533]
∆Tm = (Thot,in −Tcold,out) −(Thot,out −Tcold,in)
log
 Thot,in−Tcold,out
Thot,out−Tcold,in

(6.3)
Since the inlet and outlet temperatures, as well as the dissipated power is generally empirically known,
this can be used to attain an estimate of the actual “overall” heat transfer coeﬀicients realized, by
component, in the experiment. In a steady-state, q would be the power dissipated at the given interface,
and ∆Tm can be calculated from the measured inlet and outlet temperatures. The overall coeﬀicient
governing the heat flow between the two materials can be therefore be estimated with
hAhot→cold = qhot→cold
∆Tm
(6.4)
This is essentially the method used by both Spinelli [31] and Singh et al. [30] to calculate the overall
heat transfer coeﬀicient for the radiator for the MSRE. For the MSRE, this is straightforward, since all
of the power is dissipated in the radiator. It amounts therefore to a single calculation using the nominal
power, and an estimate of the average temperature difference across the two materials in the radiator.
Since the ARE system consists of eight different heat exchangers, to apply this method first requires an
estimate of the power dissipated within each. For a given fluid-to-fluid heat exchanger component, the
rate at which energy is removed from the hot fluid, U = dQ
dt , by conservation of energy, can be expressed
as
U = ˙mC(Tin −Tout)
(6.5)
2This can also be seen as a more sophisticated formulation of the advective heat flow equation introduced in Chapter
2.2, (2.41)
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Validation
54
Dividing this quantity by the steady state power gives the fraction of the total power dissipated within
the component at steady state. Table 6.6 shows results from the steady state shown in Figure 6.2. When
calculated on the level of helium-water heat exchangers, results agree very closely (O(10−5)), indicative
of equilibrium. The model results in 81% of power dissipated in the fuel, and around 19% in the coolant.
This is in fair agreement with the measured heat extraction of 72% and 27% reported by Cottrell et al.
[8] (see Table 6.1). The difference however, may suggest inaccuracies in the heat transfer coeﬀicients.
With estimates of the fractional power dissipation by component available, it is possible to estimate
the overall heat transfer coeﬀicients with (6.4). Below is a sample calculation of the overall heat transfer
coeﬀicient for the fuel-helium heat exchangers using the msrDynamics API.
1 # ... set up ARE system
2
3 # generate solution
4 ARE.solve(T)
5
6 # steady state power
7 P_ss = P*n.y_out[-1]
8
9 # fractional power dissipation across components
10 p_hxfhf1 = (c_f2.y_out[-1]-hx_fh1_f2.y_out[-1])*(W_f/2)*scp_f/P_ss
11 p_hxfhf2 = (c_f2.y_out[-1]-hx_fh2_f2.y_out[-1])*(W_f/2)*scp_f/P_ss
12
13 # calculate LMTD based on design data from ORNL-1845 pg. 121
14 dT_lm_f = ((F_to_K(1450)-F_to_K(620))-(F_to_K(1150)-F_to_K(180)))/math.log((F_to_K(1450)-
F_to_K(620))/(F_to_K(1150)-F_to_K(180)))
15
16 # calculate overall coefficient for each fuel-helium heat exchanger
17 h_overall_f1 = P*(hx_hwf1)/dT_lm_f
18 h_overall_f2 = P*(hx_hwf1)/dT_lm_f
Table 6.7, summarizes these estimates, against those initially calculated from Lubarsky and Greenstreet
[23]. Using (6.1), the fluid-to-tube coeﬀicients can be combined to get the total fluid-to-fluid coeﬀicients,
for a more direct comparison with overall coeﬀicients estimated with (6.4). Results are shown in Table
6.8. Smaller fluid-to-tube coeﬀicients dominate the overall heat transfer. Recall 1/hA can be seen as
a thermal resistance, analogous to that of an electrical circuit, and therefore the material interface
Table 6.6: ARE: Heat Exchanger Fraction of Total Power Dissipated
Component
Fraction of Total Power Dissipated
Fuel-Helium HX 1
0.40483
Fuel-Helium HX 2
0.40484
Coolant-Helium HX 1
0.09438
Coolant-Helium HX 2
0.09438
Total
0.99846
Table 6.7: ARE Heat Exchanger Coeﬀicient Estimates, all values in (MW/°K)
Parameter
Description
ORNL-1535, [23]
Overall, eq. (6.4)
hA ft, fh
HX Fuel-Helium, Fuel→Tubes
6.09e-03
3.35e-03
hAth, fh
HX Fuel-Helium, Tubes→Helium
1.4e-03
3.35e-03
hAht,hw,f
HX Helium-Water, Fuel-Side, Helium→Tubes
4.73e-03
11.9e-03
hAtw,hw,f
HX Helium-Water, Fuel-Side, Tubes→Water
343e-03
11.9e-03
hAct,ch
HX Coolant-Helium, Coolant→Tubes
10.3e-03
1.43e-03
hAth,ch
HX Coolant-Helium, Tubes→Helium
0.45e-03
1.43e-03
hAht,hw,c
HX Helium-Water, Coolant-Side, Helium→Tubes
0.48e-03
1.90e-03
hAtw,hw,c
HX Helium-Water, Coolant-Side, Tubes→Water
89.3e-03
1.90e-03
==PAGE:62==
6.1 Validation
55
Table 6.8: ARE Heat Exchanger Coeﬀicient Estimates, Fluid-to-Fluid, all values in (MW/°K)
Parameter
Description
ORNL-1535, [23]
Overall, eq. (6.4)
hA fh
HX Fuel-Helium, Fuel→Helium
1.14e-03
3.35e-03
hAhw, f
HX Helium-Water, Fuel-Side, Helium→Water
4.67e-03
11.9e-03
hAch
HX Coolant-Helium, Coolant→Helium
0.43e-03
1.43e-03
hAhw,c
HX Helium-Water, Coolant-Side, Helium→Water
0.48e-03
1.90e-03
can be seen as thermal resistors in series, with the largest resistance (smallest conductivity) governing
the maximum allowed flow. Note, in order to calculate the LMTD, ∆Tm, across the heat exchangers,
knowledge of helium temperatures is required. As mentioned previously, operational data for steady
state fuel temperature was recorded, however no helium temperature data is available. The calculation
of ∆Tm therefore uses design values from ORNL-1845, Cottrell et al. [8, p. 121-122], for both fuel and
helium.
The overall coeﬀicients calculated with (6.4) are on average higher than those estimated by Lubarsky
and Greenstreet [23] by a factor of three. The source of the discrepancy is unclear, nor is it explicitly
mentioned in the ORNL documents.
It could be partly explained by the fact that the coeﬀicients
calculated by Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23] assumed that the coolant would be sodium-potassium
(NaK), but by the time of the experiment, they opted for pure sodium (Na) as a coolant, due to it’s
higher boiling point and superior heat transfer properties. On average, at the coolant temperatures
seen during operation, the thermal conductivity of Na is two to three times higher than that of NaK
[12, p.
45]. Appendix M of ORNL-1845, Cottrell et al. [8, p.
188-189], discusses that without the
helium temperature data, comparison to the thermodynamic analysis in ORNL-1535, Lubarsky and
Greenstreet [23], from which the heat transfer coeﬀicients for the model are calculated, is not possible.
Therefore only overall heat balances are examined. As mentioned, this is why purely design data, not
operational data was used to calculate the overall coeﬀicients above, which require helium temperature
data. It is however noteworthy, that the overall coeﬀicients derived from this design data are significantly
different than those calculated from Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23], as it may indicate that updates
were made to the calculations closer to the experiment. In summary, there is insuﬀicient data for an
empirical calculation of the heat transfer coeﬀicients, but the design data available in the report seems
to be based on different assumptions that the data provided in the prior thermodynamic analysis, on
which the msrDynamics derives its heat transfer data.
Using the updated coeﬀicients, the equilibrium calculated with msrDynamics is reexamined. Figure 6.9,
shows the ARE system steady state following reactivity pulse at t = 0. With the updated coeﬀicients,
steady-state power reaches equilibrium around 2.42 MW, closer to the reported 2.12 MW, than when
using the calculated coeﬀicients, which results in equilibrium power around 1.61 MW (Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.10 shows the temperature and fractional heat extraction profiles, with results summarized in
Table 6.11.
Agreement in steady-state power and fractional power extraction is overall better using
the overall heat transfer coeﬀicients. Agreement in temperature differentials is better for the coolant,
and worse for the fuel, but since the steady-state power is not the same, the fractional power extraction
is a better indicator of general heat transfer characteristics, and reflects closer agreement. Notably, the
mean temperature of both the fuel and the coolant are under-estimated. This may be due to inaccuracy
in the core moderator heat transfer coeﬀicients, as the moderator represents the largest thermal mass
Table 6.11: ARE: Temperatures across core & fractional heat extraction, updated heat transfer coef-
ficients
Source
∆T Across Core (◦K)
Fractional Power Extraction
Fuel, msrDynamics
209
0.76
Fuel, ORNL-1845
173
0.72
Coolant, msrDynamics
58
0.22
Coolant, ORNL-1845
61
0.27
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Validation
56
Figure 6.9: ARE: Response to reactivity pulse at t = 0, using overall heat transfer coeﬀicients
==PAGE:64==
6.1 Validation
57
Figure 6.10: ARE: Fuel and coolant temperatures & fractional heat extraction
in the core by a significant margin, and is therefore thought to dominate steady-state energy balance.
Note, overall coeﬀicients were not calculated for the core, since the LMTD required for estimation using
(6.4) breaks down in the case of internal generation.3
Estimated overall heat transfer coeﬀicients indicate that actual coeﬀicients were higher than those
calculated by Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23]. Agreement with experimental steady-state measurements
is improved, but discrepancies remain. There is significant uncertainty in the calculation of the overall
coeﬀicients. For one, the steady-state power extraction by component was calculated using the initial
model, based on design data from Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23]. Using the values from the steady
state model implicitly assumes that these fractional extractions are independent of the heat transfer
coeﬀicients, when in reality, there would be a mutual dependence. This is confirmed by recalculating
the fractional extraction in these components following the update.4. Secondly, as helium temperature
data is unavailable, the temperatures used to calculate the log mean temperature differences in the heat
exchangers are from design data in Cottrell et al. [8]. These values seem to incorporate an update to
the estimates reported in Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23], but, based on the discrepancies seen between
operational and design data for parameters for which data is available (typically ∼5-15%), likely present
further error into the temperature estimates. Additionally, as mentioned, core heat transfer coeﬀicients
were not updated from those calculated from Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23]. Lastly, as mentioned at
the start of the Chapter, significant issues in the temperature data collection were discovered after the
experiment, which had to be manually corrected. There is therefore considerable uncertainty in the
measured data.
6.1.1.2
Heat Transfer Coeﬀicients: Estimation
Another approach to estimating the heat transfer coeﬀicients is parameter estimation. As demonstrated
in the preceding section, significant uncertainty exists in the analytical estimates of the heat transfer
coeﬀicients from Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23]. Calculation of the overall coeﬀicients by (6.4) improves
agreement between the msrDyanmics model and experimental data, but discrepancies remain, particularly
with respect to absolute temperature differences across the core. Parameter estimation allows for the
data to inform coeﬀicient estimates, rather than vice-versa, and can be informative in identifying the
source of certain discrepancies.
The goal of using parameter estimation on the heat transfer coeﬀicients is to identify potential
sources of error from design values, and to improve the accuracy of the model. It is not the goal to use
parameter estimation to tune all of the parameters to generate a high-fidelity model. The quality of
the existing data does not support such an approach, and would likely lead to over-fitting. Therefore,
3For example, if Tcold,out > Thot,in, which is true for the ARE core in steady state, the log term in the denominator can
no longer be evaluated.
4The difference is minor; on the order of 2-4%
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Validation
58
a simple approach to the estimation is suﬀicient. The estimates of heat transfer parameters are given
to SciPy’s optimization module, scipy.optimize, with bounds limited by a factor of 10, and an objective
function as a total of the sum squared differences between power and the fuel and coolant temperature
differences across the core. The objective function does not include the error against fractional heat
deposition, as it is a function of the power and temperature differences, and is therefore implicitly
minimized anyway. Below is an implementation of the objective function.
1 import numpy as np
2 from relaxations import relax_hA
3 from parameters import *
4
5 # define objective function
6 def objective(params):
7
'''
8
Takes a given set of parameters and returns the total sum-squared error
9
against target calues
10
'''
11
12
# generate solution
13
sol_jit = relax_hA(params)
14
15
# calculate error after equilibrium is reached
16
T = np.arange(0,10000,0.1)
17
T_eq = 9000
18
i_eq = [i for i in range(len(T)) if T[i] >= T_eq]
19
20
pow = np.array([s[6]*P for s in sol_jit])[i_eq]
21
pow_error = sum((pow - P)**2)
22
23
fuel_in = np.array([s[15] for s in sol_jit])[i_eq]
24
fuel_in_error = sum((fuel_in-F_to_K(1209))**2)
25
26
fuel_out = np.array([s[1] for s in sol_jit])[i_eq]
27
fuel_out_error = sum((fuel_out-F_to_K(1522))**2)
28
29
coolant_in = np.array([s[25] for s in sol_jit])[i_eq]
30
coolant_in_error = sum((coolant_in-F_to_K(1226))**2)
31
32
coolant_out = np.array([s[4] for s in sol_jit])[i_eq]
33
coolant_out_error = sum((coolant_out -F_to_K(1335))**2)
34
35
tot = pow_error + fuel_in_error + fuel_out_error + coolant_in_error + coolant_out_error
36
37
return tot
Note, relax_hA() is simply a function that runs the msrDynamics taking the given heat transfer parameters
as argument. Once initial guesses, (initial_guess below), and their associated bounds (bounds below) are
defined, the estimation can be invoked as shown below.
1 from scipy.optimize import minimize
2 result = minimize(
3
objective,
4
initial_guess ,
5
bounds=bounds,
6
method='Nelder-Mead'
7
)
The Nelder-Mead method is chosen as it was found to have a much smaller memory footprint.
Using the method above, all heat transfer coeﬀicients are estimated. Table 6.12 shows the results.
A notable advantage of parameter estimation is that direct material-to-material coeﬀicients can be
==PAGE:66==
6.1 Validation
59
Table 6.12: ARE Heat Exchanger Coeﬀicient Estimates, all values in (MW/°K)
Parameter
Description
ORNL-1535, [23]
Overall, eq. (6.4)
Estimation
hA ft,c
Core, Fuel→Tubes
48.9e-03
-
176e-03
hAtc,c
Core, Tubes→Coolant
14.6e-03
-
13.3e-03
hAcm,c
Core, Coolant→Moderator
0.92e-03
-
0.88e-03
hA ft, fh
HX Fuel-Helium, Fuel→Tubes
6.09e-03
3.35e-03
21.7e-03
hAth, fh
HX Fuel-Helium, Tubes→Helium
1.4e-03
3.35e-03
1.06e-03
hAht,hw,f
HX Helium-Water, Fuel-Side, Helium→Tubes
4.73e-03
11.9e-03
22.4e-03
hAtw,hw, f
HX Helium-Water, Fuel-Side, Tubes→Water
343e-03
11.9e-03
738e-03
hAct,ch
HX Coolant-Helium, Coolant→Tubes
10.3e-03
1.43e-03
27.5e-03
hAth,ch
HX Coolant-Helium, Tubes→Helium
0.45e-03
1.43e-03
0.47e-03
hAht,hw,c
HX Helium-Water, Coolant-Side, Helium→Tubes
0.48e-03
1.90e-03
1.83e-03
hAtw,hw,c
HX Helium-Water, Coolant-Side, Tubes→Water
89.3e-03
1.90e-03
68.3e-03
estimated at each interface, rather than an overall coeﬀicient between the two, which implicitly assumes
equal wedded area, and only holds in a steady state. Estimated coeﬀicients are generally higher than
design values from Lubarsky and Greenstreet [23], particularly on the hot side of the heat exchangers.
For example, coeﬀicients for core fuel, heat exchanger fuel, and heat exchanger helium on the fuel side are
all higher than design values by a factor of three to four. Coolant-side values tend to agree more closely
with design values. This however, may simply be an artifact of the system’s overall higher sensitivity
to the fuel heat transfer parameters, as the fuel is dissipating 70-80% of system heat. Consequently,
the estimation may not deviate very far from the initial guesses, which are the design values, as it has
little effect on the objective function compared to varying the fuel-side parameters.
Condensed results calculated with (6.1), as in Table 6.8, for fluid-to-fluid coeﬀicients are shown in
Table 6.13. Notably, the parameter estimation shows a dramatic increase in the helium-water heat
transfer coeﬀicient on the fuel side compared to both design and overall coeﬀicient estimates, and
actually shows a modest decrease in the fuel-helium coeﬀicient. This likely plays a role in the closer
agreement of core temperature profiles, shown below, achieved by including the temperature profiles
in the objective function. Ultimately, both methods reflect significantly higher fuel-side heat transfer
coeﬀicients.
Figure 6.14 shows the system equilibrium following a reactivity pulse, using the heat transfer co-
eﬀicients from the parameter estimation. Figure 6.15 shows the temperature profiles of the fuel and
coolant across the core, along with the fractional heat extraction of the fuel and coolant, with values
summarized in Table 6.16.
Equilibrium power is now 1.83MW, underestimating the experimental value
of 2.12MW, and slightly further from the estimate of power using the overall heat transfer coeﬀicients of
2.35MW. The temperature profiles agree more closely, with fractional heat extraction agreeing within
1%, and ∆T agreeing within 20◦K.
Results from the parameter estimation seem to add resolution to the conclusion drawn from those
using the overall heat transfer coeﬀicients calculated with (6.4). That is, both indicate higher heat
transfer coeﬀicients on the fuel side, but the discrepancies between the two with respect to the fuel-
helium and helium water coeﬀicients on the fuel side offer an interesting insight, as the discrepancy
Table 6.13: ARE Heat Exchanger Coeﬀicient Estimates, Fluid-to-Fluid, all values in (MW/°K)
Parameter
Description
ORNL-1535, [23]
Overall, eq. (6.4)
Estimation
hA fc,c
Core, Fuel→Coolant
11.2e-03
-
12.4e-03
hA fh
HX Fuel-Helium, Fuel→Helium
1.14e-03
3.35e-03
1.01e-03
hAhw, f
HX Helium-Water, Fuel-Side, Helium→Water
4.67e-03
11.9e-03
21.7e-03
hAch
HX Coolant-Helium, Coolant→Helium
0.43e-03
1.43e-03
0.46e-03
hAhw,c
HX Helium-Water, Coolant-Side, Helium→Water
0.48e-03
1.90e-03
1.78e-03
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Validation
60
Figure 6.14: ARE: Response to reactivity pulse at t = 0 using heat transfer coeﬀicients from parameter
estimation
Table 6.16: ARE: Temperatures across core & fractional heat extraction, using heat transfer coeﬀi-
cients from parameter estimation
Source
∆T Across Core (◦K)
Fractional Power Extraction
Fuel, msrDynamics
152
0.73
Fuel, ORNL-1845
173
0.72
Coolant, msrDynamics
51
0.26
Coolant, ORNL-1845
61
0.27
==PAGE:68==
6.1 Validation
61
Figure 6.15: ARE: Fuel and coolant temperatures & fractional heat extraction
is negative at the level of the fuel-helium heat exchanger, and positive on the level of the helium-
water (fuel-side) heat exchanger.
More concretely, coeﬀicient estimates from (6.4), indicate higher
heat fuel-side heat transfer coeﬀicients at both levels; fuel-helium and helium-water.
Whereas the
parameter estimation, actually estimates the fuel-helium coeﬀicient to be lower than design, but the
helium-water coeﬀicient to be much higher than design. This is perhaps why the mean fuel temperature,
is underestimated using the overall coeﬀicients (see Figure 6.10), but that shown in Figure 6.15, is higher
and closer to the experimental value. This may be explained by the fact that a lower coeﬀicient at the
fuel-helium level requires a higher temperature differential to be maintained to dissipate the same
amount of energy.
6.1.2
Reactivity Insertion
In the steady state analysis, the validity of the solver was examined from the perspective of equilibrium
operation. This section is an effort to validate the model against the dynamical behavior of the sys-
tem, by comparison to experimental data on the system response to a positive and negative reactivity
insertion. Experiment H-8 of the ARE, Cottrell et al. [8, p.
78-81], consisted of a 400pcm reactivity
insertion by withdrawal of a control rod, followed by reinsertion after a new equilibrium had been
reached. Figure 6.17 summarizes the available data from the experiment. These data are imported
using a graphical data interpreter5, and corrected against numerical data given on page 80 of Cottrell
et al. [8].6 Much important data are missing from this experiment. Most notably missing, is any record
of the coolant temperatures, which was likely discarded as unusable due to the temperature sensor
issues mentioned in Appendix K of Cottrell et al. [8, p. 180-183]. Other data, like flow rates and heat
transfer coeﬀicients, are all gathered from the 25-hour Xenon run equilibrium, experiment H-11, during
which the reactor was operating at 2.12MW. The reactivity insertion experiment however, started with
the reactor at 2.32 MW [34, p. 80]. Without more data to correct for this, these parameters, with the
exception of power and initial fuel temperatures, will be assumed the same as for the Xenon run.
6.1.2.1
Model Results
Figures 6.18 show the results for the reactivity insertion experiment as calculated by msrDynamics, com-
pared to experimental data, for the baseline model, i.e. that using enirely design coeﬀicients. The
models using overall and estimated heat transfer coeﬀicients have no effect on dynamic behavior, and
only show the previously discussed difference in equilibrium power. Agreement in fractional response,
∆P and ∆T, between the three models is equally poor.
5See, https://automeris.io/WebPlotDigitizer/
6If fed directly to the graphical data interpreter, initial values do not agree with the numerical data given in Cottrell
et al. [8, p.
80]. Imported data is therefore adjusted to match the initial values.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Validation
62
ORNL-LR-DWG 6557
-REGULATING 
ROO ACTION 
I 
ROD 
ROO BEING 
ROD FJL-Y 
ROO BEchG 
ROD FLLLY
WITHORAWN 
W ~ T H O R A W N ~ N S E R
_I_ 
__ 
FULLY INSERTED 
NSERTEO 
_., 
I 
I 
1650 
u. 
o, 4600 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
REACTOR FUEL OUTLET TEMPERATURE-, 
W 
d 5 1550 
8 8 1500 
5 $ 4450 
$1400 
3 
0 
2 %  
W 
i; 300 
e 
k
.
 
275 
K Q  
8 250 
a 2  
225 
w” 
2 200 
(75 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/REACTOR 
PERIOD 
I 
I 
I 
I 
[
I
 
I 
I 
r, \I 
L 
c 
T
I
 
I 
I
1
 
1
7
1
 I
I
 
Y 
I 
ch 
+ I  
I 
I 
I
I
 
-----+-I J 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 6.17: ARE: Reactivity Insertion Experiment Data, Cottrell et al. [8, p. 79]
==PAGE:70==
6.1 Validation
63
Figure 6.18: ARE: 400pcm Reactivity Insertion, Baseline Model
Most notable among the discrepancies are, firstly, the magnitude of the response to insertion. Fol-
lowing positive insertion, ORNL data shows the reactor going from 2.34MW to 3.94MW7, a ∼1.6
MW excursion. Similarly, following the subsequent negative insertion, reactor power dipped by ∼1.5
MW. These responses are less than 0.5 MW ∆P for the msrDynamics model.
Secondly, ORNL data
shows equilibrium following positive insertion at ∼0.6 MW above initial equilibrium. Similarly, subse-
quent negative insertion results in an equilibrium ∼0.8 MW below that of prior to insertion. For the
msrDynamics results, there is little change between the equilibrium power following reactivity insertion.
This drives the similar behavior seen in the temperature profiles; with the msrDynamics results showing
a stronger restoration towards equilibrium than experimentally observed. Lastly, there are some clear
discrepancies in the delay dynamics. The plateau following insertion, though visible in the ORNL data,
is significantly more prominent in the msrDynamics solution. Similarly to the MSRE, this plateau is a
result of fuel circulation and will be discussed further in the simulation study. Additionally, particularly
visible in the plots of ∆T, the response of the fuel following changes in the outlet temperature seems
occur significantly earlier than experimentally observed.
6.1.2.2
Feedback Estimation, SciPy
The magnitude of the power changes, as well as the shift in equilibria, in response to reactivity input are
largely governed by the temperature-reactivity feedback, α, of each material. It is possible to arbitrarily
match the magnitude of the transient response by adjusting the fuel temperature-reactivity feedback,
however, this does not address the disparity in equilibrium power change. This seems to indicate that
the shifts in equilibrium is a result of a combination of the fuel and coolant temperature-reactivity
7This comes from page 80 of Cottrell et al. [8], and disagrees somewhat with the graphical data. This is due to the
graphical interpretation of the drawings given in Figure 6.17.
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Validation
64
feedbacks. As a first-approach, an objective function minimizing sum-squared error against the power
during the transients is defined, and then passed to scipy.minimize. This method yields yields estimates
of the temperature-reactivity feedbacks as given in Table 6.19 Estimated moderator feedback agrees
fairly well with experiment, but has very weak effects on the transient dynamics. Therefore, like the
steady-state coolant heat transfer coeﬀicients, may simply be a result of the estimation algorithm not
deviating very far from the initial guess. Estimated fuel feedback is lower by a factor of three. Most
notably, estimated coolant feedback is estimated to be positive. This will be investigated further in the
following section. Results for the reactivity insertion using these parameters, together with the model
using estimated heat transfer coeﬀicients are shown in Figure 6.20. Results for the other two models
are similar. For brevity, they are not shown. The estimated coeﬀicients reduce equilibrium power by
∼0.1 MW, but result in much closer agreement in fractional response.
The fractional response in
temperature, on the order of 80-100◦K, in the msrDynamics model is significantly greater than that seen
in experiment, which was on the order of 20-40◦K. This is peculiar given the fairly close agreement
in power profiles. Despite the lack of absolute coolant temperature data, the power extracted in the
coolant can be inferred using the fuel temperature and core power profiles. Assuming equilibrium flow
rates and ignoring changes in moderator temperature allows for an energy balance of the form.
U fuel + Ucoolant = P
(6.6)
where U fuel and Ucoolant is the power extracted by the fuel and the coolant respectively. P is the total
power. Inserting (6.5) and rearranging yields
Ucoolant = P −˙mfC f ∆T f = ˙mcCc∆Tc
(6.7)
from which the coolant temperature can be inferred as
∆Tc = P −˙mfC f ∆T f
˙mcCc
(6.8)
Figure 6.21 shows the calculated fractional heat extraction for the fuel, (6.5), and that inferred for
the coolant (6.7), as well as actual inferred, (6.8), temperature differences, compared to those calculated
with msrDynamics. Note, (6.7), only holds in a steady state, and therefore the negative extraction seen
in the fractional extraction plot during the second insertion is not physical. What is evident is that
prior to the first insertion, the fuel heat extraction and inferred coolant extraction agree closely with
the model, and are consistent with reported values. In the equilibrium following the first insertion
however, the ORNL data reflect a large increase in the coolant heat extraction, with a commensurate
spike in coolant temperatures well above that of the fuel, necessary to make up for the modest increase
in fuel temperatures recorded. Without coolant temperature data, it is impossible to verify whether this
actually happened, but is thought be unlikely. More likely, this is a vestige of the temperature data issues.
Appendix L of Steffy [34, p. 184-187] discusses power determination from heat extraction for the ARE.
Calculations were based on a “primary” heat balance, based on the temperature differentials across the
core, and a “secondary” heat balance, based those of the heat exchangers. The power determination for
the primary heat balance during the reactivity insertion experiment, H-8, was estimated at 1.87MW [8,
p. 185]. That determined from the secondary heat balance was 2.34 MW [8, p. 185]. The time-series
data however, shown in Figure 6.17, seem to reflect the power as determined from the secondary heat
balance. This is a clear indication that the core fuel temperature data is significantly underestimated
by the available data. Furthermore, as the majority of the power generation is occurring in the fuel,
Table 6.19: ARE: Temperature-reactivity feedback coeﬀicients, Cottrell et al. [8] vs Estimation
Material
α f , Cottrell et al. [8], ◦K−1
α f , Estimation, ◦K−1
Fuel
-1.76e-04
-0.61e-04
Moderator
0.19e-04
0.14e-04
Coolant
-1.06e-04
0.23e-04
==PAGE:72==
6.1 Validation
65
Figure 6.20: ARE: 400pcm Reactivity Insertion, Estimated Heat Transfer and Temperature-Feedback
Coeﬀicients
Figure 6.21: ARE: 400pcm Reactivity Insertion, Fractional Heat Extraction
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Validation
66
∼98% [23, p.
13], and the specific heat capacity of the coolant is actually slightly higher than that of
the fuel, c f = 1.089e-03 MJ/(kg·K) & cc = 1.256e-03 MJ/(kg·K), one would the fractional response of
fuel temperature to exceed that of the coolant. The fuel temperature data however, at the given power
levels, seem to suggest nearly equal rise in fuel and coolant temperatures. Given the totality of the
available data therefore, it is likely that the fuel temperature response is under-estimated by the ORNL
data.
6.1.2.3
Feedback Estimation, OpenMC
In the preceding section, the temperature-reactivity feedback coeﬀicients estimated to match the ob-
served data differ in magnitude from those reported by ORNL. For the coolant, the estimated coeﬀicient
for the coolant feedback was also of opposite sign. The sign of a feedback coeﬀicient is in some ways
more consequential than its magnitude, as it encodes fundamentally different behavior and safety im-
plications. Monte-Carlo particle transport simulation of the ARE geometry using OpenMC can provide
insight into the expected temperature-reactivity feedbacks of the different materials. As discussed in
Chapter 3, a CAD model of the ARE is drawn in order to obtain certain geometrical measurements
required to calculate some of the parameters used in the ARE model. CAD_to_OpenMC is capable of cre-
ating OpenMC-readable mesh files so that neutron transport simulations can be run on the same CAD
model. Figure 6.22 shows the model at each stage. The temperature-reactivity coeﬀicients for the the
fuel, coolant and moderator were measured in separate experiments: H-5, H-7 and H-10.8. An effort
to eliminate the feedback effects from other materials was incorporated into the experimental design
of each, but could not be fully achieved, and therefore corrections based on measured feedbacks of the
other materials were applied at each stage.
The fuel feedback coeﬀicient, also referred to as the “instantaneous coeﬀicient” in Cottrell et al. [8,
p. 62], is the dominant effect on shorter timescales, i.e. seconds up to a few minutes, and therefore the
most important from a control perspective. Thus corrections to coolant and moderator coeﬀicients are
derived from the fuel coeﬀicient as a baseline. Fuel feedback was measured by a slow withdrawal of the
control rods. Mechanisms controlling heat extraction, e.g. helium flow rates, remained constant. As
such, power remained constant while temperature was increased. The measured coeﬀicient from this
experiment, α f , was -1.76e-04 ◦K−1, taken from the first six minutes of the experiment in an effort to
capture only the fuel feedback effects. This was found to agree fairly well with a previously measured
range of between -0.79e-04◦K−1 and -1.84e-04 ◦K−1 [8, p. 62].
The coolant feedback coeﬀicient was then measured by rapidly cooling the coolant, in order to
minimize moderator temperature change, recording the reactivity change, and simply subtracting the
inferred effect of the previously measured fuel feedback. The measured coeﬀicient, αc, by this method
was -1.06e-04◦K−1. As acknowledged in the report, there is significant uncertainty in this value due
firstly to a temperature correction to the fuel temperature data. Secondly, it was calculated from a
1.9◦K−1 change in temperature over 90 seconds, which is a very small range compared to that measured
for the fuel and moderator, which was around 50 minutes [8, p. 64-66].
The moderator coeﬀicient was measured by cooling the coolant over 50 minutes, such that there
was suﬀicient time for it to cool, and the reactivity effect minus that of the fuel and coolant led to a
calculation of the moderator coeﬀicient, αm, of 0.20e-04◦K−1. The uncertainty in this estimate results
from the compounded uncertainty of both the fuel and coolant reactivity feedback coeﬀicient estimates.
As described in Chapter 2, temperature-reactivity effects are mainly due to density changes, and
a dependence of the macroscopic cross sections on temperature, also referred to as “Doppler Broaden-
ing”. Doppler broadening as a function of temperature is built into the OpenMC module, and material
densities can be dynamically defined based on temperature through the Python API. This allows for
the temperature of materials in the simulation to be varied independently, which is diﬀicult to achieve
8For more detail on each, consult pages 61-67 and Appendix O of Cottrell et al. [8]
==PAGE:74==
6.1 Validation
67
REF 
DWG 16336 
c 3 
0 
li 
W 
m 
10 
lo' 
i 
(a) ARE, Design & Dimensions, Cottrell et al. [8, p.
5]
(b) ARE, CAD Model
(c) ARE, CAD_to_OpenMC Mesh
(d) ARE, OpenMC Neutron Flux Plot
Figure 6.22: ARE, CAD Model to OpenMC Simulation
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Validation
68
experimentally. The density functions are defined in OpenMC as follows
ρf (T) = 3.79g/cm3 −0.00093(◦K−1g/cm3) · T,
Fuel, Cottrell et al. [8, p. 113]
ρm(T) =
2.27g/cm3
1 + 12e −06◦K−1(T + 253◦K),
Moderator, see footnote
ρc(T) = 0.89g/cm3 −0.00024(◦K−1g/cm3) · T,
Coolant, interpolated, Cottrell et al. [8, p. 113]
(6.9)
9 where all take a temperature T in Kelvin as an argument, and evaluate to give density in grams per
cubic centimeter. To calculate the feedback coeﬀicients with OpenMC, transport simulations are run over
a range of 200◦K. The change in the value of ke f f at each temperature is recorded, and the average over
this range is taken to be the overall coeﬀicient. The code snipped below demonstrates this calculation
for the fuel coeﬀicient.
1 # define temperature range
2 temps = [F_to_K(i) for i in range(1150,1313)]
3 k_effs = []
4
5 # iterate over temperatures
6 for t in temps:
7
8
# build and run model
9
model = build_fuel_model(h5m_filepath ,T_f=t,operating_temp=977.59)
10
sp_filepath = model.run(output = True)
11
12 with openmc.StatePoint(sp_filepath) as sp:
13
14
# store k_eff
15
k_eff = sp.k_combined
16
k_effs.append(k_eff.nominal_value)
17
results.write(f"{k_eff.nominal_value}\n")
18
19 # calculate coefficient
20 coeffs = [(k_effs[i]-k_effs[i-1])/k_effs[i] for i in range(1,len(k_effs))]
A full sample implementation of the coolant temperature-reactivity feedback coeﬀicient estimate in
OpenMC is given in Appendix D.3. Table shows the temperature-reactivity coeﬀicients as measured by
Cottrell et al. [8] compared with those from the parameter estimation and OpenMC simulations. The OpenMC
results underestimate observed feedback. This may be due to geometrical effects, such as differential
thermal expansion of materials, that are not at presently accounted for in the CAD model.
More
importantly, transport simulations in OpenMC indicate negative feedback for the moderator, and positive
feedback for the coolant, which are both at odds with the experimental data. The coeﬀicients predicted
by OpenMC, are however, more consistent with expectation, and in the case of the coolant, with the result
of the parameter estimation against experimental data.
As has been demonstrated, the coolant dynamics have a weaker effect on the power and temperature
profiles of the core, compared to the fuel dynamics. This is because there is no internal generation in the
coolant. The fuel is in a sense its own coolant, while the coolant serves primarily as a moderator coolant.
9Moderator density-temperature dependence was not given in Cottrell et al. [8], therefore the density function employs
a linear approximation based on the thermal expansion coeﬀicient estimated by Wei et al. [36]
Table 6.23: ARE: Temperature-reactivity feedback coeﬀicients
Material
α, Cottrell et al. [8], ◦K−1
α, Estimation, ◦K−1
α, OpenMC, ◦K−1
Fuel
-1.76e-04
-0.61e-04
-3.51e-05
Moderator
0.19e-04
0.14e-04
-2.98e-05
Coolant
-1.06e-04
0.23e-04
6.81e-06
==PAGE:76==
6.2 Simulation Study
69
If one were to speculate a priori as to what the effect of an increase in coolant temperature with respect
to reactivity feedback, the primary effects to consider would be scattering an absorption. The former
having a positive effect on reactivity by attenuating neutron energy, and the latter having a negative
effect by removing neutrons from the total population. An increase in temperature, reduces the density
of the coolant, and by (2.3), reduces the macroscopic cross-sections of both scattering and absorption.
As these reductions have opposing contributions to reactivity, the relative values should be indicative
of the net effect. According to National Institute of Standards and Technology [25], the scattering cross
section of sodium in the thermal spectrum is on the order of 3 barns, while the absorption cross section
is on the order of 0.5 barn. A reduction in coolant density would therefore have a larger differential
reduction on the total scattering cross section in the core, thereby reducing reactivity.
The purpose of the moderator in a thermal spectrum reactor is to slow down the neutrons through
scattering of the neutrons with its constituent nuclei, reducing their energy into the thermal spectrum,
where they are more likely to induce fission in the uranium fuel by several orders of magnitude.10 An
effective moderator consists of nuclei with two essential properties: same order of magnitude mass of a
neutron, and a low absorption cross-section. The former maximizes the energy loss per collision, and
the latter maximizes total neutron population. Intuitively, the density of the moderator is reduced as
a result of a rise in temperature, the mean free path before collision of a neutron traveling through
the moderator will increase, thereby reducing the moderator’s overall capacity to attenuate the kinetic
energy of the neutrons. This is likely a primary reason for the OpenMC calculated coeﬀicient. In the
experiment measuring the moderator temperature coeﬀicient, experiment H-10 [8, p. 66], the coeﬀicient
was found to be positive, but small. It was then corrected by subtracting the measured value of the
coolant coeﬀicient, which happened to be negative, thereby giving a positive estimate for the moderator
coeﬀicient. Therefore, assuming the coolant coeﬀicient was, in reality, positive, then the calculated
moderator coeﬀicient would have been negative. The stipulated inaccuracy could therefore reasonably
follow from the uncertainty in measurement of the coolant coeﬀicient.
Among key characteristics identified by the operators were strong negative temperature-reactivity
feedback, and strict limitation of power on the heat disposal system [8, p. 69]. Despite certain discrep-
ancies between the model and observed data, these essential behaviors are observed in the msrDynamics
model. Damping in response to transient effects is strong, and equilibrium power is almost uniquely
defined by the heat transfer coeﬀicients. Despite the issues with respect to data quality and availability,
a coherent, and fairly accurate model can be generated, making changes only to parameters for which
there is a strong case to do so.
6.2
Simulation Study
For the purposes of the simulation study, the model is implemented using overall heat transfer coeﬀicients
and feedback coeﬀicients from the parameter estimations discussed in the preceding section. This is has
been shown, per the results of the preceding section, to be the best balance between equilibrium, i.e.
agreement with equilibrium power, and transient behavior, i.e. agreement with the reactivity insertion
experiment. The goal of this section, as with the MSRE, is to examine overall system behavior. General
characteristics of the system are quite similar, and the observed phenomena are discussed in more detail
in the preceding chapter. For the sake of brevity, analysis of analagous phenomena will not be repeated
in depth.
6.2.1
Reactivity Insertion
Figure 6.24 shows the response of the ARE system at different power levels to a 40pcm step reactivity
insertion, with both nonlinear and linearized point kinetics.11. General behaviors are very similar to
those of the MSRE. At lower power, fractional response is stronger and more oscillatory, while at higher
10Recall the energy dependence of nuclear cross-sections shown in Figure 2.1.
11For more detail on linearized point kinetics see A.2
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Simulation Study
70
Figure 6.24: ARE: Response to 40pcm step reactivity insertion
==PAGE:78==
6.2 Simulation Study
71
power, the system is heavily damped. Linear point kinetics diverge most significantly at lower power,
where fractional response is much greater. The same plateau observed in the MSRE response is present
for the ARE, ending predictably around 47s following the insertion, corresponding to the fuel and
coolant transit time.12
Notably, the power response of the ARE is significantly more damped than that of the MSRE. The
plateau resulting from faster dynamics is already visible at 0.2MW for the ARE, whereas for the MSRE,
it is only discernible at 5.0 MW and greater. This is likely due to the fuel representing a much larger
thermal mass in the MSRE. The fuel mass in the MSRE core, around 1373kg, is about 10 times that
of the ARE, which is around 144kg.
The fuel in the ARE therefore heats up more quickly at the
same power, which leads to more rapid feedback dynamics. The total fuel mass in the core is therefore
an important consideration in reactor design, and can act as a direct control on the behavior of the
temperature feedbacks.
6.2.2
Frequency Response
A frequency response experiment was not performed for the ARE, so no comparison to experimental
data can be made, but the results are nonetheless useful for characterizing system behavior. Figure
6.25 shows the response of the ARE system to periodic reactivity input at different power levels. The
response profiles are very similar to those of the MSRE; peak magnitude is inversely proportional to
the power, and there is a dip in the peak associated with the fuel circulation. This effect is discussed
in more detail in Chapter 5.2. As such, the same prediction of the first peak and dip can be made
in the magnitude of the response, associated with the relationship period of the input, and the fuel
circulation time. Figure 6.26 shows the magnitude of the response, with fuel transit time τ = τl as well
as that at using an arbitrarily doubled fuel transit time τ = 2τl. Predictably, increased fuel transit time,
results resonant commensurately higher resonant periods of input, i.e. lower frequency. However, the
predictions based on the fuel transit time matching one full cycle for negative resonance, and one half
cycle for positive resonance, do not perform as well for the ARE. Evidently there is added complexity
with respect to the cause of the dip in the magnitude. This is also manifest in the visble complexity
of the profile of the magnitude response, compared to that of the MSRE. This is potentially due to
the relatively rapid dynamics of the ARE, which creates stronger overall thermal inertia. Additionally,
since the simulation study is using the positive coolant feedback from the parameter estimation, the fuel
and the coolant have opposing reactivity effects. Characterization of the resonance therefore becomes
more diﬀicult.
12See the MSRE simulation study in Chapter 5 for a more detailed description of this phenomenon.
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Simulation Study
72
(a) Frequency Response at 0.1MW
(b) Frequency Response at 1.0MW
(c) Frequency Response at 2.12MW
Figure 6.25: ARE: Response to Periodic Reactivity Input
==PAGE:80==
6.2 Simulation Study
73
Figure 6.26: ARE: Response to periodic reactivity input, at different fuel transit delays, 2.12 MW
==PAGE:81==
7
Discussion
The type of models implemented in this project fall under the general class of models known as reduced
models. The goal of a reduced model is to maintain acceptable approximations to system-level dynamics,
while reducing the size of the state space so that the system may be suitable to solve. Such a model
becomes useful when it is validated against empirical data. Chapter 2 and 3 discuss the approximations
that are folded into the models, and the results presented represent a qualified success in this regard,
and the msrDynamics tool significantly streamlines the process of implementing these dynamic models.
Most, if not all, of the existing literature in the field relies on GUIs for implementing the dynamic
models. Accessing these models may require software licenses, and modifying the models requires click-
and-drag interaction. The msrDynamics API is implemented entirely in Python, and installable with the
Python package manager pip.1
It is therefore much more accessible. The object-oriented, modular
design allows for flexible modification and extension, and makes model building faster and easier. In
principle, it should make this type dynamic models, and even other thermal hydraulic system models,
easier to implement, and open to scrutiny.
Given the complexity of MSR systems, these models have performed well in characterizing their
dynamics. They adequately capture the strong self-stabilizing behavior, the nonlinear effects at different
power levels, the effect of delay dynamics on power and temperature profiles, as well as the system
response to input in the frequency domain. Additionally, in analysis of the models, and particularly
in resolving the discrepancies in the ARE results, important lessons are learned with respect to global
behavior, which can be useful from the context of control strategy.
The equilibrium power is almost entirely dependent on the capacity of the heat disposal system. In
the absence of automatic control, the operators of the ARE found that power could be finely controlled
by adjusting the helium blower speeds on the secondary coolant system [8, p.
74]. As no helium
temperature data is available, more approximate methods were employed to adequately estimate the
heat transfer parameters in the secondary system, which only confirmed the close correspondence of the
heat disposal capacity to equilibrium power. Only until the overall coeﬀicient was employed, as done
by Singh et al. [30] was acceptable agreement with experiment attained. Therefore, even in the absence
of core control mechanisms, the power profile of an MSR is strictly limited by heat disposal.
Additionally, due to the high specific heat capacity, and the nonlinear reactivity effects, the reactors
are less stable at low power. This was seen in both the step reactivity insertions and in the frequency
responses. In fact, at higher power, even for relatively large (40pcm compared to 1pcm for the frequency
response) reactivity insertions, the transient behavior of both reactors is well approximated by linearized
equations. This effect can be mitigated by reducing the total mass of fuel in the core, a potentially
important consideration for MSR design.
A brief discussion of the main takeaways from each experiment is given below, followed by possible
extensions to this study.
7.1
MSRE
In the case of the MSRE, for which there exists years of relativity high-quality data, most of the model
discrepancies can be attributed to approximation error. The results of the model agreed more closely
with experiment when the number of lumps used to represent the core region was increased.
This
is why the ORNL theoretical models generally agreed better with experiment.
As the goal of the
1See github.com/LukeLabrie/msrDynamics.
==PAGE:82==
7.2 ARE
75
MSRE implementation with the msrDynamics API was mostly to validate the validity of the solver, these
higher order models were not implemented. Overall system behavior and stability characteristics were
well-represented by the one region model, which allows for rich analysis of the dynamics.
7.2
ARE
For the ARE, the assumption of valid experimental data, as directly reported in Cottrell et al. [8], is
unfortunately optimistic. Agreement with experiment is therefore poorer than that of the MSRE. Model
validation in this case becomes more speculative. However, with relatively few parameter changes, a
fairly coherent model is developed. Additionally, the speculative approach offers important insights
into the characteristics of the system, and is generally helpful in developing strategies to analyze MSR
systems.
These strategies include heat exchanger analysis, parameter estimation and Monte-Carlo
particle transport. All offer possibilities for possible extensions to this project, which will be discussed
below.
7.3
Possible Extensions
7.3.1
Heat Exchanger Modelling
All components in the MSRE and ARE, with the exception of the MSRE core, are essentially counterflow
heat exchangers. In the ORNL model (see Chapter 3.1.1), they are modelled with a lumped approach,
where the fuel volumes are discretized as well-stirred tanks. As discussed in Ball [2], the accuracy of
these lumped models in predicting transient behavior diminishes as the length and wedded heat transfer
area increase. This is because they do not consider any spatial distribution of heat transfer, only an
average rate for the node mass. This can potentially be resolved by placing more lumped models in series.
Additionally, it would likely be worthwhile to implement more detailed approximations of these heat
exchangers, particularly for transient responses. An example would be the “plug flow” model proposed
by Ball [2]. Both would be an interesting extension of the msrDynamics API and warrant further study.
7.3.2
Parameter Estimation
Parameter estimation proved to be a valuable tool for refining the ARE model, and offers further poten-
tial for MSR modelling. The models presented in the preceding chapters start from physical principles
of neutron dynamics and heat transfer to generate predictive results. Comparison to experimental data
provides an estimate of its validity, which can perhaps be improved upon closer analysis of the model.
This is essentially a top-down, from principles to results, type of approach. The successful implemen-
tation of parameter estimation on the model results, indicates that a data-driven modelling approach
might also be well-suited for these systems. For an experiment like the ARE, the risk of over-fitting is
too significant to rely on such an approach, but for other systems with more and better quality data,
it could be a powerful approach in tuning an robust model, and informing control strategies.
7.3.3
Monte-Carlo Particle Transport
Monte-Carlo neutron transport in OpenMC provided an independent verification of the suspected error
in feedback coeﬀicients between those predicted by the parameter estimation and those reported in
Cottrell et al. [8]. This was done using the kef f values as calculated by OpenMC, which is an open-source
tool with an active development community and a rich feature set. As such, the potential applications
in the context of dynamic model are many. A few of these are discussed below.
To add more lumps to the model of the core masses, as was done for the MSRE at ORNL, knowledge
of the spatial distribution of parameters becomes important. For instance, lumps representing an inlet
==PAGE:83==
7.3 Possible Extensions
76
region, a central region, and an outlet region may have different fractional generation, as determined by
the spatial distribution of the neutron flux profile, which can be very accurately estimated with OpenMC
(see Figure 6.22(d)).
For the purposes of heat generation in the models implemented in this thesis, only neutron flux is
considered, and almost entirely in the fuel. OpenMC can calculate energy deposition in all materials, and
includes coupled neutron-photon transport for a more detailed estimate of the spatial distribution of
heating.
OpenMC includes a depletion module, which could be coupled with the dynamic models to estimate
how the dynamics vary over longer timescales, i.e. weeks and months. Experimental features even
include a depletion module that accounts for the online fission product removal that the design of an
MSR enables.
In summary, the ecosystem of open-source tools to support such MSR models is rich, and constantly
growing. The msrDynamics tool, in conjunction with existing tools therefore offers much potential for
further study.
==PAGE:84==
8
Conclusion
For the MSRE, the msrDynamics solver performed well against existing work, and against experimental
data. The discrepancies can be largely explained by approximation error in the model. These results
therefore serve as a validation of both of the modelling approach, and of the solver. Such a validation
supports the implementation of the model for new systems, like the ARE. As discussed in great detail
in preceding chapters, data issues plague the experimental report for the ARE, and thus agreement
with experimental data was generally poorer. However, overall, the implementation for the ARE is a
qualified success. Examining the discrepancies, offers a rich understanding of the underlying dynamics,
through which concrete strategies are established for analysis of these types of systems. Furthermore,
qualitative behavior is well-captured, and changing only parameters for which there is ample evidence
to do so, results in a coherent model that agrees well with experiment.
The results presented in this thesis tentatively validate the modeling approach against two different
experiments, and in doing so, present an open-source tool for future extension and validation. Hopefully,
these results serve to solidify the understanding of the model and its uses, and provide a set of strategies
for characterizing MSR systems. Ultimately, the success of such models are at the mercy of the depth
and quality of the available data.
As such, further experiment should serve as a basis for further
improvement and validation.
==PAGE:85==
A
Theory
A.1
Reactor Period
The introduction of delayed neutrons to the diffusion approximation in Chapter 2.1.2.2 argues that
in the absence of delayed neutrons, the time-dependent behavior of a reactor would be too rapid for
adequate control. This can now be easily demonstrated with (2.28). Ignoring delayed neutrons yields
a single equation describing n(t), i.e.
dn(t)
dt
= ρ
Λn(t)
(A.1)
which by separation of variables yields
n(t) = n0e(ρ/Λ)t = n0et/τ
(A.2)
where τ = Λ/ρ, and represents the time required for n(t) to grow by factor of e or decay by a factor of 1/e
for ρ > 0 and ρ < 0 respectively. In the context of reactor physics, τ is referred to as the reactor period
and is sometimes denoted by T. For thermal spectrum reactors (like an MSR), prompt neutron lifetime,
Λ, is typically on the order of 10−4s. A typical positive reactivity insertion, e.g. from the withdrawal
of a control rod, is on the order of one part in one thousand . The reactor period in this case would
be T = Λ/ρ = 10−4/10−3 = 0.1s. Therefore by (A.2), reactor power (∝n) would increase by a factor of
e10, ∼22,000 times the initial power in one second. [24, p. 660-661]. As summarized by Masterson [24,
p.
661], “... this would completely destroy the reactor and everything else around it. (It could also
send the reactor into orbit.)”. Observed reactor periods, T, for typical reactors are on the order of tens
and hundreds of seconds.1 Therefore, despite being a small fraction of the total neutron production
(∼O(10−3)), delayed neutrons are crucial to slowing the dynamics of the total neutron population to a
timescale well within human control.
A.2
Linearized Point Kinetics
Chapter 5 introduces results from a linearized point-kinetics model. Recall from (3.4), rewritten below,
dn(t)
dt
= ρ(t) −β
Λ
n(t) +
n
X
i=1
λiCi(t)
dCi(t)
dt
= βi
Λn(t) −λiCi(t) −Ci(t)
τc
+ Ci(t −τl)e−λiτl
τc
the nonlinearity introduced by the multiplication of ρ(t) and n(t) in the equation for n. The Hartman-
Grobman Theorem states that near a hyperbolic equilibrium point x0, the nonlinear system
˙x = f(x)
(A.3)
can be approximated by
˙x = J(x0)(x −x0)
(A.4)
1Reactor period when including delayed neutrons can be estimated using the inhour (inverse-hour) equation, which
is derived from point-kinetics. See chapter 16.1 Masterson [24, p. 673-677]
==PAGE:86==
A.2 Linearized Point Kinetics
79
where A is the Jacobian matrix of f(x) evaluated at x0. Recall, that where f(x) is defined by
f(x) =

f1(x1, x2, . . . , xn)
f2(x1, x2, . . . , xn)
...
fm(x1, x2, . . . , xn)

the Jacobian matrix J of f at x is defined as:
J(f(x)) =

∂f1
∂x1
∂f1
∂x2
· · ·
∂f1
∂xn
∂f2
∂x1
∂f2
∂x2
· · ·
∂f2
∂xn
...
...
...
...
∂fm
∂x1
∂fm
∂x2
· · ·
∂fm
∂xn

The Jacobian of the model system becomes
J(f(x)) =

∂n(t)
∂n
∂n(t)
∂C1
∂n(t)
∂C2
. . .
∂n(t)
∂ρ
. . .
...
...
...
...
...
...
=

ρ(t)−β
Λ
λ1
λ2
. . .
n(t)
Λ
. . .
...
...
...
...
...
...

(A.5)
where only dn(t)
dt
is shown, as it is the only nonlinear equation in the model, and therefore the rest of the
equations remain unchanged under linearization. Inserting (A.6) into (A.4), gives
˙x ≈J(x0)(x −x0) =

ρ0−β
Λ
λ1
λ2
. . .
n0
Λ
. . .
...
...
...
...
...
...


n(t) −n0
C1(t) −C01
C2(t) −C02
...
ρ(t) −ρ0
...

(A.6)
In effect, this amounts to the equation for dn(t)
dt
in the point kinetics equations, (3.4), becoming
dn(t)
dt
= ρ0 −β
Λ
n(t) +
n
X
i=1
λiCi(t) + n0
Λ ρ(t)
(A.7)
which is now linear. To compute solutions under the linear approximation with msrDynamics, the nonlinear
equilibrium state, x0, is found by storing the state after enough time has elapsed for transient behavior
to subside. This state becomes the initial state for a new solution, computed with a linearized equation
for n(t). This is demonstrated below in the msrDynamics API.
1 # define nonlinear system equations as normal
2 # ...
3
4 # solve
5 MSRE.solve(T)
6
7 # set initial conditions to equilibrium point from nonlinear solution
8 for node in MSRE.nodes:
9
node.y0 = node.y_out[-1]
10
11 # linearize n
12 n.dndt = ((rho.y0-beta_t)/Lam)*n.y() + lam[0]*C1.y() + lam[1]*C2.y() + lam[2]*C3.y() + lam
[3]*C4.y() + lam[4]*C5.y() + lam[5]*C6.y() + n.y0*(rho.y()+rho_ext)/Lam
13
14 # solve
15 MSRE.solve(T)
==PAGE:87==
B
API
B.1
Duﬀing Oscillator
The duﬀing oscillator implementation in JiTCDDE is provided below.
1 from jitcdde import y, t, jitcdde
2 import symengine as se
3 import numpy as np
4
5 # parameters
6 delta = 0.3
7 alpha = -1.0
8 beta = 1.0
9 gamma = 0.3
10 omega = 1.2
11 tau = 1.0
# delay
12
13 # Duffing Oscillator
14 dxdt = y(1)
15 dydt = -delta*y(1,t-tau) - alpha*y(0) - beta*y(0)**3 + gamma*se.cos(omega*t)
# dv/dt
16
17 # Initialize JITCDDE
18 DDE = jitcdde([dxdt,
19
dydt])
20
21 # Initial conditions
22 DDE.constant_past([0.0,
23
0.0])
24
25
26 # Integrate and collect data
27 T = np.arange(0,100,0.1)
28 solution = [DDE.integrate(time) for time in T]
The MATLAB code and Simulink model are provided as an attachment to the thesis, and can also
be found at https://github.com/LukeLabrie/msc_eng_thesis.
The parameters for each model are matched as closely as possible through absolute and relative
tolerances (1e-10 & 1e-5), max step size (10.0) and initial step size (1.0), and both solvers use a
Bogacki-Shampine adaptive step.
B.2
Node Object
The full Node object definition is given below.
1 class Node:
2
"""
3
This class represents a node in an MSR system, encapsulating physical properties and
dynamics
4
5
Attributes:
6
m (float): Mass of the node in kilograms (kg).
==PAGE:88==
B.2 Node Object
81
7
scp (float): Specific heat capacity of the node in joules per kilogram kelvin (J/(kg*
K)).
8
W (float): Mass flow rate through the node in kilograms per second (kg/s).
9
y0 (float): Initial temperature of the node in kelvin (K).
10
dTdt_advective (float): Symbolic expression for the rate of temperature change due to
advective heat flow in kelvin per second (K/s).
11
dTdt_internal (float): Symbolic expression for the rate of temperature change due to
internal heat generation in kelvin per second (K/s).
12
dTdt_convective (float): Symbolic expression for the rate of temperature change due
to convective heat flow in kelvin per second (K/s).
13
dndt (float): Symbolic expression for the rate of change of neutron population.
14
dcdt (float): Symbolic expression for the rate of change of precursor concentration.
15
drdt (float): Symbolic expression for the rate of change of reactivity.
16
y: JiTCDDE state variable object, to be assigned by the System class.
17
y_out (list): Solution data, to be populated by the System class.
18
19
Methods:
20
set_dTdt_advective(source): Sets the rate of temperature change due to advection.
21
set_dTdt_internal(source, k): Sets the rate of temperature change due to internal
heat generation.
22
set_dTdt_convective(source, hA): Sets the rate of temperature change due to
convective heat transfer.
23
set_dndt(r, beta_eff, Lambda, lam, C): Sets the rate of change of neutron population
using the point kinetics equation.
24
set_dcdt(n, beta, Lambda, lam, t_c, t_l): Sets the rate of change of precursor
concentration.
25
set_drdt(sources, coeffs): Sets the rate of change of reactivity based on feedback.
26
dydt(): Calculates and returns the total rate of change of state variables.
27
28
The class is designed to model the thermal-hydraulic and neutron-kinetic behavior of a
node within a nuclear reactor system.
29
"""
30
def __init__(self,
31
m: float = 0.0,
32
scp: float = 0.0,
33
W: float = 0.0,
34
y0: float = 0.0) -> None:
35
self.m = m
# mass (kg)
36
self.scp = scp
# specific heat capacity (J/(kg*°K))
37
self.W = W
# mass flow rate (kg/s)
38
self.y0 = y0
# initial temperature (°K)
39
self.dTdt_advective = 0.0
# sym. expression for advective heat flow (°K/s)
40
self.dTdt_internal = 0.0
# sym. expression for internal heat generation (°K/s)
41
self.dTdt_convective = 0.0 # sym. expression for convective heat flow (°K/s)
42
self.dndt = 0.0
# sym. expression for dn/dt (n = neutron population)
43
self.dcdt = 0.0
# sym. expression for dc/dt (c = precursor concentration)
44
self.drdt = 0.0
# sym. expression for dr/dt (r = reactivity)
45
self.y = None
# JiTCDDE state variable object, to be assigned by System
46
self.index = None
# JiTCDDE state variable index, to be assigned by System
47
self.y_out = np.array([])
# solution data, to be populated by System
48
49
def set_dTdt_advective(self, source):
50
'''
51
Energy from advective heat transfer
52
source: source node (state variable y(i) or constant)
53
dumped: if 'from node' is a constant (indicates dumping instead of
54
recirculation), this needs to be set to true
55
'''
56
# reset in case of update
57
self.dTdt_advective = 0.0
58
self.dTdt_advective = (source-self.y())*self.W/self.m
59
60
def set_dTdt_internal(self, source: callable , k: float):
61
'''
62
Energy from fission
63
source: source of generation (state variable y(i))
==PAGE:89==
B.2 Node Object
82
64
k: constant of proportionality
65
'''
66
# reset in case of update
67
self.dTdt_internal = 0.0
68
self.dTdt_internal = k*source/(self.m*self.scp)
69
70
def set_dTdt_convective(self, source: list, hA: list):
71
'''
72
Energy from convective heat transfer
73
a: from node(s) (state variable(s) y(i))
74
hA_mcp: ratio of [convective heat transfer coefficient(s) * wetted area(s) (MW/C)]
75
'''
76
# reset in case of update
77
self.dTdt_convective = 0.0
78
for i in range(len(source)):
79
self.dTdt_convective += hA[i]*(source[i]-self.y())/(self.m*self.scp)
80
81
def set_dndt(self, r: y, beta_eff: float, Lambda: float, lam: list, C: list):
82
'''
83
Point kinetics equation for neutron population
84
r: reactivity , rho, (state variable y(i))
85
beta_eff: delayed neutron fraction
86
Lambda: prompt neutron lifetime (s)
87
lam: decay constants for associated precursor groups
88
C: precursor groups (list of state variables y(i))
89
'''
90
# reset in case of update
91
self.dndt = 0.0
92
precursors = 0.0
93
for g in enumerate(lam):
94
precursors += g[1]*C[g[0]]
95
self.dndt = (r-beta_eff)*self.y()/Lambda + precursors
96
97
def set_dcdt(self,
98
n: y,
99
beta: float,
100
Lambda: float,
101
lam: float,
102
t_c: float,
103
t_l: float):
104
'''
105
Precursor concentration
106
n: fractional neutron concentration (state variable y(i))
107
beta: fraction for precuror group
108
Lambda: prompt neutron lifetime
109
lam: decay constant for precursor group
110
t_c: core transit time (s)
111
t_l: loop transit time (s)
112
'''
113
# reset in case of update
114
self.dcdt = 0.0
115
source = n*beta/Lambda
116
decay = lam*self.y()
117
outflow = self.y()/t_c
118
inflow = self.y(t-t_l)*np.exp(-lam*t_l)/t_c
119
self.dcdt = source - decay - outflow + inflow
120
121
def set_drdt(self, sources: list, coeffs: list):
122
'''
123
Reactivity feedback
124
sources: list of derivatives of feedback sources (dy(i)/dt)
125
coeffs: list of respective feedback coefficients
126
'''
127
# reset in case of update
128
self.drdt = 0.0
129
fb = 0.0
==PAGE:90==
B.2 Node Object
83
130
for s in enumerate(sources):
131
fb += s[1]*coeffs[s[0]]
132
self.drdt = fb
133
134
def dydt(self):
135
y1 = self.dTdt_advective
136
y2 = self.dTdt_internal
137
y3 = self.dTdt_convective
138
y4 = self.dndt
139
y5 = self.dcdt
140
y6 = self.drdt
141
return y1 + y2 + y3 + y4 + y5 + y6
==PAGE:91==
C
MSRE Model
This appendix provides reference parameter file and a Python implementation of the MSRE model in
msrDynamics. File paths are relative to the source code repository, Labrie [19], which includes the source
code for all of the MSRE results provided in the report.
C.1
Parameters
The parameters for the MSRE, originally written in MATLAB by Singh et al. [30], see Chvala [7], are
ported to Python via msre/parameters.py, given below. The comments on most parameters (not derived
from the others) provide reference to the relevant source documentation.
1 import numpy as np
2 import math
3 pi = math.pi
4
5 # domain
6 t0 = 0.0
7 tf = 1000.00
8 T = np.arange(t0,tf,0.01)
9
10 # NEUTRONICS DATA
11 tau_l = 16.73
# ORNL-TM-0728 %16.44; % (s)
12 tau_c = 8.46
# ORNL-TM-0728 %8.460; % (s)
13 P = 8.0
# Thermal Power in MW ORNL-TM-1070, p.2
14 n_frac0 = 1.0
# initial fractional neutron density n/n0 (n/cm^3/s)
15 Lam = 2.400E-04
# mean generation time ORNL-TM-1070 p.15 U235
16 # Lam = 4.0E-04;
# mean generation time ORNL-TM-1070 p.15 U233
17 lam = np.array([1.240E-02, 3.05E-02, 1.11E-01, 3.01E-01, 1.140E+00, 3.014E+00])
18 beta = np.array([0.000223, 0.001457, 0.001307, 0.002628, 0.000766, 0.00023])
# U235
19 # beta = np.array([0.00023, 0.00079, 0.00067, 0.00073, 0.00013, 0.00009])
# U233
20 beta_t = np.sum(beta)
# total delayed neutron fraction MSRE
21 rho_0 = beta_t-sum(np.divide(beta,1+np.divide(1-np.exp(-lam*tau_l),lam*tau_c))) # reactivity
change in going from stationary to circulating fuel
22 C0 = beta / Lam * (1.0 / (lam - (np.exp(-lam * tau_l) - 1.0) / tau_c))
23
24 # Feedback co-efficients
25 a_f = -8.71E-05
# U235 (drho/°C) fuel salt temperature -reactivity feedback coefficient ORNL-
TM-1647 p.3 % -5.904E-05; % ORNL-TM-0728 p. 101 %
26 a_g = -6.66E-05
# U235 (drho/°C) graphite temperature -reactivity feedback coefficient ORNL-
TM-1647 p.3 % -6.624E-05; % ORNL-TM-0728 p.101
27
28 # CORE HEAT TRANSFER PARAMETERS
29 # FUEL PARAMETERS - DONE
30 vdot_f = 7.5708E-02
# ORNL-TM-0728 % 7.571e-2; % vol. flow rate (m^3/s) ORNL-TM-1647 p.3,
ORNL-TM-0728 p.12
31 rho_f = 2.14647E+03
# (partially enriched U-235)ORNL-TM-0728 p.8 2.243E+03; % (Th-U) density
of fuel salt (kg/m^3) ORNL-TM-0728 p.8
32 W_f = 1.623879934566580e+02
# 1.83085e+02;%vdot_f*rho_f; % 182.78; % calcd from m_dot*cp*
delT=P; vdot_f*rho_f; % fuel flow rate (kg/s)
33 # tau_f_c
= tau_c; % ORNL-TM-0728 % 8.45; % transit time of fuel in core (s) ORNL-TM-1070 p
.15, TDAMSRE p.5
34 m_f = W_f * tau_c
# fuel mass in core (kg)
35 nn_f = 2
# number of fuel nodes in core model
36 mn_f = m_f / nn_f
# fuel mass per node (kg)
==PAGE:92==
C.1 Parameters
85
37 # cp_f
= 4.2*9/5; % (MJ/deg-C) total fuel heat capacity TDAMSRE p.5
38 scp_f = 1.9665E-3
# specific heat capacity of fuel salt (MJ/kg-C) ORNL-TM-0728 p.8
39
40 # Core Upflow - DONE
41 v_g = 1.95386
# graphite volume(m^3) ORNL-TM-0728 p. 101
42 rho_g = 1.860E3
# graphite density (kg/m^3) ORNL-3812 p.77, ORNL-TM-0728 p.87
43 m_g = v_g * rho_g
# graphite mass (kg)
44 cp_g = 3.6 * 9 / 5
# TDAMSRE p.5 graphite total heat capacity (MW-s/C) ORNL-TM-1647 p.3
45 scp_g = 1.773E-3
# cp_g/m_g; % graphite specific heat capacity (MW-s/kg-C) ORNL-TM-1647 p.3
46 mcp_g1 = m_g * scp_g
# (mass of material x heat capacity of material) of graphite per lump (
MW-s/°C)
47 mcp_f1 = mn_f * scp_f
# (mass of material x heat capacity of material) of fuel salt per lump
(MW-s/°C)
48 mcp_f2 = mn_f * scp_f
# (mass of material x heat capacity of material) of fuel salt per lump
(MW-s/°C)
49 hA_fg = 0.02 * 9 / 5
# (fuel to graphite heat transfer coeff x heat transfer area) (MW/°C)
ORNL-TM-1647 p.3, TDAMSRE p.5
50 k_g = 0.07
# fraction of total power generated in the graphite
ORNL-TM-0728 p.9
51 k_1 = 0.5
# fraction of heat transferred from graphite which goes to the first fuel lump
52 k_2 = 0.5
# fraction of heat transferred from graphite which goes to the second fuel lump
53 k_f = 0.93
# fraction of heat generated in fuel - that generated in the external loop ORNL-
TM-0728 p.9
54 k_f1 = k_f / nn_f
# fraction of total power generated in lump f1
55 k_f2 = k_f / nn_f
# fraction of total power generated in lump f2
56
57 # New node for power deposited in fuel outside the core
58 k_out = 1 - (k_g + k_f)
# fraction of power generated in fuel in external loop ORNL-TM-0728
p.9
59 m_out = W_f
# (kg) Mass of node such that resident time is 1 sec (W_f needs to be defined)
60
61 # Initial conditions - DONE
62 Tf_in = 6.3222E+02
# in °C ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
63 T0_f2 = 6.5727E+02
# 6.5444E+02; % in °C 6.461904761904777e+02; ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
64 T0_f1 = Tf_in + (T0_f2 - Tf_in) / 2
# 6.405952380952389e+02; in °C
65 T0_g1 = T0_f1 + (k_g * P / hA_fg)
# 6.589285714285924e+02; in °C
66 # T0_out = k_out * P / m_out / scp_f + T0_f2
# in °C (scp_f needs to be defined)
67
68
69 # Heat Exchanger - DONE
70 # Geometry
71 d_he = 16
# (in) he diameter ORNL-TM-0728 p. 164
72 h_he = 72
# (in) active height % 96; %(in) he height ORNL-TM-0728 p. 164
73 od_tube = 0.5
# (in) coolant tube OD ORNL-TM-0728 p. 164
74 id_tube = od_tube - 2 * 0.042
# (in) coolant tube ID ORNL-TM-0728 p. 164
75 n_tube = 159
# number of coolant tubes ORNL-TM-0728 p. 164
76 a_tube = 254 * 144
# (in^2) total area of tubes ORNL-TM-0728 p. 164
77 l_tube = a_tube / n_tube / (np.pi * od_tube)
# (in) tube length
78 v_tube = n_tube * np.pi * (od_tube / 2) ** 2 * l_tube
# (in^3) hx shell volume occupied by
tubes
79 v_cool = n_tube * np.pi * (id_tube / 2) ** 2 * l_tube
# (in^3) hx volume occupied by coolant
80 v_he = (d_he / 2) ** 2 * np.pi * h_he
# (in^3) volume of heat exchanger shell
81 v_he_fuel = v_he - v_tube
# (in^3) volume available to fuel in shell
82
83 # Unit conversions
84 in_m = 1.63871e-5
# 1 cubic inch = 1.63871e-5 cubic meters
85
86 # PRIMARY FLOW PARAMETERS - DONE
87 W_p = W_f
# fuel flow rate (kg/s)
88
89 m_p = v_he_fuel * in_m * rho_f
# fuel mass in PHE (kg)
90 nn_p = 4
# number of fuel nodes in PHE
91 mn_p = m_p / nn_p
# fuel mass per node (kg)
92 cp_p = scp_f
# fuel heat capacity (MJ/(kg-C))
93
94 # SECONDARY FLOW PARAMETERS - DONE
95 vdot_s = 5.36265E-02
# ORNL-TM-0728 p. 164 % 5.236E-02; % coolant volume flow rate (m^3/s)
==PAGE:93==
C.1 Parameters
86
ORNL-TM-1647 p.3
96 rho_s = 1.922e3
# coolant salt density (kg/m^3) ORNL-TM-0728 p.8
97 W_s = 1.005793369810108e+02
# vdot_s*rho_s; % calcd from mdot*cp*delT; vdot_s*rho_s; %
coolant flow rate (kg/s) ORNL-TM-1647 p.3
98
99 m_s = v_cool * in_m * rho_s
# coolant mass in PHE (kg)
100 nn_s = 4
# number of coolant nodes in PHE
101 mn_s = m_s / nn_s
# coolant mass per node (kg)
102 scp_s = 2.39E-3
# cp_s/m_s; % specific heat capacity of coolant (MJ/(kg-C) ORNL-TM-0728 p.8
103
104 A_phe = 2.359E+01
# effective area for heat transfer (primary and secondary, m^2) ORNL-TM
-0728 p.164
105
106 ha_p = 6.480E-01
# heat transfer*area coefficient from primary to tubes (MW/C) ORNL-TM-1647
p.3
107 ha_s = 3.060E-01
# heat transfer*area coefficient from tubes to secondary (MW/C) ORNL-TM
-1647 p.3
108
109 # Primary Side
110 mcp_pn = mn_p * cp_p
# (mass of material x heat capacity of material) of fuel salt per lump
in MW-s/°C
111 hA_pn = ha_p / nn_s
# 3.030; % (primary to tube heat transfer coeff x heat transfer area) in
MW/°C
112
113 # Tubes - DONE
114 nn_t = 2
# number of nodes of tubes in the model
115 rho_tube = 8.7745E+03
# (kg/m^3) density of INOR-8 ORNL-TM-0728 p.20
116 m_tn = (v_tube - v_cool) * in_m * rho_tube / nn_t
# mass of tubes (kg)
117 scp_t = 5.778E-04
# specific heat capacity of tubes (MJ/(kg-C)) ORNL-TM-0728 p.20
118 mcp_tn = m_tn * scp_t
# mass*(heat capacity) of tubes per lump in MW-s/°C
119
120 # Secondary Side - DONE
121 mcp_sn = mn_s * scp_s
# (mass of material x heat capacity of material) of coolant salt per
lump in MW-s/°C
122 hA_sn = ha_s / nn_s
# (tube to secondary heat transfer coeff x heat transfer area) in MW/°C
123
124 # Initial conditions - DONE
125 # Primary nodes
126 Tp_in = T0_f2
# in °C ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
127 T0_p4 = Tf_in
# 6.5444E+02; % in °C 6.461904761904777e+02; ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
128 T0_p1 = Tp_in + (T0_p4 - Tp_in) / 4
# in °C
129 T0_p2 = Tp_in + 2 * (T0_p4 - Tp_in) / 4
# in °C
130 T0_p3 = Tp_in + 3 * (T0_p4 - Tp_in) / 4
# in °C
131
132 # Secondary nodes
133 Ts_in = 5.4611E+02
# in °C ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
134 T0_s4 = 5.7939E+02
# in °C ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
135 T0_s1 = Ts_in + (T0_s4 - Ts_in) / nn_s
# in °C
136 T0_s2 = Ts_in + 2 * (T0_s4 - Ts_in) / nn_s
# in °C
137 T0_s3 = Ts_in + 3 * (T0_s4 - Ts_in) / nn_s
# in °C
138 # Tube nodes
139 T0_t1 = (T0_p1 * hA_pn + T0_s3 * hA_sn) / (hA_pn + hA_sn)
# in °C
140 T0_t2 = (T0_p3 * hA_pn + T0_s1 * hA_sn) / (hA_pn + hA_sn)
# in °C
141
142 # Radiator Parameters - DONE
143
144 # Initial conditions - DONE
145 # Primary nodes
146 Trp_in = T0_s4
# 5.933E+02; % in °C ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
147 T0_rp = Ts_in
# in °C ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
148
149 # Secondary nodes - DONE
150 Trs_in = 37.78
# (C) air inlet temperature ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
151 T0_rs = 148.9
# (C) air exit temperature ORNL-TM-1647 p.2
152
153 # Radiator Geometry
==PAGE:94==
C.1 Parameters
87
154 od_rad = 0.01905
# (m) outer diameter of tubes in the radiator ORNL-TM-0728 p.296
155 tube_wall_thick = 0.0018288
# (m) thickness of tubes in the radiator ORNL-TM-0728 p.296
156 id_rad = od_rad - 2 * tube_wall_thick
157 n_rtubes = 120
# number of tubes in the radiator (rows times tubes per row) ORNL-TM-0728 p
.296
158 l_rtube = 9.144
# (m) length of tubes in the radiator ORNL-TM-0728 p.296
159 v_rp = pi * (id_rad / 2) ** 2 * l_rtube * n_rtubes
# volume available to salt in the
radiator
160 # v_rtube = pi * (od_rad / 2) ** 2 * l_rtube * n_rtubes - v_rp
# volume of metal in radiator
tubes *TUBES NOT MODELED
161
162 n_tpr = 12
# number of tubes per row in the radiator matrix
163 n_row = 10
# number rows in the radiator matrix
164 tube_space = 0.0381
# (m) spacing between tubes and rows of matrix
165 v_rs = (n_row * od_rad + (n_row - 1) * tube_space) * (n_tpr * od_rad + (n_tpr - 1) *
tube_space) * l_rtube
# volume of air inside radiator
166
167 # PRIMARY FLOW PARAMETERS - DONE
168 W_rp = W_s
# coolant salt flow rate (kg/s)
169 m_rp = v_rp * rho_s
# coolant salt mass in rad (kg)
170 nn_rp = 1
# number of coolant salt nodes in the radiator
171 mn_rp = m_rp / nn_rp
# coolant mass per node (kg)
172 cp_rp = scp_s
# coolant specific heat capacity (MJ/(kg-C))
173
174 # SECONDARY FLOW PARAMETERS - DONE
175 vdot_rs = 94.389
# ORNL-TM-0728 p. 296; 78.82; % air volume flow rate (m^3/s) ORNL-TM-1647 p
.2
176 rho_rs = 1.1237
# air density (kg/m^3) REFPROP (310K and 0.1MPa)
177 W_rs = vdot_rs * rho_rs
# air flow rate (kg/s)
178
179 m_rs = v_rs * rho_rs
# coolant air mass in rad (kg)
180 nn_rs = 1
# number of coolant nodes in rad
181 mn_rs = m_rs / nn_rs
# coolant mass per node (kg)
182 scp_rs = 1.0085E-3
# (MJ/kg-C) specific heat capacity of air at (air_out+air_in)/2 REFPROP
183
184 A_rad = 6.503E1
# (m^2) surface area of the radiator ORNL-TM-0728 p.14
185 h_roverall = P / A_rad / ((T0_rp + Trp_in) / 2 - (T0_rs + Trs_in) / 2)
# cald as: P/A_rad/((
T0_rp+Trp_in)/2-(T0_rs+Trs_in)/2)
3.168E-4; % (MW/m^2-C) polimi thesis
186
187 # Primary Side
188 mcp_rpn = mn_rp * cp_rp
# (mass of material x heat capacity of material) of fuel salt per
lump in MW-s/°C
189 hA_rpn = h_roverall * A_rad / nn_rs
# 3.030; % (primary to secondary heat transfer coeff x
heat transfer area) in MW/°C
190
191 # Secondary Side - DONE
192 mcp_rsn = mn_rs * scp_rs
# (mass of material x heat capacity of material) of coolant salt
per lump in MW-s/°C
193 hA_rsn = h_roverall * A_rad / nn_rs
# (tube to secondary heat transfer coeff x heat transfer
area) in MW/°C
194
195 # Pure time delays between components - DONE
196 tau_hx_c = 8.67
# (sec) delay from hx to core TDAMSRE p.6
197 tau_c_hx = 3.77
# (sec) subtracted 1 sec for external loop power generation node resident
time; delay from core to fuel hx TDAMSRE p.6
198 tau_hx_r = 4.71
# (sec) fertile hx to core TDAMSRE p.6
199 tau_r_hx = 8.24
# (sec) core to fertile hx TDAMSRE p.6
200
201 first_val = (rho_0 - beta_t) * n_frac0 / Lam + lam[0] * C0[0] + lam[1] * C0[1] + lam[2] * C0
[2] + lam[3] * C0[3] + lam[4] * C0[4] + lam[5] * C0[5]
==PAGE:95==
C.2 Implementation
88
C.2
Implementation
An implementation of the MSRE model using msrDynamics with the above parameters is given below
from msre/model.ipynb.
1 from parameters import *
2 import numpy as np
3 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4 from jitcdde import t
5 from msrDynamics.objects import Node, System
6
7 MSRE = System()
8
9 # radiator
10 T_out_rc = Node(m = mn_rp, scp = mcp_rpn/mn_rp, W = W_rp, y0 = T0_rp)
11 T_out_air = Node(m = mn_rs, scp = mcp_rsn/mn_rs, W = W_rs, y0 = T0_rs)
12
13 # heat exchanger
14 T_hf1 = Node(m = mn_p, scp = mcp_pn/mn_p, W = W_p, y0 = T0_p1)
15 T_hf2 = Node(m = mn_p, scp = mcp_pn/mn_p, W = W_p, y0 = T0_p2)
16 T_hf3 = Node(m = mn_p, scp = mcp_pn/mn_p, W = W_p, y0 = T0_p3)
17 T_hf4 = Node(m = mn_p, scp = mcp_pn/mn_p, W = W_p, y0 = T0_p4)
18 T_ht1 = Node(m = m_tn, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_t1)
19 T_ht2 = Node(m = m_tn, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_t2)
20 T_hc1 = Node(m = mn_s, scp = mcp_sn/mn_s, W = W_s, y0 = T0_s1)
21 T_hc2 = Node(m = mn_s, scp = mcp_sn/mn_s, W = W_s, y0 = T0_s2)
22 T_hc3 = Node(m = mn_s, scp = mcp_sn/mn_s, W = W_s, y0 = T0_s3)
23 T_hc4 = Node(m = mn_s, scp = mcp_sn/mn_s, W = W_s, y0 = T0_s4)
24
25 # core
26 n = Node(y0 = n_frac0)
27 C1 = Node(y0 = C0[0])
28 C2 = Node(y0 = C0[1])
29 C3 = Node(y0 = C0[2])
30 C4 = Node(y0 = C0[3])
31 C5 = Node(y0 = C0[4])
32 C6 = Node(y0 = C0[5])
33 rho = Node(y0 = 0.0)
34
35 # add reactivity input
36 t_ins = 500
37 inserted = 5e-4
38 insert_duration = 0.0
39 t_wd = 2500
40 def rho_insert(t):
41
if (t<t_ins):
42
return 0.0
43
else:
44
return inserted
45
46 rho_ext =MSRE.add_input(rho_insert, T)
47
48 T_cg = Node(m = mcp_g1/scp_g, scp = scp_g, y0 = T0_g1)
49 T_cf1 = Node(m = mn_f, scp = scp_f, W = W_f, y0 = T0_f1)
50 T_cf2 = Node(m = mn_f, scp = scp_f, W = W_f, y0 = T0_f1)
51
52 MSRE.add_nodes([T_out_rc,T_out_air,T_hf1,T_hf2,T_hf3,T_hf4,T_ht1,T_ht2,T_hc1,
53
T_hc2,T_hc3,T_hc4,n,C1,C2,C3,C4,C5,C6,T_cg,T_cf1,T_cf2,rho])
54
55 # dynamics
56
57 # radiator
58 T_out_rc.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_hc4.y(t-tau_hx_r))
59 T_out_rc.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_out_air.y()], hA = [hA_rpn])
60
61 T_out_air.set_dTdt_advective(source = Trs_in)
==PAGE:96==
C.2 Implementation
89
62 T_out_air.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_out_rc.y()], hA = [hA_rsn])
63
64 # heat exchanger
65 T_hf1.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_cf2.y(t-tau_c_hx))
66 T_hf1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_ht1.y()], hA = [hA_pn])
67
68 T_hf2.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_hf1.y())
69 T_hf2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_ht1.y()], hA = [hA_pn])
70
71 T_hf3.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_hf2.y())
72 T_hf3.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_ht2.y()], hA = [hA_pn])
73
74 T_hf4.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_hf3.y())
75 T_hf4.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_ht2.y()], hA = [hA_pn])
76
77 T_ht1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_hf1.y(),T_hf2.y(),T_hc3.y(),T_hc4.y()], hA = [hA_pn,
hA_pn,hA_sn,hA_sn])
78 T_ht2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_hf3.y(),T_hf4.y(),T_hc1.y(),T_hc2.y()], hA = [hA_pn,
hA_pn,hA_sn,hA_sn])
79
80 T_hc1.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_out_rc.y(t-tau_r_hx))
81 T_hc1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_ht2.y()], hA = [hA_sn])
82
83 T_hc2.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_hc1.y())
84 T_hc2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_ht2.y()], hA = [hA_sn])
85
86 T_hc3.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_hc2.y())
87 T_hc3.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_ht1.y()], hA = [hA_sn])
88
89 T_hc4.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_hc3.y())
90 T_hc4.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_ht1.y()], hA = [hA_sn])
91
92 # core
93 n.set_dndt(r = rho.y()+rho_ext, beta_eff = beta_t, Lambda = Lam, lam = lam, C = [C1.y(),C2.y
(),C3.y(),C4.y(),C5.y(),C6.y()])
94 C1.set_dcdt(n.y(),beta[0],Lam,lam[0],tau_c,tau_l)
95 C2.set_dcdt(n.y(),beta[1],Lam,lam[1],tau_c,tau_l)
96 C3.set_dcdt(n.y(),beta[2],Lam,lam[2],tau_c,tau_l)
97 C4.set_dcdt(n.y(),beta[3],Lam,lam[3],tau_c,tau_l)
98 C5.set_dcdt(n.y(),beta[4],Lam,lam[4],tau_c,tau_l)
99 C6.set_dcdt(n.y(),beta[5],Lam,lam[5],tau_c,tau_l)
100
101 T_cg.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_cf1.y()], hA = [hA_fg])
102 T_cg.set_dTdt_internal(source = n.y(), k = k_g*P)
103
104 T_cf1.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_hf4.y(t-tau_hx_c))
105 T_cf1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_cg.y()], hA = [k_1*hA_fg])
106 T_cf1.set_dTdt_internal(source = n.y(), k = k_f1*P)
107
108 T_cf2.set_dTdt_advective(source = T_cf1.y())
109 T_cf2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [T_cg.y()], hA = [k_2*hA_fg])
110 T_cf2.set_dTdt_internal(source = n.y(), k = k_f2*P)
111
112 rho.set_drdt(sources = [T_cf1.dydt(), T_cf2.dydt(), T_cg.dydt()], coeffs = [a_f/2,a_f/2,a_g])
113
114 # solve
115 sol_jit = MSRE.solve(T)
116
117 # plot
118 fig,axs = plt.subplots(2,3,figsize=(18,12))
119
120 # Set a professional color scheme
121 colors = ['tab:blue', 'tab:orange', 'tab:green', 'tab:red', 'tab:purple', 'tab:brown']
122
123 # Function to update the style of each axis
124 def update_axis_style(ax, title, x_label='', y_label='', x_ticks=True):
==PAGE:97==
C.2 Implementation
90
125
ax.set_xlim([t0,tf])
126
ax.set_title(title)
127
ax.set_xlabel(x_label)
128
ax.set_ylabel(y_label)
129
ax.grid(True, which='both', linestyle='--', linewidth=0.5)
130
ax.tick_params(axis='x', which='both', bottom=x_ticks, top=False, labelbottom=x_ticks)
131
ax.tick_params(axis='y', which='both', left=True, right=False, labelleft=True)
132
133 # Applying the updated style to the subplots
134 # Fuel temperatures
135 sol_jit = np.array(sol_jit)
136 update_axis_style(axs[0, 0], "Fuel Node Temperatures (C)", y_label=r"$^\circ$ C")
137 axs[0,0].plot(T,[s[20] for s in sol_jit],label="core 1",color=colors[0])
138 axs[0,0].plot(T,[s[21] for s in sol_jit],label="core 2",color=colors[1])
139 axs[0,0].plot(T,[s[2] for s in sol_jit],label="hx 1",color=colors[2])
140 axs[0,0].plot(T,[s[3] for s in sol_jit],label="hx 2",color=colors[3])
141 axs[0,0].plot(T,[s[4] for s in sol_jit],label="hx 3",color=colors[4])
142 axs[0,0].plot(T,[s[5] for s in sol_jit],label="hx 4",color=colors[5])
143
144 # Coolant temperatures
145 update_axis_style(axs[0, 1], "Coolant Node Temperatures (C)", y_label=r"$^\circ$ C")
146 axs[0, 1].plot(T, sol_jit[:, 6], label=f"hx 1", color=colors[0])
147 axs[0, 1].plot(T, sol_jit[:, 7], label=f"hx 1", color=colors[1])
148 axs[0, 1].plot(T, sol_jit[:, 8], label=f"hx 1", color=colors[2])
149 axs[0, 1].plot(T, sol_jit[:, 9], label=f"hx 1", color=colors[3])
150 axs[0, 1].plot(T, sol_jit[:, 0], label=f"r 1", color=colors[4])
151
152 # Tube node temperatures
153 update_axis_style(axs[0, 2], "Tube Node Temperatures (C)", y_label=r"$^\circ$ C")
154 axs[0,2].plot(T,[s[6] for s in sol_jit],label="hx 1",color=colors[0])
155 axs[0,2].plot(T,[s[7] for s in sol_jit],label="hx 2",color=colors[1])
156
157 # Precursor concentrations
158 update_axis_style(axs[1, 2], "Precursor Concentrations", x_label="t (s)", y_label=r"
concentration (1/cm$^3$)")
159 for i in range(6):
160
axs[1, 2].plot(T, sol_jit[:, i+13], label=f"C{i+1}", color=colors[i])
161 axs[1, 2].set_yscale("log")
162
163 # Multiplication factor temp
164 update_axis_style(axs[1, 0], r"$n$", x_label="t (s)", y_label=r"$\frac{n}{n_0}$")
165 axs[1, 0].plot(T, sol_jit[:, 12], label="n", color='tab:blue')
166
167 # Reactivity
168 update_axis_style(axs[1, 1], r"$\rho$", x_label="t (s)")
169 axs[1, 1].plot(T, sol_jit[:, 22], label="n", color='tab:orange')
170
171 # Adding legends
172 for ax in axs.flat:
173
ax.legend()
174
175 plt.tight_layout()
176 plt.show()
==PAGE:98==
D
ARE Model
This appendix provides reference parameter file and a Python implementation of the ARE model in
msrDynamics. File paths are relative to the source code repository, Labrie [19], which includes the source
code for all of the ARE results provided in the report.
D.1
Parameters
The parameters for the ARE are given below. The comments on most parameters (not derived from
the others) provide reference to the relevant source documentation.
1 import numpy as np
2 import math
3 from collections import namedtuple
4
5 #################################
6 # functions
7 #################################
8 def iwc_to_Pa(h20):
9
'''
10
Inches water column -> Pa
11
'''
12
return h20*248.8
13
14 def cfm_to_m3s(v):
15
'''
16
Cubic ft/min -> m3/s
17
'''
18
return v/2119
19
20 # fuel density (kg/m^3) ORNL-1845 pg. 113
21 def fuel_density(temp):
22
return 1000*(4.04-0.0011*(temp+273.15))
23
24 # F to K conversion
25 def F_to_K(tempF):
26
return (tempF -32)*5/9+273.15
27
28 def mass_flow(m,P,V,T):
29
'''
30
m: molar mass of gas
31
P: pressure
32
V: volume
33
T: temperature
34
'''
35
return m*P*V/(R*T)
# helium mass flow (kg/s)
36
37 def h_US(C,k,D,R,r,Pr,p):
38
'''
39
convective heat transfer coefficient BTU/(sec*ft^2*degF) ORNL-1535 p.15
40
C: leading coefficient
41
k: thermal conductivity BTU/(sec*ft^2)
42
D: pipe diameter (ft)
43
R: Reynold's modulus
44
r: Exponent for Reynold's modulus
==PAGE:99==
D.1 Parameters
92
45
Pr: Prandtl modulus
46
p: Exponent for Prandtl modulus
47
'''
48
return 0.023*(k/D)*(R**0.8)*(Pr**0.4)
49
50 def R_US(u,r,nu):
51
'''
52
Reynold's Modulus ORNL -1345 p.7
53
u: fluid velocity (ft/hr)
54
r: pipe radius (ft)
55
nu: kinematic viscosity (ft^2/hr)
56
'''
57
return 2*u*r/nu
58
59 def Pr_US(nu,rho,c,k):
60
'''
61
Prandtl Modulus ORNL-1345 p.7
62
nu: kinematic viscosity (ft^2/hr)
63
rho: density (lb/ft^3)
64
c: heat capacity (Btu/(lb*degF))
65
k: thermal conductivity BTU/(hr*ft^2)
66
'''
67
return nu*rho*c/k
68
69 Point = namedtuple('Point', ['x', 'y'])
70 def hA(W,points):
71
'''
72
Quadratic approximation of convective heat transfer coefficient ,
73
given available data
74
75
W: flow rate (lb/s)
76
points: data points of (flow rate (lb/s),hA)
77
78
returns hA in BTU/(sec*degF)
79
'''
80
81
# Create matrices for the system of equations
82
order = len(points)
83
a = [[p.x**i for i in reversed(range(order))] for p in points]
84
A = np.array(a)
85
b = np.array([p.y for p in points])
86
87
# Solve for the coefficients
88
coeffs = np.linalg.solve(A, b)
89
90
# evaluate terms
91
terms = [coeffs[i]*W**(order-i) for i in range(order)]
92
93
return sum(terms)
94
95 ###############################################################################
96 # constants
97 ###############################################################################
98
99 # domain
100 t0 = 0.0
101 tf = 1000.00
102 T = np.arange(t0,tf,0.01)
103
104 # reactivity insertion
105 inserted = 4e-3
106 insert_duration = 0.4/0.011 # ORNL -1845
107 t_ins = 300.00
108 t_wd = t_ins + (60*4)
109
110 # dimensions
==PAGE:100==
D.1 Parameters
93
111 pi = math.pi
112 R = 8.314
# ideal gas constant
113 m_H = 0.004
# molar mass of helium (kg/mol)
114 P = 2.2
# steady-state power (MW) ORNL -1845 pg. 58
115
116 # density
117 rho_inconel = 8.5*1000
# inconel density (kg/m^3)
118 rho_h = 0.167
# helium density (kg/m^3) NEEDS TO BE TEMPERATURE DEPENDENT
119 rho_m = 2.75*1000
# BeO density (kg/m^3) ORNL -1845 p.
120
121 # specific heat capacities
122 #scp_f = 1.9665e-3
# specific heat capacity of fuel salt (BTU/lb*defF) -> (MJ/kg-C)
ORNL-TM-0728 p.8
123 scp_t = 0.101*4.1869e-3 # specific heat capacity of inconel 600 (BTU/lb*defF) -> (MJ/kg-C)
ORNL-1845 p.113
124 scp_f = (0.26*4.1869e-3)
# specific heat capacity of fuel salt ORNL -1845 p.113 (BTU/lb*defF)
-> (MJ/kg-C)
125 scp_c = 0.3*4.1869e-3
# specific heat capacity of cooolant (BTU/lb*defF) -> (MJ/kg-C) ORNL
-1845 p.113
126 scp_h = 1.248*4.1869e-3 # specigic heat capacity of helium (BTU/lb*defF) -> (MJ/kg-C) ORNL
-1845 p.113
127 scp_m = 0.48*4.1869e-3
# specific heat capcity of moderator (BTU/lb*defF) -> (MJ/kg-C) ORNL
-1845 p.113
128
129 # delays
130 tau_hx_c_f = 20. # fuel-helium hx to core delay (unknown)
131 tau_hx_c_c = 20. # coolant-helium hx to core delay (unknown)
132 tau_c_hx_f = 20. # core->hx delay (unknown)
133 tau_h = 0.5
# helium loop delay (unknown)
134
135 # NEUTRONICS DATA, borrowed from MSRE model
136 tau_l = 40.0
# ORNL-TM-0728 %16.44; % (s)
137 tau_c = 8.3
# ORNL-1845 p.120
138 #tau_l = 5.00
# ORNL-TM-0728 %16.44; % (s)
139 #tau_c = 8.3
# ORNL-1845 p.120
140 n_frac0 = 1.0
# initial fractional neutron density n/n0 (n/cm^3/s)
141 # Lam = 2.400E-04
# mean generation time ORNL-TM-1070 p.15 U235
142 Lam = (2.400E-04)
# mean generation time ORNL-TM-1070 p.15 U235
143 # Lam = 4.0E-04;
# mean generation time ORNL-TM-1070 p.15 U233
144 lam = np.array([1.240E-02, 3.05E-02, 1.11E-01, 3.01E-01, 1.140E+00, 3.014E+00])
145 beta = (np.array([0.000223, 0.001457, 0.001307, 0.002628, 0.000766, 0.00023]))
# U235
146 # beta = np.array([0.00023, 0.00079, 0.00067, 0.00073, 0.00013, 0.00009])
# U233
147 beta_t = np.sum(beta)
# total delayed neutron fraction MSRE
148 rho_0 = beta_t-sum(np.divide(beta,1+np.divide(1-np.exp(-lam*tau_l),lam*tau_c))) # reactivity
change in going from stationary to circulating fuel
149 C0 = beta / Lam * (1.0 / (lam - (np.exp(-lam * tau_l) - 1.0) / tau_c))
150
151 ###############################################################################
152 # core
153 ###############################################################################
154
155 # wights (borrowed from MSRE model)
156 k_f1 = 0.475
# fractional power generation (fuel)
157 k_f2 = 0.475
# fractional power generation (fuel)
158 k_m = 1-(k_f1+k_f2) # fractional power generation (beryllium)
159 k_1 = 0.5
160 k_2 = 1-k_1
161
162 # thermal feedback (1/Kelvin, temperature provided in Kelvin) ORNL-1845 pg. 115
163 a_f = (-9.8e-5)*9/5
164 a_b = (1.1e-5)*9/5
165 a_c = (-5.88e-5)*9/5
166
167 # operating conditions taken from 25-hr Xenon run Exp. H-8
168 # temperatures
169 T_fuel_avg = F_to_K(1311)
# ORNL 1845 pg. 58
==PAGE:101==
D.1 Parameters
94
170 T0_c_f1 = F_to_K(1209)
# core fuel inlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 120
171 T0_c_f2 = F_to_K(1522)
# core fuel outlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 120
172 T0_c_c1 = F_to_K(1226)
# core coolant inlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 121
173 T0_c_c2 = F_to_K(1335)
# core coolant outlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 121
174 T0_c_t1 = ((T0_c_f1+T0_c_c1)/2) # core tube temp
175 T0_c_m = F_to_K(1300)
# beryllium initial temp
176
177 # flow rates
178 F_c_f = 46/15850
# core fuel flow rate (gal/min)->(m^3/s) ORNL -1845 pg. 120
179 F_c_c = 152/15850
# core coolant flow rate (gal/min)->(m^3/s) ORNL-1845 pg. 121
180
181 # dimensions
182 V_fuel = 52071.248849/1e6
# CAD model (cm^3)->(m^3)
183 A_fuel = (69872.856584/2-(6*6.996))/10000
# CAD model (cm^3)->(m^2)
184 V_tubes = (5453.961+34777.657)/1e6
# CAD model (cm^3)->(m^3)
185 A_tubes = (73445.338-(12*7.728))/10000
# CAD model (cm^3)->(m^2)
186 A_tube_bends = 2*(20044.557-(62*pi*(3.137/2)**2))/10000
# CAD model (cm^2)->(m^2)
187 V_coolant = (248933.207)/1e6
# CAD model (cm^3)->(m^3)
188 A_mc = 961677.131/10000
# CAD model (cm^2)->(m^2)
189 V_m = 926899.473/1e6
# CAD model (cm^2)->(m^3)
190
191 # density
192 # rho_c = 1000*0.78
# coolant density (kg/m^3)
193
194 # density data from https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/tr/pdf/AD0622191.pdf
195 temperature = np.array([F_to_K(t) for t in [1576.8, 1886.2, 2093.5, 2268.9, 2491.2]])
196 density = np.array([16.0186*r for r in [46.738, 43.926, 42.224, 40.641, 38.933]]) # lb/ft^3
-> kg/m^3
197
198 # line of best fit
199 coefficients = np.polyfit(temperature , density, 1)
200 slope, intercept = coefficients
201 def coolant_density(T_c):
202
return T_c*slope + intercept
203 rho_c = coolant_density((T0_c_c1+T0_c_c2)/2)
204
205 # mass
206 m_f_c = fuel_density(T_fuel_avg)*V_fuel
207 m_c_c = rho_c*V_coolant
# coolant mass (kg)
208 m_m_c = (5490/2.205)
# ORNL-1845 p.111s (lb)->(kg)
209 m_t
= V_tubes*rho_inconel
# mass of tubes (kg)
210
211 # mass flow rate
212 W_f = F_c_f * fuel_density(T_fuel_avg)
# fuel mass flow rate (kg/s)
213 W_c = F_c_c * rho_c
# coolant mass flow rate (kg/s)
214
215 # convective heat transfer coefficient for the core fuel
216 rho_c_f = 187
# core fuel density in (lb/ft^3) ORNL -1535 p.16
217 cp_c_f = 0.26
# core fuel heat capacity (Btu/(lb*degF)) ORNL -1535 p
.16
218 mu_c_f = 60*60*8.27e-3
# absolute viscosity of core fuel lb/(hr*ft) ORNL
-1535 p.16
219 nu_c_f = mu_c_f/rho_c_f
# kinematic viscosity (ft^2/hr)
220 d_c_f = 0.097933071
# fuel pipe diameter (ft) CAD Model
221 v_c_f = (40*8.02083)/(pi*(d_c_f/2)**2)
# velocity of core fuel (ft/hr) (gpm->ft^3/hr
conversion)
222 k_f_US = 4.17e-4
# thermal conductivity of the fuel in BTU/(sec*ft^2)
ORNL-1535 p.16
223 k_f_US_hr = 60*60*4.17e-4
# thermal conductivity of the fuel in BTU/(hr*ft^2)
ORNL-1535 p.16
224 R_c_f = R_US(v_c_f,d_c_f/2,nu_c_f)
# Reynold's number for core fuel
225 r_c_f = 0.8
# coefficient on Reynold's modulus
226 Pr_c_f = Pr_US(nu_c_f,rho_c_f,cp_c_f,k_f_US_hr) # Prandtl modulus core fuel
227 p_c_f = 0.4
# Coefficient on Prandtl's modulus
228 C_c_f = 0.023
# leading coefficient
229 h_f_US = h_US(C_c_f,k_f_US,d_c_f,R_c_f,r_c_f,Pr_c_f,p_c_f) # Convective heat transfer
==PAGE:102==
D.1 Parameters
95
coefficient core fuel (BTU/(sec*ft^2*degF))
230 h_f_US_hr = h_f_US*60*60
# Convective heat transfer coefficient core
fuel (BTU/(hr*ft^2*degF))
231 h_f_c = ((h_f_US_hr/0.1761)*1e-6)
# Convective heat transfer coefficient
core fuel (MW/(m^2*degC))
232 hA_f_c = h_f_c*A_fuel
233
234 # convective heat transfer coefficient for the core tubes
235 hA_t_hx_US = 1/0.137 # BTU/(sec*degF) ORNL -1535 p. 47
236 h_t_US = (hA_t_hx_US/11.15+hA_t_hx_US/8.02)/2 # tube htc (Btu/(sec*ft^2*defF))
237 hA_t_c_US = h_t_US*A_fuel*10.764
238 hA_t_c = hA_t_c_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3)
# MW/(degK)
239
240 # fuel-tube coefficient (core)
241 hA_ft_c = 1/((1/hA_t_c)+(1/hA_f_c))
242
243 # coolant
244 A_coolant_tubes_US = 317085/929
# CAD model (cm^2)->(ft^2)
245 h_c_c_US = 166
# coolant heat transfer coefficient (BTU/(hr*ft^2*defF))
ORNL -1535 p.23
246 hA_c_c_US = A_coolant_tubes_US*h_c_c_US
247
248 # elbows
249 hA_t_c12_US = 1/(0.130)
# ORNL -1535 pg.24
250 hA_tc_c_US = 1/((1/hA_c_c_US)+(1/hA_t_c12_US))
251 hA_tc_c = hA_tc_c_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3)
# MW/(degK)
252
253 # moderator
254 hA_m_US = 1/2.060 # ORNL-1535 p.28
255 hA_c_US = 1000*1/0.771 # ORNL-1535 p.28
256 hA_mc_US = 1/((1/hA_m_US)+(1/hA_c_US))
257 hA_mc_c = hA_mc_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3)
# MW/(degK)
258
259 # specific heat
260 mcp_t_c = scp_t*m_t
261 mcp_f_c = scp_f*m_f_c
262 mcp_c_c = scp_c*m_c_c
263 mcp_m_c = scp_m*m_m_c
264
265 ###############################################################################
266 # fuel-helium heat exchanger
267 ###############################################################################
268
269 # initial temperatures
270 T0_hfh_f1 = F_to_K(1450)
# fuel-helium hx fuel inlet temp (K) ORNL -1845 pg. 121
271 T0_hfh_f2 = F_to_K(1150)
# fuel-helium hx fuel oulet temp (K) ORNL -1845 pg. 121
272 T0_hfh_h1 = F_to_K(180)
# fuel-helium hx helium inlet temp (K) ORNL -1845 pg. 121
273 T0_hfh_h2 = F_to_K(620)
# fuel-helium hx helium outlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 121
274 T0_hfh_t1 = ((T0_hfh_f1+T0_hfh_h1)/2) # initial tube temp
275
276 # flow rates
277 F_hfh_h1 = (7300)/2119
# fuel-helium hx helium fuel inlet flow rate (ft^3/min)->(m^3/s)
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
278 F_hfh_h2 = (12300)/2119
# fuel-helium hx helium fuel outlet flow rate (ft^3/min)->(m^3/s)
ORNL-1845 pg. 121
279
280 # dimensions
281 L_eff_US = 93.65*12
# effective tube length of hx (in) ORNL -1535 pg. 47
282 V_p_hx_US = (math.pi*((1.0/2) -0.109)**2)*L_eff_US # volume in hx tubes (in^3) ORNL-1535 pg.
47
283 V_p_hx = V_p_hx_US/61020 # in^3 -> m^3
284 V_t_hx_US = ((L_eff_US)*math.pi*((1.0/2))**2 - V_p_hx_US) # tube volume in heat exchangers (
in^3)
285 V_t_hx = V_t_hx_US/61020 # in^3 -> m^3
286 A_t_hx = (pi*((1.0) -2*0.109)*L_eff_US)/144 # hx inner tube area (in^2 -> ft^2) ORNL-1535 p.47
287 A_to_hx = (pi*(1.0/2)*93.65*12)/144 # hx outer tube area (in^2 -> ft^2) ORNL -1535 p.47
==PAGE:103==
D.1 Parameters
96
288
289 # mass
290 m_f_hx = V_p_hx*fuel_density(T_fuel_avg)
291 m_h_hxfh = (((27.0*27.5*27)/61020)-V_t_hx-V_p_hx)*rho_h # hx volume minus tube volume
292 m_t_hxfh = V_t_hx*rho_inconel
293
294 # heat transfer fuel<->tube
295 hA_f_hx_US = 5.724
# BTU/(sec*degF) ORNL -1535 p.47
296 hA_t_hx_US = 1/0.137 # BTU/(sec*degF) ORNL -1535 p.47
297 hA_ft_hx_US = 1/((1/hA_f_hx_US)+(1/hA_t_hx_US))
298 hA_ft_hx = hA_ft_hx_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3)
299
300 # mass flow rate of helium
301 W_h_fh = F_hfh_h1*(0.1362) # (kg/s) = volumetric flow rate * denisty of helium at 180F, 2.2
H20, 7300 cfm ORNL-1845 p.122
302 W_h_fh_US = W_h_fh*2.205
# (lb/s)
303
304 # available coefficient data for helium ORNL -1535 p.47
305 fh_p1 = Point(0.5,0.58)
306 fh_p2 = Point(1.0,0.8)
307 fh_p3 = Point(1.5,0.955)
308 hA_h_hx_US = hA(W_h_fh_US ,[fh_p1,fh_p2,fh_p3])
309 hA_ht_hx_US = 1/((1/hA_h_hx_US)+(1/hA_t_hx_US))
310 hA_ht_hx = hA_ht_hx_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3) # BTU/(sec*degF) -> (MW/C)
311
312 # product of mass and specific heat capacities
313 mcp_t_hx = m_t_hxfh*scp_t
314 mcp_f_hx = scp_f*m_f_hx
315 mcp_h_hxfh = m_h_hxfh*scp_h
316
317 ###############################################################################
318 # helium-water heat exchanger (fuel loop)
319 ###############################################################################
320
321 # initial temperatures
322 T0_hhwf_h1 = F_to_K(620)
# helium-water hx (fuel loop) helium inlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg.
121
323 T0_hhwf_h2 = F_to_K(180)
# helium-water hx (fuel loop) helium outlet temp (K) ORNL -1845 pg
. 121
324
325 T0_hhwf_w1 = F_to_K(61)
# helium-water hx (fuel loop) water inlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg.
121
326 T0_hhwf_w2 = F_to_K(124)
# helium-water hx (fuel loop) water water outlet temp (K) ORNL
-1845 pg. 121
327
328 T0_hhwf_t1 = ((T0_hhwf_h1+T0_hhwf_w1)/2)
329
330 V_h_hxhw_US = (pi*((0.625/2) -0.049)**2)*825*12 # in^3 ORNL-1535 p.47
331 V_h_hxhw = V_h_hxhw_US/61020 # m^3
332 m_h_hxhwf = V_h_hxhw*rho_h
333
334 V_t_hxhw_US = ((pi*((0.625/2))**2)*825*12)-V_h_hxhw_US
335 V_t_hxhw = V_t_hxhw_US/61020 # m^3
336 m_t_hxhwf = rho_inconel*V_t_hxhw
337 mcp_t_hxhw = m_t_hxhwf*scp_t
338
339 # water mass flow rate
340 W_hhwf_w = 998*((103*2)/15850)
# water flow (kg/s) ORNL-1845 p.121
341 W_hhwf_w_US = W_hhwf_w*2.205
# (lb/s)
342 V_w_US = (27*27.5*27)-V_t_hx_US-V_h_hxhw_US
# in^3
343 V_w = V_w_US/61020
# in^3 -> m^3
344 m_w_hxhwf = V_w*998
345 scp_w = 4.181e-3
346 mcp_w = m_w_hxhwf*scp_w
347 mcp_h_hxhw = m_h_hxhwf*scp_h
348
==PAGE:104==
D.1 Parameters
97
349 # helium<->tube
350 hxhw_h_p1 = Point(0.5,1.40)
351 hxhw_h_p2 = Point(1.0,2.37)
352 hxhw_h_p3 = Point(1.5,3.22)
353 hA_h_hxhw_US = hA(W_h_fh_US ,[hxhw_h_p1,hxhw_h_p2,hxhw_h_p3])
354 hA_t_hxhw_US = 1/0.00456 # BTU/(sec*degF)
# ORNL -1535 p.47
355 hA_ht_hxhw_US = 1/((1/hA_h_hxhw_US)+(1/hA_t_hxhw_US))
356 hA_ht_hxhw = hA_ht_hxhw_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3)
# BTU/(sec*degF) -> MW/C
357
358 # tube<->water
359 hxhw_w_p1 = Point(3.54,12.5)
360 hxhw_w_p2 = Point(7.08,22.8)
361 hxhw_w_p3 = Point(10.61,30.8)
362 hA_w_hxhw_US = hA(W_hhwf_w_US ,[hxhw_w_p1,hxhw_w_p2,hxhw_w_p3])
363 hA_tw_hxhw_US = 1/((1/hA_t_hxhw_US)+(1/hA_w_hxhw_US))
364 hA_tw_hxhw = hA_tw_hxhw_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3)
# BTU/(sec*degF) -> MW/C
365
366 ###############################################################################
367 # coolant-helium heat exchanger
368 ###############################################################################
369
370 # initial temperatures
371 T0_hch_c1 = F_to_K(1235)
# coolant-helium hx coolant inlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 121
372 T0_hch_c2 = F_to_K(1105)
# coolant-helium hx coolant outlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 121
373
374 T0_hch_h1 = F_to_K(170)
# coolant-helium hx helium inlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 122
375 T0_hch_h2 = F_to_K(1020)
# coolant-helium hx helium outlet temp (K) ORNL-1845 pg. 122
376
377 T0_hch_t1 = ((T0_hch_c1+T0_hch_h1)/2)
378
379 # dimensions
380 V_c_hxch_US = 101.6*12*pi*((1.0/2) -0.109)**2 # (in^3) ORNL-1535 p.58
381 V_c_hxch = V_c_hxch_US/61020 # (in^3) -> (m^3)
382 V_t_hxch_US = (101.6*12*pi*((1.0/2))**2)-V_c_hxch_US # (in^3) ORNL-1535 p.58
383 V_t_hxch = V_t_hxch_US/61020 # (in^3) -> (m^3)
384 V_h_hxch_US = (16.25**2)*13.75 # (in^3) ORNL -1535 p.58
385 V_h_hxch = V_h_hxch_US/61020 # (in^3) -> (m^3)
386
387 # mass
388 m_c_hx = V_c_hxch * rho_c
389 m_t_hxch = V_t_hxch*rho_inconel
390 m_h_hxch = rho_h*V_h_hxch
391
392 # product of mass and specific heat capacity
393 mcp_c_hxch = m_c_hx*scp_c
394 mcp_h_hxch = m_h_hxch*scp_h
395 mcp_t_hxch = m_t_hxch*scp_t
396
397 # helium mass flow rate
398 F_h_ch = 2000/2119 # ft^3/min->m^3/s ORNL-1845 p.122
399 W_h_ch = F_h_ch*0.1389 # volumetric flow rate * denisty of helium at 170F, 4.0 H20 ORNL -1845
p.122
400 W_hxch_h_US = W_h_ch*2.205
# (kg/s)->(lb/s)
401
402 # coolant<->tube
403 hA_c_hx_US = 17.3 # (BTU/(sec*degF)) ORNL-1535 p.58
404 hA_t_hxch_US = 1/0.126 # (BTU/(sec*degF)) ORNL-1535 p.58
405 hA_ct_US_hx = 1/((1/hA_c_hx_US)+(1/hA_t_hxch_US))
# BTU/(sec*degF)
406 hA_ct_hx = hA_ct_US_hx*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3) # MW/C
407
408 # tube<->helium
409 hxch_h_p1 = Point(0.11,0.526)
410 hxch_h_p2 = Point(0.22,0.743)
411 hxch_h_p3 = Point(0.33,0.889)
412 hA_h_hxch_US = hA(W_hxch_h_US ,[hxch_h_p1,hxch_h_p2,hxch_h_p3])
413 hA_th_hxch_US = 1/((1/hA_h_hxch_US)+(1/hA_t_hxch_US))
==PAGE:105==
D.1 Parameters
98
414 hA_th_hxch = hA_th_hxch_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3) # BTU/(sec*degF) -> MW/C
415
416 ###############################################################################
417 # helium-water heat exchanger (coolant loop)
418 ###############################################################################
419
420 # initial temperatures
421 T0_hhwc_h1 = F_to_K(1020)
# helium-water hx (coolant loop) helium inlet temp (K) ORNL-1845
pg. 122
422 T0_hhwc_h2 = F_to_K(170)
# helium-water hx (coolant loop) helium outlet temp (K) ORNL-1845
pg. 122
423
424 T0_hhwc_w1 = F_to_K(70)
# helium-water hx (coolant loop) water inlet temp (K) ORNL -1845 pg
. 121
425 T0_hhwc_w2 = F_to_K(100)
# helium-water hx (coolant loop) water water outlet temp (K) ORNL
-1845 pg. 121
426
427 T0_hhwc_t1 = ((T0_hhwc_h1+T0_hhwc_w1)/2)
428
429 # dimensions
430 V_h_hxhwc_US = (pi*((0.625/2) -0.049)**2)*255.1*12 # in^3 ORNL -1535 p.58
431 V_h_hxhwc = V_h_hxhwc_US/61020 # (in^3) -> (m^3)
432 V_t_hxhwc_US = ((pi*((0.625/2))**2)*255.1*12)-V_h_hxhwc_US # in^3 ORNL -1535 p.58
433 V_t_hxhwc = V_t_hxhwc_US/61020 # (in^3) -> (m^3)
434 V_w_hxhwc_US = (17**3)-V_t_hxhwc_US -V_h_hxhwc_US # (in^3) ORNL-1535 p.58
435 V_w_hxhwc = V_w_hxhwc_US/61020 # (in^3) -> (m^3)
436
437 # mass
438 m_h_hxhwc = rho_h*V_h_hxhwc
439 m_t_hxhwc = V_t_hxhwc*rho_inconel
440 m_w_hxhwc = V_w_hxhwc*998
441
442 # product of mass and specific heat capacity
443 mcp_h_hxhwc = m_h_hxhwc*scp_h
444 mcp_t_hxhwc = m_t_hxhwc*scp_t
445 mcp_w_hxhwc = m_w_hxhwc*scp_w
446
447 # tube<->helium
448 hxhwc_h_p1 = Point(0.11,0.424)
449 hxhwc_h_p2 = Point(0.22,0.709)
450 hxhwc_h_p3 = Point(0.33,0.957)
451 hA_h_hxhwc_US = hA(W_hxch_h_US ,[hxhwc_h_p1,hxhwc_h_p2,hxhwc_h_p3])
452 hA_t_hxhwc_US = 1/0.015 # ORNL-1535 p.58
453 hA_ht_hxhwc_US = 1/((1/hA_h_hxhwc_US)+(1/hA_t_hxhwc_US))
454 hA_ht_hxhwc =
hA_ht_hxhwc_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3) # BTU/(sec*degF) -> MW/C
455
456 # mass flow
457 W_hhwc_w = 998*((38.3*2)/15850)
# water flow rate in helium-water hx (kg/s) ORNL-1845 p.122
458 W_hhwc_w_US = W_hhwc_w*2.205 # (kg/s)->(lb/s)
459
460 # tube<->water
461 hxhwc_w_p1 = Point(3.33,5.92)
462 hxhwc_w_p2 = Point(6.67,10.2)
463 hxhwc_w_p3 = Point(10.0,14.3)
464 hxhwc_w_p4 = Point(16.67,21.5)
465 hA_w_hxhwc_US = hA(W_hhwc_w_US ,[hxhwc_w_p1,hxhwc_w_p2,hxhwc_w_p3 ,hxhwc_w_p4])
466 hA_tw_hxhwc_US = 1/((1/hA_t_hxhwc_US)+(1/hA_w_hxhwc_US))
467 hA_tw_hxhwc = hA_tw_hxhwc_US*(9/5)*(1.05504)*(1e-3) # BTU/(sec*degF) -> MW/C
==PAGE:106==
D.2 Implementation
99
D.2
Implementation
An implementation of the ARE model using msrDynamics with the above parameters is given below from
are/model.ipynb.
1 from jitcdde import t
2 from parameters import *
3 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4 from msrDynamics.objects import Node, System
5
6 # ARE system
7 ARE = System()
8
9 # CORE NODES
10 c_f1 = Node(m = m_f_c/2, scp = scp_f, W = W_f, y0 = T0_c_f1)
11 c_f2 = Node(m = m_f_c/2, scp = scp_f, W = W_f, y0 = T0_c_f2)
12 c_t1 = Node(m = m_t, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_c_t1)
13 c_c1 = Node(m = m_c_c/2, scp = scp_c, W = W_c, y0 = T0_c_c1)
14 c_c2 = Node(m = m_c_c/2, scp = scp_c, W = W_c, y0 = T0_c_c2)
15 c_m1 = Node(m = m_m_c, scp = scp_m, y0 = T0_c_m+50)
16 n = Node(y0 = n_frac0)
17 C1 = Node(y0 = C0[0])
18 C2 = Node(y0 = C0[1])
19 C3 = Node(y0 = C0[2])
20 C4 = Node(y0 = C0[3])
21 C5 = Node(y0 = C0[4])
22 C6 = Node(y0 = C0[5])
23 rho = Node(y0 = 0.0)
24
25 # add reactivity input
26 def rho_insert(t):
27
if (t<t_ins):
28
return 0.0
29
elif (t<(t_ins+insert_duration)):
30
return ((t-t_ins))*(inserted/insert_duration) # linear
31
elif (t < t_wd):
32
return inserted
33
elif (t < t_wd+insert_duration):
34
return inserted -((t-t_wd))*(inserted/insert_duration) # linear
35
else:
36
return 0.0
37
38 rho_ext = ARE.add_input(rho_insert, T)
39
40 # FUEL-HELIUM HX1
41 hx_fh1_f1 = Node(m = m_f_hx/2, scp = scp_f, W = W_f/2, y0 = T0_hfh_f1)
42 hx_fh1_f2 = Node(m = m_f_hx/2, scp = scp_f, W = W_f/2, y0 = T0_hfh_f2)
43 hx_fh1_t1 = Node(m = m_t_hxfh, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_hfh_t1)
44 hx_fh1_h1 = Node(m = m_h_hxfh/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_fh, y0 = T0_hfh_h1)
45 hx_fh1_h2 = Node(m = m_h_hxfh/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_fh, y0 = T0_hfh_h2)
46
47 # FUEL-HELIUM HX2
48 hx_fh2_f1 = Node(m = m_f_hx/2, scp = scp_f, W = W_f/2, y0 = T0_hfh_f1)
49 hx_fh2_f2 = Node(m = m_f_hx/2, scp = scp_f, W = W_f/2, y0 = T0_hfh_f2)
50 hx_fh2_t1 = Node(m = m_t_hxfh, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_hfh_t1)
51 hx_fh2_h1 = Node(m = m_h_hxfh/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_fh, y0 = T0_hfh_h1)
52 hx_fh2_h2 = Node(m = m_h_hxfh/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_fh, y0 = T0_hfh_h2)
53
54 # COOLANT-HELIUM HX1
55 hx_ch1_c1 = Node(m = m_c_hx/2, scp = scp_c, W = W_c/2, y0 = T0_hch_c1)
56 hx_ch1_c2 = Node(m = m_c_hx/2, scp = scp_c, W = W_c/2, y0 = T0_hch_c2)
57 hx_ch1_t1 = Node(m = m_t_hxch, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_hch_t1)
58 hx_ch1_h1 = Node(m = m_h_hxch/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_ch, y0 = T0_hch_h1)
59 hx_ch1_h2 = Node(m = m_h_hxch/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_ch, y0 = T0_hch_h2)
60
61 # COOLANT-HELIUM HX2
==PAGE:107==
D.2 Implementation
100
62 hx_ch2_c1 = Node(m = m_c_hx/2, scp = scp_c, W = W_c/2, y0 = T0_hch_c1)
63 hx_ch2_c2 = Node(m = m_c_hx/2, scp = scp_c, W = W_c/2, y0 = T0_hch_c2)
64 hx_ch2_t1 = Node(m = m_t_hxch, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_hfh_t1)
65 hx_ch2_h1 = Node(m = m_h_hxch/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_ch, y0 = T0_hch_h1)
66 hx_ch2_h2 = Node(m = m_h_hxch/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_ch, y0 = T0_hch_h2)
67
68 # HELIUM-WATER HX1 (FUEL LOOP)
69 hx_hwf1_h1 = Node(m = m_h_hxhwf/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_fh, y0 = T0_hhwf_h1)
70 hx_hwf1_h2 = Node(m = m_h_hxhwf/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_fh, y0 = T0_hhwf_h2)
71 hx_hwf1_t1 = Node(m = m_t_hxhwf, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_hhwf_t1)
72 hx_hwf1_w1 = Node(m = m_w_hxhwf/2, scp = scp_w, W = W_hhwf_w, y0 = T0_hhwf_w1)
73 hx_hwf1_w2 = Node(m = m_w_hxhwf/2, scp = scp_w, W = W_hhwf_w, y0 = T0_hhwf_w2)
74
75 # HELIUM-WATER HX2 (FUEL LOOP)
76 hx_hwf2_h1 = Node(m = m_h_hxhwf/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_fh, y0 = T0_hhwf_h1)
77 hx_hwf2_h2 = Node(m = m_h_hxhwf/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_fh, y0 = T0_hhwf_h2)
78 hx_hwf2_t1 = Node(m = m_t_hxhwf, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_hhwf_t1)
79 hx_hwf2_w1 = Node(m = m_w_hxhwf/2, scp = scp_w, W = W_hhwf_w, y0 = T0_hhwf_w1)
80 hx_hwf2_w2 = Node(m = m_w_hxhwf/2, scp = scp_w, W = W_hhwf_w, y0 = T0_hhwf_w2)
81
82 # HELIUM-WATER HX1 (COOLANT LOOP)
83 hx_hwc1_h1 = Node(m = m_h_hxhwc/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_ch, y0 = T0_hhwc_h1)
84 hx_hwc1_h2 = Node(m = m_h_hxhwc/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_ch, y0 = T0_hhwc_h2)
85 hx_hwc1_t1 = Node(m = m_t_hxhwc, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_hhwf_t1)
86 hx_hwc1_w1 = Node(m = m_w_hxhwc/2, scp = scp_w, W = W_hhwc_w, y0 = T0_hhwc_w1)
87 hx_hwc1_w2 = Node(m = m_w_hxhwc/2, scp = scp_w, W = W_hhwc_w, y0 = T0_hhwc_w2)
88
89 # HELIUM-WATER HX2 (COOLANT LOOP)
90 hx_hwc2_h1 = Node(m = m_h_hxhwc/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_ch, y0 = T0_hhwc_h1)
91 hx_hwc2_h2 = Node(m = m_h_hxhwc/2, scp = scp_h, W = W_h_ch, y0 = T0_hhwc_h2)
92 hx_hwc2_t1 = Node(m = m_t_hxhwc, scp = scp_t, y0 = T0_hhwf_t1)
93 hx_hwc2_w1 = Node(m = m_w_hxhwc/2, scp = scp_w, W = W_hhwc_w, y0 = T0_hhwc_w1)
94 hx_hwc2_w2 = Node(m = m_w_hxhwc/2, scp = scp_w, W = W_hhwc_w, y0 = T0_hhwc_w2)
95
96 ARE.add_nodes([c_f1,c_f2,c_t1,c_c1,c_c2,c_m1,n,C1,C2,C3,C4,C5,C6,rho,
97
hx_fh1_f1,hx_fh1_f2,hx_fh1_t1,hx_fh1_h1,hx_fh1_h2,
98
hx_fh2_f1,hx_fh2_f2,hx_fh2_t1,hx_fh2_h1,hx_fh2_h2,
99
hx_ch1_c1,hx_ch1_c2,hx_ch1_t1,hx_ch1_h1,hx_ch1_h2,
100
hx_ch2_c1,hx_ch2_c2,hx_ch2_t1,hx_ch2_h1,hx_ch2_h2,
101
hx_hwf1_h1 ,hx_hwf1_h2,hx_hwf1_t1,hx_hwf1_w1 ,hx_hwf1_w2,
102
hx_hwf2_h1 ,hx_hwf2_h2,hx_hwf2_t1,hx_hwf2_w1 ,hx_hwf2_w2,
103
hx_hwc1_h1 ,hx_hwc1_h2,hx_hwc1_t1,hx_hwc1_w1 ,hx_hwc1_w2,
104
hx_hwc2_h1 ,hx_hwc2_h2,hx_hwc2_t1,hx_hwc2_w1 ,hx_hwc2_w2,
105
])
106
107 # dynamics
108 # CORE
109 c_f1.set_dTdt_advective(source = (hx_fh1_f2.y(t-tau_hx_c_f)+hx_fh2_f2.y(t-tau_hx_c_f))/2)
110 c_f1.set_dTdt_internal(source = n.y(), k = k_f1*P)
111 c_f1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [c_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ft_c/2])
112
113 c_f2.set_dTdt_advective(source = c_f1.y())
114 c_f2.set_dTdt_internal(source = n.y(), k = k_f2*P)
115 c_f2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [c_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ft_c/2])
116
117 c_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [c_f1.y(), c_f2.y(), c_c1.y(), c_c2.y()],
118
hA = [hA_ft_c/2,hA_ft_c/2,hA_tc_c/2,hA_tc_c/2])
119
120 c_c1.set_dTdt_advective(source = (hx_ch1_c2.y(t-tau_c_hx_f)+hx_ch2_c2.y(t-tau_c_hx_f))/2)
121 c_c1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [c_t1.y(),c_m1.y()], hA = [hA_tc_c/2,hA_mc_c/2])
122
123 c_c2.set_dTdt_advective(source = c_c1.y())
124 c_c2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [c_t1.y(),c_m1.y()], hA = [hA_tc_c/2,hA_mc_c/2])
125
126 c_m1.set_dTdt_internal(source = n.y(), k = k_m*P)
127 c_m1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [c_c1.y(), c_c2.y()], hA = [hA_mc_c/2]*2)
==PAGE:108==
D.2 Implementation
101
128
129 n.set_dndt(rho.y()+rho_ext, beta_t, Lam, lam, [C1.y(), C2.y(), C3.y(), C4.y(), C5.y(), C6.y()
])
130 C1.set_dcdt(n.y(), beta[0], Lam, lam[0], tau_c, tau_l)
131 C2.set_dcdt(n.y(), beta[1], Lam, lam[1], tau_c, tau_l)
132 C3.set_dcdt(n.y(), beta[2], Lam, lam[2], tau_c, tau_l)
133 C4.set_dcdt(n.y(), beta[3], Lam, lam[3], tau_c, tau_l)
134 C5.set_dcdt(n.y(), beta[4], Lam, lam[4], tau_c, tau_l)
135 C6.set_dcdt(n.y(), beta[5], Lam, lam[5], tau_c, tau_l)
136 rho.set_drdt([c_f1.dydt(),c_f2.dydt(),c_m1.dydt(),c_c1.dydt(),c_c2.dydt()],[a_f/2,a_f/2,a_b,
a_c/2,a_c/2])
137
138 # FUEL-HELIUM HX1
139 hx_fh1_f1.set_dTdt_advective(source = c_f2.y(t-tau_c_hx_f))
140 hx_fh1_f1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ft_hx/2])
141
142 hx_fh1_f2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_fh1_f1.y())
143 hx_fh1_f2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ft_hx/2])
144
145 hx_fh1_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh1_f1.y(),hx_fh1_f2.y(),hx_fh1_h1.y(),hx_fh1_h2.y
()],
146
hA = [hA_ft_hx/2,hA_ft_hx/2,hA_ht_hx/2,hA_ht_hx/2])
147
148 hx_fh1_h1.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwf2_h2.y(t-tau_h))
149 hx_fh1_h1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hx/2])
150
151 hx_fh1_h2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_fh1_h1.y())
152 hx_fh1_h2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hx/2])
153
154 # FUEL-HELIUM HX2
155 hx_fh2_f1.set_dTdt_advective(source = c_f2.y(t-tau_c_hx_f))
156 hx_fh2_f1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ft_hx/2])
157
158 hx_fh2_f2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_fh2_f1.y())
159 hx_fh2_f2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ft_hx/2])
160
161 hx_fh2_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh2_f1.y(),hx_fh2_f2.y(),hx_fh2_h1.y(),hx_fh2_h2.y
()],
162
hA = [hA_ft_hx/2,hA_ft_hx/2,hA_ht_hx/2,hA_ht_hx/2])
163
164 hx_fh2_h1.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwf1_h2.y())
165 hx_fh2_h1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hx/2])
166
167 hx_fh2_h2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_fh2_h1.y())
168 hx_fh2_h2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_fh2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hx/2])
169
170 # COOLANT-HELIUM HX1
171 hx_ch1_c1.set_dTdt_advective(source = c_c2.y(t-tau_c_hx_f))
172 hx_ch1_c1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ct_hx/2])
173
174 hx_ch1_c2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_ch1_c1.y())
175 hx_ch1_c2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ct_hx/2])
176
177 hx_ch1_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch1_c1.y(),hx_ch1_c2.y(),hx_ch1_h1.y(),hx_ch1_h2.y
()],
178
hA = [hA_ct_hx/2,hA_ct_hx/2,hA_th_hxch/2,hA_th_hxch/2])
179
180 hx_ch1_h1.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwc1_h2.y(t-tau_h))
181 hx_ch1_h1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_th_hxch/2])
182
183 hx_ch1_h2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_ch1_h1.y())
184 hx_ch1_h2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_th_hxch/2])
185
186 # COOLANT-HELIUM HX2
187 hx_ch2_c1.set_dTdt_advective(source = c_c2.y(t-tau_c_hx_f))
188 hx_ch2_c1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ct_hx/2])
==PAGE:109==
D.2 Implementation
102
189
190 hx_ch2_c2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_ch2_c1.y())
191 hx_ch2_c2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ct_hx/2])
192
193 hx_ch2_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch2_c1.y(),hx_ch2_c2.y(),hx_ch2_h1.y(),hx_ch2_h2.y
()],
194
hA = [hA_ct_hx/2,hA_ct_hx/2,hA_th_hxch/2,hA_th_hxch/2])
195
196 hx_ch2_h1.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwc2_h2.y(t-tau_h))
197 hx_ch2_h1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_th_hxch/2])
198
199 hx_ch2_h2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_ch2_h1.y())
200 hx_ch2_h2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_ch2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_th_hxch/2])
201
202 # HELIUM-WATER HX1 (FUEL LOOP)
203 hx_hwf1_h1.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_fh1_h2.y())
204 hx_hwf1_h1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hxhw/2])
205
206 hx_hwf1_h2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwf1_h1.y())
207 hx_hwf1_h2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hxhw/2])
208
209 hx_hwf1_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf1_h1.y(),hx_hwf1_h2.y(),hx_hwf1_w1.y(),
hx_hwf1_w2.y()],
210
hA = [hA_ht_hxhw/2,hA_ht_hxhw/2,hA_tw_hxhw/2,hA_tw_hxhw/2])
211
212 hx_hwf1_w1.set_dTdt_advective(source = T0_hhwf_w1)
213 hx_hwf1_w1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_tw_hxhw/2])
214
215 hx_hwf1_w2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwf1_w1.y())
216 hx_hwf1_w2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_tw_hxhw/2])
217
218 # HELIUM-WATER HX2 (FUEL LOOP)
219 hx_hwf2_h1.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_fh2_h2.y())
220 hx_hwf2_h1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hxhw/2])
221
222 hx_hwf2_h2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwf2_h1.y())
223 hx_hwf2_h2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hxhw/2])
224
225 hx_hwf2_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf2_h1.y(),hx_hwf2_h2.y(),hx_hwf2_w1.y(),
hx_hwf2_w2.y()],
226
hA = [hA_ht_hxhw/2,hA_ht_hxhw/2,hA_tw_hxhw/2,hA_tw_hxhw/2])
227
228 hx_hwf2_w1.set_dTdt_advective(source = T0_hhwf_w1)
229 hx_hwf2_w1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_tw_hxhw/2])
230
231 hx_hwf2_w2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwf2_w1.y())
232 hx_hwf2_w2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwf2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_tw_hxhw/2])
233
234 # HELIUM-WATER HX1 (COOLANT LOOP)
235 hx_hwc1_h1.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_ch1_h2.y())
236 hx_hwc1_h1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hxhwc/2])
237
238 hx_hwc1_h2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwc1_h1.y())
239 hx_hwc1_h2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hxhwc/2])
240
241 hx_hwc1_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc1_h1.y(),hx_hwc1_h2.y(),hx_hwc1_w1.y(),
hx_hwc1_w2.y()],
242
hA = [hA_ht_hxhwc/2,hA_ht_hxhwc/2,hA_tw_hxhwc/2,hA_tw_hxhwc
/2])
243
244 hx_hwc1_w1.set_dTdt_advective(source = T0_hhwc_w1)
245 hx_hwc1_w1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_tw_hxhwc/2])
246
247 hx_hwc1_w2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwc1_w1.y())
248 hx_hwc1_w2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc1_t1.y()], hA = [hA_tw_hxhwc/2])
249
==PAGE:110==
D.2 Implementation
103
250 # HELIUM-WATER HX2 (COOLANT LOOP)
251 hx_hwc2_h1.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_ch2_h2.y())
252 hx_hwc2_h1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hxhwc/2])
253
254 hx_hwc2_h2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwc2_h1.y())
255 hx_hwc2_h2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_ht_hxhwc/2])
256
257 hx_hwc2_t1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc2_h1.y(),hx_hwc2_h2.y(),hx_hwc2_w1.y(),
hx_hwc2_w2.y()],
258
hA = [hA_ht_hxhwc/2,hA_ht_hxhwc/2,hA_tw_hxhwc/2,hA_tw_hxhwc
/2])
259
260 hx_hwc2_w1.set_dTdt_advective(source = T0_hhwc_w1)
261 hx_hwc2_w1.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_tw_hxhwc/2])
262
263 hx_hwc2_w2.set_dTdt_advective(source = hx_hwc2_w1.y())
264 hx_hwc2_w2.set_dTdt_convective(source = [hx_hwc2_t1.y()], hA = [hA_tw_hxhwc/2])
265
266 # solve system
267 sol_jit = ARE.solve(T)
268
269 # plot
270 fig,axs = plt.subplots(3,3,figsize=(18,18))
271
272 t_0 = 0.0
273 t_f = 1000
274
275 # Set a professional color scheme
276 colors = ['tab:blue', 'tab:orange', 'tab:green', 'tab:red', 'tab:purple', 'tab:brown',
277
'tab:pink', 'tab:gray', 'tab:olive']
278
279 # Function to update the style of each axis
280 def update_axis_style(ax, title = '', x_label='', y_label='', x_ticks=True, y_scale='linear')
:
281
ax.set_xlim([t_0, t_f])
282
ax.set_title(title)
283
ax.set_xlabel(x_label)
284
ax.set_ylabel(y_label)
285
ax.grid(True, which='both', linestyle='--', linewidth=0.5)
286
ax.tick_params(axis='x', which='both', bottom=x_ticks, top=False, labelbottom=x_ticks)
287
ax.tick_params(axis='y', which='both', left=True, right=False, labelleft=True)
288
ax.set_yscale(y_scale)
289
290 # Core Node Temperatures
291 update_axis_style(axs[0, 0], "Core Node Temperatures (K)")
292 axs[0,0].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
293 axs[0,0].plot(T,c_f1.y_out,label="core f1")
294 axs[0,0].plot(T,c_f2.y_out,label="core f2")
295 axs[0,0].plot(T,c_t1.y_out,label="core t1")
296 axs[0,0].plot(T,c_c1.y_out,label="core c1")
297 axs[0,0].plot(T,c_c2.y_out,label="core c2")
298 axs[0,0].plot(T,c_m1.y_out,label="core m")
299 axs[0,0].legend()
300
301 update_axis_style(axs[0, 1], "HX Fuel->Helium Node Temperatures (K)")
302 axs[0,1].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
303 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh1_f1.y_out,label="hx_fh1 f1")
304 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh1_f2.y_out,label="hx_fh1 f2")
305 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh1_t1.y_out,label="hx_fh1 t1")
306 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh1_h1.y_out,label="hx_fh1 h1")
307 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh1_h2.y_out,label="hx_fh1 h2")
308 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh2_f1.y_out,label="hx_fh2 f1")
309 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh2_f2.y_out,label="hx_fh2 f2")
310 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh2_t1.y_out,label="hx_fh2 t1")
311 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh2_h1.y_out,label="hx_fh2 h1")
312 axs[0,1].plot(T,hx_fh2_h2.y_out,label="hx_fh2 h2")
==PAGE:111==
D.2 Implementation
104
313 axs[0,1].legend()
314
315 update_axis_style(axs[0, 2])
316 axs[0,2].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
317 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf1_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwf1 h1")
318 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf1_h2.y_out,label="hx_hwf1 h2")
319 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf1_t1.y_out,label="hx_hwf1 t1")
320 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf1_w1.y_out,label="hx_hwf1 w1")
321 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf1_w2.y_out,label="hx_hwf1 w2")
322 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf2_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwf2 h1")
323 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf2_h2.y_out,label="hx_hwf2 h2")
324 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf2_t1.y_out,label="hx_hwf2 t1")
325 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf2_w1.y_out,label="hx_hwf2 w1")
326 axs[0,2].plot(T,hx_hwf2_w2.y_out,label="hx_hwf2 w2")
327 axs[0,2].legend()
328 axs[0,2].set_title("HX Helium->Water (Fuel Loop) Node Temperatures (K)")
329
330 update_axis_style(axs[1, 1])
331 axs[1,1].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
332 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch1_c1.y_out,label="hx_ch1 c1")
333 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch1_c1.y_out,label="hx_ch1 c2")
334 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch1_t1.y_out,label="hx_ch1 t1")
335 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch1_h1.y_out,label="hx_ch1 h1")
336 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch1_h2.y_out,label="hx_ch1 h2")
337 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch2_c1.y_out,label="hx_ch2 c1")
338 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch2_c1.y_out,label="hx_ch2 c2")
339 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch2_t1.y_out,label="hx_ch2 t1")
340 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch2_h1.y_out,label="hx_ch2 h1")
341 axs[1,1].plot(T,hx_ch2_h2.y_out,label="hx_ch2 h2")
342 axs[1,1].legend()
343 axs[1,1].legend()
344 axs[1,1].set_title("HX Coolant->Helium Node Temperatures (K)")
345
346 update_axis_style(axs[1, 2])
347 axs[1,2].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
348 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc1_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc1 h1")
349 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc1_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc1 h2")
350 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc1_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc1 t1")
351 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc1_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc1 w1")
352 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc1_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc1 w2")
353 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc2_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc2 h1")
354 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc2_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc2 h2")
355 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc2_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc2 t1")
356 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc2_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc2 w1")
357 axs[1,2].plot(T,hx_hwc2_h1.y_out,label="hx_hwc2 w2")
358 axs[1,2].legend()
359 axs[1,2].set_title("HX Helium->Water (Coolant Loop) Node Temperatures (K)")
360
361 update_axis_style(axs[1, 0])
362 axs[1,0].plot(T,n.y_out,label="n")
363 axs[1,0].set_xlabel("t (s)")
364 axs[1,0].set_title(r"$n$")
365 axs[1,0].set_ylabel(r"$\frac{n}{n_0}$")
366 axs[1,0].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
367 axs[1,0].legend()
368
369 update_axis_style(axs[2, 0])
370 axs[2,0].plot(T,rho.y_out,label="rho")
371 axs[2,0].set_xlabel("t (s)")
372 axs[2,0].set_title(r"$\rho$")
373 axs[2,0].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
374
375 update_axis_style(axs[2, 1])
376 axs[2,1].plot(T,C1.y_out,label="C1")
377 axs[2,1].plot(T,C2.y_out,label="C2")
378 axs[2,1].plot(T,C3.y_out,label="C3")
==PAGE:112==
D.3 Parameters
105
379 axs[2,1].plot(T,C4.y_out,label="C4")
380 axs[2,1].plot(T,C5.y_out,label="C5")
381 axs[2,1].plot(T,C6.y_out,label="C6")
382 axs[2,1].legend()
383 axs[2,1].set_xlabel("t (s)")
384 axs[2,1].set_yscale("log")
385 axs[2,1].set_ylabel(r"concentration (1/cm$^3$)")
386 axs[2,1].legend(loc="right")
387 axs[2,1].set_title("Precursor Concentrations")
388 axs[2,1].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
389
390 update_axis_style(axs[2, 2])
391 axs[2,2].plot(T,[k*P for k in n.y_out],label="Power")
392 axs[2,2].set_xlabel("t (s)")
393 axs[2,2].set_title("Power")
394 axs[2,2].set_ylabel("P (MW)")
395 axs[2,2].set_xlim([t_0,t_f])
396
397 plt.tight_layout()
398 plt.show()
D.3
Parameters
The python script and relevant functions for the ARE coolant temperature-reactivity feedback coeﬀicient
estimate with OpenMC are given below. More particle transport simulations on the ARE can be found at
https://github.com/openmsr/are.
1
2 import openmc
3
4 ###############################################################################
5 # initialize materials, with densities as a function of temperature
6 ###############################################################################
7 def create_materials(operating_temp , c_temp = 977.59, fuel_temp = 977.59, Tm = 977.59):
8
#ARE material definitions
9
10
# halfnium concentration <50 ppm accoring to ORNL-4616, so 25 ppm assumed
11
h = 0.0025
12
13
#######################################################################
14
#fuel salt NaF-ZrF4-UF4 0.5309-0.4073-0.0618 %mol
15
salt = openmc.Material(name='salt', temperature = fuel_temp)
16
salt.add_element('F',41.96,percent_type='wo')
17
salt.add_element('Na',11.13,percent_type='wo')
18
salt.add_element('Zr',34.52*(1.0-h),percent_type='wo')
19
salt.add_element('Hf',34.52*(h),percent_type='wo')
20
salt.add_nuclide('U235',11.57,percent_type='wo')
21
salt.add_nuclide('U238',0.83,percent_type='wo')
22
salt.set_density('g/cm3',3.79-0.00093*fuel_temp)
23
24
#######################################################################
25
#moderator blocks
26
BeO = openmc.Material(name='BeO',temperature = Tm)
27
28
# by ao, expressed in ppm
29
BeO.add_element('Be',499792)
30
BeO.add_element('O',499792)
31
32
# impurities
33
BeO.add_element('Si',330)
34
BeO.add_element('Al',50)
==PAGE:113==
D.3 Parameters
106
35
BeO.add_element('Pb',25)
36
BeO.add_element('Ni',5)
37
BeO.add_element('Mn',5)
38
BeO.add_element('Co',1)
39
40
# density with temperature and differential expansion adjustment
41
lambda_BeO = 12e-6
42
lambda_inconel = 14.4e-6
43
temp_adj_BeO = 1/(1+lambda_BeO*(Tm+253))
44
diff_exp_adj = (1+lambda_BeO*operating_temp)/(1+lambda_inconel*operating_temp)
45
BeO.set_density('g/cm3',2.75*temp_adj_BeO*diff_exp_adj)
46
47
#######################################################################
48
#inconel
49
inconel = openmc.Material(name='inconel',temperature = operating_temp)
50
51
# from ORNL-2264 (average)
52
inconel.add_element('Ni',76.5,percent_type='wo')
53
inconel.add_element('Cr',15.275,percent_type='wo')
54
inconel.add_element('Fe',7.375,percent_type='wo')
55
inconel.add_element('Mn',0.2075,percent_type='wo')
56
inconel.add_element('C',0.035,percent_type='wo')
57
inconel.add_element('Cu',0.12,percent_type='wo')
58
inconel.add_element('Si',0.175,percent_type='wo')
59
inconel.add_element('S',0.007,percent_type='wo')
60
inconel.add_element('Al',0.105,percent_type='wo')
61
inconel.add_element('Ti',0.1725,percent_type='wo')
62
inconel.add_element('B',0.04625,percent_type='wo')
63
inconel.add_element('N',0.0295,percent_type='wo')
64
temp_adj_inconel = 1/(1+lambda_inconel*operating_temp)
65
inconel.set_density('g/cm3',8.5*temp_adj_inconel)
66
67
#insulation (diatomaceous earth)(ORNL1535 pg. 80)
68
insulation = openmc.Material(name='insulation',temperature = operating_temp)
69
insulation.add_element('Si',1)
70
insulation.add_element('O',2)
71
insulation.set_density('g/cm3',0.28832)
72
73
#insulation.add_element('O',13)
74
#insulation.add_element('Al',2)
75
#insulation.add_element('Ca',1)
76
#insulation.add_element('Fe',2)
77
#insulation.add_element('K',2)
78
#insulation.add_element('Na',2)
79
#insulation.add_element('Ti',1)
80
#insulation.set_density('g/cm3',2.24)
81
82
#######################################################################
83
#coolant
84
coolant = openmc.Material(name='coolant',temperature = c_temp)
85
coolant.add_element('Na',1.0)
86
coolant.set_density('g/cm3',-0.00024*c_temp+0.88648)
87
88
#######################################################################
89
#helium
90
helium = openmc.Material(name='helium',temperature = operating_temp)
91
helium.add_element('He',1.0)
92
helium.set_density('g/cm3',1.03*(10**-4))
93
94
#######################################################################
95
#stainless https://www.aesteiron.com/sa240 -304l-stainless-steel-sheet-plate.html
96
stainless = openmc.Material(name='stainless',temperature = operating_temp)
97
stainless.add_element('C',0.030,percent_type='wo')
98
stainless.add_element('Mn',2.00,percent_type='wo')
99
stainless.add_element('P',0.045,percent_type='wo')
100
stainless.add_element('S',0.030,percent_type='wo')
==PAGE:114==
D.3 Parameters
107
101
stainless.add_element('Si',0.75,percent_type='wo')
102
stainless.add_element('Cr',18.00,percent_type='wo')
103
stainless.add_element('Ni',8.0,percent_type='wo')
104
stainless.add_element('N',0.1,percent_type='wo')
105
stainless.add_element('Fe',39.045,percent_type='wo')
106
stainless.set_density('g/cm3',8.5*temp_adj_inconel)
107
108
#######################################################################
109
#absorber
110
lambda_boron = 4.6e-6
111
temp_adj_boron = 1/(1+lambda_boron*operating_temp)
112
boron = openmc.Material(name = 'boron',temperature = operating_temp)
113
boron.add_element('B',4.0)
114
boron.add_element('C',1.0)
115
boron.set_density('g/cm3',2.52*temp_adj_boron)
116
117
#######################################################################
118
#blanket
119
blanket = openmc.Material(name = 'blanket',temperature = operating_temp)
120
blanket.add_element('F',5.0)
121
blanket.add_element('Li',1.0)
122
blanket.add_element('Th',1.0)
123
blanket.set_density('g/cm3',5.0)
124
125
#######################################################################
126
#shield
127
shield = openmc.Material(name = 'iron',temperature = operating_temp)
128
shield.add_element('Fe',1.0)
129
shield.set_density('g/cm3',7.874)
130
131
mats = [salt,BeO,inconel,insulation,coolant,helium,stainless,boron]
132
133
return mats
134
135 ###############################################################################
136 # set up openmc model
137 ###############################################################################
138 def build_coolant_model(h5m_filepath ,coolant_temp=977.59,fuel=None,nuclear_data=None,
operating_temp=977.59,batches=100,inactive=10,particles=10000):
139
140
mats = create_materials(operating_temp ,c_temp = coolant_temp)
141
if fuel:
142
mats = [m for m in mats if m.name != 'salt']
143
mats.append(fuel)
144
mats_openmc = openmc.Materials(mats)
145
if nuclear_data:
146
mats_openmc.cross_sections = nuclear_data
147
148
mats_openmc.export_to_xml()
149
settings = openmc.Settings()
150
settings.temperature = {'method':'interpolation'}
151
settings.batches = batches
152
settings.inactive = inactive
153
settings.particles = particles
154
settings.export_to_xml()
155
source_area = openmc.stats.Box([-200., -200., -200.],[ 200.,
200.,
200.],
only_fissionable = True)
156
settings.source = openmc.Source(space=source_area)
157
# settings.verbosity = 10
158
settings.export_to_xml()
159
160
dag_univ = openmc.DAGMCUniverse(h5m_filepath)
161
geom = openmc.Geometry(root=dag_univ)
162
geom.export_to_xml()
163
164
model = openmc.model.Model(geom,mats,settings)
==PAGE:115==
D.3 Parameters
108
165
return model
166
167
168 import os
169 import statistics as stats
170
171 ###############################################################################
172 # iterate over temperature range
173 ###############################################################################
174 def F_to_K(tempF):
175
return (tempF -32)*5/9+273.15
176
177 # inputs (nuclear data path is optional)
178 h5m_filepath = os.getcwd() + '/h5m_files/ARE_rods_35.h5m'
179 nuclear_data_path = None
180 output_filename = 'coolant_coefficient_16.02.2024.txt'
181
182 # started at 1312F = (1312F-32 F)*5/9 --> 711.1111 C
183 # experiement was from 1150 to 1312
184 temps = [F_to_K(i) for i in range(1150,1313)]
185 k_effs = []
186
187 results = open(output_filename ,'w+')
188 for t in temps:
189
model = build_coolant_model(h5m_filepath ,coolant_temp=t,operating_temp=977.59)
190
sp_filepath = model.run(output = True)
191
192
with openmc.StatePoint(sp_filepath) as sp:
193
k_eff = sp.k_combined
194
k_effs.append(k_eff.nominal_value)
195
results.write(f"{k_eff.nominal_value}\n")
196
197 coeffs = [(k_effs[i]-k_effs[i-1])/k_effs[i] for i in range(1,len(k_effs))]
198 for c in coeffs:
199
results.write(f"{c}\n")
200
201 print(f"coolant coeff: {stats.mean(coeffs)}")
202 results.write(f'temperature coefficient of reactivity estimate: {stats.mean(coeffs)}\n')
203 results.write(f'temperature coefficient of reactivity stdev: {stats.stdev(coeffs)}')
204 results.close()
==PAGE:116==
Bibliography
[1]
A Technology Roadmap for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems. December 2002. url: https:
//www.gen-4.org/gif/jcms/c_40481/technology-roadmap.
[2]
S. J. Ball. Approximate Models for Distributed-Parameter Heat-Transfer Systems. Technical report.
Accessed: 2024-01-30. Oak Ridge, Tennessee: University of North Texas Libraries, August 1963.
url: https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc1201699/ (visited on 30 January
2024).
[3]
SJ Ball and TW Kerlin. Stability analysis of the molten-salt reactor experiment. Technical report.
Oak Ridge National Lab.(ORNL), Oak Ridge, TN (United States), 1965.
[4]
P. Bogacki and L.F. Shampine. “A 3(2) pair of Runge - Kutta formulas.” In: Applied Mathe-
matics Letters 2.4 (1989), pages 321–325. issn: 0893-9659. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0893- 9659(89)90079- 7. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0893965989900797.
[5]
Richard L. Burden and J. Douglas Faires. Numerical analysis. Brooks/Cole Cengage Learning,
2011.
[6]
Charter of the Generation IV International Forum. 2006. url: https://www.gen-4.org/gif/
jcms/c_83851/charter-nov2006.
[7]
Ondrej Chvala. 2017 MSRE Paper. https://github.com/ondrejch/2017-MSRE-paper. 2017.
[8]
W B Cottrell et al. “OPERATION OF THE AIRCRAFT REACTOR EXPERIMENT.” In:
(September 1955). doi: 10.2172/4237975. url: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/4237975.
[9]
CRC Handbook. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 88th Edition. 88th edition. CRC Press,
2007. isbn: 0849304881. url: http://www.amazon.com/CRC-Handbook-Chemistry-Physics-
88th/dp/0849304881/ref=sr_1_5?ie=UTF8&qid=1302802093&sr=8-5.
[10]
Thomas James Dolan. Molten salt reactors and thorium energy. Woodhead Publishing, 2017.
[11]
J.J. Duderstadt and L.J. Hamilton. Nuclear Reactor Analysis. Wiley, 1991. isbn: 9780471223634.
url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=R057QgAACAAJ.
[12]
O. J. Foust, editor. Sodium-NaK Engineering Handbook. Volume I. Prepared under the auspices of
the Division of Reactor Development and Technology, United States Atomic Energy Commission.
New York, London, Paris: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers Inc., 1972. url: https://www.
osti.gov/biblio/4631555.
[13]
Maureen Searcy Ingrid Gonçalves. “Manhattan’s Critical Moment.” In: University of Chicago
Magazine (2017).
[14]
R. Hargraves. Thorium: Energy, Cheaper Than Than Coal. CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2012. isbn: 9781478161295. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=8ieMMAEACAAJ.
[15]
J.P. Holman. Heat Transfer: Tenth Edition. McGraw-Hill Education, 2010. isbn: 9780073529363.
url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=7TGGPwAACAAJ.
[16]
T. W. Kerlin, S. J. Ball, and R. C. Steffy. “Theoretical Dynamics Analysis of the Molten-Salt
Reactor Experiment.” In: Nuclear Technology 10.2 (1971), pages 118–132. doi: 10.13182/NT71-
A30920. eprint: https://doi.org/10.13182/NT71-A30920. url: https://doi.org/10.13182/
NT71-A30920.
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
110
[17]
Hans Jürgen Korsch, Hans-Jörg Jodl, and Timo Hartmann. Chaos: a program collection for the
PC. Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.
[18]
V S Kostarev, O L Tashlykov, and V A Klimova. “The increasing of the energy eﬀiciency of
nuclear power plants with fast neutron reactors by utilizing waste heat using heat pumps.” In:
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 552.1 (June 2019). doi: 10.1088/1757-
899X/552/1/012022. url: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/552/1/012022.
[19]
Luke Labrie. MSC Engineering Thesis. https://github.com/LukeLabrie/msc_eng_thesis.
2024.
[20]
Luke Labrie-Cleary. ARE CAD Model. Onshape CAD model. 2021. url: https://cad.onshape.
com/documents/b83e5f739a4507bf06f2a2a9/w/9511a6ac44a9e4d439d86976/e/36d3d4af112bbf8cad7d521b?
renderMode=0&uiState=62d907b3549a2247567bee8c.
[21]
Luke Labrie-Cleary. ORNL Aircraft Reactor Experiment (ARE) Design. Online. 2022. url: https:
//github.com/openmsr/are/blob/main/docs/are.pdf.
[22]
J.C. Lee. Nuclear Reactor: Physics and Engineering. Wiley, 2020. isbn: 9781119582328. url:
https://books.google.dk/books?id=JrXLDwAAQBAJ.
[23]
Bernard Lubarsky and B. L. Greenstreet. Thermodynamic and Heat Transfer Analysis of the
Aircraft Reactor Experiment. Technical Report ORNL-1535. Operated by Carbide and Carbon
Chemicals Company, a Division of Union Carbide and Carbon Corporation. Oak Ridge, Tennessee:
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion Division, August 1953.
[24]
R.E. Masterson. Introduction to Nuclear Reactor Physics. CRC Press, 2017. isbn: 9781498751490.
url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=ZjwPEAAAQBAJ.
[25]
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Neutron Scattering Lengths and Cross Sections
- Na. https://www.ncnr.nist.gov/resources/n- lengths/elements/na.html. Accessed:
17/02/2024.
[26]
“Nuclear Power.” In: (2023). url: https : / / www . iea . org / energy - system / electricity /
nuclear-power.
[27]
“Nuclear Power is the Most Reliable Energy Source and It’s Not Even Close.” In: (2021). url:
https://www.energy.gov/ne/articles/nuclear-power-most-reliable-energy-source-
and-its-not-even-close.
[28]
L. Perko. Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems. Texts in Applied Mathematics. Springer
New York, 2008. isbn: 9780387951164. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=A7fvvz9Puf8C.
[29]
L.F. Shampine and S. Thompson. “Solving DDEs in Matlab.” In: Applied Numerical Mathematics
37.4 (2001), pages 441–458. issn: 0168-9274. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9274(00)
00055-6. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168927400000556.
[30]
Vikram Singh et al. “Nonlinear dynamic model of Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment – Validation
and operational analysis.” In: Annals of Nuclear Energy 113 (2018), pages 177–193. issn: 0306-4549.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2017.10.047. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S030645491730381X.
[31]
Benedetto Spinelli. “Preliminary Analysis of the MSRE Dynamic Behavior.” PhD thesis. Mi-
lan, Italy: Politecnico di Milano, 2010. url: https://www.politesi.polimi.it/retrieve/
a81cb059-6a49-616b-e053-1605fe0a889a/2010_07_Spinelli.pdf.
[32]
W.M. Stacey. Nuclear Reactor Physics. Wiley, 2018. isbn: 9783527413669. url: https://books.
google.dk/books?id=NzlJDwAAQBAJ.
[33]
R C Steffy Jr. “FREQUENCY-RESPONSE TESTING OF THE MOLTEN-SALT REACTOR
EXPERIMENT.” In: (January 1970). url: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/4184484.
[34]
R. C. Steffy Jr. “EXPERIMENTAL DYNAMIC ANALYSIS OF THE MSRE WITH sup233U
FUEL.” In: (January 1970). doi: 10.2172/4132458. url: %5Curl%7Bhttps://www.osti.gov/
biblio/4132458%7D.
==PAGE:118==
Bibliography
111
[35]
RC Steffy and PJ Wood. “Theoretical dynamic analysis of the MSRE with 233U fuel.” In: Oak
Ridge National Laboratory Technical Report (1969).
[36]
Jie Wei et al. “Modified Embedded Atom Method Potential for Modeling the Thermodynamic
Properties of High Thermal Conductivity Beryllium Oxide.” In: ACS Omega 2019 (April 2019),
6339−6346. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00174.
