==PAGE:1==
Master of Science in Engineering
Master’s Thesis in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
Cell Composition Aware
Differential Gene Expression Analysis
Angeliki Kallia Spentza
Supervisor: Lars Rønn Olsen
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In bulk transcriptomics studies, changes occuring in the genetic programs of cell types
can be masked due to tissue composition. This thesis aims to disentangle the effects
of cell type proportions from real differential expression signals.
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are hematopoietic cancers that are charac-
terized by notable alterations in the relative abundances of various blood cell types.
Here, molecular changes in MPN are investigated using linear regression models that
incorporate information on tissue composition. The complex interplay between model
design, functional characterization, and cellular composition is thoroughly investi-
gated.
A novel analytical framework for heterogeneous samples that improves on
traditional expression analysis methods is proposed. This framework implements a
combination of data deconvolution, linear modeling, and functional enrichment anal-
yses. The composition-adjusted linear models presented in this work were able to
trace molecular and functional changes not detected by traditional methods.
Cell composition aware differential gene expression analysis provides unique in-
sights into expression patterns of heterogeneous tissues.
Applying these methods
to complex diseases such as MPN can lead to novel approaches in diagnostics and
treatment, ultimately improving patient lives.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared over the period of five months at DTU Health Tech,
the Department of Bioinformatics at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in
fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree of Science in Engineer-
ing (M.Sc. Eng.) in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology.
Kongens Lyngby, 11th February 2024
Angeliki Kallia Spentza
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Lars Rønn Olsen, for trusting me with a great
research topic and for always being enthusiastic and motivating me throughout the
process.
Moreover, I would like to acknowledge the doctors at CAG Ziri who have produced
and continue to produce a wealth of research and knowledge on myeloproliferative
neoplasms.
Lastly, I extend heartfelt gratitude to my family, friends, and partner for their support.
I am also thankful for the lasting influence of cherished ones who have departed from
this earthly existence yet forever remain in my heart.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
auROC
area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve
BH
Benjamini and Hochberg
BP
Biological Processes
CMP
Common myeloid progenitor cells
cawDEA
Composition Aware Differential Gene Expression Analysis
DAG
directed acyclic graph
DE
Differential Expression
DEA
Differential Expression Analysis
DEGs
Differentially Expressed Genes
DGE
Differential Gene Expression
ES
Enrichment Score
ET
Essential Thrombocythemia
GO
Gene Ontology
GMP
Granulocyte-Monocyte Progenitor cells
GSEA
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
HSC
Hematopoietic Stem Cells
JAK2
JAK2 V617F
KEGG
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
mRNA
messenger Ribonucleic Acid
MPN
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms
NES
Normalized Enrichment Score
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbreviations
NGS
Next-Generation Sequencing
ORA
Overrepresentation Analysis
PCA
Pricipal Component Analysis
PMF
Primary Myelofibrosis
PV
Polycythemia Vera
RNA-seq
RNA sequencing
scRNA-seq single-cell RNA sequencing
ssGSEA
single sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Hypothesis Development: Analyzing Cell Composition’s Role . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Objectives: Beyond Traditional Expression Analysis . . . . .
2
1.3
Navigating the Thesis: A Structured Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
2.1
Analysis of mRNA Expression Through Microarray Technology . . . .
5
2.2
Differential Expression Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Identifying Differentially Expressed Genes . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Linear Regression Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Employing Linear Regression in Expression Analysis . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
Statistical Test for Differential Expression . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Challenges in Analyzing Heterogeneous Biological Samples . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Philadelfia Negative MPN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Decomposition of Mixture Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.1
Signature or Reference Matrices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Exploring Gene Functions with Overrepresentation Analysis . . . . . .
12
2.7
Advanced Insights with Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8
Functional Clustering based on similarity metrics . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8.1
Semantic similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Philadelphia Negative MPN Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.1.2
The Immune-Response-In-Silico Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.3
Simulated Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.4
GO Biological Pathways and KEGG Data . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Dimensionality Reduction with PCA for Data Visualization . . . . . .
19
3.3
xCell: Deconvolving Cell Populations from Mixture Samples . . . . . .
19
3.4
Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.1
Integrating Enrichment Scores to Refine Linear Models
. . . .
20
3.4.1.1
The Multicolinearity Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.2
Evaluation Metrics of Cell Composition Aware DEA . . . . . .
22
3.5
Overrepresentation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
Functional Clustering and similarity metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7.1
Semantic Similarity of GO terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7.2
Clustering by Gene Overlap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.8
Statistical and Computational Analysis Tools and Software
. . . . . .
26
4
Results
27
4.1
Testing the Framework: Validation via Simulated Datasets . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Dissecting Cellular Composition In Silico: Enrichment Scores for Cell
Populations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Strategic Selection of Covariates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Advanced Analysis of MPN Leveraging Composition Covariates . . . .
34
4.4.1
Overrepresentation Analysis (ORA) Insights . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.2
Pathway Exploration: Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.2.1
Neurodegenerative Links in MPN
. . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.2.2
Inflammatory Pathways: A Closer Look at MPN Pa-
tients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4.3
MPN Model Designs with Compositional Interaction Terms . .
40
4.5
Comparative Analysis of the Three Chronic MPN Conditions . . . . .
42
5
Discussion
51
6
Conclusion
57
6.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2
Future Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Bibliography
61
Appendices
71
Extra Figures
73
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In transcriptomics studies, the comparison of gene expression in tissues is a corner-
stone of understanding the underlying mechanisms associated with different diseases
or treatments. While such analyses are eﬀicient when conducted on samples derived
from pure cell cultures, they become more complicated when dealing with complex
samples such as brain tissues, solid tumors, or peripheral blood. The challenges lie
in detecting differential gene expression in complex samples, where diverse cell types,
states, and counts are present simultaneously. This facet becomes particularly pro-
nounced in diseases like Philadelphia chromosome-negative Myeloproliferative Neo-
plasms (MPN). Myeloproliferative neoplasms are a group of blood disorders that
involve significant changes in the proportions of different types of blood cells.
In
this context, the conventional approaches for detecting differential gene expression
encounter diﬀiculties in addressing the compositional effects arising from variations in
cell types between conditions. This project aims to investigate methods for removing
the compositional effects on the mRNA expression levels in mixture samples.
1.1
Hypothesis Development: Analyzing Cell
Composition’s Role
Specific blood cells, such as the Common myeloid progenitor cells (CMP), Granulocyte-
Monocyte Progenitor cells (GMP), Erythrocytes, Hematopoietic Stem Cells (HSC),
and platelets, show significantly higher levels in the blood of MPN patients compared
to healthy. In contrast, immune cell populations such as T cells and B cells are signif-
icantly underrepresented. In mixture samples such as blood, the observed differential
gene expression arises from two primary sources: a) variations in the abundance of
specific cell populations between healthy and disease states and b) functional alter-
ations in the genetic programs of the diverse cell populations.
The central hypothesis of this thesis is that incorporating proxies representing
disease-relevant cell abundances into linear models for differential expression analysis
will remove compositional effects.
This approach aims to disentangle the confounding effects of cellular composition.
And will allow for a more accurate characterization of molecular changes in mixed
samples.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
1.2
Research Objectives: Beyond Traditional
Expression Analysis
This project aims at inferring information on cell proportion changes between condi-
tions when this information is not experimentally available. Although experimental
methods that quantify cell type proportions exist, obtaining this information is very
often impractical [1–3]. When experiments have already been completed, it is not
feasible to retrospectively examine the proportions of cells in the samples. In studies
involving a significant cohort of participants, the financial cost and manual labor
required are prohibitive to perform an experimental count of cell populations in all
the samples. Moreover, Chikina and others support that incorporating true counts
might actually perform worse than incorporating proxy variables representative of
composition [4].
Furthermore, utilizing the inferred scores of cell type abundance, the objective
is to conduct a comprehensive Differential Expression Analysis (DEA) to mitigate
the influence of mixture composition. To achieve this, covariates reflecting cell type
enrichment are incorporated into the design of the linear models.
This approach
will enable to confidently identify Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) and their
biological significance.
Some research groups have addressed the incorporation of cell-type information
in linear models before [4–6]. However, to our knowledge, it is the first time that
cell Composition Aware Differential Gene Expression Analysis (cawDEA) with popu-
lation enrichment covariates is applied to blood samples from MPN, coupled with an
extensive and in-depth functional analysis.
Moreover, this project aims to highlight the potential of re-analyzing existing
data by incorporating newer notions of research advancement. Here, a re-analysis of
microarray data is performed to account for the often overlooked confounding effect
of blood composition.
An integral aspect of this analysis is making the findings
accessible and comprehensible to practitioners in the medical field.
Although RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), a technique that uses Next-Generation Se-
quencing (NGS) to investigate the presence and amount of RNA molecules in multiple
biological samples in parallel, bears many improvements to microarrays, it remains
susceptible to some of the same analytical pitfalls as microarrays: RNA from a mix-
ture of cells can only reflect the average expression in a cell mixture. Therefore, we
propose performing cawDEA for bulk RNA-seq or microarray data.
1.3
Navigating the Thesis: A Structured Overview
In the first two chapters, introductory and general background information are pro-
vided to familiarize the reader with the key topics of this thesis. In the third chapter,
the methods and datasets are presented. The focus is on describing the methods de-
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Navigating the Thesis: A Structured Overview
3
veloped during the project period. Any workflows, parameters, and tools are stated
to allow for reproducibility. Reasoning for the choices made is provided. The results
are presented in chapter four, and the main body of the results is split into three
parts:
1. Initially, a simulated dataset of samples with known composition and differential
expression patterns is used to validate the proposed framework. A comparative
analysis is conducted between the results obtained from the unadjusted and
adjusted models against the ground truth.
2. Then the methodology is applied to analyze blood expression data from a cohort
of patients with Philadelphia negative MPN and subsequently compare them
to those of healthy donors. The implemented method facilitates an in-depth
examination of the functional changes orchestrated by MPN pathology.
3. In the final stage, a more in-depth exploration of MPN conditions is undertaken,
aiming to discern unique molecular and functional changes across Essential
Thrombocythemia (ET), Polycythemia Vera (PV), and Primary Myelofibro-
sis (PMF).
The findings are then discussed in chapter five. Finally, chapter six summarizes
this thesis, describes its limitations, and points to future directions.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Analysis of mRNA Expression Through Microarray
Technology
In transcriptomics studies, messenger Ribonucleic Acid (mRNA) from whole tissues
is measured and compared between conditions or treatments. Contrary to the static
nature of a cell’s DNA, the transcriptome dynamically reflects real-time changes occur-
ring in the cell’s genetic program. The mRNA plays a crucial role in protein synthesis
by transmitting genetic information from DNA to the site of protein synthesis — the
ribosomes [7].
Microarrays, initially conceived by Patrick O. Brown, are chips that contain com-
plementary DNA (cDNA) probes bound on the chip surface [8]. The cDNA hybridizes
mRNA that has been extracted from a tissue of interest and fluorescently labeled (Fig-
ure 2.1). The mRNA expression is measured with the help of a scanner as fluorescent
intensity [9]. The bioinformatics and statistical analysis of the intensity values en-
ables the simultaneous analysis of thousands of genes and the identification of disease-
associated variations [10]. Their usability and low cost have allowed their widespread
use in large-scale clinical studies. Microarrays have led to significant advances in the
discovery of key biological information and in therapeutic applications.
Figure 2.1. Summary illustration of microarray workflow. Messenger RNA (mRNA) is iso-
lated from cells or tissues. The mRNA is converted to single-stranded complementary DNA
(ss cDNA) via reverse transcription. The ss cDNAs are fluorescently labeled and hybridize
ss probes mounted on a chip surface. Special scanners are used to measure fluorescent in-
tensity. Computational and statistical processing is applied to produce tables representing
gene expression of thousands of genes per sample. Graphical representation created with
Adobe Illustrator.
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
Today, the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies and the significantly
reduced cost of RNA-seq technologies have resulted in the gradual abandonment of
DNA microarrays. Despite this, the analysis of microarray data remains relevant.
The existing wealth of information provided by clinical studies of big cohorts and
the fact that RNA-seq is susceptible to some of the same limitations as microarrays
underscore the ongoing significance of understanding and leveraging microarray data
analysis techniques.
While more and more research leans towards single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) technologies, the high costs limit their application in clinical practice
and multi-patient studies. At the time of writing scRNA-seq datasets on MPN are
limited. Additionally, scRNA-seq is affected by tissue dissociation and survival bias
of specific cell types.
On the other hand, bulk RNA analysis methods, such as RNA-seq and microarrays,
offer practicality, familiarity, and established analytical tools, particularly beneficial
in a clinical context.
Furthermore, a wealth of mRNA data collected from large
patient cohorts is deposited and publicly available for various human diseases and
conditions. Using the wealth of these data offers substantial cost savings, a valuable
contribution to the ever-demanding healthcare landscape.
2.2
Differential Expression Analysis
2.2.1
Identifying Differentially Expressed Genes
A central goal in genomics studies is to compare gene expression patterns between
two or more conditions and find genes that are significantly different between the
conditions. These genes are called differentially expressed (DE). From microarrays
that can simultaneously analyze the mRNA expression from tens of thousands of genes
to RNA-seq and scRNA-seq technologies, advances in molecular and computational
biology have led to the development of robust methods for identifying transcripts that
shift their expression between two or more conditions.
Genes are considered to be differentially expressed if they meet a certain expression
change threshold with statistical significance (p-value).
Expression change is the
alteration in the average expression of a gene in a group of samples belonging to one
group (or condition) compared to the average expression of the same gene in another
group (or condition). In other terms, this is called the foldchange of a gene and is
reported in logarithmic scale with base 2.
log2FC = log2
Mean Expression of gene A in Disease
Mean Expression of gene A in Healthy
To determine if the observed change is significant, a null hypothesis of no difference
between the expression in the two conditions is tested. If the p-value obtained by the
statistical test is less than the accepted threshold of the Type I Error (the probability
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Differential Expression Analysis
7
to reject the null hypothesis while it is true), the null hypothesis is rejected.
In
situations where multiple tests are performed, such as the sequential tests of thousands
of genes in mRNA expression data, the p-values need to be corrected for multiple
testing. For example, with a significance threshold of 0.05, if 10, 000 hypothesis tests
were to be performed, we accept that 500 significant results might be false positives.
To correct for multiple testing, various methods exist, such as Bonferroni correction,
Holm’s, or Benjamini and Hochberg (BH). Of these, the last one is the least stringent
and will be used in this thesis to control the false discovery rate. The most common
way to determine the size and direction of changes in gene expression are linear
regression models.
2.2.2
Linear Regression Models
In a linear regression problem, the variation in a response variable Y can be partially
explained by the variation in other variables, the covariables X (or explanatory vari-
ables). In other terms, Yi can be expressed as a function of Xi, where i denotes a
row of data. The goal is to estimate the function f(Xi, β), with β denoting a vector
of unknown parameters that best fits the data. In its most simple version, a linear
regression model is denoted as,
Yi = β0 + β1Xi + ϵi
where β0 is the mean value of the response variable Yi, β1 is the change in the response
variable for one unit of change in the explanatory variable Xi and ϵ is the error term
(residual).
Residuals are the difference between an observed value and the fitted
value provided by the model. Once the function that best describes the relationship
between the response and explanatory variables has been selected, the parameters
β of the regression model are estimated. The most common parameter estimation
method is the least squares method, which aims to minimize the sum of the squares
of the residuals.
β1 =
∑(x −¯x) · (y −¯y)
∑(x −¯x)2
β0 = ¯y −β1¯x
2.2.3
Employing Linear Regression in Expression Analysis
Microarray data are on a continuous scale, with gene expression values usually skewed
towards zero. The logarithmic transformation of the expression data tends to make
the noise more symmetric and, hence, closer to a normal distribution. The expression
of a particular gene can then be modeled as
Yi,j = β0,j + βjXi + ϵji
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background
where
• Yi,j is the log2-transformed expression of the gene j in sample i,
• β0,j is the baseline expression for gene j
• βj is the change in expression value of gene j for one unit of increase in the
covariate Xi
• Xi is the covariate for sample i
• ϵi,j stands for the error term associated with the i-th sample and j-th gene
[11,12].
2.2.4
Statistical Test for Differential Expression
The models’ parameter estimation is followed by statistical tests for differential ex-
pression. In their most basic form, statistical models for DEA commonly employ
t-tests to evaluate the significance of differences in gene expression levels between
control and treatment scenarios. The t-test involves computing empirical means (mc
and mt) for control and treatment populations alongside their variances (s2
c and s2
t)
and assessing the normalized distance between the two groups.
t = (mc −mt)
√
s2c
nc + s2
t
nt
When the calculated t-value surpasses the critical value or cutoff, determined by the
chosen confidence level, it is inferred that the gene expression levels significantly differ
between the two situations. The confidence level is the risk of making a Type I error,
incorrectly concluding a difference when there is none.
Microarray data analysis presents a challenge in obtaining accurate estimates of
the standard deviation of individual gene measurements, particularly when dealing
with only a few replicates. A Bayesian statistical framework is introduced to tackle
this problem. This framework uses the fact that genes expressed at similar levels
tend to have equal variance. By incorporating prior knowledge, the model improves
the reliability of variance estimates for individual genes. This is done by examining
the expression levels of other genes in the same expression range within a single
experiment, essentially pooling genes with similar expression levels [13]. To calculate
the significance of the change in the expression of gene j between two conditions, a
moderated t-statistic is used to compute p-values in which both the standard error
and the degrees of freedom are modified. The standard error is moderated across
genes with a shrinkage factor, which borrows information from all genes to improve
the inference on any single gene. The degrees of freedom are also adjusted by a term
representing the a priori degrees of freedom for the model [14].
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Challenges in Analyzing Heterogeneous Biological Samples
9
2.3
Challenges in Analyzing Heterogeneous Biological
Samples
When analyzing whole tissue (bulk) RNA-seq data or microarrays, the outcomes illus-
trate a snapshot of an overall expression at the moment of tissue collection. However,
in these cases, interesting and important information might be masked.
While traditional applications of bulk methods are very eﬀicient when samples
are pure cell cultures, the specimens being studied are often complex tissues. Tissues
such as brain cortex, solid tumor, and peripheral or whole blood are highly entangled,
i.e. multiple cell types in different states and proportions are present within the same
specimen. The composite signal captured by these technologies tends to be an aver-
age measure of cellular expression. However, the measured shifts in gene expression
often mirror alterations in cell-type composition rather than underlying changes in
the transcriptional state of the cell [15]. In Figure 2.2, three cases of heterogenous
samples are described. In the first case, cell proportions do not change between the
two conditions of interest, and alteration in the measured gene expression reflects the
change in the genetic program of the cell affected by the disease. In the second case,
both the composition and genetic program change. The last case is a more compli-
cated case, where a gene is upregulated in one population while downregulated in
another cell population, and the proportions of the two populations change dramati-
cally between conditions. In the two last cases, traditional DEA applications struggle
to assess true transcriptional changes.
Group 1
Group 2
(a)
Group 1
Group 2
(b)
Group 1
Group 2
(c)
Figure 2.2. Heterogenous samples
Tissue composition can vary naturally across or even within individuals. Blood is
the most commonly chosen specimen for studies involving large human cohorts due
to its easy accessibility and ability to reflect the immune system’s status. However,
it exhibits non-trivial variability in composition from one sample to another [16].
Notably, the composition might change due to the specific condition under study.
For example, neuronal death in neurodegenerative conditions or overrepresentation
of particular cells in cancer tissue [17, 18]. It is essential to be critical when inter-
preting results obtained with traditional approaches, as they may primarily reflect
compositional alterations rather than functional changes within the cells [19,20].
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background
2.4
Philadelfia Negative MPN
Philadelphia (BCR-ABL1)-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are a group
of bone marrow disorders. The dysregulation of blood production in the bone marrow
of MPN patients results in abnormal blood counts and the release of progenitor cells
(HSC,CMP,GMP) in the periphery [21].
A genetic alteration in a single myeloid
hematopoietic stem cell triggers a complex molecular cascade that leads to a sustained
abnormal cell proliferation [22,23].
The fundamental biological misfunction that drives the disease is the dysregulation
of the Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of the transcription (JAK-STAT)
signaling pathway [24]. Principal driver mutations, accounting for 90% of instances,
are associated with the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), calreticulin (CALR), and myelopro-
liferative leukemia virus (MPL) genes. Additional mutations affecting epigenetic and
transcriptomic regulation, DNA methylation, and other pathways are also known to
contribute to the complex biology of these conditions [25].
The World Health Organisation (WHO) classifies all MPN as blood cancers [26].
Classical Philadelphia chromosome-negative MPN are characterized as rare chronic
conditions; however, they are frequently underdiagnosed. These clonal myeloid stem
cell disorders frequently manifest as clot formation (thrombosis) and bleeding (hemor-
age) and impose an elevated risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia (AML) [27].
The most common causes of death in myelofibrosis include the progression to leukemia
in about 2 out of 10 patients, followed by other comorbidities, including cardiovascu-
lar diseases and cytopenia,infection and hemorage [28]. Despite the potential severity,
when discovered in early stages (ET, PV) these disorders often exhibit slow or stable
development [25].
The three main types of Philadelphia negative classical MPN are differentiated, in
part, by the overproduction of specific blood cell types. Essential thrombocythemia
(ET) is characterized by an overproduction of platelets, often leading to blood clotting
(thrombosis) and spleen swelling. Polycythemia vera (PV) involves erythrocyte (red
blood cells) overproduction, with main symptoms fatigue, shortness of breath, often
and heavy bleeding. Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) entails the production of fewer and
usually low-quality blood cells. In PMF patients, scar tissue accumulation in the bone
marrow (the center of hematopoiesis) hinders blood cells from proper development
[29]. Thus, hematopoiesis starts taking place outside of the bone marrow (e.g., in the
spleen). As a result, hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and premature hematopoietic
precursor cells (HPC) are released into the circulation [30]. These three conditions
bear a non-uniform risk, with PMF being the most severe, followed by PV. While
it is not entirely understood why a patient develops one rather than the other type
of MPN, some researchers support that the order of mutation acquisition and the
stem cell of origin play a crucial role in phenotype development [31]. Another widely
accepted notion is that the MPN are a continuum of diseases, starting with ET, to
PV and gradually developing to the more severe form of PMF where the risk for
transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is high [32].
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Decomposition of Mixture Samples
11
Most MPN cases likely arise through the acquisition of driver mutations rather
than through the inheritance of genetic abnormalities from parents [23]. The available
data suggest that some of these mutations may be acquired during fetus development
or early childhood and often remain latent until adulthood [33]. Key risk factors for
the development of the disease are aging and sex. Some environmental factors such
as radiation exposure, chronic inflammation, and smoking are also linked to disease
development [34].
Therapeutic strategies for MPN focus on symptom relief for managing the disorder
as a chronic condition. Clinical interventions include repeated phlebotomies (removal
of an amount of blood) and treatment with ruxolitinib aiming to reduce blood count.
Other drug treatments are the administration of hydroxyurea and interferons that
aim to reduce the JAK2-mutant allelic burden [35].
2.5
Decomposition of Mixture Samples
The goal of decomposition is the in-silico dissection of heterogeneous biological sam-
ples into their constituent cell types. Different authors have developed various algo-
rithms to estimate cell proportions [36–44]. The growing field of algorithm design
for proportion and expression estimation in mixture samples is followed by numerous
studies benchmarking, applying, and reviewing these tools [45–51]. In this thesis,
the focus is specifically on finding proxies of cell-type proportions. Two tactics for
tackling this problem are discussed here.
Classic deconvolution methods
The expression of a gene in a heterogeneous sample can be expressed as the linear
combination of the gene’s expression in each cell type weighted by the frequency
of the cell type in the heterogeneous sample. A necessary assumption is that each
cell type maintains comparable expression levels across all samples. Therefore, the
deconvolution problem can be expressed by the equation,
yij =
K
∑
k=1
cjkpki + eij
with k = (1, K], j = (1, M] and i = (1, N] and where
• yij the observed expression of gene j in heterogeneous sample i,
• cjk the mean expression of gene j in cell type k,
• pki the proportion of cell type k in sample i,
• eij error term,
• K is the number of cell types,
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background
• M the number of genes and
• N the number of samples.
The deconvolution problem is defined as: Given yij and cjk estimate the propor-
tions of cell types pki [52].
Enrichment-based deconvolution methods
Enrichment-based deconvolution methods determine the cellular makeup of a sample
by calculating enrichment scores for specific cell types [38,44,53]. Instead of relying on
proportions, these scores capture the relative abundance of each cell type based on the
enrichment of specific molecular markers. The computational method used for this
task is single sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (ssGSEA), which evaluates the
enrichment of pre-defined gene sets within a single sample and provides a quantifiable
score for each gene set. When applied to cell-type-specific gene signatures, ssGSEA
estimates the relative abundance of various cells by calculating the degree to which
genes associated with a particular cell type are over- or under-represented in a single
sample. These scores reflect cell-type abundance in the biological sample.
2.5.1
Signature or Reference Matrices
Decomposition typically requires a reference expression matrix, also called a signature
matrix. This is a matrix that reflects the typical expression levels of selected marker
genes in different cell types. Similar to how a signature represents a person’s name in a
unique and identifiable manner, a signature matrix of cell types serves as a distinctive
identification method for various cell types on their specific gene expression patterns.
It distinguishes the different cell types based on their unique genetic programs and
provides a distinctive molecular profile for each cell type. The creation of reliable
signature matrices is a complex task that, in many cases, has been shown to introduce
bias in the deconvolution independently of the chosen algorithm [43].
2.6
Exploring Gene Functions with Overrepresentation
Analysis
The DEA results can be a list of thousands or more differentially expressed genes.
Interpreting these can be tedious and requires specialist knowledge (biologists or med-
ical doctors). Overrepresentation Analysis (ORA) is a commonly used bioinformatics
method for the functional interpretation of gene expression data. Before explaining
the ORA method, it is necessary to introduce two new terms.
==PAGE:25==
2.6 Exploring Gene Functions with Overrepresentation Analysis
13
Gene Ontology (GO)
Ontologies are terms that aim to describe genes with a controlled vocab-
ulary. The GO database provides a standardized resource for universal
functional annotation of genes and gene sets.
GO terms are intercon-
nected in a big hierarchical tree, a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where
parent nodes branch out to child nodes that are functions or processes
included in (or subsets of) the parent term. The GO vocabulary is split
into three not interconnected clusters of terms:
1. Biological Process: Describes events and specific objectives the
organism or cell has been genetically tuned to perform.
2. Molecular Function: Describes the biochemical activity of a gene
product.
3. Cellular Component: Describes the location in the cell where a
gene product is active.
Each of these sub-annotation schemes has a distinct DAG. The graphs
are not static but are regularly updated based on new scientific findings
and knowledge [54].
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways
KEGG pathways is a collection of databases that integrates a network
of molecular entities, such as genes, proteins, and small molecules, and
their interactions. KEGG pathways are representations of molecular in-
teraction and reaction networks in various biological processes.
These
pathways provide a systems-level view of biological functions and help re-
searchers understand how genes function together in a coordinated man-
ner to carry out specific biological processes.
Enrichment results from
KEGG pathways reveal gene sets involved in specific interaction and re-
action networks.
This includes pathways related to signaling cascades,
metabolic pathways, and disease-related processes.
The statistical method of ORA evaluates whether specific predefined gene sets, that
reflect pathways or biological functions (KEGG, GO), are significantly more present
in a subset of genes from the list of differential expression compared to what would be
expected by chance [55]. Although this method allows the functional characterization
of the data, it presents some limitations.
The main drawbacks of ORA are that
it requires the selection of an arbitrary threshold to determine DEGs, it does not
distinguish between pathways that are over- or under-represented in the list of selected
genes, and it assumes independence of genes and pathways.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Background
2.7
Advanced Insights with Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) is a functional characterization method of
expression data that improves greatly on the ORA approach [55, 56]. In GSEA, all
the genes of the DEA are included without a predefined cutoff. The genes are ranked
and assigned weights based on a chosen static (e.g., foldchange, −log10(p.adjusted) ∗
sign(foldchange)). For each pathway, the GSEA tool examines the genes one by
one from the top to the bottom of the ranked list. A running score, the Enrichment
Score (ES), is increased if a gene is part of the pathway currently examined; otherwise,
points are subtracted. These run-sum scores are weighted to amplify enrichment in
the top- and bottom-ranking genes, while the ES in genes with middle-ranking ranks
is not enhanced. The ES is the run-sum score where it reaches its maximum value.
ES is normalized relative to the pathway size, resulting in a Normalized Enrichment
Score (NES) [57]. The size normalization corrects for the fact that bigger gene sets
are expected to achieve higher scores.
A p-value based on permutation is calculated by randomly shuffling the gene labels
to create a null distribution, with the null hypothesis of no association between the
genes and the phenotype. The observed ES is then compared to the scores obtained
in these permutations to determine the likelihood of obtaining such a score by chance.
P-values lower than the chosen threshold indicate stronger evidence against the null
hypothesis. Or, in other words, greater confidence in the observed enrichment [57].
In addition, for each pathway’s enrichment, the ”leading edge” (also called core
enrichment), gene-ratio, and BH adjusted p-values are calculated. The leading edge
is a list containing the genes that most strongly contribute to the detected enrichment
signal of a pathway. The gene-ratio is the number of DEGs that overlap with the genes
in the pathway set divided by the total number of genes in the predefined pathway
set. The p-values are adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing with BH method.
2.8
Functional Clustering based on similarity metrics
In many cases, the results of the functional analysis (GSEA) yield lengthy lists of hun-
dreds of pathways, NES, and statistic scores. Clustering of the pathways is chosen as
an eﬀicient and scalable method for identifying patterns and generating insights from
the data. Two functional enrichment methods that stand out are clustering based on
overlap of genes in the leading edge and clustering based on semantic similarity. It
is worth noting that clustering based on gene overlap is inherently straightforward,
involving the grouping of pathways based on shared genes, and will not be elaborated
upon further.
==PAGE:27==
2.8 Functional Clustering based on similarity metrics
15
2.8.1
Semantic similarity
Clustering of GO terms involves assessing their functional similarity based on their
relationship and distance in the DAG. GO terms that exhibit closer proximity or
greater interconnectivity in the graph are considered to be more similar. The graph
connections are expressed as either ”is part of” or ”is a”, with the latter having a
higher semantic similarity score than the former [58].
To obtain a semantic similarity score between two GO terms, the approach involves
the identification of the shortest branch connecting the two terms and multiplication
of the weights of the edges along this branch. Although numerous methods exist to
calculate similarity, the ’Wang’ method improves on previous similarity methods as
it considers not only the number of shared predecessor terms but also the locations
of these ancestor terms linked to the two specific terms in the graph [59].
As an example, the following use case is presented, where the goal is to calculate
semantic similarity between two genes. Each gene is associated with a set of GO terms.
Using the method developed by Wang and others to calculate the semantic similarity
between two genes A and B, with M and N GO terms accordingly, a similarity matrix
is constructed for the GO terms (M x N). For each row, the maximum similarity score
is determined, as well as the maximum score for each column. The sum of these two
values is then divided by the total number of GO terms (M + N). This calculation,
based on the method of Wang, provides a quantitative measure of functional similarity
between genes based on their associated GO terms.
==PAGE:28==
16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
3.1
Data
3.1.1
Philadelphia Negative MPN Data
The MPN data were provided by Lars Rønn Olsen and the clinical academic group of
the Zealand Inflammation Research Initiative (CAG ZIRI). The expression data were
produced with Affymetrix microarrays and include the expression of 20023 genes in
160 Philadelphia negative MPN patients and 21 healthy donors. More specifically 45
ET, 90 PV and 25 PMF patients are included (Appendix 1(b)). Age is only known
for the MPN positive participants while not for the healthy. This imposes a limiting
factor as age is a major influencer of immunological status and can greatly impact
transcriptomic variation.
It is known that some of the patients are under one of
three treatment schemes and only some of them are responsive. Unfortunately, the
information on which patients are baseline and which have or are receiving treatment
at the moment of blood collection is untraceable. However, what is known for all
participants is the JAK2 V617F (JAK2) mutational status. The age of the patient
group ranges from 26 to 87 years old, with an overall mean of 65. The mean age is
higher for PMF and the lowest for ET (Appendix 1(a)). The microarray expression
data were provided already processed, so no quality control or normalization steps
are required before their downstream use in this thesis (Appendix 2).
3.1.2
The Immune-Response-In-Silico Data
To generate synthetic data, the Immune Response In Silico (IRIS) dataset was used
as a signature matrix [60]. The IRIS dataset contains the expression of 14145 genes in
22 immune cell types and has been created from a collection of microarray data. The
genes included in this dataset are chosen due to their ability to discriminate among
the 22 cell populations. IRIS is accessible through the R package CellCODE [4].
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Methodology
3.1.3
Simulated Datasets
Expression data of synthetic mixture samples are generated in silico. First, a cell-
count matrix is created so that:
(a) The cell-type composition significantly differs for one cell type between half of
the samples in the simulated data.
(b) The composition design accounts for the fact that some cell types are much
more common than others in peripheral blood [61].
(c) The within-group variation is greater for one group (it is assumed that disease
samples will have greater variability).
Three independent cell-count datasets are generated with these constraints. The
synthetic count data are then used to simulate gene expression of mixture samples
using the function simulateMixture from the R package CellCODE [4]. The function
introduces an expression alteration to one cell type before the aggregation to simulate
cell-type-specific expression differences and is epigrammatically explained here.
A fraction of the chosen cell types’ genes (0.1) is determined to be differentially
expressed in one of the groups. The alteration is performed by multiplying the expres-
sion values of the selected genes by a factor drawn from a normal distribution N(0, 2).
The selection of which specific genes’ expression is modified is random. These pa-
rameters (fraction of genes and standard deviation) were selected after testing the
model performances for a combination of multiple parameter values (See 4(a), 4(b)).
The combination of parameters that achieve high accuracy in DEGs classification are
selected.
Thus, the generated mixture samples have known cell-type composition and known
ground truth Differential Gene Expression (DGE).
To limit the complexity, five
unique cell types (Neutrophils, CD4+ T cells, Dendritic cells, naive B cells) were used
to create mixtures, and thirty samples distributed into two groups were generated to
ensure statistical power. An expression matrix is generated for each of the five cell
types and each cell count dataset. In total, fifteen datasets are generated.
3.1.4
GO Biological Pathways and KEGG Data
GO biological pathways (v.2023.1) and KEGG medicus pathways (v.2023.2) were
downloaded from the Human Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB).
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Dimensionality Reduction with PCA for Data Visualization
19
3.2
Dimensionality Reduction with PCA for Data
Visualization
To observe patterns in the expression data, dimensionality reduction was performed
using the method of Pricipal Component Analysis (PCA). PCA highlights and al-
lows the visualization of any major patterns in the expression data by reducing its
dimensions while preserving the initial variability as closely as possible [62]. It calcu-
lates orthogonal eigenvectors that are linear combinations of the original expression
data (genes). During PCA with RNA expression, the genes are used to understand
patterns of similarity between samples. The prcomp function from base R, with the
expression matrix (Samples x Genes), is used. Prior to PCA, the data were centered
on the mean and scaled by dividing by the standard deviation to ensure that genes
with higher absolute expression do not overpower the PCA. For the PCA visual-
izations, batch correction of the expression data was performed with the function
removeBatchEffect from the limma package.
3.3
xCell: Deconvolving Cell Populations from Mixture
Samples
The deconvolution of mixture samples is performed using the xCellAnalysis func-
tion from the R package xCell (version 1.1.0), with default parameters for microarray
data and selected cell types [44]. The tool provides signature matrices for multiple
cells. Only cell types known to be present in whole blood are included in the de-
convolution process. This improves the algorithm’s accuracy in distinguishing among
different populations. The presence of different cell types was evaluated with the
function xCellSignifcanceBetaDist. Here, xCell is chosen over other tools such
as Cibersortx , as it includes multiple signature matrices for all cell types that are
relevant to the pathology of MPN, including HSC [42].
The scores in xCell are
computed based on multiple validated reference signatures. It is known that signa-
ture matrices can introduce biological and technical biases in the decomposition [43].
Thus, the numerous signatures provided and used by xCell ensure that the datasets
used to create the signature do not affect the results. Moreover, xCell is a reliable
and user-friendly tool.
A concise summary of the algorithm follows: For each cell-type specific signature,
compute the enrichment in the ranked gene expression of the sample. Signatures
that are enriched toward the top of the ranked list achieve higher scores. The scores
corresponding to one cell type are averaged. A transformation derived from simula-
tions with train data is applied to ensure that the transformed scores reflect cell-type
frequencies. Finally, the output of xCell is the transformed scores. These can be
compared across cell types and samples [44].
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Methodology
3.4
Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma)
The limma package (version 3.58.1) in R was used for DEA [63]. With the limma
framework, one linear regression model is fitted for every gene, and an empirical
Bayes method is employed to borrow information across genes, allowing for more
stable variance estimates. The limma implementation was chosen as it is a go-to tool
for microarrays and offers flexibility in the design and contrast matrix specification.
In a typical workflow with limma, quality assessment, background correction, within-
and between-array normalization, and filtering of unexpressed probes are performed
before modeling. However, the data provided here are already pre-processed as shown
in the Supplementary Figure 2. Since the principal component analysis revealed that
some variability might be introduced due to batch effects (Supplementary Figure 2),
batch correction was performed by including batch as a covariate in the statistical
models. The specific contrasts that we want to make are defined with the help of the
makeContrasts function of limma, and the models are fit using the lmFit function
followed by an empirical Bayes moderation with the eBayes function. During the
empirical Bayes moderation, the option robust=TRUE is used, which is suggested to
be used when data come from human RNA in clinical studies. This option accounts
for outlier (hypervariable) genes and improves the statistical power of the experiment.
The resulting p-values are corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the BH
method, which limits the false discovery rate (FDR); this correction method is chosen
because it reduces false positive results while also minimizing the false negative results
[64].
3.4.1
Integrating Enrichment Scores to Refine Linear Models
The enrichment scores calculated with xCell are included as covariates in the linear
regression models. The selection of cell types is explained in the next sections. Here,
the formulation of two model designs that account for composition is described. First,
one (or more) selected celltype is included in the design. The design matrix with one
cell type covariate accounts for the effect of the celltype’s enrichment on the gene
expression 3.1.
y ∼0 + Condition + CelltypeEnrichment
(3.1)
In limma, the zero indicates a design matrix without an intercept term and is a
matter of preference.
The condition term is a factor with two levels: health and
disease. The chosen cell is implied to have an equal effect on the expression in the
two conditions. Genes identified as significantly differentially expressed by this model
indicate that after adjusting for sample composition, there is a significant difference
in the expression of that gene between patients and healthy.
In the second case, the chosen cell is expected to have varying effects on the
expression of the gene depending on the condition. This is portrayed in equation 3.2.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma)
21
y ∼0 + Condition + Condition:CelltypeEnrichment + CelltypeEnrichment
(3.2)
The formula 3.2 denotes the multiple linear regression model:
yji = β0jp0i + β1jp1i + β2jgip0i + β3jgip1i + β4jgi + ϵji
where
• yji is the normalized log intensity of expression for gene j in sample i.
• β0j is the mean expression of yji for the healthy.
• β1j is the mean expression of yji for the patients.
• β2j is the change of expression of yji in the healthy for one unit of change in
the enrichment score while all other variables are held constant.
• β3j is the change of expression of yji in the patient group for one unit of change
in the enrichment score while all other variables are held constant.
• β4j is the change of expression due to the main effects of the cell enrichment,
independently of the condition
• Factor p represents patient (p = 1) or control status (p = 0) for the respective
sample.
• gi denotes the enrichment score of the cell population in sample i.
• ϵji denotes the residual for gene j and sample i.
The genes for which the difference between β3 and β2 is significant have an expression
dependent not solely on the number of cells present but also on the rate at which the
gene is being transcribed within those cells.
In summary, including a cell type enrichment variable in the model helps control
for the variation in gene expression due to differences in the composition of cell
types among samples. This allows the identification of expression changes that are
independent of differences in cell count.
However, without the interaction term, we might miss out on capturing how the
effects of the conditions on gene expression vary depending on the level of cell type
enrichment. In other words, we might not fully account for the potential interac-
tion between the conditions and the composition of cell types in influencing gene
expression.
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Methodology
3.4.1.1
The Multicolinearity Problem
In this analysis, multicollinearity or, more precisely, exact collinearity can arise from
related cell types being included in the same model design [65]. The issue of collinear-
ity arises when two predictor variables have a linear or natural relationship, obscuring
their impact on the dependent variable. When multiple independent variables are in-
volved, it is called multicollinearity. Multicollinearity can lead to unreliable coeﬀicient
estimates and reduced power. For the mathematical notations on multicollinearity,
the reader is invited to read more in [65,66].
A standard detection method is the calculation of correlation between the pairs of
explanatory variables; a rule of thumb suggests multicollinearity if it exceeds a certain
threshold. However, multicollinearity can emerge among three or more variables and
remain undetectable through bivariate correlations.
In limma models, collinearity between covariables, for example, patients with low
CD4+ T cell count also having low CD8+ T cell count, might reduce the power
to detect differential expression. In that case, the effects of CD4+ T cells on the
expression are indistinguishable from the CD8+ T cells.
To address multicollinearity, highly correlated variables are removed or linearly
combined (summed) [67]. The Pearson’s correlation coeﬀicient for each pair of cell
types is calculated to identify correlated variables. This project adopts these methods
as their application with limma is straightforward. Other methods, such as LASSO,
Ridge regression, or partial least squares regression, offer more complex alternatives
for adressing multicollinearity [66].
3.4.2
Evaluation Metrics of Cell Composition Aware DEA
To evaluate how accurately the models’ results match the ground-truth DEGs, the
following metrics are utilized. First, term definitions are provided, followed by a short
description.
Definitions
DE gene: positive label
Non-DE gene: negative label
True positive (TP) = the number of genes correctly identified as DE
False positive (FP) = the number of genes incorrectly identified as DE
True negative (TN) = the number of genes correctly identified as non-DE
False negative (FN) = the number of genes incorrectly identified as non-DE
Accuracy represents the ratio of correctly classified instances (both true positives
and true negatives) to the total number of instances. Perfect classification yields an
accuracy score of 1, while random classification achieves a score of 0.5.
However,
when the dataset is imbalanced, meaning one class significantly outweighs the other
in terms of occurrences, a model may achieve a high accuracy score by simply labeling
all instances as belonging to the larger class. Despite this high accuracy, such a model
may not effectively address the underlying problem.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma)
23
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
Precision is the proportion of true positives out of all instances predicted as positive
by the model.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall (or Sensitivity or True positive rate) of a test is its ability to determine as
many real DE genes as possible. It is calculated as the ratio of true positives to all real
positive cases. In some cases, there is more value in identifying as many true DEGs
as possible, even with the cost of higher False positives. For example, identifying
patients with cancer. Then, the model with the highest recall is preferably chosen.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
Specificity (or true negative rate) of a test is its ability to determine the non-DE
genes correctly.
Specificity =
TN
TN + FP
auROC A Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is a graphical representa-
tion of a binary classifier’s performance across various discrimination thresholds. It
illustrates the trade-off between sensitivity (true positive rate) and specificity (true
negative rate). The Area Under the Curve (AUC) is a single numerical value that
quantifies the classifier’s ability to distinguish between classes, with a higher AUC
indicating a better discriminative power (i.e., 1: perfect classification, 0.5: random
classification). For computing the AUC the function auROC from the limma package
was used.
F1-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, and provides a good single
metric on if the model performs good on both positive (DEGs) and negative (non-
DEGs) classes.
F1 = 2 · precision · recall
precision + recall
In summary, accuracy should be avoided when the data are imbalanced.
A high
accuracy score can be achieved by classifying all observations as the majority class.
Recall and precision focus on the ability to identify the positive class, and they can
be combined into one metric, the F1-score. The area under the Receiver Operating
Characteristic Curve (auROC) score should be used when positive and negative class
classification is equally important, but it is susceptible to class imbalance. However,
ROC auc is a good metric for ranking predictions, which is relevant for DEA. The
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Methodology
data are heavily imbalanced towards the negative class (by design, only 10% of the
genes are differentially expressed), but we are interested in the model’s performance
on both labels. Therefore, the F1-score and auROC metrics will be used to evaluate
performance. The accuracy will be, however, mentioned to showcase how it can lead
to wrong conclusions.
Pearson correlation coeﬀicient (r) of log-foldchanges measures the linear corre-
lation of the log-fold values between two models. It is calculated by dividing the
variables’ covariance by the product of their standard deviations, resulting in a nor-
malized value that ranges from -1 to 1. A value close to 1 indicates a strong positive
linear relationship (-1 strong negative linear relationship), and a value close to 0
suggests little to no linear relationship between the log-foldchanges.
r =
∑(x −mx)(y −my)
√∑(x −mx)2(y −my)2
where x and y are two vectors of length n ,mx and my corresponds to the means
of x and y, respectively.
The p-value of the correlation is determined by the distribution table of the t
value,
t =
r
√
1 −r2 ·
√
n −2
for df = n −2 degrees of freedom.
Pearson correlation, rather than Spearman’s for example, is chosen for compar-
ing log-foldchanges predicted by different Limma models because it assesses linear
relationships and because of its suitability for continuous variables.
3.5
Overrepresentation analysis
To perform ORA the function fora from the fgsea (version 1.28.0) R package was
used. The algorithm implements an adaptive Monte Carlo approach with improved
eﬀiciency of sampling that outperforms conventional GSEA tools on speed and mem-
ory [57]. DEGs were chosen based on the p-adjusted threshold of 0.05 and an absolute
log2-foldchage of zero, which is equivalent to a foldchange greater than one. The gene
lists are ranked in descending order using the moderated t-statistic, a metric that com-
bines the significance information from the p-adjusted value and the magnitude of
fold change. The function was used with default parameters.
==PAGE:37==
3.6 Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
25
3.6
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
While ORA evaluates whether predefined gene sets are over-represented in a defined
gene list, GSEA evaluates their distribution across the entire list. The fgsea package
uses a fast gene set enrichment analysis (fgsea) technique to calculate enrichment
scores for gene sets in larger datasets eﬀiciently.
From the R package fgsea the
function fgsea is used to calculate pathway enrichment scores, normalized scores, p-
and p-adjusted values as well as the core genes contributing to the enrichment of
each pathway [57]. As with ORA the genes are ranked in descending order based on
t-statistic. However, no predermined hard cut-offs are needed with this method, and
the whole ranked gene list (total output from limma) is used to perform GSEA with
default parameters.
3.7
Functional Clustering and similarity metrics
3.7.1
Semantic Similarity of GO terms
To cluster the GO biological processes based on semantic similarity, the object ob-
tained by the fgsea function is converted into an enrichResult object using the
function enrichDF2enrichResult of the package multienrichjam.
This step en-
sures compatibility of the object with the function pairwise_termsim that computes
the similarity matrix of the GO terms and is part of the R package enrichplot. The
similarity method ’Wang’ is used to calculate the correlation between GO terms [59].
The godata function of the R package GOSemSim is used to obtain the DAG of the
GO BP using the database ’org.Hs.eg.db’ from the Org.Hs.eg.db package [58, 68].
Visualization of the clusters produced by semantic similarity-grouping is done with
the treeplot function from the enrichplot package. The plots are exported as pdf
and processed in Figma to correct for overlapping label format produced by the pack-
age. The original cluster names chosen by enrichplot are based on word counts and
are non-meaningful. They were manually curated into meaningful names in Figma.
When multiple GSEA results from different contrasts are compared, the function
compareCluster from the R package Clusterprofiler is used.
3.7.2
Clustering by Gene Overlap
The similarity of pathways is calculated by the degree of overlap among the leading
edge genes of two sets.
The leading edge is the set of genes that contributes to
the NES score calculation (explained in Chapter 2). Clusters are defined with the
method for hierarchical clustering, and every cluster is assigned the name of the most
representative term of that cluster. The algorithm used to choose the cluster name
is ’pagerank’ and is implemented in the aPEAR package in R [69].
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Methodology
3.8
Statistical and Computational Analysis Tools and
Software
All statistical and computational analyses were performed in R version 4.3.2 within R
Studio RStudio version 2023.06.0+421. Some plots were exported from R and edited
using Figma.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Testing the Framework: Validation via Simulated
Datasets
The validation method outlined in this section is designed to assess the incorporation
of enrichment scores as covariates in limma models.
The models’ ability to yield
compositionality aware DEA results is evaluated. Two main model designs are formu-
lated, ”y ∼0 + group” and ”y ∼0 + group + cell_enrichment”, from here on, referred
to as unadjusted (or baseline) and adjusted model design, accordingly.
To evaluate the performance of the models, mixture samples with known propor-
tions of five cell types and known Differential Expression (DE) are simulated. Six
models are assessed: Model zero, the baseline model, is not adjusted for composition.
The remaining five models are adjusted for one cell type at a time. Enrichment scores
are calculated using xCell [44]. The tool provides estimates for celltype abundance
that correlate well with the real proportions, although the enrichment of some cell
types can be harder to infer (Appendix Figure 5).
Next, the models’ performance is evaluated utilizing binary classification metrics
and by assessing the correlation of estimated log-foldchanges with ground truth data
(Figure 4.1 and 4.3(a)). These metrics provide insights into the models’ ability to
correctly identify DE genes. Moreover, examining metrics such as precision, recall,
specificity, and auROC sheds light on the trade-offs inherent in model performance,
guiding decisions regarding model selection and interpretation. In total, 15 simulated
mixture datasets are used to measure model performance (see Chapter 3).
The auROC is a metric that accounts for the model’s ability to distinguish between
DEGs and non-DEGs. An auROC of 0.5 (or 50%) indicates a random classification,
whereas 1 is a perfect classifier. A high Recall score, on the other hand, suggests
that the model can identify a high proportion of real DE genes. The adjusted models
achieve significantly higher auROC and Recall compared to the baseline model (Figure
4.1).
Precision evaluates how many times a model is correct out of all the times it
labels a gene as DE. Precision is overall low in both the adjusted and unadjusted
designs. Accuracy is a measure of how many true DEGs and non-DEGs the model
can identify, compared to the total number of genes in the dataset. Specificity is
the opposite measure of recall, and it accounts for the ability to identify truly non-
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1. Evaluation of performance metrics. Model 0 is the baseline model. Models
1-4 are adjusted using celltype 1-4 as a composition covariate, accordingly. The adjusted
models have a better performance than the unadjusted model in terms of (a) auROC and
(b) Recall. The accuracy and specificity do not follow the same trend (c,d). Significance
was tested using ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD for the comparison of all group means.
The significance of pairwise comparisons by the Tukey HSD test is indicated with asterisks.
P-adjusted <= 0.0001: ****, < 0.001 : ***, < 0.01 : **, < 0.05 : *, ns : not shown.
DE genes out of all the real non-DEGs (false positives and true negatives). If the
cost of identifying a gene as DE when it is not, is greater than the cost of missing
out on some real DE genes, a model with high specificity should be preferred. The
unadjusted model achieves the highest specificity and accuracy but the lowest recall.
Although high accuracy can mislead us to believe that this model outperforms
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Dissecting Cellular Composition In Silico: Enrichment Scores for Cell Populations
29
the others, we must be careful. By design, the dataset is imbalanced; true DEGs
make up 10% of the total genes. Thus, only 950 genes are DE and 8566 are non-
DEGs. If the baseline model is keen to labeling genes as non-DEGs, and the dataset
has a disproportionate high amount of non-DEGs, the model will inevitably achieve
high specificity and accuracy. Even if its performance is worse than other models.
Reversely, the adjusted models achieve higher recall in general. However, the low
precision and high recall of the adjusted models suggest that the DEGs are well
detected but include many false positives.
Given the imbalanced nature of the data, a more suitable metric is the F1-score,
which can distinguish between the classes and does not exhibit bias towards models
that perform well only on the small or large class. In Figure 4.2, it is shown that the
majority of the adjusted models outperform the zero model, and for those models,
the performance is independent of the cell of DGE-origin.
The adjusted models’ recall, specificity, accuracy and precision scores seem to
depend on the cell of DGE origin (Figures 4.2(b), 4.2(d), 4.2(f)). For example, when
the expression of cell type five is altered to produce DEGs, all five adjusted models
display improved specificity, precision, and accuracy (Figure 4.2). On the other hand,
the recall scores of the adjusted models peak when cell type three is picked to produce
DEGs.
Moreover, the patterns observed in the auROC, F1-score, and accuracy suggest
that the choice of covariate potentially impacts the model’s performance. Interest-
ingly, the models that include the cell of DGE-origin as a covariate do not perform
better than the other adjusted models. For example, the model that includes celltype
4 as a covariate (model4) achieves higher auROC when the cell type five is the DE-
origin cell; similarly, model3 has the best performance in the dataset where cell type
five produces the differential expression.
Likewise, the model’s performance does not appear to be affected when the
abundance of the covariate cell type differs significantly between the two condi-
tions (Appendix 6).
Celltypes 4-5 are more abundant in the simulated mixture
samples, whereas celltypes 1-2 are the least abundant.
However, the correlation
of log-foldchanges to the ground truth is higher when the cell type of DGE-origin is
more abundant in the mixture (Figure 4.3(b)), independently of the model design.
4.2
Dissecting Cellular Composition In Silico:
Enrichment Scores for Cell Populations
The enrichment scores of blood cell types in the MPN data are determined using
the xCell algorithm [44]. The tool offers a list of preselected cell types that can be
included in the deconvolution process, from specialized blood cells, to epithelial cells
and neurons. An inbuilt function is provided to assess whether a cell type is absent
from the input data (see Chapter 3). However, the application of this function has
a questionable performance as neurons are implied to be part of the MPN whole
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4.2. Evaluation of the model performance according to six different metrics (F1-
score, Recall, auROC, Specificity, Accuracy, and Precision). Model 0 is the baseline model.
Models 1-4 are adjusted using celltype 1-4 as a composition covariate, accordingly.
The
annotation of the heatmaps indicates the cell of DGE-origin coded by color. Each row is a
different simulated mixture dataset.
blood samples. Therefore, only cell types known to be typically found in peripheral
blood are chosen for the deconvolution. Moreover, hematopoietic stem cells are also
included as they are known to circulate in the periphery of blood cancer patients [21].
The MPN data are fed to the tool without prior batch correction, as the original work
suggests [48].
The deconvolution reveals patterns of composition changes between healthy and
MPN patients (Figure 4.4(a)). Megakaryocytes and platelets are expressed in lower
levels in healthy compared to MPN blood. The same is true for Eosinophils, with
some greater variation in their abundance.
HSC, as well as the progenitor cells
CMP and GMP, are found to be enriched in MPN especially in some PV and all
PMF patients (Figure 4.4(b)). On the opposite of these alterations, the lymphocyte
enrichment (T and B cell populations) is reduced across the three stages of the disease.
Notably, patients with MPN exhibit a decreased percentage of natural killer (NK) cells
compared to healthy controls.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Strategic Selection of Covariates
31
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3. (a.) The correlation of log-foldchange between the limma results and ground
truth is plotted for the baseline and one adjusted model. The significant DEGs (purple)
correlate well (Pearson’s R = 0.92) with the ground truth data (threshold p-adjusted < 0.05).
(b.) Heatmap with Pearson’s correlation coeﬀicients for the overall correlation of the limma
results (no hard cut-off used) and ground truth data (all r values were statistically significant).
Better correlation values are achieved when the simulated data have DE coming from a cell
type with higher abundance.
Importantly, heterogeneity of cell-type proportions is evident across samples of
the same condition, highlighting the diﬀiculties inherent in gene expression analysis
in mixture samples of whole blood.
4.3
Strategic Selection of Covariates
The decision on which cell populations’ scores to use for the adjusted models is guided
by three primary pillars: biological knowledge, change of population abundance, and
avoidance of colinearity in the linear regression models. Based on biological knowledge
of the characteristics in MPN pathophysiology, the cell types in Table 4.1 were initially
selected. Additionally, the minimum and maximum enrichment score of a cell type,
as well as the scale of the change of abundance between the conditions (Figure 8) and
the introduction of colinearity in the model, are assessed.
To avoid the introduction of multicollinearity in the linear regression, Pearson’s
correlation coeﬀicients (r) are computed between all the selected cell types (Figure
4.5). Variables that are naturally related and have an r value higher than 0.65 are
summed into a unique enrichment variable. The following sum scores are calculated:
• CD8 Score: CD8.Tem + CD8.Tcells + CD8.Tcm
• CD4 score: CD4.Tnaive + CD4.Tcm + CD4.Tcells + CD4.Tem
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Results
(a) Deconvolution heatmap with raw enrichment
scores.
(b) Deconvolution heatmap with z-scaled enrich-
ment scores.
Figure 4.4. Deconvolution of whole blood samples into 29 blood cell types. a. Enrichment
scores for each cell type per sample are displayed (not scaled).
An annotation index is
shown on the top part of the heatmap, indicating the condition, JAK2 mutation status, age,
and batch for each sample. Cells are clustered based on enrichment scores by hierarchical
clustering. b. The enrichment scores shown are Z-scaled for each cell type so that the values
represent the standard deviation from the mean enrichment score of a particular cell type.
• Thrombocyte score: Platelets + Megakaryocytes
• Myeloid Progeny score: CMP + GMP
The correlation coeﬀicients are then recalculated (Figure 4.5). Finally, following
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Strategic Selection of Covariates
33
Celltype
Enrichment score
(min-max)
Significance
CD4+ T cells
0 −0.5
YES
CD8+ T cells
0 −0.41
YES
NK
0 −0.29
YES
Erythrocyres
0 −0.31
NO
Neutrophils
0 −0.16
NO
Eosinophils
0 −0.81
NO
Basophils
0 −0.27
NO
Platelets
0 −0.31
YES
Megakaryocytes
0 −0.67
YES
HSC
0 −0.48
YES
CMP
0 −0.46
YES
GMP
0 −0.37
YES
Table 4.1. The selection of cell-type covariates is based on three criteria: biological rele-
vance, significant alteration in population size among conditions, and multicolinearity. The
table lists cell types central to the MPN disease, the range of enrichment scores for each cell
type, and a binary (yes/no) indicator of whether the population alters its numbers signifi-
cantly between conditions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5. Correlation plots of enrichment scores, using Pearson’s correlation coeﬀicient.
Only significant correlation values are shown; otherwise, they are left blank. a. Correlation
plot of the selected cells. b. Cell types with an absolute correlation coeﬀicient higher than
0.6 were summed into unique scores, representing a group of naturally related cells.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Results
variables are chosen as covariates: CD8 T cells, CD4 T cells, platelets, CD8 score, CD4
score, Myeloid progeny score + HSC, Thromboscore, CD4 score + Thromboscore,
HSC + Thromboscore.
4.4
Advanced Analysis of MPN Leveraging
Composition Covariates
To investigate the molecular alterations occurring in patients with MPN while simul-
taneously addressing the compositional nature of the data, the following contrasts
are established and examined:
1. Comparison of all MPN patients with healthy donors.
2. Contrast between MPN patients carrying the JAK2 mutation and patients with-
out the mutation.
3. Comparison between mutation-negative MPN patients and healthy individuals.
The first contrast reveals differences between MPN patients and individuals in
a healthy state. The second contrast aims to investigate molecular differences due
to the burden of JAK2 mutation and offers insights into both shared traits and
differences between the two patient groups. Lastly, the final model provides insight
into molecular changes between health and disease that are not a result of JAK2
mutation.
For each of the three models, a baseline design and adjusted designs that incor-
porate the covariate scores described in the previous section are created with limma
(Described in Methods 3.4.1). For each comparison, the log-foldchange of each gene
between the two conditions, the average expression of the gene, and associated stat-
ics (p-value, adjusted p-values, moderated t-statistic) are calculated. The results are
corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method that
controls the false discovery rate (FDR). For this analysis, a cutoff of 0.05 for the
p-adjusted values and log2-foldchange of zero (absolute foldchange bigger than 1) is
used to distinguish genes that are significantly differentially expressed. In Table 4.2
the DEA results are summarized.
Noticeably, the number of identified DEGs differs between designs. In some cases,
the adjusted model picks up a higher differential expression, whereas in others, it is
more strict. These results indicate the importance of accounting for the composition
of samples. In the next sections, a functional analysis is undertaken to gain more
detailed insights into the differences of designs.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Advanced Analysis of MPN Leveraging Composition Covariates
35
Covariate
MPN.all vs. Healthy
Up/Down
MPN.mut vs. MPN.wt
Up/Down
MPN.wt vs Healthy
Up/Down
Unadjusted
5086/4257
629/282
3526/2967
CD8 score
3960/3160
453/221
2934/2445
CD4 score
3771/3174
557/307
2769/2376
Stem&Progeny score
3796/3451
769/483
1815/1628
Thrombocyte score
2554/2808
734/489
1362/1812
CD4& Thromb.score
1818/2192
637/579
1109/1684
Stem& Thromb.score
1510/1882
738/585
423/901
Table 4.2. Number of significantly differentially expressed genes across model designs and
comparisons. Including different cell types as covariates influences the results (Thresholds:
Adjusted p-value<0.05, abs(logFC )>0)
4.4.1
Overrepresentation Analysis (ORA) Insights
The ORA method serves as an initial approach to outline the molecular pathways
implicated in each contrast and provides a preliminary insight into the underlying
biological mechanisms. A point of interest is whether different model designs reveal
distinct functional changes and if these relate to the specific cell types included in
each model.
The KEGG legacy dataset of canonical pathways is used to investigate the func-
tional changes between each design and contrast. As a first step, the ORA method is
used to evaluate which functional pathways are overrepresented in the list of signifi-
cant DEGs. ORA is a fast and relatively simple method that uses the ranked DEGs
(based on t statistic) identified earlier (Table 4.2).
In Figure 4.6, the top overrepresented terms in the list of DEGs and their associ-
ated significance in each model design and comparison are shown. An important note
here is that ORA is non-directional, meaning that it can not be inferred if a term is
over- or under- represented in the selected gene list. It can only inform about path-
ways more prevalent in the given list of genes than what is expected by chance. To
compare functional enrichment across designs, z-scores of gene-ratios are calculated.
This approach enables the identification of changes for pathways with minimal score
variance.
Notably, in the comparison of non-mutant JAK2-MPN to healthy subjects, the
KEGG_Hematopoietic_cell_lineage pathway is overrepresented in the DGE lists of
all designs except the ones that include HSC as covariates in the model (based on ad-
justed p-values). Moreover, the designs that include HSC, present lower z-scores mean-
ing that less genes overlap with the Hematopoietic cell lineage gene set. Therefore,
the use of HSC as covariates, has potentially the effect of removing over-expressed
genes due to composition.
In the contrast of JAK2 mutant to non mutant patients, the KEGG_Spliceosome
pathway appears to be overrepresented in two adjusted models. Alterations in splicing
factor regulation are known to be associated with the different disease stages and sub-
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Results
Figure 4.6. The gene-ratio values are calculated with ORA and subsequently transformed
to z-scores. The heatmap displays the z-scores of selected pathways in the three contrasts,
across the different designs. A gene-ration is the number of DEGs that overlap in the gene
set with the pathway set divided by the total number of genes in the predefined pathway set.
BH-adjusted p-values are denoted as ≤0.001 : ∗∗∗∗, ≤0.005 : ∗∗∗, ≤0.01 : ∗∗, ≤0.05 : ∗
types of MPNs [70]. After more careful investigation of the overlapping genes within
this pathway, SRSF2 and other frequently observed genes affected by spliceosome
mutations were present.
The KEGG_Jak_Stat_signaling_pathway which refers to the central pathway as-
sociated with the disease is only observed to be enriched in the design that accounts
for alteration in CD4 populations and platelet abundance. Another interesting find-
ing is the observed patterns of the cytokine pathway presented in Figure 4.6. Cy-
tokines and cytokine-induced inflammation have a central role in the pathogenesis of
MPN [71–73]. In two out of three contrasts, the pathway is represented in the DGE
list. The baseline model identifies more genes of the cytokine set in patients carrying
the JAK2 mutation than the adjusted models. Although the adjusted designs result
in fewer genes overlapping with the pathway of cytokine-cytokine receptor interac-
tion, the pathway is still marked as significantly present in the list of top DEGs, of
JAK2-mutant compared to wildtype. The exception is the stem and progenitor cell
adjusted model, in which the pathway is not identified significantly present. Notice-
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Advanced Analysis of MPN Leveraging Composition Covariates
37
able, this pathway is only traceable with the Thrombocytes-adjusted models in the
thrid contrast.
Although the ORA analysis method is fast and allows finding patterns in the
lengthy DEA results; it has inherent limitations and weaknesses.
First, the need
to define a threshold of what is significant and accordingly narrow down the list of
DEGs impacts the analysis. What is a good threshold is not always an obvious choice.
Moreover, because of the arbitrary thresholds, the set of DEGs used for running ORA
might only include a few out of many very interesting genes and might, therefore, miss
important information existing within the data. Lastly, in contrast to GSEA, ORA
does not use or incorporate the information on the direction of log-foldchange of the
genes in the input list.
4.4.2
Pathway Exploration: Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
Findings
The DEA results are further analyzed using the GSEA method to overcome the
inherent limitations of ORA. The GSEA method allows for a more detailed analysis
of functional similarities and differences between the model designs. However, the
results showed very high similarities between the different model designs within each
contrast (MPN vs. Healthy, MPN Jak2 mutant vs. MPN Jak2 wildtype, MPN Jak2
wildtype vs Healthy). The high level of concordance between the results makes their
interpretation challenging.
To identify dissimilarities among the designs the significant KEGG pathways from
the GSEA results of each design were clustered based on two methods described in
chapter 3: semantic similarity and gene overlap. The resulting clusters are almost
identical across the designs (not shown here). This means that the differences cap-
tured by the different model designs are not traceable on a higher level but demand
for a more careful investigation.
A more thorough analysis is undertaken for each comparison, and the significant
KEGG pathways among the designs are compared. Figure 4.7 shows the overlap of
functional terms among the designs. After careful examination of the overlaps, nine
terms were chosen for further investigation. These terms show discrepancies between
the designs and are chosen due to their potential role in the disease phenotype. The
comparison of significant KEGG pathways that show some degree of variation among
designs is shown in Figure 4.8.
4.4.2.1
Neurodegenerative Links in MPN
Neurodegenerative diseases are thought to be linked to MPN as both conditions are
models of chronic inflammation and can remain undiagnosed in patients for a consid-
erable period of time [75]. In Figure 4.8 the pathway of Alzheimer’s disease is shown
to be enriched in the non-mutant patients compared to the ones carrying the muta-
tion, as well as in the healthy compared to the whole consortium of MPN patients.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7. The overlap of significant KEGG pathways among the different model designs,
identified with GSEA (p-adjusted threshold: < 0.05). (a.) Overlap among enriched terms
in MPN patients compared to healthy. (b.) Overlap among depleted terms in MPN patients
compared to healthy (or in other words enriched in healthy compared to MPN). Plots of set
overlaps are created in R with the package ComplexHeatmap (version 2.18.0) [74].
When the healthy participants are compared to the non-mutant patient group, no dif-
ference is seen. Interestingly, the pathway of Parkinson’s disease is enriched in JAK2
wildtype patients compared to healthy only when the design including Thrombocytes
as covariate is used, but the opposite appears in the design adjusted for stem and
progenitor cells.
4.4.2.2
Inflammatory Pathways: A Closer Look at MPN Patients
Patients with Philadelphia-negative MPN exhibit chronic inflammation and immune
dysregulation [72,76]. Thus, in the MPN data analyzed here, the inflammation- and
cytokine-related pathways are expected to be upregulated in patients. From Figure
4.8 it is clear that adjusted models exclusively pick up the cytokine signal when the
unadjusted models fail to harbor statistical power.
GSEA for GO biological pathways of inflammation, reveals that patients bearing
the JAK2 mutation present higher counts of inflammation and immune response-
related terms compared to the nonJAK2-mutant patients. This is displayed in Fig-
ure 4.9. In the total cohort of MPN patients, inflammation pathways are found to
be enriched only when the hematopoietic stem cell-adjusted models (HSC, HSC &
Thromb.) are implemented (Figure 4.9(a)). Immune response terms are mostly neg-
atively enriched in the JAK2 negative and the whole MPN cohort compared to the
healthy.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Advanced Analysis of MPN Leveraging Composition Covariates
39
Figure 4.8.
Nine selected KEGG pathways are shown with their associated NES and
adjusted p-values computed with the GSEA method. Significance of p-adjusted is marked
with asterisks where padj <= 0.001: ****, < 0.005 : ***, < 0.01 : **, < 0.05 : *, ns : not
shown.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9. Total counts of significant GO biological pathways among the different model
designs, identified with GSEA (p-adjusted threshold: < 0.05). The terms are grouped into
positive (UP) and negative (DOWN) NES bins. (a.) Terms are filtered based on the string
INFLAMMATION, and only significant terms are kept. (b.) Terms are filtered based on
the string IMMUNE, and only significant terms are kept.
Another well-known trait of MPN pathophysiology is the migration of leukocytes
from and towards target tissues under the presence of chemokine signals and the
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Results
overproduction of chemokines by platelets [75]. In Figure 4.8 an upregulation of the
KEGG chemokine pathway is evident in JAK2 positive patients compared to JAK2
negative patients, but the opposite is true for the two comparisons between MPN and
healthy subjects.
The KEGG pathway of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) displays a similar pattern
(Figure 4.8). The NES value of the cell adhesion pathway shows a reversed sign in
two adjusted models of the contrast of all patients vs. healthy, although with not
enough statistical power.
4.4.3
MPN Model Designs with Compositional Interaction Terms
In MPN, cell counts of platelets and T cells are altered significantly in patients’ blood.
The inclusion of an interaction term in linear regression models aims to disentangle
the molecular changes that affect mRNA expression at the level of genetic program
modifications from the cell abundance effects. The interaction term consists of the
enrichment of the specific cell type under question and the condition state. In this
way, the hypothesis is tested that the relationship between the enrichment of a cell
type in the sample and the expression of a gene is different in MPN patients than in
healthy.
The interaction term coeﬀicient captures the difference between the slopes for the
MPN and healthy samples (Figure 4.10). The coeﬀicient of the main effect for the
condition in the limma models accounts for genes that are differentially expressed
between MPN and healthy, and the interaction coeﬀicient (when significant) marks
genes where the change in expression at a given population enrichment level varies
between MPN and healthy subjects.
Five cell types are tested to identify genes whose expression differs between the
healthy and MPN for different sizes of the cells’ population, and all genes in the
dataset are tested. Significant genes with a threshold of an adjusted p-value under
0.05 are presented in Table 4.3.
Covariate
Genes with differential slopes
DEA (Up/Down)
GSEA (Up/Down)
Platelets
-
39/238
105/560
CD4 T cells
PPP1R15A,PCGF3-AS1
GPR174,H1-4
0/9
11/336
CD8 T cells
-
0/0
15/254
NK cells
GPR174,H1-4,PCGF3-AS1
4/53
0/0
CD4 Score
GPR174,H1-4,DNAJC19
PCGF3-AS1,TPT1P8,VPS39
5/6
23/254
CD8 Score
-
0/0
27/20
Table 4.3. In the first column of the table, genes with a significantly different expression
between MPN and healthy samples at different cell-type specific enrichment levels are listed.
In the second column, the number of significantly up-and down-regulated genes from the
DEA results are presented. The last column counts the positive or negative enrichment of
GO biological processes pathways (GSEA). Significance threshold p-adjusted < 0.05.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Advanced Analysis of MPN Leveraging Composition Covariates
41
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10.
Two genes (PPP1R15A left and GPR174 right) whose slopes significantly
differ in CD4+ T cells depending on health status. On the y-axis the log2(expression) of
the genes is plotted, while the x-axis shows the enrichment scores for the CD4+ T cells
population. The presence of a significant interaction term in the linear regression indicates
that the effect of one predictor variable (cell-type enrichment) on the response variable (gene
expression) is different at different values of the other predictor variable (condition). The
linear regression model used is ”y ∼condition+CD4.Tcells+condition:CD4.Tcells+batch”.
The expression of four genes (PPP1R15A, PCGF3-As1, GPR174, H1-4) in CD4+
T cells differs significantly between healthy and MPN samples at different levels of
population enrichment (Table 4.3). Three of these genes (PCGF3-As1, GPR174, H1-
4) also differ in the NK cells of patients with MPN. Recent studies have highlighted
the role of PPP1R15A (GADD34) in regulating stress response pathways in CD4+ T
cells, impacting cell survival, apoptosis, and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines
[77, 78]. PCGF-AS1, which is the antisense RNA of the PCGF3 gene, may play a
role in regulating gene expression by interfering in transcription and/or translation.
Here, GPR174 (LPS3) is found to be produced significantly less in patients’ CD4+
T cells than in healthy cells. Lack of GPR174 has been shown to activate the pro-
duction of Interleukin-2 (IL-2) in CD4+ T cells, and is involved in the regulation of
T cell proliferation [79,80]. GPR174 might influence NK cell activation and effector
responses through immune signaling pathways.
H1-4 is a histone variant of the H1 family that plays a central role in chromatin
packaging into nucleosomes. A specific function of H1-4 in CD4+ T and NK cells
is unknown. However, histone alterations can modify DNA packaging and thus can
profoundly impact gene expression. Notably, the linear combination of CD4+ T cell
subpopulations into one sum score (CD4 Score) did yield more genes in comparison
to CD4+ T cells but also excluded one gene (GPR174).
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Results
Accounting for cell composition with interaction terms decreases the number of
DEGs. Specifically, 9343 genes were found to be differentially expressed (5086 up and
4257 down-regulated) in the (not adjusted) baseline model (Table 4.2). DEGs are
greatly reduced when interaction terms are included in the adjusted linear regression
design compared to adjusted models without interaction terms (Tables 4.2, 4.3 and
Figure 4.11). The number of significant GO pathways of biological processes is also
reduced in the adjusted models. However, they do not follow exactly the trend of the
DEA numbers (Table 4.3).
In Figure 4.12 GO Biological Processes (BP) terms are clustered according to
semantic similarity (see Chapter 3). CD4+ T cell clusters of GO BP terms reflect
distinct functional pathways relevant to T-cell activation, differentiation, and effector
functions, including cytokine production, antigen processing, and immune regulation.
On the other hand, the clusters identified in platelets emphasize unique biological
processes essential for platelet function, including RNA processing, ribosome biogen-
esis, and organelle dynamics, reflecting the distinct role of platelets in hemostasis,
thrombosis, and immune control (Figure 4.12).
It is known that platelets form aggregates with themselves and other cells such as
T-cells [75,81]. Interestingly, the functional analysis of the adjusted data targeted to-
wards adhesion terms (Figure 4.13) suggests the enrichment of cell adhesion pathways,
which were not identified as significant by the baseline model. Conversely, other path-
ways are not identified as significant in the adjusted models. The platelet-adjusted
data show a distinct pattern of adhesion enrichment, with positive regulation of cell-
cell adhesion mediated by cadherin, but are negatively enriched for integrin-mediated
adhesion.
4.5
Comparative Analysis of the Three Chronic MPN
Conditions
This section aims to investigate the landscape of three MPN conditions: ET, PV,
and PMF. Here, three contrasts are being examined: PV vs.
ET, PMF vs.
PV,
and PMF vs. ET. The exclusion of the healthy donors allows for the inclusion of
age as a covariate in the linear regression models.
Removing the impact of age-
related variability in gene expression, will result in developing a more precise image
of the molecular changes occurring in the MPN. The regression models adjusted for
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) and CD4 score are formulated as ”y ∼MPNsubtype+
CelltypeEnrichment + age + batch” and are compared to the baseline model. The
JAK2 mutational status is not taken into consideration in the models investigated
here. However, it is worth noting that epidemiologically, over 90% of PV patients
carry the JAK2 mutation. This trend is reflected in this dataset, where 89 of the 90
PV patients harbor the JAK2 mutation.
Table 4.4 presents the results of differential expression analysis (DEA), highlight-
ing the number of significant (padj < 0.05) upregulated/downregulated genes with
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Comparative Analysis of the Three Chronic MPN Conditions
43
(a) Y ∼condition +batch
(b) Y
∼condition + Platelets + condi-
tion:Platelets + batch
(c) Y
∼condition + CD4.Tcells + condi-
tion:CD4.Tcells + batch
(d) Y ∼condition + NK + condition:NK +
batch
Figure 4.11. DEA in the baseline model and three selected cell types (Platelets, CD4+
T cells, NK cells). Data points are genes, genes indicated with blue color are significantly
downregulated in MPN patients compared to healthy, red points are genes significantly
upregulated in patients. Higher numbers of DEGs are determined by the unadjusted model
compared to the adjusted.Threshold for differential expression: adjusted p-value < 0.05,
absolute log2-foldchange greater than zero (absolute FoldChange > 1).
an absolute log2-foldchange greater than zero across the three contrasts.
MPN patients are believed to progress from ET to PV, and eventually to PMF,
with some cases advancing to leukemic transformation. ET and PV patients have
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Results
Cytokine Production and Immune Response
Leukocyte Development and Morphogenesis
Cell Growth and Activation
GOBP_MAPK_CASCADE
GOBP_RNA_SPLICING_VIA_TRANSESTERIFICATION_REACTIONS
GOBP_REGULATION_OF_CELL_GROWTH
GOBP_GANGLIOSIDE_METABOLIC_PROCESS
GOBP_CELL_ACTIVATION
GOBP_CYTOPLASMIC_TRANSLATION
GOBP_CELL_ACTIVATION_INVOLVED_IN_IMMUNE_RESPONSE
GOBP_CELL_MORPHOGENESIS
GOBP_LEUKOCYTE_DIFFERENTIATION
GOBP_MYELOID_LEUKOCYTE_DIFFERENTIATION
GOBP_POSITIVE_REGULATION_OF_CYTOKINE_PRODUCTION
GOBP_CYTOKINE_PRODUCTION_INVOLVED_IN_IMMUNE_RESPONSE
GOBP_IMMUNOGLOBULIN_PRODUCTION
GOBP_PRODUCTION_OF_MOLECULAR_MEDIATOR_OF_IMMUNE_RESPONSE
GOBP_CYTOKINE_PRODUCTION_INVOLVED_IN_INFLAMMATORY_RESPONSE
GOBP_IMMUNE_EFFECTOR_PROCESS
GOBP_LEUKOCYTE_MEDIATED_IMMUNITY
GOBP_ACTIVATION_OF_INNATE_IMMUNE_RESPONSE
GOBP_NATURAL_KILLER_CELL_MEDIATED_IMMUNITY
GOBP_ACTIVATION_OF_IMMUNE_RESPONSE
GOBP_REGULATION_OF_ANTIGEN_PROCESSING_AND_PRESENTATION
GOBP_REGULATION_OF_IMMUNE_SYSTEM_PROCESS
number of genes
100
200
300
400
p.adjust
GOBP_PRODUCTION_OF_MOLECULAR_MEDIATOR_INVOLVED_IN_INFLAMMATORY_RESPONSE
GOBP_ADAPTIVE_IMMUNE_RESPONSE_.._MMUNOGLOBULIN_SUPERFAMILY_DOMAINS
GOBP_NEGATIVE_REGULATION_OF_IMMUNE_SYSTEM_PROCESS
GOBP_LYMPHOCYTE_MEDIATED_IMMUNITY
GOBP_IMMUNE_SYSTEM_DEVELOPMENT
GOBP_CYTOKINE_PRODUCTION
GOBP_LEUKOCYTE_MEDIATED_CYTOTOXICITY
GOBP_ADAPTIVE_IMMUNE_RESPONSE
Innate and Adaptive Immunity
Lymphocyte and Leukocyte-Mediated Immunity
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
(a) Clusters of significant GO biological processes terms for CD4+ T cells.
RNA Processing and Modification
GOBP_REPRODUCTION
GOBP_RIBOSOMAL_SUBUNIT_EXPORT_FROM_NUCLEUS
GOBP_MITOTIC_CELL_CYCLE
GOBP_MITOPHAGY
GOBP_ORGAN_INDUCTION
GOBP_REGULATION_OF_DNA_RECOMBINATION
GOBP_NEGATIVE_REGULATION_OF_TRANSCRIPTION_BY_RNA_POLYMERASE_II
GOBP_RNA_SPLICING_VIA_TRANSESTERIFICATION_REACTIONS
GOBP_RNA_SPLICING_VIA_ENDONUCLEOLYTIC_CLEAVAGE_AND_LIGATION
GOBP_TELOMERE_MAINTENANCE
GOBP_MITOCHONDRIAL_RNA_METABOLIC_PROCESS
GOBP_MITOCHONDRIAL_RNA_PROCESSING
GOBP_RNA_5_END_PROCESSING
GOBP_RNA_METHYLATION
GOBP_FORMATION_OF_CYTOPLASMIC_TRANSLATION_INITIATION_COMPLEX
GOBP_RIBOSOMAL_LARGE_SUBUNIT_ASSEMBLY
GOBP_RIBOSOMAL_SMALL_SUBUNIT_ASSEMBLY
GOBP_SPLICEOSOMAL_TRI_SNRNP_COMPLEX_ASSEMBLY
GOBP_SPLICEOSOMAL_SNRNP_ASSEMBLY
GOBP_BOX_C_D_SNORNP_ASSEMBLY
GOBP_RRNA_MODIFICATION
GOBP_MATURATION_OF_5_8S_RRNA
GOBP_MATURATION_OF_LSU_RRNA
GOBP_NUCLEAR_TRANSCRIBED_MRNA_CATABOLIC_PROCESS_DEADENYLATION_DEPENDENT_DECAY
number of genes
100
200
300
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
p.adjust
GOBP_RNA_POLYMERASE_I_PREINITIATION_COMPLEX_ASSEMBLY
GOBP_NUCLEAR_TRANSCRIBED_MRNA_CATABOLIC_PROCESS
GOBP_NUCLEAR_TRANSCRIBED_MRNA_POLY_A_TAIL_SHORTENING
GOBP_SPLICEOSOMAL_COMPLEX_ASSEMBLY
GOBP_MATURATION_OF_SSU_RRNA_FROM_TRICISTRONIC_..._RRNA
GOBP_MATURATION_OF_5_8S_RRNA_FROM_TRICISTRONIC_..._RRNA
mRNA Degradation and Decay
Ribosomal RNA Maturation and Modification
Ribosomal and Spliceosomal Assembly
Cell Regulation
(b) Clusters of significant GO biological processes terms for Platelets.
Figure 4.12. fGSEA results of platelets-adjusted and CD4+ T cells-adjusted models were
filtered for significant terms (adjusted p values < 0.05). The remaining terms were clustered
based on semantic similarity (see Methods). The unbiased clustering reveals unique pathways
relevant to each cell type.
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Comparative Analysis of the Three Chronic MPN Conditions
45
Figure 4.13.
Analysis of ”ADHESION” terms in the GSEA results from the different
interaction models. Significance is denoted with star signs as follows: p-adjusted < 0.001 :
∗∗∗∗, < 0.005 : ∗∗∗, < 0.01 : ∗∗, < 0.05 : ∗
Design
PV vs. ET (Up/Down)
PMF vs. PV (Up/Down)
PMF vs. ET (Up/Down)
Baseline
174/19
2937/2425
1964/1818
HSC adjusted
287/40
1724/1432
910/467
CD4 score adj.
1/0
2797/2368
1247/1145
Table 4.4. Counts of up-/down- regulated genes from the DEA results for the three pairwise
contrasts of MPN conditions, with thresholds of padj < 0.05 and absolute log2-foldchange
> 0.
better prognostics and survival rates compared to PMF. However, ET and PMF
patients share some similarities, such as comparable thrombocyte overproduction that
makes their clinical distinction challenging. In Table 4.4, the observed differences are
indeed the smallest between PV and ET, and the biggest difference occurs between
PMF and PV.
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of samples, based on cell type deconvolution
scores (Figure 4.14), portrays the expected behavior: PV and ET samples lay closer
in the PCA plot, meaning they exhibit more similar composition patterns compared
to PMF patients.
In Figure 4.15, the correlation of the DEA results among the three model designs
(baseline, adjusted with CD4 score, adjusted with HSC) for the PMF vs. PV con-
trast is shown. The log2-foldchanges among the three designs correlate well, with a
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Results
Figure 4.14.
PCA of the enrichment scores, annotated for MPN condition and JAK2
mutation status
Pearson’s Correlation Coeﬀicients between 0.98 and 0.99 among each pairwise model
comparison.
The DEA is followed by a GSEA with Gene Ontology Biological Process (GO BP)
terms. Table 4.5 summarizes the GSEA results. The contrast of PMF patients to PV
reveals the greatest functional changes independently of model design.
Design
PV vs. ET (Up/Down)
PMF vs. PV (Up/Down)
PMF vs. ET (Up/Down)
Baseline
591/63 (654)
315/996 (1311)
292/678 (970)
HSC adjusted
730/72 (802)
282/859 (1141)
256/372 (628)
CD4 score adj.
577/118 (695)
314/1050 (1364)
389/928 (1317)
Table 4.5. GSEA results of three contrasts with GO BP. Significant (padj< 0.05) posi-
tively/negatively enriched terms (+/-). The total number of significant terms is displayed
in parentheses.
To investigate the functional changes between the conditions as well as the discrep-
ancies between the different model designs the GSEA results are filtered for significant
terms (padj < 0.05) and the top two terms with the highest positive NES and with
the highest negative NES are plotted. In Figure 4.16, the top positive and negative
terms of all designs for each contrast are presented.
In the top terms for the PV vs. ET contrast, a positive enrichment of myeloid cell
activation processes is observed together with the regulation of degranulation. Dur-
ing degranulation, pro-inflammatory factors, such as various cytokines, are released.
Ribosomal, mitochondrial, and cell cycle-related pathways are, on the other hand,
negatively enriched.
In the PMF vs. PV and the PMF vs. ET contrasts, mitochondrial terms are
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Comparative Analysis of the Three Chronic MPN Conditions
47
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.15. Pearson’s correlation of log2-foldchange between the different model designs
tested. The different colors indicate genes identified as significant in either one of the designs,
both or none. (a.) Comparison of CD4 score adjusted model to baseline. (b.) Comparison
of HSC score adjusted model to baseline. (c.) Comparison of HSC score adjusted model to
CD4 score adjusted model.
on the top of the list with enriched terms. Thus, PV patients likely experience a
downregulation of mitochondrial genes and PMF an enrichment compared to the two
other conditions. On the other hand, the HSC-adjusted model reveals a depletion of
biological pathways for interleukin 6 (IL-6) production and immune response in PMF
compared to PV patients. IL-6 is a pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine that induces
activation of JAK/STAT and has been implicated to have a critical role in MPN.
In the PMF vs. ET contrast, IL-6 production, B-cell receptor signaling and anti-
gen relevant pathways are negatively enriched.
All models reveal enrichment for
energy production (oxidative phosphorylation, ATP synthesis).
Finally, a clustering approach was adopted to explore the functional enrichment
results. Rather than focusing on the top terms by NES, in this approach, similarity
between pathways is calculated by the degree of overlap among the leading edge genes
of two sets (explained in Chapter 3). After clustering all terms of each GSEA result,
pathways that do not meet a significance threshold of adjusted p-value less than 0.05
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Results
(a) PV vs. ET
(b) PMF vs. ET
(c) PMF vs. PV
Figure 4.16. Top positive and negative significant terms, by NES, of all designs for each
contrast are presented in three dotplots. Each model design is designated by a different
datapoint shape.
are discarded. Next, cluster names that include at least one string from a selection
of disease-relevant terms (T cell, cytokine, chemokine, hematopoietic, JAK, Janus,
apoptotic, immune, inflammatory and adhesion) are filtered. The remaining terms
are ranked by NES and the top and bottom entries are selected for visualization.
In Figure 4.17, the selected terms for the contrast of PMF vs. ET are shown in the
HSC and CD4 Score adjusted data. ET and pre-fibrotic PMF present similar clinical
and morphological characteristics but varying prognoses, underscoring the need for
developing tools to accurately differentiate between them.
In both designs, the positively enriched terms in the PMF condition are part of
the cluster ”Apoptotic chromosome condesation”, pointing to DNA alterations that
occur during the apoptotic cell state.
This suggests that activation of cell death
differs significantly between PMF and ET. This is supported by other groups, where
bone marrow-derived megakaryocytes are reported to have a high apoptotic rate in
PMF and decreased programmed cell death in ET [82].
One term in particular, ”response to lipid”, stood out in the HSC-adjusted func-
tional enrichment. Although this term might appear irrelevant, investigation of the
leading edge genes revealed many important disease-related genes.
To list a few,
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Comparative Analysis of the Three Chronic MPN Conditions
49
(a) CD4 score adjusted data
(b) HSC adjusted data
Figure 4.17.
Functional pathways for the contrast of PMF vs.
ET are shown in (a.)
the CD4 Score and (b.) the HSC adjusted data. Implementation of a unique clustering
approach of the GSEA results followed by a manual selection of interesting clusters highlights
important pathways that were not identified previously.
TGFB1, JAK2, EGFR, MAPK1, BCL10, SAFb1, the anti-apoptotic gene BCL2, and
many interleukins and other cytokines are included in the leading edge of the pathway
named ”response to lipid”. This brings up a limitation of the functional enrichment
method, where pathways can be interpreted in many different ways, and some might
be disregarded as irrelevant because of naming.
==PAGE:62==
50
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter, the main findings of this thesis are briefly summarized, and a thorough
interpretation and discussion is provided.
Validation of the implemented method
was carried out by evaluating the performance of models adjusted for compositional
changes and by comparing them to the baseline model.
The evaluation is based
on classification metrics (Precision, Recall, ROC AUC, Accuracy, F1-score) and the
correlation of log-foldchanges between the differential expression analysis results and
the ground truth. The evaluation of model performance reveals intriguing patterns
regarding the choice of cell type inclusion and its impact on performance metrics.
The area under the ROC curve value, recall, and F1-score are generally higher in
the adjusted models compared to the baseline. Including covariates for the enrichment
of any cell type improves DE analysis. It was found that the models’ performance
is not impacted by the choice of the cell type of DGE-origin as a covariate. Simi-
larly, the abundance of the covariate cell type does not significantly influence model
performance.
Notably, correlation between log-foldchanges and ground truth data as well as
the performance of all models, tend to improve when the cell type of DGE-origin is
more abundant in the mixture. In general, performance seems more dependent on the
cell of DGE-origin rather than the covariate choice. These findings underscore the
complexity of heterogeneous mixtures, emphasizing the importance of comprehensive
validation procedures in refining analytical methodologies.
Deconvolution of the mixture samples revealed patterns of cell composition in
the healthy state and disease. These results are consistent with findings from other
research groups, indicating changes in the megakaryocyte, platelet, leukocyte, and
immune effector cell count as well as the abundance of hematopoietic stem and pro-
genitor cells [83].
On the other hand, although erythrocytes are expected to be
overproduced in PV patients, this trend is not captured in the data analyzed here.
This could either be an artifact of the deconvolution algorithm, meaning that the
decomposition is not performing well enough for these cell types, or it could be due
to patients undergoing different treatment schemes, affecting their blood cell counts.
Moreover, varying age is an important factor affecting cell counts and cell program
expressions. This could explain why patients with the same condition do not show
consistent count and expression patterns nor cluster together (Figure 5.1).
To correct for compositional effects in the mixture data, enrichment scores of
particular cell types were used as covariates in the linear regression model designs.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Discussion
ET_c_869.CEL
PV_c_763.CEL
PV_a_30.CEL
ET_c_865.CEL
PV_c_762.CEL
PV_c_880.CEL
PV_a_107.CEL
ET_c_889.CEL
ET_c_766.CEL
PV_c_879.CEL
PV_c_884.CEL
PV_c_888.CEL
PMF_c_696.CEL
PMF_c_713.CEL
PV_c_864.CEL
PV_c_767.CEL
PV_c_779.CEL
ET_c_890.CEL
PV_c_753.CEL
PV_c_758.CEL
PV_c_819.CEL
ET_a_18.CEL
ET_a_90.CEL
ET_a_82.CEL
ET_a_51.CEL
ET_a_57.CEL
ET_c_368.CEL
ET_c_867.CEL
PMF_c_897.CEL
PMF_c_672.CEL
ET_c_826.CEL
PMF_c_706.CEL
PMF_c_670.CEL
PMF_a_43.CEL
PMF_a_69.CEL
PMF_c_748.CEL
PV_c_863.CEL
PMF_c_685.CEL
PV_b_242_P1_96.CEL
PV_a_5.CEL
ET_c_838.CEL
PV_a_109.CEL
PV_c_800.CEL
ET_c_872.CEL
PV_c_241.CEL
PV_a_74.CEL
PMF_a_64.CEL
PV_a_53.CEL
Ctrl_89.CEL
Ctrl_161.CEL
PV_c_873.CEL
ET_c_545.CEL
ET_b_197_A1_19.CEL
Ctrl_299.CEL
Ctrl_338.CEL
PV_a_85.CEL
Ctrl_155.CEL
ET_a_81.CEL
PV_a_31.CEL
PV_a_217.CEL
PV_b_302_X1_28.CEL
PV_a_118.CEL
PV_b_446_AH1_23.CEL
PV_a_12.CEL
PV_b_230_B1_8.CEL
ET_b_211_G1_24.CEL
ET_b_337_AB1_10.CEL
Ctrl_104.CEL
Ctrl_136.CEL
PV_b_228_K1_35.CEL
Ctrl_174.CEL
ET_a_114.CEL
PMF_a_40.CEL
ET_b_203_C1.CEL
ET_b_399_AF1_1.CEL
Ctrl_1923.CEL
Ctrl_1899.CEL
Ctrl_1890.CEL
Ctrl_1914.CEL
ET_c_194.CEL
ET_c_213.CEL
ET_a_29.CEL
PV_a_17.CEL
PMF_c_669.CEL
ET_c_775.CEL
PMF_c_893.CEL
PV_c_780.CEL
PV_c_866.CEL
PMF_a_88.CEL
PMF_a_26.CEL
PV_c_321.CEL
PV_c_792.CEL
PMF_b_227_J1_92.CEL
PV_c_868.CEL
ET_c_878.CEL
PV_c_834.CEL
PV_c_755.CEL
ET_c_809.CEL
PV_c_804.CEL
PV_b_269_S1_11.CEL
PV_b_434_AG1_10.CEL
PV_b_233_L1_20.CEL
PV_b_283_U1_13.CEL
PV_a_4.CEL
ET_a_25.CEL
PV_a_200.CEL
Ctrl_284.CEL
PV_a_22.CEL
PV_a_103.CEL
PV_b_260_Q1_48.CEL
PV_b_304_Y1_10.CEL
ET_c_783.CEL
ET_c_830.CEL
PV_c_193.CEL
PV_c_232.CEL
PV_c_823.CEL
PV_c_870.CEL
PV_b_303_I1_79.CEL
PV_a_8.CEL
ET_b_205_E1_48.CEL
PV_b_280_Z1_18.CEL
PMF_b_306_AA1_24.CEL
PV_b_332_AC1_16.CEL
ET_a_112.CEL
PV_b_202_D1_95.CEL
PV_b_234_M1_87.CEL
PV_b_238_O1_90.CEL
PV_a_92.CEL
PV_c_788.CEL
PV_c_817.CEL
PV_a_215.CEL
PMF_a_59.CEL
PMF_b_301_V1_77.CEL
PV_b_348_AD1_86.CEL
PV_a_106.CEL
PMF_c_673.CEL
PMF_c_707.CEL
ET_c_813.CEL
PV_c_216.CEL
ET_c_773.CEL
ET_c_796.CEL
PV_c_871.CEL
PMF_a_47.CEL
Ctrl_1922.CEL
Ctrl_1912.CEL
Ctrl_1915.CEL
ET_b_235_N1_1.CEL
PV_b_258_F1_3.CEL
PV_a_27.CEL
ET_a_113.CEL
PV_a_44.CEL
PV_a_110.CEL
PMF_c_747.CEL
Ctrl_139.CEL
Ctrl_193.CEL
Ctrl_112.CEL
Ctrl_118.CEL
PMF_b_381_AE1_6.CEL
PV_b_285_T1_8.CEL
Ctrl_187.CEL
PV_c_219.CEL
PV_b_262_R1_1.CEL
PV_a_50.CEL
ET_a_61.CEL
ET_a_97.CEL
PV_a_76.CEL
PV_a_71.CEL
PV_a_66.CEL
PV_a_68.CEL
PV_a_33.CEL
PV_a_36.CEL
ET_b_212_H1.CEL
ET_a_52.CEL
ET_a_132.CEL
PV_a_210.CEL
PV_a_95.CEL
PV_a_14.CEL
PV_a_46.CEL
ET_a_100.CEL
PV_a_28.CEL
PV_a_48.CEL
JAK2mut
age
disease
batch
batch
1
2
3
disease
HD
ET
PV
PMF
age
80
30
JAK2mut
0
1
0
50
100
150
Figure 5.1.
Sample distances (euclidian distance) based on gene expression.
Patients
do not cluster based on the hierarchical clustering of their gene expression with the Ward
method.
==PAGE:65==
5 Discussion
53
The choice of cell types was guided by biological knowledge, expression patterns
observed from the deconvolution, and the avoidance of multicollinearity. Other groups
have approached the problem of delineating expression changes in mixture samples
with a similar but not identical solution [5,6].
Here, two different model designs were tested and compared against a baseline
model: A design with cell enrichment as a covariate and a design including an inter-
action term of cell enrichment and disease condition. The number of DEGs is affected
by the introduction of a composition covariate, as well as by the specific choice of
covariate. In some cases, the models with enrichment covariates are more specific,
detecting less DEGs, while in other cases, the adjusted models could detect more
DEGs than the unadjusted model. Similarly, introducing interaction terms reduces
the number of identified DEGs and GO terms.
HSC are found to be present in elevated numbers in the peripheral blood flow of
MPN patients [21]. Overrepresentation analysis of KEGG terms reveals that mod-
els adjusted for hematopoietic stem cells can correct for the effect of elevated HSC
cell count on the expression. Moreover, the adjusted models exclusively pick up on
expression signals, such as spliceosome pathway regulation and the JAK/STAT path-
way, which have been shown to be central for the MPN pathophysiology [24, 70].
It is known that the dysregulation of the JAK/STAT pathway negatively affects
hematopoiesis, inflammation, and cell apoptosis. Particularly, the activation of Janus
kinase-2 (JAK2) contributes to the expression of T-cell exhaustion programs in CD4
and CD8 positive T cells in the majority of patients with myelofibrosis [84].
Contrary to recent opinions, a positive association between MPN and neurode-
generative diseases could not be established [75].
The relevant KEGG pathways
(Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s disease) are found to be enriched in the healthy rather
than the MPN patients. However, only in one adjusted model a role for Parkinson’s
pathway in non-mutant MPN patients is shown. The MPN condition is associated
with two other major driver mutations (CALR, MPL) that are mutually exclusive
with the JAK2 mutation. It is unknown to what extent the JAK2-negative patients
may carry other major MPN mutations, and a link between these mutations and
neurodegeneration still needs to be established.
Studies at the single cell level have demonstrated that the increased produc-
tion of inflammatory cytokines results from both an increase in the percentage of
cytokine-secreting cells, as well as augmented cytokine secretion per cell in MPN
patients [85, 86].
Independent studies have proved a significant enrichment of in-
flammatory pathways in MPN compared to healthy donors [87]. Here, the adjusted
models for CD4 Score, Myeloid progenitor (CMP, GMP) and HSC, and HSC and
thrombocytes (megakaryocytes, platelets) exclusively pick up the enrichment of cy-
tokine pathways in MPN patients after correcting for composition changes.
The
thrombocyte and CD4+ & Thrombocyte-adjusted models pick up cell adhesion and
chemokine pathways in MPN patients.
Similarly, analysis of the adjusted models that include interaction terms reveals
that terms of cytokine production are enriched in CD4+ interaction models, and
cell adhesion pathways are enriched in platelet interaction models. Moreover, the
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Discussion
interaction models reveal that the expression patterns of two genes, GADD34 and
LPS3, differ significantly between MPN and healthy samples in CD4+ T cells, po-
tentially promoting the secretion of interleukin and other cytokines and controlling
T cell death or survival in MPN [77–80].
The formation of cell aggregates such as platelets-platelets, leukocyte-platelets,
and erythrocytes-erythrocytes in MPN for one, impairs blood flow, secondly pushes
the cells towards the vascular epithelium where they interact with transformed ep-
ithelial cells and become dysregulated, but also the immediate interaction of the cells
in the cell-complex promotes their activation or suppression [22].
The activated platelets overproduce cytokines, whereas CD8+ T cells become
suppressed by interacting with platelets. This suppression contributes to the impaired
ability of the immune system to fight the MPN disease as well as other infections
(bacterial, viral, etc.) [88]. This could explain why immune-related pathways are,
in general, downregulated in the functional analyses (GSEA) of MPN compared to
healthy.
The balanced production of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines assures the
normal function of the organism and maintains the ability to fight infections and
other abnormal agents, such as cancer cells.
Dysregulation of the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines transforms an inflammatory reaction that, under normal
conditions, aims at eliminating harmful agents and fostering recovery into a persistent
state of inflammation. Moreover, dysregulation of cell adhesion molecules in the blood
and bone marrow microenvironment has been shown to contribute to the cancerous
modification of hematopoietic stem cells [89]. This could play a role in the leukemic
transformation of MPN patients.
The utilized GSEA method revealed many more interesting terms, but they are
not presented in this research for the sake of conciseness. To briefly mention a few,
Diabetes Mellitus and viral, bacterial, and parasite infection pathways were also iden-
tified, which are closely associated with the altered immune landscape in MPN [75,90].
During the exploration of the three classical MPN conditions (ET, PV, PMF)
with composition aware DEA, functional terms such as myeloid cell activation, de-
granulation, cell death, and mitochondrial pathways are found to play a central role
in distinguishing the three conditions. Furthermore, the negative enrichment of im-
mune response-related pathways in all three contrasts suggests that all three diseases
suffer from an overstimulated yet inadequate immune state.
The biological interpretation of linear regression model designs, using functional
annotation results as a guide is a complex task. On one hand, GSEA parses huge lists
of DEGs and yields functional annotation, which allows for biologically meaningful
interpretation without particular knowledge of the function of each gene. Since net-
works of genes make up biological processes, GSEA is less susceptible to single gene
fluctuations. However, the annotation of sets is not always obvious, and pathways
that might seem irrelevant can play a major role in the disease under investigation.
During the investigation of functional pathways for individual disease states carried
out in this thesis, the pathway of response to lipid was shown to be of particular
interest, even though the name of this gene set did not seem relevant. It is not always
==PAGE:67==
5 Discussion
55
straightforward which terms should be selected and analyzed further. Searching only
for pathway terms that include certain words can be heavily biased and limit the
search.
Lastly, functional analysis in interaction models augmented with a clustering
methodology reveals covariate celltype specific pathways.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
mRNA expression analysis allows for the identification of genes and gene networks
associated with various phenotypes or diseases. However, when analyzing expression
data from peripheral blood samples, significant challenges arise due to the complex na-
ture of blood composition. This complexity emerges from the presence of diverse cell
populations whose proportions vary not only between healthy individuals and those
with diseases like Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), but also among individuals
within each group.
Changes in the quantity of cells make the detection of alterations that occur at the
expression level of the cell’s genetic program challenging. The aim of this thesis was
to address the limitations posed by compositional effects in bulk mRNA expression
analysis, particularly in the context of MPN. The central hypothesis of this project
is that incorporating proxies representing disease-relevant cell abundances into linear
models for differential expression analysis mitigates these compositional effects. By
doing so, the aim was to disentangle the confounding influences of cellular composition
and obtain a more accurate characterization of molecular changes in mixed samples.
This work demonstrates that models accounting for cell type enrichment signifi-
cantly impact the outcomes of both differential expression analysis (DEA) and gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA). Specifically, we observed that including cell type
enrichment as covariates in linear regression models improved the area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (auROC), and F1-score, and led to the iden-
tification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that may have been overlooked in
unadjusted models
Furthermore, our analysis of MPN blood samples revealed a generalized inflam-
mation state and dysregulation of the immune system in MPN patients. Notably,
specific genes were identified that are expressed by individual cell types and that may
play central roles in disease progression. Additionally, composition-aware functional
analysis uncovered both known and novel pathways implicated in MPN pathogenesis,
offering potential therapeutic and diagnostic targets for further exploration.
In conclusion, by re-evaluating existing MPN microarray data with methods pre-
sented here, an improved differential gene expression analysis of MPN and other
mixture samples can be achieved. Hopefully, the findings of this project can advance
our understanding of MPN biology and help to bridge the gap in the current practice
of blood and other mixture sample analysis.
==PAGE:70==
58
6 Conclusion
6.1
Limitations
The complexity of heterogeneous tissues pose major challenges in achieving complete
accuracy and precision in DEA outcomes.
Furthermore, the reliance on existing
microarray data, while cost-effective, may introduce biases and limitations inherent
to retrospective analyses.
It was shown here that using enrichment scores of any cell type improves the
model performance and produces altered DEA results.
However, GSEA revealed
that the covariate choice has a big impact on the functional analysis.
Therefore,
the selection of cell-type enrichment covariates for the regression model design needs
careful investigation and might be different depending on the tissue, disease, or goals
of the study. Specific domain knowledge of the topic and area of research should
guide this choice, followed by a thorough validation.
Here, a basic validation method is proposed and showcased. However, a more
advanced and meticulous validation that expands on more model designs and on
sum score covariates would greatly benefit the understanding of more complex model
designs.
Cell composition-aware DEA is shown to produce in some cases less DEGs, and
in few cases more DEGs. The same is true for the GSEA method and the number of
enriched pathways. The models can not be judged solely based on counts of either
DEGs or significant functional terms. The interpretation of the model design with
functional annotation (GSEA method) is a good alternative. However, it comes with
its own limitations:
(a) GSEA can yield hundreds of enriched terms. To parse the big amount of data a
clustering method can be utilized as shown in this work but domain knowledge
is still needed to filter through the results.
(b) Functional enrichment results are not always straightforward and are found to
often be contradicting.
Therefore, composition-aware differential gene expression analysis can greatly ben-
efit from further endeavors and research on the topic.
6.2
Future Research
Moving forward, several promising avenues for future research emerge from this study.
These are listed here:
Computational Perspectives
• Optimization of the validation method by expanding it to test whether summing
related populations of cells into one score (e.g., CD4+ T mem, CD4+ T cells,
etc.) impacts the model performance.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Future Research
59
• Expansion of the framework and models to assign DEGs to their cell type of
origin. This has been approached by others (csSAM, CellCode), but has not
yet been fully utilized in studies of expression in mixture samples [4,40].
• The study briefly addresses the formation of cell complexes, such as platelet
aggregates or platelet-leukocyte complexes in the blood of MPN patients. These
could be further analyzed using computational tools for cell-to-cell interactions.
Biological Perspectives
• Building on findings in this project to further investigate a potential role of
mitochondria in the ET, PV, and PMF assessment. Similarly, assessing cell
type apoptosis, specifically T-cell apoptosis, and its potential role in the immune
deficiency of MPN patients.
==PAGE:72==
60
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
J. M. Basgen, S. Rozen, and S. Nicholas, “Comparison of Methods for Counting
Cells in Tissue Sections,” Microscopy and Microanalysis, vol. 11, no. S02, 2005.
[2]
B. Brando, D. Barnett, G. Janossy, F. Mandy, B. Autran, G. Rothe, B. Scarpati,
G. D. . Avanzo, J. Luc, D. . Hautcourt, R. Lenkei, G. Schmitz, A. Kunkl, R. Chi-
anese, S. Papa, and J. W. Gratama, “Cytofluorometric Methods for Assessing
Absolute Numbers of Cell Subsets in Blood,” Journal of Quantitative Cell Sci-
ence, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 327–346, 2002.
[3]
D. Cadena-Herrera, J. E. Esparza-De Lara, N. D. Ramírez-Ibañez, C. A. López-
Morales, N. O. Pérez, L. F. Flores-Ortiz, and E. Medina-Rivero, “Validation of
three viable-cell counting methods: Manual, semi-automated, and automated,”
Biotechnology Reports, vol. 7, 2015.
[4]
M. Chikina, E. Zaslavsky, and S. C. Sealfon, “CellCODE: A robust latent variable
approach to differential expression analysis for heterogeneous cell populations,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 31, pp. 1584–1591, 5 2015.
[5]
C. P. Shannon, C. X. Yang, and S. J. Tebbutt, “A bloody primer: Analysis of
RNA-seq from tissue admixtures,” in Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1712,
2018.
[6]
F. Ferraro, C. Fevga, V. Bonifati, W. Mandemakers, A. Mahfouz, and M. Rein-
ders, “Correcting Differential Gene Expression Analysis for Cyto-Architectural
Alterations in Substantia Nigra of Parkinson’s Disease Patients Reveals Known
and Potential Novel Disease-Associated Genes and Pathways,” Cells, 2022.
[7]
H. F. Lodish, A. Berk, S. L. Zipursky, P. Matsudaira, D. Baltimore, and D. James,
Molecular Cell Biology, 7th edition, vol. 5. 2013.
[8]
M. Schena, D. Shalon, R. W. Davis, and P. O. Brown, “Quantitative Monitoring
of Gene Expression Patterns with a Complementary DNA Microarray,” Science,
vol. 270, no. 5235, 1995.
[9]
C. A. Afshari, “Perspective: Microarray technology, seeing more than spots,” in
Endocrinology, vol. 143, 2002.
==PAGE:74==
62
Bibliography
[10] J. R. Pollack, “A perspective on DNA microarrays in pathology research and
practice,” in American Journal of Pathology, vol. 171, 2007.
[11] G. K. Smyth, “Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differen-
tial expression in microarray experiments,” Statistical Applications in Genetics
and Molecular Biology, vol. 3, no. 1, 2004.
[12] J. Lu, J. K. Tomfohr, and T. B. Kepler, “Identifying differential expression in
multiple SAGE libraries: An overdispersed log-linear model approach,” BMC
Bioinformatics, vol. 6, 2005.
[13] W. Hatfield, S. Hung, P. Baldi, G. W. Hatfield, S.-P. Hung, and P. Baldi, “Differ-
ential analysis of DNA microarray gene expression data,” Molecular Microbiology,
vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 871–877, 2003.
[14] B. Phipson, S. Lee, I. J. Majewski, W. S. Alexander, and G. K. Smyth, “ROBUST
HYPERPARAMETER ESTIMATION PROTECTS AGAINST HYPERVARI-
ABLE GENES AND IMPROVES POWER TO DETECT DIFFERENTIAL EX-
PRESSION 1,” The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 946–963,
2016.
[15] D. Repsilber, S. Kern, A. Telaar, G. Walzl, G. F. Black, J. Selbig, S. K. Parida,
S. H. Kaufmann, and M. Jacobsen, “Biomarker discovery in heterogeneous tis-
sue samples -taking the in-silico deconfounding approach,” BMC Bioinformatics,
vol. 11, 2010.
[16] P. Brodin and M. M. Davis, “Human immune system variation,” Nature Reviews
Immunology, pp. 21–27, 2016.
[17] A. M. Gorman, “Neuronal cell death in neurodegenerative diseases: Recurring
themes around protein handling: Apoptosis Review Series,” Journal of Cellular
and Molecular Medicine, vol. 12, no. 6A, 2008.
[18] S. M. Ansell and R. H. Vonderheide, “Cellular Composition of the Tumor
Microenvironment,” American Society of Clinical Oncology Educational Book,
vol. 33, 2013.
[19] G. Meng, W. Tang, E. Huang, Z. Li, and H. Feng, “A comprehensive assessment
of cell type-specific differential expression methods in bulk data,” 2023.
[20] M. K. Jaakkola and L. L. Elo, “Estimating cell type-specific differential expres-
sion using deconvolution,” Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–11,
2022.
[21] W. C. Wu, H. W. Sun, H. T. Chen, J. Liang, X. J. Yu, C. Wu, Z. Wang,
and L. Zheng, “Circulating hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells are myeloid-
biased in cancer patients,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, vol. 111, no. 11, 2014.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
63
[22] T. Barbui, G. Finazzi, and A. Falanga, “Myeloproliferative neoplasms and throm-
bosis,” 2013.
[23] G. Greenfield, M. F. McMullin, and K. Mills, “Molecular pathogenesis of the
myeloproliferative neoplasms,” 2021.
[24] X. Hu, J. Li, M. Fu, X. Zhao, and W. Wang, “The JAK/STAT signaling pathway:
from bench to clinic,” Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy, 2021.
[25] M. Mahmud, S. Vasireddy, K. Gowin, and A. Amaraneni, “Myeloproliferative
Neoplasms: Contemporary Review and Molecular Landscape,” Int. J. Mol. Sci,
2023.
[26] T. Barbui, J. Thiele, H. Gisslinger, H. M. Kvasnicka, A. M. Vannucchi,
P. Guglielmelli, A. Orazi, and A. Tefferi, “The 2016 WHO classification and
diagnostic criteria for myeloproliferative neoplasms: document summary and in-
depth discussion,” Blood Cancer Journal, vol. 8, p. 15, 2018.
[27] M. A. Elliott and A. Tefferi, “Thrombosis and haemorrhage in polycythaemia
vera and essential thrombocythaemia,” 2005.
[28] G. M. Dores, R. E. Curtis, M. S. Linet, and L. M. Morton, “Cause-specific
mortality following polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primary
myelofibrosis in the US population, 2001–2017,” 2021.
[29] J. M. Klco, R. Vij, F. H. Kreisel, A. Hassan, and J. L. Frater, “Molecular Pathol-
ogy of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms,” Am J Clin Pathol, vol. 133, pp. 602–615,
2010.
[30] N. Mende and E. Laurenti, “Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells outside the
bone marrow: where, when, and why,” 2021.
[31] D. G. Kent and A. R. Green, “Order Matters: The Order of Somatic Muta-
tions Influences Cancer Evolution,” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine,
2017.
[32] L. F. Ocias, M. O. Holmström, C. H. Riley, C. L. Andersen, D. Rønnov-Jessen,
J. Starklint, M. Frederiksen, M. S. Steffensen, O. W. Bjerrum, S. Farmer,
T. Mourits-Andersen, H. C. Hasselbalch, and T. S. Larsen, “Status og perspek-
tiver for behandling af de kroniske myeloproliferative neoplasier.,” Ugeskrift for
laeger, vol. 177, no. 19, 2015.
[33] N. Williams, J. Lee, L. Moore, J. E. Baxter, J. Hewinson, K. J. Dawson, A. Men-
zies, A. L. Godfrey, A. R. Green, P. J. Campbell, and J. Nangalia, “Driver mu-
tation acquisition in utero and childhood followed by lifelong clonal evolution
underlie myeloproliferative neoplasms,” Blood, vol. 136, 2020.
==PAGE:76==
64
Bibliography
[34] R. M. Shallis, R. Wang, A. Davidoff, X. Ma, N. A. Podoltsev, and A. M. Zeidan,
“Epidemiology of the classical myeloproliferative neoplasms: The four corners of
an expansive and complex map,” 2020.
[35] J. How, J. S. Garcia, and A. Mullally, “Biology and therapeutic targeting of
molecular mechanisms in MPNs,” 2023.
[36] S. Ghaffari, K. J. Bouchonville, E. Saleh, R. E. Schmidt, S. M. Offer, and S. Sinha,
“BEDwARS: a robust Bayesian approach to bulk gene expression deconvolution
with noisy reference signatures,” Genome Biology, vol. 24, no. 1, 2023.
[37] R. Gaujoux and C. Seoighe, “Gene expression CellMix: a comprehensive toolbox
for gene expression deconvolution,” Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 17, pp. 2211–
2212, 2013.
[38] T. Gong and J. D. Szustakowski, “Gene expression DeconRNASeq: a statistical
framework for deconvolution of heterogeneous tissue samples based on mRNA-
Seq data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1083–1085, 2013.
[39] G. J. Hunt, S. Freytag, M. Bahlo, and J. A. Gagnon-Bartsch, “Gene expression
dtangle: accurate and robust cell type deconvolution,” Bioinformatics, vol. 35,
no. 12, pp. 2093–2099, 2019.
[40] S. S. Shen-Orr, R. Tibshirani, P. Khatri, D. L. Bodian, F. Staedtler, N. M. Perry,
T. Hastie, M. M. Sarwal, M. M. Davis, and A. J. Butte, “Cell type–specific gene
expression differences in complex tissues,” Nature Methods, pp. 287–289, 2010.
[41] D. Tsoucas, R. Dong, H. Chen, Q. Zhu, G. Guo, and G.-C. Yuan, “Accurate
estimation of cell-type composition from gene expression data,” Nature Commu-
nications, 2019.
[42] A. M. Newman, C. B. Steen, C. Long Liu, A. J. Gentles, A. A. Chaudhuri,
F. Scherer, M. S. Khodadoust, M. S. Esfahani, B. A. Luca, D. Steiner, M. Diehn,
and A. A. Alizadeh, “Determining cell type abundance and expression from bulk
tissues with digital cytometry,” Nature Biotechnology, pp. 773–782, 2019.
[43] F. Vallania, A. Tam, S. Lofgren, S. Schaffert, T. D. Azad, E. Bongen, W. Haynes,
M. Alsup, M. Alonso, M. Davis, E. Engleman, and P. Khatri, “Leveraging het-
erogeneity across multiple datasets increases cell-mixture deconvolution accuracy
and reduces biological and technical biases,” Nature Communications, 2018.
[44] D. Aran, Z. Hu, and A. J. Butte, “xCell: Digitally portraying the tissue cellular
heterogeneity landscape,” Genome Biology, vol. 18, no. 1, 2017.
[45] A. M. Newman and A. A. Alizadeh, “High-throughput genomic profiling of
tumor-infiltrating leukocytes,” 2016.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
65
[46] K. A. Tran, V. Addala, R. L. Johnston, D. Lovell, A. Bradley, L. T. Koufariotis,
S. Wood, S. Z. Wu, D. Roden, G. Al-Eryani, A. Swarbrick, E. D. Williams, J. V.
Pearson, O. Kondrashova, and N. Waddell, “Performance of tumour microenvi-
ronment deconvolution methods in breast cancer using single-cell simulated bulk
mixtures,” Nature Communications, 2023.
[47] F. Avila Cobos, J. Alquicira-Hernandez, J. E. Powell, P. Mestdagh, and
K. De Preter, “Benchmarking of cell type deconvolution pipelines for transcrip-
tomics data,” Nature Communications, vol. 11, p. 5650, 11 2020.
[48] D. Aran, “Cell-type enrichment analysis of bulk transcriptomes using xcell,” in
Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 2120, 2020.
[49] F. Marchi, F. Sckaff, X. Cao, R. C. Ribeiro, J. E. Rubnitz, S. B. Pounds, and J. K.
Lamba, “A Cibersortx Signature Predicts Outcome in Pediatric AML Patients,”
Blood, vol. 140, no. Supplement 1, 2022.
[50] G. J. Sutton, D. Poppe, R. K. Simmons, K. Walsh, U. Nawaz, R. Lister, J. A.
Gagnon-Bartsch, and I. Voineagu, “Comprehensive evaluation of deconvolution
methods for human brain gene expression,” Nature communications, 3 2022.
[51] Y. Im and Y. Kim, “A Comprehensive Overview of RNA Deconvolution Methods
and Their Application,” 2023.
[52] F. A. Cobos, J. Vandesompele, P. Mestdagh, and K. De Preter, “Computational
deconvolution of transcriptomics data from mixed cell populations,” Bioinfor-
matics, vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 1969–1979, 2018.
[53] K. Yoshihara, M. Shahmoradgoli, E. Martínez, R. Vegesna, H. Kim, W. Torres-
Garcia, V. Treviño, H. Shen, P. W. Laird, D. A. Levine, S. L. Carter, G. Getz,
K. Stemke-Hale, G. B. Mills, and R. G. W. Verhaak, “Inferring tumour purity
and stromal and immune cell admixture from expression data,” Nature Commu-
nications, 2013.
[54] P. D. Thomas, “Chapter 2 The Gene Ontology and the Meaning of Biological
Function,” Methis in Molecular Biology, vol. 1446, pp. 15–24, 2016.
[55] A. Subramanian, P. Tamayo, V. K. Mootha, S. Mukherjee, B. L. Ebert, M. A.
Gillette, A. Paulovich, S. L. Pomeroy, T. R. Golub, E. S. Lander, and J. P.
Mesirov, “Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for inter-
preting genome-wide expression profiles,” PNAS, 2005.
[56] J. Reimand, R. Isserlin, V. Voisin, M. Kucera, C. Tannus-Lopes, A. Rostamian-
far, L. Wadi, M. Meyer, J. Wong, C. Xu, D. Merico, and G. D. Bader, “Pathway
enrichment analysis and visualization of omics data using g:Profiler, GSEA, Cy-
toscape and EnrichmentMap,” Nature protocols, pp. 482–517, 2019.
==PAGE:78==
66
Bibliography
[57] G. Korotkevich, V. Sukhov, N. Budin, B. Shpak, M. N. Artyomov, and A. Ser-
gushichev, “Fast gene set enrichment analysis,” Biorxiv, 2021.
[58] G. Yu, “Gene ontology semantic similarity analysis using GOSemSim,” in Meth-
ods in Molecular Biology, vol. 2117, 2020.
[59] J. Z. Wang, Z. Du, R. Payattakool, P. S. Yu, and C.-F. Chen, “A new method
to measure the semantic similarity of GO terms,” Bioinformatics, vol. 23, no. 10,
pp. 1274–1281, 2007.
[60] A. R. Abbas, D. Baldwin, Y. Ma, W. Ouyang, A. Gurney, F. Martin, S. Fong,
M. van Lookeren Campagne, P. Godowski, P. M. Williams, A. C. Chan, and
H. F. Clark, “Immune response in silico (IRIS): Immune-specific genes identified
from a compendium of microarray expression data,” Genes and Immunity, vol. 6,
no. 4, 2005.
[61] N. G. Orfanakis, R. E. Ostlund, C. R. Bishop, and J. W. Athens, “Normal blood
leukocyte concentration values.,” American journal of clinical pathology, vol. 53,
no. 5, 1970.
[62] I. T. Jolliffe, “Principal Component Analysis, Second Edition,” Encyclopedia of
Statistics in Behavioral Science, vol. 30, no. 3, 2002.
[63] M. E. Ritchie, B. Phipson, D. Wu, Y. Hu, C. W. Law, W. Shi, and G. K.
Smyth, “Limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and
microarray studies,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 43, no. 7, 2015.
[64] K. Korthauer, P. K. Kimes, C. Duvallet, A. Reyes, A. Subramanian, M. Teng,
C. Shukla, E. J. Alm, and S. C. Hicks, “A practical guide to methods controlling
false discoveries in computational biology,” Genome Biology, vol. 20, no. 1, 2019.
[65] M. Gregorich, S. Strohmaier, D. Dunkler, and G. Heinze, “Regression with highly
correlated predictors: Variable omission is not the solution,” International Jour-
nal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 18, no. 8, 2021.
[66] Y.-K. Tu, V. Clerehugh, and M. S. Gilthorpe, “Collinearity in linear regression is
a serious problem in oral health research,” Eur J Oral Sci, vol. 112, pp. 389–397,
2004.
[67] H. Midi, S. K. Sarkar, and S. Rana, “Collinearity diagnostics of binary logistic
regression model,” Journal of Interdisciplinary Mathematics, vol. 13, no. 3, 2010.
[68] G. Yu, F. Li, Y. Qin, X. Bo, Y. Wu, and S. Wang, “GOSemSim: An R package
for measuring semantic similarity among GO terms and gene products,” Bioin-
formatics, vol. 26, no. 7, 2010.
[69] I. Kerseviciute and J. Gordevicius, “aPEAR: an R package for autonomous
visuali-sation of pathway enrichment networks,” bioRxiv, 2023.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
67
[70] M. Hautin, C. Mornet, A. Chauveau, D. Bernard, L. Corcos, and E. Lippert,
“cancers Splicing Anomalies in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms: Paving the Way
for New Therapeutic Venues,” MDPI Cancers, 2020.
[71] H. C. Hasselbalch, “Perspectives on chronic inflammation in essential thrombo-
cythemia, polycythemia vera, and myelofibrosis: Is chronic inflammation a trig-
ger and driver of clonal evolution and development of accelerated atherosclerosis
and second cancer?,” 2012.
[72] H. C. Hasselbalch, “Chronic inflammation as a promotor of mutagenesis in es-
sential thrombocythemia, polycythemia vera and myelofibrosis. A human inflam-
mation model for cancer development?,” 2013.
[73] H. C. Hasselbalch and M. E. Bjørn, “MPNs as Inflammatory Diseases: The
Evidence, Consequences, and Perspectives,” 2015.
[74] Z. Gu, “Complex heatmap visualization,” iMeta, vol. 1, no. 3, 2022.
[75] H. C. Hasselbalch, V. Skov, L. Kjær, T. L. Sørensen, C. Ellervik, and T. Wie-
necke, “Myeloproliferative blood cancers as a human neuroinflammation model
for development of Alzheimer’s disease: Evidences and perspectives,” 2020.
[76] C. H. Riley, M. K. Jensen, M. K. Brimnes, H. C. Hasselbalch, O. W. Bjerrum,
P. T. Straten, and I. M. Svane, “Brief report Increase in circulating CD4 CD25
Foxp3 T cells in patients with Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloproliferative
neoplasms during treatment with IFN,” Blood, vol. 118, no. 8, pp. 2170–2173,
2011.
[77] Chen Shaodan, Wang Qiulei, Wang Hui, and Xia Sheng, “Endoplasmic reticulum
stress in T cell-mediated disease,” Scandinavian Journal of Immunology, vol. 98,
no. 3, 2023.
[78] D. Mukherjee, L. S. Bercz, M. A. Torok, and T. A. Mace, “Regulation of Cellular
Immunity by Activating Transcription Factor 4,” Immuno Lett, 2020.
[79] Y. Shinjo, K. Makide, K. Satoh, F. Fukami, A. Inoue, K. Kano, Y. Otani,
T. Ohwada, and J. Aoki, “Lysophosphatidylserine suppresses IL-2 production
in CD4 T cells through LPS3/GPR174,” Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications, vol. 494, no. 1-2, 2017.
[80] M. J. Barnes and J. G. Cyster, “Lysophosphatidylserine suppression of T-cell
activation via GPR174 requires Gαs proteins,” Immunology and Cell Biology,
vol. 96, no. 4, 2018.
[81] S. Avram, A. Lupu, S. Angelescu, N. Olteanu, and D. Mut-Popescu, “Abnormal-
ities of platelet aggregation in chronic myeloproliferative disorders,” Journal of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, vol. 5, no. 1, 2001.
==PAGE:80==
68
Bibliography
[82] A. M. Florena, C. Tripodo, A. D. Bernardo, E. Lannitto, C. Guarnotta, R. Por-
casi, S. Ingrao, V. Abbadessa, and V. Franco, “Different immunophenotypical
apoptotic profiles characterise megakaryocytes of essential thrombocythaemia
and primary myelofibrosis,” Journal of Clinical Pathology, vol. 62, no. 4, 2009.
[83] C. H. Riley, M. Hansen, M. K. Brimnes, H. C. Hasselbalch, O. W. Bjerrum,
P. thor Straten, I. Marie Svane, M. Krogh Jensen, and C. Caroline Hassel-
balch Riley, “Expansion of circulating CD56 bright natural killer cells in patients
with JAK2-positive chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms during treatment with
interferon-a,” European Journal of Haematology, vol. 94, no. 3, pp. 227–234,
2014.
[84] I. Veletic, S. Prijic, T. Manshouri, G. M. Nogueras-Gonzalez, S. Verstovsek, and
Z. Estrov, “Altered T-cell subset repertoire affects treatment outcome of patients
with myelofibrosis,” haematologica |, vol. 106, no. 9, 2021.
[85] M. Kleppe, M. Kwak, P. Koppikar, M. Riester, M. Keller, L. Bastian, T. Hri-
cik, N. Bhagwat, A. S. McKenney, E. Papalexi, O. Abdel-Wahab, R. Rampal,
S. Marubayashi, J. J. Chen, V. Romanet, J. S. Fridman, J. Bromberg, J. Teruya-
Feldstein, M. Murakami, T. Radimerski, F. Michor, R. Fan, and R. L. Levine,
“JAK-STAT pathway activation in malignant and nonmalignant cells contributes
to MPN pathogenesis and therapeutic response,” Cancer Discovery, vol. 5, no. 3,
2015.
[86] J. C. Wang, H. Sindhu, C. Chen, A. Kundra, M. I. Kafeel, C. Wong, and
S. Lichter, “Immune Derangements in Patients with Myelofibrosis: The Role
of Treg, Th17, and sIL2Rα,” PLoS ONE, 2015.
[87] A. Rodriguez-Meira, G. Buck, S. A. Clark, B. J. Povinelli, V. Alcolea, E. Louka,
S. McGowan, A. Hamblin, N. Sousos, N. Barkas, A. Giustacchini, B. Psaila,
S. E. W. Jacobsen, S. Thongjuea, and A. J. Mead, “Unravelling Intratumoral
Heterogeneity through High-Sensitivity Single-Cell Mutational Analysis and Par-
allel RNA Sequencing,” Molecular Cell, vol. 73, no. 6, 2019.
[88] A. Micaela, C. Simões, M. O. Holmström, P. Aehnlich, A. Rahbech, M. J. W.
Peeters, A. Radziwon-Balicka, C. Zamora, T. W. Klausen, V. Skov, L. Kjaer,
C. Ellervik, D. E. Fassi, S. Vidal, H. C. Hasselbalch, M. H. Andersen, P. T.
Straten, L. Arranz, and M. P. Radsak, “Patients With Myeloproliferative Neo-
plasms Harbor High Frequencies of CD8 T Cell-Platelet Aggregates Associated
With T Cell Suppression,” Article, vol. 13, p. 1, 2022.
[89] R. Windisch, N. Pirschtat, C. Kellner, L. Chen-Wichmann, J. Lausen, A. Humpe,
D. S. Krause, and C. Wichmann, “cancers Oncogenic Deregulation of Cell Adhe-
sion Molecules in Leukemia,”
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
69
[90] A. R. Landtblom, T. M.-L. Andersson, ￿. Paul, W. Dickman, ￿. Karin, E. Smedby,
S. Eloranta, ￿. Nurgul Batyrbekova, J. Samuelsson, M. Björkholm, and ￿. Ma-
lin Hultcrantz, “Risk of infections in patients with myeloproliferative neo-
plasmsâ€”a population-based cohort study of 8363 patients,” Leukemia, vol. 35,
pp. 476–484, 2021.
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
Appendices
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
Extra Figures
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. a. The distribution of age in the three MPN conditions. PMF is associated with
older age. b. Left plot: the data are unbalanced with the most patients for PV. Top right:
PV patients rarely carry the JAK2 mutation; in this dataset, only 1 PV patient is JAK2
positive. Bottom right: All healthy patients are in the first batch, which can be a source of
significant batch effects.
==PAGE:86==
74
Appendix Extra Figures
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2. The received data are already log-transformed. The first principal component
(PC1) of the data explains 30% of the observed variability, minor separation of the data
points due to batch group is observed along PC1. a. In each row, the expression density
of a random gene across samples is plotted. The gene expression values were subjected to
a mathematical transformation by squaring each value. The left plots show the squared
expression, while the right plots show the expression in the format it was received. The log-
transformed Affymetrix intensity values are expected to range from 2 to 15. Therefore, the
data is already log-transformed. b. Expression of two random genes across samples stratified
by condition (red dotted curve is the overall density curve of the gene in all samples).c.PCA
plot before batch correction of the data. The first principal component (PC1) of the data
explains 30% of the observed variability; minor separation of the data points due to batch
group is observed along PC1. b. PCA plot after batch correction of the data. The batch
effect needs to be accounted for and removed during the modeling phase.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix Extra Figures
75
Figure 3. The first principal components capture 30% of the data variability, while the
rest of the first 50 principal components individually explain a relatively small portion of
the total variability. This is a result of the high complexity and subtle patterns in the data.
(a) Accuracy pheatmap
(b) Recall pheatmap
Figure 4.
Simulations were used to choose the best performing parameters for creating
synthetic DEGs.
==PAGE:88==
76
Appendix Extra Figures
Figure 5. Inferred enrichment scores for cell types (y-axis) and true cell type abundance (x-
axis) correlate well for most cell types (plots 1 −4). However, the tool has some limitations
as some cell types are diﬀicult to infer (plot 5).
Figure 6. Frequncies of cell types in the three different simulated data
==PAGE:89==
Appendix Extra Figures
77
Basophils (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0
50
150
−2
0
1
2
−0.05
0.15
Q−Q Plot for Basophils
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Eosinophils (p 0.19)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.4
0.8
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.2
0.2
Q−Q Plot for Eosinophils
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Neutrophils (p 0.03)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0
15
30
−2
0
1
2
−0.05
0.05
Q−Q Plot for Neutrophils
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Monocytes (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.04
0.08
0
100
−2
0
1
2
0.00
0.06
Q−Q Plot for Monocytes
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Mast.cells (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0
40
100
−2
0
1
2
−0.01
0.03
Q−Q Plot for Mast.cells
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
DC (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.12
0
30
60
−2
0
1
2
−0.02
0.06
Q−Q Plot for DC
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD4.Tmem (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
20
−2
0
1
2
−0.1
0.2
Q−Q Plot for CD4.Tmem
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD4.Tnaive (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.20
0.00
Q−Q Plot for CD4.Tnaive
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD4.Tcells (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.1
0.1
Q−Q Plot for CD4.Tcells
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD4.Tcm (p 0.17)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0
30
60
−2
0
1
2
−0.10
0.05
Q−Q Plot for CD4.Tcm
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD4.Tem (p 0.01)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.15
0.30
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.15
0.05
Q−Q Plot for CD4.Tem
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD8.Tnaive (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.06
0.12
0
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.04
0.04
Q−Q Plot for CD8.Tnaive
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD8.Tcells (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.15
0.30
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.1
0.1
Q−Q Plot for CD8.Tcells
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD8.Tcm (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.10
0.10
Q−Q Plot for CD8.Tcm
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CD8.Tem (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Q−Q Plot for CD8.Tem
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
B.cells (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.15
0.30
0
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.10
0.10
Q−Q Plot for B.cells
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
B.naive (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0
40
80
−2
0
1
2
−0.05
0.15
Q−Q Plot for B.naive
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
B.memory (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0.20
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.10
0.05
Q−Q Plot for B.memory
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
NKT (p 0.04)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
10
25
−2
0
1
2
−0.3
0.0
Q−Q Plot for NKT
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
NK (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.10
0.10
Q−Q Plot for NK
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Platelets (p 0.46)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.15
0.30
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.15
0.05
Q−Q Plot for Platelets
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
HSC (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.1
0.2
Q−Q Plot for HSC
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CLP (p 0.23)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.2
0.0
0.2
Q−Q Plot for CLP
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
CMP (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
40
80
−2
0
1
2
−0.2
0.1
Q−Q Plot for CMP
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
GMP (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
40
80
−2
0
1
2
−0.1
0.2
Q−Q Plot for GMP
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
MEP (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0
60
120
−2
0
1
2
0.00
0.10
Q−Q Plot for MEP
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Macrophages (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.00
0.10
0
40
80
−2
0
1
2
−0.05
0.10
Q−Q Plot for Macrophages
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Megakaryocytes (p 0.00)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.3
0.1
0.4
Q−Q Plot for Megakaryocyt
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Erythrocytes (p 0.53)
Scores
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0
20
40
−2
0
1
2
−0.2
0.0
Q−Q Plot for Erythrocytes
Theoretical Quantiles
Sample Quantiles
Figure 7. The distributions and q-q plots of the enrichment scores are plotted. The p-values
of the Shapiro-Wilk test are included in the histograms. The Shapiro-Wilk Test tests the
null hypothesis that the samples come from a normal distribution. P-values less than 0.05
reject the null hypothesis meaning that the data do not come from a normal distribution.
Only cell types included in the xCell run are shown.
==PAGE:90==
78
Appendix Extra Figures
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
Figure 8.
To compare the scores of celltypes between the different conditions, the non-
parametric Kruskal-Wallis test is chosen. This test does not assume a normal distribution
for the data nore equal variances. The result of this test is a p-value indicating if any of the
groups differs significantly from the others. To make all pairwise comparisons the method
Dunn test is used, which is a non-parametric alternative for pairwise comparisons after a
Kruskal-Wallis test. Bonferonni correction for multiple testing is used.
==PAGE:91==
==PAGE:92==
