==PAGE:1==
 DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Exploring socio-technical resilience in 
wind energy systems: Analysis of 
extreme weather mitigation strategies
Author
Marta Wioletta Czerwinska
DTU Wind-M-0752
February 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0752
February 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Julia Kirch Kirkegaard
Tom Cronin
Niels- Erik Clausen
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Marta Wioletta Czerwinska 
Title:
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind 
energy systems: Analysis of extreme 
weather mitigation strategies 
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
ii
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the in Department of Wind Energy &
Energy Systems, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Marta Wioletta Czerwińska - s213268
Signature
Date
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The thesis is initiated to explore how the Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI)
theoretical framework can assist in investigating how the current preparedness, dynamics
and efforts of the wind energy industry translate into the resilience of wind farms towards
extreme weather conditions in the face of climate changes. Existing social and technical
literature presents insufficient information on this particular issue. Therefore, this thesis
aims at filling this gap.
The thesis presents a novel research design that analyses the interviews with industry
experts to understand current dynamics in the wind energy industry towards two object
studies, namely icing and tropical cyclones.
Promising results of the analysis have been demonstrated by positioning the industry’s
current efforts on specific dimensions corresponding to key performance indicators that
are in compliance with RRI principles. The main outcome is that the wind energy industry
is mainly at the reflexive and tactical level of awareness, implementation and assessment
of RRI key performance indicators. Therefore, the limitations and recommendations ac-
cording to these dimensions were presented to outline potential future steps for the wind
energy industry. These results can assist the industry in improving wind farm resilience
in a more holistic manner.
iv
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I want to raise my appreciation to everyone who was involved in this thesis. First of all, I
am thankful for my team of supervisors, Julia Kirch Kirkegaard, Tom Cronin and Niels-Erik
Clause, whose guidance, expertise and motivation helped to a great extent in creating this
project. Secondly, I would like to thank all of the participants of the interviews that I built
my thesis on; their knowledge and commitment during conversations were irreplaceable.
I want to also to extend my heartfelt thanks to my family. To my parents, Piotr and Wioletta,
who always supported me through words of motivation and unwavering belief in me. To
my siblings, Wiktoria and Maks, for being by my side, especially at critical moments,
comforting and motivating me to keep going. I would like to thank my boyfriend Pawel
for making me laugh and fully supporting every day of this project. Your support and
understanding have meant the world to me. Finally, I would like to thank my friend Dominik
for listening every day about my progress and hardships.
For the request of any additional information, contact:
marta.czerwinska403@gmail.com
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Empirical background
5
2.1
Characteristic of climate and weather
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Extreme Weather Phenomena: Introduction and Characteristics
. . . . . .
6
2.3
Factors Generating Extreme Weather Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Variety of Extreme Weather Conditions in the World
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Literature Review
13
3.1
Impact of extreme weather conditions on renewable energy sources . . . . 13
3.2
Impact of Extreme Weather Conditions on Wind Energy Industry . . . . . . 13
3.3
Selection of case studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Gaps in the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Theoretical Framework
21
4.1
Introduction to Responsible Research and Innovation
. . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
The Need for an Integrated RRI Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Integrating RRI into Industry Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Methodology
29
5.1
Research design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Data analysis techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.4
Ethical considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6
Analysis of Case Studies Through the Lens of an Integrated RRI Model
37
6.1
Case Study Icing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6.2
Case Study Tropical Cyclones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Discussion and Conclusions
61
7.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
7.2
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Bibliography
68
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Climate change mitigation is driven by introducing renewable energy resources to ensure
more sustainable energy production. Two main technologies present as efficient alterna-
tive sources to conventional power plants, namely solar and wind. However, comparing
these two, wind turbines offer more capacity and are more efficient than solar panels [1]
[2].
Even though wind technology has been known for decades, firstly, it was used for simple
tasks such as grinding grain. Currently, wind energy is one of the main elements of the
global energy mix, covering wind farms onshore and offshore. Data from 2022 presents
the growth of this technology all over the world with 906 GW of installed capacity [3]. The
eastern part of the world, including China and India, has seen a significant increase in the
share of wind power in recent years; installed capacity in China reached 400 gigawatts
[4], while in India, 42 gigawatts [5] according to the data from the end of 2022. More
central parts of the world, especially Europe, also actively introduced wind power, which
at the end of 2022 accounted for 240 gigawatts [6]. The western part of the world is also
extensively investing in wind turbines, as in the United States, the installed power reached
144 gigawatts at the end of 2022 [7]. From these examples, it can be concluded that the
wind energy industry has grown in response to the need for more clean and affordable
energy.
Wind power refers to clean energy because it uses the natural flow of air to produce elec-
tricity, and because of this, it is highly dependent on weather conditions. Key factors
affecting the operation of wind turbines are the parameters of wind, such as speed, direc-
tion and turbulence [8]. However, there are many other meteorological parameters that
can influence the operation of wind turbines, like temperature, humidity or air pressure.
Therefore, the sensitivity of these constructions to various atmospheric conditions can
pose a challenge to the wind energy industry, especially in the face of the fact that human
activity visibly influences climate changes that, in turn, change weather patterns [9].
With the growing significance of wind power to society as an alternative energy source,
its resilience to weather conditions comes into question. Therefore, this thesis focuses
on not only technology but also moral considerations. Hence, it tries to look at this prob-
lem through the lenses of Research in Science and Technology Studies (STS) that is
presented in literature:
Research in Science and Technology Studies (STS) suggests that conceptions of respon-
sibility should build on the understanding that science and technology are not only tech-
nically but also socially and politically constituted [10].
In order to look at the broader perspective of the wind energy industry, it is decided to use
the theoretical framework of Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI), which presents
itself in literature as a model in research processes and innovations that takes into ac-
count reflexive and anticipatory approach aiming at consideration of social aspects and
integration of moral values on the early stages of projects [11].
Therefore, this master’s thesis aims to provide specific insight into the present state of
integration of RRI in the wind energy industry, focusing on the resilience of wind energy
technology to extreme weather conditions. In order to take a better look at the prepared-
ness of the wind energy industry, two main study objects of extreme phenomena, icing
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
1
==PAGE:10==
and tropical cyclones, are chosen.
1.1
Problem definition
The general definition of the problem is based on the fact that uncertainties of extreme
weather conditions have a visible influence on the wind energy industry in terms of re-
silience, siting decisions, interference in the energy supply, damage to the infrastructure,
decrease in energy efficiency and a need to adjust health and safety matters. Due to the
constant growth of this industry, more and more wind farms are being built all over the
world. Given the variety of locations of these infrastructures, it is not easy to create one
universal approach to develop and operate them.
Not only the location but also the complicated structure, including a significant number of
the wind energy industry stakeholders, makes it difficult to capture their perspective on the
issue of the extreme weather conditions on wind farms. As this industry covers various
stakeholders such as developers, manufacturers of the equipment, technical asset oper-
ators, technicians, authorities, local communities, scientists, environmental organisations
and many more, the issue lies in linking their goals and business to coordinate efforts and
decision-making in the realm of the resilience of wind energy.
Various matters related to regulations and energy policies in multiple countries and regions
may complicate the development and operation of wind farms. Changes in legislation and
energy strategies lead to uncertainties about how to handle the implications of increasingly
diverse weather conditions in wind power development.
Furthermore, wind energy projects usually need to be accepted by the local communities.
This approval is crucial to the success of the projects, especially when they are built
in areas prone to extreme weather events. The concerns from society related to the
resilience of wind farms lie in structural damage, which can cause danger to the safety
of the neighbourhood, power outages and impact on the environment. Therefore, it is
important to build wind turbines that are as resilient as possible so as not to negatively
affect the perspectives on this technology [12].
1.2
Research questions
This section presents the thesis’s scope by formulating the research questions. Therefore,
the main research question and supplementary questions are created to understand the
purpose of this thesis.
This thesis concentrates on the understanding of the wind energy industry preparedness
based on the evident problem of how the impact of climate change influences the occur-
rence and intensification of icing and tropical cyclones by using the theoretical framework
of RRI. The main scope is to assess how using this theoretical framework can help in
investigating not only the technical perspectives but also the social, ethical and environ-
mental in the context of the wind energy industry’s efforts to create resilient technology.
In order to unravel the idea of the main research question, it is broken into two supple-
mentary research questions.
The first supplementary research question focuses on finding the perspectives, dynamics
and preparedness of wind power industry experts with knowledge of extreme conditions
such as icing and tropical cyclones. Hence, the purpose of this supplementary question
is to identify activities, research, technologies and possible knowledge gaps through the
theoretical framework of RRI.
2
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:11==
The second supplementary research question focuses on how analysis through the RRI
theoretical framework can serve as a guide to identify specific actions and further initia-
tives to improve a more holistic approach to the challenges of extreme weather in the wind
energy industry.
In the Figure 1.1, the main research question and supporting research questions are pre-
sented.
Figure 1.1: Main and supplementary research questions
1.3
Structure of thesis
This thesis is divided into seven chapters. The main idea for each chapter’s content is
presented below.
Introduction in chapter 1 presents the main scope of the thesis by including context and
problem definition, research questions and the significance of the study.
Empirical background in chapter 2, contains all the collected data on climate, weather
and weather extremes with specific examples.
Literature review in chapter 3 outlines the impact of extreme weather conditions on
renewable energy with the impact on wind energy, selection of case studies based on
real-life examples and gaps in the literature.
Theoretical framework in chapter 4 presents the conceptual frame of this research and
its main components.
Methodology in chapter 5, describes research design, data collection methods, analysis
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
3
==PAGE:12==
techniques and ethical considerations.
Analysis of case studies in chapter 6 presents an analytical evaluation of the wind
energy industry under the issue of icing and tropical cyclones.
Discussion and conclusions in chapter 7 contain an interpretation of the results from
analysis and a final summary of the whole thesis.
4
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:13==
2
Empirical background
2.1
Characteristic of climate and weather
The difference between climate and weather is mainly the time scale. Weather in literature
is described as the current atmospheric state, whereas climate is an averaged perspective
of weather over a long period of time [13]. The climate is described as long-term because
it takes into account around 30 years, which is agreed by climate scientists as enough to
establish the average outcomes of the weather conditions [13]. The weather, on the other
hand, is described as short-term because it considers constantly changing parameters
such as atmospheric pressure, wind and rainfall. Weather is what we experience daily,
while climate is a historical and long-term perspective [13].
As the climate is a long-term observation of specific atmospheric conditions, it results from
a complex interaction between many forces, such as solar radiation [14], atmospheric
circulation, movement of ocean currents, land topography and other parameters [15].
The climate is defined by the statistical weather of a specific region, mainly by average
temperature and precipitation [16]. Additionally, characteristics of climate can be obtained
by parameters such as wind, humidity, atmospheric pressure, and cloud cover [16]. Not
only these parameters but also topography, distance from water reservoirs, and the loca-
tion on the land can influence climate [16].
The specified climate of the region is affecting the life of its inhabitants. Climate factors
such as solar radiation, temperature, rainfall and the length of vegetation period can de-
termine the type and quality of crops. With the use of climate data, farmers can make
decisions on types of crops, and harvesting plans, which is important for food availability
worldwide. [17] Not only food but also access to water is linked with climate character-
istics. Any changes in water cycles due to increased rainfalls, level of seas and high
temperatures can influence the access to drinking water, affecting human health. [18]
The main influential aspect of the changes in climate that can affect human health is a
rise in temperature. Extreme heat can affect air quality, spread different types of dis-
eases, and violate food and water safety. [19] There is also a link between climate and
energy. The main impacts of climate in terms of energy are increased electricity demand
through winters and summers, water access for conventional power plants and interfer-
ence in production due to extreme phenomena [20]. Therefore, the climate is crucial in
many areas of society’s daily lives.
Weather is the atmospheric condition that is happening at a specific place and time in the
world [21]. Additionally, it can be defined similarly to climate by specific meteorological
aspects, such as temperature, atmospheric pressure, precipitation, wind or humidity [22].
One of the main aspects of planning our daily activities is the weather forecast, as it can
impact decisions such as clothing choices, planning travels, water management, sports
activities, tourism, agriculture, construction of infrastructure, energy management and
lifesaving actions before natural disasters [22]. Therefore, understanding the weather
conditions is a fundamental aspect of daily life.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Extreme Weather Phenomena: Introduction and
Characteristics
To describe weather phenomena such as earthquakes, tropical cyclones, tornadoes and
so on, people often use the term ”extreme weather”. This is accurate, as these are all
examples of weather conditions that occur outside of what is considered normal and occur
only in particular circumstances. To precisely define extreme weather, it could be said that
it is something that deviates from typical weather patterns [23]. Literature provides a great
explanation of this term by describing examples from real life:
For some extreme weather events, the idea of what constitutes an extreme can vary
from place to place. It often depends on what region is used to experiencing and what
is prepared for. A 20-cm snowfall would be an extreme event for Washington, D.C., for
example, but not for Montreal. In Washington, such an event would come close to an
emergency. In Montreal, it would be merely an inconvenience. [23].
Many scientists are wondering if the weather is going to be more extreme due to climate
changes [24], [25], [26]. To help answer this question, the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) [9] comes with confirmation that due to increased human ac-
tivity, the climate is changing, which in turn shifts weather patterns by rising intensity and
occurrence of extreme weather phenomena.
2.3
Factors Generating Extreme Weather Conditions
Besides climate changes, there are some additional factors that can influence the appear-
ance of extreme weather phenomena.
The first drivers of extreme weather conditions are atmospheric circulations. The two
most powerful ones are El Niño and La Niña. The first one occurs when heated surface
ocean waters in the central and eastern Pacific become much warmer than normal, and
the second one, in contrast, occurs when the same part of the ocean cools down [27]. El
Niño effect results in heavy precipitation that leads to both floods and droughts, and La
Niña results in droughts, extensive heat, wildfires and storms [27].
Changes in ocean circulation are also drivers that influence the climate in different areas
of the world. One of the biggest known ocean currents is Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC). Literature indicates that slowing down AMOC due to climate changes
can cause flooding, droughts, stronger hurricanes and extra-tropical cyclones [28].
The third factor that can influence the occurrence of extreme weather conditions is geo-
graphical location. In mountain regions, due to specific locations in relation to sea level,
heavy air condensation can cause extensive snowfalls and rainfalls. [29]
Regions with lakes and rivers, due to the proximity of these large bodies of water that
are able to store a lot of heat and release it progressively, can affect the temperature of
the surrounding area [30]. The greenhouse gas effect that usually appears in urbanised
areas can raise temperatures, creating more favourable conditions for extreme weather
conditions [31].
The last factor is the solar activity cycle, which changes the amount of solar radiation
that is emitted by the sun, which has an effect on the temperature of the atmosphere.
However, comparing it to the greenhouse gas emission, its impact is very small [32].
6
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Variety of Extreme Weather Conditions in the World
Extreme weather phenomena cover the whole world, creating major difficulties for soci-
ety. Countries that are used to specific extremes that occur frequently in their area apply
created mitigation strategies. However, countries that do not experience them often can
suffer from significant losses due to the lack of preparation. This section presents an
overview of extreme weather conditions, including their characteristics and typical loca-
tion of occurrence. Additionally, to confirm that extreme phenomena can migrate, this
section outlines interesting examples of unusual occurrences from real life.
2.4.1
Tropical Cyclones
Tropical cyclones are among the most powerful and dangerous to society and infras-
tructure extreme weather phenomena. There are two types of tropical cyclones: hurri-
canes and typhoons. There is no difference between these two in terms of maximum
wind speeds, as they are classified when wind speed is higher than 120 kilometres per
hour. However, the main difference between typhoons and hurricanes is based on geo-
graphical occurrence. Tropical cyclones, known as hurricanes, are in the North Atlantic,
central North Pacific and eastern North Pacific. Typhoons, on the other hand, are known
by their term in the Northwest Pacific. In the South Pacific and Indian Ocean, the tropical
cyclones term is used [33].
Tropical cyclones form over warm ocean waters where the water surface temperature is
at least 26°C. The warm waters provide the energy needed to sustain the cyclone. Not
only temperature but also the deep converge of air in the troposphere creating cyclonic
circulation has to occur. Additionally, the vertical shear of wind should be at a minimum to
keep heat and moisture. The next factor is high humidity, which creates deep convection
associated with cumulonimbus clouds. All these effects create favourable conditions for
forming tropical cyclones [34].
Typical Regions for tropical cyclones
Regions vulnerable to tropical cyclones include the Caribbean, the southeastern coast of
the United States, East Asia and many other coastal areas [13].
Cyclones in the Indian Ocean are a significant atmospheric phenomenon that can seri-
ously impact coastal areas and communities located along the ocean [35]. Tropical cy-
clones in the Atlantic arise in the form of hurricanes, especially in the Caribbean Sea and
the south-eastern coast of the United States [36]. The Pacific, on the other hand, is home
to typhoons, which often affect East Asian countries such as Japan, the Philippines and
China [37].
Atypical Regions for tropical cyclones
To confirm that climate changes can affect the occurrence of tropical cyclones in regions
that have not experienced this extreme before, the examples are presented below.
One example is the southern coast of Africa, more precisely Mozambique, which expe-
rienced Cyclone Idai in March 2021. This unusual phenomenon was most likely caused
by climate change, which is increasing the activity of tropical cyclones in the western In-
dian Ocean [38]. The Arabian Sea is another example of a non-standard location where
tropical cyclones appear. This area has started experiencing more tropical cyclones in
recent years; for instance, in May 2018, cyclone Mekunu hit Oman and Yemen, causing
additional issues such as intensified rainfalls and floods [39]. In addition, in recent years,
tropical cyclone activity has also been reported in the Gulf of Mexico on Florida’s west
coast for the same reason as in the Arabian Sea [40].
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
7
==PAGE:16==
2.4.2
Tornadoes
A tornado is an extreme weather phenomenon which forms in conical shape and falls
from storm clouds spinning to the surface of the Earth. A tornado event is characterised
by strong winds, which can exceed 480 kilometres per hour. To classify tornadoes, the
Fujita scale is used, which is also known as the F scale. The Fujita scale evaluates the
scale of the tornado by classification based on intensity and the damage caused by the
phenomenon. The F0 class indicates that the tornado was weak and F5 that it was very
powerful [41].
The interaction between warm, humid air over the ocean and cool air on land are good
conditions for thunderstorms, which can potentially create tornadoes. The tornadoes are
usually short in duration; however, they are capable of causing damage to everything that
is in their path [42].
Typical Regions for tornadoes
A tornado is an atmospheric phenomenon that occurs in specific regions of the world.
The United States, Central America and Europe are particular areas that experience tor-
nadoes.
Tornado Alley in the USA, as the name indicates, is the most known place in the world
that frequently experiences phenomenon tornadoes. This alley consists of different parts
of states in the USA, such as Texas, Kansas, Oklahoma, Nebraska and Colorado [43].
It is an area where warm and moist air masses from the Gulf of Mexico and cooler air
masses from Canada meet, creating perfect conditions for tornadoes [43]. Central Amer-
ican region, particularly in Mexico, Honduras and Nicaragua, is also prone to the potential
for tornadoes [44].
Atypical Regions for tornadoes
Tornadoes can migrate to different places in the world as a consequence of climate change.
Hence, below are some interesting examples.
An interesting example of an untypical tornado happened in 2018 in the south of Spain.
This event happened in the Valley of the Mediterranean Sea, which is not typically known
for this phenomenon. During one day, this tornado caused significant damage to the
region of Andalusia near the city of Adra [45].
2.4.3
Thunderstorms, lightning, strong winds
Thunderstorms are atmospheric phenomena characterised by sudden and intense light-
ning, accompanying rainfall, hail and strong winds [46]. Thunderstorms are formed in
uncertain conditions, where warm and humid air that flows up mixes with cold air which
leads to condensation and the formation of a dense cloud known as a cumulonimbus
cloud [46].
Lightning strikes are rapid electrical discharges between thunderstorms, clouds, and be-
tween clouds and earth. They are produced by the dissociation and ionisation of atmo-
spheric particles during condensation and crystallisation processes in storm clouds [47].
Moreover, thunderstorms and clouds generate intensive rainfalls as a result of the conden-
sation of warm air rising upward [46]. Additionally, intensive airflow in the thunderstorm
clouds generates strong winds.
Typical Regions for thunderstorms, lightning, strong winds
One of the best-known regions for thunderstorms, as well as the previously mentioned
tornadoes, is the Tornado Alley [48]. Another typical place for this phenomenon is The
Great Plains region in Central Africa. It is an area where air masses from Nigeria, moist
8
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:17==
air from the Gulf of Guinea and air masses from over the Sahara meet [49]. The Mediter-
ranean coastal region, which includes countries such as Spain, France, Italy and Greece,
is also prone to the occurrence of thunderstorms especially during summer [50].
The mentioned locations only present places where the thunderstorms are very often. In
fact, there are many other regions across the world that are also prone to these extreme
weather conditions.
Atypical locations of thunderstorms, lightning and strong winds
Usually, Arctic areas are not prone to thunderstorms; however, in 2021, a dramatic rise
in lightning strikes was observed north of the planet [51]. As the temperature rises, ice
starts to melt, which adds a lot of moisture to the air; that instability creates favourable
conditions for thunderstorms. In 2021 at the highest latitudes, the number of lightning
strikes accounted for 7278 [51].
As this phenomenon is quite typical for many regions, there are not many examples of
untypical locations besides the Arctic. However, what is interesting is the increased inten-
sification of this phenomenon. The scientists predict that with every one-degree increase
in temperature, the number of lightning strikes will rise by 12% [52].
2.4.4
Snowstorms, blizzards and icing
Snowstorms, known as winter storms, form when the temperature in both the atmo-
sphere and ground is below zero degrees and when there is enough water vapour to form
snowflakes [53]. A blizzard, on the other hand, is a prolonged, more harsh snowstorm
whose duration exceeds three hours and causes a substantial amount of snowfall [53].
Additionally, blizzards are characterised by very strong wind speeds, accounting even
for 56 kilometres per hour [53]. Furthermore, blizzards are more dangerous because it
reduces visibility.
Ice is known as the stable form of water, and icing is, in general, any kind of ice that
covers an object that forms when the temperature is less than or equal to 0 degrees [54].
It forms during condensation freezing, where ice accumulates on solid walls of objects by
condensation of vapour [54].
Typical locations of snowstorms, blizzards and icing
Snowstorms are frequent phenomena in many countries during winter, while blizzards are
ones that typically occur in cold climates in regions like Alaska, Siberia and Scandinavia
[55]. Furthermore, mountainous regions of the United States, specifically in the states of
Colorado and Utah, are also prone to this phenomenon [55]. Lastly, famous for its low
temperatures, Antarctica is exposed to these extreme conditions [55].
Atypical locations for snowstorms, blizzards and icing
There have been a few interesting snowstorm outbreaks in the world in recent years. One
example is the recent observation of snow in the Sahara [56]. Even though it might be
unusual for regions that are associated with very high temperatures to experience snow-
fall. However, in 2022, Algeria’s part of the Sahara was covered in snow [56]. Another
fascinating event happened in the sunny state of southern California in the United States
in 2023. San Francisco and Los Angeles, which are among the largest cities in California,
observed that temperatures in February of 2023 significantly dropped, causing snowfall
and warnings of blizzards [57]. In February 2021, a historic winter event happened in the
state of Texas in the United States [58]. In the whole central part of Texas, including one
of the biggest cities, Austin, the temperatures dropped and caused snowfall and icing. It
was the longest winter event in the history of the state and lasted 8 days, causing power
outages for 10 million people [58].
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
9
==PAGE:18==
2.4.5
Drought and wildfires
Drought is a phenomenon that is defined as a long period of time without or with an insuf-
ficient amount of precipitation of rain and snow. Based on different areas, the definition
of drought varies. The most known and used is the term meteorological drought, which
refers to the degree of dryness or its time [59]. The second one is hydrological drought,
which means a decrease in water in and above ground [59]. The third one is agricultural
drought which occurs where the humidity of soil is insufficient for harvesting yields [59].
Additionally, due to agriculture droughts the plants have insufficient amount of water, which
causes their death and drying. This results in plants being the main fuel for wildfires as
they do not have any moisture [60].
Typical locations of droughts and wildfires
Droughts are most common in Australia and some states, such as California in the United
States [61], [62]. In both of these places, the extreme temperature and prolonged droughts
cause the spread of wildfires. In 2021, due to record-breaking extreme heat and droughts,
wildfires caused a burn of around 7.1 million acres of land in the whole United States [63].
One of the typical victims of droughts is the continent of Australia. In 2007 and in 2012, it
was decided to officially declare this continent to be in drought [64]. The region of Africa
called Sahel historically had struggled with a significant drop in rainfall, which was caused
by the 1970s severe droughts [64]. Unfortunately, the pattern continues as from 2000, this
region was declared to be in drought four times. The other parts of Africa, including coun-
tries such as Ethiopia, Somalia, Eritrea and Djibouti, also experience periods of droughts
due to high temperatures[64]. The United States also struggle with droughts, especially
in the southern part of the country. In 1957, almost all counties in Texas had decelerated
to be in severe droughts [64]. Additionally, in 2010, the drought-hit this region, and by
2013, most of the state struggled with its effects [64].
Atypical locations of droughts wildfires
Tropics are known for their significant amount of rainfall; however, in 2014, in the south-
western part of Brazil, an untypical drought was observed [65]. The situation was caused
by a decrease in rainfall, wrong water management and degradation of the environment
due to the activity of people [65]. An example of unusual wildfires occurred in Sweden in
2018. Scandinavia is known for its high precipitation and it is not associated with droughts.
However, in 2023, in both May and June, there was no sign of any kind of rainfall, which
in turn posed a huge risk of a similar situation as in 2018 [66]. Not only Sweden but also
Norway, Denmark and other Baltic countries have started to observe this kind of situation,
especially during summer [66]. Another interesting example is the situation in Canada in
2023. Even though Canada is struggling with fires every year, the circumstances in 2023
exceeded all predictions [67]. Already in the beginning of June, the amount of burned land
reached 13.5 million hectares, which can be compared to the size of Mississippi state in
the USA [67].
2.4.6
Floods
Flood is a phenomenon that occurs when the land that is normally dry is soaked by water.
floods can occur when rivers surpass their edges; there is heavy rainfall or extensive
melting of the ice [68]. Additionally, extreme tsunamis or storms can impose a risk of
inflow of sea into land [68]. The floods can last from a couple of hours to even days and
can quickly develop, covering more land [68].
Typical locations of floods
There are many areas all over the world that suffer flooding as it is a part of the normal
water cycle.
One of the places that is frequently affected by floods is India due to its location near the
10
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:19==
river Brahmaputra. In 2005, the most memorable flood happened in Bombay City, causing
the death of 1000 people. Between the years 1980 and 2017, India experienced floods
235 times [69]. Another country that experiences a lot of floods is Bangladesh, where
each year, around 18% of the land is covered in water [69]. The reason of these events
is closely linked to flow of water from Himalays and heavy rainfall during monsoons [69].
Not only Bangladesh but also Pakistan is prone to flooding due to monsoon season [69].
The United States cities are also experiencing occasional flooding due to their location
near rivers. Additionally, the extremes such as hurricanes and earthquakes that happen
in the United States can increase the risk of flooding [69]. One of the examples is the
hurricane of Galveston that happened in 1900 which caused flood in the state of Texas
[69]. Similarly to the United States, the rivers of Bolivia are the main drivers of flooding in
this region [69]. Especially in the the area of the Amazon River, an extensive amount of
land is flooded every year [69]. The residents of Bolivia are so used to this problem that
they often decide to use river as way to commute [69].
Atypical locations of floods and heavy rainfalls
As floods span across the globe, it is not easy to find specific examples of atypical lo-
cations of this phenomenon. However, in some countries it can be noticed that floods
occur more often and are more destructive due to increased rainfall, occurrence of other
extreme weather conditions and rising sea levels.
However, in 2021 part of Germany, Belgium and Netherlands were affected by extreme
flood caused by heavy rainfalls. As a result small villages and small cities were flooded
to a depth of several meters [70].
The influence of extreme weather conditions has a significant impact on society, both in
terms of health and safety, as well as the economy and infrastructure.
Extreme weather phenomena such as droughts or floods can lead to threats to society.
For instance, prolonged extreme temperatures pose a risk of sunstroke, which puts human
health in danger [71]. Whereas floods may result in loss of life, property and spread of
infectious diseases [72]. From an economic point of view, extreme temperatures and
droughts negatively affect agriculture, which threatens the finances of food producers
and the general accessibility to food. Moreover, floods and droughts can significantly limit
access to drinking water. [73].The influence on infrastructure and business sector suffer
due to extreme weather conditions. Floods, storms, tropical cyclones and blizzards are
potential sources of significant damage to infrastructure and are contributing to extensive
loss of finances [74]. The costs of rebuilding infrastructure after natural disasters can
generate significant expenses, for instance, the US budget was severely strained after
the Katrina hurricane [75].
As statistics indicate since 2008 on yearly average 22.5 million people was relocated due
to natural disasters caused by weather extremes [76]. Therefore, the urgency to adapt is
now more evident than ever.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:21==
3
Literature Review
Firstly, this chapter presents a literature review of topics that are most important for this
thesis. The first section presents the effects of extreme weather conditions on renewable
power with examples. Then the next section explores the problem more specifically for the
wind energy industry. With this literature review, the next section presents a case study
selection which is explained through examples from real life. In the end, this chapter
outlines gaps in the literature that this thesis will address.
3.1
Impact of extreme weather conditions on renewable
energy sources
As presented in chapter 2, the generation of electricity by renewable energy systems
depends on weather conditions, which means that is also affected by its extremes. Here
are some examples that confirm this statement.
For instance, droughts can lead to a decrease in water levels, which can directly hinder
the efficiency of hydropower plants [77]. At the same time, strong winds accompanying
topical cyclones may damage and stop wind turbines [78]. Extreme weather conditions
can also influence energy consumption by society. For instance, prolonged heat increases
the need for air conditioning [79]. Damages can also occur on wind turbines and their grid
infrastructure due to tropical cyclones, storms and tornadoes [80].
The renewable energy sector, therefore, faces a challenge in terms of production, avail-
ability, and infrastructure safety against extreme weather conditions.
3.2
Impact of Extreme Weather Conditions on Wind Energy
Industry
The literature analysis of extreme weather conditions and their influence on the wind
energy industry yields numerous compelling conclusions. Current research is focused
on technical and economical. The researchers try to deeply understand how extreme
weather conditions influence the operation of wind turbines and the effects of that from
an economic point of view.
Technical literature covers the impact of climate change on energy systems to evaluate
if there are any potential risks that the energy industry should address. The main focus
is on the dependency of energy production on changing climate patterns and how it can
affect the availability and reliability of energy supply [81]. Firstly it crucial to acknowl-
edge that wind turbines are complex infrastructures with thousand of components [82].
Secondly, they are being developed both onshore and offshore with fixed and floating
foundations [83]. Lastly it is highly dependent on weather conditions as it uses wind to
produce electricity. Therefore, both development and operation of wind energy systems
prone to extreme weather events pose a challenge to wind energy industry.
Current trend of a dynamically developing wind energy sector, is to build more efficient
wind turbines with more approachable operation and maintenance costs [84]. The litera-
ture focuses on the identification and analysis of novel technologies which can assist in
achieving these goals. The general idea is to develop high-tech machines involving higher
towers, lighter blades, optimised controlled systems, and reliable grid infrastructure [85].
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
13
==PAGE:22==
The integrity of high-power wind turbines in challenging environmental conditions is an-
other crucial aspect of research. The researchers point out the necessity of applying more
sustainable materials, which is essential for the resilience and ecology of the whole life cy-
cle of wind turbines [85]. Furthermore, continuous progress in production processes and
component’s quality and efficiency are vital [85]. For the future perspective, researchers
concentrate on hybrid farms and the development of energy storage systems, which seem
to play a critical role in the energy transition [86]. This area of research incorporates the
efforts to create more sustainable, efficient and affordable solutions in the wind energy
industry.
In the context of various atmospheric conditions, literature provides extensive research on
different innovations for wind turbines to be more resilient. According to the literature, the
wind energy industry is currently working on anti-icing technologies, which enable wind
turbines to operate in cold climates and react to weather risks by auto shutdown to avoid
damages [87]. The literature also offers information about the work of manufacturers on
new turbine designs that are more resilient to tropical cyclones [88].
3.3
Selection of case studies
The following section describes how objects of the study of extreme weather conditions
were selected, considering their impact on wind farm operations, by referring to the avail-
able literature and examples from past events.
3.3.1
Wind Energy in Icing Conditions
Atmospheric icing is a risk to the efficient work of wind turbines. Firstly, it can cause
interference in energy production that, in turn, results in economic losses. Secondly, ice
accumulation on wind rotor blades can pose a risk of ice throw that compromises safety
aspects.
There are two main categories of atmospheric icing, which are defined as in-cloud icing
and precipitation icing. The first one encompasses rime ice and glaze, and the second
one involves drizzle and wet snow [89].
The process of meteorological icing favours the creation of ice accumulation, which during
this process passes through different stages. The first stage is incubation time, in which
parameters of the weather, such as temperature, humidity and wind, favour the accretion
of ice [89]. The next stage is instrumental icing, which refers to a situation when ice re-
mains on the structure, and the performance of the wind turbine decreases [89]. When
the meteorological ice period ends, then, depending on how severe it was, it is either still
in the time of instrumental icing or starts its recovery time [89]. Wind turbines need to
be stopped if the load limit caused by ice on the blades is exceeded to ensure that the
structure is safe. However, it is worth adding that any accumulation of ice on the blades
of a wind turbine can contribute to a reduction in its lifetime. Load limits are determined
by design values that are created based on the environmental and safety conditions de-
termined during construction [89].
The ice accumulation on wind turbine blades affects the surface geometry of this compo-
nent, reducing its aerodynamic efficiency. This results in a decrease in the lifting power
of wind turbine blades and increases resistance, which reduces electricity production and
even causes the entire wind turbine to shut down [89]. An instance of ice accumulation
on a turbine blade is presented Figure 3.1.
14
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: Ice on wind turbine blades [90]
In addition, increased vibration and noise levels occur when ice accumulates on wind
turbine infrastructure. It is worth noting that ice does not build up equally on each blade, so
it can also be observed that the blades with ice accumulation are poorly balanced, which
causes degradation and destruction of the components and inaccurate measurements in
wind speeds [89].
Ice buildup occurring on blades and the tower can also pose a safety risk to visitors of
these facilities, like service technicians. A turbine operating with accumulated ice can
throw large chunks of ice onto the wind farm site and even outside, creating a danger to
people, animals and structures in the neighbourhood [89]. Figure 3.2 provides an example
of falling ice pieces.
Figure 3.2: Ice on wind turbine blades [90]
Based on how icing affects the operation of the farm, it was decided to make this the first
case study in this thesis.
The icing issue is the most common problem in cold climates. More and more wind tur-
bines are built every year in this region because these places are characterised by high
wind speeds and significant distance from local communities [91]. Therefore, it seems
that this issue is not deeply rooted in the social sphere; however, ensuring reliable pro-
duction from wind farms is still crucial in the social context as it provides an essential
source for daily life. Furthermore, icing can occur in new areas as confirmed in the sub-
subsection 2.4.4.
Current literature on this issue mainly focuses on the efficiency and technological improve-
ments to mitigate ice accumulation on wind turbines. Even though the literature shows
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
15
==PAGE:24==
that there are some ways to enhance the resilience of wind energy, there is a lack of
information about mitigation strategies of the effect of icing on society and the environ-
ment. To sum up, the decision to take icing as a case object is based on the fact that the
development and operation of wind farms in these conditions can affect society and the
environment, and there is a knowledge gap in this context.
3.3.2
Wind Energy in Tropical cyclones
Tropical cyclones are one of the most powerful weather extremes, as presented in subsec-
tion 2.4.1, and have the potential to risk wind farm structures and decrease energy produc-
tion, especially if they are located in coastal areas. Tropical cyclones are known for very
high wind speeds and abrupt changes in wind direction, which are the least favourable
conditions for wind farms [92].
These intensive storms, like any other thunderstorms, are also characterised by heavy
precipitation and lightning strikes. The effect of lightning strikes can create a great risk
of structural damage to wind turbine blades. Heavy rains, on the other hand, can cause
erosion of blades and floods that can influence the foundation where the electrical in-
frastructure of the wind turbine is located [93]. Additionally, tropical cyclones can create
extreme wind speeds that can cause structural damage to wind turbines. But not only the
wind speed but also its abrupt change of direction can hinder rotor blades by unbalanced
distribution of loads, vibrations and increased fatigue. All of these aspects can limit the
lifetime and damage critical components of the wind turbines [94].
One of the interesting examples of how destructive and powerful tropical cyclones are to
the wind energy industry happened in June 1998 in Gujarat, India. Firstly, this destructive
force was detected in the Arabian Sea, and then it continued to grow in intensity and
migrated to the western part of India. The maximum wind speed of this tropical cyclone
reached 193 km/h. The result of this extreme phenomenon was the severe loss of 10,000
human lives and significant damage to infrastructure [95]. The effect on the wind energy
industry of this tropical cyclone is presented in Figure 3.3a and Figure 3.3b. Figure 3.3
shows the effects of this event on the wind turbine and grid infrastructure.
(a) Damaged wind turbine [96]
(b) Damaged wind turbine with lattice towers [96]
Figure 3.3: Gujarat, India 1998
On September 11, 2003, Typhoon Maemi hit Miyakojima Island in Japan, significantly
damaging the area of wind farms. The average wind speed that was recorded at the
weather station during this typhoon was around 136 km/h, with wind gusts that reached
16
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:25==
even 266 km/h. All six wind turbines operated were severely damaged. As a result of this
typhoon, two Micon M750/400kW turbines tipped over due to tower collapse, and one
Enercon E40/500kW turbine fell over due to the failure of the foundation. Additionally,
the blades on the other three turbines were broken. Wind tunnel tests and numerical
simulation show that the maximum wind speed in the turbine area during this typhoon
was about 216 km/h, and the maximum wind gust reached 324 km/h [97].
Figure 3.4 presents the effect of this event on the wind turbine.
Figure 3.4: Japan, Miyakojima wind farm hit by typhoon 2003 [96]
In contrast, the second selected research case in this thesis concerns the impact of trop-
ical cyclones on the development and operation of wind farms.
The choice of this phenomenon is primarily reasoned by its destructive characteristics.
However, it was also chosen because the wind energy industry is currently developing a
lot of new wind farms in areas where the occurrence of tropical cyclones is possible, and
the existing knowledge and strategies are limited.
Unlike the first case, the problem of tropical cyclones is relatively less described in the
literature. This is due to the recent expansion of wind farms in locations prone to this phe-
nomenon [98] [99]. An area prone to these phenomena becomes not only a technological
challenge, but also requires changes in wind farm management strategies adapting to
specific and hard-to-predict weather conditions.
As it expands its operations into areas affected by tropical cyclones, the wind industry
must operate at the frontiers of existing knowledge. Not only is this new territory in terms
of technology, but it also requires the application of a fresh perspective on safety, sus-
tainability and operation in conditions that can be much more dynamic than in traditional
operating areas. The most vulnerable wind farms to tropical cyclones are the ones that
are developed offshore and in coastal areas. Management of such facilities is complicated
by maintenance, which must be planned in detail due to the location [100]. Currently, in
the literature, one can find interesting wind turbine designs that are supposed to resist
this phenomenon [88]. However, this area is still under research.
Further research of wind energy systems that are exposed to tropical cyclones, can pro-
vide measures to create more reliable design of the wind turbines and enhance mitigation
strategies during the operation..
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
17
==PAGE:26==
3.4
Gaps in the literature
Ignoring the broader perspective, such as social, ethical or environmental, in the context
of wind farms’ infrastructure resilience to extreme weather conditions can interfere with
the understanding this issue completely.
Research on the social acceptance of wind farms focuses mainly on analysing community
reactions before construction and during project decision-making. Factors such as visual
impact, attachment to place, developer-community relations, trust in the planning process,
and community benefits have been intensively studied in the context of social acceptance
of wind farms [101].
There is a lack of information in the literature on how public acceptance is shaped by
extreme weather, which can pose challenges for wind energy systems. In addition, de-
spite existing technologies that mitigate the impact of extreme weather on wind farms,
the literature does not report on how stakeholders, such as developers or manufacturers,
integrate these solutions into the industry. The lack of sufficient research on this aspect
makes it impossible to understand how the impact of extreme weather affects community
perceptions of wind farms.
Studies to date often focus on the pre-decision period and community reactions to project
proposals, with little consideration of the temporal dimension [102]. The impact of extreme
weather on long-term community acceptance and the evolution of residents’ attitudes after
wind farm construction remains an area that requires detailed research.
Responsibly conducted research and innovation is becoming an increasingly important
topic in today’s scientific debates. To combine scientific research with social and technical
perspectives, the social literature uses a framework known as Responsible Research
and Innovation (RRI). One of the RRI researchers, Stilgoe [103], provides a definition of
responsible research innovation that highlights the essence of its purpose:
“Responsible innovation means taking care of the future through collective stewardship
of science and innovation in the present.”
To analyse this definition, it can be deduced that Stilgoe understands RRI as a tool for a
holistic approach, which assures that currently developing scientific work and innovations
can benefit future generations.
Unfortunately, there is a gap in the literature as the application of the RRI framework did
not appear in the context of wind farms exposed to icing and tropical cyclones. That is why
this research seeks to identify opportunities to improve upstream processes, meaning the
potential to improve the early stages or fundamental aspects of research and innovation
processes. This suggests a focus on ethical issues, stakeholder engagement and antic-
ipating social impacts in the early planning and conceptualisation of research initiatives
[104].
Innovations to mitigate the effects of extreme weather conditions on wind farms already
exist. Nevertheless, due to limited spaces where wind farms can be installed and chang-
ing climatic conditions, these structures will appear in areas exposed to harsh weather
conditions. Improved reliability and safety through these new technologies can contribute
to the overall independence of wind farms. This is important from a social perspective
because it increases the perception of wind energy as a safe and reliable energy source,
potentially reducing concerns or opposition from local communities. Involving local com-
munities in discussions about these technologies promotes transparency and community
engagement. When communities perceive that their concerns are being acknowledged
18
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:27==
and addressed, this can contribute to greater public acceptance. Currently, the industry
is mainly focused on a technical approach to the problems of establishing and manag-
ing wind farms in extreme conditions. However, a holistic approach that promotes an
understanding of the problem as a whole, rather than just individual elements, can help
integrate wind farm development and management strategies in line with public concerns.
A holistic analysis of the wind power industry can provide an easier, more constructive
approach to considering the social, environmental, cultural and technical aspects involved
in building and managing wind farms.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:29==
4
Theoretical Framework
This chapter presents the general introduction to Responsible Research and Innovation
theoretical framework. Then it focuses on how to integrate RRI principles in industry by
presentation of key elements of this model.
4.1
Introduction to Responsible Research and Innovation
In addition to Stilgoe’s definition, presented in the section 3.4, one of the most frequently
cited definitions of Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) comes from Von Schomberg
[105].
Von Schomberg [105] portrays RRI in the literature as a transparent and interactive pro-
cess in which people in society and those who come up with new ideas work together.
The goal is to ensure that these new ideas are ethically okay, good for society and can last
long. In this way, they can be well integrated into our lives [106]. Von Schomberg’s [105]
explanation of RRI is important for understanding the ideas in this study and is presented
below:
Responsible Research and Innovation is a transparent, interactive process by which so-
cietal actors and innovators become mutually responsive to each other with a view on
the (ethical) acceptability, sustainability and societal desirability of the innovation process
and its marketable products (to allow a proper embedding of scientific and technological
advances in our society).”
Von Schomberg’s definition [105] highlights three important things that make up the main
ideas of RRI. Firstly, RRI examines how new ideas are made and what comes from them.
It stresses the importance of thinking about what’s right and what people want in research
and innovation outcomes. Secondly, RRI is all about improving innovative projects, fitting
in with the bigger plan of improving society. Lastly, getting different groups involved is
crucial, recognising that many different people, like policymakers, businesses, and the
public, play a part in this process [106].
4.2
The Need for an Integrated RRI Model
While the integration of RRI principles at the organisational level has been increasingly
reported in the available literature about RRI [106] [107] [108], it lacks an industry level ap-
proach. The essential nature of tailoring RRI to specific industries lies in their relevance to
the industries and the broader social context. The challenge of the operationalising RRI in
industrial level is dictated by the fact that industry is a very complex combination of stake-
holders needs to consider responsible practices, without compromising their economic
competitiveness. [106].
The available literature on Research and Innovation Responsibility (RRI) is dominated by
a generic approach, focusing on general principles and neglecting the important aspect of
integrating the RRI method across industries. RRI implementation methods in the context
of a holistic approach to innovation prove inadequate, mainly due to the lack of consider-
ation of RRI management principles tailored to specific industries. This lack of specificity
is a significant limitation that also exists in the wind energy industry. [106]
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
21
==PAGE:30==
4.3
Integrating RRI into Industry Strategy
This section reveals the theoretical foundation of the integrated Responsible Research
and Innovation (RRI) model in an industrial context. The theoretical framework is based on
the paper entitled ”Key Performance Indicators of Responsible Research and Innovation
in Industry: A Case Study in ICT” written by Emad Yaghmaei [106].
Although this thesis uses a model based on the aforementioned paper, due to the per-
spective of analysing only one company, it was decided to adapt it for application at the
level of the entire wind power industry.
4.3.1
Key Performance Indicators of RRI (RRI KPIs)
A KPI, in a general sense in the available sources of knowledge, is presented as a mea-
surable target. It indicates how organisations or industries are achieving the intended
goals. Evaluation of these indicators supports organisations or industries in determining
effective direction in achieving their goals [109].
Organisational vs Industrial KPIs
In the literature, KPIs are most often used at the organisational level however, due to
the specifications of this thesis, it was decided to look at an industry perspective. KPIs,
differ at the organisation and industry level due to their scope, operational environment
and objectives. Some differences in KPIs at the organisational and industry levels are
outlined below.
For the organizational-level scope, KPIs focus on efficiency, productivity and overall pro-
cess results for a single company. In contrast, from the industry perspective, KPIs focus
on selecting sector-specific indicators and considering characteristic aspects. For the op-
erational environment, KPIs at the organisational level reflect the overall operation of the
company, emphasising aspects such as processes. On the other hand, at the industry
level, KPIs covers global trends, competitiveness and cooperation between entities of an
industry. In the case of goals, KPIs that are applied at the organisational level are consis-
tent with the mission and vision of the company. In contrast, these industry-level metrics
are aligned with market requirements and global trends.
Role of KPIs at Industry level
Key Performance Indicators (KPI) in the context of RRI are crucial in assessing, monitoring
and improving actions aligned with the principles of RRI. One of the main purposes of
implementing KPIs within RRI is to measure progress in the industry. KPIs are not only
characterised by measuring progress; these indicators also have other functions, which
are described below. KPIs help in accessing:
• industry awareness of RRI concept,
• industry commitment to RRI concept,
• the impact of industry research and innovation activities on society,
• how RRI concept contributes to solutions of existing social and environmental prob-
lems,
• how well the industry is operating in line with social values,
• strategies for improvement and specific targeted actions.
Selection of KPIs
The results from interviews with ICT leaders from the article ”Key Performance Indicators
of Responsible Research and Innovation in Industry: A Case Study in ICT” [106] indicate
22
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:31==
explicitly the need to develop an integrated RRI model. Three key RRI performance in-
dicators, namely awareness, implementation and assessment, are core elements of the
model. Existing studies on RRI indicators mainly focus on general aspects, with rare con-
sideration of industry specifics. In this context, the developed RRI model for this thesis
focuses on three key indicators to match specific RRI principles with a particular industry.
These key indicators, in turn, break down into a series of sub-indicators, aligning industry
practices with society’s needs and moral values.
This model based on the aforementioned work, which assumes three KPIs and sub-
indicators considering the needs of this thesis, is presented at Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: RRI KPIs based on [110]
4.3.2
Dimenssions of RRI Implemntation
The integrated RRI model assumes five dimensions of implementation. These dimen-
sions show the successive stages of implementation of projects, which are valuable to
people even at the initial planning stage. This approach is referred to in the literature
as ”value by design” [106], which is used in research and development projects. These
dimensions aim to establish an integrated approach to RRI in the industry’s pre-initiatives
at successive dimensions of development. The model assumes that the dimensions illus-
trate the progression of each RRI sub-indicator from no implementation of RRI principles
to a holistic RRI model with full implementation of the relevant principles. The chosen
dimensions for the purpose of this thesis are defensive, reflexive, tactical, strategic and
inclusive.
At the defensive level, the industry does not engage in RRI, thinking only about the general
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
23
==PAGE:32==
assumptions without considering moral values. At this stage, the industry does not pay
attention to any RRI rules. It does not take up any aspects of social responsibility in its
actions or is unable to apply them. The reflexive dimension assumes that the industry
is not yet implementing RRI principles at this stage; however, it is beginning to consider
one moral value. At the tactical dimension, the industry starts to consider a set of moral
values; however, they are not implementing them yet. The strategic level means that the
industry achieves the integration of primary RRI by incorporating one moral value. At the
highest level, the industry achieves inclusive dimension which corresponds to integrated
or holistic RRI. They take into account all set of moral values and are ready for continuous
improvement based on RRI principles.
The Figure 4.2 shows a model showing the successive dimensions of RRI implementation
in the industry. The vertical axis shows the main RRI indicators, while the horizontal axis
shows the successive dimensions of implementation. In addition, each dimension and its
scope is explained in detail.
Figure 4.2: Definition of each dimension of RRI based on [106]
4.3.3
Connecting RRI dimensions and RRI KPIs
Evaluation of sub-indicators aligned with key indicators through selected dimensions pro-
vides feedback, enabling the industry to align practices with RRI principles. In addition,
it allows monitoring of the progress of implementation of RRI principles and adjusting
activities according to developments and the needs of society.
RRI Awareness sub-indicators in RRI dimensions
The first key performance indicator is ”RRI Awareness”, which refers to awareness of
RRI principles in the industry context. Three specific sub-indicators were found for this
KPI: ”Moral Values Awareness”, ”Acknowledgement of Moral Values in Industry Strategic
Plan”, and ”Acknowledgement of Standards and Regulations”. Evaluation of the ”Moral
Values Awareness” sub-indicator at different dimensions of this KPI to assess how the
industry is evolving towards a more conscious approach to moral values [111]. The next
sub-indicator, ”Acknowledgement of Moral Values in Industry Strategic Plan”, evaluates
the extent to which moral values are taken into account in industry strategic plans. As-
sessing this element at the different dimensions of RRI implementation provides an un-
derstanding of whether the industry is transforming its ethical assumptions into practice
[112]. The last sub-indicator in the context is ”Acknowledgment of Standards and Regula-
tions”, which examines the industry compliance with applicable standards and regulations
[112]. A general explanation of each dimension of implementation of these sub-indicators
is provided in the Figure 4.3.
24
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.3: RRI Awareness based on [106]
RRI Implementation sub-indicators in RRI dimensions
The next listed KPI is ”RRI Implementation”, which refers to the process of practical im-
plementation of RRI principles and approaches to achieve specific objectives and results.
This indicator has been split into the following three sub-indicators: ”Anticipatory Design”,
”Collaboration and Data Sharing”, and ”Transparency”.
Examination of the ”Anticipatory Design” sub-indicator at different dimensions of RRI im-
plementation assesses the extent to which the industry anticipates the potential impacts
of its actions.
The sub-indicator ”Collaboration and Data-Sharing” evaluates the collective efforts to dis-
seminate data and information between each other and external stakeholders. Evaluation
of this element at different levels of RRI implementation is important to determine whether
the organisations of the industry are operating in isolation or actively collaborating with
each other and other stakeholders.
The evaluation of the ”Transparency” sub-indicator shows how clear and open the industry
is in its operations.
Information for the progressive implementation of these sub-indicators through RRI levels
is described as follows: Figure 4.4.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.4: RRI Implementation based on [106]
RRI Assessment sub-indicator in RRI dimensions
The last KPI, ”RRI Assessment”, relates to the analysis and evaluation of the effectiveness
and compliance of activities with RRI principles. This KPI has three main sub-indicators:
”Technological Innovation and Adaptation”, ”Risk Assessment and Management”, and
”Financial Resilience and Business Continuity”.
The evaluation of the ”Technological Innovation and Adaptation” sub-indicator at the dif-
ferent stages of RRI implementation makes it possible to assess the extent to which the
industry incorporates innovation and adaptation aspects in its projects.
The sub-indicator ”Risk Assessment and Management” evaluates how the industry iden-
tifies and handles the risks associated with their work. Evaluation of this element at differ-
ent levels of RRI implementation is important to assess the extent to which the industry
is taking action to minimise potential risks.
Analysis of the ”Financial Resilience and Business Continuity” sub-indicator assesses
how financially resilient and ready industries are to maintain business continuity in the
face of change and uncertainty.
A step-by-step discussion of the implementation of these sub-indicators using RRI levels
is presented at theFigure 4.5
26
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.5: RRI Assessment based on [106]
By using the theoretical framework, this thesis aims to analyse which dimension the wind
energy industry is currently in terms of icing and tropical cyclones. Through chosen KPIs
and sub-indicators, which were explained in detail in this chapter, the interpretation of the
results of the analysis will indicate at which of the described dimensions the industry is
operating. To better understand this theoretical framework, the next chapter 5 will serve.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:37==
5
Methodology
This chapter describes the methodology which is chosen for this study. It is divided into
specific sections to explain the research design and outline the data collection methods,
including inclusion criteria and types of participants, tools used for collecting data, and the
procedure. Additionally, this chapter also discusses data analysis techniques and ethical
considerations.
5.1
Research design
This study is designed to be exploratory, as it examines current research and collective
efforts among stakeholders of the wind energy industry related to icing and tropical cy-
clone extremes to understand how these initiatives enhance the resilience of wind energy
systems. Based on industry experts’ views, this study explores how they perceive the
opportunities and constraints of industry efforts to approach the issues of extreme condi-
tions in a holistic way. Wind energy industry experts’ subjective perceptions formed this
study’s main data. Additionally, for this study, an experimental, qualitative paradigm was
applied by using semi-structured interviews [113].
In the context of first-hand experience and the relevance of subjective views, qualitative
research presents as a helpful method [114]. The qualitative method can assist in delv-
ing into complex issues and understanding the social context by capturing the subjective
opinions of participants who were taking part in this study [115].
For a deep understanding of the context in which research is analysed, the qualitative
method includes various factors which reveal the precious personal experiences of study
participants [116].
Through qualitative data, researchers can access the subjective views and interpretations
of research participants. This allows them to reflect on individual differences and under-
stand how these subjects perceive different aspects. In addition, qualitative methods are
essential in studying human behaviour and motivation complexity. With correctly con-
ducted qualitative research, the data obtained can be as valuable as quantitative data.
During the qualitative study, the researcher is in constant interaction with the participants
in an attempt to discover the meaning of their perspective [117].
According to Miles and Huberman (1994) [118]:
”You cannot study everyone everywhere doing everything”.
This qualitative research will use a case study approach to explore the relationship be-
tween empirical background and case studies. As described in chapter 3, only two case
studies will be evaluated in this thesis. The first is based on one extreme weather condi-
tion, icing, and the second relates to tropical cyclones. The qualitative case study method
tests the hypothesis and not the entire theory. Wind farms face various extreme weather
conditions, but to test the theory, it was decided to pick two.
5.2
Data Collection
This thesis classifies as qualitative because it aims to analyse the behaviours of a specific
group, which is the wind energy industry. To discover specific actions of the industry, the
interviews and empirical background from literature are used as a data source. Due to
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
29
==PAGE:38==
limited data in literature on this topic the interviews with industry experts are the primary
data for this study. This section explains the characteristics of participants and the tool
and procedure to conduct these interviews.
5.2.1
Participants
The number of participants that take part in this thesis is nine experts in the wind energy
industry. These participants are divided into two categories based on extreme weather
conditions that they have knowledge about. The reason for this separation is to investigate
two specific weather extremes, icing and tropical cyclones.
To be sure that the chosen participants are appropriate for this study, a few inclusion
criteria have been established and are presented below.
• Individuals must be affiliated with the wind energy industry.
• Participants should either work for a wind energy developer, be a wind energy de-
veloper, or be a scientist within the field.
• Individuals must have a connection to wind farms that have experienced or may ex-
perience one of the selected extreme conditions, namely icing or tropical cyclones.
According to Mishler (1986) [119], the goal of qualitative interviews is to seek interpre-
tations and not the facts or laws of the interviewees. On the other hand, Kvaler (1996)
[120] claims that qualitative research methods can promote understanding and change.
Furthermore, Neuman (2000) [117] states that qualitative researchers should focus on
specific cases by trying to understand and interpret them. According to these scientists
the methodological approach of this thesis makes sense in terms of the presented goal
of this thesis.
The participants’ identities in the case studies have been anonymised for ethical and pri-
vacy reasons. Table 5.1 and Table 5.2 present a comprehensive overview of the partici-
pants involved in each case study presented, offering valuable insights into their affiliation,
discipline, company and country. To distinguish each participant in the analysis, it was
decided to use pseudonyms that ensure the confidentiality and privacy of the individu-
als involved in this thesis. Pseudonyms are created based on specific extreme weather.
That is why there are two groups of participants. For each group, a specific code is se-
lected: one that starts with ”I”, referring to icing conditions, and another one that starts
with ”TC”, meaning tropical cyclones. The numbers are also distributed after each code
to differentiate specific experts.
Table 5.1: Participants for case study 1: Icing
Type of participant
Affiliation
Discipline
Company
Country
Expert I.1
Senior Technical Asset Manager
Agroculture
European Energy A/S
Sweden
Expert I.2
Chief Commercial Officer
Land surveying and mapping, Leadership
Weather Guard Lightning Tech
United States
Expert I.3
CEO
Electrical Engineering
Weather Guard Lightning Tech
United States
Expert I.4
Senior Research Fellow
Mechanical Engineering, Civil Engineering
NREL
United States
Expert I.5
Chief Blade Officer
Mechanical Engineering
Wind Power Lab
Denmark
Table 5.2: Participants for case study 2: Tropical cyclones
Type of participant
Affiliation
Discipline
Company
Country
Expert TC.1
Senior Metocean and Load Engineer
Engineeering design and applied mechanics
Confidential
Denmark
Expert TC.2
Professor, Department of Wind and Energy Systems
Meteorology and Physics
DTU
Denmark
Expert TC.3
Head of Innovation and End-Use Applications
Sustainable Energy Technologies
IRENA
Germany
Expert TC.4
Chief Blade Officer
Mechanical Engineering
Wind Power Lab
Denmark
Expert TC.5
Research scientist at the Department of Meteorology
Mechanical Engineering, Applied Mathematics
University of Reading
Great Britain
Expert TC.6
Senior Research Fellow
Mechanical Engineering, Civil Engineering
NREL
United States
30
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:39==
5.2.2
Exploratory study: Semi-structured interviews
The decision whether to use interviews or questionnaires is based on the fact that the
technique of collecting data influences the way of understanding the subject [121]. Re-
searchers who want to explore case studies would preferably use interviews as a data
collection method, as it does not strive to cover the whole population but to provide the
participant’s perspectives on the explored subject.
For this study, semi-structured interviews involving direct open questions and specific
questions about experience are used [113]. Before each interview, participants could get
familiar with an interview guide that helps in preparing for specific questions. The interview
guides are designed for specific case studies, so one is for icing and the second for tropical
cyclones, but the questions are constructed similarly so that it is easier to compare them.
The first part of the interview consisted of an introduction of the researcher and participant.
The participants were asked to provide their educational background, current occupation
and specific area of interest in wind energy. After the introductory part, the permission to
record the meeting was established. The second part of the interview was divided into
categories of the expert’s areas of interest.
For each category of questions, depending on the interviewee’s expertise in specific
weather conditions, for this study, either icing or tropical cyclones, the questions were
chosen accordingly. The list below presents a general summary of these categories with-
out a breakdown of specific extreme weather conditions.
• Information regarding wind energy in extreme weather conditions within the individ-
ual’s expertise. This category concerns questions regarding wind energy in extreme
weather conditions related to participant’s knowledge. In this category, questions
are aimed at gathering specific information about the influence of these extreme
phenomena on the operation and resilience of wind farms, as well as an under-
standing of practices of management and maintenance in the context of an expert’s
specific field.
• The category of question ”Resilience and Mitigation” focuses on measuring meth-
ods, innovative technologies and examples of successfully used mitigation strate-
gies related to the improvement of resilience of wind farms under extreme weather
conditions.
• The category of questions ”Enhancing Resilience and Sustainability” aims at un-
derstanding the definition of resilience and sustainability in the context of the wind
energy industry under specific extreme weather events to the specific participant.
• The category of question ”Illustrative Examples” focuses on presenting illustrative
examples of the influence of icing or tropical cyclones on wind energy projects and
analysis of relevance and role of understanding challenges posed by industry.
• The category of questions ”Understanding Perceptions” concentrates on the per-
ceptions of developers, researchers and experts related to their possibilities and
limitations of the intensified collaboration with authorities and themselves to improve
the resilience and sustainability of wind energy infrastructure in the case of icing or
tropical cyclones.
• The ”Role of Authorities” category focuses on authorities’ role in facilitating dialogue
between developers, researchers and experts to build a framework for mitigating
icing and tropical cyclone issues. This category seeks to understand if it is worth-
while to collaborate with authorities and if there is a need for intensified collaboration
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
31
==PAGE:40==
between stakeholders. Furthermore, the questions focus on determining what pri-
orities should be considered in enhancing the resilience of wind farms’ sustainable,
social, techno-economic, and ethical development, as well as the lack of consider-
ation on that subject.
• The category of questions ”Challenges and opportunities” concerns identifying chal-
lenges and opportunities related to collaboration in resolving problems related to ic-
ing or tropical cyclones in wind energy projects. The questions focus on opportunity
analysis, particularly which collaboration efforts effectively influence the wind farms,
improving resilience. Simultaneously, exploring challenges related to collaboration
and deliberating on why the cooperation can pose a problem, especially when the
authorities would play a role in dialogue in aiming to create a framework for mitiga-
tion of icing and tropical cyclones in the wind energy industry.
• The category of questions ”Future Directions” focuses on future perspective on re-
search and collaboration in the context of resilience to icing or tropical cyclones in
wind energy projects. With special consideration to possible directions of develop-
ment, which can be foreseen in the field of research and collaboration and identifi-
cation of new technologies, political methods or initiatives, which have the potential
to influence the way of handling future challenges of icing or tropical cyclones in the
wind energy industry.
The above-presented categories reflect only a semi-structured interview; as it is an ex-
ploratory study, the researcher could have some flexibility in formulating questions for
each participant. It also enabled the researcher to gain additional input and explanation
when needed.
For social science research, semi-structured interviews, the central premise is that the
viewpoint of interviewees is more likely to be found in the openly designed structure rather
than in a standardised type of conversation [122]. A more formalised list of questions
characterises structured methods like questionnaires. On the other hand, semi-structured
interviews are more flexible and less- formal, which allows for bringing up new topics
during the interview based on what the participants have said.
5.2.3
Procedure
The focus of the process of selection of participants for the interview was on finding the
relevant people. The search process was initiated by identifying authors of interesting
scientific articles related to this study and finding them on the LinkedIn portal. Another
approach used for data collection involved using recommended people from the already
performed interviews; in literature, this process is referred to as snow-balling [123]. This
method was used because of the difficulty of obtaining contacts for people suitable for this
study. Participants present in the study helped through their network of contacts to recruit
potential future participants.
The first contact was established through a message on LinkedIn or a shared e-mail ad-
dress. After the presentation of the idea and topic of this study, interested people proceed
to the stage where they receive an interview guide that consists of possible questions that
could appear during the interview. After a positive evaluation of the interview guide, the
potential interviewee received an invitation to a meeting by email.
Most interviews were conducted via video conference on the Microsoft Teams platform.
Only one was performed in person. As the recording of the interviews can help to focus on
the conversation and not be distracted by making notes. The first thing of each interview
32
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:41==
was to ask permission to record. These recordings assist in transcribing the content later.
All the participants agreed to be recorded.
Additionally, all interviews were performed without intermediate people. This allowed flex-
ible conversation specified for the interviewee. The interviews lasted from thirty to sixty
minutes. The longer the conversation, the more information was collected, but in some
cases, due to lack of specific knowledge or availability of participants, the meetings were
shorter. All the interviews were conducted in English, as it was the only common language
for all the participants.
In some cases, people contacted didn’t agree to participate or, after evaluating the pos-
sible questions, were not able to provide answers, and because of these rejections, the
number of participants is nine. However, the ones who agreed to the interview shared
their thoughts, knowledge and experience in an eager and valuable way.
5.3
Data analysis techniques
5.3.1
Data analysis process
According to Kawulich (2004) [124], there are many techniques that exist for analysing
the collected data in a qualitative way. Still, as Kawulich (2004) [124] suggest, it can be
easier if the researcher realises quickly that there is no specific method for this process.
In this study, the researcher attempts to analyse the qualitative data by interpreting the
interviewees’ perspectives and understanding how they perceive the stated problem from
different angles.
Firstly, for the purpose of the analysis, recorded interviews were transcribed. Next, all
the transcriptions were carefully read, and during that process, they were classified into
specific sub-indicators.
To analyse the data it was decided to use qualitative coding that is in literature presented
as one that fits data such as one obtained in interviews. There are different types of
qualitative coding; however, for the purpose of this thesis, it was decided to use actual
quotes from interviews, which refer to literature as in-vivo coding [125]. The reason for
using this specific method is based on the fact that the main scope of this work is to
investigate real perspectives of the wind energy industry. The process of in-vivo cod-
ing in the thesis involved classifying the statements within the specific case study, then
within the categories of key performance indicators, and finally dividing them into specific
sub-indicators. Additionally, it should be mentioned that some of the quotes needed sub-
stantive and grammatical changes, which were done for the reader to understand specific
statements.
An example of the in-vivo coding used in this work is shown in Figure 5.1.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.1: Example of in-vivo coding
5.3.2
Operationalisation of Theoretical Framework and Empirical
Background
Operationalising the Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) framework for wind farm
development involves systematically integrating RRI principles into research and innova-
tion processes. Below are the steps for operationalising, integrating and analysing the
RRI framework using interview data and empirical data. This procedure was based on
the article ”Responsible Research and innovation key performance indicators in industry:
A case study in the ICT domain” [106] and adapted for the purposes of this thesis.
1. Definition of RRI dimensions
(a) the first step is the identification and definition of key RRI dimensions relevant
to the operation and development of wind farms in extreme weather conditions,
specifically icing and tropical cyclones, based on interviews, existing literature
and theoretical background. The identified and defined dimensions are defen-
sive, reflexive, tactical, strategic and inclusive.
2. Development of RRI Key Performance Indicators
(a) The second step, based on the defined dimensions, is the formulation of spe-
cific indicators that can be measured to assess the level of compliance with
RRI principles in wind farm projects vulnerable to icing and tropical cyclones.
In this thesis, three KPIs are identified: RRI Awareness, Implementation and
Assessment.
3. Development of Sub-indicators
34
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:43==
(a) the third step, based on the defined indicators, is the formulation of specific
sub-indicators to examine current industry practices and procedures for RRI.
Three key sub-indicators are found for the RRI Awareness indicator: Moral
Values Awareness, Acknowledgment of Moral Values in Industry Strategic Plan
and Acknowledgment of Standards and Regulations. For the RRI Implementa-
tion indicator, three more sub-indicators were identified: Anticipatory Design,
Collaboration and Data Sharing and Transparency. For the last RRI Imple-
mentation indicator, the following sub-indicators were selected: Technological
Innovation and Adaptation, Risk Assessment and Management and Financial
Resilience and Business Continuity.
4. Data Collection
(a) The forth step, focus on a qualitative research method to collect data on the
identified RRI indicators. For this study interviews and empirical analysis are
used as the main data source.
5. Transcription of Interviews
(a) The fifth step, is creation of transcription from the interview recordings. The pro-
cess involve listening to the recordings, and manually transcribing their content
in the form of text. In addition, an IT tool, oTranscribe, was used to streamline
the process.
6. In Vivo Coding
(a) The sixth step, is in-vivo coding method to process transcription data from the
interviews.
7. Analysis using RRI Sub-indicators within Indicators
(a) The seventh step is the analysis of the statements of the participants, gener-
ated through the in-vivo coding method, in specific RRI sub-indicators.
8. Synthesize Results
(a) The eighth step is the interpretation of results which places the efforts of indus-
try in a specific dimension.
9. Recommendations and Future Directions
(a) The ninth step is the presentation of recommendations and limitations for wind
energy industry of how to improve more holistic approach towards wind farm
development and operation in extreme weather conditions.
5.4
Ethical considerations
As the research is based on the interviews several key aspects of ethical considerations
are applied so that the involved people are secure and can talk safely without any negative
consequences.
Firstly, participants were aware that they could withdraw their participation at any time
of this study. Secondly, all the names were anonymous and changed into pseudonyms
to secure their privacy. The last consideration involves deleting all the recordings that
participants agreed to after the study is done.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:45==
6
Analysis of Case Studies Through the
Lens of an Integrated RRI Model
This chapter presents the analysis of two case studies, icing and tropical cyclone effect,
through the Integrated RRI Model for the wind energy industry. The process of the RRI
integration with case studies is shown through quotes from interviews with participants
to show the current perspective and situation in the wind energy industry. Each case
study was analysed by using three KPIs with specified sub-indicators presented in sub-
section 3.3.1.
6.1
Case Study Icing
6.1.1
RRI Awareness
The first KPI is ”RRI Awareness” is divided into three sub-indicators: ”Awareness of moral
values”, ”Acknowledgment of Moral Values in Industry Strategic Plan”, and ”Acknowledge-
ment of Standards and Regulations”. An important challenge for the wind energy industry
is raising awareness in the context of RRI, particularly when this infrastructure is devel-
oped in areas prone to icing. Each sub-indicator assists in understanding how the industry
is aware of the issue of icing on wind turbines presented in chapter 3 in the context of RRI
principles.
Awareness of moral values
Sub-indicator ”Awareness of moral values”, measures the realisation of the industry in
serving a common good by making proper decisions and actions in order to build good
relations with society in the context of icing impact on wind turbines. As Expert I.4 pointed
out, the importance of RRI is not just a necessity but shows moral value:
”...exploration under the framework of responsible research innovation is commendable.”
It is difficult to understand if there is any real risk to society when wind turbines operate
in icing conditions. That is why it was decided to ask experts during the interviews if the
problem is real and affects society. Expert I.5 explains this potential implication to society,
expressing two types of impacts that wind turbines in icing conditions have on human life:
”Wind turbines are critical infrastructure, and if they do not work, then industry loses power,
and it causes, for example, power cuts in hospitals or in the homes of the elderly or in
people’s homes in general, which can cause casualties. There is a difference between a
direct effect and a hidden effect. The indirect effect on people’s lives is often hard to define
or formulate in the mind of the people who regulate because, well, it is still something that
can have a direct effect on people’s lives, but it is not something that actively kills them. It
is hidden. Direct and indirect risk to life are two different ways of regulating, which I do not
agree with because I would say the risk is a risk, and if industry wind farm doesn’t work,
the industry loses some critical infrastructure.”
To sum up, from the industry perspective, it is not easy to understand moral values in the
face of icing challenges on wind farms because it is thought to capture real risk for society.
However, Expert I.5 was able to explain one important moral value, which is human life.
Acknowledgment of moral values in industry strategic plan
The second sub-indicator, ”Acknowledgment of Moral Values in Industry Strategic Plan”,
refers to the extent to which the wind power industry actively creates its strategic plans
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
37
==PAGE:46==
by integrating moral values [106] to minimise the effects of icing on turbine blades. This
reflexive model can be seen in strategic operation and maintenance plans.
Expert I.5 points out the need to convince key decision-makers to discuss moral values
in depth and to take potential steps to implement them:
”Significant responsibility rests with operators and manufacturers, which puts them in the
role of key stakeholders who should initiate and commit to responsible practices.”
In the context of anticipating icing challenges, interview participants emphasised the need
for contingency plans and increased safety measures for extreme events. Key stakehold-
ers should be the ones to spread awareness of moral values according to Expert I.5,
the main question is what is the role of government. Expert I.5 explained the role the
government plays by highlighting the lack of current proactive engagement with the icing
problem:
”Government institutions are not very involved in the operation and maintenance of wind
turbines...”
Given the low level of involvement on the part of the government, Expert I.5 also highlights
his observation about the lack of regularity in the current industry system:
”The system that is currently in place is not working perfectly because every owner and
every manufacturer knows best, and that is not a healthy strategy.”
Given the criticality of infrastructure such as wind farms, explained by Expert I.3, adapta-
tion to icing conditions is needed, especially when human lives are at stake. As Expert
I.3 also stresses, there is a willingness to create requirements for the supervision and
maintenance of wind farms to ensure human safety and the effective operation of these
installations. However, the industry should keep learning from the experience. Expert’s
I.3 statement highlighting these considerations is shown below.
”I think that there is an urgency to adapt and we should start implementation of rigorous
requirements to ensure resilience. This increase of strategies during icing signals a will-
ingness to learn and need to establish the necessary protocols for reliable and resilient
wind farm operations.”
In conclusion, there is a need for a more coordinated and consolidated way that encom-
passes all moral values in the wind energy industry strategic plans. This requires ongoing
commitment, especially for industry leaders as key stakeholders in promoting awareness
and integration of moral values.
Acknowledgement of standards and regulations
In the context of wind turbines in icing conditions, the third sub-indicator, which is ”Ac-
knowledgment of Standards and Regulations”, evaluates what kind of regulatory guide-
lines the industry is following. Below there are statements from experts regarding their
level of familiarity with the current situation of the regulatory framework.
Expert I.5 refers to the lack of uniformity in the industry, where each owner and mainte-
nance operator has its own approach. He also expresses his dream of the existence of an
organisation similar to the FAA in aviation, which would inspect and supervise the main-
tenance of wind turbines according to certain standards. However, he notes the difficulty
of establishing such an agency in the wind power industry, arguing that human lives are
not at risk, according to other experts.
”In my ideal world, there would be an organisation such as the FAA, which is the American
Aeronautical Federation or Federal Airline Agency, which inspects aircraft. If they are not
38
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:47==
maintained to their standard, then the aircraft does not get a licence or the licence is
revoked. Establishing such agency in wind industry seems difficult as many experts do
not think that people are at risk. I believe that it is not true, as many people have died
working on wind turbines. However, it is hard to compare to the aircraft industry because
when an aircraft crashes, several hundred people die. Of course, this should not be an
argument because one life is not more valuable than another.”
The same Expert I.5 from Denmark additionally described how the situation regarding
regulations and standards is in his country, pointing out the importance of existing stan-
dardisation organisations such as the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC),
Danish Standard and German Institute for Standardisation Registered Association (DIN).
Expert I.5 stresses that these standardisation rules play an important role in the design
and production process and are crucial for obtaining certification for the entire wind farm
and its individual components. This is because certification confirms that both design and
manufacturing meet the highest safety and efficiency standards. Additionally, Expert I.5
points to the existing standard for operational maintenance and its growing importance in
the industry. He notes that currently, best practices are virtually non-existent and that this
standard is an attempt to create a more unified approach for the operational maintenance
of wind turbines. The Expert’s I.5 statement is as follows:
”The government does not introduce any guidelines or regulations. This is dealt with by
the standardisation industry. This industry includes, for example, the IEC, Danish Stan-
dard and DIN, which work together to create standards, some of which are then used as
regulatory standards for design and production. These standards specify what the blades,
towers or foundations, for example, should be installed. There are already standards in
place that specify specific design aspects so that manufacturers has some basic rules to
follow to build a turbine that needs to be certified. If specific standards are not followed,
the wind farm and its components cannot be certified. I think that this is the main way how
authorities ensure that some rules are followed; I cannot think of anything else. However,
there is also one standard that is quite interesting. It’s about operational maintenance,
which is still in the early stages, but it’s a proactive approach from the industry to create
a more standardised benchmark for turbine operation and maintenance so that there are
some established best practices. This is indeed an important standard because currently,
best practice is essentially non-existent.”
Expert I.1 shed light on the situation in Sweden, emphasising that regulations in this coun-
try do not come directly from the government but from Environmental Impact Assessment
and building permits. During this process, the need for anti-icing systems at a given loca-
tion is determined. Environmental impact assessment is used by authorities to evaluate
the potential environmental impacts of wind farms before obtaining building permits. Ex-
pert’s I.1 confirming statement is:
”When it comes to the matter of icing, one may find, within the framework of operating
or construction permits, a potential requirement for the installation of an icing prevention
system in wind turbines. This isn’t necessarily a directive stemming directly from govern-
mental bodies; rather, it emanates from the broader environmental impact plan, assessing
how our construction may influence the surrounding ecosystem. Subsequently, govern-
ment agencies evaluate the particulars of permits based on factors such as the potential
risk of icing and its environmental impacts. Thus, during the initial phases of a project,
particularly during land acquisition, the need for an ice prevention system is determined
and specified within the permits.”
A different dynamic can be observed in the United States Expert I.3 from Texas presents
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
39
==PAGE:48==
the current situation in the state, emphasising the essence of freedom of action resulting
from the absence of imposed regulations. Texas, as a state characterised by unique
autonomy, is a fascinating example of a flexible approach to regulation in the energy
sector. Expert I.2 from Texas explained what is the situation regarding regulations in this
state:
”Texas operates more like the Wild West, enjoying a level of autonomy that allows them
considerable freedom, especially in terms of business. This independence also means
that Texas has fewer regulations compared to the whole United States. While this is
beneficial for business in some cases, it poses challenges when it comes to guaranteeing
the resilience of public infrastructure. During a recent storm, Texas faced icing issues with
wind turbines, but the cascading losses in the grid were primarily linked to disruptions in
natural gas production rather than the icing itself. Despite this, Texas hasn’t implemented
new regulations promptly. Although some studies were conducted, no concrete rules
have been put in place for renewable energy generation. In Texas, efforts are being
made to address these shortcomings and enhance the robustness of the grid for future
stability. However, as of now, specific regulations mandating preventive measures, such
as applying de-icing coatings to turbines, have not been established. Operators have
learned from past experiences, adopting techniques like tilting and rotating blades to shed
ice, but these are reactive measures rather than preventive ones.”
To sum up, countries already have some regulations and standards, but they vary for
each country. Taking it a step further, some countries don’t even have regulations and
corresponding standards yet. This shows that the industry is still in the early stages of
RRI’s sub-indicator ”Acknowledgment of Standards and Regulations”.
6.1.2
RRI Implementation
The second KPI is the ”RRI Implementation” and is divided into three sub-indicators: ”An-
ticipatory Design”, ”Collaboration and Data Sharing”, and ”Transparency”. This KPI eval-
uates the implementation of RRI principles based on the awareness of moral values. As
Expert I.4 emphasised:
”...having clear guidelines is crucial.”
The implementation phase of RRI in the area of wind farm operations in icing conditions
requires consideration of several key relevant sub-indicators, which are discussed and
explained below.
Anticipatory Design
The sub-indicator ”Anticipatory Design” evaluates current and future in foreseeing chal-
lenges of the wind energy industry guided by ethical values. In the context of wind farm
operations in icing conditions, anticipatory design can include research into modern anti-
icing technologies, analysis of meteorological forecasts, and development of adaptation
strategies. The sub-indicator ”Anticipatory Design” emphasises the need to foresee po-
tential problems and develop contingency plans
The biggest challenge is the lack of a complete understanding of the icing process, mak-
ing it difficult to accurately predict this phenomenon’s timing and frequency. Expert I.1
explains in detail all the hazardous implications of icing, on operation of wind farms and
local communities.
”The predominant challenge lies in our imperfect understanding of icing. It’s challenging
to predict precisely when and how often icing events will occur despite existing models
that allow for estimations. The technical challenges diverge in various directions. The
main concern relates to the potential damage that ice can cause to the infrastructure of
40
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:49==
the wind turbines. If the blades carry extra mass due to ice accumulation, it may lead
to structural damage, overloads, or even resonance. Consequently, operators often opt
to shut down the machine to prevent such harm. Secondly, predicting the impact on
profitability and cash flow becomes a significant challenge. Since operating with ice is
generally avoided, shutdowns are inevitable, leading to downtime. The third critical aspect
is the social dimension, considering the potential danger when the machine is in operation
and capable of throwing ice. Once shut down, the ice simply falls off. The uncertainty
lies in understanding how far the ice might be thrown, its potential size, velocity, and the
necessary precautions. The biggest unknown revolves around the community’s comfort
with predictions that the ice won’t pose a problem. Establishing trust requires a credible
narrative and reliable information, assuring them that the wind plant won’t cause harm to
them, their livestock, or nearby surroundings.”
Preventive strategies and additional safety measures are needed when there is a risk of
serious structural damage, such as blade or tower failures. As Expert I.1 points out, this
rest mainly on developers and operators of wind farms:
”Wind farm developers and operators should anticipate challenges related to the risk of
severe structural damage, including blade and tower failures. They should have plans
and enhanced safety measures for such extreme events as icing.”
Current forecasting practices for performance deviate from reality, which significantly im-
pacts project profitability. The anticipatory approach indicates the need to improve fore-
casting processes and provide reliable information to avoid inaccuracies between fore-
casts and actual performance. Expert I.5 provided an example that indicates how the
situation currently stands in the wind power industry:
”Often, wind farms are built in locations where an average yield of, let’s say, 50% is ex-
pected, but in reality, industry end up with 33% or 30%. This means wind turbines do not
produce as much as initially predicted during construction.”
Improving the prediction of the economic aspects of icing conditions enables more ef-
fective preparation and management of potential losses in the wind power industry. By
accurately predicting the economic challenges of icing, the industry can more effectively
plan risk management strategies and adapt to changing weather conditions. To this end,
the industry is directing efforts to understand better the economic losses associated with
icing. During the interviews, Expert I.1 presented the economic losses due to icing based
on the information from the WinterWind conference 2023. Expert I.1 outlined that not only
does the loss of production affect the economic loss of icing but also the cost of sourc-
ing missing production due to financial obligations and the cost of loss of more valuable
production. The forecasts of financial losses due to icing that are estimated to be around
3% of annual energy production can be even 10% in real life. The Figure below presents
the estimated economic losses due to icing presented during the WinterWind conference
and explained by Expert I.1.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 6.1: Proposal to estimate economic icing losses [126]
In summary, currently the problem lies in understanding the risk of icing. The industry is
working on adaptation strategies based on the current state of knowledge. However, ex-
perts in their statements stressed that there is a need for further improvement. According
to them, first, there is a need to adjust the prediction of annual production from the project
and then understand what are the economic takeoffs associated with icing.
Collaboration and Data Sharing
Wind energy, is a complex industry that involves many stakeholders, such as develop-
ers, manufacturers, operators, regulators, scientific and local communities. Cooperation
among them is crucial for the successful implementation of RRI. This includes sharing
information, coordinating actions in case of hazards, and open communication about
progress, challenges and results of anti-icing research. Sharing data on icing hazards
and the effectiveness of applied solutions is key to improving the safety and efficiency of
wind farm development and operations. Sub-indicator ”Collaboration and Data Sharing”
highlights the need to facilitate information sharing, particularly in the context of anti-icing
solutions.
Initiatives such as wind energy digitalisation point to the attempts to create structures
allowing data access while securing it. As Expert I.4 acknowledged in his statement:
”Data sharing is a broader topic, initiatives like the recent webinar on wind energy digital-
isation, led by Andy Clifton’s founder of enviConnect, help to create structures for acces-
sible and protected data entry.”
To enhance collective efforts of knowledge sharing, wind energy industry is creating spe-
cial conferences. Expert I.1 presents an example of such an event specifically dedicated
to the icing operation of wind farms, which is called WinterWind. This conference takes
place every year in Sweden to present new innovations and practical experiences to bet-
ter understand how to deal with icing conditions. Expert I.1 attended the conference and
shared the importance and role of the event:
”Winter Wind is an annual event where the Swedish wind organisation presents a variety
of research, providing valuable information on operations in Arctic conditions. Attendees
at this conference can gain important insights, especially when operating in the winter
42
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:51==
months under icing conditions. In addition, organised field trips allow participants to visit
wind farms similar to those where research on Arctic conditions is conducted. It is worth
noting that Winter Wind is also a platform on which the Swedish Wind Energy Organi-
zation, with more than 650 members representing various sectors, collaborates, sharing
knowledge and experience to effectively deal with the challenges of Arctic conditions and
ice in the wind energy industry.”
Collaboration with authorities is key to identifying economic implications and potential
incentives or regulations related to anti-icing. Expert I.5 suggests that working together
allows for effective responses to the economic aspects of anti-icing. As one interview
participant emphasised:
”Collaborating with experts and developers can help authorities make informed decisions
about implementation of various de-icing technologies.”
One statement points to a lack of knowledge sharing in the wind power industry, espe-
cially in operations and maintenance (O&M). The criticism focuses on O&M, which often
maintains secrecy and treats information like trade secrets, which is an obstacle to effec-
tive knowledge sharing. This reluctance to cooperate generates a divide between origi-
nal equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and resource holders, both nationally and globally.
Despite the existence of some initiatives to bridge this gap, such as exclusive resource
holder groups, the problem of a culture of widespread knowledge sharing still exists. In-
dustry conferences are often where large companies declare cooperation, but the overall
knowledge-sharing culture is not developed. As a result, despite the global use of similar
turbine models, information on common problems and their solutions is not widely shared,
creating frustration for those observing the industry flooded with opportunities for shared
learning, analogous to car communities where car owners freely share knowledge online.
Expert I.5 puts it this way:
”I’d like to transition to initial question about knowledge sharing within the industry, and
my response is that there isn’t enough. Many asset owners are willing to share their
knowledge, but there’s a distinct contrast when it comes to Operations and Maintenance
(O&M) teams. The O&M sector tends to be secretive, treating information as confidential.
T This situation often leads to a division between asset owners and Original Equipment
Manufacturers, this dynamic is not only observed in the USA but also globally. Some
initiatives, like asset owners’ exclusive groups, attempt to address this gap, providing a
platform for knowledge exchange. However, at large conferences, major companies may
talk about collaboration at their level, yet the broader knowledge-sharing culture is lacking.
Despite the global use of similar turbine models, information about common issues and
solutions isn’t widely shared, creating frustration for those observing the industry’s missed
opportunities for collaborative learning, akin to how other communities, like car owners,
freely share knowledge online.”
As a result, many experts need to use their own networks to follow the situation in industry.
Expert I.5 presents his own method of collaboration that he uses in his daily work.
”We are also involved in collaboration with DTU University and are working together on
new ways to monitor lightning and understand the reduction in energy production from
erosion or control the prevention of erosion by stopping turbines during rainfall. Of course,
being a blade specialist, I have a network of blade specialists that I talk to. I engage in
dialogue from the service side and from the wind farm owner’s side to share knowledge of
what is happening in the industry as I have little knowledge of what is going on in the world,
so I often use my network of colleagues. I try to keep up with new types of blades coming
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
43
==PAGE:52==
onto the market that may have particular problems, and I try to develop a maintenance
strategy for them to ensure they last for their lifetime.”
To summarise the expert’s perspective, the industry is currently working on enhancing col-
laboration among themselves through investments in conferences such as WinterWind to
share innovations and exchange experiences related to icing issues on wind turbines.
The industry is also working on platforms such as enviConnect to share data safely. De-
spite these efforts, the wind energy industry faces resistance from turbine manufacturers
to share their data, so there is a problem with a culture of broad knowledge sharing, which
affects effective collaboration.
Transparency
The sub-indicator ”Transparency” assesses how the wind energy industry ensures access
to truthful and reliable information between each other and other external stakeholders.
Being open in communication in the context of business is actually not an obligation, but
in the context of RRI, hiding information can hinder the perspective of society towards
wind energy. In the case of wind farm operations in icing conditions, it is important to
make available information about the technologies used, research processes, safety test
results, and possible icing incidents.
According to the section about ”Collaboration and Data Sharing”, the wind energy industry
willingly shares information and results of its research during conferences. However, as
Expert I.5 outlined, the issue with transparency lies in equipment operators and manufac-
turers (O&M), as they are not eager to provide their models of yield assessment. That
is why developers have to use external companies to check if the project is not at risk of
implications such as icing because they are concerned that O&M will present the situation
in their own favour. The confirmation can be found in Expert’s I.5 statement:
”I believe that a significant responsibility lies with equipment operators and manufacturers
(O&M) because they conduct yield assessment so they are aware of the expected rainfall
and icing conditions, as the wind profile determines whether a wind farm can be econom-
ically viable in a particular area. Therefore, I think they should bear greater responsibility
for sharing the actual results of their models. This way, they cannot present information
in an overly positive manner or alter certain data to make wind farms appear better than
they actually are. Farm owners should find out in advance whether icing is a significant
issue...”
Additionally, Expert I.5 presents a possible solution to facilitate more transparent sharing
of specific information by introducing regulations. Expert I.5 suggests that these regu-
lations are key to ensuring the reliability of the information, which will enable owners to
make informed decisions about location, turbine type and maintenance strategies.
”... Hence, I believe there should be regulations that facilitate more transparent sharing
of such information.”
To sum up, there is a clear need for increased transparency in the wind power industry in
the context of icing. From the expert quotes, it can be seen that the industry has some
ideas to improve resistance from turbine manufacturers in sharing detailed data. Imple-
menting regulations to support would be a key step toward increasing public confidence
in wind projects and more effective cooperation among various industry players.
6.1.3
RRI Assessment
The third KPI, which is ”RRI Assessment”, is broken into three sub-indicators: ”Techno-
logical Innovation and Adaptation”, ”Risk Assessment and Management”, and ”Financial
44
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:53==
Resilience and Business Continuity”. This KPI evaluates different preparedness strate-
gies by exploring strengths and weaknesses in mitigation measures to icing conditions on
wind energy systems.
Technological Innovation and Adaptation,
The sub-indicator ”Technological Innovation and Adaptation” assesses specific mitigation
approaches by the implementation of innovations and adaption strategies.
In the case of technology, it helps to identify if the current innovations, such as anti-icing
systems, are enough to handle the icing events on wind turbines. As expert I.5 confirm in
his statement:
”The primary challenge for resilience in the wind industry is the increasing frequency and
intensity of extreme weather events, such as icing. These events can lead to damage
and downtime, making it necessary to develop and implement innovative technologies to
ensure the resilience of wind turbines during icing events.”
Expert I.5 also outlines that to enhance the resilience of wind farms, a number of different
technological solutions to prevent ice accumulation are currently available on the mar-
ket. However, there is no perfect solution to be sure that wind turbines can operate in
icing conditions. Expert I.5 presents solutions for ice prevention on wind turbines in his
statement.
”Innovative technologies to enhance resilience during icing events include advanced anti-
icing systems, improved blade coatings, and sensors for real-time ice detection. De-
sign strategies focus on optimising the turbine’s ability to remove ice. Some turbines
use heated components to prevent ice accumulation or employ aerodynamic designs to
reduce ice formation.”
Cases of innovative anti-icing systems, such as heating elements on blades, are proving
significant reductions in icing-related downtime. Implementation of such systems assists
in maintaining turbine performance in icing conditions. The successful application of coat-
ings on blades to reduce ice adhesion confirms the effectiveness of innovations in specific
regions. Expert I.5:
”There are case studies where improved anti-icing systems, such as electrical heating
elements on blades, have significantly reduced ice-related downtime. These systems help
maintain performance during icing conditions. Blade coatings that minimise ice adhesion
have also shown success in certain regions.”
Expert I.1 presents existing solutions to mitigate the effects of ice accumulation on blades
based on knowledge gained during the WinterWind conference.
The first solution that Expert I.1 mentions is the use of heating systems, such as heating
mats woven into the blades during construction, which is widely recognised as an effective
method of preventing ice build-up on wind turbine blades.
Another more advanced one is using nanotechnology, such as NEINICE coating, which is
an effective method of repelling moisture when applied to turbine blades. Such a coating
helps prevent moisture from adhering to the blades, improving their performance during
and once icing phenomena occur.
Next technology is energy storage systems, which can support turbines in icing conditions.
It is very useful and assist in powering de-icing systems, ensuring that turbines continue
to operate even in severe weather conditions.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
45
==PAGE:54==
In addition, there is a need to develop fast and automatic ice detection systems. De-
veloping accurate and automatic methods of detecting ice build-up on blades is crucial
for rapid response and prevention of performance degradation. The company Eologix is
currently working on preventive algorithms by investigating when to operate and when to
stop operation during icing conditions with and without the heating of blades. Expert I.1
explained Eologix results during the interview:
The first thing we talked about during the WinterWind conference was preventative ice
cycles. Normally, industry have reactive ice preventive cycles, which means that if industry
have a blade heating system, it is triggered when the torque is low enough, and industry
have certain conditions like low temperature and wind speed. But actually, it was shown
that if industry stop before a very aggressive icing event hits and start after it has passed,
it turns out that industry will get a lot better results. So, if industry are just stopping the
turbine reactively, industry come down to an effect of 43% compared with stopping before
icing conditions preventively; industry can recover up to 90%. Heating helps even more;
if industry act reactively with the heating system, industry can recover up to 94%, and if
industry do it preventively, industry can recover even 97%. Heating helps a great deal in
both cases, but allocating heating preventively rather than reactively can also get back to
operation way faster.”
The figure presents the stimulation of Eologix company results that are explained by Ex-
pert I.1.
Figure 6.2: Comparison of operation and heat strategy of Eologix company [127]
A final important aspect is ice classification, which is used to decide whether or not a
de-icing system should be installed. Current classifications may not adequately take into
account the complexity of ice accumulation and its impact on wind turbines. Expert I.1
mentioned that during the WinterWind event, company Nergica presented results of the
redefinition of ice classification by including more categories to the original IEA ice clas-
sification [128].
To summarise, the industry is actively working on many innovations and strategies to
make wind farms more resilient to icing, which aligns with RRI principles. Despite the fact
of the existence of mitigation strategies, in reality, the implementation process is slow due
46
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:55==
to the high cost of these technologies.
Risk Assessment and Management
The sub-indicator ”Risk Assessment and Management” evaluates how the wind energy
industry forecasts and takes care of risks associated with icing on wind turbines.
The most common risk is blade ice accumulation, which leads to loss of production and
can impose danger to wind farm visitors. To assess risk, different factors such as fre-
quency of icing, potential financial losses, worker safety and the impact on energy pro-
duction should be considered. As Expert I.4 outlines in the statement, effective risk man-
agement requires developing the ability to first identify potential risks and their probability.
”The aim is to enhance modelling and prediction capabilities to better understand and
anticipate the risks associated with icing”
Insurance companies use disaster teams, such as Natcat teams, to assess risks associ-
ated with structures, including wind turbines. Expert I.5 suggests that similar teams could
be used to identify the risk of icing on turbine blades. Expert I.5:
”Currently, there are weather models that are utilised by insurance companies. In these
companies, teams responsible for natural disasters are formed, commonly known as Nat-
Cat teams. This operates in the following way: if industry want to build a house, wind
turbine, or any other structure, the NatCat team examines the area where the construc-
tion is to take place. NatCat then assesses the risk of the worst possible events and
their probabilities of occurring over. The NatCat team estimates far in advance because
if something can happen once in 10,000 years, it is still a likely event, and every proba-
bility carries risk. NatCat scrutinises the risk for each region where industry want to build
something. They then build risk models for that specific area and determine the premium
accordingly. So, there are teams that assess the risk but do not share their analyses with
the property owners.”
Expert I.1 stresses that both traditional structures and urban buildings are subject to the
phenomenon of icing, which is a common element in various environments. However,
wind turbines are a specific structure that is definitely taller and in constant motion, which
poses an additional risk. Expert I.1:
”I think that just like any structure, even a house in a city is subject to icing. Of course,
wind turbines are structures more than 100 meters in the air, so the risk of falling ice is
somewhat higher. In addition, the object is rotating, so the ejection of ice can be much
greater. However, to mitigate this problem, signs are being put to warn of this danger.”
When assessing icing risks, it is important to carry out a site-specific risk assessment.
Expert I.1 stresses that, even if the turbines are reliable, a detailed site-specific risk as-
sessment is necessary, taking into account specific weather conditions for specific areas.
Expert I.1:
”While turbines may meet high standards, a specific risk assessment for the location is
crucial.”
In the context of risk assessment and management, especially in Sweden, it is necessary
to stop wind turbines in case of icing to avoid the risk of ice ejection. Public safety is a
priority, which emphasises the need to monitor and respond to icing hazards, as Expert
I.1 pointed out:
”I am not sure how it is operating in the different parts of the world, but definitely in Sweden,
the turbines need to be stopped cause otherwise industry will have a risk of ice throw. In
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
47
==PAGE:56==
Sweden, as there is a lot of ice build-up, it can be very dangerous.”
In conclusion, the wind power industry is currently focusing on developing effective strate-
gies to manage the risks associated with turbine blade icing. There are already some risk
management strategies like signs warnings from ice throw. However, from expert’s state-
ment it seems that there is a still need for more proactive approaches
Financial Resilience and Business Continuity
The sub-indicator ”Financial Resilience and Business Continuity” evaluates to what extent
the wind energy industry is financially resilient in case of icing. Therefore, it examines if
the industry is prepared for icing by insurance policies and strategies to maintain stable
and continuous energy production from wind farms.
Assessing financial resilience and business continuity requires a broader socioeconomic
perspective. Building an weather resilient turbine can lead to increased costs, which will
affect finances of investors. It is important to find a balance between weather resilience
and project profitability, as one Expert I.3 points out:
”However, I don’t think we should stand back, but we should avoid proving everything
against everything by looking at the socio-economic lenses. If industry starts to design
wind turbines against all types of risks, then the investors would not be able to afford it.”
Planning anti-icing systems requires careful calculations and assessments of the impact
on profitability. Some wind farms, despite the lack of de-icing systems, may be economi-
cally viable because the cost of implementation outweighs the loss of business interrup-
tion. Expert I.1:
”When I was an operator of a wind farm in north Sweden, I did not have a de-icing system
because it was calculated that there was no need for such a system, even though the
blades looked tragic with a huge accumulation of ice. To some extent, it looked like this
every year, but the cost of using de-icing mats during construction was higher than what
industry will lose in revenue from the operation of this wind turbine due to ice. That is
why the definite decision was not to build these turbines with de-icing systems. It was
preliminary calculated that we would have an 8% loss of annual energy production, which
cannot be converted into the instalment of these mats. Before construction, this type of
calculation is done based on an energy efficiency assessment which reflects more or less
the reality but is not as precise as I would like it to be.”
Expert I.1 also stresses the need for a balanced approach to anti-icing systems.
”Balance the economic implications of de-icing systems, considering both the costs of
implementation and the potential losses due to downtime.”
However, as the Expert I.1 points out, it is not that simple:
”Secondly, predicting the impact on profitability and cash flow becomes a significant chal-
lenge. Since operating with ice is generally avoided, shutdowns are inevitable, leading to
downtime.”
Local communities are often open to the growing renewable energy sector when they
bring economic benefits. Expert I.3 stresses the importance of considering the economic
benefits for local communities and the need to ensure public acceptance of wind projects:
”Communities, so even though in areas which would naturally oppose renewable energy,
they are very accommodating when the economic benefits arrive. This is something that
the wind industry should consider.”
48
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:57==
In summary, the wind power industry is trying to assess its financial resilience and busi-
ness continuity in winter conditions, especially those related to turbine blade icing. There
is a need to take a broader socioeconomic perspective to find a balance between weather
resilience and project profitability. Planning for anti-icing systems requires precise calcu-
lations. Currently, the main justification for ice prevention systems is mostly based on
economic aspects, not really taking into account social aspects.
6.2
Case Study Tropical Cyclones
6.2.1
RRI Awareness
The first KPI for this case study is ”RRI Awareness”, which is divided into three sub-
indicators: ”Awareness of moral values”, ”Acknowledgment of Moral Values in Industry
Strategic Plan”, and ”Acknowledgement of Standards and Regulations”.
Raising awareness in the context of RRI in the tropical cyclone wind industry is crucial,
particularly when wind farms are built in areas exposed to this phenomenon. Tropical
cyclones pose a challenge because of strong winds and the need to adapt structures to
these conditions, as outlined in the chapter 3.
Moral value awareness
In the context of the sub-indicator ”Moral Values Awareness”, Expert TC.3 stresses the
growth of the wind energy market and industry. However, ensuring sustainability and full
responsibility is important, which shows that the industry recognises a set of moral values.
Expert TC.3:
”I mean, it is clear that the wind power market will continue to grow much bigger and
faster than we have seen. I think that the industry has already learned quite a lot, but
of course, learning has to continue. It has an amazing future, and I think that everyone
agrees on that. But of course, the challenge, as I say, is to make this industry as resilient
but also as, let’s say, sustainable as possible for not only the environmental aspect but
also economic aspects. And of course, from the public sector side also, how countries
can continue to promote and support those technologies in the most effective way. And
that includes not only the cost-related aspect but also something very important that the
industry mentioned, and it’s the engagement with communities, sustainability aspects,
environmental aspects, ecosystems, and so on. And most of those are already being
investigated. I think that there is a need, to continue to spread the good practices and
continue to try to address the gaps.”
The wind energy industry tries to provide stable energy access to society, but due to
extreme events such as tropical cyclones, some major interference can appear. Expert
TC.1 explain the reasoning behind this:
”The wind energy industry wants to, of course, deliver a stable power supply to the net-
work or to customers, and during such events as tropical cyclones, it can be noticed that
turbines would need to basically shut down because of severe wind speeds. So the issue
that industry faces is how to ensure that they don’t shut down an entire park and then
suddenly there is no power in the grid.”
To summarise, because of wind energy industry expansion, there is a need to look more
holistically at impacts such as tropical cyclones, including many different factors. Not
only wind turbines but also accompanying infrastructure like grid resilience matter in the
context of a stable power supply. Taking it all into account the industry currently is able to
acknowledge a set of moral values.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
49
==PAGE:58==
Acknowledgment of Moral Values in Industry Strategic Plan
The sub-indicator ”Acknowledgment of Moral Values in the Industry’s Strategic Plan” eval-
uates how the industry is including moral values in strategic plans when wind farms are
located in areas prone to tropical cyclones.
Expert TC.2 outlines that the job of scientists is to only support developers in decisions
on which turbine to choose by creating designs that are as resilient as possible to tropical
cyclones. However, Expert TC.2 also points out that developers are the ones who are the
decision-makers. In confirmation, the following is a statement from Expert TC.2:
”Scientist generally works on how to make wind farm designs more resilient to tropical
cyclones. But developers are the ones who decide on the specified type of turbine that is
going to be used according to their assessment.”
Furthermore, Expert TC.3 emphasised the importance of incorporating mitigation mea-
sures throughout the life cycle of wind turbines - from installation and commissioning to
operation, maintenance and decommissioning. This approach reflects a commitment to
moral values, looking beyond the technical aspects and considering the broader environ-
mental and social impacts of wind energy technology. Expert TC.3 confirmed the reflec-
tion of this thesis:
”If the industry has a weather event like a tropical cyclone with a high impact, it will def-
initely require additional research and development, like new materials, new designs or
new safety measures in the machine itself. Then, the industry has some steps in be-
tween. It also considers the mitigation measures across the whole lifecycle. When the
industry installs and commissions the wind turbine, it also evaluates what can be done to
anticipate and avoid those impacts. During the operation and maintenance, the industry
evaluates what are the different measures that can implemented. Industry also considers
decommissioning, but that’s more about sustainability and corporate responsibility.”
During events such as tropical cyclones, no one is allowed to access wind turbines be-
cause these structures are designed in a manner that can be operated online. There are
also different reliability levels, but what can be understood from the Expert TC.1 state-
ment is that there are many different scenarios of the impact of tropical cyclones on wind
turbines and accompanying substations and grids. As these can be operated remotely,
experts cannot see a direct effect on people’s lives but can see a hidden one, which is a
loss of energy. However, Expert TC.1 points out that the industry is taking into account
this issue in design, which is explained in the statement below.
”I mean, there’s not supposed to be anybody on the structures like wind farms if they
experience a tropical cyclone. I mean, they are designed for that. I mean, basically,
you have different exposure levels, right? So, we design towards a 50-year level and
50-year return period because these structures are unmanned. So, there are different,
you could say, reliability levels depending on how the structure is supposed to be used.
But of course, I mean, then actually, there’s a different reliability level for the substation
because you could say one thing is if one turbine breaks down, another thing if the offshore
substation breaks down, then you would see a huge grid loss. And then you could, as you
say, look into scenarios where people would lose power, and that would create a disaster.
And I think I have the feeling that that’s already accounted for in the design approach, at
least.”
Expert TC.3 believe that wind energy has the potential to be the most resilient option
even in extreme weather conditions to produce electricity, and the wind energy industry
is already confirmed to be independent from fossil fuels. Furthermore, wind energy also
50
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:59==
proved to be the solution for the issues of access to electricity in remote areas, according
to Expert TC.3. All the advantages of wind energy systems, according to Expert TC.3,
are presented below:
”In terms of resiliency, it’s clear to me also that wind energy systems are among the most
resilient options ever because they do not depend on importing fuels that require a whole
infrastructure that is exposed to externalises and geopolitics. And also in terms of infras-
tructure, they have proven that they can withstand very difficult weather conditions. And
at the end, they are the most resilient solution for communities that are really in remote
areas or even have no access to the grid. So, for me, it’s clear that renewables, in gen-
eral, including wind power, are going to be the resilient and affordable energy source of
the future.”
To sum up, the wind energy industry seems prepared and is able to acknowledge a few
moral values in its strategic plan in the face of tropical cyclones. Even if it is optimistic
about the resilience to withstand all the hardships of tropical cyclones, it still needs to
be more strategic by taking into consideration all of the implications, which are not really
captured in expert statements.
Acknowledgement of standards and regulations
The sub-indicator ”Acknowledgment of Standards and Regulations,” evaluates important
aspects of the regulatory framework of wind turbine development in areas that are prone to
tropical cyclones. Current challenges and expert perspectives on the subject are outlined
below.
Expert TC.6 outlines that currently, there are some standards that consider the effect of
tropical cyclones. However, these standards differ only a bit from general ones. In the
statement, Expert TC.6 criticises these standards by explaining why these are not good
enough and need additional revaluation depending on the location of these phenomena.
Expert TC.6:
”There are some standards that take into account typhoon class or tropical storm class.
All that changes in the normal ones is that it increases the maximum wind speed by a
little bit. And that was chosen to sort of envelope the highest wind speeds that were seen
around the world at 90 to 95 per cent of the locations where we’ve seen this, not 100
per cent. But it doesn’t get around the fact that in order to install a specific wind plant
offshore in a place that’s exposed to tropical cyclones, you not only need to design them
for tropical cyclones, but you also need to assess the risk of that specific location for those
wind turbines in your site suitability assessment. So, the turbines may be standard for a
very high level of wind, but then you have to actually do the calculation that says how
much risk that turbine still has in that particular location. So, in various places, like the
northern part of the U.S. coast, the hurricane risk is lower. The intensity of the storms
is lower because they’re farther from the tropics. So you end up with a typhoon-class
wind turbine that’s likely to be good enough for most of the situations there. If you go
further south, into the tropics, or if you go to East Asia into places around China, Vietnam,
and perhaps even South Korea and Japan, you may have high risks because the storms
may be more intense. Yeah. And with the climate changes, who knows what’s going to
happen, right?”
Expert TC.5 explains why it is important to evaluate the norms so that they can be used
correctly for future events. Expert TC.5:
I guess there is always a need to revise and revisit those norms to make sure that they
are up-to-date and that because, yeah, they have been developed for the risks from the
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
51
==PAGE:60==
past. So, but whether they are fit to deal with the risks of the future, that would be the
question, whether they need to be updated or maybe they are fine, but you need to come
back to them and make sure that that’s the case.
Expert TC.3 mentions that there is a lack of reflection on international standards of wind
turbines for developing countries. As these places are more prone to extreme weather
conditions and are future markets of the wind energy industry, there is a need to align the
international standards to specified for a specific region. Expert TC.3 explains this issue
comprehensively in the statement below.
In the case of wind power, like many other technologies, it’s mainly developed countries
that have an industry to produce and sell that technology. Now, the challenge with that
is that those standards developed by those companies mainly reflect the conditions of
their markets. So far, the markets have been basically the North Hemisphere, so the US,
Europe, and North Asia. As you said, the potential future markets are in different regions,
for example, in the Middle East, Africa, Latin America, and Southeast Asia, and they have
very different weather conditions, more extreme temperatures, typhoons and cyclones,
etc. So, the recommendation there is that we need to find a way that those emerging and
developing countries can also be represented and participate in the technical committees
that develop those standards. In that way, these local conditions, let’s say, which are more
extreme, can already be addressed by international standards. There will be no need to
develop additional standards to cover certain aspects because they are not included in
the international ones. So some organisations of the wind energy industry have been
very vocal about that, that we need to find ways that developing countries and emerging
economies, which are the future markets for these technologies, also participate there,
also because they need to reflect their local weather conditions in this technology.
To summarise, there is acknowledgement from the wind energy industry of international
standards for wind turbines exposed to higher wind speeds. However, these are not
perfect as they do not reflect specific regional conditions and are not adjusted to countries
that are still developing. As the process of creation of such standards takes years, experts
believe that there is a need for more intensified national collaboration to address this issue.
6.2.2
RRI Implementation
The next KPI is ”RRI Implementation”, which is broken into three sub-indicators: ”Anticipa-
tory Design”, ”Collaboration and Data Sharing”, and ”Transparency”. This sub-indicator
evaluates the extent to which industry ventures implement RRI principles in practice in
accordance with moral values.
Anticipatory design
The sub-indicator ”Anticipatory Design,” evaluates how the wind energy industry is prepar-
ing for the risk of tropical cyclones on their wind farms.
Expert TC.2 presents in a statement what is wind industry’s approach towards operation
during extreme wind speeds. There are different aspects of wind that can harm wind
turbines which challenges the operators as Expert TC.2 points out in her statement:
”Basically, one of the basic things is that we shut down the turbine when the wind is getting
too strong. But sometimes it’s not only the wind speed but also the direction of the wind.
But how to make the turbine know this, you know, this damaging or this challenging, this
danger is coming. We are using advanced technology to, you know, to simulate it or to
observe it before it comes, you know, before it arrives and to shut down, to save it.”
Expert TC.5 explains two main factors for improving the resilience of wind farms under
tropical cyclones. The first one is to try to create new designs that can sustain these con-
52
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:61==
ditions and the second one is to keep working on predictions of occurrence and migration
of tropical cyclone paths by enhancing projections. The Expert’s TC.5 explanation and
reasoning are presented below.
”So I would say, I guess one challenge for the engineers would be to design machines
that can extract energy and that are resilient to the passage of tropical cyclones. The
other thing, of course, is trying to know more about as much as possible where you have
the risks of tropical cyclones. And then, in these times with climate change, you would
also like to know how those patterns will change in the future. What we know right know
is a warmer climate or a warmer atmosphere is, in a sense, more able to hold moisture.
And moisture is sort of the fuel of a tropical cyclone. So if you have moisture available,
then it is available to be transformed into water. And in that transformation, you have a
lot of release of heating, which is what makes a tropical cyclone more intense. So yeah,
the expectation would be to have more intense conditions in the future. But there are
other aspects. It’s not just intensity. It’s also where and when they would occur. And
those are more complex processes. There is also a large uncertainty in the changes to
the circulation in the atmosphere. So they are not easy things to predict because there
are many, many factors that go into them. I mean, the models that meteorologists have
are always getting better, slowly sometimes, but they are getting better. So, there is
information from the climate models that are being developed, and there is more and
more data available of better quality. So, I guess one thing is to keep an eye on the
development of science and climate change. And the other aspect is trying to design new
turbines that can cope better with the conditions.”
Additionally, Expert TC.4 outlines that there are designs of different components of wind
turbines that can sustain typhoons. However, these are still not perfect. The Expert’s
TC.4 statement is presented below.
”There are now typhoon-certified turbine types where the blades and turbines are more
resistant to extreme weather events, but they still have some limitations.”
Expert TC.4 also mentions the issue of the wind industry trying to design wind farms big-
ger to harvest as much energy as possible from one infrastructure. However, he raises
his concern about complications and emphasises that the wind energy industry is cur-
rently discussing if that should be the main approach. Expert’s TC.4 considerations are
presented below.
”One of the concerns is the size and the diameter of the wind turbine rotors. As we go
bigger and bigger, then, of course, the stress and the fatigue on the blade may increase.
And also, for example, the problems of being impacted by very high winds. So, there
is now a discussion on whether wind turbines should continue to grow in size or should
now kind of stop and become more modular instead of just having bigger and bigger wind
turbines. I think this is an important discussion that the industry is having at the moment.”
To sum up, the wind energy industry is working on anticipatory approaches towards the
operation and development of wind farms in the face of tropical cyclones. All of them
anticipate the risks and explain possible mitigation strategies and aspects to improve so
that wind energy is more resilient towards tropical cyclones. From experts’ statements, it
can be seen that there are a lot of different concerns and ongoing discussions of how to
approach the challenges of the design of wind turbines.
Collaboration and Data sharing
The sub-indicator, ”Collaboration and Data Sharing,” evaluates how the wind energy in-
dustry is sharing data and working together to prepare for the issue of tropical cyclones.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
53
==PAGE:62==
Industry stakeholders may be hesitant to collaborate openly due to concerns about pro-
tecting their financial interests and competitive advantage, according to Expert TC.6.
”Sharing data has been a topic not just in extreme weather, but in the maintenance of
the plants and operations of the plants as well. There’s a lot of talk about sharing data,
but then two factors are, data is generally considered to be proprietary and a competitive
advantage for each company to own and protect their own data. So they’re not willing to
share it for economic reasons. And also, sharing data will require effort.”
Expert TC.3 points out that in order to create better norms, there should be more col-
laboration between different stakeholders of the wind energy industry as the process of
standardisation is time-consuming, and many countries have been working on the same
things for a couple of years, which is not really efficient.
”So these standards for any industry, including the wind power industry, have to cover,
again, the whole life cycle and aspects of the technology. And that certainly includes what
is called Environmental Sustainability Impacts. Climate change is having an impact on
changing weather events, making them more frequent and more intense. Two pieces of
advice for standardisation bodies should be crucial. The first one is that the scientific and
academic community should be more involved in the development of standards in a coop-
erative way, because the scientific community is the one who is assessing or evaluating
and coming up with new approaches to address those challenges. And again, creating
standards involves processes that are slow. The importance lies as early as possible,
let’s say, sharing that knowledge and findings from the scientific community with the stan-
dardisation community. And also the international collaboration on that, because we have
seen, for example, cases where two, three, four, five countries are actually researching
on the same topic.”
Expert TC.5 outlines the issue with collaboration by explanation of how some efforts can-
not find end users. Expert TC.5:
”Yeah, I think this is always like the collaboration efforts, yes, but it’s like when you’re
developing all the strategies, I think it’s sometimes tough to find end users that can actually
use that in the real life, and sometimes the purpose of some researchers is to just develop
these things that if anyone will need at some point something useful from that, maybe that
will be ... Yeah, but I guess part of the job is to try to advertise what we are doing and
approach the people who we think might use it.”
Summarising the Experts’ quotes, a picture emerges of a lack of full collaboration between
industry stakeholders. However, it can also be seen from the statements that the experts
see these challenges and are aware of them. In addition, they are reflexive about what
works well and what still needs to be improved in terms of collaboration and sharing data.
A good summary of this problem and what should be improved, along with an example of
collaboration, was provided by Expert TC.2:
”I understand that this issue is really complex and full of uncertainties, and I believe that
the whole community should work together, sharing knowledge, to effectively deal with
issues related to tropical cyclone resilience. One example of a promising cooperative
effort was the Taiwan Strait Wind Park, which perfectly illustrates the situation. Both the
Danish and Taiwanese governments seem to have played a positive role by encouraging
university cooperation with developers and allowing access to certain data. Unfortunately,
due to different regulations in the two regions, the university has not agreed to comply with
Taiwan’s regulations. However, I believe that by learning from this type of situation, the
government had good intentions to reach an agreement between universities and the
54
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:63==
company to improve collaboration between researchers and developers.”
Transparency
The sub-indicator, ”Transparency,” evaluates how the wind energy industry is clear and
open about strategies, equipment and technological advances.
Expert TC.1 statement indicates that he himself is not sure how much he can disclose in
this context due to his obligations to suppliers, who are reluctant to share their data due
to commitments towards suppliers, which can present an insufficient transparency level.
However, it is understandable that Expert TC.1 might be committed to some contracts.
The Expert’s TC.1 statement is presented below.
”I guess what I can say is that, of course, I mean, for instance, you would have your
sensors. You would need to ensure that they can sustain even higher wind speeds. So
you would have sensors that would tell you when you could – yeah, maybe a sensor that
would tell you how to yaw your turbine in extreme wind speeds, and maybe you would
have to ensure that you could say all the different hardware that you have in your system
needs to be able to sustain an even higher wind speed when you move into areas like
this. So there’s – yeah, more strict requirements for these areas. Yeah. I’m honestly not
sure how much I can reveal because it’s not – you could say it’s not our technology, right?
We buy it from suppliers. So, of course, we have some information, but they are also very
protective about it.”
Expert TC.1 also reflects on who and why should be transparent. In his statement, he
mentions that transparency by collaboration is important between developers and de-
velopers and manufacturers. However, he cannot see the point of manufacturers being
transparent with each other as they are competitors, and it can affect their business. The
Expert’s TC.1 statement is presented below.
”Developers and operators of wind farms have to work with manufacturers on a daily basis,
at least partly, to achieve the goal and make a cost-efficient design for our wind turbines
and support structures, and basically put out as many turbines as we can with a cost-
efficient design, balanced towards a certain reliability level or a sufficient reliability level.
So, where I’m getting with this, I mean, for developers, it is important to collaborate in
terms of different technology advances. The different manufacturers will try to differentiate
themselves from competitors and offer different solutions. And I don’t see necessarily that
they would collaborate and be transparent towards each other.”
Expert TC.1 also explains what are the most important things in being transparent in the
wind energy industry. Expert TC.1 mentions that it is crucial to have a common design
approach, which is already reflected in IEC standards. Additionally, he points out that
sharing technological innovations should also be accessible to every stakeholder in the
industry.
”In terms of aligning and being clear about things in the industry, I think that for me, the
most important part is to have a reliable, common design approach. This means that it
makes sense for me to collaborate in terms of agreeing to specific standards based on
robustness cases, industry load and safety factors to have a sufficient reliability level. I
think it is important to be open in these aspects and maybe also in terms of technological
advances. Anyway, I think with IEC standards the industry is quite transparent with what
types of designs of wind turbines are on the market.”
To sum up, Expert’s TC.1 reflections on transparency, the actual level is supported by
standards of wind turbine design. According to him, there is a need for transparency
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
55
==PAGE:64==
between stakeholders, specifically developers, in terms of new technological advances
but not between manufacturers because it can affect the wind energy market.
6.2.3
RRI Assessment
The third and final KPI of this analysis is the ”RRI Assessment”, which is broken into
three sub-indicators: ”Technological Innovation and Adaptation”, ”Risk Assessment and
Management”, and ”Financial Resilience and Business Continuity”. The evaluation of this
indicator implies conducting a pre-assessment of current industry practices to identify its
strengths and weaknesses towards RRI principles in the context of tropical cyclones.
Technological Innovation and Adaptation
In the context of the Technology Innovation and Adaptation sub-indicator, a key industry
challenge is to forecast reliable design values in areas with limited data, such as those
exposed to tropical cyclones.
The industry is currently working on innovative solutions to mitigate the effects of tropical
cyclones on wind turbines. However, this is not an easy task, and many considerations
need to be taken into account in terms of design and operation. Expert TC.1 presents
these aspects in his statement presented below.
”So both in terms of, you could say, design as well as the actual operation of the farm,
the key challenge is being able to predict reliable design values to extreme values. One
of the issues is that we don’t have reliable data for these tropical cyclones because they
don’t have such a large spatial extent as the storms. So basically you don’t have a lot of
reliable data to assess what will be your design values. So that’s one key issue. You could
say, if we’re talking operations, I think some of the issues might be that maybe there’s a
greater risk in delivering a stable power supply to the network, and during such events,
you will see that your turbines would need to basically shut down because you see too
severe wind speeds.”
More and more interesting technological and adaptive solutions are emerging in the in-
dustry to face the effects of tropical cyclones. Expert TC.3 shared an interesting example
of innovation about a Chinese manufacturer, Win, which presented an innovative wind
turbine design specifically designed to withstand tropical cyclones without stopping en-
ergy production. Traditionally, during extreme events like tropical cyclones, the method
is to stop the blades. This new solution that Expert TC.3 mentions allows the continued
production of energy during tropical cyclones by pitching blades., during extreme events
like tropical cyclones. Expert TC.3 statement that confirms and explains this is presented
below.
”I read that the Chinese manufacturer called Win has come up with a new design for wind
turbines that can withstand cyclones and typhoons in the Pacific region without putting the
turbine idling, so without stopping power generation. So usually what you do is that you
pitch the blades so they stop. But they found a smart way where they can have a pitch
of the blade, but not completely stop the generation of electricity, but continue to operate
even during a cyclone or a typhoon.”
The industry is also focusing on experimenting with innovative wind turbine designs that
differ from conventional ones by optimising the orientation of blades according to wind
direction. A research team consisting of different universities and the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory in the US have found that blades facing away from the wind are less
likely to collide with the turbine tower during strong wind gusts. As a result, the blades
do not need to be as massive and rigid. It can be compared to palm trees. The blades
can gently flex in high winds instead of breaking. To test this concept, the research team
56
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:65==
developed a turbine called the Segmented Ultralight Morphing Rotor. After four years of
testing, they successfully shared the results that revealed that even at peak wind speeds,
the turbine effectively and systematically generated power [129].
Expert TC.6 outlines the potential to be as innovative towards offshore wind farms by
expressing that the wind energy industry is still immature in this context. Expert TC.6
explains this opportunity to be more innovative in his statement below.
”Soon, floating offshore will also be very commercial, wind turbines and so on, so I believe
there are some things to look at in that regard, and many opportunities and challenges, I
think, and we should focus a little bit on that. I would say in that vein, there is a lot of inno-
vation possible in the structures that are used for offshore wind turbines. There has not
been a lot of innovation up until now. They’re using some fairly standard approaches that
have been used by oil and gas over the years, and they’re not necessarily inexpensive;
they may be more expensive than is needed, so there has not been a lot of innovative
work on bottom-mounted systems, and really the idea of a floating system and how it
withstands extreme weather, completely unknown, so the opportunity is there to develop
something that will be more resilient with respect to extreme weather than what has been
installed up until now.”
Expert TC.6 also compares the issue of being innovative towards tropical cyclones and
icing. He mentions that it is easier for industry to be prepared for icing than for tropical
cyclones because there are a lot of uncertainties, and the industry is still inexperienced.
The Expert’s TC.6 statement is resented below.
”I believe that for icing, we have some solutions right now that are good, maybe not perfect,
but I heard about a lot of new things about preventive maintenance, and different solutions
for that issue. For tropical cyclones, there’s still a lot of uncertainty in that topic because
the industry is inexperienced still, so yes, there are a lot of things in that, and yeah, we’ll
see what the future will bring, and I think it’s great to look at those issues beforehand, to
have some overview on it to be prepared for what is coming.”
To sum up, the industry is struggling to be innovative towards wind energy in the face of
tropical cyclones due to uncertainties in designs and a lack of reliable data. Even though
there are some technological innovations and adaptation strategies with positive results
of testing, these are not yet used commercially in the wind energy industry.
Risk Assessment and Management
In the context of ”Risk Assessment and Management,” an important aspect is the adap-
tation of projects to the specific conditions of the area, which entails the need for compre-
hensive risk assessment and management.
The Expert TC.1, in his statement, compared how different countries assess the risk.
He stressed in his statement that design in Denmark differs from design in regions with
specific conditions, such as Japan or the United States, where there are various risks,
such as tropical cyclones. Expert Tc.1 statement is presented below.
”If industry were to construct a building here in Denmark, industry design it towards a
certain design standard and to gain a certain reliability level. And if the industry were to
design the same structure, let’s say, in Japan or Italy or the US, where the industry sees
very different site conditions, let’s say, typhoons, the industry might not see the same
reliability in the design. I mean, the industry might have a less safe design, but maybe
that’s also okay.”
Expert TC.1 points out that there are different parameters of climate change, not only
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
57
==PAGE:66==
temperature. However, forecasting these changes is challenging due to the large number
of uncertainties. Expert TC.1 mentions that currently industry is mainly focusing on the
parameters that can pose potential risks to a project in the scenarios of tropical cyclones.
Expert TC.1:
”Yes, it’s quite an important topic, this climate change. I hope I have not been misun-
derstood, but let’s talk about temperature - it’s like.... How should I put it? It’s a basic
parameter that changes due to climate changes. There is a fundamental variable that is
currently experiencing significant changes. From there, we have many derived parame-
ters and effects. If we go a few steps deeper into discussing, for example, the potential
intensification of tropical cyclones in a specific area, predicting the actual results becomes
extremely difficult, given our current level of knowledge. This may sound a little strange,
but there are countless unknowns in evaluating the inputs that go into the model that con-
tribute to the evaluation. As a result, we need to focus on identifying the parameters that
primarily control the project or the areas where uncertainty and risk are most significant.
This is somewhat like conducting a risk assessment, where the industry looks at poten-
tial changes and their consequences. Adopting a risk-based approach is crucial in such
scenarios.”
Expert TC.1 presents the case of the United States in terms of risk management based
on possible law implications if the wind turbine wind turbine fails. Due to fear of the law,
sue authorities try to minimise risk by not granting everyone permission to develop wind
farms by considering aspects such as environmental and social. Expert TC.1:
”Yeah, I mean, the US is quite harsh, actually, to be honest. So basically, you could say the
way it works in the US is that anybody can sue anybody. So it’s a very different approach
to what we’re used to, for instance, in Denmark. So, in the US, the authorities can be sued
by private individuals if they have granted permission for some company to put up wind
turbines on behalf of the state and the people in the US. They’re very keen on ensuring
that they minimise the risk that, for instance, the turbines will break, and we would see,
let’s say, a turbine losing parts on the seabed, for instance, that would have a potential
risk for the environment. So you could say it’s kind of managed through more kind of
generic laws, as I see it, and not a specific law on tropical cycles. But in general, we have
to ensure in every aspect that you could say that we’re not compromising safety, both
for the environment and for people. The strictness of these regulations varies between
countries.”
As Expert TC.2 presents, not only do the wind turbines need to be designed to survive
tropical cyclones but also to make sure that the location is not at risk of this phenomenon.
Expert TC.2:
”But it doesn’t get around the fact that in order to install a specific wind plant offshore in
a place that’s exposed to tropical cyclones, you not only need to design them for tropical
cyclones, but you also need to assess the risk of that specific location for those wind
turbines in your site assessment. So, the wind turbines may be standard for a very high
level, but then you have to actually do the calculation that says how much risk that turbine
still has in that particular location. And if the risk is low, you’re done. You don’t have
another problem. But if the risk is higher, then you have to do additional work to estimate
what the risk looks like.”
In the wind energy industry, when deciding whether to build in cyclone-prone areas, the
analysis takes into account the combination of frequency and impact of phenomena to
assess risk and to choose appropriate mitigation strategies. Expert TC.3 presents this in
58
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:67==
his statement below.
”Regarding industry questions about the steps taken when deciding to build in cyclone-
prone areas, our analys,is considered the combination of the frequency and impact of
events to assess risks. For instance, events like tropical cyclones have a low frequency
but high impact, necessitating different mitigation strategies. Insurance might be more
appropriate for low-frequency events, whereas high-frequency and high-impact events
demand research, development, and potentially new designs or materials.”
To sum up, there are many different parameters of climate change that need to be taken
into account while developing wind farms. The wind energy industry is currently focusing
on identifying key parameters of risk assessment. In the United States, for instance, risk
management is imposed by its regulatory framework, which, on the one hand, can affect
the flexibility of the wind energy industry but, on the other, minimise the risk of unfortunate
events. The industry experts present some familiarity with risk assessment and manage-
ment approaches, but because of a lot of uncertainties in estimations of tropical cyclones,
there are still aspects to improve.
Financial Resilience and Business Continuity
The sub-indicator, ”Financial Resilience and Business Continuity,” evaluates how financial
resilience involves the ability to survive difficult conditions, such as unpredictable weather
events, including tropical cyclones, by balancing profitability with sustainability goals to
ensure business continuity in the wind energy industry.
While deciding whether to build a specific project, according to Expert TC.1, it is impor-
tant to consider variables such as efficiency evaluation, investment and state subsidies.
Although technical aspects such as foundation design are important, they are secondary
to assessing project viability and financial returns. Expert TC.1 confirmed this in his state-
ment that is presented below.
”Everything is, of course, driven by the business case, which in turn is determined by
performance evaluation. There are various factors that influence certain conditions, for
example, subsidies in some countries, such as Taiwan, where field conditions are compli-
cated and development is expensive. As an engineer, I don’t know the details, but there is
a financial incentive from customers or the state to encourage the development of these
projects. In short, the project decision is not mainly determined by the fundamentals of
design but is based more on business potential, wind speed and financial availability to
match the field conditions.”
Expert TC.6, reflects on understanding of management of risk and financial compromise
that are crucial in investing in mitigation strategies to events like tropical cyclones. Ac-
cording to him, it is important to understand what is this financial compromise between a
more secure design of wind turbines that is costly at the beginning of development and
if it is not a waste of financial capital if the risk is unknown. That is why Expert TC. that
understanding the risk is the most important for the industry, especially in a changing
environment. Even though there are a lot of uncertainties in this regard, there is an op-
portunity for industry, especially small businesses, to create specific equipment that can
help resolve these doubts. Expert TC.6 statement is presented below.
”Understanding the risk and the financial trade-off involves mitigating that risk with some
installed equipment. Or, in the case of cyclones, mitigating that risk with extra thick steel
and stronger blades. I mean, those are all capital investments at the front end. Industry
has to know what that financial trade-off is to know when it’s going to be an effective
investment and when you’re wasting money or when you’re creating risks that are much
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
59
==PAGE:68==
too high. So we have to understand the actual risk that’s involved and what the cost of
overcoming that risk or cost per reduction of the risk might be. And I think part of the
risk really involves what you mentioned as well, that you’re looking at an always changing
environment. So you can’t completely depend on past records or past data. You have
to add some uncertainty because of what’s coming may be different. And even if I don’t
know what it is, you have to include the uncertainty. And that increases the risk. And risk,
of course, is probability of occurrence times the consequence. You have to know both
of those things to see what you pay to mitigate that risk. But in this there are also many
opportunities for small businesses and industry to build for example new components and
some meteorological sensors. So there’s some opportunity for us to grow there. But of
course, we need to take into account all the uncertainty and risk. And I believe that’s
very important for us right now, especially with tropical cyclones, because I think we are
starting to build more offshore in the world.”
To sum up, financial aspects are the most important while developing wind farms, but
there are different incentives that can help, especially if it is built in specific conditions.
From Expert TC.6 statement it can be see that financial resilience is correlated with risk
and the main focus should be on developing the mitigation strategies in wind energy in-
dustry. There are many different aspects of economical aspects that wind energy industry
is currently discussing.
60
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:69==
7
Discussion and Conclusions
This chapter focuses on presenting the main findings of this study in two main sections,
which are discussion and conclusions.
7.1
Discussion
This section presents the interpretation of the results of the analysis of two case studies,
icing and tropical cyclones.
7.1.1
Interpretation of Results
Based on the analysis of qualitative data which consist of both interviews and empirical
data, the specific dimension for the wind energy industry is chosen based on subsec-
tion 4.3.2. The Figure 7.1 presents current dimension on which the wind power industry
is with the help of key performance indicators and their corresponding sub-indicators.
Figure 7.1: Summary of results
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
61
==PAGE:70==
A more detailed interpretation of the results of the first KPI, which is ”RRI Awareness”
based on two case studies, is presented in the Figure 7.2. They include an explanation of
specific dimension that is selected, the barriers and recommendations for improvement.
Figure 7.2: Results of RRI Awareness KPI based on analysis
62
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:71==
Subsequent results for the next KPI, which is ”RRI Implementation”, are presented in the
Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Results of RRI Implementation KPI based on analysis
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
63
==PAGE:72==
For the last KPI which is ”RRI Assessment” is presented in the Figure 7.4.
Figure 7.4: Results of RRI Assessment KPI based on analysis
64
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:73==
7.1.2
Addressing Research Questions
Main Research Question
Firstly, from the presented analysis in regards to the main research question presented
inchapter 1, it can be concluded that wind energy expert’s perception differs from sub-
indicator to sub-indicator for both case studies. However, it can assumed that they are
also in line with specific issues and things that need improvement. For example, for both
case studies, the results of the sub-indicator ”Transparency” revealed that experts can
identify the same barrier, which is resistance from original equipment manufacturers to
being open and clear.
To conclude the results of all three KPIs, the wind energy industry is not yet fully approach-
ing the principles of the RRI theoretical framework. Mostly, it appears to be on reflexive
and tactical dimensions, which presents as it is on a good path in considering different
aspects of moral values of wind farms in icing and tropical cyclone conditions. The future
of the wind energy industry in terms of effective preparedness for icing and tropical cy-
clones needs additional improvements, and with presented recommendations, it might be
able to be more inclusive and look at the effect of these extreme events more holistically.
Supplementary Research Questions 1
In the context of the first supplementary research question presented in chapter 1, the
interpretation of the results presents what are the current perspectives, dynamics and
preparedness of the wind energy industry. Experts of the wind energy industry presented
during interviews for icing many interesting innovations and adaptation strategies, like
ant-icing technologies and preventative operation of wind turbines. At the same time, for
the tropical cyclones, they presented that the industry is currently working on new turbine
designs in terms of innovation. To sum up, it is clear that the wind energy industry is
proactive in creating specific resilience strategies, but unfortunately, there is still a lack of
implementation of these ideas. Additionally, for both case studies, experts outlined a lot
of knowledge gaps and things that are currently not working as well as they would like to.
Supplementary Research Questions 2
In the context of the second supplementary question, the RRI theoretical framework helps
in identifying, first of all, limitations in the efforts of the wind energy industry in the face
of tropical cyclones and icing. Secondly, it helped in creating specific recommendations
to improve preparedness in a holistic manner, taking into account a broader perspective.
To sum up, this tool can be used as well in other extreme weather conditions to better
prepare for the future.
7.2
Conclusions
This section presents the main conclusions of the whole master thesis by presenting a
comparison with previous research, presenting possible applications, limitations and rec-
ommendations for future work.
7.2.1
Comparison with Previous Research
This master thesis presents a fresh approach that addresses gaps presented in chapter 3
in both social and technical literature.
Firstly, considering the theoretical framework, this thesis presents a new approach to
RRI by focusing on evaluation at the industry level, as social literature on RRI until now
examined RRI on the level of a single company or organisation.
Secondly, this thesis provides a new perspective on the issue of extreme weather con-
ditions in the wind energy industry by not only considering it from a techno-economic
perspective but also more holistically by taking into account a set of moral values.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
65
==PAGE:74==
7.2.2
Limitations
The first limitation of this thesis is the procedure of collecting data. Since this process was
based on semi-structured interviews, the participants were able to present the situation
and their perspectives subjectively, which, in turn, could hinder the results.
The second limitation is the number of participants that took part in this thesis. As the
wind energy industry consists of many stakeholders, it might be beneficial to seek more
perspectives to have more reliable and confirmed data. However, due to the scope of this
thesis, the number of participants was limited.
The third limitation is the inclusion criteria for the participants. Although in the end, the
appropriate amount and type of participants were found for this thesis some of them were
not able to answer all of the questions and present the situation due to the lack of specific
knowledge on the specific subject.
Another important limitation of this work is the creation of a specific theoretical framework
that is based on literature [106], including a selection of dimensions, key performance in-
dicators and corresponding sub-indicators. As the created theoretical framework is based
on one from the literature of completely different areas and levels, the way of the usage
of the one presented in this thesis might need additional work to better pick specific di-
mensions and indicators.
The last limitation is the decision to choose only two specific case studies of extreme
weather conditions. As there are many extreme phenomena that can affect the devel-
opment and operation of wind turbines, the scope of this thesis was limited to only two
answers to test if the theoretical framework of RRI can help in the evaluation of wind
energy industry resilience.
To address these limitations, future research could explore the actions of specific compa-
nies or use different KPIs with specific sub-indicators to further enhance our understanding
of the industry’s efforts in the realm of wind energy in extreme weather conditions.
7.2.3
Recommendations for Future Research
Due to the limitations of this study, there is the urge to explore some potential recommen-
dations for future research. The list of potential next steps is presented below.
• Future research should consider the collection of data through more structured in-
terviews and additional surveys to check the credibility of the data.
• Future research can consider interviewing different types of industry stakeholders
to diversify perspectives and experiences from additional points of view by creating
new inclusion criteria.
• Future research can consider changing the main components of the theoretical
framework by more customised dimensions, KPIs and sub-indicators to fully assess
specific issues.
• Future research can also consider additional evaluation of a few companies or or-
ganisations of the wind energy industry to answer research questions on a smaller
scale.
• Future research can try to analyse other extreme weather events with the created
theoretical framework in this thesis to compare if there are any similarities or op-
portunities by learning from different strategies of the wind energy industry towards
specific extreme phenomena.
66
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:75==
7.2.4
Summary
To conclude, even though there are some limitations to this thesis, it serves as a new
approach to making the wind energy industry more resilient in terms of uncertainties of
climate change. Constant urge to improve and courage to critically look at some of the
actions present that the wind energy industry looks on its laurels. As the renewable energy
industry is growing every year and presents itself to society as a valuable option among
many other sources of energy, there is a constant need for the industry to keep learning
and adapting. This thesis examines something new that can reassure society that the
wind energy industry can reflect on its actions, especially when the realism of climate
change is increasingly affecting everyone globally.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
67
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[1]
IRENA. access date 2024. URL: https : / / www . irena . org / Energy - Transition /
Technology/Wind-energy.
[2]
IRENA. access date 2024. URL: https : / / www . irena . org / Energy - Transition /
Technology/Solar-energy.
[3]
Lucía Fernández. Global installed wind energy capacity 2022. 2023. URL: https:
//www.statista.com/statistics/268363/installed-wind-power-capacity-worldwide/#:
~:text=The%20cumulative%20capacity%20of%20installed%20wind%20power%
20worldwide,power%20capacity%2C%20at%20about%20842%20gigawatts%20that%
20year..
[4]
Hannele Holttinen and Birte Holst Jørgensen. Annual report 2022. 2023. URL:
https://iea-wind.org/portfolio-item/annual-report-2022/.
[5]
Lucía Fernández. India: Wind Energy Capacity 2022. 2023. URL: https://www.
statista.com/statistics/865745/india-wind-energy-capacity/#:~:text=The%20wind%
20energy % 20capacity % 20in % 20the % 20south % 20Asian , year % 2C % 20wherein %
20the%20value%20was%20around%2040.1%20gigawatts..
[6]
Lucía Fernández. Europe: Wind Power Capacity 2022. 2023. URL: https://www.
statista.com/statistics/421483/total-wind-power-in-europe/.
[7]
Lucía Fernández. U.S. and EU: Installed Wind Power Capacity 2022. 2023. URL:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/215646/cumulative- installed- wind- power-
capacity-in-the-us-and-the-eu/#:~:text=In%202022%2C%20the%20cumulative%
20installed%20wind%20power%20capacity,Europe%20was%20around%20255.5%
20gigawatts%20the%20same%20year..
[8]
Stefan Emeis. “Current issues in wind energy meteorology”. In: Meteorological
Applications 21.4 (2014), pp. 803–819. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/met.1472.
eprint: https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/met.1472. URL:
https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/met.1472.
[9]
Plattner Stocker Qin. “IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the In-
tergovernmental Panel on Climate Change”. In: IPCC — intergovernmental panel
on climate change (2013).
[10]
Jack Stilgoe, Richard Owen, and Phil Macnaghten. “Developing a Framework for
Responsible Innovation”. In: Research Policy 42 (Nov. 2013), p. 1569. DOI: 10.
1016/j.respol.2013.05.008.
[11]
Jack Stilgoe, Richard Owen, and Phil Macnaghten. “Developing a Framework for
Responsible Innovation”. In: Research Policy 42 (Nov. 2013), pp. 1568–1580. DOI:
10.1016/j.respol.2013.05.008.
[12]
Geraint Ellis and Gianluca Ferraro. The Social Acceptance of Wind Energy: Where
we stand and the path ahead. Dec. 2016. DOI: 10.2789/696070.
[13]
URL: https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/climo/.
[14]
Kevin E. Trenberth and David P. Stepaniak. “The flow of energy through the Earth’s
climate system”. In: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 130.603
(2004), pp. 2677–2701. DOI: 10.1256/qj.04.83.
[15]
Alison N. P. Stevens. Factors Affecting Global Climate. 2011. URL: https://www.
nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/factors-affecting-global-climate-17079163/
#.
68
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:77==
[16]
National Geographic Society. All About Climate. 2024. URL: https://education.
nationalgeographic.org/resource/all-about-climate/.
[17]
Marian Ciszewski. WPŁYW Zmian Klimatycznych na rolnictwo W Polsce. Nov.
1BC. URL: https://agronews.com.pl/artykul/wplyw- zmian- klimatycznych- na-
rolnictwo - w - polsce / # : ~ : text = W % C5 % 9Br % C3 % B3d % 20g % C5 % 82 % C3 %
B3wnych%20czynnik%C3%B3w%20klimatycznych%20determinuj%C4%85cych%
20rodzaj%20i%20efektywno%C5%9B%C4%87,zmuszaj%C4%85c%20do%20poszukiwania%
20nowych%20rozwi%C4%85za%C5%84%20i%20metod%20produkcji..
[18]
United States Environmental Protection Agency. Climate Change Impacts. access
date 2024. URL: https : / / climatechange . chicago . gov / climate - impacts / climate -
impacts-water-resources.
[19]
Climate Change Impacts. access date 2024. URL: https://climatechange.chicago.
gov/climate-impacts/climate-impacts-human-health.
[20]
Climate Change Impacts. access date 2024. URL: https://climatechange.chicago.
gov/climate-impacts/climate-impacts-energy.
[21]
Kim Rutledge, Melissa McDaniel, and Santani Teng. Weather. 2023. URL: https:
//education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/weather/.
[22]
World Meteorological Organization. Weather. Nov. 2023. URL: https://wmo.int/
topics/weather.
[23]
David Francis and Henry Hengeveld. Extreme weather and climate change. Min-
ister of Supply and Services Canada, 1998.
[24]
David Francis and Henry Hengeveld. Extreme weather and climate change. Min-
ister of Supply and Services Canada, 1998.
[25]
Met Office. How is climate linked to extreme weather? access date 2024. URL:
https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/climate/climate-and-extreme-weather.
[26]
Roddy Sheer and Doug Moss. Is there a strong link between extreme weather
events and climate change? Aug. 2013. URL: https://www.scientificamerican.com/
article/climate-change-and-extreme-weather/.
[27]
Wenju Cai et al. “Increasing frequency of extreme El Niño events due to green-
house warming”. In: Nature Climate Change 4 (2014), p. 2. URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:54189871.
[28]
Xiaoqin Yan, Rong Zhang, and Thomas Knutson. “The role of Atlantic overturning
circulation in the recent decline of Atlantic major hurricane frequency”. In: Nature
Communications 8 (Nov. 2017). DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-01377-8.
[29]
Martin Beniston. “Mountain Weather and Climate: A General Overview and a Fo-
cus on Climatic Change in the Alps”. In: Hydrobiologia 562 (June 2006). DOI:
10.1007/s10750-005-1802-0.
[30]
Christopher O’Malley et al. “An Investigation into Minimizing Urban Heat Island
(UHI) Effects: A UK Perspective”. In: Energy Procedia 62 (2014). 6th International
Conference on Sustainability in Energy and Buildings, SEB-14, pp. 72–80. ISSN:
1876-6102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.12.368. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876610214033992.
[31]
T. R. Oke. Boundary layer climates. Dec. 1987. URL: https://www.routledge.com/
Boundary-Layer-Climates/Oke/p/book/9780415043199.
[32]
Sami K. Solanki, Natalie A. Krivova, and Joanna D. Haigh. “Solar Irradiance Vari-
ability and Climate”. In: Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 51.1 (2013),
pp. 311–351. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082812-141007. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1146/annurev-astro-082812-141007.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
69
==PAGE:78==
[33]
National Oceanic US Department of Commerce and Atmospheric Administration.
What is the difference between a hurricane and a typhoon? June 2013. URL: https:
//oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/cyclone.html.
[34]
David B Enfield, Fritz P Loewe, and Howard B Bluestein. Climate. Jan. 2024. URL:
https://www.britannica.com/science/climate-meteorology.
[35]
O. P. Singh, T. M. Ali Khan, and Md. S. Rahman. “Changes in the frequency of
tropical cyclones over the North Indian Ocean”. In: Meteorology and Atmospheric
Physics 75.1–2 (2000), pp. 11–20. DOI: 10.1007/s007030070011.
[36]
Rafael Méndez-Tejeda and José J. Hernández-Ayala. “Links between climate change
and Hurricanes in the North Atlantic”. In: PLOS Climate 2.4 (2023). DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pclm.0000186.
[37]
E.A. D’Asaro et al. “Impact of typhoons on the ocean in the Pacific”. In: Bulletin of
the American Meteorological Society 95.9 (2014), pp. 1405–1418. DOI: 10.1175/
bams-d-12-00104.1.
[38]
Kombo Hamad Kai et al. “Assessment of the impacts of tropical cyclones idai to
the western coastal area and hinterlands of the South Western Indian Ocean”. In:
Atmospheric and Climate Sciences 11.04 (2021), pp. 812–840. DOI: 10.4236/acs.
2021.114047.
[39]
Abubakr A. Salih et al. “Climate change and locust outbreak in East Africa”. In:
Nature Climate Change 10.7 (2020), pp. 584–585. DOI: 10.1038/s41558- 020-
0835-8.
[40]
Greg Holland et al. “Model investigations of the effects of climate variability and
change on future Gulf of Mexico tropical cyclone activity”. In: All Days (2010). DOI:
10.4043/20690-ms.
[41]
T. Theodore Fujita. “Tornadoes and downbursts in the context of generalized plan-
etary scales”. In: Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 38.8 (1981), pp. 1511–1534.
DOI: 10.1175/1520-0469(1981)038&amp;lt;1511:taditc&amp;gt;2.0.co;2.
[42]
Paul M. Markowski and Yvette P. Richardson. “Tornadogenesis: Our current un-
derstanding, forecasting considerations, and questions to guide future research”.
In: Atmospheric Research 93.1 (2009). 4th European Conference on Severe Storms,
pp. 3–10. ISSN: 0169-8095. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2008.09.015.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016980950800255X.
[43]
Frazier AE, Hemingway B, and Brasher J. “Land surface heterogeneity and tor-
nado formation: A comparison of tornado alley and Dixie Alley”. In: Journal of
Climatology amp;amp; Weather Forecasting 05.02 (2017). DOI: 10.4172/2332-
2594.1000203.
[44]
E. Yu. Krasilnikov. “Prevention of destructive tropical and extratropical storms, hur-
ricanes, tornadoes, dangerous thunderstorms, and catastrophic floods”. In: Non-
linear Processes in Geophysics 9.1 (2002), pp. 51–59. DOI: 10.5194/npg-9-51-
2002.
[45]
Europa Press. Los Tornados Dañaron 175 hectáreas de Casi 250 invernaderos en
el Poniente de Almería. Feb. 2018. URL: https://www.europapress.es/andalucia/
almeria - 00350 / noticia - tornados - danaron - 175 - hectareas - casi - 250 - invernaderos -
poniente-almeria-20180206143859.html.
[46]
Edwin Kessler. Thunderstorm morphology and dynamics. University of Oklahoma
Press, 1986.
[47]
Łukasz Staszewski. 2010. URL: http://eeeic.org/proc/papers/52.pdf.
[48]
Howard B. Bluestein. Tornado Alley: Monster storms of the Great Plains. Oxford
University Press, 2008.
70
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:79==
[49]
Ouma Fred Ogutu. 2012. URL: https://meteorology.uonbi.ac.ke/sites/default/files/
cbps/sps/meteorology/Fred%20Ouma.pdf.
[50]
Nicolau Pineda et al. “Lightning and precipitation relationship in summer thunder-
storms: Case studies in the North Western Mediterranean region”. In: Atmospheric
Research 85.2 (2007), pp. 159–170. ISSN: 0169-8095. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.atmosres.2006.12.004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0169809506002900.
[51]
Léonie Chao-Fong. “drastic” rise in high arctic lightning has scientists worried. Jan.
2022. URL: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/jan/07/lightning-
high-arctic-rise-scientists-worried.
[52]
David M. Romps et al. “Projected increase in lightning strikes in the United States
due to global warming”. In: Science 346.6211 (2014), pp. 851–854. DOI: 10.1126/
science.1259100. eprint: https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1259100.
URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1259100.
[53]
National Geographic Society. Blizzard. 2023. URL: https://education.nationalgeographic.
org/resource/blizzard/.
[54]
Y. Zhao et al. “A review of recent literature on icing phenomena: Transport mecha-
nisms, their modulations and controls”. In: International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 159 (2020), p. 120074. ISSN: 0017-9310. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120074. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0017931020330106.
[55]
Richard Lemmons. Where do blizzards occur? - global climate. Jan. 2024. URL:
https://www.climate-policy-watcher.org/global-climate-2/blizzards.html.
[56]
Jasper Knight. Snowfall in the Sahara Desert: An unusual weather phenomenon.
Jan. 2024. URL: https://theconversation.com/snowfall-in-the-sahara-desert-an-
unusual-weather-phenomenon-176037.
[57]
Max Matza. La Snow dusts Hollywood sign as winter storm tightens grip. Feb.
2023. URL: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-64768453.
[58]
National Centers for Environmental Information. The Great Texas freeze: February
11-20, 2021. Feb. 2023. URL: https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/news/great-texas-freeze-
february-2021.
[59]
Dionysia Panagoulia. “DEFINITIONS AND EFFECTS OF DROUGHTS”. In: Apr.
1998, p. 2.
[60]
Western Fire Chief Association. The impact of drought on Wildfire Risk. Nov. 2023.
URL: https://wfca.com/wildfire-articles/impact-of-drought-on-wildfire-risk/.
[61]
Danielle C. Verdon￿Kidd and Anthony S. Kiem. “Nature and causes of protracted
droughts in Southeast Australia: Comparison between the Federation, WWII, and
big dry droughts”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 36.22 (2009). DOI: 10.1029/
2009gl041067.
[62]
Lorraine Flint et al. “Characterizing drought in California: new drought indices and
scenario-testing in support of resource management”. In: Ecological Processes 7
(Dec. 2018). DOI: 10.1186/s13717-017-0112-6.
[63]
NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information. Annual 2021 wildfires re-
port. 2022. URL: https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/monitoring/monthly-report/
fire/202113.
[64]
Alison Ince Rodgers. Understanding droughts. 2023. URL: https : / / education .
nationalgeographic.org/resource/understanding-droughts/.
[65]
Maria José Pinheiro Anacléto et al. Effects of an atypical drought on the benthic
macroinvertebrate community in a tropical reservoir. Mar. 2018. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1590/1676-0611-BN-2017-0352.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
71
==PAGE:80==
[66]
Jari Tanner and Karl Ritter. Drought and rising heat bring unusual wildfire warnings
in Northern Europe. June 2023. URL: https://apnews.com/article/nordics-baltics-
weather-drought-forest-fires-690d885a094579c753a379e6667ea685.
[67]
NASA. Relentless wildfires in Canada. Aug. 2023. URL: https://earthobservatory.
nasa.gov/images/151696/relentless-wildfires-in-canada.
[68]
Diane Boudreau et al. Flood. 2023. URL: https://education.nationalgeographic.org/
resource/flood/.
[69]
World Vision. The countries most prone to flooding. Mar. 2023. URL: https://www.
worldvision.org.uk/about/blogs/countries-most-prone-to-flooding/.
[70]
Frank Lehmkuhl et al. “Assessment of the 2021 Summer Flood in Central Europe”.
In: Environmental Sciences Europe 34.1 (Oct. 2022), p. 1. DOI: 10.1186/s12302-
022-00685-1.
[71]
Fumihiko Sasai et al. “Climate change and nephrology”. In: Nephrology Dialysis
Transplantation 38.1 (Sept. 2021), pp. 41–48. ISSN: 0931-0509. DOI: 10.1093/
ndt/gfab258. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/ndt/article-pdf/38/1/41/48830618/
gfab258.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfab258.
[72]
S.N. Jonkman and J.K. Vrijling. “Loss of life due to floods”. In: Journal of Flood
Risk Management 1.1 (2008), pp. 43–56. DOI: 10.1111/j.1753-318x.2008.00006.x.
[73]
Tim Wheeler and Joachim von Braun. “Climate Change Impacts on Global Food
Security”. In: Science 341.6145 (2013), pp. 508–513. DOI: 10.1126/science.1239402.
URL: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1239402.
[74]
Rebecca Gasper, Andrew Blohm, and Matthias Ruth. “Social and economic im-
pacts of climate change on the urban environment”. In: Current Opinion in Envi-
ronmental Sustainability 3.3 (2011), pp. 150–157. ISSN: 1877-3435. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2010.12.009. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S187734351000148X.
[75]
Tatyana Deryugina, Laura Kawano, and Steven Levitt. “The economic impact of
Hurricane Katrina on its victims: Evidence from individual tax returns”. In: American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10.2 (2018), pp. 202–233. DOI: 10.1257/
app.20160307.
[76]
National Geographic Society. The influence of climate change on extreme envi-
ronmental events. 2023. URL: https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/
influence-climate-change-extreme-environmental-events/.
[77]
2022. URL: https : / / www . globaldata . com / data - insights / power - and - utilities /
droughts-hit-hydropower-generation-in-europe-amid-worsening-energy-crisis/.
[78]
Jui-Sheng Chou, Yu-Chen Ou, and Kuan-Yu Lin. “Collapse mechanism and risk
management of wind turbine tower in strong wind”. In: Journal of Wind Engineering
and Industrial Aerodynamics 193 (2019), p. 2. ISSN: 0167-6105. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jweia.2019.103962. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167610519305537.
[79]
Iea. Is cooling the future of heating? – analysis. 2020. URL: https://www.iea.org/
commentaries/is-cooling-the-future-of-heating#.
[80]
Seongmun Oh et al. “A study of tropical cyclone impact on the power distribu-
tion grid in South Korea for estimating damage”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 156 (2022), p. 2. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rser.2021.112010. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1364032121012739.
[81]
Jiawei Wang et al. “On Machine Learning-Based Techniques for Future Sustain-
able and Resilient Energy Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy
14.2 (2023), pp. 1230–1243. DOI: 10.1109/TSTE.2022.3194728.
72
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:81==
[82]
Erich Hau. Wind turbines: Fundamentals, Technologies, application, economics.
Springer, 2013.
[83]
Belachew Desalegn et al. “Onshore versus offshore wind power trends and recent
study practices in modeling of wind turbines’ life-cycle impact assessments”. In:
Cleaner Engineering and Technology 17 (2023), p. 100691. ISSN: 2666-7908.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clet.2023.100691. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2666790823000964.
[84]
Christopher Walford. In: Wind Turbine Reliability: Understanding  and Minimizing
Wind Turbine Operation and Maintenance Costs (2006). DOI: 10.2172/882048.
[85]
Juliana Lucena. “Recent advances and technology trends of wind turbines”. In:
Jan. 2021, pp. 177–210. ISBN: 9780323910934. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-323-91093-
4.00009-3.
[86]
Reve. Adapting Wind Farm Designs for Extreme Weather Conditions. June 2023.
URL: https://www.evwind.es/2023/06/28/adapting-wind-farm-designs-for-extreme-
weather-conditions/92511.
[87]
Allen Hall. Wind turbine deicing advances. Sept. 2022. URL: https://weatherguardwind.
com/advances-in-wind-turbine-deicing/.
[88]
Windcycle Energy. Innovation in typhoon-resistant wind turbine design. Jan. 2023.
URL: https://windcycle.energy/typhoon-resistant-wind-turbine/.
[89]
Dimitris Katsaprakakis, Nikos Papadakis, and Ioannis Ntintakis. “A Comprehen-
sive Analysis of Wind Turbine Blade Damage”. In: Energies 14 (Sept. 2021). DOI:
10.3390/en14185974.
[90]
Baring-Gould. “Expert Group Study on Recommended Practices 13: Wind Energy
Projects in Cold Climates”. In: 2017. URL: https://usercontent.one/wp/iea-wind.
org/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/RP-13.2-Cold-Climates.pdf?media=1675080948.
[91]
DNV. 2019. URL: https : / / www . dnv . com / article / reflections - on - wind - farm -
development-in-cold-climates-179663.
[92]
Miguel A. Jaimes et al. “Probabilistic risk assessment on wind turbine towers sub-
jected to cyclone-induced wind loads”. In: Wind Energy 23.3 (2020), pp. 528–529.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/we.2436. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
pdf/10.1002/we.2436. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/we.
2436.
[93]
Alessandra Salgado et al. Wind Farms for cyclone zones: New standards and
designs. Oct. 2019. URL: https://energypost.eu/wind-farms-for-cyclone-zones-new-
standards-and-designs/.
[94]
Marcin Kubiak. The detrimental effects of high wind speed on wind turbines. June
2023. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/detrimental-effects-high-wind-speed-
turbines-marcin-kubiak/.
[95]
[Null]. 1998- tropical cyclone ARB 02 (03A). URL: https://hurricanescience.org/
history/storms/1990s/arb03a/.
[96]
Niels-Erik Clausen, Søren Ott, and Per Nørgård. PPT - wind turbines in regions
exposed to tropical cyclones. Sept. 2014. URL: https://www.slideserve.com/ban/
wind-turbines-in-regions-exposed-to-tropical-cyclones.
[97]
Keiji Takahara et al. “Damages of wind turbine on Miyakojima Island by Typhoon
Maemi in 2003”. In: Jan. 2004.
[98]
Lixuan Hong and Bernd Möller. “Risks of tropical cyclones on offshore wind farms
in China”. In: 6th Dubrovnik conference on sustainable development of energy,
water and environment systems. 2011.
[99]
J. Osvaldo Martín del Campo, Adrián Pozos￿Estrada, and Oscar Pozos￿Estrada.
“Development of fragility curves of land￿based wind turbines with tuned mass
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
73
==PAGE:82==
dampers under cyclone and seismic loading”. In: Wind Energy 24.7 (2020), pp. 737–
753. DOI: 10.1002/we.2600.
[100]
Zhengru Ren et al. “Offshore wind turbine operations and maintenance: A state-
of-the-art review”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 144 (2021),
p. 110886. ISSN: 1364-0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.110886.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032121001805.
[101]
Rebecca Windemer. “Acceptance should not be assumed. How the dynamics of
social acceptance changes over time, impacting onshore wind repowering”. In:
Energy Policy 173 (2023), p. 113363. ISSN: 0301-4215. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.enpol.2022.113363. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0301421522005821.
[102]
Gundula Hübner et al. “Broadening the social acceptance of wind energy – An
Integrated Acceptance Model”. In: Energy Policy 173 (2023). ISSN: 0301-4215.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2022.113360. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0301421522005791.
[103]
Jack Stilgoe, Richard Owen, and Phil Macnaghten. “Developing a Framework for
Responsible Innovation”. In: Research Policy 42 (Nov. 2013), p. 1570. DOI: 10.
1016/j.respol.2013.05.008.
[104]
Christopher Groves. “Putting visions in their place: responsible research and in-
novation for energy system decarbonization”. In: (2022). URL: https://doi.org/10.
1080/23299460.2022.2149954.
[105]
Rene Von Schomberg. “Towards Responsible Research and Innovation in the In-
formation and Communication Technologies and Security Technologies Field”. In:
(Mar. 2011), p. 9. DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.2436399.
[106]
Emad Yaghmaei. “Responsible research and innovation key performance indica-
tors in industry: A case study in the ICT domain”. In: Journal of Information, Com-
munication and Ethics in Society 16 (Apr. 2018). DOI: 10.1108/JICES-11-2017-
0066.
[107]
Ellen-Marie Forsberg et al. “Is RRI a new RI logic? A reflection from an integrated
RRI project”. In: Journal of Responsible Technology 5 (2021), p. 100007. ISSN:
2666-6596. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrt.2020.100007. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S266665962030007X.
[108]
Ibo Van de Poel et al. “Company Strategies for Responsible Research and Innova-
tion (RRI): A Conceptual Model”. In: Sustainability 9.11 (2017). ISSN: 2071-1050.
DOI: 10.3390/su9112045. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/9/11/2045.
[109]
Laura Hennigan. What is a KPI? definition examples. Apr. 2023. URL: https://
www.forbes.com/advisor/business/what-is-a-kpi-definition-examples/.
[110]
Emad Yaghmaei. “Responsible research and innovation key performance indica-
tors in industry: A case study in the ICT domain”. In: Journal of Information, Com-
munication and Ethics in Society 16 (Apr. 2018), p. 9. DOI: 10.1108/JICES-11-
2017-0066.
[111]
Emad Yaghmaei. “Responsible research and innovation key performance indica-
tors in industry: A case study in the ICT domain”. In: Journal of Information, Com-
munication and Ethics in Society 16 (Apr. 2018), p. 12. DOI: 10.1108/JICES-11-
2017-0066.
[112]
Emad Yaghmaei. “Responsible research and innovation key performance indica-
tors in industry: A case study in the ICT domain”. In: Journal of Information, Com-
munication and Ethics in Society 16 (Apr. 2018), p. 14. DOI: 10.1108/JICES-11-
2017-0066.
74
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:83==
[113]
Steinar Kvale and Svend Brinkmann. Interviews: Learning the craft of qualitative
research interviewing. Sage Publications, 2015.
[114]
M.B. Miles, A.M. Huberman, and J. Saldana. Qualitative Data Analysis. SAGE
Publications, 2014. ISBN: 9781452257877. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?
id=3CNrUbTu6CsC.
[115]
J.W. Creswell and J.D. Creswell. Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and
Mixed Methods Approaches. SAGE Publications, 2017. ISBN: 9781506386713.
URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=KGNADwAAQBAJ.
[116]
M.Q. Patton. Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods. SAGE Publications,
2002. ISBN: 9780761919711. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=FjBw2oi8El4C.
[117]
W.L. Neuman. Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches.
pkt 4. Allyn and Bacon, 2000. ISBN: 9780205315161. URL: https://books.google.
dk/books?id=As6UAAAACAAJ.
[118]
Matthew B Miles and A Michael Huberman. Qualitative data analysis: An expanded
sourcebook. sage, 1994.
[119]
Elliot George Mishler. Research interviewing: Context and narrative. Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1986.
[120]
Steinar Kvale. Interviews: An introduction to qualitative research interviewing. Sage
Publications, 1996.
[121]
Eric Drever. Using semi-structured interviews in small-scale research: A Teacher’s
Guide. SCRE Centre, University of Glasgow, 2003.
[122]
U. Flick. An Introduction to Qualitative Research. SAGE Publications, 2018. ISBN:
9781526464224. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?id=P7ZkDwAAQBAJ.
[123]
Mahin Naderifar, Hamideh Goli, and Fereshteh Ghaljaei. “Snowball Sampling: A
Purposeful Method of Sampling in Qualitative Research”. In: Strides in Develop-
ment of Medical Education In Press (Sept. 2017), p. 2. DOI: 10.5812/sdme.67670.
[124]
Barbara Kawulich. “Kawulich, B. B. (2004). Data Analysis Techniques in Qualita-
tive Research. In Darla Twale (Ed.), Journal of Research in Education, 14(1) p.
96-113.” In: Journal of Research in Education 14 (Jan. 2004), pp. 96–113.
[125]
Jimmie Manning. “In Vivo Coding”. In: Nov. 2017, pp. 1–2. ISBN: 9781118901762.
DOI: 10.1002/9781118901731.iecrm0270.
[126]
2023. URL: https://windren.se/WW2023/2_1_15_Antikainen_AEP_losses-
less_than_half_of_the_truth_of_the_economic_icing_losses_Pub_v1.pdf.
[127]
Micheal Moser, Doris Schadler, and Harald Hohlen. 2023. URL: https://windren.
se/WW2023/1_1_33_Moser_Increasing_O-and-M_benefits_from_icing_sensors_
by_means_of_smart_data_augmentation_Pub_v1.pdf.
[128]
Charles Godreau, Claudia Hodonou, and David Durette. 2023. URL: https : / /
windren.se/WW2023/3_2_7_Godreau_On_the_performance_of_ice_detection_
methods_used_in_wind_energy_a_long-term_field_study_Pub_v2.pdf.
[129]
Kelsey Simpkins. Inspired by palm trees, scientists develop hurricane-resilient
wind turbines. Aug. 2023. URL: https://www.colorado.edu/today/2022/06/15/
inspired-palm-trees-scientists-develop-hurricane-resilient-wind-turbines.
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
==PAGE:85==
Exploring socio-technical resilience in wind energy systems: Analysis of extreme weather mitigation
strategies
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fredriksborgvej, 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
