==PAGE:1==
Detecting Phishing Certificates
An Investigation into Machine Learning Techniques
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Detecting Phishing Certificates
An Investigation into Machine Learning Techniques
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Magnea Haraldsdóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of machine learning.
Magnea Haraldsdóttir - s212946
Signature
Date
ii
Detecting Phishing Certificates
MagnaHaraldsletter
04.02.2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Phishing attacks using digital certificates to appear safe to the user, have increased rapidly
in recent years. As an example, around 80% of phishing attacks in 2021 used digital cer-
tificates to appear legitimate. The most common methods today of detecting phishing
websites rely on users reporting the websites to phishing repositories where they are then
confirmed. This process can be slow allowing the attacker time to have their phishing
attack out on the internet. Newer methods that implement machine learning models for
the detection of phishing websites based on their digital certificate have been shown to
be effective. This paper presents a system that uses certificate and domain name related
features along with machine learning methods for the detection of phishing websites. To
develop the system data was collected from PhishTank and Tranco for domain names and
Censys used for certificate retrieval. The domain related features are partly engineered
using a BiLSTM model to get a vector representation of the domain name. Using the
features engineered from the certificate and domain name a classifier is trained and this
thesis compares Random Forest, K-nearest neighbors and Support Vector Machine classi-
fiers. Enriching the feature set with the vector representation of the domain names results
in higher performance in distinguishing suspicious certificates from benign ones.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, and especially Sajad for his great support in this
project and always being open to my questions and doubts. I would like to thank my
Muninn team that has cheered me on and made every day in the oﬀice a fun day when
working on this project. Especially I would like to thank Emil, CTO at Muninn, for the
brainstorming and the great support during my thesis.
Finally I could not have done this without the great support of my fiance who has been
my rock through this process.
iv
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
API
=
Application Programming Interface
AUC
=
Area Under the Curve
BiLSTM
=
Bidirectional Long-Short Term Memory
CA
=
Certificate Authority
CRLs
=
Certificate Revocation Lists
CT
=
Certificate Transparency
FPR
=
False Positive Rate
HTTPS
=
HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure
KNN
=
K-Nearest Neighbours
LSTM
=
Long-Short Term Memory
MCC
=
Matthews Correlation Coeﬀicient
NLP
=
Natural Language Processing
OCSP
=
Online Certificate Status Protocol
PKI
=
Public Key Infrastructre
RF
=
Random Forest
RNN
=
Recurrent Neural Networks
ROC
=
Receiver Operating Characteristic
SAN
=
Subject Alternative Name
SCT
=
Signed Certificate Timestamp
SVM
=
Support Vector Machine
TLD
=
Top Level Domain
TLS
=
Transport Layer Security
TPR
=
True Positive Rate
Detecting Phishing Certificates
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Certificates and secure network communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Phishing attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Machine learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Literature Review
13
3.1
Data sources and review process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Results of literature review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Data
19
4.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Data cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Methodology
27
5.1
Feature engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Exploratory data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Classifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Results
39
6.1
Domain model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Classification model development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Application of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Limitations and Future Work
59
8
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
A Literature Review
67
A.1 Repositories queried and the query . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2 Review protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B Certificate Collection
70
C Feature Plots
72
Detecting Phishing Certificates
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
It is pretty safe to assume that most readers of this thesis, if not all, have at some point
received a link to a website that seemed legit and trustworthy but the site was in fact a
scam trying to steal information from you. These attacks known as phishing attacks have
been on the rise in recent years, so much that they are the most common cyber attack
monitored by the FBI [1]. These attacks have the goal of getting the victims to disclose
sensitive information usually with the intent of scamming money out of them.
Phishing attacks are often hidden as postal services, banking services or government oﬀicial
sites. Hiding behind such trusted entities makes it easier for users to be fooled. Previously
a user could depend on the padlock icon in their browser to be sure that they were passing
on sensitive information through a secure website.
Nowadays using HTTPS, which is
what gives a website the padlock in browsers, can no longer be considered a good enough
indicator for the safety of the website. This is due to the fact that the majority attackers
have started using HTTPS in their attacks fooling users with a false sense of security from
the lock icon [2].
Attackers usually get their phishing attacks to users through emails or text messages with
some text trying to get the user to click a link. The greatest defense is an informed and
sceptical user against these attacks. In fact the Federal Trade Commission of the USA
advice people to be aware of the methods phishing attacks use [3]. They also recommend
keeping all security software up to date but those usually do not stop users from enter-
ing the phishing websites to begin with, rather they protect the device of the user from
malware. There do exist repositories of phishing websites, such as PhishTank [4] but for a
phishing website to show up in these types of lists someone needs to have been, or almost
have been, a victim of the attack. This is due to the fact that these phishing lists are user
driven, someone has to report it before it is confirmed to be a phishing website.
With the increased use of HTTPS in phishing attacks comes an increased amount of certifi-
cates linked to phishing websites as certificates are needed for establishing communication
over HTTPS. Previous work has shown that it is a feasible idea to classify certificates into
phishing certificates and benign certificates. Policies and best practices regarding certifi-
cate usage for websites are always evolving and this could affect the trends that distinguish
phishing certificates from benign ones. This thesis will focus on exploring the features of
a certificate that are likely to have an effect on the classification of certificates along with
expanding on previous work by implementing advanced domain related features. The goal
is to implement a machine learning algorithm that can classify a certificate to be either
benign or phishing based on its certificate and domain name alone.
The advanced domain related features are built using a natural language processing (NLP)
approach with a popular method used for NLP called Long-Short Term Memory or LSTM.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
1
==PAGE:12==
The LSTM model is used to extract a vector representation of the domain names and
these vector representations of the domain names are used to expand the features from
the certificate. With the feature set a few classifiers are trained to different combinations
of features to establish the best performing model and features. The classifiers that are
compared are Random Rorest, K-Nearest Neighbours and Support Vector Machine. To
evaluate and find the best performing classifier F1-score, accuracy and the confusion matrix
are used. A time-based evaluation is also conducted to see how well the classifier generalizes
trough time. The evaluations show that enhancing domain related features improves the
performance of distinguishing phishing certificates.
Lastly this thesis presents a possible application of such a classifier as the one developed in
this thesis. The development of such an application is left as future work but an example
of the classification module of the application is shown where the classifier is used for
evaluating a new phishing website and its real counterpart.
All code and the final datasets can be found at this GitHub repository https://github.com/
magneaharalds/PhishingDetection
2
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This chapter presents the concepts this thesis builds on and uses. It will cover secure
network communication and how certificates are used in that space, along with the contents
of certificates. It will give a background on phishing attacks in recent years and lastly
cover the machine learning methods used to build a certificate classifier.
2.1
Certificates and secure network communication
Hypertext transfer protocol secure (HTTPS) is the secure version of HTTP network proto-
col, used when transferring data between web browser and website. HTTPS is important
to secure the transfer of the data, this is especially important when working with sensitive
data like bank accounts or peoples emails. In modern browsers users are warned that the
website is not secure if it does not use HTTPS. For example the padlock in Google Chrome.
The encryption is done by using a protocol called Transport Layer Security (TLS). TLS
uses a private and a public key for its encryption. Not using HTTPS allows anyone to see
that information having the right tools to snoop around the network [5].
Using TLS ensures two main things, encryption and authentication. That is, it ensures
that the data being transferred is hidden from third parties and has not been tampered
with as well as that the communicating parties are who they claim they are [6]. This
secure communication is achieved using a public key infrastructure (PKI). This process
produces certificates commonly known as ”digital certificate”, ”TLS certificates” or ”x509
certificates”. TLS uses x509 certificate format resulting in that naming convention. In this
thesis these TLS certificates will simply be referred to as certificates. The issuance of the
certificates is handled by Certificate Authoroties (CA). A CA is a trusted third-party and
core part of the PKI responsible for verifying the identity of users wanting to offer secure
services [7].
As there is no way to delete certificates, they have to be revoked by which can only be
done by the CA, this might arise when for example the private key shows signs of being
compromised. There are two ways certificates can be revoked by the CA, the Certificate
Revocation Lists (CRLs) and the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP). The CRLs
allow parties depending on the certificates to check if the certificate has been revoked by
the CA and the OCSP allows for checking of the status of the certificates in real time [8,
9]. A workaround this problem is having short lived certificates. In fact, in 2020 Apple set
a limit to the lifetimes of certificates to 398 days [10] and Chrome and Mozilla followed.
This caused certificate authorities to only issue certificates with 13 month validity period.
In fact Google Chrome has announced that they are planning on changing the maximum
allowed validity period to 90 days in the near future [11].
The first Certificate Transparency (CT) log was launched in 2013 by Google as a response
to an attack in 2011. This attack compromised DigiNotar, a CA from the Netherlands,
Detecting Phishing Certificates
3
==PAGE:14==
which issued rogue certificates allowing for man-in-the-middle attacks [12]. CAs are en-
couraged to submit all certificates to a CT log to improve security online by bringing
accountability to the system that protects HTTPS. When doing so the CA receives a
Signed Certificate Timestamp (SCT) as a commitment from the CT log that the certifi-
cate will be included in the logs. The SCT is then attached to the certificate by the CA
making it accessible during a TLS handshake. This allows browsers to make sure that the
certificate has been included in a CT log when initiating a TLS handshake with a website.
Both Safari and Chrome require that certificates have at least two SCTs depending on the
lifetime of the certificate. The CT logs are also monitored and an owner of a domain can
subscribe to CT monitors and get notified when certificates for those domains are included
in the logs monitored by that CT monitor [12].
To understand the source of the data used in this thesis it is important to have an overview
of the structure of a certificate. The following list shows the mandatory fields of a certificate
and the optional fields under a field called extensions that are used [13].
• version
• serial number
• issuer
• subject
• subject public key information
• validity period
– not before
– not after
• signature algorithm
• extensions (optional)
– key usage
– basic constraints
– subject alternative name (SAN)
– CRL distribution points
– authority key id
– extended key usage
– certificate policies
– authority info access
– and more
Subject Alternative Name (SAN) is a field that is used quite extensively in this thesis.
Originally certificates only supported a single subject indicating the domain the certificate
is valid for but SANs were added as an extensions to allow for multiple domain names to
be included in a single certificate [14].
2.2
Phishing attacks
Phishing is a cybercrime that utilises social engineering and technical deceit to steal peo-
ples identity data and credentials, often with the goal of scamming money out of people
4
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:15==
[2]. In 2022 Phishing attacks claimed the most victims out of internet crimes monitored by
the FBI according to the 2022 Internet Crime Report, claiming around 300,000 reported
victims with the loss of $52,089,159 [1]. In the APWG Phishing Activity Trends Report
[2], it is shown how the use of HTTPS in phishing attacks has increased in recent years, and
from Q3 2020 until Q2 2021, around 80% of attacks are using HTTPS. Phishing attacks
are often launched through emails or text messages with the goal of leading the consumer
to a fraudulent website that appears legit. Serving the phishing website over HTTPS gives
a false sense of security to the user, as for example the padlock icon in Chrome has come
to be a symbol of trusted sites.
2.3
Machine learning
This thesis utilizes machine learning to classify certificates based on whether they are likely
to be phishing or benign certificates. The workflow of a typical classification pipeline is
shown in Figure 2.1. To build such a pipeline a labeled dataset is required and usually
the data requires some preprocessing. This could be scaling features, handling categorical
variables and dealing with missing values. The data is then split into training and testing
sets. The training set is used to train the classification algorithm and the testing set is
used to evaluate the performance on unseen data. In this section the machine learning
methods used in this thesis are introduced along with the evaluation metrics utilized.
Features
Labels
Preprocessing +
Feature extraction
Feature set
Machine Learning
Model
Trained Classifier
Labels
Unseen pre-
processed data
Training
Phase
Prediction
phase
Figure 2.1: A typical machine learning based classification pipeline
2.3.1
Random Forest
Random forest is an ensemble learning method based on decision trees. To understand
random forest algorithms one must have an understanding of decision trees, for this reason
decision trees will first be introduced.
Decision trees are like the naming suggests tree-based methods for classification. Each
node of the tree structure represents a question or a decision and the branches out of those
nodes represent the outcome of the question/decision. Leaf nodes in the tree represent the
final prediction of the model. When building these decisions some criteria for how good
the decision needs to be established. There are two things to consider, how balanced is
the question and how pure the resulting classes are. To account for the purity an impurity
measure is used, written as I(r) for the root and I(v1), I(v2), ..., I(vK) for the impurity at
the branches where K is the number of branches. The impurities are then weighted by
Detecting Phishing Certificates
5
==PAGE:16==
the fraction of observations at each branch (N(vk)/N(r)), this is then combined to get an
overall impurity after the split. By looking at the difference in impurity before the split
and after the split a purity gain ∆is obtained, given by the formula
∆= I(r) −
K
!
k=1
N(vk)
N(r) I(vk).
(2.1)
The trees are built recursively where the split with the highest purity gain is selected. To
control the complexity of the tree, stopping criteria are used. Common stopping criteria
are to stop when a branch contains less than a specific number of observations, stop
splitting if a certain depth of the tree is reached or stop splitting when the purity gain for
the best split is below a predefined value [15].
Now back to the random forest method. Random forest, simply put, is an application of
bagging on decision trees. Bagging produces T datasets by sampling with replacement
from the original dataset. Next a decision tree is trained on each of the sampled datasets.
If the decision trees would be built in the standard way, a problem would arise. The
decision trees would often select the same splits over and over creating very correlated
trees. To solve this problem each tree should only consider a subset of the features for the
splitting. Since the root split will not always have the same features available the resulting
trees are less correlated. This randomisation in both the sampling of the data and the
feature sampling helps prevent overfitting [15]. The class for an observation is chosen by
combining the predictors, the prediction that is the most common for the observation will
be the prediction from the random forest. A nice feature of random forest algorithms is
that they provide insight into feature importance. The higher the feature importance of a
feature, the more important it is when it comes to predicting the class of an observation
[16].
2.3.2
K-Nearest Neighbours
The K-nearest Neighbours classifier is based on two main things, the closeness of two
observations and the class of the neighbours of a observation. We define a K-neighborhood
of a point x as
NX(x, K) = {The K observations in X which are nearest to x}
(2.2)
where X is the dataset [15]. Using this K-neighborhood, a simple classification method
would then be to fix K (for example K = 10) then x gets assigned the class which has the
most elements in NX(x, K). The situation where there is a tie for the most elements in
NX(x, K) can arise, but there are a few ways to break the tie and choose the class. The
simplest way to break a tie is to select the class of the closest neighbor [15]. The choice
of the value K is here a parameter that needs to be chosen. Figure 2.2 shows an example
of a 3-neighborhood of an unclassified observation. In that example the green observation
would be classified into the purple class.
6
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:17==
?
Figure 2.2: Example of a 3-neighborhood around the green point.
2.3.3
Support Vector Machine
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a classification method. The aim is to find a hyper-
plane that separates the data points from each other in the best way possible while also
maximizing the margin between the two classes. The margin is defined as the distance
between the hyperplane and the nearest data point from either class, this is where the
support vector name comes from. Maximizing this margin leads to better generalization
on unseen data. This hyperplane is then used as the decision boundary for new unseen
data. Figure 2.3 shows a simple example of what a hyperplane in 2D looks like.
Figure 2.3: An example of the hyperplane between two classes, the blue
dots and the green dots. The yellow shaded area represent the margins
between the two classes that are aimed to be maximized 1.
For non-linearly separable data the Kernel trick is used. A kernel function is used to trans-
1https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=73710028, accessed 11.01.2024
Detecting Phishing Certificates
7
==PAGE:18==
form the data to a higher dimension where the data becomes linearly separable. Common
kernel functions are the polynomial kernel, radial basis function kernel and sigmoid kernel.
[17]
When training an SVM model it can be regularised and the parameter of regularization is
often called C. In this thesis the SVM are based on the SciKit-learn SVM classifier where
the parameter C controls the strength of the regularization, a lower value resulting in more
regularization, that is a larger margin [18].
2.3.4
Long Short-Term Memory
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks are a type of Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN). RNNs allow outputs from previous steps to be used as inputs whilst having hid-
den states. Key components of RNNs are their ability to handle sequential data taking
into account historical information. This makes them popular within natural language
processing (NLP) and speech recognition. RNNs suffer from what is called the vanishing
gradient problem making it hard to learn long term dependencies as multiplicative gradi-
ent becomes exponentially decreasing/increasing with respect to the number of layers in
the neural network. An example of the structure of a sentiment analysis RNN is shown
in Figure 2.4 where the goal is to determine the sentiment in a piece of text [19].
Figure 2.4: The structure of a sentiment analysis RNN, the x<i> are the
inputs, a<i> is the activation and then there is one output ˆy [19].
LSTM networks were developed as a way to handle the vanishing gradient problem in
traditional RNNs and capture long-term dependencies. Key component of LSTM models
are the gates, the input gate, the forget gate and the output gate. These gates control
the information flow within and out of the memory cell. The forget gate allows the LSTM
network to select how much of the long-term memory is not required. This is done using
a sigmoid function. After this the network decides and stores the information from the
new input and updates the state of the cell. This is done using the sigmoid function and
tanh function. The sigmoid decides if the new information should be added to the long
term memory where as the tanh function gives a weight deciding the importance of this
new information. This is what is called the input gate. The last step is to calculate the
8
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:19==
output of the LSTM cell, and again, sigmoid and tanh functions are used. This is the
output gate. Figure 2.5 shows how an LSTM cell is structured. [20, 19]
Figure 2.5: The structure of an LSTM cell [20].
Bidirectional LSTM models (BiLSTM) are LSTM models where the input sequence is
processed in two ways, from beginning to end and from the end to beginning. BiLSTM
are commonly used in solving NLP problems as they allow for setting a word of a sentence
into context with the word in front and after it. [21]
To evaluate LSTM models used for classification the accuracy and loss are observed. The
accuracy is explained in section 2.3.5. The loss is a function that is used to evaluate the
weights during training, it is this function that is minimized during training to improve
the model. Therefore monitoring the loss function during training can provide insight into
the performance as a lower loss is desirable [21].
2.3.5
Evaluation metrics
In classification machine learning, there are four combinations of the class the observation
actually belongs to and then what is predicted by the model [15].
• True Positives, TP: Number of observations which are in fact positive and the
classifier labeled as positive.
• False Positives, FP: Number of observations which are in fact negative and the
classifier labeled as positive.
• False Negatives, FN: Number of observations which are in fact positive and the
classifier labeled as negative.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
9
==PAGE:20==
• True Negatives, TN: Number of observations which are in fact negative and the
classifier labeled as negative.
With these combinations there are a few evaluation tools:
Confusion matrix displays these four combinations in an easily readable matrix, where
on the diagonal are the numbers for the correctly classified observations and on the off-
diagonal the incorrectly classified. Figure 2.6 shows the structure of a confusion matrix
TP
FP
FN
TN
Positive
Negative
Actual values
Predicted Values
Negative
Positive
Figure 2.6: Confusion Matrix. Correctly classified observations count to-
wards the diagonal and the off diagonal are incorrectly classified observa-
tions
Another commonly used metric are the accuracy (Equation 2.3) and F1-score (Equation
2.4) [15].
Accuracy = TP + TN
N
, where N is the number of observations
(2.3)
F1-score =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
(2.4)
Accuracy is a measure of how often the classifier is right. This metric can cause problems
when working with unbalanced datasets and that is where the F1-score comes in. The F1-
score handles unbalanced datasets better than accuracy and is therefore often a preferred
metric instead of accuracy [15].
Another metric based on the confusion matrix is the Matthews Correlation Coeﬀicient
(MCC). It produces a high score only when the prediction obtained good results in all
four of the categories of the confusion matrix, proportional to the the size of the positive
and negative elemnts of the dataset [22].
MCC =
TP · TN −FP · FN
"
(TP + FP)(TP + FN)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
(2.5)
10
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:21==
Another evaluation of classification models is the area under the curve (AUC) and
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC). These are also based on the confusion
matrix by defining a false positive rate (FPR) and a true positive rate (TPR).
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
(2.6)
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(2.7)
By plotting the values of FPR against TPR as can be seen in Figure 2.7, the ROC is
obtained and the AUC is then defined as the area under the curve of the ROC. Now if the
AUC is 1 the number of false positives is 0 and the number of true positives is the total
number of positives. This means that the classifier is working perfectly, i.e. a higher AUC
is desirable [15].
Figure 2.7: An example of an ROC curve and AOC is the area under the
curve on the figure [15].
Detecting Phishing Certificates
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:23==
3
Literature Review
This chapter covers the process and results of a systematic literature review conducted
on the topics of this thesis. The purpose of the systematic literature review is to review
methods and results in previous attempts at detecting phishing attacks using certificates.
Moreover to gain an overview of the algorithms used, the data collection methods and the
performance of these implementations.
3.1
Data sources and review process
The repositories that were searched are IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital Library, Web of Science
and Scopus. Each of these repositories have their own query language but the queries
are constructed such that in the document title the keywords ”certificate/s” or ”digital
certificate/s” must be mentioned. Then there are two groups of conditions for the abstract.
First one is that one of the keywords ”phishing”, ”malicious” or ”suspicious” must be
present in the abstract. This is to make sure the literature we search for does actually
address malicious certificates. Second condition is that we require one of the following to
also be in the abstract, ”detection”, ”identification”, ”machine learning”, ”deep learning”,
”supervised” or ”unsupervised”. This is to make sure the methodology is of interest as
only machine learning based approaches are within the scope of this project.
For the
specific queries for each repository see Appendix A. All the information from the queries
was extracted from the four libraries on 12. September 2023.
The number of identified papers in each repository can be seen in Table 3.1. There are
some duplicates so these are removed based on DOI and title. After that irrelevant papers
were filtered out based on the abstract, leaving 12 papers of interest. For a more detailed
description of the review of papers see Appendix A.
Repository
No. of papers
IEEE Xplore
11
ACM Digital Library
68
Web of Science
27
Scopus
38
Table 3.1: Number of papers identified in each repository
3.2
Results of literature review
In this section the results of the literature review are covered. The focus of the literature
review is to map which methods have been used, what are the data sources and what does
the feature engineering look like in each of the papers.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
13
==PAGE:24==
3.2.1
Methods used
Most of the papers identified have focused on a binary classification approach, either the
certificate is malicious/phishing or it is benign. There have been attempts at multiclass
classification where there has been a third category for medium risk certificates [23]. It
seems to be the overall conclusion that Random Forest (RF) methods outperform other
classical and ensemble Machine Learning methods [23, 24, 25, 26]. There has also been
research into using neural networks for solving this problem [27, 28, 29]. The performance
of using neural networks has been similar to the Random Forest implementations though
it is stated that with Neural Network approaches feature engineering is not necessary
but Drichel et al. [27] still use the features engineered for the RF implementation as an
encoding for the certificate. Figure 3.1 provides an overview of the algorithms used in the
papers identified in the literature review.
3.2.2
Data sources and labeling
Most papers used Alexa [30] to collect benign URLs but Alexa is no longer maintained,
so in more recent articles, Tranco [31] has become a popular choice for top domains.
PhishTank and OpenPhish were the most popular providers of malicious URLs. To collect
the certificates, either OpenSSL or Censys [32] was used. An overview of this can be seen
in Table 3.2.
Some papers take the approach of having three categories of data. There is always the
malicious category based on blacklists like PhishTank. Then for the benign certificates
two categories are constructed, one that is based on lists such as Alexa or Tranco and then
another benign list based on domains that receive low traﬀic but still are not a part of
any phishing blacklists[33, 25]. AlSabah et al. [25] show how the properties of the popular
and unpopular benign certificates vary, giving reason to having these three categories in
the dataset.
In [33, 26] the problem of defining a ground truth is explained. When building a dataset
solely on certificates there can be multiple domain names attached to the certificate
through either the SANs or a wildcard domain. In [26] a certificate was labeled phishy or
benign if the SANs only included phishing or benign domains respectively or unlabeled
domains. A certificate is labeled conflicted if it contains both a benign and a phishing
domain in the SANs. This challenge of a ground truth is something that needs to be
considered and the possibility of the conflicted certificates is something that needs to be
checked.
3.2.3
Feature engineering in previous work
It is important to analyse the features used in previous work to gain an overview of what
has been done and what has worked well. As the interest lies in domain based features
there is a special focus on previous work on domain related features.
Dong et al., 2015 [24] built the dataset solely based on certificate features along with a
check if the domain of the website is the same as the subject common name. An important
feature they use are temporal features based on the not_before and not_after fields
14
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:25==
from the certificate. Their arguments for why these are important features do not apply
anymore as the best practice of certificate creation is moving towards shorter and shorter
validity period in certificates, making temporal features less useful in the detection of
phishing certificates. The check for the match between domain and subject common name
is also not that useful as the use of SANs has increased.
Fasllija et al., 2019 [34] introduce suspicious keywords and TLD based features are used on
the bases that using some keywords in the subdomains or a trusted TLD as a subdomain
can fool the user into thinking the site is legit. They also calculate the Shannon entropy
to measure the randomness of a domain.
Hageman et al., 2021 [33] implement domain related features where individual predictions
are done for each domain in the SANs and the individual predictions are then combined
in a metaclassifier using max., min., average and median. This is done because the goal
is to be able to classify certificates on their own and not have a specific domain linked to
the certificate.
Homayoun et al. 2022 [26] build on the feature sets from [27, 34, 29] and combine features
from all papers into a bigger dataset. The domain related features are all lexical based
features aggregated over the domains in the SANs.
The feature set by Li et al., 2021 [29] is partially built on the certificate chain which
requires the solution to establish the whole certificate chain for each certificate.
Efforts into developing a clustering algorithm have been done by Sakurai et al., 2020
[35]. The clustering algorithm was used on the subject common name in the certificate to
establish a set of templates that can then be used to cluster new unseen certificates.
Alsabah et al., 2022 [25] explored using Passive DNS features along with certificate and
domain features. Using the Passive DNS features does show a positive affect on the FPR
when classifying the certificates.
3.2.4
Conclusion
With the exception of [26], [34] and [27] there has not been a lot of exploration of the
domain name and features based on the domain. The features proposed in [26] are all
lexical based features. This means that there is an opportunity to explore more advanced
features based on the domain names.
Even though some good features can be extracted from the chain of the certificate or by
using passive DNS feature it requires more work in the data gathering for prediction of
a single certificate. This is where exploring more advanced domain related features is an
interesting idea, it could provide more insight with out having to gather more data than
the domain name and its corresponding certificate.
An overview of the articles reviewed in this chapter is in Table 3.2.
The table shows
the article names, the authors, algorithms used data sources and whether there were any
domain based features in the feature set.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.1: Number of papers per algorithm.
16
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:27==
Article Name
Author
Year
Algorithm
Datasource
Domain name
as a feature
Beyond the Lock Icon:
Real-time Detection of
Phishing Websites Using
Public Key Certificates
Z. Dong, A.
Kapadia, J. Blythe
L. J. Camp
2015
Random forest, KNN,
Decision table,
Naive Bayes Tree,
Logistic Regression,
Decision Tree
Alexa
PhishTank
TCP connection
for certificates
Check domain
name =
subject common
name
Risk Evaluation of
X.509 Certificates -
A Machine Learning
Application
Hawanna, Varsharani
Kulkarni, Vrushali
Rane, Rashmi
Joshi, Pooj
2016
Random Forrest
Bagging
Boosting
Alexa
PhishTank
Wire shark and
Network miner
Check domain
name =
subject common
name
Hunting Malicious TLS
Certificates with Deep
Neural Networks
Torroledo, Ivan
Camacho, Luis David
Bahnsen, Alejandro Correa
2018
Deep Neural Network
Vaderetro
abuse.ch
censys.io
Alexa
Rank based
on domain
ranking
Phish-Hook: Detecting
Phishing Certificates
Using Certificate
Transparency Logs
Fasllija, Edona
Enişer, Hasan Ferit
Prünster, Bernd
2019
Decision Tree
SVM
KNN
MLP
UCI Machine
Learning
Repository
Yes
Discovering HTTPSified
Phishing Websites
Using the TLS Certificates
Footprints
Sakurai, Yuji
Watanabe, Takuya
Okuda, Tetsuya
Akiyama, Mitsuaki
Mori, Tatsuya
2020
DBSCAN (clustering)
OpenPhish
Relies only on
subject common
name
Machine Learning-Based
Malicious X.509
Certificates’ Detection
Jiaxin Li,
Zhaoxin Zhang
and Changyong Guo
2021
LR, DT and SVM. RF,
XGBoost, LightGBM
and CatBoost.
CNN and LSTM.
PhishTank
SSLBL
Alexa rank
crt.sh and Censys
Rank based
on domain
ranking
Can a TLS certificate
be phishy?
Hageman, Kidmose,
Hansen, Pedersen
2021
No Machine Learning
The Tranco list.
APWG’s eCX.
Censys
No
Finding Phish in a
Haystack: A Pipeline
for Phishing Classi-
fication on Certificate
Transparency Logs
Drichel, Arthur
Drury, Vincent
Von Brandt, Justus
Meyer, Ulrike
2021
Random Forrest
RNN
CT logs
OSINT,
Alexa,
Tranco
Yes
Content-Agnostic
Detection of Phishing
Domains using Certificate
Transparency and
Passive DNS
Alsabah, Mashael
Nabeel, Mohamed
Boshmaf, Yazan
Choo, Euijin
2022
Random Forrest
PhishTank
Alexa
Self made
benign list.
Domain length
Detecting Ambiguous
Phishing Certificates
using Machine Learning
Homayoun, Sajad
Hageman, Kaspar
Afzal-Houshmand, Sam
Jensen, Christian D.
Pedersen, Jens M.
2022
SGD, KNN, Decision Tree,
Random Forrest,SVM
Lasso, Ridge, ElasticNet,
RF regression, DTR, Bagging
Regression
CT logs
Yes
Table 3.2
Detecting Phishing Certificates
17
==PAGE:28==
18
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:29==
4
Data
This chapter covers the process of building the dataset and the necessary data cleaning.
It goes trough the process of gathering both phishing and benign domains to have labeled
data, and how those are used to create a collection of certificates. Along with building
a certificate dataset, a dataset of domains separate from the one used for the certificate
collection is established. This dataset will be used to develop a model that will enhance
the feature set with domain based features.
4.1
Data collection
To establish a set of benign domains a list from Tranco [31] was extracted on the 30.
October 2023. Tranco is a research oriented project that collects the top 1 million domains
over the last 30 days. This is done by combining the rankings from other providers which
all have their own methods of calculating the popularity. Tranco then combines these with
the goal of providing a more stable top 1 million domain list. The top 20,000 domains
from the Tranco list are selected to be used as the list of benign domain names.
To establish a set of phishing domains, a list of valid online phishing URLs was collected
from PhishTank [4] on the 30. October 2023. PhishTank is a site where anyone can report
a phishing website. Then a community of people that verify these suspected phishing sites.
Only URLs using HTTPS protocol are extracted as those are the only ones of interest.
Under the assumption that domains in the Tranco list are benign due to their popularity,
certificates associated with them can not be deemed as phishing certificates. There is an
overlap in the phishing URL list extracted and the Tranco list created but this is due to
user-generated phishing attacks. This can for example be a file stored in Google Drive,
the file might rightly be a phishing attack but that does not mean that the certificate
associated with the Google Drive website should be considered malicious. After filtering
the extracted list from PhishTank there are 26,268 URLs in the list. The root domain
is used as a the domain of interest, for example https://www.example.com/path will
become example.com. The Tranco list is already in this format.
Using a certificate dataset from Censys, certificates are extracted for the domain names
from the gathered data from PhishTank and Tranco. The certificate dataset from Censys
is the most exhaustive in existence. The data collection is done by syncing with a number
of CT logs and observing a certificate as a part of a TLS handshake during a Censys scan
of the public internet. The dataset Censys provides to researchers has a one month lag
so data collected on the 1. November 2023 will not show up in the dataset until the 1.
December 2023 [32].
When saving certificates to their datasets, Censys does some processing of the certificates.
They parse or decode the certificates so they store all the information contained within
the certificate. Additionally they store information from major root stores such as Apple,
Detecting Phishing Certificates
19
==PAGE:30==
Google Chrome, Microsoft and Mozilla NSS among other information not utilized in this
thesis [36].
In simple words, the data collection procedure is that a query was run against the Cen-
sys dataset for the fields of the certificate of interest in this thesis where the parameter
not_valid_after is after 1. January 2023 and before 1. January 2024. These results
are then matched to the Tranco and phishing list on the field names, if there is a match
that certificate is kept.
To read more about the data collection process in detail and
the Censys dataset used see Appendix B. Using this procedure 1,900,001 certificates were
collected.
Due to the nature of the data collection process, and the dataset provided
by Censys, the collection of certificates established contains duplicates and can contain
multiple certificates matching to the same domain. Processing and cleaning is therefore
required.
Another set of phishing domains needs to be established to build a model for enhancing
the domain related features. A list of phishing domains was extracted on the 9. January
2024. After processing the new phishing URL list in the same manner as was done with
the list for certificate collection, all certificates contained in both lists are removed. This
is to ensure that the phishing domains used for the domain based model training are not
in the certificate dataset. This list has 25,146 phishing URLs. The establishment of a new
Tranco based benign list is not as straight forwards as the most popular domains tend to
stay the most popular so fetching a new Tranco list and taking the top domains might
result in a lot of the same domains as are in the certificate dataset. Instead the top 50,000
domain names are selected and from those 50,000, 25,000 are randomly sampled. This
results in a dataset consisting of 50,146 labeled domains. In hindsight, it would have been
more realistic to collect the phishing domains for the feature enhancing model before the
phishing URLS for the classification. This was not something that was thought necessary
at the time when the certificate collection started, and therefore was not done until later.
The same can be said about the benign set of domains, in hindsight there are better ways
to the domain collection of two datasets that do not overlap, but again, it was not thought
necessary at the time of the first data collection.
4.2
Data cleaning
When exploring the certificate collection, a substantial amount of certificates with identical
subject common name were observed. It can not be assumed that all certificates with the
same subject common name will be duplicates but they do have very similar patterns
which could cause the dataset to be biased if not taken care of. A procedure for dropping
duplicates of the subject common name is developed based on the percentiles of the count
of how many subject common names have x many repeats. Calculating the percentiles
shows that 75% of the data has 13 occurrences or less of their subject common name
and 90% of the data has less than 34 occurrences.
Figure 4.1a shows the cumulative
distribution of repeats of the subject common names and how there are a few subject
common names that appear extremely often in the dataset. Based on these percentile
20
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:31==
values, 13 and 34, the aim is to have every count of the subject common name within
these two values of repetitions if it exceeded the 90th percentile, 34. This is achieved by
random sampling a number, n, between the two percentiles and then random sampling
n observations from the same subject common name. Figure 4.2 shows the process of
filtering. This process reduced the dataset to 79,196 from 1,900,001 certificates. Figure
4.1b shows the cumulative distribution after filtering. This drastic drop in certificates is
mostly due to one subject common name appearing 1,647,210 times in the dataset and a
few others that have a high number of repetitions in the dataset. This filtering is justified
by the fact that including all these certificates, even though they are individual certificates,
they come from the same origin and display the same features when processed. This would
then cause the models to learn to recognize these specific certificates instead of phishing
certificates from benign ones. This process does not completely eliminate duplicates in the
dataset but is used as the initial cleansing to reduce the size of the dataset to a manageable
size.
To establish a ground truth, i.e. label the data, each certificate collected is linked to the
domain it matched to when collecting the certificates from Censys. This is done separately
for the Tranco domains and the phishing domains. This results in some certificates match-
ing to multiple domain names from either list and in some cases they match both lists. In
the case of the multiple matches, 786 were phishing matches, 1955 Tranco matches and 193
had both phishing and Tranco matches, with multiple domain matches. After analysing
the amount and the origin of these certificates with multiple matches it was deemed safe
to drop them. Big portion of the phishing ones that were dropped come from various
hosting services that slipped the initial filtering of the phishing list. The dataset includes
more Tranco matches so dropping the certificates with multiple Tranco matches should
not impact the amount of data in any significant way. In the case of exactly one match
to both Tranco and the phishing list there were 426 certificates, and as with the filtering
of the phishing list, these can be considered as benign certificates with user-generated
phishing material, therefore they are dropped. This leaves every certificate only being
matched to a phishing domain or a benign domain and the data can be labeled.
Figure 4.3a and Figure 4.3b show the number of certificates assigned to each day. The
field not_valid_after only has values within the year 2023 but that is, as stated before,
how the data was filtered in the Censys dataset. However the field not_valid_before
displays some interesting findings. There are certificates with a not_valid_before date
many years before 2023. These certificates will be considered outliers as it is common
practice to only have certificates valid for less than a year so these would not provide
valuable input into the model building. Figures 4.4a and 4.4b show the distribution after
dropping the outliers.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
21
==PAGE:32==
(a) Before filtering data
(b) After filtering data
Figure 4.1: Cumulative distribution function of the count of how many
subject common names have x many repeats.
22
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:33==
Unfiltered dataset
Count occurrences of
subject common
name
No
Yes
Is the count greater 
than the 90th percentile
 of all counts
Keep all data with
subject common
name
Sample n many rows
with that subject
common name where
n is sampled from the
75th percentile and
the 90th percentile
Filtered Dataset
Figure 4.2: Filtering process to reduce duplicates of certificates with the
same subject common name.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
23
==PAGE:34==
(a) not_valid_before
(b) not_valid_after
Figure 4.3: Distribution of the validity period fields of the certificates
24
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:35==
(a) not_valid_before
(b) not_valid_after
Figure 4.4: Distribution of the validity period fields of the certificates after
removing outliers.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
25
==PAGE:36==
26
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:37==
5
Methodology
This chapter will cover the proposed solution and its components. The proposed solution
pipeline is depicted in Figure 5.1. As can be seen, there is a domain model component, this
component is built on domain names alone and uses an LSTM model to create features
based on the domain name. The raw certificates need processing and that is where the
feature engineering component comes in. As can be seen in Figure 5.1, the feature space is
two-fold, there are the certificate features and then lexical features from the domain name
and the SANs. This means that the feature set is considered as a pair between the domain
name and a certificate connected to the domain name. Finally there is the classification
component that takes the output of the domain model and the features engineered and
classifies the {certificate, domain} pairs. For the classification component three classifi-
cation algorithms are tested, Random Forest, K-nearest Neighbors and Support Vector
Machines.
This approach of considering the certificate and domain as a pair that needs classification,
eliminates the problems with defining ground truth for the whole list of SANs.
5.1
Feature engineering
The feature extraction builds on the features defined in [26]. In [26] the feature set is
twofold, certificate based features and features based on the SANs. Since the proposed
solution looks at a certificate and a domain name as a pair, features based solely on
the single domain can be constructed. Therefore the feature set can be split into three,
certificate based features, SAN based features and domain related features.
The certificate related features are features solely based on the certificate and a list of these
can be seen in Table 5.1. These are features based on the direct fields of the certificate
such as subject and issuer. They also include features as the number of SANs or the
longest common subsequence of the SANs. The SAN related features are more focused
on the lexical properties of the SANs, like the length, number of vowels, or if it contains
any suspicious keywords. These lexical properties are then aggregated over each domain
name in the SANs. The SAN related features are listed in Table 5.2. The domain related
features in the same way as the SAN based features are lexical based but this time it is
based on the single domain, these are listed in Table 5.3.
When defining the feature set, the focus is on only using certificate and domain based
features to allow for the prediction to only be based on available data, that is data that
the browser has to gather anyways. There are 28 certificate based features, 19 domain
based features and 18 SAN based features. After feature extraction, the dataset contains
what might be considered duplicates. This is due to the fact that certificates are renewed
and then they appear the same when the features have been extracted, the only difference
between them is the date for which they are valid. In [26] duplicates are removed based
Detecting Phishing Certificates
27
==PAGE:38==
Training of NLP
model
Certificate features
Lexical features
Extracted
features
Evaluation of NLP
model
Feature
vector
Training
Evaluation
Feature Engineering
Classification developement
Pre-processed
certificates
Labeled domains
Labeled domains +
their certificates
Classifier
Unseen 
Certificates
Feature extraction
Label
Domain based
feature model
Model that returns a
vector representation
of domain names
Domain
names
Figure 5.1: Overview of the pipeline to be developed in this thesis. There
are two separate domain datasets, the one on the right is used for the
machine learning domain related feature building and the other one on the
left that is linked to certificates. Combining all features and labels from
the domains, a classifier is trained and tested.
on the SANs they are covering and being signed by the same CA. Since the dataset is also
based on the domain name the duplicates are removed based on the labeled domain, the
SAN and the issuer. This leaves 12.016 certificates with engineered features out of the
28
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:39==
79,196 from the data cleaning process.
Feature
Type
Description
validation_level
int
Validation level of the certificate
apple_ever_valid
bool
If the certificate has ever been considered valid
by the Apple root store
nss_ever_valid
bool
If the certificate has ever been considered valid
by the Mozilla NSS root store
microsoft_ever_valid
bool
If the certificate has ever been considered valid
by the Microsoft root store
subject_has_country
bool
If the subject has anything in the country field
subject_has_province
bool
If the subject has anything in the province field
subject_has_locality
bool
If the subject has anything in the locality field
subject_has_common_name
bool
If the subject has anything in the common name
field
subject_only_cn
bool
If the subject only has something in the common
name field and all other subject fields are empty
subject_len
int
Length of the subject
length_seconds
int
Length of the validity period in seconds
ocsp_urls
bool
If the certificate has an OCSP (Online Certificate
Status Protocol) URL
crl_dist_point_present
bool
If the certificate has an CDP (CRL distribution
point) URL
num_san_dns_names
int
Number of SANs in the DNS names field
pub_key_algorithm
cat
The public key algorithm
version
int
Version of the certificate
signature_algorithm_name
cat
The signature algorithm name
len_serial_number
int
Length of the serial number
len_issuer_dn
int
Length of the issuer
issuer_has_common_name
bool
If the issuer has a common name
subject_is_empty
bool
If the subject is empty
lcs_sans
int
The longest common subsequence of all the SANs
lcs_sans_normed
float
The longest common subsequence of all the SANs,
normalized
authority_info_access
bool
If the certificate has authority information access
present
certificate_policies
bool
If the certificate has certificate policies present
basic_constraints
bool
If the certificate has basic constraints present
key_usage_value
int
The key usage
authority_key_id
bool
If the certificate has authority key id present
Table 5.1: Certificate Based Features
Detecting Phishing Certificates
29
==PAGE:40==
Feature
Type
Description
mean_san_domain_len
float
Average length of the domains in the SAN
san_sus_keyword
float
Number of domains in the SAN that have
a suspicious keyword divided by the
number of SANs
san_sus_tld
float
Number of domains in the SAN that have
a suspicious TLD divided by the number
of SANs, suspicious TLDs from [37, 38, 39]
san_shannon_entropy
float
Average Shannon entropy for the SANs
san_num_dashes
float
Average number of ”-” in the SAN domains
san_num_tokens
float
Average number of tokens in the SAN domains
san_num_parts
float
Average number of parts in the SAN domains
san_token_is_tld
float
Number of domains in the SAN that have a
TLD as a token divided by the number of SANs
san_frac_special_char
float
Fraction of special characters on average
in the SANs
san_is_international
float
Number of domains in the SAN that are
international domains divided by the number
of SANs
san_frac_vowels
float
Fraction of vowels on average in the SANs
san_frac_digits
float
Fraction of digits on average in the SANs
san_has_digit_only_subdomain
float
Number of domains in the SAN that have
a digit only subdomain divided by the
number of SANs
san_mean_len_subdomains
float
Average subdomain length in the SANs
san_has_single_char_subdomain
float
Number of domains in the SAN that have
adivided by the number of SANs
san_char_diversity
float
Average char diversity in the SANs
san_alphabet_size
float
Average alphabet size in the SANs
Table 5.2: SAN based Features
30
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:41==
Feature
Type
Description
domain_len
int
Length of the domain including ”.”
sus_keyword
bool
If the domain contain a suspicious keyword
sus_tld
bool
If the domain has a suspicious TLD, suspicious
TLDs from [37, 38, 39]
shannon_entropy
float
Shannon Entropy of the domain
num_dashes
int
Number of ”-” in the domain
num_tokens
int
Number of tokens. A token is a part of the
domain between ”-” or ”.”
num_parts
int
Number of parts. A part is between two ”.”
token_is_tld
bool
If a part of the domain is a TLD
frac_special_char
float
Fraction of the domain that is a special character
is_international
bool
If the domain is International Domain Name,
that is it contains any international characters
frac_vowels
float
Fraction of the domain that are vowels
frac_digits
float
Fraction of the domain that are digits
has_digit_only_subdomain
bool
If the domain contains a subdomain that is
only digits
mean_len_subdomains
float
Mean of the lengths of the subdomains of
the domain
has_single_char_subdomain
bool
If the domain has single character subdomains
char_diversity
float
Fraction of unique characters in the domain
to the total number of characters
alphabet_size
int
Number of unique characters in the domain
is_wildcard_match
bool
If the certificate matched to the domain
through a wildcard SAN
has_wildcard_san
bool
If the certificate contains a wildcard SAN
Table 5.3: Domain Based Features
Detecting Phishing Certificates
31
==PAGE:42==
5.1.1
Domain based model for feature engineering
As mentioned in section 2.3.4, LSTM models have been very popular in solving Natural
Language Processing (NLP) problems. This subsection will cover how to treat domain
names as sentences and treat the classification of domain names as an NLP problem. This
classification model is then used to generate features based on the domain name with the
goal of enriching the feature set for classification.
The techniques and model structure used for sentiment analysis of text can be used to
classify the domains.
There are two sentiments considered in this thesis, benign and
phishing. Figure 2.4 shows the structure of such a neural network, where there are multiple
inputs, in this case the words, and only one output, a label (benign/phishing). The words
are based on the domain names and a full domain will result in what will be referred to
as domain sentences.
To build these domain sentences, pre-processing is required. The pre-processing builds on
a method called word segmentation. In this thesis the word segmentation used is Python
package [40] based on the chapter Natural Language Corpus Data by Peter Norvig in the
book Beautiful Data [41]. This method can take in a string that has no space between
the words and split into a sentence with spaces using a probabilistic model based on the
333,000 most common words in the Google Web Trillion Word Corpus [40].
Split domain on "."
Domain name
Use word
segmentation on
each part of the
domain
Build sentence from
all the words
Domain
Sentence
(a)
['auth-ourtime', 'voice-chaats', 'workers', 'dev']
auth-ourtime.voice-chaats.workers.dev
['auth', 'our', 'time']
['voice', 'chaat', 's']
['workers']
['dev']
Build sentence from
all the words
auth our time voice chaat s workers dev
(b)
['thesprucepets', 'com']
thesprucepets.com
['the', 'spruce', 'pets']
['com']
Build sentence from
all the words
the spruce pets com
(c)
Figure 5.2: Pre-processing of domain names for LSTM training (a) and
examples of the domain name pre-processing (b) and (c).
The sentences are built by splitting the domain on ”.” to get the parts of the domain. Word
segmentation is then used on the parts of the domain to get the words from the domain.
32
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:43==
Once the domain has been split into words a sentence is built. This process can be seen
in Figure 5.2a. Examples of this process applied to domain names from the dataset can
be seen in Figures 5.2b and 5.2c.
To fit an LSTM model on text, it is necessary to convert the text to something the model
can understand, i.e. numbers. To do that the strings are tokenized, meaning a tokenizer
is trained on the training data and each word is assigned a numerical value. This makes
it possible to turn all text sequences (domain sentences) into a sequence of integers [42].
These tokenized sequences then go trough an embedding layer.
The embedding layer
takes the tokenized vectors that are the size of the vocabulary and maps them to a lower
dimensional space [43]. Once the tokenized sequences have been embedded, they can be
used for training of the LSTM model. The LSTM model is built as a classification model
and the performance can therefore be measured in accuracy and loss.
To create new features based on the classification model, the second last layer of the
BiLSTM model is extracted and the outputs of that layer are calculated for each domain
sentence in the certificate dataset. These new features can then be used as inputs into
classification algorithms and will be refered to as vector representations of the domain
name.
5.2
Exploratory data analysis
To gain insight into the dataset established, an exploratory analysis is done.
In this
section only the key takeaways from the exploratory analysis are covered. For the rest of
the visualizations see Appendix C.
Figure 5.3 displays various lexical domain based features. Here it can be seen that there
is a difference in the distributions of the features depending on the phishing and benign
domains. In fact, when a t-test is conducted on the two groups, see Table 5.4, there is a
significant difference between the groups for all four variables shown in Figure 5.3. This
indicates that using lexical features based on the domain will help solve the classification
problem. Figure 5.3a shows how it is more common for phishing domains to have longer
domain names. Figure 5.3b shows how it is more common for phishing domains to have
a higher Shannon Entropy compared to benign domains. The Shannon entropy measures
the randomness or uncertainty in a random variable. In this case a high Shannon entropy
implies that the domains are more random, that is, phishing domains tend to be more
random than benign certificates.
This is also reflected in Figure 5.3c where phishing
certificates tend to have a larger alphabet, that is have more unique letters in the domain
though this might be a consequence of the domains usually being longer. Figure 5.3d
on the other hand displays a lower trend in the character diversity for phishing domains
compared to benign domains. This again could be a result of longer domain names and
therefore it would have more repeats of characters.
The distribution of the validity period of the certificates can be seen in Figure 5.4. Figure
5.4a shows how it is most common for benign certificates to be valid for 90 days or around
Detecting Phishing Certificates
33
==PAGE:44==
(a) Length of the domain
(b) Shannon entropy of the domain
(c) Alphabet size of the domain
(d) Character diversity of the domain
Figure 5.3: Distribution of various lexical domain based features
domain_len
shannon_entropy
alphabet_size
char_diversity
t-statistic
70
55
62
-47
p-value
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Table 5.4: Results of a t-test between the phishing and benign certificates.
Taking a 0.05 significance level the hypothesis is rejected and the conclusion
is that there is significant statistical difference between the means of the
groups.
a year where as for the phishing certificates, Figure 5.4b shows how almost all phishing
certificates have a validity period of 90 days. This feature is likely to stop giving any
insights into whether a certificate is phishing or not if Google go trough with their plans
to only support 90 day certificates in Chrome.
In [34, 27] lists of keywords are proposed as suspicious keywords. In [34] the list is based
on famous applications of social media, commerce or cryptocurrency, as this is a known
phishing technique, that is, to include known words to confuse the user.
In [27] the
keywords are based on a list of URLs from PhishTank.
To test if trends in phishing
domains have changed, a new keyword extraction based on a PhishTank extraction was
34
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:45==
(a) Validity length of the benign certificates
in days
(b) Validity length of the phishing certifi-
cates in days
Figure 5.4: Distribution of the validity length (length_seconds) converted
to days for easier reading.
conducted. This list of phishing URLs does not overlap any phishing URLs used to build
the certificate dataset, this is done to make sure that the feature is not built on and
applied to the same data. Similar to [27], the URLs are split on dots an the TLD removed
before extracting keywords using TF-IDF [44], where the term frequency is calculated for
words after removing stopwords from the english language. The words are built from the
domains in the same way as is explained in Figure 5.2a. To compare the lists of keywords
from the literature and the generated keywords, the suspicious keyword feature is built
for each of the lists and the distribution of each can be seen in Figure 5.5. There is a
clear difference between Figure 5.5a and 5.5b suggesting that to maintain the proposed
system the keywords must be updated as time passes. In the model building the keyword
matching used is the one developed in this thesis.
Distribution of features based on the subject field of the certificates can be seen in Figure
5.6. Even though it is more common for benign certificates to only have the common name
part of the subject field there is still a good amount of certificates that have other parts of
the subject field. An example is the country in the subject, see Figure 5.6a, where a good
proportion of benign certificates have that field where as the phishing certificates almost
only have the common name filled out in the subject. This is then reflected in the length
of the subject, Figure 5.6c, where benign certificates have two peaks in the distribution of
the length.
Figure 5.7a shows how the distribution of the longest common sub-sequence varies be-
tween benign and phishing certificates. Benign certificates seem to have longer common
sub-sequences than phishing certificates but when contrasted with the lcs_sans_normed
feature in Figure 5.7b, there seems to be not as a drastic difference in the distributions
between the two groups.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
35
==PAGE:46==
(a) Number of suspicious keywords per
phishing and benign certificates with newly
generated keywords
(b) Number of suspicious keywords per
phishing and benign certificates with key-
words from the literature.
Figure 5.5: Distribution of the suspicious keywords and comparison with
different keyword lists.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.6: Distribution of features based on the subject field of the certifi-
cates.
36
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: Distribution of the longest common sub-sequence (LCS) of the
SANs for each certificate and the LCS normed to the longest domain in the
SAN list.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
37
==PAGE:48==
5.3
Classifiers
In the classifier component of the solution, the features from the domain model and the
features extracted in the feature engineering component are combined into a feature space.
Many classification algorithms are sensitive to unscaled data so it is important to scale the
data before fitting the model [45]. To scale the data, the built in scaler StandardScaler
[46] from SciKit-learn was used. The classification algorithms investigated in this thesis all
have hyper-parameters. Hyper-parameters are parameters that cannot be learned by the
model and therefore it is recommended that they be tuned [47]. One method for hyper-
parameter tuning is GridSearchCV from SciKit-Learn [48]. GridSearchCV exhaustively
searches for the best performing hyper-parameters from a pre-defined set of values for each
hyper-parameter. The hyper-parameters are optimized with respect to cross-validation on
the training data. To measure how the models generalize, k-fold cross-validation is used.
In k-fold cross-validation the training set is split into k smaller sets. The model is then
trained on k −1 of the folds of the training set. The remaining fold is used for testing.
This is then repeated for all folds, that is each fold will be the test set once. The overall
performance of the model is then taken as an average of the k evaluations [49]. A visual
of this datasplit is displayed in Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: The split of the dataset in a 5-fold cross-validation [49]
38
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:49==
6
Results
This chapter will cover the results from the model building.
First the results of the
BiLSTM model for domain names will be covered and then the classification models.
This chapter will also cover the evaluation of these models. A time based evaluation is
conducted on the classification model and an investigation into different thresholds in the
classification is presented. Finally an example of a new phishing attack is presented and
the results from applying the best performing classifier to that example.
6.1
Domain model development
The data used in this section is as described in chapter 4 a set of labeled domain names.
To be specific, 50,146 domain names and for the model development they are split into
training, validation and testing subsets. The specifics of the split can be seen in Figure
6.1.
15%
LSTM Model
50,146 domain
names
Train
Test
75%
10%
Validation
Figure 6.1: Domain name dataset split for training, validation and testing.
Using the method explained in section 5.1.1, a BiLSTM model is built. This section will
cover the results of the best fitting model after hyper-parameter tuning.
Figure 6.6 displays the model structure of the BiLSTM domain classifier, while Figures
6.2a and 6.2b present the accuracy. Lastly, Figure 6.3 illustrates the loss after 200 epochs.
Figure 6.2b shows the learning curve without epoch 0, as epoch 0 is significantly lower
in accuracy both for the training and testing data. Looking at the loss, the training and
testing losses are close to each other up to around epoch 75. After that the lines start to
separate a bit more. The same trend can be seen with the accuracy, the testing accuracy
starts to decline around epoch 100, showing a lower trend in the testing accuracy. This
is not a huge difference in trends but it all suggests that the model has started to overfit
to the training data, causing a decrease in the accuracy of the testing data. A peak in
performance of the testing data is reached around epochs 70-75.
The same model structure is trained only for 75 epochs this time and this model is saved
and will be used used for domain feature building. The accuracy and loss for this new
model can be seen in Figures 6.4a, 6.4b and 6.5. Table 6.1 shows the model accuracy
and loss for training, validation, testing and the domains from the certificate dataset.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
39
==PAGE:50==
(a) All epochs
(b) Without epoch 0
Figure 6.2: Model accuracy per epoch of the BiLSTM domain classifier.
Figure 6.3: Loss per epoch for training and testing
It is clear that within the domain dataset constructed for the domain classification, the
accuracy of the model is high, but when it is used to predict the unseen data from the
certificate dataset the accuracy suffers.
Train
Validation
Test
Certificate Dataset Domains
Accuracy
0.97
0.94
0.93
0.77
Loss
0.13
0.24
0.26
0.59
Table 6.1: Model accuracy and loss for training, validation, testing and the
domains from the domains from the certificate dataset.
40
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:51==
(a) Model accuracy
(b) Model accuracy without epoch 0.
Figure 6.4: Final BiLSTM model for domain names
Figure 6.5: Loss per epoch of the final BiLSTM model for domain names
Detecting Phishing Certificates
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.6: The model structure of the BiLSTM domain classifier
42
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:53==
6.2
Classification model development
The data in this section is the certificate dataset described in chapter 4. The balance
between the two classes is even, so there are the same amount of phishing certificates as
there are benign certificates.
For all models in this chapter trained for classification, Random Forest (RF), K-nearest
neighbours (KNN) and Support Vector Machines (SVM), hyper-parameter tuning is per-
formed along a 5-fold cross-validation. The RF models in this chapter have n_estimators=50,
the KNN models have k = 3 and the SVM models have a linear kernel and c = 0.03, as
these were the best parameters for each of the models after hyper-parameter tuning.
To set a baseline model performance, a model solely based on the certificate features is
trained. The results of a 5-fold cross-validation for the best performing models for each
of the methods are in Table 6.2. The best performing method is the random forest model
with an F1-score of 0.77 on average.
Fold
Random forest
KNN
SVM
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
1
0.75
0.75
0.77
0.73
0.74
0.72
2
0.78
0.77
0.78
0.74
0.75
0.73
3
0.78
0.77
0.77
0.73
0.74
0.71
4
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.74
0.73
0.70
5
0.78
0.77
0.77
0.73
0.72
0.69
Average
0.77
0.76
0.77
0.74
0.74
0.71
Table 6.2: F1-score of a 5-fold cross-validation of certificate only based
features and the MCC of the overall model.
After the 5-fold cross-validation the data is split into training and testing subsets as can
be seen in Figure 6.7. These splits are then used to train a single RF model, as that
was the best performing model. This model is used to get a confusion matrix and feature
importance for this feature set. This procedure is repeated for all of the feature sets to
follow.
Classification
12,016 certificates
Train
Test
75%
25%
Figure 6.7: Classification model split of data into training and testing sub-
sets.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
43
==PAGE:54==
The RF model trained on 75% of the data had an F1-score of 0.78 and an MCC of 0.55.
Looking at the confusion matrix in Figure 6.8 it is clear that this model is having a harder
time predicting benign certificates.
Figure 6.8: Confusion matrix of the classification by the RF model with
only certificate related features.
To get an idea of which features are the most important, the 10 most important features
are extracted from the random forest model trained on 75% of the data. A plot of the
feature importance can be seen in Figure 6.9. The most influential feature is the subject
length followed by longest common sub-sequence of the SANs and the length in seconds,
all features noted in section 5.2 for showing differences between the two groups.
Figure 6.9: Feature importance from the RF model with only certificate
based features.
44
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:55==
Now that a baseline model has been established with only certificate features, the models
are trained again, now with simple domain based features added (Table 5.3). Again the
random forest performs the best with an average F1-score of 0.82 on average over the
5-folds or a 0.05 increase from the certificate features only.
Fold
Random forest
KNN
SVM
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
1
0.81
0.81
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.80
2
0.82
0.82
0.79
0.79
0.78
0.80
3
0.83
0.83
0.81
0.81
0.80
0.81
4
0.82
0.82
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.80
5
0.82
0.82
0.81
0.80
0.79
0.79
Average
0.82
0.82
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.80
Table 6.3: F1-score of a 5-fold cross-validation of certificate and simple
domain based features
The RF model trained on 75% of the data had an F1-score of 0.83 and an MCC of 0.65,
a quite significant improvement in the MCC. The confusion matrix of this model can
be seen in Figure 6.10.
Compared to Figure 6.8, adding the domain related features
increases correctly classified phishing certificates making the balance in correctly classified
certificates quite even.
Figure 6.10: Confusion matrix of the classification by the RF model in
Table 6.3, with certificate and domain related features.
Figure 6.11 shows how now the subject length feature is only the 7th most important
feature with domain length as the most important feature and domain based features are
taking up the top of the most important features.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.11: Feature importance from the random forest model with cer-
tificate and domain based features.
Next the same models are trained again but now on the certificate features and the SAN
based features. Table 6.4 shows the model results. A similar performance to the results in
Table 6.3, RF outperforming the other models with an F1-score of 0.80 on average. This
is an improvement from the model with only certificate based features but slightly worse
than the model with the certificate and domain based features.
Fold
Random forest
KNN
SVM
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
1
0.79
0.79
0.76
0.76
0.74
0.74
2
0.79
0.79
0.77
0.77
0.75
0.75
3
0.80
0.79
0.79
0.78
0.76
0.75
4
0.80
0.80
0.77
0.76
0.74
0.75
5
0.81
0.80
0.79
0.78
0.75
0.74
Average
0.80
0.80
0.78
0.77
0.75
0.75
Table 6.4: F1-score of a 5-fold cross-validation of certificate and SAN based
features
The RF model trained on 75% of the data had an F1-score of 0.81 and an MCC of 0.60.
When looking at the confusion matrix for the RF model with the certificate and SAN based
features, there is an improvement in correctly classifying benign certificates compared to
the model with only certificate features but there is still some unbalance between the
number of correctly classified benign and phishing certificates. That is the feature set
46
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:57==
with the certificate and domain based features achieves better balance between the two
groups.
Figure 6.12: Confusion matrix of the classification by the Random Forest
model in Table 6.4, with certificate and SAN related features.
The feature importance for the top 10 features from the RF model is shown in Figure
6.13. Here it is the aggregated Shannon entropy, the average length of the domains in the
SAN and the fraction of vowels in the SAN that are the most important features. This is
similar to the domain based feature model, as in Figure 6.11 the domain based equivalent
to these features are in the top four most important features.
Figure 6.13: Feature importance from the random forest model with cer-
tificate and SAN based features.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
47
==PAGE:58==
Lastly, before the LSTM based features are included, is a model that has all three feature
sets, certificate, SAN and domain based features. The results using this feature set can be
seen in Table 6.5. As with the previous combinations of feature sets RF performs the best
with an F1-score of 0.82 on average, the same performance for the random forest as with
only certificate and domain related features. This implies that there is not anything to be
gained by including both the domain and SAN based features. For this reason continuing
on to the model with the LSTM features, only the certificate and domain based features
will be used in addition to the LSTM features.
Fold
Random forest
KNN
SVM
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
1
0.82
0.82
0.79
0.79
0.80
0.81
2
0.82
0.82
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.80
3
0.82
0.82
0.80
0.80
0.81
0.81
4
0.83
0.83
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.81
5
0.83
0.83
0.81
0.80
0.80
0.80
Average
0.82
0.82
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.81
Table 6.5: F1-score of a 5-fold cross-validation of certificate, SAN and
domain based features
The RF model trained on 75% of the data had an F1-score of 0.83 and an MCC of 0.66.
Again the confusion matrix in Figure 6.14 shows better balance between the two categories
compared to the model with only certificate based features in Figure 6.8. Similar to the
model with certificate and domain based features this model achieves a decent balance in
the correct classification of the two classes.
Figure 6.14: Confusion matrix of the classification by the Random Forest
model in Table 6.5, with certificate, SAN and domain based features.
48
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.15 shows the feature importance with all three feature sets. It is clear that the
domain based features and the certificate features are the most influential, supporting the
decision to not include the SAN based features when continuing to add the BiLSTM based
features.
Figure 6.15: Feature importance from the random forest model with cer-
tificate, domain and SAN based features.
Using the features engineered with the BiLSTM model developed in section 6.1 in addition
to the domain and certificate based features, RF, KNN and SVM models are trained in
the same fashion as before. In Table 6.6 the results of the 5-fold cross-validation is shown.
The random forest model performs the best with an F1-score of 0.89 on average which is
an 0.07 improvement from the random forest model in Table 6.3 with the certificate and
simple domain features.
Fold
Random forest
KNN
SVM
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
F1-score
accuracy
1
0.88
0.88
0.83
0.83
0.85
0.85
2
0.89
0.89
0.84
0.84
0.84
0.84
3
0.90
0.90
0.85
0.85
0.86
0.86
4
0.89
0.89
0.84
0.84
0.85
0.86
5
0.88
0.88
0.85
0.85
0.85
0.86
Average
0.89
0.89
0.84
0.84
0.85
0.86
Table 6.6: F1-score of a 5-fold cross-validation with LSTM based features
on domain name
Detecting Phishing Certificates
49
==PAGE:60==
The RF model trained on 75% of the data had an F1-score of 0.89 and an MCC of 0.77,
which is not only an improvement in the F1-score but also an improvement in the MCC,
compared to 0.65 with the certificate and simple domain features. The confusion matrix
is also more balanced between the two groups, as can be seen in Figure 6.16. But not only
is it more balanced but also the number of correctly classified observations has increased
quite a bit, in accordance with the higher F1-score and MCC.
Figure 6.16: Confusion matrix of the classification by the RF model, with
certificate, domain and LSTM model based features.
Figure 6.17 show the ROC and AUC of the model in Table 6.6. The AUC is 0.96, which
is considered very good as an AUC of 1.0 means the model has perfect performance.
From the feature importance in Figure 6.18 it is clear how the LSTM features are having
an impact in the classification as the top four features are LSTM based features and many
of the top 35 features are the LSTM based features. An LSTM feature is one element of
the vector representation developed from the BiLSTM model.
50
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.17: ROC and AUC of the random forest model trained on the
75% of the certificate dataset
Figure 6.18: Feature importance of the top 35 most important features
from the random forest model with certificate, domain and LSTM based
features.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
51
==PAGE:62==
6.2.1
Time based evaluation
It can not be assumed that trends in phishing websites or certificates will remain the same
over time. That is where time based evaluation is important. Time based evaluation allows
a system to be tested for how well it generalizes through time. To perform the time based
evaluation the dataset is split on the not_valid_before value of the certificates. The
initial training dataset are all certificates before the 1. May 2023. Then the performance
for each month is tested, one month at a time but always retraining with the new month
just evaluated. Figure 6.19 gives an overview of the splitting of the dataset and Table
6.7 shows the number of samples in each subset of the dataset. Due to the fact that the
phishing domain names the dataset is built on are only from websites that were still online
at the time of extraction of the PhishTank list, the dataset is unbalanced when it is split
up with respect to time. To address this issue the data used for the initial training is
balanced before the model is trained. When new data is added for retraining the balance
is adjusted again. This process is explained in Figure 6.20.
Train
Test
1
2
3
4
5
May 2023
June 2023
July 2023
August
2023
September
2023
1. december
2022
Figure 6.19: Time-based split of data month by month for the last five
months of the dataset
Datasplit
Num. samples
Initial Training set
5330
May
823
June
817
July
927
August
1132
September
1293
Table 6.7: Number of samples in the training set and each of the testing
sets for the time based evaluation.
The results of this time based evaluation is shown in Table 6.8. The best average per-
formance for the five months is 0.88 and again with the random forest model. This is in
accordance to the results in Table 6.6. This suggest the model generalizes well through
52
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:63==
Train model
Evaluate on unseen
data
Merge unbalanced
training data and
unseen data
Balance data set
Figure 6.20: Time-based evaluation work flow
time. There seems to be a slight trend upward in the F1-score for all models, but this is
most likely due to the increase in data, making it easier to predict each month. But as
Figure 6.21a shows it is not a big change and Figure 6.21b does not show the same trend
in the MCC of the model.
Model
RF
KNN
SVM
May
0.87
0.84
0.85
June
0.87
0.84
0.85
July
0.87
0.85
0.86
August
0.89
0.85
0.86
September
0.91
0.87
0.89
avg
0.88
0.85
0.86
Table 6.8: F1-score of the time-based evaluation for the last five months of
the dataset.
Model
RF
KNN
SVM
May
0.69
0.58
0.68
June
0.68
0.62
0.66
July
0.66
0.55
0.64
August
0.68
0.57
0.62
September
0.69
0.60
0.62
avg
0.68
0.59
0.64
Table 6.9: MCC of the time-based evaluation for the last five months of
the dataset.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
53
==PAGE:64==
(a) F1-score
(b) MCC
Figure 6.21: Metrics for time based evaluation for the model with the
highest F1-score, Random Forest model.
6.2.2
Different threshold choices
When working on solving a classification task as the one in this thesis, it is important
to evaluate the impact of false positives and false negatives. In this case a false negative
would mean not warning a user about a phishing website where as a false positive warned
a user about a harmless website. Therefore reducing false negatives would be beneficial
to the user. This can only be done at the cost of more false positives.
To reduce the FN the decision boundary or the threshold of the classification can be
adjusted. The default threshold is 0.5, meaning if the probability of a certificate being
a benign one is 0.55 it will be classified a benign certificate. If on the other hand the
probability would have been 0.45 it would have been classified as a phishing certificate.
Figure 6.22: The number of FP and FN with different threshold values.
For example, if the threshold is set to 0.7, the confusion matrix would be the one in Figure
54
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:65==
6.23. Here a reduction from 176 to 73 or about a 59% reduction in false negatives. The
false positives do increase but it is a balancing act to decide on such a limit.
Figure 6.23: Confusion matrix of the RF model trained with 75% of the
data using certificate, simple domain and BiLSTM domain related features
with a 0.7 threshold.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
55
==PAGE:66==
6.3
Application of results
One possible application of a model such as the one developed in this thesis is a software,
for example, a browser extension that would extract the certificate of the website a user is
accessing and predict a label for it. An overview of such a system can be seen in Figure 6.24
where the user interacts with some type of software which sends a certificate and domain
name to the classification module. In the classification module a feature extraction process
happens before the classifier then predicts a label for the certificate and domain pair.
Certificate
+ domain name
Featrue
extraction
Classifier
Label
OR
Figure 6.24: Flowchart showing an example of an application using the
classifier developed in this thesis.
The classification module is implemented in a Python script such that it takes in a certifi-
cate along with a domain name and returns the phishing probability of the pair. To show
an example, a phishing site pretending to be a French FedEx delivery manager is used
with the Python script. Figure 6.25a shows the real website of FedEx in French whereas
Figure 6.25b is the phishing site.
After getting the certificates for these two websites, the Python script is used to get a
phishing probability for the websites. The real FedEx website has 0% probability of being
a phishing website whilst the actual phishing website has a 84% probability of being a
phishing website. Using a threshold of 50% that would mean that the label for the real
website would be a benign site and the phishing website would be correctly labeled as a
phishing website. The prediction for both certificate and domain pairs took 0.48 seconds.
56
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:67==
(a) Real website
(b) Phishing website
Figure 6.25: Screenshots of the real FedEx website and the phishing FedEx
website taken on 29. January 2024.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
57
==PAGE:68==
58
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:69==
7
Limitations and Future Work
Even though this thesis has covered how to build a pipeline that can with 88% accuracy
predict if a website is a phishing website based on its certificate and domain name, there
are a few limitations to be discussed and future work that can be done to further improve
the system developed in this thesis.
The first thing to mention is the data collection process, it is always easy to be wise after
the fact, but the data collection process took more time than expected. With more time
for data collection there would have been more data to work with. With more data, more
methods for the classifier might proof successful like neural network classifiers. In the
process of writing this thesis, a neural network was trained and evaluated but it never
outperformed the classical methods shown in this thesis. Usually neural networks need
more data than the classical machine learning methods for successful training. There were
other challenges faced in the data collection process but those are discussed in Appendix
B.
Another limitation of the solution developed in this thesis are phishing attacks through
user-generated content on benign sites. These types of phishing attacks can of course not
be caught by using the certificate and domain name. This is an interesting challenge for
future work to try and tackle as it would need a different approach than the one presented
in this thesis.
Another interesting possibility for taking this work further is to develop an application that
uses the classifier developed in this thesis. In section 6.3, a framework of how this classifier
can be incorporated in a user environment to assist users to avoid phishing websites is
presented. The goal of this thesis was to implement the machine learning algorithm but
there is definitely an interesting project remaining of implementing a framework around
this classifier.
To maintain a system built on the classifier from this thesis, a continuous collection of
new domain names and their certificates would be necessary to retrain the classifier so it
keeps up with possible changes in trends of certificates and domain names.
Like mentioned in chapter 4, the collection of the domain names had it’s limitations. The
choice of taking the top 20,000 certificates to represent benign domains is something that
can be looked into further. Other approaches for the data collection might be to take
the top N domain names and take every other domain name to be used for certificate
retrieval and the other for domain model training. The choice of N is then another topic
for exploration, for example how much do benign domain names that are less popular
differ from the top domains? Another interesting question to tackle is how much of the
website visits belong to the top N domain names and if the answer to that could be used
to guide the choice of N.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
59
==PAGE:70==
To improve the model some interesting future work can be done to analyse the wrongly
classified certificate and domain pairs. Some initial work was done on this and there seems
to be a trend in the domain length of the false negatives. There was not time to finish
analysing this any further therefore it is left for future work.
60
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:71==
8
Conclusion
This thesis looks into the problem of phishing attack prevention. Phishing attacks have
been on the rise in recent years and a great majority of them use HTTPS. This thesis
proposes a solution based on the certificate and domain name of the website that utilizes
machine learning methods to predict whether a website is a phishing website or not.
The thesis covers how the data is collected for training the machine learning. The data is
built on domain lists from PhishTank and Tranco, while Censys was used for certificate
collection. It is covered in detail how the data cleaning process such as handling dupli-
cates and certificates from the same subject common name that are unique but appear as
duplicates in the feature extraction process. In this thesis features built on the certificate,
the SANs and domain are built. An exploratory analysis is conducted on the features
where the distribution for phishing certificates and benign certificates are compared. The
final dataset has 12,016 observations with equal balance between phishing and benign ob-
servations that all have a not_after field in 2023 and the not_before from 1. December
2021 to 30. September 2023.
In addition to aforementioned features, a BiLSTM model is developed to enrich the feature
set based on the domain name. This is done by building a BiLSTM classifier and extracting
the second last layer to use as a vector representation of the domain name. Since the
BiLSTM model is built as a classification model, the evaluation can be done by monitoring
accuracy and loss at each epoch in the training process.
Using these feature sets in different combinations, three different machine learning classi-
fiers, Random Forest, K-Nearest Neighbours and Support Vector Machine, are evaluated.
The different combinations of features and the different classifiers are evaluated using F1-
score and accuracy as well as analysing the confusion matrix. The best performing model
was the random forest classifier with features based on the certificate, lexical domain fea-
tures and the vector representation of the domain name, with an F1-score of 0.88. By
including the vector representation of the domain name, the performance was increased
by 6% compared to the best performing model without the vector representation. With-
out the vector representation the models had a harder time correctly classifying benign
observations compared to phishing observations but with it included, the model manages
to classify benign and phishing observations equally. The ROC is also plotted and the
AUC calculated where the best model has an AUC of 0.96.
An important evaluation method when developing a system as the one presented in this
thesis, is a time based evaluation. A time based evaluation allows for evaluating how well
the model generalizes over time. This was done by using the data that had a not_before
date before the 1. May 2023 and then for each month after that in the dataset, a prediction
was made and the model retrained after each month. The time based evaluation resulted
Detecting Phishing Certificates
61
==PAGE:72==
in an average F1-score of 0.88 which is the same as the F1-score for the 5-fold cross
validation, indicating that the model generalizes well through time.
Finally an example of what an application using the proposed classifier would look like.
A Python script that takes in a certificate and a domain name, and returns a phishing
probability that can be used for labeling is presented. This Python script serves the role
of the classification module of the presented application idea. Using the Python script,
a French FedEx scam is shown, where the phishing probability of the real site and the
phishing site are compared showing that the classifier can classify the two.
62
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
FBI Internet Crime Complaint Center. Internet Crime report 2022. Accessed: Octo-
ber 2023. url: https://www.ic3.gov/Media/PDF/AnnualReport/2022_IC3Report.pdf.
[2]
Phishing Activity Trends Report, Q2 2021. https://docs.apwg.org/reports/apwg_
trends_report_q2_2021.pdf. Accessed: 2024-01-11.
[3]
Federal Trade Commission. How to Recognize and Avoid Phishing Scams. Accessed:
2024-01-21. url: https://consumer.ftc.gov/articles/how-recognize-and-avoid-phishing-
scams#report.
[4]
PhishTank. Accessed: October 2023. url: https://phishtank.org/.
[5]
Cloudflare. What is HTTPS? Accessed: 2024-01-10. url: https://www.cloudflare.
com/learning/ssl/what-is-https/.
[6]
Cloudflare. What is TLS (Transport Layer Security)? Accessed: 2024-01-10. url:
https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ssl/transport-layer-security-tls/.
[7]
IETF. RFC8446, The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3. Ac-
cessed: 2024-01-10. url: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446.
[8]
IETF. RFC5280, Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate
Revocation List (CRL) Profile. Accessed: 2024-01-10. url: https://datatracker.ietf.
org/doc/html/rfc5280.
[9]
IETF. RFC5280, X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online Certificate Status
Protocol - OCSP. Accessed: 2024-01-10. url: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
rfc6960.
[10]
Apple’s Certificate Transparency policy. https://support.apple.com/en-us/103214.
Accessed: 2024-01-11.
[11]
The Chromium Projects. https://www.chromium.org/Home/chromium-security/root-
ca-policy/moving-forward-together/. Accessed: 2024-01-11.
[12]
Certificate Transparancy. https://certificate.transparency.dev/. Accessed: 2024-01-11.
[13]
IETF. RFC5280. Accessed: 2024-01-15. url: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5280.
[14]
IETF. RFC5280, Section 4.2.1.6. Accessed: 2024-01-15. url: https : / / www . rfc -
editor.org/rfc/rfc5280#section-4.2.1.6.
[15]
Mikkel N. Schmidt Tue Herlau and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learning
and Data Mining. Technical University of Denmark.
[16]
Joos Korstanje. Advanced Forecasting with Python: With State-of-the-Art-Models
Including LSTMs, Facebook’s Prophet, and Amazon’s DeepAR. Apress, 2021. isbn:
9781484271506. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-7150-6. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4842-7150-6.
[17]
Shan Suthaharan. Machine learning models and algorithms for Big Data Classifica-
tion: Thinking with examples for effective learning. Springer, 2016.
[18]
SciKit-Learn. Support Vector Machines. Accessed: 2024-01-19. url: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/svm.html#svm-classification.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
63
==PAGE:74==
[19]
Afshine Amidi and Shervine Amidi. Recurrent neural networks cheatsheet star. url:
https : / / stanford . edu / ~shervine / teaching / cs - 230 / cheatsheet - recurrent - neural -
networks#architecture.
[20]
Le et al. “Application of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Neural Network for
Flood Forecasting”. In: Water 11.7 (July 2019), p. 1387. issn: 2073-4441. doi: 10.
3390/w11071387. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/w11071387.
[21]
Alex Graves. Supervised Sequence Labelling with Recurrent Neural Networks. url:
https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~graves/preprint.pdf.
[22]
Davide Chicco and Giuseppe Jurman. “The advantages of the Matthews correlation
coeﬀicient (MCC) over F1 score and accuracy in binary classification evaluation”.
en. In: BMC Genomics 21.1 (Jan. 2020), p. 6.
[23]
Varsharani Hawanna et al. “Risk Evaluation of X.509 Certificates – A Machine
Learning Application”. In: Information Systems Security. Springer International
Publishing, 2016, pp. 372–389. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-49806-5_20. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-49806-5_20.
[24]
Zheng Dong et al. “Beyond the lock icon: real-time detection of phishing websites
using public key certificates”. In: 2015 APWG Symposium on Electronic Crime Re-
search (eCrime). IEEE, May 2015. doi: 10.1109/ecrime.2015.7120795. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ecrime.2015.7120795.
[25]
Mashael AlSabah et al. “Content-Agnostic Detection of Phishing Domains using Cer-
tificate Transparency and Passive DNS”. In: 25th International Symposium on Re-
search in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses. ACM, Oct. 2022. doi: 10.1145/3545948.
3545958. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3545948.3545958.
[26]
Sajad Homayoun et al. “Detecting Ambiguous Phishing Certificates using Machine
Learning”. In: 2022 International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN).
IEEE, Jan. 2022. doi: 10.1109/icoin53446.2022.9687264. url: https://doi.org/10.
1109/icoin53446.2022.9687264.
[27]
Arthur Drichel et al. “Finding Phish in a Haystack: A Pipeline for Phishing Clas-
sification on Certificate Transparency Logs”. In: Proceedings of the 16th Interna-
tional Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. ACM, Aug. 2021. doi:
10.1145/3465481.3470111. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3465481.3470111.
[28]
Ivan Torroledo, Luis David Camacho, and Alejandro Correa Bahnsen. “Hunting
Malicious TLS Certificates with Deep Neural Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 11th
ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security. ACM, Jan. 2018. doi: 10.
1145/3270101.3270105. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3270101.3270105.
[29]
Jiaxin Li, Zhaoxin Zhang, and Changyong Guo. “Machine Learning-Based Malicious
X.509 Certificates’ Detection”. In: Applied Sciences 11.5 (Mar. 2021), p. 2164. doi:
10.3390/app11052164. url: https://doi.org/10.3390/app11052164.
[30]
Wikipedia. Alexa Internet. Accessed: 2024-01-26. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Alexa_Internet#Alexa_Traffic_Rank.
64
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:75==
[31]
Victor Le Pochat et al. “Tranco: A Research-Oriented Top Sites Ranking Hardened
Against Manipulation”. In: Proceedings of the 26th Annual Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium. NDSS 2019. Feb. 2019. doi: 10.14722/ndss.2019.23386.
[32]
Zakir Durumeric et al. “A Search Engine Backed by Internet-Wide Scanning”. In:
22nd ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security. Sept. 2023.
[33]
Kaspar Hageman et al. “Can a TLS Certificate Be Phishy?” In: Proceedings of
the 18th International Conference on Security and Cryptography. SCITEPRESS -
Science and Technology Publications, 2021. doi: 10.5220/0010516600380049. url:
https://doi.org/10.5220/0010516600380049.
[34]
Edona Fasllija, Hasan Ferit Enişer, and Bernd Prünster. “Phish-Hook: Detecting
Phishing Certificates Using Certificate Transparency Logs”. In: Lecture Notes of
the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering. Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 320–334. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-030-37231-6_18. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37231-6_18.
[35]
Yuji Sakurai et al. “Discovering HTTPSified Phishing Websites Using the TLS Cer-
tificates Footprints”. In: 2020 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy
Workshops. IEEE, Sept. 2020. doi: 10.1109/eurospw51379.2020.00077. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/eurospw51379.2020.00077.
[36]
Introduction to Certificates. https://support.censys.io/hc/en-us/articles/360056772812.
Accessed: 2023-12-04.
[37]
Spamhaus. The 10 Most Abused Top Level Domains. Accessed: 2023-12-24. url:
https://www.spamhaus.org/statistics/tlds/.
[38]
Cybercrime Information Center. Phishing Landscape 2020. Accessed: 2023-12-24.
url: https://www.interisle.net/PhishingLandscape2020.pdf.
[39]
Cybercrime Information Center. Phishing Landscape 2022. Accessed: 2023-12-24.
url: https://interisle.net/PhishingLandscape2022.pdf.
[40]
Grant Jenks. Python Word Segmentation. Accessed: 2024-01-17. url: https://grantjenks.
com/docs/wordsegment/.
[41]
Toby Segaran and Jeff Hammerbacher. Beautiful data. en. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly
Media, July 2009.
[42]
TensorFlow. Tokenizer. Accessed: 2024-01-17. url: https://www.tensorflow.org/api_
docs/python/tf/keras/preprocessing/text/Tokenizer.
[43]
Ole Winther and Jes Frellsen. Deep Learning. Course. Department for Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
[44]
J.D Rajaraman A.; Ullman. Mining of Massive Datasets. Accessed: 2024-01-05. url:
http://i.stanford.edu/~ullman/mmds/ch1.pdf.
[45]
SciKit-Learn. Importance of Feature Scaling. Accessed: 2024-01-17. url: https://
scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/preprocessing/plot_scaling_importance.html.
[46]
SciKit-Learn. StandardScaler. Accessed: 2024-01-17. url: https://scikit-learn.org/
stable/modules/generated/sklearn.preprocessing.StandardScaler.html#sklearn.preprocessing.
StandardScaler.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
65
==PAGE:76==
[47]
Tuning the hyper-parameters of an estimator. StandardScaler. Accessed: 2024-01-17.
url: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/grid_search.html.
[48]
SciKit-Learn. GridSearchCV. Accessed: 2024-01-17. url: https://scikit-learn.org/
stable / modules / generated / sklearn . model _ selection . GridSearchCV . html # sklearn .
model_selection.GridSearchCV.
[49]
SciKit-Learn. Cross-validation: evaluating estimator performance. Accessed: 2024-
01-18. url: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/cross_validation.html.
[50]
Melissa L. Rethlefsen et al. “PRISMA-S: an extension to the PRISMA Statement for
Reporting Literature Searches in Systematic Reviews”. In: Systematic Reviews 10.1
(Jan. 2021). doi: 10.1186/s13643-020-01542-z. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-
020-01542-z.
[51]
Matthew J. Page et al. “The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for
reporting systematic reviews”. In: Systematic Reviews 10.1 (Mar. 2021). doi: 10.
1186/s13643-021-01626-4. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-021-01626-4.
[52]
Elsevier. What is the difference between ScienceDirect and Scopus data? url: https:
//service.elsevier.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/28240/supporthub/dataasaservice/p/
17729/.
66
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:77==
A
Literature Review
In the literature search a checklist proposed in the PRISMA-S statement [50] is followed.
PRISMA-S is an extension to the PRISMA statement [51] to provide researchers with a
checklist to make searches in a reproducible way.
A.1
Repositories queried and the query
The repositories that were searched are the following:
• IEEE Xplore
• ACM Digital Library
– Using the ACM Guide to Computing Literature
• Web of Science
• Scopus
– Indexes nearly all of ScienceDirect [52]
Each of these repositories have their own query language equivalent queries were con-
structed for each repository. The queries are constructed such that in the document title
the keywords ”certificate/s” or ”digital certificate/s” must be mentioned. Then there are
two groups of conditions for the abstract. First one is that one of the keywords ”phish-
ing”, ”malicious” or ”suspicious” must be present in the abstract. This is to make sure
the literature we search for is actually address malicious certificates. Second is that we
require one of the following to also be in the abstract, ”detection”, ”identification”, ”ma-
chine learning”, ”deep learning”, ”supervised” or ”unsupervised”. This is to make sure
the methodology is of interest to us as we are only interested in machine learning based
approaches.
No limits or filters other then the following queries were used in the search.
IEEE Xplore:
((("Document Title":certificate*) OR
("Document Title":digital certificate*)) AND
(("Abstract":phishing) OR ("Abstract":malicious) OR
("Abstract":suspicious)) AND (("Abstract":detection) OR
("Abstract":identification) OR ("Abstract":"machine learning") OR
("Abstract":"deep learning") OR ("Abstract":supervised) OR
("Abstract":unsupervised)))
ACM Digital Library
Detecting Phishing Certificates
67
==PAGE:78==
Title:(certificate* OR "digital certificate" OR "digital certificates")
AND Abstract:(phishing OR malicious OR suspicious)
AND Abstract:(detection OR identification OR "machine learning"
OR supervised OR unsupervised OR "deep learning")
Web of Science
TI=(certificate* OR digital certificate*)) AND
AB=(phishing OR malicious OR suspicious) AND
AB=( detection OR identification OR "machine learning" OR
supervised OR unsupervised OR "deep learning" )
Scopus
( ( TITLE ( certificate* OR "digital certificate" OR "digital certificates" )
AND ABS ( phishing OR malicious OR suspicious ) ) )
AND ABS ( detection OR identification OR "machine learning"
OR supervised OR unsupervised OR "deep learning" )
All the information from the queries was extracted from the four libraries on the 12.
September 2023
A.2
Review protocol
The review protocol will be
1. Search repositories
2. Remove duplicates
(a) Remove duplicates based on DOI
(b) Remove duplicates based on Title
3. Remove irrelevant papers based on abstract
When removing irrelevant papers based on the abstract the following inclusion (IC) and
quality criteria (QC) will be followed.
Id
Criteria
IC1
The paper is focused on malicious or phishing certificates
IC2
The paper is focused on detection preferebly using some machine learning algorithm
IC3
The paper utilizes different elements of the certificate as data
QC1
The goal of the paper is clear
Table A.1: Inclusion and quality criteria
In Table 3.1 we have the number of papers identified in each repository. Figure A.1 shows
the PRISMA flow chart of the systematic review. In total we started with 144 papers. We
found 61 duplicates and then 69 papers were excluded in the screening of the abstract.
68
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:79==
Identification
Screening
Included
Identification of new studies via databases and registers
Records identified from:
Databases (n = 144)
Registers (n = 0)
Records removed before screening:
Duplicate records (n = 61)
Records marked as ineligible by automation
tools (n = 0)
Records removed for other reasons (n = 0)
Records screened
(n = 83)
Records excluded
(n = 69)
Reports sought for retrieval
(n = 14)
Reports not retrieved
(n = 0)
Reports assessed for eligibility
(n = 14)
Reports excluded:
Reason1 (n = 1)
Reason2 (n = 3)
New studies included in review
(n = 12)
Figure A.1: PRISMA flow chart
When screening the abstract the most common reasons for removal were that the papers
covered certificate uses in other domains than for HTTPS. The main topics were cer-
tificates used in vehicular ad hoc networks or mobile ad hoc networks or certificateless
cryptography.
After assessing the whole papers 4 papers were excluded for two different reasons. The
first reason (R1) was an almost full duplicate that was not identified in the removal of
duplicates. This is because the papers had different titles and DOI but were by the same
authors and contained almost all of the same information. The paper containing more
information is therefore only taken into account in the review. The second reason (R2)
that either did not really use machine learning and the features of certificates or were
lacking in quality, thus not fulfilling IC2 and IC3 or QC1.
Detecting Phishing Certificates
69
==PAGE:80==
B
Certificate Collection
In gathering the certificates for both the benign and malicious domains we used the Censys
certificate dataset [32].
The certificate dataset from Censys is the most exhaustive in
existence. The data collection is done by syncing with a number of CT logs and observing
a certificate as a part of a TLS handshake during a Censys scan of the public internet.
When saving certificates to their datasets Censys does some processing of the certificates.
They parse or decode the certificates so they store all the information contained within
the certificate. Additionally they store information from major root stores such as Apple,
Google Chrome, Microsoft and Mozilla NSS among other information we do not utilize in
this paper[36].
One of the ways to access Censys data is trough their BigQuery dataset. As the dataset
has a tremendous amount of data which is increasing everyday as well we used BigQuery
to query for certificates that were valid within the year 2023. The data processed for the
year 2023 were 2.99 TB in size. To select the certificates we were interested in we created
a script that used the BigQuery API. Through the API we could get pages of the search
results which we then filtered based on the benign and malicious domain lists and saved
the certificates we were interested in having.
Using the BigQuery API we were not able to go trough all the data from 2023 as it seems
that Google limits the amounts of API request we could make. But this was the only way
we found to be able to save only the relevant data as Google charges per TB of processed
data when performing searches in BigQuery where as fetching the search result of one
query is free. As we were dealing with quite a large amount of data the API approach was
chosen purely from a cost perspective.
1
SELECT
2
names,
3
parsed.serial_number ,
4
parsed.subject ,
5
validation.apple.ever_valid AS apple_ever_valid ,
6
validation.microsoft.ever_valid AS microsoft_ever_valid ,
7
validation.nss.ever_valid AS nss_ever_valid ,
8
validation_level ,
9
parsed.validity_period.length_seconds ,
10
parsed.validity_period.not_after ,
11
parsed.validity_period.not_before ,
12
parsed.extensions.crl_distribution_points ,
13
parsed.extensions.subject_alt_name.dns_names ,
14
parsed.subject_key_info.key_algorithm.name AS key_algorithm_name ,
15
parsed.version ,
16
parsed.signature.signature_algorithm.name AS
signature_algorithm_name ,
17
parsed.issuer_dn ,
70
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:81==
18
parsed.issuer,
19
parsed.extensions.authority_info_access ,
20
parsed.extensions.certificate_policies ,
21
parsed.extensions.basic_constraints ,
22
parsed.extensions.key_usage ,
23
parsed.extensions.extended_key_usage ,
24
parsed.extensions.signed_certificate_timestamps ,
25
parsed.extensions.authority_key_id ,
26
parsed.extensions.name_constraints.critical ,
27
parsed.extensions.issuer_alt_name.directory_names ,
28
FROM
29
censys-io.research_1m.certificates_v2
30
WHERE
31
not_valid_after >= TIMESTAMP("2023-1-1 00:00:00+00")
32
AND not_valid_after < TIMESTAMP("2024-1-1 00:00:00+00")
33
AND ARRAY_LENGTH(names) > 0
Detecting Phishing Certificates
71
==PAGE:82==
C
Feature Plots
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure C.1: Distribution of certificate features
72
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:83==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e) Validity length of the benign certificates
in days
(f) Validity length of the phishing certificates
in days
Figure C.2: Distribution of certificate features
Detecting Phishing Certificates
73
==PAGE:84==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure C.3: Distribution of certificate features
74
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:85==
(a) Number of SANs for benign certificates
(b) Number of SANs for phishing certificates
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure C.4: Distribution of certificate features
Detecting Phishing Certificates
75
==PAGE:86==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure C.5: Distribution of certificate features
76
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:87==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure C.6: Distribution of domain features
Detecting Phishing Certificates
77
==PAGE:88==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure C.7: Distribution of domain features
78
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:89==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure C.8: Distribution of domain features
Detecting Phishing Certificates
79
==PAGE:90==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure C.9: Distribution of SAN features
80
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:91==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure C.10: Distribution of SAN features
Detecting Phishing Certificates
81
==PAGE:92==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.11: Distribution of SAN features
82
Detecting Phishing Certificates
==PAGE:93==
Detecting Phishing Certificates
83
==PAGE:94==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
