==PAGE:1==
Association, Dependence and Causality
Causal Structure Discovery from an Agent Perspective
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Association, Dependence and Causality
Causal Structure Discovery from an Agent Perspective
Master Thesis
2024
By
Iga Lewandowska
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This thesis gives a critical overview of the conceptual background of the study of causal-
ity, providing an in-depth overview of various logics and modeling techniques aimed at
expressing or approximating it. Based on The Ladder of Causation introduced by Pearl
and Mackenzie (2018), the paper systematically categorizes concepts from logic, mathe-
matics, and computer science.
The study further focuses on developing a set of tools for a single agent, who endeavors to
uncover the causal structure of an unknown environment through interventions and causal
structure representation update. The Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), proves instrumental
in representing causal structures intuitively and facilitating eﬀicient reasoning. The causal
descendant graph, defined as a transitive closure of the causal graph, is used to conveniently
express the observed intervention effect. The assumption of faithfulness with respect to one
variable intervention is introduced and further used in algorithms for the causal structure
discovery through interventions. An algorithmic solution for learning a causal graph from
a causal descendant graph is presented, along with a discussion on how meta-knowledge
about the causal structure, in the form of parameters, can enhance the learning process.
Additionally, an enhanced causal discovery algorithm is proposed for environments with
a known maximum length of causal chains.
Following this, the thesis delves into learning within environments characterized by limited
observability. Existing frameworks are reviewed, and their suitability for learning through
intervention is assessed. The notion of suﬀiciency in representing the causal structure is
explored. Functional causal suﬀiciency is defined and an algorithm for its verification is
developed. Moreover, a solution is proposed for expanding the observable domain, by
incorporating new variables into the causal graph.
Finally, the thesis investigates learning through the elimination of plausible causal rela-
tions, presenting an algorithm for updating plausible causal structures.
ii
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Iga Lewandowska, MSc Business Analytics, DTU
This master’s thesis project, amounting to 30 ECTS, was carried out at DTU Compute, the
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Technical University
of Denmark. The purpose of this paper was to satisfy the requirements for the Master of
Science degree in Business Analytics within the timeframe of 04.09.2023 to 04.02.2024.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Nina Gierasimczuk, for
her guidance, and generous support throughout the entire thesis completion process. Her
expertise and invaluable feedback have played an indispensable role in shaping this thesis.
Iga Lewandowska - s212445
Signature
Date
Association, Dependence and Causality
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Critical review of the formal approaches to causality
3
2.1
Association . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Causality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Causality and Learning
15
3.1
Problem background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Model Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
From a causal frame to causal graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Algorithms for learning causal structures
25
4.1
Learning scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Causal Discovery Algorithm for faithful models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Causal Discovery Algorithm for frames with intervention with possible non-
observable results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
From 7→F to ,→F representation of the causal frame
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Discussion and algortihms for learning parametrised frames . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Learning with Limited Observability
39
5.1
Existing approaches to limited observability in causal learning . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Functional causal suﬀiciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Adding new variables to the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Learning with Limited Interventions
47
6.1
Learning as eliminating plausible relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.2
Algorithm for plausible causal structure update in a model faithful with
respect to single variable intervention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Conclusions and further works
53
7.1
Open questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Bibliography
56
Association, Dependence and Causality
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
A variety of complex processes happen seamlessly at every moment inside human minds,
to help us survive and thrive in the changing environment. We are equipped with the
abilities to learn from observed patterns and correlations, make decisions based on limited
knowledge and approximate solutions to very complex problems within seconds. Even
small children can instinctively handle complicated cognitive challenges, which technology
struggles to conquer.
With the progress in artificial intelligence, machines are able to replicate more and more
effects of human cognition. Advances such as large language models amaze us with their
ability to mimic human responses and generate sophisticated content which in many cases
is indistinguishable from human work. ChatGPT was shown to outperform human average
in many tasks, such as the MBA degree exam at Wharton (Ray, 2023). It also scored 147
in the verbal IQ test, positioning it in the 99,9th percentile of population (Ray, 2023).
At the same time, using such models brings along many risks, such as factual inaccuracy,
propagation of biases or lack of contextual consistency. However impressive the results
are, artificial intelligence devoid of the ability to reason will not be able to truly replicate
human features, such as self-awareness, moral reasoning, or empathy. Another issue is the
lack of explainability, which makes the use of AI questionable in the context of potential
biases and lack of accountability.
Symbolic approach to artificial intelligence offers a solution to these problems. As Thomas
Hobbes said “Thinking is manipulation of symbols and Reasoning is computation.” The
challenge, thus, lies in explicitly defining models and processes which happen automatically
in a human brain. Cognitive science makes attempts to discover the principles of human
intelligence, and explain human behaviours, decision making and problem solving.
Even the concepts which are very intuitive to humans at early stages of development
require a plethora of complex tools available in the background. For example, being able
to learn from a statement “you should have done X” requires implicit characterisation of
a context of the situation, identification of variables relevant for a specific behaviour, and
ability to adjust the mechanisms which led to a given decision.
Furthermore, a unique human characteristic is the ability to experimentally manipulate
the environment.
By predicting the results of interventions, humans are able to plan
complicated sequences of actions aimed at a defined result.
As Pearl and Mackenzie
(2018) argue, this requires an understanding of a causal structure of the world. When an
intervention is performed, the causal links leading to a given event are broken. This can
be opposed to barely observing associations and noticing which observations coincide with
Association, Dependence and Causality
1
==PAGE:10==
each other - as in “seeing smoke is different than making smoke”. Understanding causality
is also a necessary component in answering “Why?” questions. Without being able to
express the relation of causes and effects, these question become impossible to interpret
or answer.
It may come as surprise that the investigation of causality was not a subject of scientific
discourse until very recent times. It was even dismissed as non-scientific, based on the
notion that observed data alone is suﬀicient to describe reality, and that statistics gives
appropriate tools to do so. In the past years, however, the fields of mathematics and
computer science saw a rise of interest in causality.
Formal definitions of causes and
effects were introduced.
Logical languages were developed to express it and machine
learning algorithms developed to deduce the causal structure from data points. Also in
the field of cognitive science, the processes of learning causal links by human learners were
explored (Sobel & Kushnir, 2006; Sobel & Legare, 2014).
While the field of artificial intelligence is focused on inferring causal structure of the world
from data, visibly less attention is paid to reconstructing the human ways of learning
causality in an AI agent. It is then an interesting project to explore causality from the
perspective of a single agent with no knowledge of the world, and equip this agent with a
way to represent the causal structures and tools to learn them.
2
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Critical review of the formal
approaches to causality
In “The Book of Why” Pearl and Mackenzie (2018) propose the Ladder of Causation as
a framework for describing the levels of understanding of the world. The purpose of this
section is to introduce its levels: the concepts of association, intervention and causality,
and to discuss logical and mathematical tools required to express them.
While the notion of a cause and effect in some form is intuitively clear in most cases,
throughout the years philosophy and science adapted different approaches to define and
detect it, or dismissed it in a positivist spirit of reducing the world to empirical data. As
Pearson (2014) describes it in The Grammar of Science: “That a certain sequence has
occurred and reoccurred in the past is a matter of experience to which we give expression
in the concept of causation... Science in no case can demonstrate any inherent necessity
in a sequence, nor prove with absolute certainty that it must be repeated.” Hence the
study of causation is flattened to the correlations between observed values and the lan-
guage of association is used to describe it. The concept of intervention in science was
first introduced in context of randomised trials, which attempted to break all links from
patients’ properties, preferences and actions to the chosen therapy, in order to assess its
effects, removed from a normal context that usually dictated the choice of therapy (Pearl
& Mackenzie, 2018). The languages of causality build a model of a world which is bound
by nets of causal relations and is presented to us in form of observable variables, whose
values are defined by chains of influences and interactions.
2.1
Association
The level of association is connected to observing regularities and patterns in the world
around. It is concerned with questions like ”Am I more likely to observe X if I see Y?”. In
the context of survival, the ability to learn associations is vital for recognising potential
threats or linking desired situations with accompanying perceptions. It makes humans,
and animals, look for food in places where it is most likely to be found and avoid locations
where predators are often encountered.
The prime example is the famous Pavlov dog
experiment, which gave rise to the behavioural trend in psychology. Quite surprisingly,
learning associations does not require a brain - animals as simple as box jellyfish were
shown to link visual stimuli to the pain of collision and change its behaviour as a response
(Bielecki et al., 2023).
The main weakness of operating at this level is the inability to model the world and reason
Association, Dependence and Causality
3
==PAGE:12==
about novel situations - when considering only observed relations between variables in
empirical data, it is possible to draw conclusions regarding nothing more than the exact
context the data was collected in.
This knowledge cannot be generalised to different
environments or situations when some variables attain values not observed before.
In
context of artificial intelligence, this implies limited explainability and control (Darwiche,
2017).
2.1.1
Association in Mathematical Statistics
In the realm of science and understanding data, Karl Pearson is considered the father of
analysing association. The concept of correlation enabled describing relationships between
random variables and laid foundation for the discipline of mathematical statistics. Cor-
relation is instrumental in making predictions given certain correlated parameters, which
is done in all areas of life. It enabled mathematical treatment of imperfect data recorded
in real world and introduced a variety of handy tools and tests which provided scientists
with universal measures that could be used to interpret observation.
2.1.2
Association in Probability Theory
Probability theory enables us to analyze and understand domains in which chance plays
a role, it ”often provides a bridge between topics whose relationship is not apparent until
they are viewed probabilistically” (Stroock, 2001).
Attempts were made to characterize causation in terms of probability. Hans Reichenbach
described some of the necessary conditions for certain types of causal structues. He dis-
cussed the phenomenon of ”screening off” a variable (appearance of a mediator in the causal
chain) and attempted to give a statistical definition of causation. This and following works
in the area indicated the effects that hidden causal structures have on observable data.
However, it did not create tools applicable to discovering causal relationships (Hitchcock,
2021).
In time series analysis, Granger’s causality strives to identify the causal relations between
variables by looking at how using the current and past values of x increases predictability
of y. Causality of x to y is broken down into three components: simple Granger causality
(if future values of y can be better predicted, i.e. with a smaller forecast error variance, if
current and past values of x are used), instantaneous Granger causality (which exists when
the use of values of x recorded at the same moment as predicted y gives better predictions
of y) and feedback (there is a two-directional simple causal relationm between x and y).
Granger proposes eight different exclusive possibilities of causal relations between two time
series, which can be tested using standard procedures (Kirchgässner et al., 2013).
1. x and y are independent:
2. There is only instantaneous causality
3. x is causal to y, without instantaneous causality
4. y is causal to x, without instantaneous causality
5. x is causal to y, with instantaneous causality
6. y is causal to x, with instantaneous causality
7. There is feedback without instantaneous causality
8. There is feedback with instantaneous causality
However useful this approach is in prediction, it is not suﬀicient to express causality as
understood in this paper - it lets us conclude that observed values of y show a pattern of
4
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:13==
change which can be expressed in terms of x, but it offers no tools to discover whether the
observed “causality” is indeed a cause-effect relation between variables.
In Bayesian learning, both the model parameters and the observed data are viewed as
random variables, and we seek to infer the probability distribution of the parameters
given the data. Prior distribution, which represents the initial beliefs about the parameters
before observing any data and the likelihood function, which describes the probability of
observing the data given the parameters are considered. With the use of Bayes theorem,
the posterior probability is calculated. This enables updating beliefs given a stream of
observations (Kroese & Chan, 2014).
Bayesian networks are probabilistic graphical models in which nodes represent the stochas-
tic variables and directed edges define the probability distribution shaping the relationship
between variables. They provide a human-friendly model and represent complex interac-
tions between variables.
The modularity they exhibit thanks to the local and global
Markov properties makes them computationally eﬀicient. The model can be algorithmi-
cally learned from data (Sebastiani et al., 2005). One of the methods is finding conditional
independences between variables (meaning that values of two variables are independent
on each other, when we condition them on a set of other variables). Analyzing Bayesian
networks can give answers to dependency questions (how likely is X, given particular
conditions, or conversely: how likely these conditions are to exist when we observe X).
Because we are talking about probabilities, not participation in causal influence, these
models are do not provide an account for the effects of intervening in the system to per-
form experiments - they exist in the static domain of observational data, where the values
of all variables are defined by their natural context.
As a model of human congnition, global Bayesian models were criticized for being too
complex and computationally unintuitive, thus inadequate to describe processes happening
in the brain.
A more modular perspective on cognition was proposed, which involves
hierarchically organized modules, each primarily concerned with the state of its immediate
neighbors and updating its own state in a locally Bayesian way (Kruschke, 2006) - i.e. when
faced with a new fact, agent only updates knowledge directly connected to it, without the
need to reassess every known fact that could be weakly linked to the learned object.
2.1.3
Machine learning
Some of the successes achieved by machine learning can be explained by the fact that ”some
seemingly complex abilities that are typically associated with perception or cognition
can be captured and reproduced to a reasonable extent by simply fitting functions to
data, without having to explicitly model the environment or symbolically reason about
it.” (Darwiche, 2017) While we say that such systems ”learn” from data, all it means is
adjusting parameters or function architecture.
2.1.4
Dependence Logic
The above described frameworks are useful for analysing the results of random experiments
or noisy observations. However, in some contexts agents want to reason with certainty
about the questions such as ”Given X, can I fully determine Y?”. One of the the languages
enabling this is Dependence Logic as proposed by Jouko Väänänen (2007). It extends
First Order Logic by adding an atomic Dependence Logic formula: =(x1, . . . , xn−1, xn),
whose meaning is as follows: ‘the value of the term xn depends only on the values of
the terms x1, . . . , xn−1’. This expresses also how dependence itself is defined - it is a full
determination of one variable by a set of other variables. The way in which specific values
are determined is not subject of consideration here. To observe dependence in this sense,
one must consider multiple data points (assignments in this context). It can be said that
Association, Dependence and Causality
5
==PAGE:14==
Dependence Logic adds another dimension to First Order Logic - instead of reasoning
whether a given formula is true or false in one assignment, we observe multitude of them
to then reason about the type of the set of assignments (team).
The teams can be understood as data tables and assignments as their entries. Assessing
whether given atomic Dependence Logic formula describes the type of data is a trivial task
(it requires only to group assignments for which the values of x1, . . . , xn−1 are the same and
verify if in every group there is only one value of xn). Because of a particular meaning of
quantifiers in Dependence Logic (derived from the concepts of supplement and duplicate),
their meaning escapes this interpretation. For example, to decide if a team X is of type
φ := ∃xnφ1, we need to verify whether there exists a supplement team X′ = X(F/xn)
for some function F such that (φ, X(F/xn), 1). In other words, the starting point for this
consideration is a team without the variable xn. A function F is then applied to find such
value of xn, to create a certain X′ which satisfies the formula. This creates a possibility of
considering infeasible assignments - some combinations of the values of different variables
will never coexist in real world observations, yet they have to be taken into account when
evaluating formulas in Dependence Logic. Because of this property, only the fragment of
Dependence Logic without quantifiers seems to be applicable in discovering dependencies
in observational data.
Limitations of atomic Dependence Logic formulas for learning structural func-
tions
In general, Dependence Logic formulas are not suﬀicient to draw any conclusions concern-
ing causality. They allow us to describe us to describe data at the First Rung of causation
as defined by Pearl and Mackenzie (2018). Let us take variables X1, X2 and a set of ob-
servations, which is of type = (X1, X2). Then, not having any additional information,
there is no causal pattern that we could exclude. It only tells us that X1 is a predictor
of X2. Let us consider a causal model illustrated below. Even though there is functional
dependence, we cannot conclude the causal relation between X1 and X2.
X3
X2
X1
X2 = X3 + 1
X1 = X2 + 5
Figure 2.1: An example of a causal model; the labels on arrows indicate the functions
defining values of variables
When we learn that for our set of observations the formula =(X2, X1) does not hold, it
does not improve the situation - the formulas describe correlation only. For example, the
data collected from a casual frame presented in Table 2.1 could be fit to both graphs in
Figure 2.2. It is only when we go to a language of interventions that we can express the
differences.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X1
X2
X3
X4
Figure 2.2: Graphs consistent with observations in Table 2.1
There exist extensions of Dependence Logic which express causality. They will be pre-
sented in Section 2.3.1.
6
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:15==
X1
X2
X3
X4
-
F =
{
1
if X1 > 2
0
otherwise
F =
{
1
if X1 > 4
0
otherwise
F =
{
1
if X1 > 4
0
otherwise
1
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
3
1
0
0
4
1
0
0
5
1
1
1
6
1
1
1
Table 2.1: Example causal frame
2.1.5
Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Action models of Dynamic Epistemic Logic provide a language to capture interventions
and their results. A formalisation of the learning of fully observable, universally applicable
action models is studied by Bolander and Gierasimczuk (2017). Action α is a subset of
pairs 2P ×2P (where P is the set of propositions in the model). The work shows that a set
of deterministic, universally applicable (i.e., performing the action gives a result for every
assignment s ∈2P ) actions is finitely identifiable, meaning that the agent will arrive at the
correct action model in a finite time in a conclusive way. A distinction is made between the
conditional and unconditional actions. The former require a specific preconditions - these
are defined as the smallest set pre(α) such that α is uniform in P −pre(α). Uniformity
in P −pre(α) means that the effect of the action is the same as long as the initial states
vary in values of variables from this set only. Actions are unconditional if pre(α) = ∅.
A method of learning through update is proposed. The agents begins with a set of hy-
potheses including all possible action and update their epistemic state by observing the
actions being performed. A set of arbitrary actions (including non-deterministic) is proven
to be identifiable in the limit - after observing a finite sequence of observations the agent
will converge to an action model inconclusively.
Action Models do not capture the element of causality - they only answer the question of
what outcomes of a given action in a given state are, not addressing the why? connected
to it. However, the idea behind them can be seen as an alternative to causal reasoning -
the focus is set on the practical approach to predicting the effects of actions and updating
the knowledge with observations. The agent can perfectly navigate in the environment,
set goals and plan actions to achieve them without having the understanding of how the
effects are achieved.
According to Pearl (2009), actions can have two interpretations: reactive and deliberative.
The former is defined as ”consequence of agent’s beliefs, disposition and environmental
inputs” (referred to as “act”), while the latter is ”an option of choice in contemplated
decision making, usually involving comparison of consequences” (action).
Acts are part of the ’normal state of the world’ - by observing the relevant context,
their content can be inferred. Actions on the other hand are analogous to interventions -
they break the chain of events, look forward the causal chain (agent’s attempt to predict
consequences of actions), rather than backwards to the context that led to the decision
making situation.
This difference is illustrated by the two formulas capturing utility (Pearl, 2009).
The
evidential decision theory assumes agents maximize the conditional expectation of utility
Association, Dependence and Causality
7
==PAGE:16==
for possible outcomes y and treat the decision x as an observation:
Uev(x) =
∑
y
P(y|x)u(y).
This leads to paradoxical situations, when rational patients should avoid going to the
hospital, to reduce the probability of being seriously ill or students should not study the
night before exam, as this increases the probability of them having not prepared before -
”the all remedial actions should be banish lest they increase the probability that a remedy
is indeed needed”. This approach does not account for the element of free will of the agent,
which is captured in the traditional decision theory definition of utility:
U(x) =
∑
y
P(y|do(x))u(y)
Here x is not attached to statistical observations, it functions as an exogenous variable in
the model of events.
2.1.6
STIT and BIAT logics
This problem was approached from a more philosophical perspective by Lorini and Herzig
(2008). There a transition from intention, through attempt, to basic action is characterised
and logic of intention and attempt is presented. The logic is built on an idea of basic actions
- ”a basic action type α of agent i is an action that i can intend to do without necessarily
intending to do a different action β in order to do α.” Examples of such actions are simple
motoric functions, like ”raising a hand”, or more complex sequences of movements aimed
at a given goal, which still do not require the knowledge of causal chain that builds them -
for example ”toggling the switch”. Non-basic actions then are a recursive structure, which
can be decomposed up to the level of basic actions. Agents has voluntary control only
over basic actions, the further events are not dependant on her. This idea is captured in
STIT and BIAT logics (Belnap, 2005).
A stit sentence ”α sees to it that φ” means that the decision made by an agent α ensures
that φ is true in all of the possible futures. The time is modelled as a tree, branching to
the future as decisions are made, and as events happen. A history is then a branch of
such tree, composed of a set of moments. By making decisions, the agent partitions the
histories. This setup enables talking about agency - an agent is agentive for φ if only if
φ is synonymous with [α] stit φ. Therefore, agent cannot be agentive for tautologies or
events that happen regardless of her actions. This way of modelling refuses the use of
causal structure: the actions of agents and non-agentive events have the same effects on
reality. No causal laws are needed, agency is indeterministic.
This philosophical stance does not provide much room for pragmatic description of the
world in sight and learning the links between everyday happenings. Seeing the future as
unbounded set of histories, unfolding infinitely in indeterministic way does not offer simple
ways to predict outcomes of actions and reason about them.
A more down-to-earth logical approach is discussed by Giordano and Schwind (2002).
The Causal Action Logic enriches the language of propositional logic with the causal
implication A > B, which roughly can be read as ”A causes B”. The variables include
also basic actions, denoted like do(a). The conditional operator > applies to propositions
and actions in the same way. It is also possible to express the executability of the actions,
conflicts between them or their independence. The paper presents a sound and complete
8
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:17==
axiomatization of the logic. This offers a straightforward way to encode actions and their
results, preconditions and causal laws in the domain.
2.2
Intervention
Intervention is about changing the world. Understanding this concept enables answering
questions such as ”What happens to Y, if I do X?”. Looking at the problem in the other
direction, we can ask the question ”How?” - i.e. what intervention must be taken on X
to see Y. As Judea Pearls argues, this information cannot be deduced from observational
data itself in any way - ”Seeing smoke tells us a totally different story about the likelihood
of fire than making smoke” (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018). By actively changing the variables
can we can go beyond what can be observed, because we take the value of the variable
out of its usual causal context.
For example, let us consider the relation of barometer reading, pressure and likelihood of
rain. Based on a series of observations involving a well functioning barometer we cannot
falsify the hypothesis that movement of the hand of our barometer causes both changes
in atmospheric pressure and rain conditions. It is only by moving the hand that we can
disprove this statement.
barometer
pressure
rain
However, in the experiment design there exists an inherent problem of identifying and
measuring relevant variables. There exists a risk that the intervention influences some
hidden variable that in turn influences investigated outcome. In experiment where people
are randomly assigned to smoke or not, could it be a chemical used to bleach cigarette
paper that is responsible for lung cancer? (Scheines et al., 1993)
As studies on human participants show, we instinctively understand that intervention on
an effect breaks the causal link leading to it and thus it does not make the cause more
likely to be observed, which is the case in observations. In other words, the intervention
”undoes one or more causal relations: It changes the graph representing causal relations
by removing any directed links from other variables to X (i.e., by cutting X off from the
variables that normally cause it). The motivation is that an intervention by an external
agent to set X = x renders other potential causes of x irrelevant” (Sloman & Lagnado,
2005).
When it comes to human learning, using active intervention was shown to facilitate learning
of causal structures, even when the conditional probability information and temporal
information that the learners observed in these two conditions were identical (Sobel &
Kushnir, 2006). The experiment participants’ accuracy and confidence in the answers they
gave to causal questions were significantly higher when they could perform interventions
themselves, comparing to when they were only able to observe them. Interestingly, learning
brought better results when people were able to decide on the interventions they made,
compared to when they were instructed on what to do, even though they received the same
information in both cases. Participants were introduced to a virtual setup with a set of
games consisting of colourful lights, some of which were connected to one or more sensors
which activate the light when they detect light of given colour. The interventions were
performed by pressing a button activating a given light or using a bucket to cover a light
(and thus also deactivate its impact on sensors of other lights). It can be clearly seen that
the experiments followed the definition of intervention from Pearl and Mackenzie (2018)
Association, Dependence and Causality
9
==PAGE:18==
- the participants were allowed to break the causal link of any variable and change the
variable values to observe reaction of the system. Authors conclude that ”deciding what
interventions to generate provides learners the opportunity to recognize the relationship
between interventions and outcomes and to recognize data that are critical for learning a
causal structure”, which may suggest that the aspect of attention also plays a role in this
process.
However, having the causal model as a representation of investigated phenomena, we can
use the known conditional probabilities of events to mathematically simulate interventions.
This simulates intervention by detaching all causal links normally defining the variable
value. This procedure, formalised by Pearl (2009), is an invaluable framework for verifying
causal relations between variables in contexts where performing actual interventions is
impossible because of ethical or practical reasons.
Examples of successful use of this
idea can be found in epidemiology (discovery of cholera bacteria), economics (simulating
price elasticity), social studies (discovering effects of environment and genetics on children
intelligence) and many other (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018).
2.3
Causality
By the widest definition, causality refers to the relationship between cause and effect in
events or phenomena. It is the concept that a cause precedes an effect, and the former leads
to the latter (or contributes to it in a meaningful way). This relation can be deterministic
or the effect might appear with some probability. Additionally, we might assume existence
of unobservable facts, which is a source of epistemic uncertainty. Asking the question
”Why?” has powerful consequences in the realm of human cognition.
There exists a widely accepted distinction between two types of causality - type and actual.
Type causality describes general cause-effect relationship (”Smoking causes lung cancer”)
and is especially useful in context of predictions or general understanding of sources of
phenomena, while actual causality points to specific fact and its causes (”Jill’s heavy
smoking during the 2000s caused her to develop lung cancer”) and provides understanding
of specific instances (Hitchcock, 2021). Actual causality is also considered in the context of
blame and responsibility - when an accident occurs, we are interested to what conditions
made it happen.
Definition of cause
The modern considerations of causality are often considered to be
started by Hume when he wrote: ”We may define a cause to be an object followed by
another, and where all the objects, similar to the first, are followed by objects similar to
the second. Or, in other words, where, if the first object had not been, the second never
had existed.” (Hume, 2007), thus giving two distinct definitions of causality. The first
one, regularity definition talks about time precedence and type causality. The second one
approaches the topic from a different perspective - a counterfactual. It considers not only
what happened, but what would have happened, had the conditions been different. This
involves the use of imagination and reasoning about non-existent alternative scenarios.
A full mathematical definition of actual causality was provided by Halpern (2016). The
work contains also mathematical considerations on blame, responsibility and explanation.
Counterfactuals
Acknowledging causality enables imagining alternative worlds and us-
ing counterfactuals. We can ask what would have happened, provided some conditions
had been different. These questions uncover the causal structure of the world and relations
between variables. Usually they are connected to actual causality (as in: ”If my car hadn’t
10
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:19==
broke down on the way here, I wouldn’t have been late”), however type causality also can
be discussed (”What if smoking didn’t cause cancer?”). Natural languages are able to
express counterfactual scenarios eﬀiciently and precisely - knowing that Y happened with
condition X present, we ask whether it happened because of X, despite X or regardless
of X (Pearl, 2009). This understanding is intimately linked to concepts such as credit,
responsibility, blame or regret.
One obvious problem of counterfactuals is that, by definition, they can not be experimen-
tally verified. They remain in the space of imagination and can only be as reliable as a
model which was used to formulate them. It is by hypothetical intervention of changing
the actual state of events that we can evaluate them. An attempt to formalise counterfac-
tuals was made by Lewis (2001). There, a concept of assessing counterfactual statements
in a world closest possible to the real one is introduced. However, this approach appeals
to some intuitive sense of similarity, but it does not offer a mathematical definition of
distance or a method of choosing relevant parameters.
The three steps to answer a counterfactual problem of computing the probability of Y = y
under the hypothetical condition X = x, given evidence e in a causal model are as follows
(Pearl, 2009):
Step 1 (abduction): Update the probability P(u) to obtain P(u|e).
Step 2 (action): Replace the equations corresponding to variables in a set X by the
equations X = x.
Step 3 (prediction): Use the modified model to compute the probability Y = y
Set of variables U denotes the realisation of the random exogenous events which act on
the model (in temporal understanding, Step 1 is explaining the past in light of current
observation of e). It is worth noting that U variables must appear explicitly in the model
so that Step 1 can be performed. This is why stochastic causal models are unable to answer
the counterfactuals questions - such as estimating probabilities of causes given effects and
probabilities of explanations. They do not encode the information to assess a state of a
world different than actually observed. For example, let us imagine we ask a model, which
predicts salary based on work experience and years of education, a question of ”what would
be my salary, had I chosen not to get a Masters degree?”. To get a meaningful answer it
cannot simply decrease the number of education years in the function describing salary.
It should also account for the fact that the education takes the time that otherwise would
count to the years of experience (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018).
2.3.1
Logics of reasoning about causality
Barbero et al. (2020) and Barbero et al. (2023) make an attempt to integrate the causal and
epistemic reasoning. The work introduces an adequate semantics for describing interven-
tionist counterfactuals with dynamic epistemic operators - LPAKS. Sound and complete
axiomatization of the system is provided. Apart from deducing the experiment result from
already possessed knowledge, the agent can learn from doing the intervention and seeing
results. This is achieved by introducing observables - a set of variables whose values agent
can ’record’ after an experiment is carried out, thus limiting uncertainty. This system is
consistent with the definition of intervention as introduced by Pearl and Mackenzie (2018)
- the intervention is observed in a different causal model than originally considered, which
differs by the functions that previously defined the values of variables subject to inter-
vention. In other words, the causal links to these variables are broken. In this logic, the
causal structure of the world is known to the agent - it is not object of learning. The
agent considers assignments of values to variables as possible worlds from a perspective of
Association, Dependence and Causality
11
==PAGE:20==
the actual world. The learning in this case consists of reducing the number of accessible
worlds (Barbero et al., 2023).
Thoft and Gierasimczuk (2023) use the concepts of frames and models described above to
reason in a simple causal domain. The article proposes a practical approach to learning
by observing results of interventions, accessible as a finite stream of tuples defining the
state of the world before and after the intervention. Dependence Logic atomic formulas
are used to describe the determination relations and the minimality principle is enforced
in the dependence model (all and only variables that casually influence given endogenous
variable are present in structural functions). Learning happens in fully observable domain
of binary variables, where all and only the exogenous variables are manipulable by the
agent. Additionally, each endogenous variable can only be influenced by one or many
exogenous variables (that excludes for example existence of chains longer than one). In
this limited environment learning determination is suﬀicient to deduce the casual structure
of the world.
Barbero and Sandu (2018) proposed a team semantics approach to reasoning about causal-
ity, which enable reasoning about deterministic and probabilistic causality in scenarios
when causal relations remain unchanged. They describe interventions and methods for
assessing counterfactuals in their framework.
Barbero and Yang (2020) introduce a concept of generalised causal teams and propose
a complete natural deduction calculi for it. Generalised causal teams are interesting as
they are able to express uncertainty, by having varying structural functions in the model.
Ordinary causal team is then a special case of generalised causal teams.
2.3.2
Machine learning approaches to causality
It must be noted that sometimes in machine learning setting the term ”counterfactual”
is used with a different meaning. When a model used to predict certain outcome does
not consider causality, only correlations in the data, answering a counterfactual question
in a meaningful way is impossible. There were attempts to approximate the answer, by
translating the problem to an optimisation exercise. In this approach the input is modified
in a minimal way, which enables reaching a desired output. The constraints are feasibility
(the values of variables must remain in the observed domain) and actionability (certain
variables cannot be altered). However, this approaches give results conflicting with the
ones obtained with use of causal models, as shown by (Smith, 2023). The work looks at
data generated based on causal models with known structures. It compares the output
of the a popular counterfactual explanations machine learning algorithm, DiCE ML, to
the ones calculated using the Pearl counterfactual method. The conclusion was that the
two methods gave significantly different answers and that deviation was dependant on the
underlying causal model structure. This result is not surprising given the impossibility
of the task given used methods: using the language of association we can only obtain a
description of a probable world, while answering a counterfactual question requires breaking
the causal link between a feature and its parents (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018). This has clear
intuitive sense - when asked ”What would happen if giants existed”, we tend to imagine
the world identical to ours except for the fact that giants exist, not an alternative world,
whose conditions led to emergence of this species.
2.3.3
Probability in Causality
As Pearl (2009) notes: ”Causality connotes lawlike necessity, whereas probabilities connote
exceptionality, doubt, and lack of regularity.” The main reason to use probability is to
link the causality to the reality of the uncertain and noisy world we observe. In most
phenomena we are concerned with explaining with causality, the cause does not determine
12
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:21==
the effect - it only tends to make the effect more likely. The strength of this influence
is often what we are interested in. The other reason for probabilistic reasoning about
causality are the exceptions, which are an implicit part of the language we use. Even
though we may generally agree to the statements ”My neighbour’s roof gets wet whenever
mine does” and ”If I hose my roof it will get wet”, we don’t take the premises literally and
conclude that ”If I hose the roof, my neighbour’s roof will get wet” (Pearl, 2009). The
probabilistic approach removes the need to account for all possible exceptions in order to
create a valuable model of the world.
Bayesian interpretation of probability understands it as degree of belief, which changes
with incoming information.
Bayesian rule provides a normative rule for updating be-
liefs in response to new evidence.
It defined the strength of belief in a hypothesis H,
given evidence e and implicitly considered previous knowledge K: P(H|e) = P(e|H)P(H)
P(e)
.
P(H|e) denotes posterior probability, P(H) prior probability and P(e) is a normalis-
ing constant, describing the probability of observing the evidence consistent with prior
knowledge: P(e) = P(e|H)P(H) + P(e|¬H)P(¬H). Another property useful in prac-
tical settings is the chain rule, which allows for expressing the probability of the joint
event (E1, E2, . . . En) as a product of n conditional probabilities: P(E1, E2, . . . En) =
P(En|En−1, . . . , E2, E1) . . . P(E2|E1)P(E1).
The probabilistic models are usually represented as graphs.
This is a convenient way
of showing assumptions, it allows for eﬀicient representation of joint probability functions
and facilitates inferences from observations. Bayesian networks are directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs) which represent the causal (or temporal) relationships. However, it can be noted
that DAGs can express any independences in the ordering of variables - not necessarily
stemming from causality in data generation. It is the causal interpretation and the notion
that each arrow in the graph expresses some mechanism defining the structure of the
world which makes them a powerful tool for understanding the observed phenomena and
predict the effects of interventions with minimum extra information. Causal models carry
more information than joint probability distributions - they strive to express the objective
physical constraints and explain how the data is generated, while probabilistic relationship
reflect what we know or believe about the world. The eﬀiciency of this solution comes
from the concept of Markovian parents - minimal set of predecessors of a node, which
makes it independent of all its other predecessors. Markovian parents of a variable are
suﬀicient to determine the probability associated with it. This property , called causal
Markov condition enables reasoning about variables independencies without considering
probabilities, which corresponds to how humans make predictions.
A graph gives an
illustration of an intuitive notion of relevance of certain variables in the environment
for the value of another. An important limitation for discovery of causal structures from
observations is observational equivalence. Two observationally equivalent graphs cannot be
distinguished without intervention or temporal information. The functional causal models
consist of sets of equations of the form xi = fi(pai, ui), where pai are the parents of Xi
(meaning immediate causes) and Ui represent error due to omitted factors. Intervention
is then an alteration on a set of functions.
Do-calculus
is an axiomatic system which enables reasoning about the outcomes of
interventions (do-statements) based on the conditional probabilities in observed data,
provided that a causal structure is known.
This system works with Structural Equa-
tion Models (SEM), which consist of sets of exogenous and endogenous variables (U and
V ), a set F of functions determining the value of every endogenous variable (in a form
{f1, . . . , fn} where each fi determined the value of Vi: vi = fi(pai, u)) and a joint prob-
Association, Dependence and Causality
13
==PAGE:22==
ability distribution P(u) over U. The model is completely specified when U and F are
given and fully specified at population level when ⟨P(u), F⟩is fixed. Such fully specified
model defines a causal diagram. Do-calculus introduces the do(x) operator, which enables
modelling the effects of an intervention in the model. Such intervention result with a mod-
ified model Mx in which the functions defining the values of variables in X are replaced
by constants x, while the rest of the model remains unchanged. The postintervention
distribution of an outcome Y resulting from the action do(X = x) is given by:
PM(y|do(x)) = PMx(y).
Furthermore, do-calculus provides an algebraic procedure to replace the do-statements
with equivalent observational distributions, given certain properties of a graph.
This approach is useful for finding direct effect of one variable on another, analysing medi-
ation, and reasoning about transportability of experiment results to other contexts (Pearl,
2012). The last application is vastly used for example to compare results of medical trials
on different populations with known characteristics, analyse results of policies in a new
environment, given the experience from another one or assess effectiveness of marketing
strategies in different groups or aid visual recognition engines.
14
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Causality and Learning
3.1
Problem background
3.1.1
Learning the causal structure of the world
The problem of learning in causal environment can be approached from different perspec-
tives. In this paper, the focus is on an agent based in an unknown environment, built
on an underlying causal structure, and equipped with the ability to observe the variable
values and intervene with them.
Uncovering the cause-effect relations underlying studied phenomena is a complex problem.
There exist algorithmic solutions for achieving this based on properties of distributions
in empirical data. These methods are invaluable in analysing vast observational data and
demonstrated good results in many contexts. They are applied in medicine, neuroscience,
genetics and social sciences (Scheines et al., 1993; Peters et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2018).
In the literature, causality learning from an agent perspective is often connected to sit-
uations when the agent is obtaining the knowledge of values of variables, or valuation of
a formula, given the causal structure of the world (Barbero et al., 2020; Barbero et al.,
2023) or finding the strength of assumed causal relations (Pearl, 2012), less attention is
given to discovering the causal structure of the world in context of artificial intelligence.
3.1.2
Model of the world and rationality
Similar situation as described in Section 3.1 seems to exist in game theory, where most
of the works are built on an assumption of players having full, truthful and common
knowledge about the rules of the game and actions available. An interesting approach to
relaxing this assumption was posed by Schipper (2021), where the game is represented by
a forest of trees available to agents at different points of the game, rather than one full
tree. This expresses the notion that ”rational play” should be seen as optimal only with
respect to agent’s representation of the game, not in the underlying true game as a whole.
It is by altering their play according to awareness of new actions that the agents arrive
at self-confirming equilibrium - a gameplay in which rational players keep the same set of
beliefs and do not discover anything novel. Therefore the game strategy remains constant.
For example, let us imagine a situation when two agents play tic-tac-toe. While A has a full
knowledge of the rules, B only considers moves where players put a sing in a field adjacent
to their sign from a previous move. Then agents see a different game tree for the same
position in the game. By seeing A making moves incompatible with her representation of
the game, B can update it and make different moves in a subsequent game. Her moves in
all games are rational, according to the model of the game she knows.
Association, Dependence and Causality
15
==PAGE:24==
This is analogous to a situation of an agent existing in the domain of causal relations.
The same as the player in Schipper model, she possesses some model of reality, which
may be false or lacking substantial information. She should be able encode this partial
knowledge and to update it when new evidence appears. The agent should also realise the
uncertainty connected to what she does not know and reason in such situation.
The problem explored here is the first step to building a framework addressing practical
causal discovery problems from a perspective of a single agent.
3.1.3
Machine learning algorithms for causal discovery
When studying the causal discovery from empirical data, the first problem to consider is
the identifiability of the structure from distributions of variable values. The structures can
be identified up to a Markov equivalence class - a set of graphs with the same d-separations.
Further conclusions about the specific shape of the graph within one class can be made
based on data of interventions (Singh et al., 2018). In the general case, it is not possible
to discover an underlying casual graph for Markovian and faithful structures.
Peters
et al. (2017) discuss three specific cases of identifiable structures: linear Gaussian with
equal error variances, linear non-Gaussian, and nonlinear Gaussian. Another important
assumption is that the noise in the models is additive.
There exist two main families of causal discovery algorithms: constraint-based (also re-
ferred to as independence-based) and score-based methods (Singh et al., 2018).
Constraint-based method work in three stages: discovering the graph skeleton (i.e., an
undirected graph with the same edges as the DAG corresponding to data), finding v-
structures, orienting edges. All the below described algorithms assume that the observed
variables sets are causally suﬀicient and every member of the population is characterised
by the same causal relations between variables.
The SGS algorithm is the simplest solution based on the principle of building the graph
skeleton based on the independence test: the algorithm first assumes the complete undi-
rected graph with data variables.
Then, it is trying to identify the sets of variables
conditional on which two variables adjacent in the graph are independent. If such a set
exists, it means the vertices in questions are not adjacent and the edge is removed. Then
it is orienting edges in v-structures such that A and B, and B and C are adjacent, there
is no edge between A and C, and additionally A and C are not d-separated by any subset
containing B. Then the edges are directed A →B ←C. Lastly, the remaining edges are
directed in a way to avoid cyclic relations. This algorithm has polynomial time complexity
in regards to the number of variables. This is because for each pair of vertices adjacent in
the graph, all subsets of vertices must be checked (Scheines et al., 1993).
PC is the most recognisable independence algorithm nowadays. It improves the complexity
of SGS algorithm by “thinning” the graph by first removing adjacencies with n = 0 order
conditional independence relations and increasing n in subsequent runs. In this way, for
sparse graphs much better time is achieved (Scheines et al., 1993).
PC* algorithm has the same time complexity, but gives more stable results, when the
data is not entirely faithful to the graph, for example due to measurement errors. When
verifying adjacency, the algorithm only checks subsets of variables adjacent to A and
subsets of variables adjacent to B that are on undirected paths between A and B, which
is suﬀicient for causal reasoning and decreases the risk of removing existing adjacencies
(Scheines et al., 1993).
When it comes to score-based methods, Chickering (2003) propose the GES (Greedy
16
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:25==
Equivalence Search) algorithm, which calculates the score for a current graph and all
neighbouring grpahs, obtained by adding or removing edges.
It starts with an empty
graph, adds edges until a local maximum is reached, then removes edges. The score used
is based on the maximum likelihood parameters estimation (Peters et al., 2017).
3.2
Model Definition
The starting point of the considerations in this chapter are casual models and associated
notions (definitions 1 - 6), as given by Barbero et al., 2023 (adapted from Pearl and Verma,
1995). The considerations of learning causal structure of the world based on interventions
from Thoft and Gierasimczuk, 2023 is developed further.
Throughout the text capital letters (like X, U, V ) will denote sets of variables or single
variables, when it is clear from the context. Capital letters with a subscript (like X1, Vi)
stand variables, and small letters with subscript (like x1, vi) as values of these variables,
such that X1 = x1, Vi = vi etc. Vectors are used to abbreviate assignments of values to
respective variables, for example −→
X = −→x is used to express X1 = x1, . . . , Xn = xn. A
fixed order in such a sequence is implied.
Definition 1 (Signature). Throughout this text, let S = ⟨U, V, R⟩be a finite signature
where:
• U = {U1, . . . , Um} is the finite set of exogenous variables,
• V = {V1, . . . , Vn} is the finite set of endogenous variables, and
• R(X) is a finite non-empty range of a variable in U ∪V .
A causal model is formally defined as follows.
Definition 2 (Causal model). A causal model is a triple ⟨S, F, A⟩where
• S = ⟨U, V, R⟩is the model’s signature,
• F = {FVj|Vj ∈V } contains, for each endogenous variable Vj ∈V , a map FVj :
R(U1, . . . , Um, V1, . . . , Vj−1, Vj+1, . . . , Vn →R(Vj).1 Each FV is V ’s structural function.
• A is a valuation function, assigning to every X ∈U ∪V a value A(X) ∈R(X). The val-
uation must comply with the endogenous variables’ structural functions: for each endoge-
nous variable Vj ∈V , we have A(Vj) = FVj(A(U1, . . . , Um, V1, . . . , Vj−1, Vj+1, . . . , Vn)).
Definition 3 (Causal dependency). Let F be a set of structural functions for V . Given
Vj ∈V , rename the variables in U ∪V −Vj as X1, . . . , Xm+n−1.
Under F, an endogenous variable Vj ∈V is directly causally affected by a variable Xi ∈
(U ∪V −Vj) (in symbols Xi ,→F Vj) if and only if there is a tuple
(x1, . . . , xi1, xi+1, . . . , xm+n−1) ∈R(X1, . . . , Xi1, Xi+1, . . . , Xm+n−1)
(3.1)
and there are x′
i ̸= x′′
i ∈R(Xi) such that
FVj(x1, . . . , x′
i, . . . , xm+n−1) ̸= FVj(x1, . . . , x′′
i , . . . , xm+n−1)
(3.2)
When Xi ,→F Vj, we will also say that Xi is a casual parent of Vj.
Definition 4 (Causal graph and transitive closure). The pair (U ∪V, ,→F) is called the
causal graph induced by F. The relation ,→+
F is the transitive closure of ,→F.
1Then R(X1, . . . , Xn) is an abbreviation of R(X1) × · · · × R(Xn)
Association, Dependence and Causality
17
==PAGE:26==
Definition 5 (Recursive causal model). A set of structural functions F is recursive if and
only if ,→+
F is a strict partial order (i.e. an asymmetric and transitive relation). A causal
model ⟨S, F, A⟩is recursive if and only if F is recursive. Here, a recursive causal model
will be called simply a causal model.
A causal frame will denote a tuple ⟨S, F⟩.
Definition 6 (Intervention). Let M = ⟨S, F, A⟩be a causal model with −→
X = −→x an
assignment on S. In the causal model M−
→
X=−
→
x = ⟨S, F−
→
X=−
→
x , AF−
→
X=−
→
x ⟩, which results from
an intervention of setting the values of variable in −→
X to −→x ,
• the functions in F−
→
X=−
→
x = {F ′
Vj|Vj ∈V } are such that:
– for each Vj not in −→
X, the function F ′
Vj is exactly as FVj
– for each Vj = Xi and Xi is in −→
X, the function F ′
Vj is a constant function
returning the value xi ∈−→x regardless of the values of all other variables.
• AF−
→
X=−
→
x is the unique valuation where
– the value of each exogenous variable in −→
X is the one in −→x ;
– the value of each exogenous variable not in −→
X is as in A;
– each endogenous variable complies with its new structural function (that in
F−
→
X=−
→
x ).
In other words, AF−
→
X=−
→
x (Y ) is the unique valuation satisfying the following equa-
tions:
AF−
→
X=−
→
x (Y ) = 2





xi
if Y ∈U and Y = Xi such that Xi in −→
X
A(Y )
if Y ∈U and Y is not in −→
X
F ′
Y (AF−
→
X=−
→
x (U ∪V −Y )
if Y ∈V.
3.2.1
Intuitions and remarks connected to the definitions
A causal frame describes the structure of the world, the skeleton of variables and relations
between them. A causal model then is a state of the frame. In context of logic, the values
of variables in the model are given by valuation, while in literature connected to data
science the term assignment tends to be used more frequently. As far as this paper goes,
these terms are synonymous and thus will be used interchangeably.
Because of the recursive structure of the causal models, the values of all endogenous vari-
ables can be determined once the exogenous variable values are known. The definition of
an intervention ensures that intervening on a recursive causal model yields a new recursive
causal model (see proof by Barbero et al., 2023). Hence, the result of an intervention is a
unique valuation. Each function in F describes an autonomous mechanism governing one
variable. What follows is that the models are modular - reasoning can be done in some
part of the model, without necessarily defining the entirety of it.
2Note that here Y is a variable, so AF
−
→
X=−
→
x (Y ) denotes a value assigned to Y by a valuation AF
−
→
X=−
→
x ,
which is a result of an intervention setting values of −→
X to −→
x .
18
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:27==
An important thing to notice from the definition of causal dependency is that only the
variable Vj, for which we are identifying causal parents, is bound by the structural function
FVj. What follows from it is that the values of other variables do not need to correspond
to a single ’natural’ valuation (i.e. one in which exogenous variables take any values from
their ranges and all endogenous variables are defined by their structural functions). This
is vital, as in some cases discovering causal relations requires performing interventions,
and thus removing the structural functions for some variables other than Vj. Let us look
at a simple case of such situation - a model consisting of a singe causal chain of length
two, as illustrated below.
U1
V1
V2
V1 = U1 + 1
V2 = V1 + 1
To show causal dependency between V1 and V2 we need to have some u1 ∈R(U1) and
v′
1 ̸= v′′
1 ∈R(V1) such that FV2(u1, v′
1) ̸= FV2(u1, v′′
1). We can easily see that satisfying
this condition is impossible without performing an intervention on V1 - if we only observe
the models for different values of U1 we will always get tuples such that if v1 = v′
1, then
u1 = u′
1 because V1 = FV1(U1). This problem is illustrated in Table 3.1.
U1
V1
V2
u1
v′
1
v′
2
u1
v1”
v2”
Table 3.1: The situation in which the definition of causal dependence holds for V1 and V2,
when v′
1 ̸= v′′
1 and v′
2 ̸= v′′
2
3.3
From a causal frame to causal graph
As remarked by Pearl (2009), the motivation of using graphs to describe causal relations
can be threefold:
• to conveniently express substantive assumptions
• to present probability functions in an eﬀicient way
• to facilitate inferences from observations
While in the context of symbolic considerations the second point does not have a direct
application, the other two give a suﬀicient reason to employ graph representation of the
causal frames and models. The concept of causal parents limits the amount of information
needed to find a value of a given variable - instead of recording values of all predecessors, we
can narrow down the focus to relevant ones - knowledge of which is suﬀicient for answering
a question on hand. A graph representation allows for easy analysis of relevant features
(e.g. paths leading to a vertex/emerging from it) and reasoning based on isolated partial
information.
Definition 7 (Causal Graph). Given a recursive causal frame ⟨S, F⟩with S = ⟨U, V, R⟩
and F denoting a set of structural functions, a causal graph is a pair (U ∪V, ,→F). The
variables in U ∪V define vertices, and parent - child relations in ,→F correspond to directed
edges.
Because of the definition of the causal dependence relation Xi ,→F Vj, we know that Xi
is included in the function FVj in a meaningful way (i.e. some change of the value of
Association, Dependence and Causality
19
==PAGE:28==
Xi while other variables are fixed results in change of the value of Vj; for linear models
this fact implies that all variables have non-zero coeﬀicient in the function). Existence of
such a unique structural causal model satisfying structural minimality (a representation in
which each function contains a minimal number of variables) was proven by Peters et al.
(2017), Appendix C3. The idea is that we distinguish between structural causal models
with different sets of parents for any variable, even when entail the same distributions.
For example, the two models S1 : X := NX, Y := 0 ∗X + NY and S2 : X := NX, Y := NY
are different in the respect that S1 indicates that X is a parent of Y , while it has no effect
on its value. Because of the structural minimality condition, we choose S2 as a correct
representation.
In contrast to causal frame, a causal graph does not carry the information about the ranges
of variables nor the functions that define the values of endogenous variables.
3.3.1
Structures in graphs
The purpose of this section is to introduce and briefly describe general graph notions,
which are also relevant for describing causal graphs. In this section a graph is a pair
G = (V, E), where V is the set of vertices and E ⊆V × V is a set of edges.
Directed acyclic graph (DAG) is a graph in which all edges are directed and there exist no
(directed) cycles.
Two vertices k and l are adjacent if either (k, l) ∈E or (l, k) ∈E.
A path in G is a sequence of distinct vertices X1, . . . , Xm, such that for all k ∈{1, . . . m−1}
(Xk, Xk + 1) ∈E or (Xk+1, Xk) ∈E (i.e., a path is a sequence of vertices such that every
two consecutive ones are adjacent).
We will use the notation Xk →Xk+1 to mean that (Xk, Xk+1) ∈E.
If (Xk, Xk+1) ∈E for all k ∈{1, . . . , m −1}, we speak of a directed path from X1 to Xm
and call X1 an ancestor of Xm and Xm a descendant of X1. The vertices together form
a chain. In DAGs, because of acyclicity, no vertex Xk is an ancestor nor descendant of
itself.
For any vertex in the graph, sets of ancestors and descendants can be identified using the
above definitions.
A fork is a structure in the graph when one vertex has outgoing arrows pointing to two
vertices not adjacent to each other.
A v-structure (or immorality) is a set of three vertices, where one vertex is a child of the
two others that themselves are not adjacent.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Figure 3.1: Basic structures in causal graphs: chain, fork, v-structure
If Xk−i →Xk and Xk+1 →Xk, then Xk is called a collider relative to this path.
A mediator is a variable that “transmits” the effect of Xk to Xk+1 - it enables the indirect
effect of Xk on Xk+1.
When we are considering a path from Xk to Xl, a confounder is a variable influencing Xk
and Xl via a path not going through Xk.
20
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:29==
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Figure 3.2: Characteristic locations of vertices in a causal graph: collider, mediator and
confounder
D-separation
D-separation describes a situation when variables in set Z together “block” all paths from
X to Y , and what follows - that X and Y are independent on each other given Z. Such
“blocking” can be understood as stopping the flow of information (Pearl, 2009).
We use the following notation to describe d-separation: in a DAG G, we say that two
disjoint subsets of vertices A and B are d-separated by a third (also disjoint with A and
B) subset S if every path between vertices in A and B is blocked by S. We then write
A⊥⊥GB|S
Definition 8 (d-separation). (Peters et al., 2017) In a DAG G, a path between vertices
Xi and Xm is blocked by a set S (with neither Xi nor Xm in S) whenever there is a
node Xk, such that Xk is on the path Xi, . . . , Xk, . . . , Xm and one of the following two
possibilities holds:
1. Xk ∈S
Xk−1 →Xk →Xk+1
or Xk−1 ←Xk ←Xk+1
or Xk−1 ←Xk →Xk+1
2. neither Xk nor any of its descendants is in S and
Xk−1 →Xk ←Xk+1
To illustrate the first point of the definition, let us look at the example in Figure 3.3.
X1
X4
X3
X2
X5
X1⊥⊥GX2
X2⊥⊥GX4
X3⊥⊥GX4|{X1, X2}
{X1, X2}⊥⊥GX5|{X3, X4}
{X2, X3}⊥⊥GX4|{X1}
Figure 3.3: List of possible d-separations in a graph G
The second point of the definition can be intuitively understood by looking at the example
- if we know that the grass can be made wet either by rain or activated sprinklers, just
seeing the grass wet does not change our view on the relation of probabilities of the possible
two causes. They are independent events.
Association, Dependence and Causality
21
==PAGE:30==
wet grass
sprinklers on
rain
3.3.2
Causal graph properties
The following section introduces some properties relevant for discussing graphical causal
models. They assume existence of a graph G, which represents certain causal model M3.
It serves as background for defining assumptions for the learning environment in the later
sections.
Linearity
In linear structures every function FVj ∈F has a form FVj = c1 ∗X1 + · · · + cn ∗Xn.
Linearity of the models is frequently assumed in literature - they provide a benefit of
summarizing the strength of the causal relation with a single number (a path coeﬀicient).
They also make mediation analysis much easier, since the Equation 3.3 is true (Pearl &
Mackenzie, 2018).
Total Effect = Direct Effect + Indirect Effect
(3.3)
However, this assumption makes it impossible to model interactions between sets of vari-
ables (e.g. situation in which a chemical process needs not only substrates in suﬀicient
quantities, but also a catalyst to occur).
Markov condition
In the probabilistic causal models Markov condition applies to graphs and connected
observed distributions of variables when the d-separation of given variables by some set,
implies the independence of distributions of these variables conditioned on variables of the
separating set (A⊥⊥GB|C =⇒A⊥⊥B|C)Peters et al., 2017.
The property can be equivalently phrased as: Let us take a graph G and probability
distribution P over the vertices in V , generated by the causal structure represented by
G.
G and P satisfy the Causal Markov Condition iff for every vertex W ∈V , W is
independent of V −(descendants(W) ∪parents(W)) given parents(W) (Scheines et al.,
1993).
Faithfulness
Faithfulness is a powerful assumption, as it implies that any independence of variables
means that there is no directed causal path between them (i.e. only conditional indepen-
dence relations resulting from the Markov condition in the graph exist in the distribution).
While it is easy to construct examples of models which violate faithfulness, it is argued
that such situations occur extremely rarely in nature (based on empirical evidence) and,
at the same time, it is invaluable in reasoning about the model causal structure (Scheines
et al., 1993). Cancelling out occurs when a sum of effects on directed paths from Xi to Vj
is equal to 0. This can happen for all or some values in the range of Xi. Let us consider
a graph of a linear model in Figure 3.4 where a ∗b + c = 0. It then seems that Vj is
independent of Xi, which is not implied by the graph structure (Peters et al., 2017). For
probabilistic models, it is the other direction of the implication in Markov condition.
3The relationships between the graph and a causal model are discussed later
22
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:31==
Xi
Xk
Vj
a
c
b
Figure 3.4: Example of an unfaithful graph - given a linear model where a ∗b + c = 0.
The interventions on Xi will not change the value of Vj
Acyclicity
Cyclic causal relations can be frequently observed, for example in economy. The price
elasticity of demand describes how much the demand changes with the change of price
and can be modelled as a cyclic causal relation: the decrease in price of a good typically
causes the demand to rise and growing demand causes the price to decrease as well Pearl,
2009. The equations of price and demand implicitly carry an assumption that today’s price
are defined by yesterday’s price and demand. The solution to this system of equations
is an equilibrium state, provided that the context of both variables (i.e. other variables
which influence one of both of price and demand) remains stable. It is though a common
practice in literature to assume acyclic causal structure. One of the reasons for it is that
cyclic models cannot be analysed with probabilistic methods, because they express the
feedback mechanisms and implicitly require the existence of certain temporal aspect and
a concept of equilibrium (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018). Allowing cyclic relations changes the
behaviour of counterfactuals, as shown in (Halpern, 2000) - cycles in causal relations allow
for situations in which the structural equations in the model after an intervention do not
have a solution, or have multiple solutions, and therefore describing these models requires
a different language and axiomatization.
3.3.3
Mediation
Mediation occurs when a variable Xi influences Vj through some other variable(s). For
example, when a drug decreases the risk of heart attack by decreasing patients blood
pressure (indirect effect) and still has a beneficial effect, even if the pressure is elevated
by other means (direct effect; assuming there are no other unknown mediators).
An
important note is that when we have A being a cause of B and B a cause of C, B screens
of indirect causes (Scheines et al., 1993). For example, if a person takes a bus ride (A)
they get infected by a virus (B) and, as a result, develop symptoms of the disease (C),
the circumstances of getting infected are irrelevant for reasoning about the intensity of
symptoms.
When talking about direct effect, Pearl (2012) distinguishes Controlled Direct Effect
(CDE) and Natural Direct Effect (NDE) of X on Y with a mediator M. CDE is de-
fined for each value M = m 4 as a difference of probabilities of Y , when X is set to 1 and
to 0 (intervention). NDE is found by keeping the value of the mediator to its ’natural’
value (i.e. the one it would assume according to its structural function given a certain
value of X) and then manipulating X. It is an answer to a counterfactual questions of
”What would happen, had X changed its value”. NDE is a difference in probability of Y
when changing the value of X to 1 minus when X = 0. While CDE is definable in the do-
Calculus, to calculate NDE one needs to make additional assumptions and use covariates
to decompose the problem to a solvable form.
An interesting observation in the context of the current paper is that a special case, when
the effect of mediators can be unambiguously described by performing one intervention,
4where m is a constant
Association, Dependence and Causality
23
==PAGE:32==
is when the causal impacts on paths leading from given X1 to Xj are changing the Xj in
the same way, but with opposite direction, so that the changes cancel each other out (the
graph is not faithful). Example of such situation is presented in Figure 3.5.
F = {FX1 = c
FX2 = X1 + 1
FX3 = X1 −1
FX4 = X2 + X3}
X1
X2
X3
X4
X1 7→X2, X3
X2 7→X4
X3 7→X4
X4 7→∅
Figure 3.5: An example of a model, where the effect of paths through X2, X3 cancelling
each other out and its 7→F description.
24
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Algorithms for learning causal
structures
4.1
Learning scenario
Assume a situation when an agent is placed in unknown environment, where she can
observe some variables and perform experiments (i.e., interventions, as described in Section
2.2). The agent must herself decide which interventions to perform. Variables can take
values from their respective discrete domains (finite, but not necessarily binary).
Her goal is to learn the structure of causal relations between variables (meaning that
the agent must know which variables determine which, but knowing specific functions is
not required). This is equivalent to discovering the causal graph of the model. While in
strong intuitive sense the one-to-one correspondence of the causal dependence relations
in a recursive causal model to an directed acyclic graph is obvious, it is worthwhile to
formalise the concept.
Lemma 1. The causal graph of a recursive causal frame is a DAG.
Proof. ,→F defines a set of directed edges of a graph. Since a set of structural functions of
a recursive causal frame is recursive, the transitive closure of ,→F is a strict partial order.
Therefore, the graph induced by such frame is acyclic.
Observation 2. There is one-to-one correspondence between a causal frame and causal
graph induced by it.
Proof. The graph (S, F) shares the same set of vertices with a corresponding causal frame
⟨S, F⟩where S = ⟨U, V, R⟩by Definition 4.
From Definition 3 we have a unique way of obtaining ,→F dependant only on ⟨S, F⟩, which
defines the edges of the graph.
It is worth noting that the graph corresponds to the causal frame - it does not change with
the change of the valuation A for different states (i.e., models) in the same structure.
All considerations in this chapter are based on the following assumptions, unless explicitly
stated otherwise:
• the environment is fully observable (agent is aware of existence of all variables in the
model along with their domains, and can observe their values);
Association, Dependence and Causality
25
==PAGE:34==
• all causal relations are deterministic (i.e., value of a variable is dependant only on
values of the variables in its structural function);
• the causal structure is not subject to change;
• when an intervention is performed, all observed changes are a results of it (causal
context, meaning the values of exogenous variables, remains the same);
• there are no cyclic causal relations.
Thoft and Gierasimczuk (2023) propose an approach to learning causal structures of re-
stricted class of models. This section offers a similar algorithmic approach, lifting the
restrictions of only causal chains of length one and limitations of the number of arguments
in structural functions. The agent is still learning the structure of the causal model, not
the nature of structural functions (i.e. the existence of causal dependencies, not the exact
way the values of variables are defined).
The use of interventions, instead of observations, by Thoft and Gierasimczuk (2023) makes
it possible to conclude the structure of the causal model. However, in this case the atomic
Dependence Logic formulas are not used with their original meaning and become only
notation. The formula = (X1, . . . , Xn, Y ) is in fact used to describe the existence of a
structural function {X1, . . . , Yn} ,→F Y and it is assumed that {X1, . . . , Xn} is the set of
all and only variables causally affecting Y . The original meaning of the atomic Dependence
Logic formula is that the value of Y can be determined by the values of {X1, . . . , Xn} -
regardless of existence of causal relations or their direction. The formula also holds in
cases where Y is a constant or {X1, . . . , Xn} includes constants.
In case of longer causal chains this description becomes imprecise - we can for example
choose between the sets containing parents of Y , all of its ancestors or other descendants
of its ancestors. To illustrate this point, let us look at the causal structure as in Figure 4.1.
Then what we want to express is that FY = f(X2). However, we can see that for any set
of assignment (up to a one including all possible interventions on X1, X2 or X3) we will
have that formulas =(X2, Y ), =(X1, X2, Y ) and =(X1, X2, X3, Y ) hold in this set. This is
because in fact the value of Y is only directly causally influenced by X2, so manipulating
values of other variables does not impact the value of Y in a way that could falsify the
formula.
X1
X2
X3
Y
Figure 4.1: Sets of observations of interventions in this structure are of types =(X2, Y ),
=(X1, X2, Y ) and =(X1, X2, X3, Y )
4.2
Causal Discovery Algorithm for faithful models
This section proposes an algorithm capable of identifying structure of the causal frame
in an environment where any intervention on one variable will induce the changes on all
descendant variables (e.g., in a frame where values of endogenous variables are defined by
linear functions, when the effect of “cancelling out” of paths does not occur).
26
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:35==
To formalise this notion, let us define a class of graphs to which the algorithm can be
applied. The concept of faithfulness is adapted from Peters et al. (2017), where it was
defined in terms of distributions of random variables in probabilistic setting. We will first
define relation Xj 7→Vi, which will formalise the ancestor - descendant relation.
Definition 9 (Causal Ancestor and Descendant). Xj is a causal ancestor of a variable Yi
if and only if there exists a directed path Xj to Yi. We will denote it Xj 7→Yi. Then Yi
is a causal descendant of Xj.
We will use Xj 7→Y , where Y = Y1, . . . , Yn, to abbreviate a list of relations Xj 7→
Y1, . . . , Xj 7→Yn.
7→F will denote a set of all pairs (Xj, Yi) such that Xj 7→Yi.
Definition 10 (Faithfulness with respect to single variable intervention). Let us take a
causal frame ⟨S, F⟩, an arbitrary model of this frame M = ⟨S, F, a⟩, and a model resulting
from intervention on an arbitrary single variable in M: MXi=xi = ⟨S, FXi=xi, aF
Xi=xi⟩.
The causal frame is faithful with respect to a single intervention when for all the causal
descendants Xj of Xi we have that a(Xj)F ̸= aF
Xi=xi(Xj).
A causal descendant graph is a representation of all ancestor-descendant relations in a
model. It is a full transitive closure of a graph induced by ,→F relations.
Definition 11 (Causal Descendant Graph). A causal descendant graph is a graph induced
by a tuple (U ∪V, 7→F).
Algorithm 1 presents a procedure of constructing a causal descendant graph based on
performing interventions and observing their effects. The procedure of intervention is the
same as in Definition 6. The notation a(s) should be read as: a value that assignment a
assigns to the variable s (e.g. for a = {X1 = 1, X2 = 3}, a(X2) = 3).
An observation of an intervention is defined as follows:
Definition 12. Let us take a causal model ⟨S, F, a⟩and a model M−
→
X=−
→
x = ⟨S, F−
→
X=−
→
x , aF−
→
X=−
→
x ⟩,
which results from an intervention of setting the values of variable in −→
X to −→x . Then an
observation of the intervention is a tuple ⟨a, aF−
→
X=−
→
x ⟩.
The algorithm performs an intervention on each of the variables Xj and collects informa-
tion on the variables whose values were altered by the action. The latter step is equivalent
to adding directed edges from Xj to all its descendants.
Association, Dependence and Causality
27
==PAGE:36==
Algorithm 1 Causal Frame Discovery(X, a)
Input X (set of variables),
Input a (an assignment),
Output (X, 7→F) (a causal descendant graph)
1: 7→F= ∅
2: for Xj in X do
3:
a′ = intervene(Xj in a)
4:
for s in {X −Xj} do
5:
if a(s) ̸= a′(s) then
6:
7→F .add(Xj, s)
7:
end if
8:
end for
9: end for
10: return (X, 7→F)
This approach allows for distinguishing between forks and v-structures, as each of them
has a unique description of ancestral relations 7→F, see illustration in Figure 4.2.
X1
X2
X3
X1 7→X3
X2 7→X3
X3 7→∅
X1
X2
X3
X1 7→X2, X3
X2 7→∅
X3 7→∅
Figure 4.2: Descriptions of v-structure and fork topologies
Proposition 3. Let ⟨S, F, a⟩be a recursive causal model faithful with respect to single
variable intervention. Algorithm 1 outputs all and only pairs of variables X, Y such that
X 7→F Y in the causal frame ⟨S, F⟩.
Proof. As the algorithm returns the output after iterating through a finite number of
variables, it is guaranteed to terminate and return the result. Further, we will show that
the algorithm output 7→Alg
F
is equal to 7→F in ⟨S, F⟩, i.e., for every Xn, Xm ∈U ∪V we
have that Xn 7→Alg
F
Xm iff Xn 7→F Xm.
For the direction from left to right, in lines 7-8 we have that a variable Xm is added to
the descendant set of Xn for an intervention in assignment a on Xn: a(Xm) ̸= a′(Xm). As
from the definition of intervention we have that this inequality must be a result of change
of a value of at least one argument in a structural equations for Xm (because Xn ̸= Xm).
Hence, there must exist a directed path Xn →· · · →Xm and thus Xn 7→F Xm.
For the opposite, from the faithfulness with respect to single variable intervention we have
that an intervention on Xn causes a change in a value of all its descendants, including
28
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:37==
Xm. Then a(Xm) ̸= a′(Xm) and Xn 7→Xm is added to the algorithm output, so Xn 7→Alg
F
Xm.
The existence of direct effect of Xi on Vj (i.e.
Xi ,→Vj relation) cannot be
assessed using interventions on one variable in case when there exists a directed
path from Xi to Vj of length at least two.
Let us consider an example in Figure
4.3. If we want to explore the causal relations, we will perform an intervention on X1
and see changes in X2, X3.X4. However, in the setup when we are not measuring strength
of the effects, only their existence, it is not possible to prove or disprove the existence of
X1 ,→X4 relation. Every change only on X1 will induce a change on X4 whether or not
this relation exists.
This can be shown from the definition of intervention: if the intervention is performed
only on X1, we have that FX3 = f(X1, . . . ) (where the dots indicate other, unknown
direct causes). From an intervention on X3 we would get FX4 = g(X3, . . . ). Then by
transitivity we have that FX4 = f ◦g(X1). This can be easily extended to cases when
there exist different direct causes Xn, . . . , Xp of X3 and different direct causes Xr, . . . , Xw
of X4; in this case FX4 = (g(X1, Xn, . . . , Xp), Xr, . . . , Xw). Because of the assumption of
observability of intervention effects, we can conclude that X1 will induce a change on X4.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X1 7→X2, X3.X4
X2 7→∅
X3 7→X2, X4
X4 7→X2
X1
X2
X3
X4
Figure 4.3: The graph of ,→F relations (left) and the results of Algorithm 1 (right)
As an effect of mediation, the direct and indirect effects on Vj are indistinguishable with
one variable manipulation scenarios. The algorithm based on single interventions can only
asses whether a variable Vj is an ancestor of another variable, not whether it is a child of
it. Such a distinction would require interventions on multiple variables, as described in
Section 4.4.3.
4.3
Causal Discovery Algorithm for frames with interven-
tion with possible non-observable results
The problem of discovering causal relations with certainty in frames, where interventions
can affect other variables only in certain situations, is not a trivial one.
It adds the
additional dimensions of different possible interventions and the causal context of inter-
ventions (i.e. the same intervention can have different results, if the assignment oh which
it is performed is different).
This section presents an algorithm for discovering causal
relations when performing only one intervention at a time is allowed. The faithfulness
with respect to single variable intervention from the previous section is lifted and replaced
with a weaker assumption, that if there exists a causal relation, it can be observed for
some single variable intervention.
Let us take the causal frame presented in Table 4.4, where all variable ranges are {0, 1, 2}.
Association, Dependence and Causality
29
==PAGE:38==
F = {FX1, FX2, FX3 = const
FX4 =





2
if X1 + X2 + X3 = 6
1
if 5 ≥X1 + X2 + X3 ≥4
0
otherwise
FX5 = X4
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Figure 4.4: Structural functions and a graph describing a causal frame
Then we can see that when starting Algorithm 1 from an assignment a = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1),
we will only be able to discover a graph as below and the variables defining X4 will remain
unknown, regardless of the interventions done.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
One way to tackle this challenge is to introduce the set of all possible assignments, i.e.
these where exogenous variables take every possible combination of elements from their
domain and endogenous variables have values consistent with their structural functions.
Then intervening on every variable in all available ways in the different contexts gives
suﬀicient information to reason about the full structure of the causal frame.
Algorithm 2 Causal Frame Discovery(X, a)
Input X (set of variables),
Input C (set of all possible assignments),
Output (X, 7→F) (causal graph corresponding to the causal frame)
1: k = number of variables in X
2: 7→F= ∅
3: for each a in C do
4:
for j = 1, . . . , k do
5:
for each xj in R(Xj) −{Xj(a)} do
6:
a′ = intervene(Xj = xj in a)
7:
for s in {X −Xj} do
8:
if s(a) ̸= s(a′) then
9:
7→F .add((Xj, s))
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return (X, 7→F)
Definition 13. A set of all possible assignments C = {a1, a2, . . . , al} is a set where
• each assignment represents a unique assignment from R(U1) × R(U2) × · · · × R(Um)
and every such assignment is represented
30
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:39==
• for each assignment in C the endogenous variables take the values defined by F =
{FVj|Vj ∈V }
Coming back to the example from Figure 4.4, the set of all possible assignments is as in
Table 4.1. Then the algorithm will iterate through all the assignments in C and gradually
discover the edges in 7→F.
Assuming order of considered assignments as in the table,
performing interventions on a1 will uncover the relation X4 7→X5. Intervening on a2 will
not bring any new information. Then from a3 edges X1 7→X4, X2 7→X4, X1 7→X5,
X2 7→X5 will be inferred (as a side note, the two last edges are not parent-child relations
- this is a case when graphs obtained from ,→F and 7→F differ). Lastly, from a7 the agent
will learn X3 7→X4 and X3 7→X5. The rest of operations will not give the agent any
additional knowledge.
In this example, exploring interventions on as little as one assignment (for example a9) is
suﬀicient to learn all the relations in the causal frame. However, it is only by looking at
all assignments that the agent can be certain about this fact.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
a1
0
0
0
0
0
a2
0
0
1
0
0
a3
0
0
2
0
0
a4
0
1
0
0
0
a5
0
1
1
0
0
a6
0
1
2
0
0
a7
0
2
0
0
0
a8
0
2
1
0
0
a9
0
2
2
1
1
a10
1
0
0
0
0
a11
1
0
1
0
0
a12
1
0
2
0
0
a13
1
1
0
0
0
a14
1
1
1
0
0
a15
1
1
2
1
1
a16
1
2
0
0
0
a17
1
2
1
1
1
a18
1
2
2
1
1
a19
2
0
0
0
0
a20
2
0
1
0
0
a21
2
0
2
1
1
a22
2
1
0
0
0
a23
2
1
1
1
1
a24
2
1
2
1
1
a25
2
2
0
1
1
a26
2
2
1
1
1
a27
2
2
2
2
2
Table 4.1: Possible contexts C for a causal
frame described in Figure 4.4
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
a3
a3
a7
a1
a3
a3
a7
Figure 4.5: 7→F graph learned using Algo-
rithm 2 on assignments from Table 4.1. The
label on the arrows shows by intervention on
which assignment they could be learned.
Association, Dependence and Causality
31
==PAGE:40==
4.4
From 7→F to ,→F representation of the causal frame
The algorithms in the previous sections do not differentiate between the parent-child and
ancestor-descendant relations. The illustration of this problem is presented in Figure 4.6.
All of the edges represent 7→F edges discovered by the algorithm - a transitive closure
of the graph (U ∪V, ,→F). We can make additional conclusions about which edges must
minimally be present in the ,→F set to create the interventions results as these observed
while running Algorithm 1 or 2.
Overall, the 7→F edges can be divided into these which must be present also in ,→F (solid
lines) and the transitive closure of this set (i.e., 7→F edges which might correspond to either
,→F relations in the model, or express longer causal paths; dashed lines). An example is
presented in Figure 4.6.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X1 7→X2, X3, X4, X5
X2 7→X3, X4
X3 7→X4
X4 7→∅
X5 7→∅
X6 7→X3, X4
Figure 4.6: An example of a model graph, where ,→F relations are solid lines and the
transitive closure of this set 7→F are dashed; 7→F description obtained with Algorithm 1
or 2
4.4.1
Minimal certain graph
In some cases, it is possible to differentiate ancestor-descendant relations including a medi-
ating variable and parent-child relations by analysing the descendants sets (DXj) obtained
using Algorithm 1 or 2 for each variable and looking at how they relate to each other. In
other words, to compare {DXj, Xj} set inclusion in the descendants set of other variables.
To illustrate this, let us look at the situation where we have a hidden causal structure and
the output of the Algorithm 1 as presented in Figure 4.7.
X1
X2
X3
X1 7→X2, X3
X2 7→X3
X3 7→∅
Figure 4.7: Example of a hidden causal structure (i.e. a graph (X, ,→F)) and the output
of the Causal Discovery algorithm corresponding to it.
Then, looking at the algorithm output we can deduce the following about the hidden
(X, ,→F) graph:
• X3 is the only descendant of X2, therefore they must be connected by a parent-child
relation (there cannot be a variable on the path between X2 and X3 as it would also
be a descendant of X2);
32
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:41==
• X2 is present in the descendants set of only X3, therefore X2 must be a parent of
X3 (argument analogical to the above);
• X3 is present in the descendants set of X1, however with the current information we
cannot conclude if there is parent-child relation between them. The effect of X1 on
X3 could also only be mediated by X2, or both mediated by X2 and direct.
To generalize this line of reasoning, we will denote a set of a given variable and its descen-
dants - {DXj, Xj} - by ˆ
Xj. The goal is to find ˆ
Xi such that it is the minimal superset of
ˆ
Xj, i.e., such set that contains all elements of ˆ
Xj and the fewest other variables possible.
This guarantees that the parents of a variable Xj are found, as any further ancestors
(which could also be parents at the same time) would also have their children in their
descendants sets. In this way we can find the pairs of variables which must be connected
with parent-child relations, in order for the graph to be consistent with the intervention
observations made. These are the causal relationships which minimally exist in a world
that gives the qualitative changes observed. A graph whose edges correspond to these
certain parent-child relations will be called minimal certain graph.
Definition 14 (A minimal certain graph). A minimal certain graph is a subgraph of both
(X, 7→F) and (X, ,→F) that consists the minimal number of edges that make this graph
consistent with the observed effects of interventions.
Every minimal superset inclusion relation represents an edge in the (X, ,→F) graph the
existence of which we can confirm with certainty. The existence of the remaining edges in
(X, ,→F) is not decidable within described framework with single variable intervention.
The graph is minimal also in a sense that it contains only conclusions which can be
made after analysing the results of the simplest interventions, changing a value of one
variable. More information can be obtained after preforming more complex interventions,
as described in the following sections.
4.4.2
Algorithm for finding the minimal certain graph
The procedure for finding the minimal certain graph is described in Algorithm 3. It works
in a following way: for every variable Xj and the set of its descendants (for brevity denoted
Xj 7→DXj), where DXj is not an empty set (i.e. Xj has causal influence on at least one
variable in the model), we assume that an arbitrary variable is a child of Xj. Then for other
variables in DXj we check whether the sets including this variable and its descendants are
a proper subset of a set consisting of an assumed child of Xj and its descendants (case 1)
or not (case 2). In case 1, we conclude that this variable is not necessarily a child of Xj,
as there is at least one other variable which can be in the causal chain between them (see
Figure 4.8). Then we can break the loop and move on to next element of DXj. In case
2 we check whether the variable is a descendant of any assumed child XCk. If it is, we
know that XCk is not in fact a necessary child of Xj and remove it from CXj. When we
have checked all of the known children and isChildOfChild variable is still equal to 0, it
means that no descendants of Xi were in the set and therefore it is necessarily a child of
Xj. After performing this procedure on all variables , we arrive at the minimal certain
graph.
Association, Dependence and Causality
33
==PAGE:42==
Algorithm 3 Minimal Certain Graph(7−→F)
Input X (set of variables),
Input 7→F (set of edges of the causal descendant graph),
Output (X, 7−→F) (the minimal certain graph)
1: for Xj 7→DXj in 7→F where DXj ̸= ∅do
2:
CXj = ∅(certain children of Xj, elements denoted CXj = XC1, . . . , XCp )
3:
for Xi in DXj do
4:
isChildOfChild = 0
5:
for XCk in CXj −Xi (every known child of Xj, excluding current element) do
6:
if ˆXi ⊂ˆXCk then
7:
isChildOfChild = isChildOfChild + 1
8:
continue
9:
else
10:
if ˆXCk ⊂ˆ
Xi then
11:
if XCk is in CXj then
12:
CXj.remove(XCk)
13:
end if
14:
end if
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
if isChildOfChild = 0 then CXj.add(Xi)
18:
end if
19:
end for
20:
7−→F.add(Xj 7→CXj)
21: end for
22: return 7−→F
Xj
XCk
Xi
Figure 4.8:
Case 1:
ˆXi ⊂ˆXCk - Xi is not a
child of Xj in the min-
imal certain graph.
Figure 4.9:
Case 2 when
ˆXCk
⊂
ˆ
Xi
-
The
edge
(Xj, XCk) in the minimal cer-
tain graph is removed (red)
and (Xi, XCk) added (dotted).
Xj
Xi
XCk
Xj
XC1 . . . XCk
Xi
Figure
4.10:
End
of
the
loop over potential children
when isChildOfChild = 0 -
the edge (Xj, Xi) (dotted) is
added to the minimal certain
graph.
4.4.3
Algorithm for verifying the existence of edges ,→F and its applica-
tion to (X, 7→F) representation of the causal frame
To verify the existence of a given directed edge (Xi, Xj) in a causal graph it is necessary
to find a situation in which the change in in the value of Xi causes a change in a value of
Xj and no other changes in the model (according to Definition 3).
In the simplest case (when both (1) there exists only one directed causal path between Xi
and Xj and it is a parent-child relation, and (2) there are no outgoing edges from Xj), the
intervention on Xi itself is suﬀicient. In any other case, all directed causal paths between
Xi and Xj must be blocked to verify whether an intervention on Xi affects Xj directly.
34
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:43==
Clearly, the existence of a parent-child relation between two vertices can only be considered
in the context of some graph representation. Algorithm 4 verifies the existence of an edge
between Xi and Xj, provided that it is executed on a graph whose edges are a superset of
edges in the (X, ,→F) graph. This is consistent with the idea of learning as limiting the
possibilities and converging to a causal structure representation fulfilling the minimality
condition.
The principle of working of the algorithm is derived directly from the direct causal effect
definition.
The aim is to find a situation where values of only two variables change -
therefore they are connected by an edge in (X, ,→F). In practise, this means “blocking”
values of all variables which might be on causal paths between Xi and Xj, and changing
the value of Xi, to verify its direct impact on Xj.
Algorithm 4 Check if an edge (Xi, Xj) is in ,→F
Input Edge (Xi, Xj),
Input Graph G = (X, E) (a representation of knowledge of the causal graph, where
E is a superset of edges in ,→F),
Output 1 (edge is in ,→F) or 0
1: Find directed paths Xi →· · · →Xj of length at least 2 in G. Call this set of paths P
2: Find a set of last vertices on paths in P before Xj. Call this set of vertices PPA
3: a′ = aF−−→
PP A=−−→
pP A,Xi=x′
i
(where a(−−→
PPA) = −−→
pPA and a(Xi) ̸= x′
i)
4: if a′(Xj) ̸= a(Xj) then
5:
return 1
6: else
7:
return 0
8: end if
When no initial representation is given, the algorithm can be executed on a complete
digraph with variables corresponding to the ones in hidden causal structure to be learned.
Let us look at the example of such a graph in Figure 4.11 and check whether (X1, X2) is
an edge in the (X, ,→F) graph. The directed paths from X1 to X2 are: X1 →X3 →X2,
X1 →X4 →X2, X1 →X3 →X4 →X2 and X1 →X4 →X3 →X2, therefore the set
PPA = {X3, X4}. Then we perform an intervention keeping X3 and X4 at the value as
in the current assignment and changing the value of X1. Subsequently, we check whether
after an intervention the value of X2 is the same as in the original assignment. If it is
different, we conclude that (X1, X2) is an edge in (X, ,→F).
X1
X2
X3
X4
Figure 4.11: Example of a complete digraph with 4 vertices.
Association, Dependence and Causality
35
==PAGE:44==
After running the Algorithm 4 on all edges, we can get the (X, ,→F) graph.
With no information about the structure of the graph, the verification of the existence of all
direct causal relations is a complex task (imagine for example performing an intervention
on one variable and discovering it has n descendants; then we need to perform interventions
on n −1 variables for each of the n descendants). However, the number and complexity of
interventions can be significantly decreased if some initial assumptions about the causal
structure are made. Furthermore, the procedure can be simplified by performing additional
reasoning based on the assumption of acyclicity.
This is a case when we have found the (X, 7→F) graph corresponding to the hidden causal
structure, as it certainly contains all the edges of the hidden causal graph. Then to verify
existence of an edge in the (X, ,→F) graph we can block all the causal paths from Xi to
Xj effectively, as we know that the the set of edges 7→F is a superset of ,→F.
Additionally, the with the help of Algorithm 3 we can analytically conclude the existence
of some edges in (X, ,→F) without the need to perform any interventions.
Therefore, the Algorithm 4 can be used on all the edges which are in set 7→F but not in
7−→F to get a graph identical to the hidden causal graph. A procedure is presented in
Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Find the causal graph
Input X (set of variables),
Input 7→F (set of edges of the causal descendant graph),
Input 7−→F (set of initially known edges of (X, ,→F))
where X, 7→and 7−→correspond to the same causal model M
Output (X, ,→F) (causal graph)
1: E = 7→F \ 7−→F (set of edges to verify)
2: ,→F = 7−→F
3: for (Xi, Xj) ∈E do
4:
if (Check if an edge (Xi, Xj) is in ,→F = 1) then
5:
,→F .add((Xi, Xj))
6:
end if
7: end for
8: return (X, ,→F)
4.5
Discussion and algortihms for learning parametrised frames
Let us now assume an agent who possesses some meta-knowledge of the world where
she is located. It could be the maximum length of causal chains, maximum number of
variables which directly affect another variable or the maximum number of variables that
one variable can directly affect. This section explores the possibility of modifying the
Algorithm 1 accounting for these changes, with the intention to limit the computation
time.
Maximum number of edges outgoing from Xj in a causal graph
Algorithm 3
can be run on a specific node, to check for the outgoing causal relations. However, using
it at intermediate steps of causal graph discovery would not be beneficial in terms of time
complexity. As we cannot prove or disprove the correspondence of a given 7→relation to
a ,→relation in the causal graph without knowing the whole causal structure we cannot
36
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:45==
stop the exploration at any point, even when the number of 7→relations exceeds assumed
maximum.
However, at the end of the learning process additional conclusions can be made, based on
the obtained descendant graph (output of Algorithm 1) and the minimal certain graph
(Algorithm 3). Then, in case when the number of edges outgoing from Xj in the min-
imal certain graph is equal to the maximum parameter, it can be inferred that all the
other outgoing edges in descendant graph are not direct causal relations. An example is
illustrated in Figure 4.12.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Figure 4.12: Solid arrows represent 7−→edges, dashed - 7→edges not in 7−→. When the
parameter value is 2, we can conclude that the dashed edges are not direct causal relations.
Furthermore, additional reasoning can be done and used for limiting the number of in-
terventions needed to disambiguate direct and indirect causal relations. In the example
above with the parameter value 3, the agent would only have to use Algorithm 4 once to
check which edges are in the causal graph (instead of two times without the parameter).
This is because there is an exclusive alternative between the edges (X1, X4) and (X1, X5).
However, that would require additional knowledge representation and the ability to reason
about possible alternatives.
List of all exogenous variables
As the principle of learning from interventions is
discovering descendants of each variable, the knowledge of exogenous variables does not
simplify it any way - the number of needed interventions remains the same, because the
agent still needs to intervene on all of them to observe the outgoing relations.
List of all variables with no outgoing relations (i.e., sink nodes in the graph)
Knowing this parameter limits the number of needed interventions (if it is greater than
0). In this case the algorithms can assign Xj 7→∅to the variables which have no causal
effect on other variables without performing the interventions on them.
Maximum length of causal chains
To make use of this information, the order of single
variable interventions can be modified. This can be achieved by using a recursive algorithm
discovering trees which are subgraphs of the causal descendant graph.
The algorithm
would start with an arbitrary variable, perform interventions on it and then proceed with
known descendant in a recursive manner. It would keep track of the maximum length
of the causal chain and terminate when the value reaches the parameter. When the the
algorithm terminates, it considers the last vertex explored (as it is known not to have
any outgoing relations, so Xj 7→∅). The proposition of the above described procedure is
presented in Algorithm 6, which is a modification of Algorithm 1.
Association, Dependence and Causality
37
==PAGE:46==
Algorithm 6 Causal Frame Discovery with p(Xj, X, 7→F, Exp, c, a, p)
Input Xj (starting variable),
Input X (set of variables),
Input Exp (set of explored variables),
Input c (length of the explored chain),
Input a (an assignment),
Input p (parameter - max length of chain),
Output 7→F (structure of the causal frame)
1: if Xj ∈Exp then
2:
return
3: else if c = p then
4:
Exp.add(Xj)
5:
return
6: else
7:
a′ = intervene(aF
aXj=x′
j )
8:
for s in {X −Xj} do
9:
if a(s) ̸= a′(s) then
10:
7→F .add(Xj, s)
11:
DXj.add(s)
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
Exp.add(Xj)
15:
if DXj ̸= ∅then
16:
for Xk in DXj do
17:
Call Causal Frame Discovery with p(Xk, X, 7→F, Exp, c + 1, a, p)
18:
end for
19:
end if
20: end if
To get the full structure of the causal frame, the procedure must me repeated until the set
of explored variables is equal to sat of all variables in the model. To make this possible
the algorithm must also record information about explored vertices. Algorithm 7 presents
a way to use the algorithm is presented (notation as in Algorithm 6).
Algorithm 7 Procedure for Full Causal Frame Discovery with p(Xj, X, 7→F, Exp, c, a, p)
7→F = ∅
Exp = ∅
while Exp ⊂X do
Xj = any element of X
Causal Frame Discovery with p(Xj, X, 7→F, Exp, c, a, p)
end while
38
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Learning with Limited
Observability
Chapter 4 presented algorithms which allow the agent to gain the full knowledge of the
causal structure of the world, if the agent has an unlimited capacity to observe the variables
and their values, and perform any required interventions. However, this does not apply to
many real life applications. In this case, the agent should still be able to use the possessed
knowledge and realise the uncertainty of the unknown parts of the model.
In the considerations of this paper, observability can be understood twofold: (1) the agent
can observe the existence of a c variable and (2) additionally, the agent is able to observe
the value of this variable. In this chapter we are concerned with situations when there
may exist variables, the existence of which the agent is not aware of (the assumption is
that when she knows there exists an Xi she also has epistemic access to its value).
5.1
Existing approaches to limited observability in causal
learning
5.1.1
Epistemic Causal Models
The observability in the second sense and a way in which an agent can learn the values
of variables, which are not observable is described by Barbero et al. (2023). The paper
provides a logic without the ’no-learning’ axiom (which says that if the agent knows a
formula φ after an intervention, she also knows that φ will result from the intervention
beforehand, i.e.,[−→
X = −→x ]Kφ
=⇒
K[−→
X = −→x ]φ). As a result, logic with observables
LPAKC enables expressing a situation in which agent learns the values of hidden variables
after performing an intervention (e.g. when an agent pushes the button on a flashlight
and sees it does not light up, she can deduce that the battery is empty).
However, reasoning in LPAKC assumes that the agent has a full and correct causal model
of the world. She can only learn the valuations of the propositions, not the causal relations
between them.
5.1.2
Causal Kripke Models
Causal Kripke Models (Ding et al., 2023) provide a way to model agent’s uncertainty and
offer a deduction system to reason in such situation. They are based on the definition
of actual causality introduced by Halpern (2016) and enrich the axiomatization to modal
logic, which enables expressing uncertainty, temporal aspect, possibility, and knowledge.
They capture the idea of an agent who considers that an event might happen or has some
Association, Dependence and Causality
39
==PAGE:48==
information about the world may be a causes for her choices. For example, it is possible
to model a situation in which an agent has two roads from A to B to choose from. She
knows that snow on the road slows down the traﬀic, and therefore wants to avoid a snowy
road. She learns that road1 is snowy and chooses road2. In this scenario the state of
road2 does not change her behaviour. This framework allows the agent not to know the
current or future values of variables and be aware of this fact. Moreover, this language is
capable of expressing the suﬀicient cause.
Causal Kripke Models allow also for expressing uncertainty about the causal structure of
the world. This is encoded in the function F which assigns to each endogenous variable
Xi in a world Wj a map fXi,wj : R((U ∪V ) × W) −{(Xi, wj)}) →R(Xi, wj). Thus, the
function can map different values to the variable Xi in different worlds, even though the
causal context in these worlds can be the same.
The worlds in Causal Kripke Model can stand for different causal contexts, moments in
time, sets of structural functions, causal models obtained by interventions, or combina-
tions of these. For this reason, while the logic is very expressive, the complexity of the
model explodes easily and therefore it is diﬀicult to implement in artificial intelligence
setting. Reasoning about a direct cause requires analysis of different possible scenarios.
The language in the form presented by Ding et al. (2023) does not allow for learning,
understood as removing accessibility relations.
5.1.3
Causal and interventional suﬀiciency
When trying to model the surrounding world humans follow an implicit notion of relevance
- when trying to predict or explain given phenomenon, we instinctively choose the relevant
factors to consider and disregard the rest of the observable context of the situation. These
considerations get more complicated when it comes to quantifying the causal effects of
different factors. An example of this is Simpson paradox - it appears when there is a
hidden confounding variable influencing multiple variables we believe are independent, as
described by Peters et al. (2017). In a kidney stone treatment research two treatments (A
and B) were administered to patients and recovery rates compared. Overall, treatment
B had higher recovery rate. However, when another variable is added to the picture - a
classification of the kidney stone size to small or large - treatment A has better results in
both groups. After careful analysis it becomes clear that treatment A was assigned more
often to patients with large kidney stones, whose recovery rate is lower in case of both
treatments. Therefore the aggregated results are biased. This example illustrates the need
to develop some measure of what is relevant for the model.
Peters et al. (2017) proposes two concepts:
Definition 15 (Causal Suﬀiciency). A set of variables X is usually said to be causally
suﬀicient if there is no hidden common cause [i.e. confounder] C /∈X that is causing more
than one variable in X.
This definition corresponds to an intuitive sense of a part of the environment, which can
be modeled together. Then all variables at the beginning of causal chains in the model
are independent and can be perceived as exogenous.
Further, a weaker concept of interventional suﬀiciency is defined. It stems from practical
analysis of observational and interventional variable distributions.
Definition 16 (Interventional Suﬀiciency). We call a set X of variables interventionally
suﬀicient if there exists an SCM over X that cannot be falsified as an interventional model;
that is, it induces observational and intervention distributions that coincide with what we
40
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:49==
observe in practice.
Existence of hidden confounders causes significant problems in the SCM parameters esti-
mation. To overcome this challenge, instrumental variables are used. These are variables
independent on a hidden C, affecting Y only through X, and whose values can be mea-
sured. They are used to differentiate between the effects of X on Y and the ones of C on
both variables, as shown in Figure 5.1. The identification of an instrumental variable Z
requires domain knowledge and use of information from outside the model.
C
X
Y
Z
Figure 5.1: The use of an instrumental variable Z
5.2
Functional causal suﬀiciency
In the context of an agent exploring the causal structure of the world, it is interesting
to consider how an agent can realise that the variables set in her model is not causally
suﬀicient.
Let us consider a model with a sets of exogenous variables U and endogenous variables V ,
and X = U ∪V . Then the task is to verify the existence of a variable C /∈X such that
there exists a directed path C →· · · →Xi, and C →· · · →Xj which does not include Xi.
In the framework based on learning from interventions, as described in Chapter 4, it is
not possible to discover such variable C. This is because the interventions in this context
only reveal the descendants of a given variable - there is no mechanism to follow the causal
chains in the other direction or notice insuﬀiciency of modeled relations to determine the
value of a variable.
While the concepts of variable set suﬀiciency described in the previous section come from
an idea of measuring the strength of causal relations, this problem can also be approached
from a perspective of functional determination of variable values in a deterministic domain.
Here the atomic formulas of Dependence Logic come handy. Let us look at the motivating
example from Väänänen (2007): it describes a lamp which only gives light if it is plugged
in and the switch is on (which can be drawn as in Figure 5.2).
switch
light
plug
Figure 5.2: A causal structure suﬀicient to determine the light variable value
Observational data does not give us information about the causal structure of the world.
However, this data together with knowledge of the causal structure can help us identify
the situations in which the variables set is insuﬀicient for determining the value of some
endogenous variable in a given context. For example, if we assume that the switch position
is the only variable influencing the light, and then observe situations where switch =
1, light = 1 and switch = 1, light = 0, we can clearly see that the assumption was
incorrect and there is some other variable affecting the light. Therefore, the dependence
logic formulas =(X1, . . . , Xn, Vi), whose meaning is that the value of the variable Vi can be
Association, Dependence and Causality
41
==PAGE:50==
determined using the values of X1, . . . , Xn only, can be used to discover variables missing
in the model. Functional causal suﬀiciency is a generalisation of this concept.
Definition 17 (Functional causal suﬀiciency). A set of variables X is functionally causally
suﬀicient in light of observed evidence if for every endogenous variable Vi ∈X the formula
=(parents of Vi, Vi) holds true in all observed assignments, excluding the ones where the
intervention was performed on Vi.
Note that the definition only mentions the endogenous variables, as exogenous ones are
determined by factors outside the model and therefore the formula with empty parents
set, =(Ui), would not be valid, as the exogenous variables are not constants.
Furthermore, it must be noted that it is not possible to empirically prove that a given
variable set is functionally causally suﬀicient in general, without the assumption that
ranges of all variables are known and all their combinations were observed. In all other
cases, the functional causal suﬀiciency only applies to gathered evidence. There can exist
an unobserved assignment falsifying the formula. However, it is possible to conclude when
the set of variables is not functionally causally suﬀicient for some variable. Because of the
Markov condition for the causal graphs, we know an endogenous variable is determined
fully by the values of its parents. If in our observed assignments it cannot be, it means
that one or more parents are missing in the variables set. The procedure checking whether
observed assignments show that the model is not functionally causally suﬀicient for Vi is
illustrated in Algorithm 8.
Algorithm 8 (Check functional causal suﬀiciency PA(Vi), Vi, A)
Input PA(Vi) = P1, . . . , Pn (known parents of Vi),
Input A = a1, . . . , ak (set of observed assignments with no intervention on Vi),
1: A = remove duplicates(A)
2: for each ai, aj such that ai(PA(Vi)) = aj(PA(Vi)) = p1, . . . , pn do
3:
if ai(Vi) ̸= aj(Vi) then
4:
return There exists an unknown parent of Vi
5:
Terminate
6:
end if
7: end for
8: return The collected evidence does not prove presence of an unknown parent of Vi
To illustrate how the algorithm works, let us imagine a situation, when a person knows
that her stress level and coffee consumption influence whether or not she sleeps well. Then
she wonders if there are any other relevant factors. She collects the observations of these
three variables over the days (for simplicity, let us assume all of them are in range {0, 1}).
The results (already after removing identical assignments) are presented in Table 5.1.
stress
coffee
sleep quality
a1
0
0
1
a2
1
0
1
a3
1
1
0
a4
1
1
1
Table 5.1: Observations of three variables over the days, with duplicates removed.
Let us then run the algorithm for PA(Vi) = {stress, coffee}, Vi = sleep quality, A =
42
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:51==
{a1, a2, a3, a4}.
The only pair ai, aj such that ai(PA(Vi)) = aj(PA(Vi)) = p1, . . . , pn
is a3, a4 with ai(PA(Vi)) = aj(PA(Vi)) = {1, 1}.
We have that a3(sleep quality) ̸=
a4(sleep quality) (0 ̸= 1), thus there exists an unknown parent of sleep quality.
5.3
Adding new variables to the model
Let us picture a situation where an agent already possesses a representation of the causal
structure of the world in a form of a DAG. Then, she learns about existence of a new
variable, which she is able to observe and manipulate. The question arises, how to in-
corporate the new variable into the causal graph using interventions. This task can be
divided to sub-tasks: finding parents and children of the newly added variable Z, and
removing relations between do not have an edge between them after variable Z is added.
Adding new variables to the model may be perceived as adding “higher resolution” - many
real world problems can be meaningfully represented at different levels of details. For
example, physical phenomena can be expressed with infinitely many observable variables,
so the choice of resolution is to be decided by the researcher (Peters et al., 2017).
As performing interventions on single variables in the causal model reveals only ancestor-
descendant relations, it is necessary to use more complex interventions. This allows for
blocking non-direct causal paths and finding the parent-child relations.
Let us consider a simple example of a causal DAG and a new variable Z, as illustrated in
Figure 5.3. To position the variable in the graph, we might follow the steps
1. Perform an intervention on Z, to find the set of descendants of it (DZ) [Alg. 9, 2:7].
Then, if a descendant Xi of Z has at least one parent in DZ, check whether it is a
child of Z by fixing the value of all such parents and performing an intervention on
Z. [Alg. 9, 8:14]
2. Because of acyclicity of the graph we know that the descendants of Z cannot be its
parents. For every variable in the graph not in DZ, let us keep the values of all its
children, which are not in DZ, fixed and intervene on Xi. Then by seeing a change
(or lack of it) on Z, we can assess whether Xi is a parent of Z [Alg. 9, 15:20].
3. It might be the case that some edge Pi →Cj in the graph before adding Z should be
replaced with a path Pi →Z →Cj (i.e. the effect of Pi on Cj in only transmitted
by Z). To check for such cases we can find pairs of parents and children of Z which
are connected by an edge, fix the value of Z and all of the other parents of Cj, and
change the value of Pi, to verify whether there exists an edge Pi →Cj.1 [Alg. 9,
21:28]
Note that assignment a contains all the variables of the underlying causal models (including
these not known to the agent). This is why it is possible to read the value of Z from it,
once agent is able to observe it.
1We cannot assume that the edge Pi →Cj in the original graph was the only directed path between
these vertices. For this reason we must fix all the parents of Cj.
Association, Dependence and Causality
43
==PAGE:52==
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Z
(a) Variable Z has an unkown position in the ca-
sual graph.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Z
(b) Adding edges from Z to its children.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Z
(c) Adding edges from parents of Z to Z.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Z
(d) Removing edges not present in the causal
graph with Z.
Figure 5.3: The original graph G with variable Z, followed by the results after each step
of the algorithm
44
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:53==
Algorithm 9 Supplementing DAG G with a variable Z
Input G (DAG),
Input Z = z (variable to be placed in the graph and its value in a),
Input M (underlying causal model M = ⟨S, F, a),
Output GZ (DAG including Z)
1: DZ = ∅(set of descendants of Z), GZ = G
2: a′ = intervene(aF
Z=z′) where z ̸= z′
3: for s in X \ Z do
4:
if a(s) ̸= a′(s) then
5:
DZ.add(s)
6:
end if
7: end for
8: for Xi in DZ do
9:
if parents(Xi) ∩DZ ̸= ∅then
10:
a′ = intervene(aF
P1=p1,...,Pn=pn,Z=z′) (where P1, . . . , Pn are the parents of Xi in
DZ)
11:
if a′(Xi) ̸= a(Xi) then
12:
GZ.add(Z →Xi)
13:
end if
14:
end if
15: end for
16: for Xi in X \ DZ do
17:
a′ = intervene(aF
C1=c1,...,Cn=cn,Xi=x′
i) (where C1 = c1, . . . , Cn = cn are all children
of Xi not in DZ and x′
i ̸= a(Xi))
18:
if a(Z) ̸= a′(Z) then
19:
GZ.add(Xi →Z)
20:
end if
21: end for
22: for Pi in parents(Z) do
23:
for Ci in children(Z) ∩children(Pi) do
24:
a′ = intervene(aF
P1=p′
1,PCi1=pCi1,...,PCin=pCin,Z=z) (where PCi1, . . . , PCin are par-
ents of Ci)
25:
if a(Ci) = a′(Ci) then
26:
GZ.remove(Pi →Ci)
27:
end if
28:
end for
29: end for
30: return GZ
Association, Dependence and Causality
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 6
Learning with Limited
Interventions
For an agent in an unknown environment, it is important to know what the results of her
actions might be. This enables avoiding danger and actions bringing disastrous results. It
also allows for planning actions aimed at a defined result. In a framework considered in
this paper, a goal can be defined as a change of the value of a given variable.
Let us imagine a situation when an agent enters an unknown environment and is only able
to perform a limited number of interventions. It is assumed that the world is a hidden
causal model, as in Definition 2. The aim of the agent is to obtain a representation of the
causal structure of the model as close to the reality as possible. In the limit, the plausible
causal structure becomes equal to the known causal structure and agent is sure that all
and only known relations exist.
While in the previous chapters the agent was starting with a graph with no edges, here
she assumes that all the edges might exist and tries to eliminate the ones which do not.
The agents encodes the knowledge of the causal structure of the world as a causal DAG.
At the beginning, the agent assumes that all causal dependencies are plausible. When
she observes results of an intervention, she becomes certain of the causal dependencies
confirmed by the intervention effects.
To formalise this idea, let us define plausible relations and the way in which the agent
stores her state of knowledge of the causal structure of the world.
Definition 18 (Plausible causal relation). Xi is a plausible causal ancestor of Xj, if an
agent considers it possible that some intervention on a variable Xi in some context −→
U = −→u
will result in a change of a value of Xj. The will denote such plausible causal relation
Xi 7→P Xj.
7→P will denote a set of all pairs (Xi, Xj) such that Xi 7→P Xj in the agent’s representation
of the model.
Definition 19 (Plausible causal graph). Let us take an underlying hidden causal model
M = ⟨S, F, A⟩, where S = ⟨U, V, R⟩. Let X be a set of variables X ⊆U ∪V . A plausible
causal structure of M is a tuple (X, 7→F, 7→P )1. It can be interpreted as a graph with
vertices X and two sets of edges: 7→F and 7→P .
1where 7→F abbreviates the set of all causal descendant relations, see Definition 9
Association, Dependence and Causality
47
==PAGE:56==
The relations are not plausible, when the agent has evidence supporting the fact that they
do not exist. The method of disproving the existence of causal relations varies with the
properties of the model: the simplest case among deterministic models is a model faithful
with respect to single variable intervention. Then every intervention brings conclusive
evidence about existence or nonexistence of the relations.
Further description of this
situation and the algorithm for knowledge update is presented in Section 6.2. When a
model does not have the faithfulness property, agent can be certain of observed relations,
but cannot exclude the possibility that there exists a relation which is only observable in
another causal context or by performing a different intervention.
At any point in time, the agent has knowledge of some plausible causal structure. In a
scenario when the agent is aware of existence of some variables X ⊆U ∪V and their
values, but does not have any knowledge of the causal structure, all relations are plausible
and none are known, in other words:
1. set 7→P consists of pairs (Xi, Xj) for all Xi, Xj ∈X such that Xi ̸= Xj
2. 7→F= ∅
Lemma 4. Given a plausible causal structure ⟨X, 7→F, 7→P ⟩, the edges in 7→F are a subset
of edges in 7→P .
Proof. This statement is equivalent to: there cannot exist an edge (Xi, Xj) in 7→F, which
is not in 7→P . If this was the case, the agent would have observed evidence for Xi 7→F Xj
and evidence that the relation Xi 7→F Xj does not exist, which is a contradiction.
6.1
Learning as eliminating plausible relations
With learning, the sets 7→P and 7→F gradually converge, in some cases becoming the same.
To illustrate this, let us imagine a simple causal model with two variables, where X1 is
exogenous and FX2 = f(X1). The variables are observable and manipulable to the agent.
In the beginning, she considers that either X1 causally impacts X2, X2 causally impacts
X1, or there is no relation between them.
X1
X2
?
?
Then, she performs an intervention on X1 and as an effect sees a change in the value of
X2. Therefore, she knows that X1 causally impacts X2. Because of the recursive nature
of the model, she can deduce that X2 cannot causally impact X1. Therefore, the agent
arrives at a causal descendant graph identical to the one induced by the hidden model.
X1
X2
On the other hand, let us imagine a causal model with three variables forming a fork. The
model is not assumed to be faithful with respect to single variable intervention, and the
agent has access (to observe and manipulate) to variables X2, X3.
Then the agent must then perform all possible interventions on X2 and X3 in each possible
causal context to rule out the existence of the two relations she considers possible (see
Figure 6.1).
48
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:57==
X1
X2
X3
X2
X3
?
?
Figure 6.1: Causal structure of the hidden model (left) and the representation of it that
the agent has (right).
6.2
Algorithm for plausible causal structure update in a
model faithful with respect to single variable interven-
tion
Knowing the limitations of causal discovery through interventions, it is beneficial to equip
the agent with mechanisms to maximize the learning from each intervention she can ob-
serve.
Let us assume a recursive model M which is faithful with respect to single variable in-
tervention. Then after performing an intervention on Xi and seeing its results (or just
observing the results of an intervention on a known variable), the agent can update her
knowledge in a way presented in Algorithms 10.
Algorithm 10 Plausible Causal Structure Update(X, 7→F, 7→P , Xi, a, a′)
Input X (set of variables),
Input 7→F (edges of the causal descendant graph),
Input 7→P (edges of the plausible causal relations graph),
Input Xi ∈X (variable on which an intervention was performed),
Input a (assignment before the intervention),
Input a′ (assignment after the intervention)
1: DXi = ∅(known descendants of Xi)
2: for Xj in {X −Xi} do
▷add relations to 7→F
3:
if s(a) ̸= s(a′) then
4:
7→F .add(Xi 7→F Xj)
5:
DXi.add(Xj)
6:
end if
7: end for
8: for Vi in DXi do
9:
▷remove cyclic relations
10:
7→P .remove(Vi 7→P Xi)
11: end for
12: for Xj in X \ DXi \ Xi do
13:
▷remove not existing relations outgoing from Xi
14:
7→P .remove(Xi 7→P Xj)
15: end for
16: for Xj in DXi do
17:
▷remove not existing relations outgoing from all variables in DXi
18:
for Xk in X \ DXi \ Xi \ Xj do
19:
7→P .remove(Xj 7→P Xk)
20:
end for
21: end for
22: return X, 7→F, 7→P
Association, Dependence and Causality
49
==PAGE:58==
X1
X2
X3
X4
Figure 6.2: Plausible relations without causal structure knowledge (set 7→F of known
causal relations is empty)
It is worth noting that all causal descendant relations (7→F) are also plausible relations
(i.e. in 7→P ) - this is because only the edges inconsistent with what has been observed as
a result of intervention are removed from the plausible edges set.
Because the model is faithful with respect to single variable intervention, once a change in
a variable Xj was not observed when intervention was made on Xi, it can be immediately
concluded that Xj is not a descendant of Xi. This is a situation when learning progresses
fast: observing every intervention in any casusal context separates the graph into two
disjoint sets: of descendants and non-descendants of Xi.
Let us look at an example: an agent is set in an environment with four observable vari-
ables, without any knowledge of the causal structure of the world. Therefore, the agent
assumes all the relations plausible, as illustrated in 6.2. The effect is a complete digraph
of plausibility relations.
Then the agent intervenes on X1 (or only observes the effects of an intervention) and
observes changes in the values of X3 and X4. According to Algorithm 10:
1. The agent first adds X1 7→F X3 and X1 7→F X4 to 7→F.
2. Then, she removes the edges, which create cycles with known relations, from the
plausible set - so X3 7→P X1 and X4 7→P X1 are removed.
3. Next step is to remove from the plausible relations outgoing from X1, whose existence
was disproven by the intervention - so X1 7→P X2 is removed.
4. Finally, she removes all relations outgoing from known descendants of X1 which were
shown not to exist by the intervention from the plausible set, - so X3 7→P X2 and
X4 7→P X2 are removed.
The steps above are illustrated in Figure 6.3.
In this way the agent can capture all the knowledge that can be deduced from the obser-
vations of interventions on a single variable.
50
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:59==
X1
X2
X3
X4
(a) Known descendent relations added (in red)
X1
X2
X3
X4
(b) Plausibility relations creating cycles with
known relations removed (dotted)
X1
X2
X3
X4
(c) Not detected outgoing relations from X1 re-
moved (dotted)
X1
X2
X3
X4
(d) Not detected relations outgoing from descen-
dants of X1 to its non-descendants removed (dot-
ted)
Figure 6.3: Steps in the process of plausible causal structure update
Association, Dependence and Causality
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Conclusions and further works
This thesis provides a comprehensive overview of diverse approaches to describing, how
the phenomena observed in the world interact with each other. The concepts from per-
spectives of logic, mathematics and computer science are systematically categorized based
on their placement in Pearl’s ladder of causation. Causality is the highest rung. A nuanced
comprehension of causality, distinct from mere variable association or dependency, serves
as a mean to articulate how the world operates. Additionally, it facilitates the resolution
of the fundamental question of “Why?”, which is a cornerstone of how humans see the
world. Insights into the causal factors underlying events empower individuals to learn,
strategically plan complex actions, and accomplish goals. Causality stands as an indis-
pensable component of problem solving and is instrumental in changing the environment
to serve our purposes. The concept of causality is also needed to consider counterfactuals.
Statements of what would have been, while so ubiquitous in the natural languages, were
neglected in science for a long time. Only recently has mathematics seen a progress which
gave a cause and effect precise definitions and answered the counterfactual questions using
formal reasoning.
Furthermore, this paper delves into frameworks which do not express causality directly, but
strive to capture concepts intricately connected to it - such as dependence and actions.
Association often serves as a useful simplification of causality, for example in machine
learning explainability or action learning.
Further, the idea of a single agent who tries to discover and express the causal structure
of an unknown environment is explored.
The learning process involves interventions,
observation of resultant effects, and the assimilation of conclusions into the causal structure
model. The recursive causal model is introduced and one-to-one correspondence of its
causal frame to a causal DAG is shown. Representing the causal structure as a graph
offers an intuitive, eﬀicient expression of complex structures, and facilitates reasoning.
Moreover, graph properties can be used to express causal concepts, such as independence.
To align with the intervention-based learning framework, several concepts from structural
causal models are adapted.
Firstly, a causal descendant graph is defined and juxtaposed with the causal graph. Causal
descendant graph is suﬀicient in cases when the question of interest is which variables are
going to be affected by a given intervention. Secondly, the concept of faithfulness with
respect to one variable intervention is defined. This allows for identifying an environment
where every intervention gives us maximum knowledge of the causal structure - it separates
the variables into these which are descendants of the manipulated variable and these which
Association, Dependence and Causality
53
==PAGE:62==
are not.
The paper presents Algorithm 1 for discovering the causal descendant graph in environ-
ments faithful to a single variable intervention. Subsequently, the procedure is extended
to environments lacking the faithfulness property, requiring consideration of all possible
contexts, resulting in Algorithm 2.
For scenarios demanding knowledge of direct causal links (i.e., edges in the causal graph),
Algorithm 4 distinguishes between parent-child relations and longer causal chains, utilizing
the notion of ”blocking” variables proposed by Pearl (2009). This algorithm can be applied
to all edges in a descendant graph, to learn the structure of the causal graph, as shown
in Algorithm 5. However, depending on the numbers of variables and relations between
them, this process may require multiple interventions on many variables each time. In some
practical settings, such complex interventions are costly or even impossible. To overcome
this challenge, an additional deductive step can be included in the learning process. The
definition is provided for a minimal certain graph, consisting of the descendant graph edges
which correspond to the edges in causal graph. Minimal certain graph can be found by
analysing the structure of a descendant graph, suing a method illustrated in Algorithm 3.
Moreover, the paper addresses the challenge of limited observability within the domain.
Various modeling approaches and associated dimensions of uncertainty are described.
Causal Kripke models are extremely expressive, but it comes with a price of substan-
tial computational complexity.
They allow for modelling uncertainty regarding causal
contexts, moments in time, sets of structural functions, causal models obtained by inter-
ventions, or combinations of these.
Allowing for the limited observability and possible incompleteness of the world repre-
sentation implies that some measures must be developed to assess whether the model is
suﬀicient. The notion of functional causal suﬀiciency is defined, inspired by the functional
dependence expressed by the Dependence Logic (Väänänen, 2007). Algorithm 8 opera-
tionalizes this concept. It offers means to determine, based on observed evidence, whether
the variables in the model are suﬀicient to determine the value of their descendant. When a
new variable becomes observable, Algorithm 9 provides a method for its incorporation into
the predefined causal graph of the world through a series of interventions and deductive
steps.
In the final chapter, an alternative approach to learning is explored, where the agent
initiates exploration with the assumption that all relations might exist, and gradually
eliminates those disproven by experiments. To model this approach, a plausible causal
graph is defined, and the process of learning the causal structure is explained. Algorithm
10 proposes a way to learn from observing the intervention results - to eliminate the edges
of the plausible causal graph and at the same time build a causal graph. In this way, the
agent can differentiate between variables with causally impact given other variable and
these which might impact it.
7.1
Open questions
The work of this thesis could be expanded by developing algorithms which relax the
assumption that sets of manipulable and observable variables are the same. This would
require alterations in the learning process and development of alternative means of testing
or deducing the causal structure.
Another interesting area would be to combine the approach of learning from interventions
with probabilistic modeling. Weights could be added to the DAG edges to denote the
54
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:63==
agent’s certainty of their existence, which is a novel idea as contrasted to structural causal
models, where the weights of edges stand for strength of the relation between variables.
These probabilistic DAGs could be then used to encode the agent’s beliefs about the
causal structure of the world as learning progresses.
The algorithms for updating the
graph considering given certain intervention observations could be developed and their
effectiveness investigated in various domains (e.g. non-deterministic, not fully observable
or with limited manipulability). Furthermore, heuristics could be added to improve the
performance of graph discovery for various problems.
From the perspective of cognition, this work could be continued by implementing a sample
environment and an agent learning its structure. Then, the behaviour of the agent could
be given for assessment to human subjects or compared with their behaviour in the same
situations. This would give interesting insights into how humans perceive rationality in
causal experiments and test whether the algorithms reflect the natural ways of learning.
Based on the feedback, the agent could be gradually adjusted to mimic human actions.
Association, Dependence and Causality
55
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
Pearl, J., & Mackenzie, D. (2018). The book of why. Basic Books,
Ray, P. P. (2023). Chatgpt: A comprehensive review on background, applications, key
challenges, bias, ethics, limitations and future scope. Internet of Things and Cyber-
Physical Systems, 3, 121–154. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iotcps.
2023.04.003
Sobel, D. M., & Kushnir, T. (2006). The importance of decision making in causal learning
from interventions. Memory and Cognition, 34(2), 411–419. https://doi.org/10.
3758/BF03193418
Sobel, D. M., & Legare, C. H. (2014). Causal learning in children. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Cognitive Science, 5(4), 413–427. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1291
Pearson, K. (2014). The grammar of science. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1017/CBO9781139878548
Bielecki, J., Dam Nielsen, S. K., Nachman, G., & Garm, A. (2023). Associative learning in
the box jellyfish tripedalia cystophora. Current Biology. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cub.2023.08.056
Darwiche, A. (2017). Human-level intelligence or animal-like abilities?
Stroock, D. W. (2001). Probability theory. Mathematics Unlimited — 2001 and Beyond,
1105–1113. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-56478-9_57
Hitchcock, C. (2021). Probabilistic Causation. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclo-
pedia of philosophy (Spring 2021). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Kirchgässner, G., Wolters, J., & Hassler, U. (2013). Granger causality. Introduction To
Modern Time Series Analysis, 95–125. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33436-
8_3
Kroese, D. P., & Chan, J. C. C. (2014). Bayesian inference. Statistical Modeling and
Computation, 227–262. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-8775-3_8
Sebastiani, P., Abad, M. M., & Ramoni, M. F. (2005). Bayesian networks. Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery Handbook, 193–230. https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-
25465-X_10
Kruschke, J. K. (2006). Locally bayesian learning with applications to retrospective reval-
uation and highlighting. Psychological Review, 113(4), 677–699. https://doi.org/
10.1037/0033-295X.113.4.677
Väänänen, J. (2007). Dependence logic: A new approach to independence friendly logic.
Cambridge University Press.
Bolander, T., & Gierasimczuk, N. (2017). Learning to act: Qualitative learning of deter-
ministic action models. Journal of Logic and Computation, 28(2), 337–365. https:
//doi.org/10.1093/logcom/exx036
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.
1017/CBO9780511803161.003
56
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:65==
Lorini, E., & Herzig, A. (2008). A logic of intention and attempt. Synthese, 163(1), 45–77.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-008-9309-7
Belnap, N. (2005). Agents and agency in branching space-times. Logic, Thought and Ac-
tion, 291–313. https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-3167-X_14
Giordano, L., & Schwind, C. (2002). Towards a conditional logic of actions and causation.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 2424, 382–393. https://doi.org/
10.1007/3-540-45757-7_32
Scheines, R., Glymour, C., & Spirtes, P. (1993). Causation, prediction, and search. Springer.
Sloman, S. A., & Lagnado, D. A. (2005). Do we do? Cognitive Science, 29(1), 5–39. https:
//doi.org/10.1207/s15516709cog2901\_2
Hume, D. (2007). Hume: An enquiry concerning human understanding: And other writings.
Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511808432
Halpern, J. Y. (2016). Actual causality. The MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/
10809.001.0001
Lewis, D. (2001). Counterfactuals. Wiley. https://books.google.dk/books?id=pwA1r9WFraoC
Barbero, F., Schulz, K., Smets, S., Velázquez-Quesada, F. R., & Xie, K. (2020). Thinking
about causation: A causal language with epistemic operators (M. A. Martins &
I. Sedlar, Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 12569, 17–32.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65840-3_2
Barbero, F., Schulz, K., Velazquez-Quesada, F. R., & Xie, K. (2023). Observing interven-
tions: A logic for thinking about experiments. Journal of Logic and Computation,
33(6), 1152–1185. https://doi.org/10.1093/logcom/exac011
Thoft, K. B. P., & Gierasimczuk, N. (2023). Learning by intervention in simple causal
domains.
Barbero, F., & Sandu, G. (2018). Team semantics for interventionist counterfactuals and
causal dependence.
Barbero, F., & Yang, F. (2020). Counterfactuals and dependencies on causal teams: Ex-
pressive power and deduction systems.
Smith, B. I. (2023). Evaluating counterfactual explanations using pearl’s counterfactual
method.
Pearl, J. (2012). The do-calculus revisited.
Peters, J. M., Janzing, D., & Schölkopf, B. (2017). Elements of causal inference: Founda-
tions and learning algorithms: Foundations and learning algorithms. MIT Press.
Singh, K., Gupta, G., Tewari, V., & Shroff, G. (2018). Comparative benchmarking of
causal discovery algorithms. Acm International Conference Proceeding Series, 46–
56. https://doi.org/10.1145/3152494.3152499
Schipper, B. (2021). Discovery and equilibrium in games with unawareness.
Chickering, D. M. (2003). Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 3(3), 507–554. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 /
153244303321897717
Pearl, J., & Verma, T. S. (1995). A theory of inferred causation. Studies in Logic and
the Foundations of Mathematics, 134, 789–811. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0049-
237X(06)80074-1
Halpern, J. Y. (2000). Axiomatizing causal reasoning.
Ding, Y., Manoorkar, K., Tzimoulis, A., Wang, R., & Wang, X. (2023). Causal kripke
models. Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, Eptcs, 379(379),
185–200. https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.379.16
Association, Dependence and Causality
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Association, Dependence and Causality
==PAGE:67==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
