==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Techno-economic comparison of grid 
reinforcement and battery-buffered electric 
vehicle fast charging stations
Amay Boudellal
DTU Wind Energy-M-0723 
February 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind Energy-M-0723 
February 2024
Project period: 
August 2023 - February 2024
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Mattia Marinelli
Charalampos Ziras
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Emil Mahler Larsen
Utiligize
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at 
the Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author:
Amay Boudellal
Title:
Techno-economic comparison of grid 
reinforcement and battery-buffered electric 
vehicle fast charging stations
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for E-mobility and Pro-
sumer Integration, Department of Wind and Energy Systems, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Sustainable
Energy, Electric Energy Systems.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of electrical engineering,
power systems, the electric grid and electric vehicles.
Amay Boudellal - s213396
Signature
Date
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
i
February 1st, 2024
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Connecting fast charging stations to the electric grid usually requires an upgrade to ac-
commodate the higher loading.
This upgrade takes place in the form of investments
in conventional assets such as building new transformer stations and laying new cables.
Battery-based solutions are sometimes chosen by the charge point operator to reduce these
connection costs or perform energy arbitrage. These batteries, however, could be oper-
ated following different control objectives and support the grid to reduce the investment
need in conventional assets. A grid planning algorithm is developed in several steps to
compare these two options and assess their technical benefits and drawbacks as well as
their economic impact.
The first part of the analysis assesses the impact of the rollout of distributed energy
resources on the grid of an urban Danish distribution system operator of 18,552 end
customers. The additional load and production capacity due to the development of electric
vehicles, heat pumps and PV results in a total ”green-transition” investment need of
79MDKK until 2045, with 92% of these costs caused by issues in the low voltage grid.
Undervoltages and overvoltages are partly solved through reactive power control of the
PVs’ inverters and remain the most critical and cost-heavy issues to solve, representing
66% of the total investment. In the second stage, fast charging stations are connected to
the grid. The additional loading is not critical in most cases and results in an investment
need of 2MDKK to solve thermal overloads and 18MDKK of connection costs to build
new transformer stations and lay new cables. The increased loading is experienced in the
medium voltage grid.
Once the fast charging stations’ impact and upgrade needs have been assessed, batteries
are considered as an alternative to new transformer stations. These batteries are sized
by an optimisation algorithm based on a fast charging station load profile. The range
of battery capacities spreads out between 461kWh and 1,010kWh due to the different
profiles and charging power.
Due to their higher capital costs and energy losses than
transformers, the battery-based alternative costs between 7% and 1,109% more than a
conventional grid extension. Different battery connection topologies are tested to allow
batteries to provide active and reactive power support to mitigate grid thermal overloads
and voltage issues. This support, reducing the need to invest in conventional assets due
to the distributed energy resources rollout, results in a cost reduction of batteries between
3% and 65%. In some edge cases under a low battery price and a high conventional asset
price development scenario, the battery-buffered fast charging station has lower yearly
costs than the conventional one. However, the conventional grid upgrade solution remains
the most cost-eﬀicient in 89% of all investigated cases under different price scenarios and
battery topologies. The combination of a transformer and a battery with both smaller
ratings than the ones used in the conventional or battery-based upgrade yields the best
results, with reduced costs of 61% on average compared to the conventional upgrade.
ii
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Mattia Marinelli, Head of section & Associate Professor, DTU Wind & Energy Systems,
and Charalampos Ziras, Assistant Professor, DTU Wind & Energy Systems
for their supervision and support, advice and feedback given during the process on my
research methods and writing as well as interesting discussions about the subject of this
thesis.
Emil Mahler Larsen, CTO & Co-Founder, Utiligize
for making the framework and data for this thesis available and for his time and support
during the process, discussing the methods employed and the results, as well as proofread-
ing.
I would also like to express my gratitude towards all my colleagues at Utiligize, who
supported me and provided me with the time and space to focus on this thesis.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
2
2.1
Battery-buffered fast charging stations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Impact of fast charging stations on the distribution grid . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Grid service oriented battery systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Research gap and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Methodology
5
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Conventional grid upgrade model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Battery-based grid upgrade model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Cost comparison model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
39
4.1
Base power flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Power flow with conventional grid upgrade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Power flow with fast charging stations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Power flow with fast charging stations and conventional grid upgrade . . . .
49
4.5
Battery sizing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Power flow with fast charging stations and battery-based grid upgrade . . .
53
4.7
Economic comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.8
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5
Discussion
76
5.1
Technical assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.2
Economic assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.3
Futher considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Conclusion
81
Bibliography
83
A Fast charging station locations
89
B Fast charging use
91
C Penetration of other DERs
92
D Load profiles
93
E Conventional grid upgrade model
94
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Electrification is the chosen path to decarbonise our society and mitigate climate change
impacts. Transport and heating are historically fossil-fuel-dominated sectors that are in
transition towards electricity-based technologies. The electric grid will have to face higher
loads and new consumption patterns as well as changes in power flow with the development
of generation in the low voltage part of the grid.
Electric vehicles represent an additional challenge due to the different charging modes
users can benefit from. Especially fast charging stations, requiring high power with no
flexibility as the users expect their car to charge immediately can cause severe issues in
distribution grids not dimensioned for these power levels and patterns.
The conventional grid upgrade, i.e. adding additional capacity through new cables and
transformers or replacing existing ones with higher ratings, is the preferred method to
accommodate higher loads. The use of batteries as peak storage and an asset to participate
in regulation markets is starting to develop at a commercial scale. The combination of
these batteries with fast charging stations is experimented with by charge point operators,
as it can reduce grid connection costs and time as well as energy costs by charging the
battery based on spot price signals.
These batteries, however, could also be used to
support the grid and handle situations with critical thermal loadings or voltage issues. In
this operation mode, the batteries could reduce the grid extension need for fast charging
stations as well as reduce the investment costs on assets experiencing thermal overloads
and voltage issues. The technical impact of the combined operation mode of these batteries
needs to be economically assessed in comparison to a conventional grid upgrade.
To assess whether a conventional grid upgrade or a battery-buffered solution is best suited
to accommodate fast charging stations, an algorithm to compare these is developed. This
algorithm is tested on the grid of the Danish urban distribution system operator NKE-
Elnet on which the impact of the rollout of distributed energy resources is assessed in the
first stage and the connection of fast charging stations in the second stage. The induced
thermal overloads and voltage issues are economically and technically analysed and the
upgrade requirements are calculated.
Some of these upgrades are then rolled back as
batteries are connected.
Different operation modes of these batteries where they support the grid through active
and reactive power regulation are investigated. The technical and economical most suited
option is determined by running cost-benefit analyses. The grid planning algorithm can
then be used by grid planners to identify which solution is best suited in each case, or if
a general rule can be applied to their grid.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Literature review
With the increasing penetration of electric vehicles, the need for a properly designed
charging infrastructure and the resulting strain the latter can have on the grid, there has
been research focus on the use of batteries in combination with electric vehicle charging
stations. The impact of fast charging stations and batteries on distribution grids has also
been extensively researched and key findings are presented in the following sections.
2.1
Battery-buffered fast charging stations
Regarding the design of fast charging stations with a battery buffer, [1] proposes an electri-
cal design where a grid connection of 22kW is used and 173kW is delivered to the charging
vehicle using a lithium-iron-phosphate battery. Such a design is built as a demonstration
model in a laboratory in [2], where a 16kWh battery is used to support the grid connection
to supply a 50kW charging station. The results of the experiment show that the battery,
in combination with the control system, has good peak-shaving performance and does not
overload the grid connection.
In [3], a reconfigurable battery topology is proposed to allocate strings to different micro-
grid units. The system is composed of a grid connection of 43kW in combination with a
61kW photovoltaic (PV) installation and three batteries with a capacity of 104kWh each,
used to supply two charging points of 175kW each. Here, in addition to the objective of
delivering a power output higher than the grid connection, increasing self-suﬀiciency is
another control objective. With an enhanced control strategy, a self-suﬀiciency of 87.3%
is reached during the summer, significantly reducing the exchanges with the grid.
Heavy-duty electric vehicles such as buses and trucks also require charging stations that
fit their user’s needs.
For this, [4] formulates the optimisation problem for the sizing
of batteries for an electric bus fast charging station with six spots of 450kW each. The
energy storage system reduces the transformer and feeder capacity from 1478kW to 626kW
or 641kW based on which battery type is used. Investment costs are reduced by 22.85%,
with an additional 1.65% when performing energy arbitrage.
These findings outline the technical viability of combining battery systems with fast charg-
ing stations to reduce overload in the grid and investment costs, both in simulations and
laboratory experiments.
2.2
Impact of fast charging stations on the distribution
grid
The impact of fast-charging stations on the distribution grid in terms of voltage deviation
and harmonics is investigated in [5].
To mitigate the negative effects, next to smart
charging and switching control strategies for converters, the integration of energy storage
is proposed with the additional benefit of reducing losses.
Another method of reducing harmonics and transients is a DC-bus-based (Direct Current)
fast charging station developed in [6]. Coupled with an energy management system, the
use of local renewable energy sources can be optimised and additional profits can be
earned. There is also a positive impact on the loss reduction. The dynamics of a battery-
based fast charging station are also investigated in [7] both in grid-connected and islanded
2
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:9==
mode, where the results show that a battery system with a control architecture is able to
decouple the internal dynamics in the station from the grid.
Based on real grid data, the impact of a 50kW fast charger in the city of Cuenca (Ecuador)
on a distribution feeder is assessed in [8]. The apparent power load increase is 23.85% on
the line directly connected to the charging station and between 0 and 3.27% on the rest
of the lines. An additional voltage drop of up to 0.5% is observed. Using Swedish data,
the authors in [9] observe a transformer station (2x40MVA) load increase of 9% when
connecting 3 fast charging stations with 4 spots of 250kW each, an additional voltage
drop of 0.017 p.u. (dropping below 0.95 p.u.) and voltage flicker of up to 2%.
The combined impact of slow and fast charging (up to 100kW) on a Belgian residential
grid is investigated in [10]. With a 40% penetration rate of electric vehicles (EVs), the
impact of uncoordinated home charging is almost 10 times worse than the fast charging
one (up to 2.1MW vs. 260kW).
The reviewed articles show that fast charging stations have negative effects on distribution
grids. These are not in the same order of magnitude as the impact of home charging e.g.
[10], yet they add stress to the distribution grid.
2.3
Grid service oriented battery systems
In terms of battery energy storage systems for grid services, [11] investigates the different
applications of these devices. The authors mention that these systems are used to mitigate
the overloading of transformers and to accommodate an increasing number of loads such
as EVs. [12] also outlines that these systems can reduce the impact of the green transition
on distribution grids. Both publications insist on the need to properly size battery systems
to avoid an unnecessary increase in investment and operating costs, accelerated ageing and
low eﬀiciency.
Using reference network models, [13] investigates the technical and cost impact on trans-
former substations when installing batteries of different capacities. Under consideration
of demand growth in the grid, the authors found that investment savings in the range of
20-25% in an urban area with a battery storage of 200kWh can be reached. However, at
the time this article was published (2015), batteries were not economically viable for this
solution yet. In [14], the same lead author uses a similar approach to calculate that based
on the battery size, demand growth and grid area (rural, semi-urban and urban), battery
prices between 16e/kWh (10kWh, 2% demand growth and rural grid) and 150e/kWh
(10kWh, 2.5% demand growth and urban grid) would result in a cheaper option than
a classic grid reinforcement with a transformer upgrade. Similarly, in [15] the authors
perform a cost-benefit analysis between a conventional upgrade (adding a second parallel
transformer in a station) or a battery-based one. Different types of batteries and penetra-
tion of EVs are assessed, and the battery-based grid upgrade gives a higher benefit-cost
ratio for a high number of EVs and battery cycles (more than 140 cars per day and 25,000
cycles per year) compared to a conventional one.
A software suite to compare conventional and battery-based grid reinforcement is presented
in [16]. The findings show that battery systems are a viable solution from a technical
point of view. The authors only consider charging power of up to 50kW, and no economic
assessment is made.
Based on the reviewed literature, battery systems for grid applications are a technically
viable solution as highlighted in section 2.1. They have the ability to reduce conventional
reinforcement costs, yet the economic advantage of installing and operating such a system
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
3
==PAGE:10==
is closely tied to the technology type and usage, which doesn’t make it a suitable solution
in every case.
2.4
Research gap and objectives
In the reviewed literature, it has been proven that installing stationary batteries in com-
bination with fast-charging stations reduces loading and stress on grid components such
as transformers [1, 3, 11, 12]. Moreover, investment savings can be reached [4, 13, 14],
with battery prices being the critical factor. The impact of fast charging stations on the
electric grid is assessed and the resulting effects are an increase in losses, loading and
voltage drops, though not as critical as conventional charging e.g. [6, 8, 9, 10].
The reviewed articles consider only the connected transformer station and not the rest of
the grid, particularly at a higher voltage level [8, 10, 13, 14]. Moreover, not all consider
the load increase in the grid due to the development of other distributed energy resources
[8, 9, 10, 15], and those who do use a general percentual load increase, not considering
new peaks [13, 14]. Finally, the ones who consider a load increase base their model on
standard IEEE grid models and standard load profiles [13, 14], whereas real-life grid and
smart meter data are used here. The size of the battery storage is also critical for optimal
operation [11, 12] and will be assessed based on current and future needs, in combination
with using the battery to reduce not fast-charger-related grid investments.
The main objectives of this work will be to:
• Analyse the combined impact of EV fast charging stations and other distributed
energy resources (DERs) on a distribution grid in future scenarios.
• Develop an optimisation algorithm for battery sizing based on fast charging station
load profiles.
• Compare a conventional and a battery-based grid upgrade for fast charging stations.
• Perform a cost-benefit analysis to assess the economic viability of battery-buffered
fast charging stations from a distribution grid operator perspective.
• Develop a grid planning algorithm to automatize this techno-economic analysis.
4
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:11==
3
Methodology
The methodology presented in this chapter aims to develop a grid planning algorithm
which takes inputs from multiple data sources and investigates both the impact of a high
DER penetration and fast charging stations. A conventional and a battery-based grid
upgrade method are investigated and technically and economically compared.
3.1
Overview
The flowchart in figure 3.1 summarizes the main steps of the methodology of the grid
planning algorithm presented in this chapter.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the grid planning algorithm
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
5
==PAGE:12==
The input data can be summarized in the following categories: historical grid model
and smart meter data, penetration and load profiles of new distributed energy resources
(DERs) and fast charging stations, location of these fast charging stations, economic
data and electrical parameters of grid assets and batteries. The increasing penetration
of DERs (electric vehicles (EV), heat pumps (HP) and photovoltaics (PV)) is modelled
based on scenarios and input data presented in sections 3.5.6 and 3.5.7. Every year, a
certain number of new loads or production sites are connected to the current grid and the
historical meter data is updated with the selected profiles. The power flow is run with
the pandapower solver. Pandapower is an open-source, Python-based loadflow simulation
tool developed by the Fraunhofer Institute and the University of Kassel in Germany [17].
For the thermal loading and the voltage results, yearly summary values are selected for
each asset as described in the following sections. For assets violating certain constraints,
an upgrade process is run and the grid model is updated accordingly.
A second power flow simulation and the same summary and upgrade process are run after
connecting fast charging stations. The resulting technical and economic impact on the
grid is assessed and in parallel batteries are connected to replace the second conventional
upgrade.
The costs of these solutions are compared, and different battery connection
topologies are investigated to reduce the number of measures taken in the first conventional
upgrade, therefore extending the batteries’ range of action and reducing their cost impact.
3.2
Conventional grid upgrade model
Due to the rollout of DERs, the loading of the grid components is expected to increase
and both thermal overloads and voltage violations are expected to appear. The way to
handle these issues is to upgrade cables and transformers to assets with higher ratings
that can operate within certain thresholds. These thresholds are presented in table 3.6
and the grid upgrade model for the two previously mentioned issues is presented in the
following sections.
3.2.1
Thermal overload
To identify assets that get overloaded during power flow simulations and with which asset
type they should be replaced, the following method is used. The asset loading in per-
cent is calculated by pandapower using the following formulas, for each timestamp of the
simulation:
L =
I
Imax · d · n · 100
(3.1)
L = max
(Ihv · Vhv
S
, Ilv · Vlv
S
)
· 100
(3.2)
with equation 3.1 being the loading formula for cables with L the thermal loading in
percent, I the current flowing through the cable at each timestamp and Imax the maximum
cable current based on its electrical parameters both in kA, d the derating factor set to one
and n the number of parallel cables. Equation 3.2 is the loading formula for transformers
with L the thermal loading in percent, Ihv and Ilv the high and low voltage side current
flowing through the transformer in kA, Vhv and Vlv the high and low voltage side calculated
voltage in kV, and S the rated apparent power of the transformer in MVA [17].
For each asset and for every year, the maximum value (corresponding to the 99.9th per-
centile, i.e. the largest 0.1% values are discarded to remove outliers, corresponding to nine
6
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:13==
hour per year) is found across all timesteps. If this value exceeds a certain threshold, the
asset needs to be replaced.
The last year before the maximum loading exceeds the threshold is the replacement year.
To identify the dimension of the future asset, the loading of the last simulation year (i.e.
2045) is taken and the new required capacity is calculated as the following:
Cnew = Cold · nold · L2045
nnew
(3.3)
with Cnew and Cold the new and current capacity as the rated current for cables in kA and
rated power for transformers in kVA, L2045 the asset loading in 2045 in percent, nold and
nnew the number of old and new parallel assets. The smallest asset from tables E.1 and
E.2 that validates this minimum new rated current/power is the future type. The number
of parallel assets starts at one and is increased if no asset has enough capacity until the
new capacity can distribute the required amount of current/power.
The electrical parameters of cables and transformers can be found in tables E.1 and E.2.
They are provided by Utiligize and are based on equipment manufacturer catalogues.
3.2.2
Voltage violations
The voltage violations are identified at the customer connection, i.e. at the cabinet level.
After each yearly power flow and the thermal overload-related upgrades (since this reduces
the number and severity of voltage-related issues), the maximum and minimum voltages
(corresponding to the 99.9th percentile of the maximum and minimum voltages) for each
cabinet across all timesteps of each year are analysed, and the cabinets laying outside of
the limits specified in table 3.6 are selected for an upgrade. For each of the cabinets with
a voltage violation, a graph algorithm finds the path to the closest secondary substation
and all the cables it goes through are registered.
First, the tap changer use of primary and secondary transformers is investigated.
An
algorithm that minimises the number of cabinets experiencing voltage issues by finding
the optimal combination of tap changers through a unique change (i.e.
changing the
tap position the year before a voltage issue is identified and not changing it afterwards,
due to the lack of on-load dynamic tap changers in this case) of primary and secondary
substations is used. This method can solve issues for undervoltages or overvoltages, but
not both.
Due to the large spread between minimum and maximum voltage over the
course of a day (mostly due to the high PV penetration), an on-load tap changer system
controlled remotely or automatically and based on sensors would be necessary to switch
the position of the tap changers, from a positive position in the morning when the load
is high to a negative position at midday when the load is low and the PV installations
are injecting in the grid, back to a positive position in the evening the load is high again.
The transformers are not equipped with such a system, so the tap changer position is not
changed and a cable upgrade is used instead.
Upgrading to a cable with a larger dimension reduces the internal resistance and therefore
the voltage drop. The required upgrade is estimated by distributing the maximum allowed
voltage drop at each cable on the cabinet path to the secondary substation as:
∆Vmax =





VTR, LV −Vmin
n
if Vc < Vmin,
(3.4)
Vmax −VTR, LV
n
if Vc > Vmax
(3.5)
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
7
==PAGE:14==
with VTR, LV the voltage at the low voltage bus of the secondary substation, Vmin and
Vmax the voltage boundaries defined in table 3.6, Vc the voltage at the cabinet laying
outside of the limits and n the number of cables between the cabinet and the primary
substation. From there, the new resistance for each of these cables is calculated as:
Rnew =
∆Vold · Rold
nold
∆Vmax
· nnew
(3.6)
with ∆Vold, Rold and Vold the original voltage drop, resistance and number of parallel
cables, ∆Vmax the previously calculated maximum voltage drop allowed and nnew the new
number of parallel cables. The closest cable from table E.1 with a smaller resistance is
then looked for to match this new parameter, and if none exists the new number of parallel
cables, starting at one, is increased until a cable is found.
The cable upgrade is, similar to the tap changer method, not able to solve all overvoltages
by itself either. The chosen solution which doesn’t involve installing new assets such as
reactive power compensation banks is the ability to set the power factor of the inverter for
all newly installed PV installations to 0.95 leading (in generator convention). Therefore,
the inverters consume reactive power proportionally to the injection of active power, which
helps to reduce the voltage. This method, in combination with cable upgrades, can remove
all voltage issues experienced in the grid.
3.2.3
Fast charging stations extension
When installing new assets for future fast charging stations, the same approach as the one
currently used by urban Danish DSOs is used. A 10kV cable with a 150mm2 dimension is
connected to the HV-side of the closest existing 10/0.4kV transformer station, under the
assumption that there is space for this connection. A new transformer station of 800kVA
is installed next to the fast charging station. The cable length is calculated as a straight
line using a geographical analysis in QGIS and the resulting distance will be multiplied
by two to account for the need to avoid buildings and follow roads, existing cables and
other infrastructure. The cable between the new transformer station’s LV side and the
fast charging station port is ignored. A fast charger eﬀiciency of 95% is used [18].
3.3
Battery-based grid upgrade model
A parallel path in the algorithm to the conventional grid upgrade based on assets with
larger capacities is to add battery storage systems to the grid.
The approach in this
algorithm is to size these battery systems based on the fast charging station demand and
to use the remaining capacity to resolve grid loading and voltage issues. Therefore, the
first upgrade operation (regarding thermal overloads and voltage issues caused by DERs)
is always performed as a conventional upgrade. Batteries intervene when connecting fast
charging stations to remove the upgrade requirements caused by these new loads. In a
second iteration, the use of batteries to remove some of the issues caused by DERs is
investigated.
3.3.1
Optimisation problem
The goal of the battery-based grid upgrade model is to size a battery with the smallest
possible charging power (to reduce the grid loading) and capacity (to reduce costs and
space requirements). For this, an optimisation problem with as main input a generated
yearly fast charging station profile described in section 3.5.7 is formulated. The profiles
used are generated based on the EV penetration expected in 2045, which is the most
critical scenario year. Because each profile is stochastic and involves a part of uncertainty,
8
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:15==
a large enough number of these profiles needs to be generated and used as inputs of the
optimisation algorithm, in this case, one profile per future fast charging station.
The
resulting largest battery can then be considered satisfying in most cases.
The different technical parameters of a lithium-ion battery used here are shown in table
3.1. The same fast charger eﬀiciency of 95% as in the case without batteries is used [18].
Battery one-way
eﬀiciency [%]
Depth of
discharge [%]
Power electronics
one-way eﬀiciency [%]
Initial
SOC [%]
90
80
95
50
Table 3.1: Battery and power electronics parameters [19]
The charging power is limited to 800kVA as it is the transformer’s rating used to supply
the existing fast charging station and will be used for future ones. Therefore, the goal is
to reduce this number. The battery’s capacity upper bound is set to 5,000kWh due to the
size of the distribution grid.
The battery’s operational principle is that it supplies power to the fast charger when the
demand is higher than its maximal charging power from the grid. Otherwise, the power is
directly supplied from the grid to the fast charger to avoid losses and unnecessary battery
usage. E.g., if the battery has a maximum charging power from the grid of 100kW and
the fast charger demand is 50kW, then this power is directly supplied from the grid and
the battery can charge up to 50kW. If the fast charger demand is 150kW, then 100kW will
be supplied from the grid and 50kW from the battery.
The resulting optimisation problem is the following, given:
• T: Total number of timesteps (a 15-minute resolution, so 35,040 timesteps per year.
This resolution is also the reason why the charging and discharging power are divided
by four to get energy values),
• Pcharged, max: Maximum power charged (supplied to the battery) across all timesteps
in kW,
• Pmax: Maximum charging power of 800kW,
• Q: Battery capacity in kWh,
• Qmax: Maximum capacity of 5,000kWh,
• wP: Weight on the charging power between 0.1 and 0.9,
• wQ: Weight on the capacity, complementary to the one on the charging power,
between 0.1 and 0.9,
• Pcharged, t: Power charged (supplied to the battery) at timestep t in kW,
• Pdischarged, t: Power discharged (supplied to the fast charger) at timestep t in kW,
• SOCt: Battery state of charge at timestep t in kW,
• ηb: Battery one-way eﬀiciency in percent,
• ηpe: Power electronics one-way eﬀiciency in percent,
• ηfc: Fast charger eﬀiciency in percent,
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
9
==PAGE:16==
• DOD: Maximum depth of discharge in percent.
Additionally, three variables help to constrain the charging power:
• bt: binary variable to indicate whether the fast charger demand is higher or lower
than the maximum charging power at timestep t,
• M: big-M variable to enforce conditional constraints,
• ϵ: tolerance to simulate a strict inequality constraint.
min
Pcharged, max, Q
Pcharged, max
Pmax
· wP +
Q
Qmax
· wQ
(3.7)
subject to
0 ≤Pcharged, t ≤Pmax
∀t = {1, ..., T}
(3.8)
0 ≤Q ≤Qmax
(3.9)
ϵ = 0.0001
(3.10)
M = Qmax + ϵ
(3.11)
Q · (1 −DOD) ≤SOCt ≤Q
∀t = {1, ..., T} (3.12)
Pcharged, max ≥Pdischarged, t
ηfc
+ ϵ −M · (1 −bt)
∀t = {1, ..., T} (3.13)
Pcharged, max ≤Pdischarged, t
ηfc
+ M · bt
∀t = {1, ..., T} (3.14)
bt = 1 =⇒
Pcharged, t ≤Pmax −Pdischarged, t
ηfc
∀t = {1, ..., T} (3.15)
SOCt = 0.5 · Q + Pcharged, t · ηb · ηpe
4
∀t = {1}
(3.16)
SOCt = SOCt−1 + Pcharged, t · ηb · ηpe
4
∀t = {2, ..., T} (3.17)
bt = 0 =⇒
Pcharged, t = 0
∀t = {1, ..., T} (3.18)
SOCt = 0.5 · Q −Pdischarged, t −Pmax
4 · ηb · ηpe · ηfc
∀t = {1}
(3.19)
SOCt = SOCt−1 · Q −Pdischarged, t −Pmax
4 · ηb · ηpe · ηfc
∀t = {2, ..., T} (3.20)
The objective function in equation 3.7 minimizes both the maximum charging power and
the capacity. Both terms are divided by their maximum value so that each parameter
ends up being a value without a unit between zero and one, allowing to sum them without
scaling issues, as the capacity tends to be a larger number than the charging power.
Weight parameters are also implemented in the objective functions to be able to change
the importance of each variable. The charging power at each timestep and the capacity
are constrained between zero and their upper bound values in equations 3.8 and 3.9. In
equations 3.10 and 3.11, the auxiliary variables are constrained to be just large enough
to trigger the state change of the binary variable bt. Equation 3.12 sets the constraint
for the SOC to always lay between the battery capacity and the capacity at the lowest
discharged point as specified by the depth of discharge parameter.
10
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:17==
The next two equations 3.13 and 3.14 are used as conditional statements to determine
the state of bt. In 3.13, if the maximum charging power is greater or equal to the power
discharged, i.e. delivered to the fast charger, divided by its eﬀiciency, then bt is set to
1. It means that the fast charger is not using all the grid connection power and that the
battery can charge with the remaining power. In 3.14, if the maximum charging power
is less or equal to the power discharged, then bt is set to 0. In that case, the demand at
the fast charger is higher than the power the grid connection can directly provide and the
battery needs to supply the missing power.
In the first case, the charging power of the battery is set to be less or equal to the difference
between the maximum power and power consumed by the fast charger in 3.15. Equations
3.16 and 3.17 update the SOC, with the first equation being used in the first timestep
where the SOC is initialised to 50% of the capacity and the second being used in all other
timesteps where the previous SOC is taken. Because it is a situation where the battery is
being charged, the SOC is increased with the charged power multiplied by the battery and
power electronics eﬀiciency, representing the actual power stored in the battery, divided
by four due to the 15-minute resolution.
In the second case, the charged power is set to zero in equation 3.18 as more than the grid
connection power is required. Similarly to the previous case, the SOC is updated with
either the initial or the previous value in equations 3.19 and 3.20. The SOC decreases by
the difference between the power required by the fast charger and the power supplied by
the grid divided by the battery, power electronics and fast charger eﬀiciencies as well as
four because of the time resolution.
3.3.2
Battery topology
Three different topology types are investigated to compare the additional thermal loading
and voltage issues minimisation the batteries can provide and their economic impacts.
Conventional-like topology
The first topology to be investigated is the one based on the way fast charging stations are
conventionally connected to the grid as described in section 3.2.3. In this configuration, the
closest transformer station to each new fast charging station is identified through a nearest
neighbour analysis in the QGIS software. The pandapower net object is then updated and
a 10kV cable is installed from the high voltage (HV) bus of the closest transformer station
to the bus to which both the battery and the fast charging stations are connected. This
configuration implies the use of 10kV power electronics.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.2: Battery connection under the conventional-like topology configuration
In this configuration, additionally to supplying energy to the fast charging station, the
battery can contribute to reducing the loading in the upstream medium voltage (MV)
cables, marked in red in figure 3.2. For this purpose, every MV cable connected between
the primary substation and the battery is identified in a graph algorithm and their thermal
loading is tracked during the simulation to identify overloads.
Transformer LV-side topology
Figure 3.3: Battery connection under the transformer LV-side topology configuration
This topology is identical to the previous one, with the exception that instead of connecting
the battery and fast charging station to the HV bus of the closest transformer station,
the low voltage (LV) bus is chosen. This allows the use of LV power electronics and the
battery can not only target thermal overloads in the upstream MV cables but also the
ones happening at the secondary station, marked in red in figure 3.3. Since voltage issues
are mostly present in the LV grid, the battery controller will be extended with a reactive
power droop controller to mitigate voltage issues at the connected cabinets.
12
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:19==
LV topology
Figure 3.4: Battery connection under the LV topology configuration
The last topology configuration is different in the sense that it targets a larger grid area.
Instead of connecting the battery to the closest transformer station, it is connected to the
closest cabinet. Additionally to the support the battery can provide in terms of thermal
overload mitigation to the upstream MV cables and secondary substation, all the LV
cables between the substation and the battery get supported, as marked in red in figure
3.4. A reactive power controller will also be used to reduce voltage issues at the connected
cabinets.
3.3.3
Pandapower implementation
To implement the different battery control strategies based on the grid state, a controller
with three different objectives is implemented. The controller first runs a power flow with
all battery setpoints (active and reactive power) set to zero.
The state of the grid is
then analysed and if issues are identified, the active and reactive power controllers take
action. A maximum number of 10 iterations per timestep is set. Because the controller is
not always able to converge (i.e. not solve all loading and voltage issues), the simulation
needs to be carried on to the next timestep independently of the results. In this case, the
setpoints of the last iteration are taken.
For both active and reactive power controllers, it is important to note that due to the
iteration principles, the changed power outputs are summed to the previous iteration. I.e.
if the battery’s output is not enough to solve an issue in the first iteration, in the second
one the updated grid value is the controller input and the power output is summed to the
one of the previous iteration.
Active power controller
For each battery, all the assets on which it can have an influence are monitored during
the simulation based on the previously presented topologies. If one of these assets violates
the thermal loading constraints defined in table 3.6, the battery active power output will
be recalculated based on the following formula:
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
13
==PAGE:20==
Pb, new = Pb, old −
(
Pa, max −Llimit · Pa, max
Lmax
·
n
ηb · ηpe · ηg
)
(3.21)
with:
• Pb, new: Updated battery setpoint in kW,
• Pb, old: Previous battery setpoint in kW,
• Pa, max: Active power flowing through the asset with the highest loading in kW,
• Llimit: Thermal loading limit of the asset in percent,
• Lmax: Thermal loading of the most loaded asset in percent,
• n: Number of batteries connected to that asset,
• ηb: Battery eﬀiciency in percent,
• ηpe: Power electronics eﬀiciency in percent,
• ηg: Grid eﬀiciency, assumed at 90% to take into account losses of the different assets.
The power flowing through the asset can either be positive (i.e. from the primary substa-
tion to the cabinets) or negative (the other way around). As in the pandapower convention,
positive power at a battery means charging and negative discharging, in the first case the
updated battery setpoint will be positive and smaller or negative and larger than the origi-
nal setpoint. In the second case (a PV injection larger than the consumption), the updated
battery setpoint will be positive and larger or negative and smaller than the original one.
Reactive power controller
To control the battery’s reactive power output, the voltage is calculated at each cabinet
connected below the battery.
These voltage values are used as the input for a droop
controller that will inject reactive power into the grid in the case of an overvoltage and
consume some in the case of an undervoltage. The droop curve characteristics are shown
in figure 3.5, with a deadband between a voltage of 0.99 and 1.01.
Figure 3.5: Reactive power droop curve
14
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:21==
This tight deadband is justified as the voltage limits specified in table 3.6 lay at 0.95 p.u.
and 1.025 p.u. Deadband values closer to these limits would make the controller bring
the voltage back close to these values but never within. An additional control structure
is a conditional statement where this controller is only triggered if the voltage values lay
outside of the limits of 0.95 and 1.025. This is implemented to reduce simulation runtime,
as the tight deadband limits would otherwise trigger the controller frequently, increasing
simulation time up to 10 times.
SOC controller
Figure 3.6: Battery SOC controller
After the active power setpoint of the battery is set, the state-of-charge (SOC) controller
needs to make sure that the requested power can be delivered or charged. Even if pan-
dapower offers a range of time series simulation functions that are used here, no battery
or SOC controller is integrated with the main Python package. This is outlined as: ”As
pandapower is not a time dependend [sic] simulation tool and there is no time domain
parameter in default power flow calculations, the state of charge (SOC) is not updated
during any power flow calculation.” [17]. A battery controller is proposed in a pandapower
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
15
==PAGE:22==
tutorial [17]. This Python class updates the battery’s SOC by taking the SOC at the
previous timestep and calculating based on the current power. However, no constraints
that would actually limit the SOC are enforced, so the proposed controller is extended
using the algorithm displayed in figure 3.6.
3.4
Cost comparison model
To compare the costs of conventional and battery-based grid upgrades, the capital ex-
penditures (CAPEX) of assets will be the main component.
The price of cables and
transformers is fixed at the values described in tables 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10, and the price of
the battery will be dependent on its size and installation year as specified in section 3.5.9.
Additionally to CAPEX, the lifetime is an important factor.
For this, a transformer
lifetime of 45 years and a battery lifetime of 20 years are chosen [20], where the transformer
lifetime is based on how DSOs in Denmark depreciate their assets [21], and the battery
lifetime based on an 80% remaining state of health. Depending on the actual use of the
battery, an extended or reduced lifetime can or needs to be considered.
Operation and maintenance (O&M) costs are set at 2.6% of CAPEX costs per year for
transformer and 2.5% for batteries [20, 22].
Finally, losses are the last component of the price comparison. The losses through the
transformer are calculated by pandapower and the ones through the battery will be com-
posed of a 95% power electronics and a 90% battery eﬀiciency [18, 19]. This energy will be
multiplied by the average day-ahead spot price for the DK2 bidding zone in 2021, 653.78
DKK/MWh [23]. The resulting formula is the following:
P = CCAPEX
L
+ CCAPEX · O +
35,040
∑
t=0
El, t · Cel
(3.22)
with P the asset price in DKK/year, CCAPEX CAPEX costs in DKK, L lifetime in years,
O the share of O&M costs from the CAPEX costs in percent, El, t the energy losses per
timestamp in MWh and Cel the electricity spot price in DKK/MWh.
In a second iteration, the previous formula will be extended to eventual savings on other
assets. If the batteries can be used to differ other investments that are not related to fast
charging stations, the prices of these cables and transformers will be considered and the
updated formula for the battery will then be:
P = CCAPEX
L
+ CCAPEX · O −C’CAPEX
L’
+
35,040
∑
t=0
El, t · Cel
(3.23)
with C’CAPEX the CAPEX costs of assets that don’t require an investment anymore in
DKK and L’ their lifetime in years.
When comparing asset costs between the power flows with and without batteries, the losses
across the existing transformers to which the batteries are connected are also considered
and added to the batteries’ costs. The updated formula is then:
P’ = P +
35,040
∑
t=0
(El w/ battery, t −El w/o battery, t) · Cel
(3.24)
16
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:23==
with El w/ battery, t transformer losses per timestamp with battery, and El w/o battery, t
without battery, both in MWh.
The cost comparison of transformers or batteries only considers the costs of these assets,
i.e. without building or secondary equipment-related costs (such as switches, breakers,
ventilation systems e.g.). This underestimation of the total costs is assumed to not impact
the comparison since the same costs are omitted for both transformers and batteries.
3.5
Input data
This section lists and presents the input data for the model: EV and other DERs pene-
tration and load profiles, fast charging behaviour and characteristics, economic data and
grid components information.
3.5.1
Geographical scope
The area supplied by NKE-Elnet A/S is shown on the map in figure 3.7 with the admin-
istrative boundaries of Næstved municipality [24] and Næstved town (postal code 4700)
[25]. Because statistical data is not available for the exact area within NKE-Elnet’s but
usually either for Næstved municipality or Næstved town, some assumptions will be made.
These will be specified in the following section.
Figure 3.7: Geographical boundaries and scope of the analysis
3.5.2
EV penetration
The number of electric vehicles in the future is estimated based on the total number of
vehicles expected combined with the current government’s goal of making Denmark CO2
neutral by 2045 [26]. It is expected that, by this date, 100% of vehicles will be electric.
The future number of overall vehicles is based on a linear extrapolation model based on
historical data gathered on the Bilstatistik portal, collecting the import statistics from all
car manufacturers [27]. The resulting graphs for Denmark and the grid area are shown in
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
17
==PAGE:24==
figure 3.8. It is assumed that the number of cars will develop in a similar way in Næstved
town as in the rest of Denmark and that the grid area contains 56% of the town’s cars.
This is based on the neighbourhoods of Appenæs, Lille Næstved, Holsted and Ny Holsted
being not part of the grid area, and their total population in 2023 is estimated at 25,000
people based on their surface and the surface of the similar town of Fensmark [28]. With
a total population in Næstved town of 44,996, this results in a 56% share. Even if most of
the population growth will probably take place by building new neighbourhoods outside
of the city’s current borders, transformations of areas such as those proposed in communal
development plans will still bring population growth within the grid area’s boundaries [29,
30].
Figure 3.8: Evolution of the number of cars in Denmark and the grid area
Figure 3.9: Evolution of the number of electric vehicles in Denmark and the grid area
18
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:25==
The potential of hydrogen vehicles is neither investigated nor taken into account. The
historic number of EVs is retrieved from the Bilstatistik portal [27]. By 2030, 1.2 million
EVs are expected to be driving on Denmark’s roads [31]. Between 2024 and 2030 and
2030 and 2045, the car numbers are interpolated to fit the expected rate of penetration of
electric vehicles. The resulting graphs display the expected number of EVs in Denmark
and in the grid area in figure 3.9. The evolution of the number of EVs in Næstved town
follows the same trend as in Denmark.
The number of EVs is in the same order of magnitude as the latest numbers published
by Energistyrelsen (the Danish Energy Agency) [32]. The published number is an energy
amount for electric mobility and with the average EV eﬀiciency described in section 3.5.4
and an average distance of 47km/car/day [31], 3.345 million EVs are expected in 2045 by
Energistyrelsen versus 3.649 million calculated here, an 8% relative difference.
3.5.3
Fast charging station penetration and distribution
In this analysis, fast charging will be defined as charging taking place with a capacity
above 50kW.
As of September 2023, two fast charging stations are already installed in the grid area:
one with four charging spots of 300kW each placed at a gas station and one with two spots
of 225kW on a public parking [33].
The number of required fast charging stations in the future is derived from DTU’s and
Danske E-Mobilitet’s charge point calculator introduced in [31]. As most of the area of
Næstved municipality is a rural area and Næstved town concentrates around half of the
population, it is assumed that 75% of these fast charging stations will be placed in NKE-
Elnet’s grid area. The standard parameters of the charge point calculator are used, the
only change is regarding the share of energy charged at fast charging stations, which is
set at 10.31% based on the data discussed in section 3.5.5. The resulting evolution of the
number of fast charging stations for Denmark and the grid area is shown in the graphs in
figure 3.10. By 2045, it is expected to have 29 fast charging stations installed in the area.
Considering the two existing stations, it means that 27 new ones will be installed [33].
Figure 3.10: Evolution of the number of fast charging stations in Denmark and the grid
area
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
19
==PAGE:26==
Regarding the geographical distribution of these fast charging stations, the following
method is applied. First, historical traﬀic data is collected as the number of cars per
day measured at different locations by the Danish Road Directorate [34]. This data is
used as an input in the QGIS software and a geographical interpolation is realised to
estimate the traﬀic between two measurement points (shown in figure A.1). Then, points
of interest susceptible to attracting people are collected from OpenStreetMap data [35].
These points include e.g. sports facilities, supermarkets, cinemas, restaurants and cafes,
and other stores.
Additionally, gas stations are located [36].
Finally, public parking
locations are downloaded from [37]. These locations are shown in figure A.2.
Figure 3.11: Geographical distribution of fast charging stations in the grid area in 2045
It is assumed that gas stations would be the first infrastructure providers to install fast
charging stations to sustain their business model. Based on this assumption, fast charging
stations are first placed on these points based on the penetration rate. For the remaining
stations, the following approach using QGIS functions is used. On each public parking, a
random point is placed. For each point, a weight factor is calculated based on the distance
to a point of interest and the traﬀic intensity. The distance from the parking point to the
closest point of interest lies between 33 and 511 meters, while the traﬀic data indicates
between 256 and 12,756 cars per day depending on the closest measurement point. The
resulting weight factor is calculated using the following formula:
w = 1
2 · dmax −d
dmax
+ 1
2 · nmax −n
nmax
(3.25)
20
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:27==
with w being the weight, d the distance of each potential location to the closest fast
charging station and dmax the maximum distance of 511 meters, n the number of cars
and nmax the maximum number of 12,756 cars. The resulting points and factors (shown
in figure A.3) are then exported and further processed in a Python script. There, for
each year, locations are selected stochasticly based on their weight and the number of new
fast charging stations that year. The remaining potential locations are then negatively
weighted based on the inverse of their average distance to other fast charging stations,
and a calculation for the next year is run. The updated weight equation is the following:
w’ = 2
3 · w + 1
3 ·
1
d −dmin
dmax −dmin
(3.26)
with w’ the update weight, w the weight calculated in equation 3.25, d the distance of
every potential location to the closest fast charging station, dmax and dmin the maximum
and minimum distances to an existing fast charging station in that year’s iteration.
The resulting locations of fast charging stations in 2045 are shown on the map in figure
3.11.
3.5.4
EV characteristics
The electric vehicle battery sizes and maximal charging power capacities are important
factors impacting fast charging. In figure 3.12, the evolution of battery size based on the
80% most possessed models in Næstved town is plotted over time, based on EV models
from [27] and battery capacity from [38]. It can be seen that the size of batteries tends
to increase, with models with less than 30kWh capacity being replaced with models in
the (50-70]kWh range, while the share of models with a battery larger than 70kWh stays
relatively constant. The average battery capacity grew from 50 to 65kWh between 2019
and 2023.
Figure 3.12: Distribution of EV battery size based on the 80% most possessed models in
Næstved town
This trend can, however, not be assumed to continue in the future. When looking at the
distribution of the category of cars possessed, EVs are not representative of all other fossil-
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
21
==PAGE:28==
fuel types, as shown in figure 3.13 [27]. Cars in the small and micro categories represent
constantly around 58% of 80% of the most possessed car models (excluding EVs), whereas
they are disappearing from EVs. On the other side, more than 80% of 80% of the most
possessed EV models are large, medium SUV or large SUV cars, whereas this category
only accounts for less than 20% of all other cars.
Figure 3.13: Distribution of car categories based on the 80% most possessed models in
Næstved town
The historic evolution is mostly due to the fact that a majority of premium and high-end
EVs have been put on the market, yet not a large number of models to replace small
and micro cars has been offered to this day [27]. Based on this, it will be assumed for
future scenarios that the share of vehicles with a smaller battery will increase. The future
distribution of battery sizes is shown in table 3.2.
Battery capacity [kWh]
Share of EVs [%]
(30, 50]
58
(50, 70]
21
(70, 100]
21
Table 3.2: Battery size distribution for future scenarios
Driving eﬀiciency is an important factor in estimating the required charging energy based
on the number of kilometres driven.
The evolution based on the 80% most possessed
models in Næstved town is plotted over time in figure 3.14 [27, 38]. It can be observed
that due to larger and heavier EVs (partly because of batteries with higher capacity), the
consumption increases over time, from an average of 161Wh/km in 2019 up to 175Wh/km
in 2023.
For future scenarios, a constant energy consumption of 175Wh/km will be used under the
assumption that the increasing weight of EVs in the near future will be compensated by
technical improvements and the medium to long-term development of small EVs.
22
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.14: Distribution of EV energy consumption based on the 80% most possessed
models in Næstved town
3.5.5
Usage of fast charging stations
Share of energy charged at fast charging stations
The usage of fast charging stations outside of its very specific application during a longer
trip that can’t be fulfilled with one battery charge is mostly dependent on battery size and
private charging access, as demonstrated in [39]. The authors show that over the course of
a day when comparing different charging types, fast charging never reached far above 10%
of all charging types (including home, public, semi-public, work and fast charging). They
also demonstrated an inverse relationship where the larger the battery size, the less energy
was charged at a fast charging station. Moreover, car owners without private charging
access were prone to use fast charging stations twice as much in comparison to owners
with private charging access. In table 3.3, the share of energy charged at a fast charging
station per month that will be used is shown [39], based on the distribution of battery
sizes shown in section 3.5.4.
Battery capacity [kWh]
Share of energy at fast charging
stations per month [%]
(30, 50]
13.0
(50, 70]
6.9
(70, 100]
6.3
Average based on
battery size distribution
10.31
Table 3.3: Distribution of the share of energy charged at fast charging station based on
battery size
Usage of fast charging stations from non-residents
Regarding estimating the number of EVs charging in the grid area that are not regis-
tered in Næstved, the following approach is used. From tourism-related documents, the
following information has been extracted and translated: ”The tourism that exists […] is
characterised by a large number of day tourists who come to Næstved to make use of the
city’s many shopping opportunities and other offers.” and ”In the vision for the future
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
23
==PAGE:30==
tourism efforts […], the overall message is that tourism in Næstved must build on the mu-
nicipality’s existing place-based qualities and development potential - the unique nature,
living cultural history and many events and shopping opportunities in Næstved town.”
[40].
It will be assumed in the following that these day tourists are a target group for fast
charging stations. From a survey performed in 2012, numerical data regarding this number
of day tourists can be used for further analyses [41].
Over the course of three days,
the number of people in Næstved’s town centre was counted at six different locations.
Additionally, questions were asked to a selection of these people to determine where they
were coming from e.g. The key findings from this survey are that 20% were coming from
outside Næstved town, that 52% came by car and 86% of these parked inside an area
described as the ”City Ring”, which will be assumed to be similar to the grid area. A
map showing the origin of day tourists is shown in figure B.1. The aggregated number of
people is listed in table 3.4.
Day
Hours
Number of people
Thursday
12-18
18,235
Friday
12-18
25,197
Saturday
10-14
17,367
Table 3.4: Number of people monitored in Næstved’s city centre in 2012
To estimate the number of people today and in the future over a whole week, the following
approach is used. First, it is assumed that the number of people in this survey followed
the historical and will follow the future population development of Denmark. It is also
assumed that 90% of the 20% of people coming from outside Næstved town are coming
by car and that the rate of penetration of EVs in these areas is and will be similar to the
one in Næstved town. Then, the number of people based on the 2012 data is extrapolated
to represent a complete week as the following. Monday to Wednesday are assumed as
Thursday, with an additional 20% counting for people before 12:00 and after 18:00. Friday
is counted with an additional 40% for people before 12:00 and after 18:00. Saturday is
doubled for the 14:00-18:00 period and an additional 20% is added to that for people after
18:00. Sunday is counted like Friday before 18:00. The resulting numbers are shown in
table 3.5
Day
Number of people
Monday - Thursday
21,882
Friday
35,275
Saturday
41,681
Sunday
30,236
Table 3.5: Number of people monitored in Næstveds city centre, corrected for an entire
week in 2012
It is further assumed that there are on average two people per car, that there is no seasonal
effect (the lower population during the summer due to holidays will be compensated by
tourists and bad weather in the winter is compensated by holidays and Christmas shop-
ping), and that the share of charging sessions at fast charging stations follows the data
presented in table 3.3. The resulting numbers of EVs coming outside from Næstved town
and charging at fast charging stations are shown in figure 3.15.
24
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.15: Number of EVs coming outside of Næstved town and charging at fast charging
stations
3.5.6
Penetration of other DERs
EV home charging stations
Figure 3.16: Geographical distribution of home charging stations in the grid area in 2045
The EV home charging stations are distributed by first identifying the areas with houses
with private parking spots [42]. From there, it is assumed that by 2045, all these houses
will be equipped with EV charging stations and two EVs per house. Following this, the
yearly new charging stations are stochastically distributed following the EV penetration
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
25
==PAGE:32==
curve presented in section 3.5.2. The resulting installations in 2045 are shown in figure
3.16.
EV private shared charging stations
With EV shared charging stations are meant buildings with multiple households having
access to private parking where not each spot is equipped with a charging station and
therefore this resource is shared between the users. To identify areas where this type of
charger will be placed, parking areas near larger residential buildings are identified [37,
42]. Then, the number of parking spots is estimated by assuming that 50% of each area
is available for parking and that each spot is 12.5m2 [43]. The yearly number of charging
stations for each category is retrieved from DTU’s and Danske E-Mobilitet’s charge point
calculator [31]. These charging spots are then stochastically distributed on the available
parking spots. The resulting charging stations in 2045 are shown in figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17: Geographical distribution of private shared charging stations in the grid area
in 2045
EV normal public and workplace charging stations
For the EV normal (in this case considered as not fast, i.e.
below 50kW) public and
workplace charger distribution, the same approach as for private shared charging stations
is used due to the lack of data regarding the parking availability around workplaces. First,
all public parking areas close to areas of interest for the public or workplaces are identified
[37, 42]. From there, the same method as presented in the previous section for private
shared charging stations is applied. The resulting charging stations in 2045 are shown in
figure 3.18.
26
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.18: Geographical distribution of normal public and workplace charging stations
in the grid area in 2045
Heat pumps
District heating is expected to play a major role in the heat supply of the grid area based
on the Heating Development Plan 2030 from Næstved municipality [44]. 68% of the area
is currently covered by district heating and 18% has district heating potential that might
be connected until 2030. These areas are shown in figure C.1. With this data, under
the consideration that all the Danish heating system is supposed to be gas-free in 2035
[45] and the current heating system of buildings coming from the BBR (Bygnings- og
Boligregistret, Building and apartment register) [46], the following assumptions are made.
In areas with district heating, 1% of buildings that do not have a district heating connection
or a heat pump will choose a heat pump. In areas with district heating potential, 10% of
buildings will choose a heat pump, except for the industrial area located south of Næstved,
where due to the proximity to a waste incineration facility, it is assumed that all buildings
will be connected to a local district heating grid. In areas without district heating, all the
buildings will choose a heat pump. The rate of penetration of heat pumps is set linearly
between 2024 and 2035, the buildings choosing a heat pump are assigned stochastically,
and the buildings with the current heating system information or coordinates missing are
ignored. The resulting future heat pump locations in 2045 are shown in figure 3.19.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.19: Geographical distribution of future heat pumps in the grid area in 2045
PV
In terms of the penetration of future PV installations, data for Denmark is first retrieved
from an analysis from the Danish Energy Agency, where 37,588MW are expected to be
installed in 2045 [32]. Based on production data from the Danish transmission system
operator (TSO) Energinet from 2022 [47] and power output from the Global Solar Atlas
[48], the installed capacity at that time for Næstved municipality was 60MW. The fu-
ture numbers for Næstved municipality are then calculated based on the 2022 installed
capacity in Denmark versus in Næstved municipality. Following solar park projects in
Næstved municipality and the oﬀicial development plan, it is assumed that 10% of the
future capacity will be installed in the grid area, resulting in a capacity of 73MW in 2045
[49, 50]. The PV capacity evolution is shown in figure C.2.
Based on the building’s sizes [51], it is assumed that buildings with an area of more than
7,000m2 are commercial or industrial. The minimum solar installation size is set at 4kWp
and with an average power density of 205Wp/m2, it is therefore assumed that buildings
with an area below 80m2 will not qualify for an installation [52]. Finally, the available area
for solar cells is calculated for every building, using 62.5% of the roof area for commercial
and industrial buildings and 24.5% for residential ones [53].
This data is used as input for a Python algorithm and for each year, based on the newly
connected PV capacity, a stochastic number of buildings are selected until the capacity
is reached. A linear penetration rate between 2023 and 2045 is assumed. The resulting
installations in 2045 are shown in figure 3.20.
28
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.20: Geographical distribution of future PV installations in the grid area in 2045
3.5.7
Load profiles
For all the load profiles presented in this section (except the fast charging station ones),
after the first processing step, the same method is used.
The profiles retrieved from
literature or data from Utiligize cover one or two years, in a 15-minute to 1-hour resolution,
with the hourly one linearly interpolated into 15-minute steps. The resulting profiles are
then split into weeks which are then clustered based on the seasonal behaviour, using
Python’s statsmodels library [54]. This creates, for each season, a dozen profiles that will
be used stochastically to add uncertainty to the model and a closer-to-real-life behaviour
instead of one identical profile for each DER.
EV fast charging stations
The EV fast charging station load profiles are generated using a Monte Carlo simulation
based on parameters that are published in the literature [3, 55]. These parameters, shown
in figure 3.21, observed at fast charging stations, give a probability distribution over the
arrival time, connection time, and charged energy. The charging power is given by dividing
the charged energy by the connection time.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.21: Fast charging profile parameters
To avoid generating unrealistic profiles (i.e. where the charged energy would be higher
than the battery’s capacity), for each charging session a battery capacity based on the
distribution presented in table 3.2 and in section 3.5.4 is selected and set as a limit.
Additionally, the SOC before the charging cycle is calculated with the following equation:
SOC = random(C −E)
(3.27)
With random a function picking a number between zero and the specified upper limit
between brackets, C the battery capacity and E the charged energy, both in kWh. If the
sum of the SOC before charging and the charged energy is above 80% of the capacity, then
the charging session is split and the energy above 80% is charged at a 5kW power [15]. Ad-
ditionally, the maximum fast charging power is set based on the previously chosen battery
size. For the 80% most possessed electric vehicles in Næstved in 2023, the maximum fast
charging speed is collected [27, 38]. The battery size of these vehicles is then clustered in
three categories and for the battery size selected for each charging session, a maximum fast
charging speed in this category is selected stochastically. These numbers can be found in
table D.1. A final constraint is implemented to limit the number of simultaneous charging
sessions. It is assumed that four charging spots are available per station, i.e. no more
than four simultaneous charging sessions can take place.
The number of profiles generated varies each year based on the EV penetration and the
share of charging sessions performed at a fast charging station as described in section 3.5.5.
To assess that the probability profiles from the literature shown in figure 3.21 are repre-
sentative of the use-case behaviour, they are compared with available charging data from
one of the currently two installed fast charging stations in the grid area. The data used
was collected between June 11th, 2023 and January 10th, 2024. The smart meter data,
available in 15-minute resolution, is disaggregated in single charging sessions by identifying
each peak and extracting the charging session start time, duration and charged energy.
The results are shown in figure 3.22, where the mean relative error between the literature
30
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:37==
and the observed arrival time is 3.9%. Differences in the charging duration can be ex-
plained by the time resolution of the measurements of 15 minutes being less precise than
the minute resolution in the literature, as well as the disaggregation method employed.
The observation curve skewed to longer durations might also indicate EVs with larger
batteries in the grid area than in the literature. The more evenly distributed charged
energy in the observation could be explained by EVs with a higher driving consumption
(since the data is from 2019 and this number has been increasing since) or larger EVs due
to geographical differences (the data is from the Netherlands).
Figure 3.22: Fast charging profile parameters, literature vs. observation
EV home and private shared charging stations
Figure 3.23: Clustered EV home and private shared charging profiles
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
31
==PAGE:38==
For the home and private shared charging stations, 11.2kW profiles from EV charging in
NKE-Elnet’s grid area are used. These profiles are identified using Utiligize’s EV charging
detection algorithm, and the base load power observed before charging is removed. The
resulting clustered profiles are shown in figure 3.23 and result from the observation of
45 cars over the course of a year.
The data is available in a 1-hour resolution and is
interpolated linearly down to a 15-minute resolution. Due to the lack of data regarding
private shared charging, the same profiles are used.
EV workplace charging stations
The EV workplace charging data comes from a dataset published by NREL tracking 300
EVs over the course of four years [56]. The data selected is for 2018, the start and end
charging time as well as the max charging power are logged for most of the charging events.
For the missing entries, the arrival and departure times are used with a maximum charging
power of 3.6kW. This data is used to create load profiles with a 15-minute resolution under
the assumption that the vehicle charges at the maximum power during the whole event.
The resulting clustered profiles are shown in figure 3.24.
Figure 3.24: Clustered EV workplace charging profiles
EV normal public charging stations
The EV normal public charging profiles are collected from a dataset from the Netherlands,
from the research centre ElaadNL [57]. This dataset registered 10,000 charging events in
2019. For each event, the transaction start time, the charge time, the total energy and
the maximum power are logged. These are used to create load profiles with a 15-minute
resolution under the assumption that the vehicle charges at the maximum power during
the whole event. The resulting clustered profiles are shown in figure 3.25.
32
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.25: Clustered EV public charging profiles
Heat pumps
Figure 3.26: Clustered heat pump profiles
The heat pump profiles come from a dataset based on 38 single-family houses in the city of
Hamelin, Germany [58]. The profiles are available in a 15-minute resolution, the selected
year is 2019. To ensure that the meteorological conditions are similar to those in Næstved,
the temperatures of these two locations are compared. The temperature time series for
Hamelin is also available in the dataset, the temperature from Næstved is retrieved from
the Danish Meteorological Institute [59]. Both temperatures follow the same trend and the
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
33
==PAGE:40==
mean relative error between the two locations over the year is 2.33%. Both temperature
time series are shown in figure D.1. From the 38 profiles, one average year profile is created
and split into weeks. The clustered profiles are shown in figure 3.26.
The average German single-family house is 157m2 [60]. Because these heat pumps provide
only heating and not domestic hot water [58], for each building with a new heat pump,
the power will be scaled to the building’s area based on the information available from the
BBR [46].
PV
The PV load profiles are based on the total PV production in Denmark in 2022 provided
by Energinet [61]. The data, in hourly resolution, is linearly interpolated to a 15-minute
resolution. The data is then normalised to percent of the PV’s nominal power. Because
2022 was a year with a significant increase in PV capacity in the Danish grid with more
than 1GW being newly connected [62], it is scaled to 1,664MW being 100%, so that the
highest peak delivers 100% of the nominal power. The resulting graphs are shown in figure
3.27.
Figure 3.27: Clustered PV profiles
These profiles will then be individually scaled based on the size of each new PV installation
described in section 3.5.6. Unlike the other profiles, the same profile will be applied to all
installations in one simulation.
For each installation, an inverter eﬀiciency of 97,2% is applied [63]. Regarding the fact
that not all installations are placed with a 180° orientation, a stochastic factor based on a
normal distribution function where the DC production is set at 100% for a 180° orientation
and drops to 75% towards a 90° and 270° orientation is also applied [48], following this
logic:
f(x) =
1
(25
3 )
√
2π exp

−1
2
(
x −100
25
3
)2 

(3.28)
34
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:41==
factor =
{ f(x)
if f(x) ≤100,
(3.29)
100 −(f(x) −100)
otherwise.
(3.30)
3.5.8
Thermal overload and voltage thresholds
The thresholds used for thermal overload and voltage violations are defined in table 3.6
and come from the TEGRA model developed by Green Power Denmark and are used by
DSOs across the country [64].
Loading [%]
Voltage [p.u.]
Cables
Transformers
Lower bound
voltage
Upper bound
voltage
Medium voltage
70
90
0.95
1.025
Low voltage
90
110
Table 3.6: Loading and voltage thresholds
3.5.9
Economic data
Grid components
The grid component prices (here cables and transformers) are provided by Utiligize. They
are based on data from Danish regulatory bodies and DSOs. These are specified in tables
3.7, 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10.
Rating [kVA]
16,000
20,000
25,000
Price [kDKK]
7,200
8,625
9,940
Table 3.7: 50/10kV transformer prices
Rating [kVA]
250
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
2,000
Price [kDKK]
100
130
200
250
325
380
755
Table 3.8: 10/0.4kV transformer prices
Dimension [mm2]
95
120
150
240
300
400
500
Price [DKK/m]
1,800
1,840
1,880
2,000
2,100
2,150
2,300
Table 3.9: 10kV cables
Dimension [mm2]
95
120
150
240
300
Price [DKK/m]
465
495
530
620
680
Table 3.10: 0.4kV cables
Grid component age
The age of grid components plays a role in the replacement costs as their value is de-
preciated over time. Replacing an asset before its economic end-of-life induces therefore
additional costs to the grid operator. The economic lifetime of cables and transformers is
set to 45 years [21].
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
35
==PAGE:42==
The age distribution of assets is shown in figure 3.28. The age of 96% of all transformers
is available, the missing ones are estimated as the average of all transformer ages. No age
data for cables is available and therefore the age distribution of these assets is assumed
to be the same as the average Danish medium and low voltage grid as published by the
regulatory agency [65].
Figure 3.28: Asset age distribution
The remaining value of each asset is calculated as:
Cremaining =
Cnew
L · (L −A)
(3.31)
With Cremaining the remaining and Cnew the new asset costs in DKK, L the asset lifetime
and A the age at the replacement year both in years.
Batteries
Due to the technological improvements and the increasing scale of production of batteries,
these assets are expected to see their costs similarly decrease over the next decades as it
happened in the past. A starting price for 2022 of 1.056MDKK/MWh is used and three
price evolution profiles from NREL are used for future prices [20, 66].
These values are used as a benchmark when processing results and assessing the total
costs of a classic grid reinforcement with cables and transformers with higher ratings. The
different scenarios will be used for sensitivity analyses.
36
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.29: Battery prices
3.5.10
Electric grid data
Figure 3.30: Electric grid
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
37
==PAGE:44==
The electric grid data is provided by Utiligize in the form of a pandapower net object.
The raw data that is fed into the model is provided by NKE-Elnet and the transformation
steps from the raw data to the pandapower object are similar to the ones described in [67].
The grid of NKE-Elnet, shown in figure 3.30 starts at the connection points with the DSO
Cerius in the form of four 50/10kV transformer stations. The medium voltage grid, which
spreads over 110km is then connected by 186 10/0.4kV transformer stations to the low
voltage grid which has a total length of 158km. Grid data is available between the 2,700
cabinets and the house connections is not considered, so the individual smart meters are
aggregated on these cabinets.
The grid has a typical distribution grid layout in the sense that it is operated in a radial
way at both MV and LV levels.
3.5.11
Smart meter data
The smart meter data can be split into two different categories, due to the two types
of smart meters cohabitating. 18,522 meters are installed in total, with 18,303 with an
hourly resolution and 219 with a 15-minute time resolution. The smart meter values with
an hourly resolution are interpolated linearly to get a 15-minute resolution.
In 2022, the peak load in the system happened on January 10th at 17:00, with a value of
15.751MW.
38
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:45==
4
Results
4.1
Base power flow
When running the yearly power flow on the existing grid with the forecasted load and
PV production increase, the loading of assets increases steadily. Figure 4.1 displays that
the first transformer starts to be overloaded by the year 2028, and by 2045 30% of all
transformers experience an overload. The share of cables that experience an overload is
smaller but starts earlier. The first cable is overloaded in 2024 and by 2045 10% of all
cables experience an overload. A historic simulation based on the 2022 smart meter data
show that no thermal overloads are experienced in the grid that year.
Figure 4.1: Share of overloaded assets per year
Based on the loading distribution over different voltage levels shown in figure 4.2, it can
be noted that thermal overloads happen primarily at the low voltage level. Only 18 MV
cables are overloaded in 2045 and no MV transformer is, whereas most of the overloads
and the most severe ones happen at low voltage cables and transformers, with loadings up
to 800% for cables (with most of them laying below 200%) and 300% for transformers. It
can be deduced that the MV grid is dimensioned for a significantly higher capacity than
the LV grid.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.2: Distribution of asset loading in 2045
In terms of voltage issues, the situation is more critical than thermal overloads as shown
in figure 4.3. The historic power flow based on the 2022 smart meter data shows that no
issues were found for that year. Issues happen from 2024 on and the situation worsens
over the years until 70% of cabinets experience voltage issues by 2045.
Figure 4.3: Share of cabinets with voltage violation per year
The distribution of this voltage by 2045 shown in figure 4.4 displays that undervoltages
spread over a larger range than overvoltages, with 99% of undervoltages laying between
40
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:47==
0.78 and 0.95 p.u. (range of 0.17 p.u.) and 99% of overvoltages between 1.025 and 1.116
p.u. (range of 0.089 p.u.). Only 1% of undervoltages and overvoltages happen respectively
below 0.8 p.u. and above 1.116 p.u.
Figure 4.4: Distribution of minimum and maximum voltage at cabinets in 2045
Figure 4.5: Minimum voltage drop plot from one primary substation in 2045
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.5 gives a different overview of the minimum voltage in 2045 from the primary
substation experiencing the largest voltage drop. It can be observed that, similarly to
thermal overloads, most issues happen in the LV part of the grid. The voltage drop from
the primary substation to the last MV cable is 0.029 p.u., whereas it is 0.304 p.u. between
the secondary substation and the last LV cable where the largest drop happens, due to
higher currents. The most severe drop to 0.68 p.u., significantly superior to the other can
be explained by the large number of DERs connected between the secondary substation
and the last cabinet. 290 EV home chargers are connected to this feeder, whereas the
average one only has 41 connected.
In terms of maximum voltage as shown in figure 4.6 from the primary substation experi-
encing the largest voltage increase, similar observations as for the minimum voltage can
be made. Most issues happen in the LV part of the grid. Three feeders stand out with
voltages going up to more than 1.15 p.u. These feeders are marked by a combination of
a higher PV penetration and cables with a smaller dimension than the rest of the grid,
with from left to right 1,184kW, 1,996kW and 226kW installed vs. on average 333kW
per transformer station. The first feeder, with a lower installed capacity than the second
one, experiences a larger voltage increase due to the cable dimensions, being on average
100mm2 in the first feeder vs. 150mm2 in the second one. The larger voltage increase in
the third feeder over 1.15 p.u. can be explained by the cables with an average dimension
of 96mm2 vs. 148mm2 across the rest of the grid. The high PV penetration in the LV
part of the grid has an impact on the MV part of it as well, since a slight voltage increase
can be observed through MV cables the further away they are located from the primary
substation.
Figure 4.6: Maximum voltage drop plot from one primary substation in 2045
42
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:49==
4.2
Power flow with conventional grid upgrade
Once the thermal overload-based upgrade has been applied, the loading across all assets
satisfies the overload limits, as shown in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Distribution of asset loading in 2045 after overload-related investments
The voltage issues are also mitigated, both due to the reactive power compensation by
the PV inverters and to the upgrade where cables with higher ratings also have lower
internal resistance, therefore solving some of the voltage issues and minimising overall
undervoltages and overvoltages. The voltage issues reduction is shown in table 4.1. The
overload-related investments reduce the number of cabinets experiencing undervoltages by
91% and overvoltages by 99.6%.
Cabinets with
undervoltage
Cabinets with
overvoltage
Average min
voltage [p.u.]
Average max
voltage [p.u.]
Without
investments
1225
1518
0.957
1.027
With overload
investments
109
6
0.972
1.001
Table 4.1: Voltage comparison in 2045
Figure 4.8 displaying the minimum voltage situation shows a pattern where a voltage
increase can be observed both in some MV and LV parts of the grid. This is due to the
reactive power consumption at PV inverters. This outlines that the minimum voltage
situation doesn’t happen in all cases when the load is at its highest, which, in a residential
grid, is usually in the mornings and evenings when PV production is low or zero.
In
this case, however, a PV production triggering a reactive power consumption happens
during the same time as the load is high, resulting in a minimum voltage situation with
an increase from the primary substation.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.8: Minimum voltage drop plot from one primary substation in 2045 after overload-
related investments
Figure 4.9 displays the maximum voltage situation, where only four feeders remain over
the maximum voltage limit.
Figure 4.9:
Maximum voltage drop plot from one primary substation in 2045 after
overload-related investments
Once the voltage issues-related upgrade is also applied to the grid, all voltage issues are
44
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:51==
solved. Cabinets experience both a minimum and a maximum voltage that satisfies the
limits, as outlined in figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Distribution of minimum and maximum voltage at cabinets in 2045 after
overload and voltage-related investments
A similar image to 4.8 can be observed in 4.11 where a voltage increase is observed in a
minimum voltage situation. The cable upgrade, however, allows all cabinets to lay above
the minimum voltage limit by reducing the voltage drops in the LV part of the grid.
Figure 4.11: Minimum voltage drop plot from one primary substation in 2045 after over-
load and voltage-related investments
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
45
==PAGE:52==
The cable upgrade also solves all issues in the maximum voltage situation, shown in table
4.12.
Figure 4.12: Maximum voltage drop plot from one primary substation in 2045 after over-
load and voltage-related investments
In terms of upgrade costs, figure 4.13 shows that most of the replacement happen at the
LV level, corresponding to the experienced overload and voltage issues in the previous
section.
Figure 4.13: Upgrade costs by asset type per year
46
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:53==
Only LV transformers are upgraded, most of the upgraded cables are on the LV side as well
with only a few MV cables being upgraded towards the middle and end of the simulation.
Generally, fewer upgrades are required at the beginning of the simulation due to spare
capacity in the grid.
Figure 4.14: Upgrade costs by replacement reason per year
In terms of the upgrade reason displayed in figure 4.14, it can be noted that most of the
costs (66%) for cable upgrades are related to solving voltage issues. This can be explained
by the need to install parallel cables in some situations to obtain an equivalent internal
resistance low enough to satisfy the voltage limits.
It has to be noted that figures displaying upgrade costs only take into account the costs
of solving thermal overloads and voltage issues. End-of-life and the resulting replacement
costs for assets not impacted to an extent where an upgrade is required due to the rollout
of DERs are neither considered nor plotted.
4.3
Power flow with fast charging stations
Connecting the fast charging stations to the grid results in loading and voltage changes at
the MV level. The MV transformers and cables get impacted while the LV part of the grid
is not due to the new fast charging stations being connected to new secondary substations
which are themselves connected to the HV side of existing ones.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
47
==PAGE:54==
Max loading [%]
Average loading [%]
Primary
Substation
Number of
fast chargers
w/o fast
chargers
with fast
chargers
w/o fast
chargers
with fast
chargers
1
1
30.48
31.57
10.26
10.36
2
14
38.51
42.92
15.21
16.39
3
4
9.19
11.80
3.57
3.92
4
8
62.02
60.06
21.63
22.17
Table 4.2: Load change at primary substations due to fast charging stations in 2045
Since all four of the primary substations are modelled as 25MVA and their base thermal
loading (i.e. historical consumption and DER rollout) has enough remaining capacity to
accommodate for the additional loading, fast charging stations do not have a significant
negative impact as specified in table 4.2. The observed maximum loading increase for 2045
lays at 4.41%, representing 1.1MVA for the primary substation to which 14 fast charging
stations are connected. Interestingly, the maximum loading at the primary substation
number four decreased when installing fast charging stations. The time series show that
during the months with little to no sun, the loading at this primary substation shows an
increase, whereas it decreases when PV produces a larger amount of electricity. What is
happening is that the fast charging stations consume some of the locally produced PV
electricity, reducing the feeding back to higher voltage levels and therefore supporting the
grid at its highest loading.
Regarding MV cables, a more significant loading increase in comparison to primary substa-
tions is observed. Table 4.3 summarizes the average loading over all MV cables connecting
a primary substation with a fast charging station.
Max loading [%]
Average loading [%]
w/o fast
chargers
with fast
chargers
w/o fast
chargers
with fast
chargers
55.83
70.73
23.66
32.35
Table 4.3: Average load across MV cables connected to fast charging stations in 2045
Overloads are identified at five MV cables. These cables connect a primary substation to
a fast charging station and usually experience a single or a few additional peaks due to
the combined power of multiple EVs charging at the same time. Figure 4.15 displays such
a situation where the power transmitted through a cable experiences a sharp peak at a
single timestamp due to 862kW being requested from the fast charging station.
48
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.15: Cable loading comparison with and without fast charging station in 2045
In terms of voltage, a minimal decrease can be observed. When comparing the minimum
voltage at buses connected to a fast charging station in table 4.4, a voltage decrease
of 0.04% for the average minimum voltage and 0.22% for the average mean voltage is
observed. This decrease at the HV side of secondary transformers doesn’t trigger further
undervoltage issues in the LV part of the grid.
Min voltage [p.u.]
Average voltage [p.u.]
w/o fast
chargers
with fast
chargers
w/o fast
chargers
with fast
chargers
0.9757
0.9753
0.9853
0.9831
Table 4.4: Average voltage across buses connected to fast charging stations in 2045
4.4
Power flow with fast charging stations and
conventional grid upgrade
In figure 4.16 is plotted the upgrade and extension costs for installing fast charging stations
in the grid. As outlined in the previous section, only a few MV cable sections need to
be upgraded towards the end of the simulation in 2038 due to thermal overloads caused
by the number of new fast charging stations and their utilisation due to the higher EV
penetration.
Most of the costs (91%) are related to installing the infrastructure, i.e. new transformer
station and their connection to the existing grid to accommodate for the fast charging
stations.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.16: Upgrade and extension costs by replacement reason and asset type per year
The grid upgrade on the previously overloaded MV cables removes the overload by reducing
the loading over these cables as specified in table 4.5.
Max loading [%]
Average loading [%]
w/o investment
w/ investment
w/o investment
w/ investment
70.73
68.00
32.35
32.08
Table 4.5: Average load across overloaded MV cables connecting to fast charging stations
in 2045
4.5
Battery sizing
The results of the optimisation algorithm presented in section 3.3.1 are shown in table
4.6. These results are based on the individually generated fast charging station profiles
and an equal weight factor of 0.5 on the maximum charging power and the capacity is
applied. It can be noted that the distribution between minimum and maximum charging
power and capacity are relatively spread out, with the minimum and maximum values
being respectively 64% and 146% of the mean value for the maximum charging power,
and similarly 70% and 154% for the capacity.
The boxplots in figure 4.17 show the
median as the green line and the upper and lower whiskers represent the minimum and
maximum values. The standard deviation is 20.05kW for the maximum charging power
and 149.48kWh for the capacity.
50
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:57==
Fast
charger
Max charging
power [kW]
Capacity
[kWh]
Fast
charger
Max charging
power [kW]
Capacity
[kWh]
1
73.73
1,010.24
15
92.66
754.87
2
79.25
826.97
16
108.92
572.26
3
130.48
557.92
17
93.77
743.92
4
150.53
461.27
18
106.46
679.07
5
129.66
478.72
19
115.45
507.58
6
96.81
789.30
20
109.92
510.80
7
88.02
665.94
21
66.06
888.57
8
120.00
557.92
22
120.48
485.55
9
102.29
653.59
23
77.12
823.33
10
93.94
708.59
24
81.84
787.81
11
77.46
882.54
25
104.18
621.14
12
116.08
484.60
26
119.99
538.19
13
127.95
505.13
27
94.42
726.28
14
97.46
534.55
Table 4.6: Individual profiles battery sizes
Figure 4.17: Battery parameters distribution
To explain the differences between the different combinations of maximum charging power
and capacity, the section of the profiles of the battery with the largest capacity (FC-1)
and the one with the largest charging power (FC-4) where the SOC reaches the minimum
value are shown respectively in figures 4.18 and 4.19. The profile of FC-1 is characterised
by six medium charging peaks of around 250kW, followed by three large peaks of around
400kW, followed again by four medium peaks during the recharging phase. A total of
1.075MWh is consumed over a period of 15 hours, duration between the last SOC of 90%
and when the lower limit of 10% is reached. To minimise equally charging power and
capacity, the optimum combination tends therefore towards a larger capacity that can be
slowly recharged.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.18: Profile of FC-1 at the lowest SOC in 2045
Regarding the battery with the largest charging power, the profile from the fast charging
station shows one peak reaching 500kW with multiple charging sessions spreading over
1h30. These 350kWh require a much smaller capacity than in the previous case and the
relatively large charging power of 150.53kW is the optimum for minimising the battery
capacity at the same weight factor.
Figure 4.19: Profile of FC-4 at the lowest SOC in 2045
52
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:59==
The larger the capacity, the smaller the maximum charging power requirement as the
graph in figure 4.20 where weight factors are applied on both capacity and maximum
charging power, starting with respectively 0.1 and 0.9 on the left of the x-axis and going
to 0.9 and 0.1 in 0.1 increments to the right of the x-axis.
Figure 4.20: Individual profile battery sizes based on weight factors
4.6
Power flow with fast charging stations and
battery-based grid upgrade
Since the batteries dimensioned in the previous section are based on a unique load profile,
it means that they could not be able to provide support for a slightly different profile.
This is the reason why the optimisation algorithm is run with multiple profiles. To take
this uncertainty into account, one common size parameter needs to be chosen. In table
4.7 are shown power flow results based on which set of parameters are chosen.
Sizing based
on largest
charging power
Sizing based
on largest
capacity
Sizing based
on largest
charging power
and capacity
Number of fast chargers
violating the grid
connection power
4
14
0
Number of timesteps
with violation
6
30
0
Maximum power
above grid connection
allowance [kW/%]
73.14 / 85
315.52 / 179
0
Mean power
above grid connection
allowance [kW/%]
12.19 / 14
6.28 / 4
0
Table 4.7: Battery sizing common parameters
By selecting the set of parameters with the largest charging power (i.e.
150.53kW &
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
53
==PAGE:60==
461.27kWh) or with the largest capacity (i.e. 73.73kW & 1,010.24kWh), thermal overloads
happen in the grid. Only taking the combination of both largest parameters (i.e. 150.53kW
& 1,010.24kWh) removes all of these overloads.
This over-dimensioning, however, results in low utilization of the battery’s capacities,
making the economic investment less interesting.
Using the battery to provide other
services (deferral of investment in other assets for thermal overload or voltage issue reasons)
is required to minimise these investments. The SOC duration curve in figure 4.21 shows
the percentage of timestamps per year where the SOC is equal to or greater than a certain
value. For the combination of the largest charging power and capacity, no battery reaches
ever the lowest SOC of 10%. Across all batteries, the SOC never reaches below 35% and
it is 90% of the time above 85%.
Figure 4.21: SOC duration curve without additional support in 2045
4.6.1
Conventional-like topology
For this topology, the power flow calculation is run on the grid before the investments
regarding overloads caused by fast charging stations. The installed batteries are used to
remove these overloads by compensating and injecting more power into the grid if required.
The batteries charge at the fixed power of 150.53kW as calculated in section 4.6 and inject
their power back if the demand at the fast charging station is above this power limit.
Fast charging station-caused thermal overloads
The results show that the overloads happening in the five MV cables after connecting fast
charging stations can be resolved by using the battery’s active power controller. Due to
the low number of newly overloaded assets and the low number of timestamps in which
these overloads happen, the batteries’ sizing gives enough spare capacity in addition to
supplying power to the fast charging stations.
The graph in figure 4.22 shows a section of the time series results of one of the overloaded
cables. It can be observed that during the highest peak resulting in an overload, the battery
provides 83% of the required power at the fast charging station and only 150.53kW comes
from the grid. This removes the overload and significantly decreases the peak loading.
After this peak, the cable loading is slightly higher in the situation with batteries than
without due to the recharging power being drawn from the grid.
54
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.22: fast charging station-related overloaded cable loading with and without bat-
tery in 2045
DER-caused thermal overloads
The installed batteries can also provide support to solve thermal loading issues for cables
that got overloaded due to the DER rollout and required an upgrade in the first iteration
described in section 4.2. To analyse this potential, a power flow is run on the original grid
without any investments at MV level and the battery controllers are set to adapt their
power setpoint based on the loading of the MV cables between the primary substations
and the batteries. The results in table 4.8 show that for the 18 secondary substations
to which batteries are connected (some stations have two to three batteries connected),
thermal overloads happen in the upstream cables at three stations and can be completely
removed for one station. The severity of overloads can be decreased for the two other
secondary substations, but the number of overloaded cables remains the same.
Without batteries
With batteries
Transformer
station
Thermal
overloads
Average
overload [%]
Thermal
overloads
Average
overload [%]
1
14
19.00
14
12.57
13
4
15.43
0
-
14
11
21.18
11
15.87
Table 4.8: Number of MV cables with thermal overload issues per secondary substation
with a fast charging station
The reason why the number of overloaded cables can’t be decreased for the secondary
substations 1 and 14 is shown in figure 4.23. The overloaded cables upstream of these two
secondary substations connect a total of three fast charging stations. For visualisation
purposes, the sum of the fast charging stations and batteries power as well as the average
SOC are plotted. The time series section of one of the cables shows that it starts to be
overloaded and the batteries act in the expected manner by injecting more power into the
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
55
==PAGE:62==
grid. The cable loading is brought back to an acceptable level, until all three batteries
reach their minimum SOC, therefore not being able to support the grid anymore. At the
same time, there is a demand at two of the fast charging stations, resulting in an additional
overload. This situation happens multiple times over the year, resulting in an overall lower
number of overloaded timestamps (from 2.8% to 0.7% of the year) and a lower severity,
but still requiring a conventional cable upgrade.
Figure 4.23: DER-related overloaded cable loading with and without battery in 2045
Figure 4.24 displays a time series section of the battery’s action on one of the overloaded
cables from secondary substation 13 where the issues are solved.
Figure 4.24: DER-related overloaded cable loading with and without battery
56
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:63==
It can be observed that for the three overload peaks, the battery injects active power in the
grid that is not required by the fast charging station and is therefore directed at relieving
the cable loading. The other differences between the two cable time series are that neither
the battery nor the fast charging station is connected during the power flow resulting in
the orange curve.
In terms of battery utilisation, figure 4.25 shows the SOC duration curve of one of the
batteries providing additional support. This support results in a higher utilisation but
doesn’t have a major impact as the lowest SOC during the year drops from 44% to 40%.
Figure 4.25: SOC duration curve for battery 1 with and without additional support under
the conventional-like topology in 2045
4.6.2
Transformer LV-side topology
In this topology, the power flow is run on the grid with overload-related but not voltage-
related investments due to the rollout of DERs. It is also to be noted that the reactive
power consumption from the PV inverters is set to zero and they operate at a unity power
factor. The reactive power controller is then used to inject or consume reactive power and
reduce voltage issues.
When connecting the batteries to the LV side of the closest existing secondary substation,
they cannot charge at the fixed rate of 150.53kW, or otherwise, they might induce over-
loads in the transformer. For this reason, if there are no overloads at a specific timestamp,
the smallest remaining grid capacity across all components between the primary substa-
tion and the fast charging station is calculated and sets the maximum charging power.
Similarly, batteries are not discharged at the power demand at the fast charging station
minus 150.53kW as it was the case in the previous topology, but they are discharged at
the required level to avoid thermal overloads in the upstream part of the grid. This re-
sults in varying battery utilisation based on the size and the base load of the secondary
substations as figure 4.26 shows. Three batteries reach the lowest SOC of 10% and are
active (i.e. have a SOC lower than 90%) during 72% of the year while 17 batteries are
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
57
==PAGE:64==
active less than 10% of the year. These three batteries are connected to a transformer that
experiences a high base load, and due to the charging power being distributed over three
batteries and three fast charging stations connected to the same secondary substation, the
batteries’ utilisation is high compared to the other ones.
Figure 4.26: SOC duration curve under the transformer LV-side topology in 2045
With this topology, no additional thermal overloads are induced, especially at the existing
secondary substations where the fast charging stations are connected. These were not
upgraded due to the DER rollout either, so no additional active power support than the
one presented in the previous section is required. The overloads at MV cables that were
found due to the installation of fast charging stations are solved in the same manner
as presented in the previous section, however, the overloads that were induced by the
rollout of DERs cannot be solved anymore due to not enough remaining capacity at the
transformer to feed power back in the MV grid if required.
On the other side, reactive power support is provided due to voltage issues being identi-
fied in the LV feeders connected to the transformer stations. Table 4.9 lists the number of
cabinets for the four out of 18 secondary substations with a battery concerned with un-
dervoltage issues (after cable and transformer upgrades due to thermal overloads) before
and after the batteries’ installation.
Without batteries
With batteries
Secondary
substation
Voltage
issues
Average
Vmin [p.u.]
Voltage
issues
Average
Vmin [p.u.]
1
2
0.946
0
-
2
2
0.946
0
-
8
7
0.942
0
-
12
6
0.944
0
-
Table 4.9: Voltage impact per secondary substation under the LV-side topology
The results show that the batteries can remove all remaining voltage issues.
The graphs in figure 4.27 show the voltage at one of the cabinets connected to secondary
substation 2, in purple before the battery is connected and in green after. Two fast charging
stations and batteries are connected to this substation, so their power is summed. A time
58
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:65==
series section where reactive power is used to solve voltage issues is shown. During the time
of the voltage drop, the batteries inject reactive power into the grid, therefore relieving
the situation and bringing the voltage back within authorised values.
Figure 4.27: Voltage regulation through battery reactive power compensation
4.6.3
LV topology
Similar to the previous topology, a fixed charging power for the battery can’t be set due
to the variable remaining capacity through the grid. Connecting fast charging stations
down the LV feeder creates the issue that not enough remaining capacity is available in the
LV cables to charge the battery and therefore provide enough energy to the fast charging
station.
This battery topology is run on two different grids: one without any investments and one
with overload-related but not voltage-related investments. In both cases, reactive power
consumption from PV inverters is set to zero.
The results show that batteries and fast charging stations end up causing more thermal
overloads than the DER rollout in the grid without any investments. The remaining spare
capacity at LV level is not enough to accommodate for the additional load of the fast
charging station and the battery doesn’t get enough power to charge and support it. It
creates a larger number of thermal overloads both in LV cables and secondary substation
transformers which cannot be mitigated. In the thermal overload-related investment case,
the results are more mitigated and vary from battery to battery. Only four batteries do
not create additional overload when being connected. The remaining ones, in addition to
the overload-related upgrades due to the DER rollout, do require supplementary upgrades
to distribute the fast charging stations’ and batteries’ power.
One situation is shown in figure 4.28, where the loading of a transformer is shown in the
first graph additionally to the fast charging station time series. The section is from the
beginning of the simulation, where the SOC is initialised at 50%. The transformer has
a low loading, but LV cables don’t have enough spare capacity to charge the battery.
Therefore, the SOC often reaches its minimal value, resulting in transformer overloads.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.28: fast charging station-related overloaded transformer
Figure 4.29 displays an overview by showing the number of overloaded cables downstream
of a secondary substation where a fast charging station and battery are connected. Some of
the additional thermal overloads can also be partly explained by the larger and centralised
share of reactive power compensation by the batteries to mitigate voltage issues since no
reactive power from PV inverters or conventional upgrades mitigate these.
Figure 4.29: Number of overloaded LV cables in 2045 with and without fast charging
stations in a grid without investments
60
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.30 shows the situation regarding voltage issues, which is less critical than the
thermal overloads since only eight of the 27 batteries’ grids experience more voltage issues
than the original ones.
In the case of nine batteries, voltage issues that happened in
the original grid can be solved by the battery, even when considering the additional fast
charging station load.
Figure 4.30: Number of cabinets with voltage issues in 2045 with and without fast charging
stations in a grid without investments
The reason for the number of voltage issues increase compared to the original grid can be
explained through the example in figure 4.31.
Figure 4.31: Voltage regulation through battery reactive power compensation
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
61
==PAGE:68==
The plot shows a time series section of the power output of battery 24 as well as the
voltage at two cabinets: cabinet 1, the purple curve, experiencing an overvoltage and
cabinet 2, the green curve, to which the battery is connected. In this case, an overvoltage
situation is identified in the grid. The battery starts to absorb reactive power to mitigate
it (dashed line in the second graph). However, the cabinet experiencing an overvoltage
is not the one to which the battery is connected but is placed in a different feeder. This
cabinet wasn’t experiencing voltage issues, but due to the reactive power absorption, the
voltage there starts to decrease and ends up laying below the lower voltage limit. The
undervoltage at the cabinet with the battery is, therefore, a consequence of the regulation
action. A different control strategy wouldn’t yield different results, since the root cause of
the induced undervoltage is the reactive power absorption location, which is dependent on
the battery, and not the way the reactive power is absorbed. A slightly different control
algorithm would be not to track the voltage at all cabinets in a grid but only at the one
to which the battery is connected or the ones in that feeder. In this case, the controller
would not react to the overvoltage at cabinet 1, therefore not changing the battery’s
reactive power output and inducing the undervoltage at cabinet 2. When running the
simulation with these parameters, however, no significant changes to the results presented
in figures 4.29 and 4.30 are observed.
This is not an issue in the previous topology since the batteries are connected to the
LV secondary substation bus, which typically has a more stable voltage than the one at
cabinets further downstream. In the previous topology, reactive power injection does not
cause issues at the transformer’s LV bus.
Due to the limited grid capacity at LV level, the batteries are significantly more utilised
than in the previous topologies. The SOC duration curve in figure 4.32 shows that a group
of six batteries reach the lowest SOC during 6% of the year and 8 other reach it at least
for one timestamp, resulting in the additional thermal overloads previously observed. The
higher utilisation has an impact on losses and therefore the economic assessment.
Figure 4.32: SOC duration curve under the LV topology in 2045
4.7
Economic comparison
The cost of a transformer station to connect the fast charging station in a conventional
manner serves as the benchmark and is therefore identical across all battery topology
62
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:69==
options. The cost of connecting the fast charging station to the closest existing transformer
station HV side is the one of laying down a 10kV cable with a dimension of 150 mm2. The
total resulting costs per fast charging station are detailed in table 4.10, including CAPEX,
O&M costs for transformers, and calculated losses by pandapower. The costs are based
on constant CAPEX and O&M costs and varying losses based on utilisation.
Station
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Station
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Station
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
1
19.99
10
27.53
19
18.6
2
18.55
11
17.66
20
15.43
3
19.56
12
26.3
21
21.28
4
16.38
13
18.02
22
16.15
5
21.5
14
17.86
23
19.97
6
23.35
15
17.96
24
19.44
7
19.59
16
20.16
25
18.7
8
17.34
17
16.26
26
22.95
9
18.67
18
16.16
27
20.32
Table 4.10: Conventional connection costs of fast charging stations
All the battery prices used in this section follow the medium price development scenario
presented in figure 3.29.
4.7.1
Conventional-like topology
The costs of the batteries under the conventional-like topology are shown in table 4.11.
These costs are calculated as the batteries’ and cables’ CAPEX, O&M costs and losses,
minus the transformer costs of table 4.10 since they wouldn’t be required. Due to tech-
nology costs and higher losses, battery prices are between 212% and 491% more expensive
than a connection with transformers, except for battery 1 which benefits from additional
savings and is 113% more expensive. Generally, batteries’ costs tend to decrease over
time with the CAPEX and therefore O&M costs reduction. Variations between the years
depend on the batteries’ utilisation and the resulting losses.
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
1
42.63
10
86.13
19
88.86
2
105.43
11
89.35
20
89.81
3
103.22
12
85.37
21
85.38
4
99.89
13
89.93
22
92.53
5
94.18
14
96.2
23
118.06
6
123.29
15
89.14
24
85.89
7
92.15
16
89.66
25
86.73
8
95.29
17
92.15
26
117.69
9
85.5
18
93.46
27
93.88
Table 4.11: Costs of batteries under the conventional-like topology
Since batteries are connected in the same way as a new transformer station would be, the
costs of cables are discarded in the following comparison.
It happens that battery 1 is the same unit that provides active power support to relieve
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
63
==PAGE:70==
the grid from thermal overloads caused by both the DER rollout and the fast charging
station connection. Therefore, its cost-benefit analysis (CBA) will benefit from both the
savings on the four MV cables that would have needed to be upgraded because of DERs
and the five MV cables because of the fast charging station connection.
Figure 4.33 shows the detailed breakdown of the cost-benefit analysis of battery 1 in the
form of a waterfall chart.
Figure 4.33: CBA breakdown of battery 1 under the conventional-like topology
The first and second bars from the left show the cost breakdown of respectively transformer
and battery over CAPEX, O&M and losses. For the transformer, 37% of the yearly costs
are due to CAPEX, 43% to O&M and 20% to losses. For the battery, the same distribution
is respectively 34%, 18% and 48%. The third bar represents the potential savings with
the battery option. First, the transformer costs (left bar) would be completely avoided.
Second, the CAPEX costs over the lifetime of the in total nine MV cables not requiring
an upgrade since the battery would solve the thermal overloads would also be saved. The
battery costs minus the potential savings give the total battery costs. These savings help
the battery reduce its yearly costs by 65%, yet the transformer-based solution remains
66% cheaper than the battery one.
Regarding the cables where the average overload values are decreased but not solved, the
CBA of one of the three concerned batteries is shown in figure 4.34. In this case, the
overload reduction still requires the same upgrade, as the additional savings are equal to
the additional CAPEX, meaning that the cable costs saved on with the battery are equal
to the cable costs to solve remaining issues after the battery is installed. In this case,
the battery’s final costs only benefit from the transformer savings, representing a cost
reduction of 10% and leaving the transformer as an option 89% cheaper than the battery.
64
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.34: CBA breakdown of battery 6 under the conventional-like topology
4.7.2
Transformer LV-side topology
For this topology and the following one, cable costs are included in the comparison. This
is because the transformer solution is connected to the existing grid with a 10kV 150 mm2
cable, while the batteries and the fast charging stations are connected to the LV part of
the grid, with a 300 mm2 0.4kV cable.
It is also to be noted that voltage issues are mitigated conventionally by reactive power
compensation from PV inverters (which solves 76% of issues) and through thermal overload-
caused upgrades (which solves 12% of issues). This reactive power compensation is as-
sumed here to have no costs and the costs induced by thermal overload-related investments
are not used as benchmarks since they only mitigate voltage issues as a consequence, not
a primary goal. Therefore, the economic benefit of the batteries might be underestimated
in that regard.
Due to the varying power output of the battery not based on a fixed rate but on the
thermal loading situation, the batteries’ price distribution is significantly different than
in the previous topology. Some batteries connected to a low-loaded secondary substation
result in low utilisation and therefore lower losses (which is the case for batteries 1 and
19 e.g.), while the opposite happens for other batteries (such as batteries 13, 15 and 20
e.g.). This is also outlined in the SOC duration curve in figure 4.26. The costs of batteries,
including LV cable connection costs are shown in table 4.12. In the case where conventional
upgrades are differed due to the action of multiple batteries, e.g. when two batteries are
connected to the same secondary substation that needed a conventional upgrade due to
voltage issues, then the savings are distributed equally over the two batteries.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
65
==PAGE:72==
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
1
21.41
10
67.07
19
31.1
2
45.65
11
182.47
20
218.18
3
100.11
12
65.37
21
83.81
4
42.31
13
220.05
22
45.31
5
58.08
14
63.81
23
37.42
6
118.2
15
219.95
24
28.48
7
62.53
16
86.35
25
41.75
8
44.88
17
43.97
26
112.91
9
177.98
18
35.29
27
42.12
Table 4.12: Costs of batteries under the transformer LV-side topology
The batteries’ costs end up laying between 7% and 1,121% more than the transformer
connection costs, with an average decrease of 63% for 22 batteries and an average increase
of 43% for the remaining batteries compared to the previous topology.
The most competitive battery to the conventional connection way is battery 1. It benefits
from the same savings on the five MV cables that got overloaded when connecting the
fast charging stations and it additionally decreases its losses by 66% as the secondary
substation it is connected to shows enough spare capacity to provide power to the fast
charging station during most of the time, therefore reducing the battery’s utilisation. The
transformers’ loss difference between the power flow results with and without fast charging
stations is taken into account.
Figure 4.35 shows the CBA breakdown of battery 23. This battery benefits from total
savings of 41% and reduces its final costs from 329% to 193% of the transformer’s costs.
Figure 4.35: CBA breakdown of battery 23 under the transformer LV-side topology
66
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:73==
Additional savings can also be reached on batteries 7, 14 (5,951 DKK/year each), 9,
11 (4,770 DKK/year each) and 19 (3,544 DKK/year), resulting in a cost reduction of
respectively 9%, 9%, 3% 3% and 10% additionally to the transformer savings. It can be
observed that more batteries contribute to solving issues than in the previous topology,
however, due to LV cables being cheaper than MV cables, these savings are lower than
previously.
4.7.3
LV topology
Table 4.13 displays the batteries’ costs under the low voltage topology. The higher prices
are mostly due to the higher losses resulting from the frequent utilisation to remove over-
loads compared to the previous topologies, as well as the upgrade required for newly
overloaded cables and transformers.
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
1
97.53
10
141.78
19
107.19
2
98.09
11
159.57
20
186.05
3
224.96
12
141.87
21
81.42
4
205.6
13
186.08
22
199.03
5
153.19
14
169.64
23
99.76
6
148.43
15
185.94
24
193.81
7
108.73
16
133.49
25
104.66
8
143.37
17
205.58
26
138.3
9
161.04
18
112.81
27
74.93
Table 4.13: Costs of batteries under the LV topology
Figure 4.36 shows the CBA breakdown of battery 7.
Figure 4.36: CBA breakdown of battery 7 under the LV topology
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
67
==PAGE:74==
In this case, the deferral of some voltage-related investments is compensated by higher
costs due to newly induced thermal overloads and higher losses.
The same situation
happens for multiple other batteries.
The prices lay between 206% and 1,109% of the conventional transformer costs and are
more expensive than under the transformer LV-side topology for 21 batteries by 41% and
less expensive for the remaining batteries by 88% on average. This configuration is also
more expensive than the conventional-like topology in 23 cases, by 58%.
4.7.4
Summary
Figure 4.37 displays a summary of the price per installation across the conventional up-
grade and the three battery topologies. It outlines that the conventional upgrade is always
superior in terms of costs, with a few cases where the transformer LV-side topology is a
close competitor but is far off in most of them. The LV topology is the most expensive of
all options in most cases, except in some situations where the transformer LV-side topology
is more expensive due to high losses at secondary substations.
Figure 4.37: Summary of installation costs under the different topologies
4.8
Sensitivity analysis
4.8.1
Hybrid upgrade
Another variant of the transformer LV-side topology is to install a new transformer, similar
to the conventional method, but with a smaller rating and a battery supporting it. I.e.,
instead of installing an 800kVA transformer, a 400kVA with a battery connected to its LV
side to supply power during peak times could be chosen. The battery sizing optimisation
algorithm is rerun with the maximum charging power constraint set to 400kW and capacity
to 250kWh. The largest sizing that satisfies all profiles is 237.77kWh.
The simulation is rerun with an updated topology shown in figure 4.38. The charging
68
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:75==
power of the battery is set by the controller based on the remaining capacity through the
transformer. The transformer and battery sizings allow for the fast charging station to be
supplied with the required power at any time, and no thermal overload issues are induced
compared to the transformer LV-side topology.
Figure 4.38: Hybrid upgrade topology
This method removes the additional loading on the existing transformer in comparison
to the transformer LV-side topology but also removes the possibility for reactive power
support on the existing LV grid. The advantage of this topology is the lower battery costs
due to the reduced size, which are shown in table 4.14. Here, the battery-option costs
are composed of the addition of the CAPEX, O&M and losses costs from the 400kVA
transformer and the battery, and the conventional transformer costs are the ones from the
800kVA transformer.
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
Battery
Yearly costs
[kDKK/year]
1
13.93
10
2.89
19
11.64
2
15.08
11
13.19
20
14.84
3
13.4
12
4.58
21
8.72
4
15.32
13
12.79
22
13.97
5
9.96
14
13.32
23
9.8
6
7.49
15
12.99
24
10.31
7
11.14
16
10.2
25
11.35
8
13.62
17
14.06
26
6.74
9
11.84
18
13.92
27
10.58
Table 4.14: Costs of connection (battery + 400kVA transformer) under the hybrid topology
The resulting costs are lower than the conventional connection costs in every case, with
being on average 62% more cost-eﬀicient.
The reduced battery losses due to its low
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
69
==PAGE:76==
utilisation as it is only activated for peaks over 400kW combined with a transformer
CAPEX being 48% cheaper than the 800kVA one result in interesting savings. Optimising
the battery sizing algorithm to take this into account might give a battery and transformer
combination that results in even higher savings.
4.8.2
Grouping batteries
In this grid model, 27 batteries are distributed over 18 different secondary substations in
the conventional-like and transformer LV-side topologies. It is therefore possible to com-
bine batteries per secondary station as figure 4.39 shows, which could result in a cumulated
smaller capacity required than two or three individual batteries. For this purpose, the fast
charging station profiles of the batteries to combine are summed and the battery sizing
optimisation problem is run on this new input data. The resulting calculated sizes with
an equal weight coeﬀicient on the charging power and capacity are shown in table 4.15.
Figure 4.39: Grouping battery per secondary substation
Grouped battery
Initial number
of batteries
Max charging
power [kW]
Capacity [kWh]
1
2
97.45
1,833.55
2
2
96.84
2,505.23
3
2
93.91
2,266.05
4
2
95.41
2,085.06
5
2
95.30
1,931.95
6
3
141.24
2,626.07
7
3
145.60
2,167.93
Table 4.15: Grouped profile battery sizes
70
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:77==
The optimisation results for grouping two batteries show that the optimal combination of
charging power and capacity lies at a significantly lower maximum charging power for all
batteries (previously 150.53kW). This results in a larger capacity requirement than the one
that could be achieved with a larger charging power, therefore more than doubling costs
compared to the individual battery per fast charging station. The optimisation problem is
therefore rerun but instead of optimising both charging power and capacity, the charging
power is set at an upper bound of 150.53kW and removed from the objective function.
The updated results are shown in table 4.16.
Grouped battery
Initial number
of batteries
Max charging
power [kW]
Capacity [kWh]
1
2
150.53
961.22
2
2
150.53
874.76
3
2
150.53
1,099.35
4
2
150.53
1,111.31
5
2
150.53
1,007.69
6
3
150.53
2,089.79
7
3
150.53
2,081.34
Table 4.16: Grouped profile battery sizes with fixed charging power
Based on the similar approach as in section 4.5, the minimum working combination to
cover uncertainties is a battery with 1,111.31kWh capacity when grouping two batteries,
and 2,089.79kWh capacity when grouping three batteries. It needs to be noted that the
uncertainty in this calculation is greater than in the individual one, where 27 different
profiles were used.
Here, only five and two profiles are used.
The cost reduction on
CAPEX and O&M compared to individual batteries with 1,010.24kWh capacity is 55%
for grouping two batteries and 31% for grouping three. When adding the costs of one
secondary substation per fast charging station in the conventional upgrade way, the cost
reduction is even greater.
Implementing this solution for the LV topology would require laying a parallel network to
the existing one that would connect the battery with all fast charging stations since the
spare capacity in the LV grid is not large enough to transport the power required by fast
charging stations in most cases.
When running an updated power flow simulation, the grouped batteries are able to supply
the required power at the fast charging stations. None of the grouped batteries can be used
for active power support since they are not located downstream of thermal overload issues,
so no additional savings can be made in the conventional-like topology. However, four of
the batteries now grouped into two provide reactive power support in the transformer
LV-side topology. Table 4.17 compares the yearly costs (including potential savings) of
the conventional transformer upgrade, and the individual and grouped battery costs.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
71
==PAGE:78==
Grouped
battery
Initial
number
of batteries
Transformer costs
(conventional)
[kDKK/year]
Individual
battery costs
[kDKK/year]
Grouped
battery costs
[kDKK/year]
1
2
43.3
236.46
101.67
2
2
41.21
234.88
38.52
3
2
35
232.7
194.16
4
2
53.83
137.78
55.15
5
2
34.85
92.42
26.77
6
3
59.99
223.92
104.08
7
3
51.43
728.58
371.9
Table 4.17: Costs of grouped batteries under the transformer LV-side topology
The battery grouping reduces overall costs by 17% to 84% compared to individual batter-
ies. Two of the combinations, grouped batteries 2 and 5 end up being more competitive
than the transformer solution. It is to be noted that this process of grouping batteries
requires coordination since two of the batteries that might be connected to the same ex-
isting transformer station might be installed with a 10 or 15-year difference due to the
fast charging station penetration curve, therefore reducing the coordination potential.
Figure 4.40 displays the CBA breakdown when combining the costs of two conventional
secondary substations and the cumulated savings. In this case, the additional savings on
the two transformers and the cables that were upgraded for voltage issues reason make
the battery option 7% cheaper than the transformer option.
Figure 4.40: CBA breakdown of grouped battery 2 under the conventional-like topology
72
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:79==
4.8.3
Asset prices
The economic analysis presented in the previous section was based on medium scenarios
for conventional components and battery prices. Here, two additional price scenarios, low
and high will be investigated both for conventional assets and batteries. The low and high
price scenarios for batteries are shown in figure 3.29 and for conventional assets, they are
respectively 50% lower and higher than the previously used prices.
Overview
The economic results of the different scenarios are shown in the sensitivity matrix in
table 4.18. The combination of each price scenario for conventional assets and batteries is
calculated and the most cost-eﬀicient option is stated for each of these combinations. The
percentage value represents the number of cases (each battery under each topology) in
which the most cost-eﬀicient method is superior. The results show that the conventional
solution is the most cost-effective one in most cases even in extreme scenarios, with high
conventional component prices and low battery prices e.g., where batteries are superior
in only 11% of all cases. The total cost differences are so high that the model isn’t very
sensitive to price variations.
Battery
Low
Medium
High
Low
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Conventional
assets
Medium
Transformer
98.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
High
Transformer
89.0%
Transformer
96.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Table 4.18: Asset price sensitivity matrix across all topologies
When considering only the most competitive topology, i.e. the transformer LV-side one,
the results shift towards batteries becoming more competitive, as outlined in the sensitivity
matrix 4.19, but again, only up to 30% of all cases are competitive.
Battery
Low
Medium
High
Low
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Conventional
assets
Medium
Transformer
93.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
High
Transformer
70.0%
Transformer
89.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Table 4.19: Asset price sensitivity matrix under the transformer LV-side topology
Changing the battery size doesn’t significantly impact the results either. Until now, a
1,010.24kWh battery was considered, due to the common sizing across all profiles chosen
in section 4.6. When specifying 150.53kW charging power as a constraint and rerunning
the optimisation algorithm, the larger battery capacity is 625.07kWh (38% decrease) and is
still able to provide the active and reactive power support previously mentioned. Running
the sensitivity analysis over all topologies gives the sensitivity matrix 4.20.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
73
==PAGE:80==
Battery
Low
Medium
High
Low
Transformer
99.0%
Transformer
99.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Conventional
assets
Medium
Transformer
86.0%
Transformer
95.0%
Transformer
99.0%
High
Transformer
79.0%
Transformer
80.0%
Transformer
90.0%
Table 4.20: Asset price sensitivity matrix under a 625.07kWh battery
Batteries become a superior solution in less favourable economic cases than before (e.g.
high battery and medium conventional asset prices), but overall in only between 1% and
10% more cases than with the 1,010.24kWh battery. This can be explained by the losses,
which are not size-dependent, making up larger shares of the overall battery prices.
Conventional asset most favourable scenario
The most favourable case for the conventional asset-based solution, shown in figure 4.41
is under a low conventional asset price scenario and a high battery price. In this case,
some additional savings are made but these as well as the transformer savings are offset by
newly induced overloads and voltage issues since this case happens under the LV topology.
This battery is also concerned with massive losses due to a high utilisation.
Figure 4.41: CBA breakdown the most competitive conventional option
Battery most favourable scenario
The battery’s most competitive case is one of the edge cases, where the final battery’s
costs are close to zero, as shown in figure 4.42. This case, under the transformer LV-side
topology, benefits from savings on MV cables due to active power support. It happens
during the conventional asset high price and battery low price scenario.
74
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:81==
Figure 4.42: CBA breakdown the most competitive conventional battery
4.8.4
Electricity prices
The electricity price, used for losses in the CBA calculation, is the 2021 average day-ahead
spot price for the bidding area DK2. For the sensitivity analysis, this will be assumed as
the medium scenario and a low scenario (2020 price, 211.73 DKK/MWh, 68% lower) and
a high scenario (2022 price, 1,563.34 DKK/MWh, 239% higher) are assessed [23].
The results in the sensitivity matrix 4.21 show for each topology and electricity price the
option which is the most cost-eﬀicient one and the percentage of cases (i.e. across all 27
batteries) under which it is more cost-eﬀicient.
Electricity price scenario
Low
Medium
High
Conventional-like
Transformer
96.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Topology
configuration
Transformer LV-side
Transformer
96.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
LV
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Transformer
100.0%
Table 4.21: Electricity price sensitivity matrix
Similar to the asset prices, the electricity price doesn’t significantly impact the compet-
itiveness of one solution over the other. Only under the low electricity price scenario,
4% of the battery cases are cheaper than the conventional upgrade for two topologies.
The batteries with the lowest losses pass under the threshold of the conventional upgrade
costs.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
75
==PAGE:82==
5
Discussion
5.1
Technical assessment
5.1.1
Battery topologies
The three battery connection topologies presented here allow for different contributions
of these on the grid. These contributions can be split between active and reactive power
support and are limited by the chosen topology. The conventional-like topology, where the
battery is connected at the LV side of the closest secondary substation requires MV power
electronics. Additionally, this topology can only provide active power support on MV
cables and primary substations. However, since these assets are generally more expensive
than the LV ones, in the case of a battery being able to differ some of these investments, its
economic assessment will be significantly impacted for the better. Reactive power support
is not provided here, since voltage issues appear only in the LV part of the grid and there
is not enough transformer capacity to distribute reactive power without inducing thermal
overloads.
The transformer LV-side topology allows to solve some of the thermal overloads happening
at the MV part of the grid, under the limitation of the transformer’s capacity. Active power
support can also be provided to this transformer but is not required here. Additionally,
reactive power support to the LV grid can be provided. Voltage issues that would need
to be solved by upgrading existing cables can therefore be avoided. This reactive power
support doesn’t impact the batteries’ SOC or state of health (SOH) since it is completely
emulated by the inverters.
The final topology connects the batteries and the fast charging stations to the closest
cabinet. This downstream connection creates challenges since the required power to charge
the batteries and supply the fast charging stations needs to be distributed through the
LV grid which already faces issues due to the DER rollout. In theory, the battery could
provide active power support to upstream cables and substations on both MV and LV
levels, additionally to reactive power support.
In practice, the required power for the
additional load from the fast charging stations creates new thermal overloads and voltage
issues, which makes this topology configuration not a suitable solution.
5.1.2
Battery sizing
The optimisation problem which sizes batteries based on a fast charging station load
profile has demonstrated its accuracy when looking at individual profiles. However, when
choosing a common size for all batteries that would satisfy all generated profiles, the only
combination which doesn’t violate any grid constraint is the one of the largest charging
power and capacity, resulting in an over-dimensioned battery for the sole purpose of fast-
charging active power support. When using this battery to provide active power support
to other assets, some of these batteries start to use their full range of capacity, but until
then it results in a large investment need with limited benefits.
The positive aspect of this low utilisation is that the batteries’ degradation will be slower
and their SOH will remain high for a longer time than for highly utilised batteries.
This results in a longer lifetime and therefore decreases the CAPEX over time. To increase
the batteries’ utilisation, participation in other regulation markets such as primary fre-
quency control can be considered, especially when grouping all the batteries in a virtual
power plant. This needs to be coordinated with the fast charging station demand and
76
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:83==
the batteries can only be scheduled during hours when the demand is low. The resulting
risk, however, is that the batteries induce thermal overloads when being activated for that
purpose. This activation would result in value stacking, further discussed in section 5.3.2.
5.1.3
Existing transformer upgrade
The strength of the conventional-like topology is the removal of MV-side thermal overloads
through active power support, and therefore consequent additional savings. The trans-
former LV-side topology can, additionally to voltage support through reactive power, also
contribute to removing MV-side thermal overloads. However, this topology is limited by
the secondary substation’s transformer size and can in this case, only solve the minor
thermal overloads. A hybrid solution could be to upgrade the size of the transformer to
allow for more power to flow through. This would reduce the battery’s costs by allowing
for greater savings on cable costs, but the required transformer upgrade would diminish
these savings and this drawback needs to be assessed.
5.1.4
Voltage issue mitigation methods
As mentioned in section 3.2.2, several methods can be used to deal with voltage issues.
Here, the use of reactive power compensation from the PV inverters in combination with
a conventional cable upgrade to reduce the internal resistance is used. Other methods
can be used, such as transformer tap changers. It is mentioned that these could not be
used due to not being on-load tap changers remotely or sensor-based controlled. However,
in a grid with the suited components, simulations using the pandapower transformer tap
changer controller [17] could show whether this solution is suited and enough to remove
all voltage issues. Three other solutions exist: the use of reactive power compensation
units, placed strategically in the grid where reactive power injection or consumption has
the most positive effect, could be investigated. Another one is to equip PV inverters with
a controller that sets the active power injection to zero when the voltage measured at the
connection point is above a certain threshold. The final one is to extend the MV grid in
areas where the most severe voltage issues at LV level are identified. Replacing some LV
cables with MV ones and installing new transformer stations would help technically but
need to be economically assessed first.
5.2
Economic assessment
The economic sensitivity analysis has shown that the model is not very sensitive to asset
and battery prices. The cost differences are so significant that price variations in both
these categories do not affect the majority of outcomes. Only some edge cases give the
economic advantage to the battery-based solution.
The electricity price also plays a role in the economic assessment but to a lower extent.
Due to the batteries’ higher losses in comparison to transformers, they are more affected
both positively in the case of low electricity prices and negatively in the case of high prices.
The chosen electricity price here is the 2021 average day-ahead one, significantly higher
than the previous years but similar to the 2023 one. A strong future price evolution could
move the balance in favour of one or the other option, but only in a minority of cases.
Batteries that benefit from the highest additional savings are the ones able to differ in-
vestments in the MV part of the grid. However, these are also the batteries that will be
activated most often to solve these issues. These savings, then come at the cost of higher
losses (which are taken into account in the CBA analysis) and at a higher degradation
rate, potentially resulting in a lower lifetime which would affect negatively the batteries’
costs.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
77
==PAGE:84==
The best economic outcome is reached under different topology variations, such as the hy-
brid upgrade, which is systematically cheaper than the conventional upgrade, or grouping
batteries when the topology allows it, resulting in 29% of cases under which the battery
is economically superior.
5.3
Futher considerations
5.3.1
Battery ownership
In this thesis, the ownership of the battery lies in the hands of the grid operators. However,
based on current regulations, these are not allowed to own or operate such an asset [68].
When a battery is installed in combination with a fast charging station today, the charge
point operator is usually the owner and operator of the battery. This battery can then be
used to perform energy arbitrage: the operator charges it when the electricity spot price
is low, therefore decoupling the charging sessions from the time when power is drawn from
the grid [69]. While this method can be very effective for the charge point operator to
reduce both connection and energy costs, the battery is not operated in a grid-supportive
way, and could even increase the stress on it if one assumes that owners of EVs charging
at home follow similar price signals.
Therefore, the grid-supportive operation of the batteries as presented in this thesis is only
possible under the participation of the charge point operator in local congestion or voltage
support markets where the financial incentives are higher than the potential savings from
energy arbitrage or a change of regulations allowing the grid operators to own and operate
these assets (which is currently discussed [68]).
The work in this thesis shows that under the right conditions, grid investment savings can
be reached by using batteries. If these batteries could be owned by grid operators, social
welfare could be increased and society could benefit from it. Therefore, the regulation
framework needs to be adapted to allow this while enforcing rules to ensure that the
batteries are not misused to generate additional revenues.
5.3.2
Value stacking
Value stacking is using the battery for multiple purposes and offering its services on mul-
tiple markets, therefore maximising its utilisation and increasing the revenue stream. Al-
ready mentioned in the previous sections, this is dependent on the battery ownership and
the regulation framework around it. Besides congestion management and investment de-
ferral, common battery applications are primary frequency control and energy arbitrage.
As of now, these two cannot be performed by grid operators, due to unbundling regula-
tions. From a technical point of view, the remaining battery capacity after its primary
objective (here differ grid investments) needs to be assessed first. The average number of
cycles per year under different topologies is shown in table 5.1.
Topology
Average number of cycles
per battery per year
Conventional-like
94
Transformer LV-side
59
LV
50
Hybrid upgrade
8
Table 5.1: Number of cycles per topology
With an assumed average 2,000 cycles lifetime, over a 20-year period as used here, batteries
78
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:85==
in the conventional-like topology do not have a significant spare capacity. This is mostly
due to the control method which uses a fixed charging power, compared to the other ones
based on the grid’s status. The same method on the conventional-like topology would
probably result in a lower number of cycles. On the LV topology, the cycle number is
lower than the transformer LV-side topology because of the grid upgrade performed to
accommodate the battery and fast charging loads. Before these upgrades, the average
number of cycles per battery and year lies at 157, resulting in an estimated lifetime of 13
years. The other topologies and in particular the hybrid upgrade could offer more spare
capacity, between 820 and 1,840 cycles for other purposes, over 20 years or more.
From a scheduling point of view, figure 5.1 shows the batteries’ minimum remaining capac-
ity for every day of a year after investment deferral activation under the conventional-like
topology.
Figure 5.1: Minimum remaining capacity per hour under the conventional-like topology
over a year
This topology connects the batteries to the MV part of the grid, therefore making feeding
back not dependent on the capacity of the LV grid. It shows that for some hours of the
day, the remaining capacity is relatively homogenous across the battery fleet, but still
with differences of up to 40% (e.g. from 05:00 to 15:00), and spreads out even more in
the evening and night. This shows that each battery needs to be assessed individually
before it can be used to do value stacking since not all of them might be available. The
other aspect to consider is local congestion at the activation time, to ensure that no new
thermal overloads are induced in the distribution grid when using the batteries on other
markets.
5.3.3
Battery size footprint
The battery’s footprint is another factor that influences its economic impact. When in-
stalling a fast charging station in a public parking space, it can be assumed that the space
requirements are not as strict as compared to a densely built urban area. However, batter-
ies of the size investigated here still require a larger footprint than a secondary substation
that would be built in the conventional option (14.4m2 for a 1MWh battery vs. 7.41m2 for
a 800kVA secondary substation) [70, 71]. The space for the battery that would otherwise
probably be an additional parking spot represents a loss for the parking operator who
would ask for some sort of compensation. This cost needs to be added to the batteries’
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
79
==PAGE:86==
economic impact and might make it a less viable option.
5.3.4
Flexibility
Flexibility is a widely discussed topic in the electric grid and markets as a solution to
accommodate high loads in grids that are not dimensioned to withstand these. In this
case, as well, flexibility could be a viable solution to reduce some of the investments that
represent a significant amount of money and are caused by peaks.
More than 80% of the voltage issues due to the rollout of DERs are solved during the
thermal overload-related investments, but 66% of the total upgrade costs are spent on
solving the remaining 20%. Similarly, the overload peaks that happen after connecting
the fast charging stations only occur during a few timesteps. Savings could be achieved on
the cables to upgrade or the battery to install by activating flexibility on other installations
(since fast charging stations are not suited for that due to the immediate power expectation
from the users). Installing a small-scale battery to handle these peaks might also be a
viable solution, as presented under the hybrid topology.
80
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:87==
6
Conclusion
The methodology for a grid planning algorithm to assess the impact of DERs and fast
charging stations has been developed and tested on the grid and meter data from the
Danish DSO NKE-Elnet. Furthermore, a conventional and a battery-based upgrade to
accommodate fast charging stations have been compared technically and economically,
under different topology configurations.
The impact of DERs results in thermal overloads and voltage issues mostly on the LV side
of the grid, requiring investments and the use of other measures such as reactive power
compensation.
The total investment need due to the additional load and production
capacity lies at 79MDKK until 2045, with 92% of these costs caused by issues in the low
voltage grid. The voltage issues not being solved by reactive power compensation require
a cable upgrade and represent 66% of the total investment.
Fast charging stations mostly impact the MV grid by increasing the loading in primary
substations and MV cables.
In this case, the MV grid showed enough spare capacity
resulting in only a few issues due to additional loading compared to DERs. The alternative
solution to the conventional grid extension is to use batteries. These fulfil their role without
causing technical issues, but their higher costs and losses make this option 212% to 491%
higher than the cost of using transformers.
One advantage of batteries is their additional saving potential that can be achieved by
removing the need to replace assets with thermal overloads or voltage issues due to the
DER or fast charging station rollout. The developed active and reactive power controllers
show that the power output of batteries can be controlled based on the grid’s status to
reduce thermal loading and voltage issues. Different battery topologies are tested and can
target either the MV grid by placing batteries upstream of secondary substations or the
LV grid by placing them downstream of these stations. Thermal overloads on the MV grid
can be removed and significant savings can be reached due to the high costs of MV cables,
resulting in battery savings of up to 65%. Fewer thermal overloads can be removed when
connecting the batteries to the LV grid, but this configuration can solve voltage issues.
The resulting battery savings lay between 3% and 41%.
However, the battery-based solution is not economically viable even with these savings
due to the relatively high costs of batteries compared to conventional grid components
and their higher losses. Across all topologies situations, a transformer-based conventional
upgrade is between 7% and 1,109% more cost-eﬀicient, the large spread being due to
energy losses and battery-induced savings or additional expenses.
This model is not particularly sensitive to price variations. Conventional assets and bat-
tery price development as well as electricity prices were investigated and results show that
the conventional upgrade method is economically more viable in the large majority of
cases. Sensitivity analyses show that batteries are more cost-eﬀicient than conventional
upgrades only in up to 11% of the cases depending on the chosen topology and the in-
dividual situation. In the most cost-eﬀicient topology, 30% of the investigated cases are
less expensive than a conventional upgrade under the right economic situation. Differ-
ent topology variations yield better results, such as grouping batteries for multiple fast
charging stations creates individual situations where batteries are economically superior
to transformers. Using a hybrid upgrade where a transformer is built and combined with
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
81
==PAGE:88==
a smaller capacity battery is the most competitive topology variation, resulting in an aver-
age of 62% cost savings compared to a conventional upgrade. This topology shows that a
transformer sized at 50% of the connection needed in combination with an optimally sized
battery is a reliable and cost-eﬀicient solution, especially when compared to a conventional
upgrade.
It can be concluded that using batteries to differ conventional grid investments is sensi-
tive to the chosen topology and while some might not be a universal solution and need
to be assessed individually, others give systematic savings. The grid planning algorithm
developed and tested on this use case presents a methodology that grid planners can use
to assess the technical and economic impact of the two discussed grid upgrade methods.
The current and forecasted battery prices are one of the main challenges regarding the
competitiveness of this solution compared to conventional assets. In case of major addi-
tional decreases in these prices or increases in conventional asset prices, the battery-based
solution might significantly gain attractiveness. Further major blockers to getting there
are the current regulation not allowing DSOs to own and operate such assets, and the lack
of experience of grid operators with these assets.
This analysis was performed from the DSO point of view. For a charge point operator,
the battery solution still makes sense, as it allows for a faster and cheaper connection to
the grid, and operational savings by decoupling the fast charging station demand from the
time the power needs to be drawn from the grid. If not owned by the DSO, the batteries
could also be used to perform other grid services, such as primary frequency control. This
would result in a higher utilisation and lower costs, but requires coordination with the
fast charging station demand and could result in inducing new thermal overloads. These
operation modes might, therefore, end up with higher investment needs for the DSO.
Future work
Future investigations can be carried out on multiple aspects touched upon in this thesis.
Regarding the generation of fast charging station profiles, differences between stations
based on parameters that were not taken into account here can appear: a station located
next to a road experiencing a high traﬀic number will probably be more used than a
station seeing less traﬀic. Charging price is also an important factor, as users will prefer
a cheaper operator. Finally, based on the location type of the fast charging station, its
peak usage and the time of this peak might vary based on which type of amenities it
is close to [72]. Another investigation area is the batteries’ charging mode. Here, the
batteries are charged either based on a fixed charging power or on the available remaining
grid capacity. Another mode could charge the battery based on the upcoming needs. A
machine learning algorithm could be trained based on a large number of profiles and it
could optimise the charging of the battery based on the forecasted upcoming demand at
the fast charging station. As the hybrid topology showed the most interesting economic
results, the battery sizing algorithm could be extended to take this parameter into account,
and output not only a battery charging power and capacity but also a transformer capacity,
where the combination of these two assets would result in the minimum costs. Finally,
the value stacking opportunity can be investigated and the combined operation mode of
these batteries on multiple markets can be assessed technically and economically, to find
where the largest technical impact can be made and social welfare generated.
82
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
H. Hõimoja et al. “An Ultrafast EV Charging Station Demonstrator”. In: Interna-
tional Symposium on Power Electronics Power Electronics, Electrical Drives, Au-
tomation and Motion (2012). doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/SPEEDAM.2012.6264617.
[2]
D. Sbordone et al. “EV fast charging stations and energy storage technologies: A
real implementation in the smart micro grid paradigm”. In: Electric Power Systems
Research 120 (2015), pp. 96–108. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2014.07.033.
[3]
Jan Engelhardt et al. “Energy management of a multi-battery system for renewable-
based high power EV charging”. In: eTransportation 14 (2022), p. 100198. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.etran.2022.100198.
[4]
Huajie Ding, Zechun Hu, and Yonghua Song. “Value of the energy storage system
in an electric bus fast charging station”. In: Applied Energy 157 (2015), pp. 630–639.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.01.058.
[5]
Lu Wang et al. “Grid Impact of Electric Vehicle Fast Charging Stations: Trends,
Standards, Issues and Mitigation Measures - An Overview”. In: IEEE Open Journal
of Power Electronics 2 (2021), pp. 56–74. doi: 10.1109/OJPEL.2021.3054601.
[6]
Wajahat Khan, Furkan Ahmad, and Mohammad Saad Alam. “Fast EV charging
station integration with grid ensuring optimal and quality power exchange”. In: En-
gineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 22.1 (2019), pp. 143–
152. issn: 2215-0986. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2018.08.005. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2215098617315057.
[7]
Mostafa M. Mahfouz and M. Reza Iravani. “Grid-Integration of Battery-Enabled
DC Fast Charging Station for Electric Vehicles”. In: IEEE Transactions on Energy
Conversion 35.1 (2020), pp. 375–385. doi: 10.1109/TEC.2019.2945293.
[8]
L. G. González, E. Siavichay, and J. L. Espinoza. “Impact of EV fast charging
stations on the power distribution network of a Latin American intermediate city”.
In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 107 (2019), pp. 309–318. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.03.017.
[9]
Kalid Yunus, Hector Zelaya De La Parra, and Muhamad Reza. “Distribution grid
impact of Plug-In Electric Vehicles charging at fast charging stations using stochastic
charging model”. In: Proceedings of the 2011 14th European Conference on Power
Electronics and Applications. 2011, pp. 1–11.
[10]
Niels Leemput et al. “MV and LV Residential Grid Impact of Combined Slow and
Fast Charging of Electric Vehicles”. In: Energies 8.3 (2015), pp. 1760–1783. issn:
1996-1073. doi: 10.3390/en8031760. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/8/3/
1760.
[11]
Chunyang Zhao et al. “Grid-connected battery energy storage system: a review on
application and integration”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 182
(2023), p. 113400. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2023.113400.
[12]
K. Prakash et al. “Planning battery energy storage system in line with grid sup-
port parameters enables circular economy aligned ancillary services in low volt-
age networks”. In: Renewable Energy 201 (Part 1 2022), pp. 802–820. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2022.10.101.
[13]
Carlos Mateo et al. “Analysis of the impact of battery storage on power distribution
systems”. In: (2015).
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
83
==PAGE:90==
[14]
Carlos Mateo et al. “Cost-benefit analysis of battery storage in medium-voltage dis-
tribution networks”. In: IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution 10 (3 2016),
pp. 815–821. issn: 1751-8687. doi: https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-gtd.2015.0389.
[15]
Marjan Gjelaj et al. “Optimal infrastructure planning for EV fastcharging stations
based on prediction of user behaviour”. In: IET Electrical Systems in Transportation
10 (1 2020), pp. 1–12. issn: 2042-9738. doi: https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-est.2018.
5080.
[16]
Jos van der Burgt et al. “Grid impact of charging electric vehicles; study cases in
Denmark, Germany and The Netherlands”. In: 2015 IEEE Eindhoven PowerTech
(2015), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/PTC.2015.7232234.
[17]
L. Thurner et al. “pandapower — An Open-Source Python Tool for Convenient
Modeling, Analysis, and Optimization of Electric Power Systems”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems 33.6 (Nov. 2018), pp. 6510–6521. issn: 0885-8950. doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2018.2829021.
[18]
Janamejaya Channegowda, Vamsi Krishna Pathipati, and Sheldon S. Williamson.
“Comprehensive review and comparison of DC fast charging converter topologies:
Improving electric vehicle plug-to-wheels eﬀiciency”. In: 2015 IEEE 24th Interna-
tional Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE). 2015, pp. 263–268. doi: 10 .
1109/ISIE.2015.7281479.
[19]
Md Mustafizur Rahman et al. “The development of techno-economic models for
the assessment of utility-scale electro-chemical battery storage systems”. In: Applied
Energy 283 (2021), p. 116343. issn: 0306-2619. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apenergy.2020.116343. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261920317256.
[20]
Wesley Cole and Akash Karmakar. “Cost Projections for Utility-Scale Battery Stor-
age: 2023 Update”. In: (2023). url: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy23osti/85332.pdf.
[21]
Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet Klima-. Bekendtgørelse om indtægtsrammer for
netvirksomheder. 2021. url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2021/1127.
[22]
M. Ravindran. “Transformer life-cycle costing analysis”. In: International Journal of
Scientific & Engineering Research 9.4 (2018). issn: 2229-5518. url: https://www.
ijser.org/researchpaper/TRANSFORMER-LIFE-CYCLE-COSTING-ANALYSIS.pdf.
[23]
Nord Pool. Day-ahead prices. 2023. url: https : / / www . nordpoolgroup . com / en /
Market-data1/Dayahead/Area-Prices/ALL1/Yearly/?view=table.
[24]
Robert J. Hijmans and Berkeley. Museum of Vertebrate Zoology University of Cali-
fornia. Second-level Administrative Divisions, Denmark. 2015. url: https://geodata.
lib.berkeley.edu/catalog/stanford-zz765fd7706 (visited on 09/13/2023).
[25]
Neogeografen N. Darville. dagi. 2015. url: https://github.com/ok-dk/dagi (visited
on 09/13/2023).
[26]
Klima- Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet. Sådan hjælper Danmark andre lande til at
nå deres klimamål. 2023. url: https://kefm.dk/aktuelt/nyheder/2023/apr/saadan-
hjaelper-danmark-andre-lande-til-at-naa-deres-klimamaal#:~:text=Klimaloven%20s%
C3%A6tter%20bindende%20nationale%20m%C3%A5l,udledninger%20uden%20for%
20Danmarks%20gr%C3%A6nser. (visited on 09/12/2023).
[27]
DBI IT A/S. Bilstatistik. 2023. url: https://www.bilstatistik.dk/ (visited on 09/12/2023).
[28]
Danmark Statistik. BY1: Folketal 1. januar efter byområder, landdistrikter, alder og
køn. 2023. url: https://www.statistikbanken.dk/by1 (visited on 09/20/2023).
[29]
Næstved Kommune - Plan & Trafik. Lokalplan C1.1/30-3/E28.1-1/E3.1-1. 2012.
url: https://dokument.plandata.dk/20_1062219_1473415527517.pdf (visited on
09/26/2023).
84
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:91==
[30]
Næstved Kommune - Plan & Trafik. Lokalplan 027. 2012. url: https://dokument.
plandata.dk/20_1425741_APPROVED_1331201555356.pdf (visited on 09/26/2023).
[31]
Søren Jakobsen et al. Sådan skaber Danmark grøn infrastruktur til én million el-
biler: Analyse og anbefalinger fra DEA og DTU, november 2019. English. Technical
University of Denmark, 2020.
[32]
Energistyrelsen. Analyseforudsætninger til Energinet. 2023. url: https://ens.dk/
service/fremskrivninger-analyser-modeller/analyseforudsaetninger-til-energinet (visited
on 09/15/2023).
[33]
ChargeFinder. ChargeFinder. 2023. url: https://chargefinder.com/dk/naestved/
ladestandere-elbiler/2pj5wy (visited on 09/12/2023).
[34]
Vejdirektoratet. Vejdirektoratet. 2023. url: http://vej08.vd.dk/komse/nytui/komse/
komSe.html?noegle=2505043944 (visited on 09/12/2023).
[35]
Geofabrik GmbH and OpenStreetMap Contributors. Denmark. 2018. url: http://
download.geofabrik.de/europe/denmark.html (visited on 09/13/2023).
[36]
Google. Google Maps. 2023. url: https : / / www . google . dk / maps / search / gas +
station/@55.2330784,11.7449977,13.19z/data=!4m2!2m1!6e2?entry=ttu (visited
on 09/13/2023).
[37]
Brandon Cohen. Open Parking Map App. 2023. url: https://parkingreform.org/
resources/parking-lot-map/open-parking-map-app/ (visited on 09/13/2023).
[38]
EV Database. EV Database. 2015. url: https : / / ev - database . org/ (visited on
09/13/2023).
[39]
Rick Wolbertus and Robert Van Den Hoed. “Fast Charging Systems for Passenger
Electric Vehicles”. In: World Electr. Veh. J. 11 (4 2020), p. 73. doi: https://doi.org/
10.3390/wevj11040073.
[40]
Mærk Næstved. Turismetillæg. 2018. url: https://www.naestved.dk/media/ddrbofz3/
bilag-a-til-kommuneplanstrategi-2019-turismetillaeg.pdf (visited on 09/13/2023).
[41]
ICP A/S. Detailhandelsanalyse - Næstved kommune. 2013. url: https://naestvederhverv.
dk/wp-content/uploads/sites/8004/2014/11/ICP-N%C3%A6stved-april-2013.pdf
(visited on 09/13/2023).
[42]
OpenStreetMap contributors. Planet dump retrieved from https://planet.osm.org.
2017. url: https://www.openstreetmap.org.
[43]
Søren Flytkjær and Rasmus Jungersen. Vores biler bliver større - og nu undersøges
det, om p-båsene også burde være det. 2022. url: https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/
indland/vores-biler-bliver-stoerre-og-nu-undersoeges-det-om-p-baasene-ogsaa-burde-
vaere-det (visited on 09/29/2023).
[44]
Næstved Kommune. Varmeplanskort 2030. 2022. url: https : / / naestved . viewer .
dkplan.niras.dk/plan/8#/3349 (visited on 09/14/2023).
[45]
Klima- Energi- og Forsyningsministeriet. Aftale om et mere grønt og sikkert Dan-
mark. 2022. url: https://kefm.dk/aktuelt/nyheder/2022/jun/aftale-om-et-mere-
groent-og-sikkert-danmark- (visited on 09/14/2023).
[46]
Vurderingsstyrelsen. BBR. 2022. url: https://bbr.dk/forside (visited on 09/14/2023).
[47]
Energinet. Production per Municipality. 2023. url: https://www.energidataservice.
dk/tso-electricity/CommunityProduction (visited on 09/15/2023).
[48]
Solargis s.r.o. Global Solar Atlas. 2023. url: https://globalsolaratlas.info/map?c=55.
230785,11.609802,11&s=55.174554,11.758448&m=site&pv=small,180,40,1 (visited
on 09/15/2023).
[49]
Næstved Kommune. Debatoplæg Solcelleanlæg ved Viborggård. 2023. url: https://
www.naestved.dk/media/0lipuwwt/debatoplaeg_solceller-ved-viborggaard.pdf (visited
on 09/15/2023).
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
85
==PAGE:92==
[50]
Næstved Kommune. Forslag til Klimaplan 2020-2030. 2020. url: https://www.
naestvedfjernvarme . dk / media / 36719 / bilag - 61 - forslag - til - naestved - kommunes -
klimaplan-2020-2030.pdf (visited on 09/15/2023).
[51]
Martin Raifer. overpass turbo. 2023. url: https://overpass- turbo.eu/ (visited on
09/15/2023).
[52]
Energistyrelsen. Technology Data - Generation of Electricity and District Heating.
2016. url: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Analyser/technology_data_catalogue_
for_el_and_dh.pdf (visited on 09/15/2023).
[53]
J. Melius, R. Margolis, and S. Ong. Estimating Rooftop Suitability for PV: A Review
of Methods, Patents, and Validation Techniques. 2013. url: https://www.nrel.gov/
docs/fy14osti/60593.pdf (visited on 09/15/2023).
[54]
Skipper Seabold and Josef Perktold. “statsmodels: Econometric and statistical mod-
eling with python”. In: 9th Python in Science Conference. 2010.
[55]
Rick Wolbertus and Robert Van Den Hoed. “Electric Vehicle Fast Charging Needs
in Cities and along Corridors”. In: World Electr. Veh. J. 10 (2 2019), p. 45. doi:
https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj10020045.
[56]
Christopher Neuman, Andrew Meintz, and Myungsoo Jun. “Workplace Charging
Data.” In: NREL Data Catalog (2022). doi: https://doi.org/10.7799/1838140. url:
https://data.nrel.gov/submissions/182.
[57]
ElaadNL. Download data van Elaad. 2020. url: https://platform.elaad.io/download-
data/ (visited on 09/13/2023).
[58]
Elisabeth Schneider & Michael Knoop Marlon Schlemminger Tobias Ohrdes. “Dataset
on electrical single-family house and heat pump load profiles in Germany”. In: Sci
Data 9 (2022). doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-022-01156-1.
[59]
DMI. DMI. 2023. url: https://www.dmi.dk/frie-data/ (visited on 09/13/2023).
[60]
Statistisches Bundesamt (Destatis). Von Januar bis November 2020 genehmigte
Wohnungen: 59 % in Mehrfamilienhäusern. 2021. url: https://www.destatis.de/DE/
Presse/Pressemitteilungen/2021/02/PD21_N015_44.html#:~:text=Wohnungen%
20in%20neuen%20Einfamilienh%C3%A4usern%20waren,Einfamilienh%C3%A4usern%
20betrug%20durchschnittlich%20152%20Quadratmeter. (visited on 09/15/2023).
[61]
Energinet. Production and Consumption - Settlement. 2023. url: https://www.
energidataservice . dk / tso - electricity / ProductionConsumptionSettlement (visited on
09/13/2023).
[62]
Energistyrelsen. Energistyrelsen lancerer ny solcelleopgørelse over udbygningen med
solceller i Danmark. 2023. url: https://ens.dk/node/4320/pdf (visited on 09/13/2023).
[63]
Raveendhra Dogga and M.K. Pathak. “Recent trends in solar PV inverter topolo-
gies”. In: Solar Energy 183 (2019), pp. 57–73. issn: 0038-092X. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.solener.2019.02.065. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0038092X19301999.
[64]
Can Karatas, Jasmin Mehmedalic, and Jonas B. B. Hansen. TEGRA-modellen –
Forstærkning. 2022. url: https://greenpowerdenmark.dk/files/media/document/
RA638-TEGRA-modellen-Forstaerkning.pdf.
[65]
Forsyningstilsynet. Reguleringsregnskaber. 2023. url: https://forsyningstilsynet.dk/
el/indberet/netvirksomheder/reguleringsregnskaber.
[66]
BloombergNEF. Top 10 Energy Storage Trends in 2023. 2023. url: https://about.
bnef.com/blog/top-10-energy-storage-trends-in-2023/ (visited on 11/22/2023).
[67]
Tim Unterluggauer et al. “Impact of cost-based smart electric vehicle charging on
urban low voltage power distribution networks”. In: Sustainable Energy, Grids and
Networks 35 (2023), p. 101085. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.segan.2023.101085.
86
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:93==
[68]
Council of European Energy Regulators. CEER Short paper on the ownership of
Storage Facilities in the Electrical Distribution System. 2023. url: https://www.
ceer.eu/documents/104400/-/-/d87af5f6-794d-ac83-f3f5-c28c26789cfd.
[69]
Freewire. Boost Charger 150. 2023. url: https://freewiretech.com/dc-boost-charger/.
[70]
Battery Backup Power. 1,144 KWh (1 MWh) Industrial Battery Backup And En-
ergy Storage Systems (ESS) (277/480Y Three Phase). 2023. url: https://www.
backupbatterypower.com/products/1-144-kwh-industrial-battery-backup-and-energy-
storage-systems-ess-277-480-three-phase?pr_prod_strat=use_description&pr_rec_
id=83109ee86&pr_rec_pid=6561192214696&pr_ref_pid=6561191395496&pr_seq=
uniform.
[71]
ABB. UniPack-G Product catalog. 2023. url: https://library.e.abb.com/public/
4da8d0dee20f40a99ed6eb87e9286858/UniPack- G%20Catalog%20Rev%20C.pdf?x-
sign=rJTzAR9JjxJJB4L3JbesotOFzk08zcOgNQ+ubqBwAyKhlUAcHyhFvCMBO8sDlhro.
[72]
Xiao-Hui Sun, Toshiyuki Yamamoto, and Takayuki Morikawa. “Fast-charging sta-
tion choice behavior among battery electric vehicle users”. In: Transportation Re-
search Part D: Transport and Environment 46 (2016), pp. 26–39. issn: 1361-9209.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2016.03.008. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1361920916000377.
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
87
==PAGE:94==
88
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:95==
A
Fast charging station locations
Figure A.1: Traﬀic data
Figure A.2: Points of interest for fast charging stations
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
89
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.3: Potential future fast charging stations
90
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:97==
B
Fast charging use
Figure B.1: Day tourists coming outside of Næstved town
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
91
==PAGE:98==
C
Penetration of other DERs
Figure C.1: District heating areas
Figure C.2: PV capacity
92
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:99==
D
Load profiles
Battery size
category [kWh]
Battery size [kWh]
Maximum fast
charging power [kW]
32.3
37
(30, 50]
35.8
40
49
46
52
46
54.25
74
64
141
64.8
80
66.25
223
(50, 70]
67.3
214
67.5
145
67.5
114
68.2
143
68.7
145
69
218.5
70.45
154
70.6
250
74
37
(70, 100]
76
198
77
154
82.6
108
95
223
Table D.1: EV maximum fast charging power based on battery size
Figure D.1: Temperature in Næstved and Hamelin in 2019
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
93
==PAGE:100==
E
Conventional grid upgrade model
Dimension
[mm2]
Voltage
[kV]
Rated current
[A]
R [Ω/km]
X [Ω/km]
C [nF/km]
95
10
222
0.32
0.097
310
120
10
243
0.253
0.099
400
150
10
283
0.206
0.091
360
240
10
373
0.125
0.085
440
300
10
455
0.075
0.089
440
400
10
515
0.083
0.097
560
500
10
570
0.067
0.094
620
95
0.4
213
0.32
0.103
370
120
0.4
240
0.254
0.072
1,000
150
0.4
276
0.206
0.080
1,260
240
0.4
315
0.127
0.072
970
300
0.4
410
0.103
0.072
1,030
Table E.1: Cable electrical parameters
Voltage
level [kV]
Rated
power [kVA]
Short circuit
voltage [%]
Real component
of short circuit
voltage [%]
Iron
losses [kW]
Open loop
losses [%]
60/10
16,000
10
0.66
17.9
0.146
60/10
20,000
10
0.65
21.1
0.105
60/10
25,000
10
0.6
24.6
0.06
10/0.4
250
4
1.2
0.82
0.382
10/0.4
400
4
1.075
1.15
0.288
10/0.4
600
4
1.016
1.5
0.238
10/0.4
800
6
0.963
1.7
0.212
10/0.4
1,000
6
0.88
2
0.2
10/0.4
1,250
6
0.84
2.4
0.192
10/0.4
2,500
6
0.76
4.3
0.172
Table E.2: Transformer electrical parameters
94
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
==PAGE:101==
Techno-economic comparison of grid reinforcement and
battery-buffered electric vehicle fast charging stations
95
==PAGE:102==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Wind Energy
Frederiksborgvej 339
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
vindenergi.dtu.dk
