==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Microfabrication of microneedle-based
sensor for fast scan cyclic
voltammetry
Feb 2024
Master Thesis – Jonathan Fredslund Kristiansen
DTU Bioengineering
Supervisors: Stephan Sylvest Keller, Arto Heiskanen
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to thank Prof.
Stephan Sylvest Keller, and senior researcher Arto
Heiskanen for providing input and knowledge and supervising this project.
Thanks to both Prof. Stephan Sylvest Keller, and my friend Benedek Ga´al for giving feedback
on drafts of the thesis.
Thank you to the staff at DTU Nanolab who have been very helpful in providing equipment
training and aided in process-related questions.
I thank Jill Venton from the University of Virginia for providing online lectures on FSCV
and writing some insightful papers.
Lastly, I would like to thank the whole Biomic group (Research group of Prof. Stephan
Sylvest Keller), and the whole Bioanalytics group (Research group of Prof. Jenny Emn´eus)
at DTU for all their inputs at weekly team meetings and their help in the lab.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Allergies are estimated to affect 10-30% of the world’s population and can range from mild
symptoms to death, in the worst case. However, the most common way of testing them
is currently the skin prick test, which is only qualitative and can be uncomfortable for the
patient. With the motivation of getting closer to developing an allergy test that can quantify
the allergic responses in patients, this master thesis investigates the Microfabrication of a
microneedle-based sensor for fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) as a novel approach for
testing allergies.
Firstly, the thesis establishes the relevancy of FSCV for allergy testing through an in-
terdisciplinary literature study. This helps in understanding the technique, how it might fit
into a novel context of testing in the skin rather than the brain, and how it can be integrated
on a microneedle electrode chip for insertion in the skin of patients.
It explores a method of optimizing the needle-based microelectrodes by using a simpler
2D microelectrode chip that is faster to make. In this exploration, several batches of both
pyrolyzed carbon and gold microelectrode chips are made. The working batches are charac-
terized by CV and EIS and used for FSCV of dopamine, a well-studied neurochemical that
FSCV is often used to detect.
The work improves the process flow for the simpler microelectrodes by changing their
design and adding plasma ashing steps which fixes that the chips were not working in previous
work. It develops and tests a process flow for making the microneedle electrodes by combining
process flows and knowledge from previous work in the Biomic group. In addition, it suggests
further improvements for both process flows and designs.
Moreover, the thesis work fabricates a batch of microneedle-based sensor chips, which
although not working as intended, provides learning for future fabrication and development.
In attempting to optimize the microelectrodes for FSCV, the work discovers that to do
so, a different set-up is needed: a flow cell, a different potentiostat with the possibility to
change wait-time between scans, a different flat electrode design that is more relevant to the
needles, and possibly better electromagnetic shielding of the equipment.
Lastly, the thesis suggests a plan for going forward and outlines the main challenges,
which gives a better starting point for future work.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Current ways of testing for allergies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Previous work done in the Biomic group
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Skin anatomy: epidermis and dermis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Mast cells and the allergic response of the immune system
. . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Electrochemical system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
FSCV concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
Electrode considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.3
Histamine detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.4
Effects of pH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
In-plane silicon micro-needles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Method
14
3.1
Fabrication of 2D electrode chips
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Design variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Original carbon electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Gold electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Electrode characterization using CV and EIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Plasma treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.2
Electrolyte preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Cyclic voltammetry (CV)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.4
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
FSCV measurements of dopamine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Needle electrode design considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Fabrication of microneedle electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Results
28
4.1
Optimization of gold microelectrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Optimization of carbon microelectrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Pyrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
==PAGE:5==
4.2.3
Other factors influencing yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Preliminary CV and EIS measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.1
CV and EIS on Au microelectrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.2
CV and EIS on carbon microelectrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Flat electrode, FSCV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.1
Dopamine LOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.2
Dopamine colorplots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4.3
Background drift study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.4
Stability testing after FSCV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Microneedle fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5.1
DRIE etch depth in Si . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5.2
Clamping problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5.3
Front-side etching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5.4
Backside electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6
Microneedle electrode characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Discussion
51
5.1
Optimization of microneedle design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Needle fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
Scope of the allergy test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.4
Penetration depth of needles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.5
Aims of the thesis - were they accomplished? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Conclusion
55
7
Outlook
56
A Effect of too high plasma
57
B Needle damages
58
C Dose and defocus tests
59
D Raw color plots
60
E Pictures from clean room
61
F Overview tables of 2D microelectrode wafers
62
4
==PAGE:6==
G Micro-needle holder
63
H Wafer overviews
64
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Worldwide, allergic rhinitis affects between 10% and 30 % of the population, and sensitization
(IgE antibodies) to foreign proteins in the environment is present in up to 40% of the
population [1]. Making a better allergy test could therefore improve the lives of a lot of
people. The project, InstaPatch [2], which this thesis is a part of, aims to make an improved
version of the skin-prick test that is quantitative, faster, and less uncomfortable to the
patient. This thesis explores fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) as a technique to use for
this test by combining it with microneedle-based electrodes meant to be inserted into the
skin of patients.
FSCV has been used to measure a range of neurotransmitters in vivo in the brains of small
animals. Dopamine has especially been studied using this technique, but other molecules
including histamine have also been measured [3]. The molecule histamine plays a big role in
the allergic response of the body by being released by mast cells in the presence of allergens
[4]. The amount of histamine released can therefore be correlated to how allergic a patient is
to a given allergen. It is therefore our hypothesis that FSCV would be a relevant technique
for making an allergy test.
1.1
Current ways of testing for allergies
The most common way to detect allergies in patients is by the skin prick test. This test,
done at the doctor, tests for an immediate allergic reaction to common allergens by delivering
allergens through small needles that are pricked into the skin, typically on the forearm. It
is then checked if the exposed area becomes red or swollen, which would indicate an allergy.
As a comparison, it is also checked if the person reacts to histamine (if no reaction, the test
could give false negatives) and glycerin or saline (if a reaction happens, the test could give
false positives) [5].
The allergy skin prick test is, however, only qualitative, and doesn’t tell how allergic the
patient is, which can be relevant to know in case of a strong allergy. In addition, it can be
uncomfortable for the patient, since it can cause itchiness. Lastly, it takes around 20-40 min,
depending on how many allergies are tested [5].
There are also other tests such as blood tests for IgE antibodies which, however, have a
higher rate of false positives (About 50% to 60% of all allergy blood tests give false positives)
[6]. Additionally, long-duration tests, such as a patch test, can be done to detect delayed
allergic reactions [5], but this is again only qualitative.
The InstaPatch project [2] aims to offer an alternative to especially the allergy skin prick
test by developing a test that is quantitative, faster, and less uncomfortable for the patient.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Previous work done in the Biomic group
The work of this thesis is a continuation of several people’s work from the Biomic group who
have either been working directly on the InstaPatch project or on related projects where
knowledge sharing within the group has been crucial in elevating the work.
Stephanie Bisgaard has, in her Ph.D. thesis, tested various designs of in-plane Si micro
needles in terms of penetration depth, mechanical stability, tissue damage, and ability to
deliver allergens [7]. The optimal design of the microneedles tested in her Ph.D. thesis is
therefore used in this work for the microneedle-based sensor (see Figure 1 a)).
Figure 1: a) SEM image of microneedle of the optimized design for penetration depth, figure
borrowed from [7]. b) Illustration of a carbon macro-electrode chip, figure borrowed from
[8]. c) SEM image of needle-based leaky optrode, figure borrowed from [9].
During this Master’s thesis, a sensor-free version is simultaneously tested in vivo, by
other people in the Biomic group in collaboration with Gentofte Hospital. This is done to
study any discomfort in patients. The design being tested is therefore considered the final
one, and this thesis will use the same, for being able to directly apply the results in future
work on the InstaPatch project.
An electrochemical sensor needs to be fabricated on top of these microneedles. The recipe
for a standard flat three-electrode-system chip is adopted from Ph.D., Nicolai Støvring, who
has already optimized many of the process-specific steps for making flat macro-electrodes
(see Figure 1 b)) and suggested a process for making micro-electrodes with variations in the
shape and size of the active surface of the working electrode. This is an important tool for
optimizing the design of the electrode on the needles since it is simpler to work with and
faster to fabricate.
The recipe, although working for macro-electrodes, had not yet been optimized for micro-
electrodes.
In a previous student project by Andreas Feldinger, the recipe was used for
micro-electrodes but did not yield chips that had any signal in CV measurements [8]. Thus
some further optimization is done in this thesis to improve on the recipe. Nevertheless, it is
2
==PAGE:9==
a good starting point for this thesis and it is possible to use the maskfiles as a template to
save time.
The recipe for integrating the sensor on the microneedles is heavily inspired by Celine S.
Dinesen’s master’s thesis on a leaky optrode probe sensor [9] (see Figure 1 c)). It is adjusted
for the different needle design and uses a sensor similar to the flat electrodes by Nicolai.
Thus, the starting point of the work on the needle-based sensors is a combination of mainly
these three different process flows from three other group members. The resulting recipe is
then further optimized and tweaked for practical purposes due to machine availability in the
cleanroom.
1.3
Objectives of the thesis
Optimizing FSCV directly on microneedles is challenging and the fabrication of microneedles
is time-consuming. Thus, the core focus of the thesis will be working on a simpler system to
get a better understanding of FSCV and the influence of the shape and size of the electrodes.
Furthermore, the thesis will attempt to compare both gold and carbon as electrode materials.
In the original project plan of the thesis, I wrote the objectives as:
1. Optimize the electrode size for FSCV on flat electrodes [(2D microelectrode chips)]
2. Optimize electrode number for FSCV on flat electrodes [(2D microelectrode chips)]
3. Apply the knowledge gained from the flat electrodes to fabricate microneedle-based
electrodes that are optimized for FSCV
4. Demonstrate and further optimize the FSCV detection of histamine using the fabri-
cated microneedle-based electrodes
However, before being able to address the objectives, the process flow for making the flat/2D
electrode chips needs to be optimized to produce electrodes that are working. The goals are
pretty ambitious since FSCV as a technique has not been studied much at DTU. Lastly,
while these are the specific objectives of the thesis, the overall goal of an improved allergy
test is kept in mind throughout the work.
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Theory
2.1
Skin anatomy: epidermis and dermis
Figure 2: Simplified illustration (not to scale) of a cross-section of the epidermis and dermis
and the response of mast cells when allergens (antigen) bind to target antibodies on the
surface.
Since the aim is to measure an allergic response in the skin, it is important to understand
its structure. The skin, the body’s largest organ, is a critical barrier against environmental
hazards and pathogens. It consists of two primary layers: the epidermis and the dermis [10]
(as shown in the simplified Figure 2). It is in the dermis that the mast cells are located.
As mentioned in the introduction, these cells release histamine in the presence of allergens.
Thus, it is, important to know about the thickness of both the dermis and epidermis.
The Epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin and acts as a physical barrier to external
threats. It consists mainly of the cell type keratinocytes and includes several sub-layers:
the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, and stratum corneum [10]. Its
thickness varies across different body parts but is relatively thinner on the forearm, a common
place for allergy testing. The thickness of the epidermis in the volar (inner) forearm was in
a systematic review and meta-analysis reported to have a mean value of 69.3 um in females
(lower limit 56.7 um, upper limit 82.0 um, sample size 440), and 71.1 um in males (lower
limit: 49.8 um, upper limit: 92.5 um, sample size: 67) [11]. The dermis, on the other hand,
is a bit thicker, and ranges from 0.6 to 4 mm depending on the body site [12].
The Dermis, situated beneath the epidermis, is a denser layer made up of connective
tissue. It provides structural integrity and elasticity, containing blood vessels, nerves, and
4
==PAGE:11==
various immune cells, including the mast cells [13] as mentioned.
It is important to reach the dermis by penetrating through the thickness of the epider-
mis for efficient histamine measurements. However, penetrating too deeply should also be
avoided, to not cause unnecessary discomfort or damage. The skin is very elastic, and would
inevitably have some level of indentation when penetrating it, so the needle needs to be
longer than the desired penetration depth.
2.2
Mast cells and the allergic response of the immune system
Before diving into the specifics of making an allergy test, it is relevant to understand some
things about the immune system concerning allergies. In general, allergies occur when the
immune system overreacts to an otherwise harmless substance, which creates an unwanted
allergic response.
At the heart of this allergic response are mast cells, which are immune cells abundantly
present in connective tissues of the body. These cells, upon exposure to an allergen, release
various mediators, with histamine being the most significant (see Figure 2).
Histamine,
stored in the granules of mast cells, is a key player in inflammatory responses, leading
to common allergy symptoms such as itching, swelling, and redness. It has the function of
increasing the permeability of capillaries to white blood cells and proteins [13]. This is meant
to protect the body in case of harmful substances, but in allergies, it creates unnecessary
discomfort or in the worst case leads to death. Furthermore, the mast cells, when activated,
may also generate lipid-derived substances that cause an immediate inflammatory response
[14]. It is relevant to know about these other changes since they change the environment
where histamine is desired to be measured.
In addition, typical concentrations of histamine are relevant to know. The normal base
level of plasma histamine is around 0.3-1 ng/mL and around 100 ng/mL in a cardiac arrest
[15]. In acute allergic reactions at the emergency department visit, patients showed elevated
levels of plasma histamine (>10 nmol/L) [16]. However, the local concentration near the
mast cells is expected to be much higher during the reaction, and thus the allergy test may
not need that low a limit of detection (LOD).
In an old study, histamine content in human lung mast cells ranged from 2.5 ± 0.5
pg/mast cell for the smallest diameter mast cells (8-10 microns) to 10 ± 2.5 pg/mast cell
for the largest (16-20 microns) [17]. Histamine has a molar mass of 111.15 g/mol, and thus
the intracellular concentration would be in the range 2-7 uM for the large cells and 3-13 uM
for the small cells, by the account of this study. The needed LOD for an allergy test would
therefore be reasonable to be on the order of 100 nM.
5
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Electrochemical system
Before diving into FSCV as a potential technique to measure allergies, it is important to
look at some of the basics of an electrochemical system.
A typical electrochemical cell consists of three electrodes, the working electrode, counter
electrode, and reference electrode immersed in a liquid known as an electrolyte solution (see
Figure 3 a)). If the liquid contains electroactive species, their oxidation or reduction at the
electrode surface can be measured by applying a range of potential differences between the
working and counter electrode, and measuring the current as done in cyclic voltammetry.
To properly analyze this behavior, the reference electrode is used to compare the potential
difference to a known constant. The role of the electrolyte is to provide a current pathway
between the working and counter electrode, and thereby complete the circuit [18].
Figure 3: a) a standard electrochemical cell, showing three electrodes (working, reference,
and counter) submerged in an electrolyte solution and connected to a potentiostat for ap-
plying a voltage. b) Illustration of the diffusion of analytes towards electrode surfaces (not
to scale), featuring a macro electrode, experiencing mostly linear diffusion, a 2D microelec-
trode, experiencing diffusion from 180 degrees, and a 3D microelectrode exposed to diffusion
of analytes from almost all directions.
For an analyte to be oxidized or reduced at the electrode, it first has to find its way there.
Thus diffusion becomes important. The role of electrode shape and size can play a role in
the diffusion pathways of analyte species as shown in Figure 3 b). A large macro electrode
will mostly experience linear diffusion towards the surface, whereas a smaller microelectrode
will experience diffusion from more directions. A 3D microelectrode such as a carbon fiber
6
==PAGE:13==
which is cylinder-shaped, will experience diffusion from even more directions. This has the
effect of increasing the current density. Thus, by using smaller electrodes, the signal per
area will be greater. In a cyclic voltammogram, this would be visible in the manner that
the shape would be more sigmoidal rather than the typical ”duck-bill” shape which features
the classic oxidation peak at a certain potential, after which the current falls when going
to higher potentials due to diffusion limitations (see Figure 4 a) for an example of a typical
CV).
Figure 4: Example of electrode characterization of a 100 um diameter Au electrode (Plotted
in the PStrace Software). A) Cyclic voltammogram showing the automatic peak detection
working well for the anodic current but not for the cathodic one. B) Impedance spectroscopy
measurement in a Nyquist plot. The bold triangles show the measurements while the shaded
triangles show the best fit using a Randles circuit fit.
In general, the factors affecting the peak (faradaic) current of a CV are described by the
Randles-ˇSevˇc´ık equation (here at 25 °C):
ip = 2.69 · 105n3/2AC
√
Dν
(1)
where ip is the peak current, n is the number of electrons transferred in a redox event, A is
the electrode area, C is the analyte concentration, D is the diffusion coefficient, ν is the scan
rate [18]. Hence, lowering the electrode area will decrease the peak current. Note, however,
that this equation does not take the diffusion effects of microelectrodes into account. For
microelectrodes, tne current does not decrease linearly with area since the current density
increases.
Another important concept in electrochemistry is the electrochemical double layer. In
the electrode, negative(positive) charges will build up on the interface with the liquid which
7
==PAGE:14==
causes positive(negative) charges from the solution to be attracted to the surface. This is
essentially a plate capacitor that will (de)charge as the potential difference is scanned. It
means that most of the potential drop happens very close to the surface of the electrodes
and the bulk solution (at a certain distance from the electrodes) is subject to a relatively
constant potential [18]. The Helmholtz layer, which can be divided into an inner Helmholtz
plane (IHP) and an outer Helmholtz plane (OHP), is used to describe the potential drop.
After the IHP and OHP, the diffuse layer exists, where the solution is still experiencing a
potential gradient to a much smaller extent. Outside the diffuse layer, the solution consists
of equal amounts of positive and negative species (see Figure 5 a)).
Figure 5: a) Illustration of the electrochemical double layer, existing on the surface of elec-
trodes and particles in solutions. b) schematics of a Randles circuit used for approximating
the electrochemical system.
For some applications, it is worth knowing the approximate size of the diffusion layer.
The diffusion coefficient of dopamine in water has been reported to be 6.0 · 10−6cm2s−1 [19].
For a simple approximation, the diffusion length can be calculated by l =
√
6 · D · t [20]. As
an example, for CVs at a scan speed of 200 mV/s in the range -1 to 1 V, the diffusion length
(for 20 s) is calculated to be 270 um, whereas for FSCV at 400 V/s from -0.4 to 1.3 V, it is
calculated to be 5.5 um.
There will inevitably be a capacitive current from the electrochemical double layer which
will show up in measurements. It is relevant to know its size and what factors influence it.
8
==PAGE:15==
In the case of a potential sweep, it can be described by the following equation (Eq. 2):
Ic = νCd + ((E/Rs) −νCd) exp (−t/RsCd)
(2)
where ν is again the scan rate, Cd is the capacitance of the double layer, E is the electrode
potential, Rs is the solution resistance, and t is time [18]. It can be seen that the capacitive
current increases with scan speed faster than the peak (faradaic current) and thus at high
scan speeds, the capacitive current will be higher.
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) is another tool used to characterize elec-
trodes. In EIS, a small AC voltage is applied over a range of frequencies to measure the
impedance (extracted from the output alternating current). The data can then be repre-
sented by a Nyquist plot with real impedance (Z’) on the X-axis and imaginary impedance
(Z”) on the Y-axis [18]. Using EIS, the electrochemical system can with great approximation
be modeled as an electric circuit. A simple, yet accurate circuit which is commonly used,
is a Randles circuit which includes only four elements (see Figure 5 b)). R1 is the solution
resistance. R2 is known as charge transfer resistance, which is the resistance for transferring
a charge from the solution species to the electrode. C1 corresponds to the electrochemical
double layer. W1 is known as Warburg impedance and comes from the diffusion of species
to the electrodes. The Warburg element from the Randles circuit will for example be visible
as a straight 45 degrees line in the Nyquist plot [21] (see Figure 4 b) for an example of a
typical EIS).
2.4
Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry
2.4.1
FSCV concepts
Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) is different from regular Cyclic voltammetry (CV) in
that it uses much faster scan rates, above 100 V/s compared to CV, which has a typical scan
rate of 100 mV/s (see Figure 6 a)). This means that the capacitive current will be much
higher than the faradaic current as seen from Equation 1 and 2. There is thus a need to
subtract this background current to get useful information as illustrated in 6 b).
A background must therefore be established before a measurement can be taken, and it
means that one of the downsides of FSCV is that basal levels of the analyte are difficult to
establish since they often cannot be distinguished from the background. However, it may
be possible to use a model for the background signal as has been done by [23]. In general,
due to the fast scan rates, it is very good at detecting fast changes that happen over a few
seconds. For that reason, it has been used to detect changes in neurotransmitters in vivo in
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 6: a) Illustration of the difference in waveform for conventional CV and fast scan CV.
Ordinary CV usually scans continuously at a typical rate of 100 mV/s, whereas FSCV scans
at a rate of more than 100 V/s. Additionally, FSCV has a relatively long break in between
scans. b) Illustration of the relative size of background and signal in an FSCV scan, inspired
by [22].
the brains of rats where the releases and changes are very rapid [22]. If applied correctly,
it can be quantifiable in terms of the size of the change from the background. By knowing
the oxidation and reduction potentials of molecules at certain scan speeds, it is also possible
to distinguish different species to some extent. However, since these potentials can overlap,
FSCV is not the most selective technique [24].
FSCV is considered good for fast changes happening within 90 s [24], but is not good for
long experiment durations due to drifts in the background signal. Concerning the allergy
test, this shouldn’t be a problem since the aim is to measure immediate allergic reactions,
and it therefore still seems to be a suitable method.
Another characteristic of FSCV is that it in most cases is adsorption-limited instead of
diffusion-limited due to the fast scan rate. However, at high concentrations (100 uM) it can
become diffusion controlled as shown in [22]. For that reason, a wait time is applied between
scans, also called hold time. Here, the potential is kept constant for a given time to allow
adsorption of the analyte species (see Figure 6). Jill Venton’s group for example uses a 90
ms hold time for dopamine and a scan time of 10 ms. Thus, the scans happen at a rate of
10 Hz. However, this is a compromise between being able to measure fast changes and low
concentrations. If the wait time at the holding potential is short, the peak current will be
lower, and you will not be able to measure as low concentrations but will have more data
10
==PAGE:17==
points per time [24]. Thus, the ideal hold time depends on the application, the desired LOD
and number of data points/time.
While FSCV is not very selective due to the oxidation and reduction potentials of
molecules overlapping, the holding potential can to some extent be used to control selec-
tivity. Dopamine is for example attracted to negative potentials, so a holding potential of
-0.4 V is used by Venton’s group when measuring dopamine. Serotonin is also attracted to
a negative potential, but still adsorbs at a positive holding potential, so a holding potential
above 0 V can be more selective to serotonin by reducing the amount of dopamine adsorbed.
[24]
While it’s possible to analyze individual scans from FSCV, it can quickly become tedious
due to the large amounts of data collected in a short time. The background subtracted data
is therefore often shown in a color plot which is a tool that allows visualization of the scans
over time. The color plots can then be used to extract data such as the amount of time a
certain analyte has increased above the background. FSCV, unlike other analysis methods,
has both a fast rise and fall time when measuring changes in concentrations. [24]
2.4.2
Electrode considerations
The working electrode used in most FSCV studies is a carbon fiber microelectrode. Carbon
electrodes have the advantage that when going to higher potentials, for example, 1.3 V
instead of just 1.0 V, the surface gets renewed by the breaking of carbon bonds, which in
turn helps to avoid fouling [25]. However, gold has also been shown to work for the detection
of different neurochemicals [26], and has other advantages than carbon such as simplifying
the fabrication process and that its surface is easy to modify. It was, however, noted by [26]
that gold has a smaller potential window than carbon when measuring dopamine in a TRIS
buffer solution. The potential window refers to the range of potentials that can be scanned
without visibly oxidizing or reducing the electrolyte solution and is thus dependent on both
the electrode and electrolyte [18]. It is worth noting that FSCV often only uses a 2-electrode
system, for example, a carbon fiber against an Ag/AgCl reference electrode [22].
Regardless of the material, however, the size of the working electrode is important. The
smaller the electrode, the smaller the capacitance will be (capacitance is proportional to the
area). As seen in Equation 2, this will first of all lower the background current. It will also
mean the exponential in the equation reaches 1 faster and thereby a steady state. This can
help explain why smaller electrodes tend to have a more stable background signal. For those
reasons it also makes a lot of sense to use carbon fibers due to their size. However, when
the active surface area is smaller, the peak current will also be lower (see Eq. 1), and the
11
==PAGE:18==
potentiostat needs to be able to pick up a small current from the background noise. Thus,
it becomes a balance of choosing the right size. The shape and size of a typical carbon fiber
microelectrode is a cylinder with a diameter of 7 um and an exposed length of about 150
um [27]. A 2D circle with the same total area would have a diameter of 65 um, which is a
good reference point for the work of this thesis. Although carbon fibers have been studied
extensively for FSCV, they have the disadvantage of being fragile and thus not ideal for
inserting into the skin. In addition, they need a counter electrode that also needs to be
inserted. This thesis therefore focuses on using microfabrication to avoid these issues.
In the complex solution of the human body, other molecules are also expected to foul
the electrode. Larger electrodes can normally be cleaned and polished to remove the fouling
and allow for new measurements.
However, this is challenging when using a small size
as in FSCV, so chemical ways to clean electrodes could be considered [28]. Alternatively,
the electrode should be for one-time use only, which is reasonable to expect in a medical
application anyway. If fouling is a problem within the measurement window, it could be
worth considering ways to improve sensitivity or decrease fouling, for example by applying
a Nafion coating or modifying it with PEDOT as done by some studies [3].
2.4.3
Histamine detection
In the case of histamine, the oxidation occurs after 1.0 V and is proposed to undergo a 1
electron oxidation that forms a radical. The radicals then react to form dimers and further
polymerization. Histamine can therefore be extremely fouling to the electrode surface and
the reaction is not very reversible [29]. Thereby the signal is expected to be reduced over
time [30].
In a study by Chang, Su-Youne, et. al [31], the optimal FSCV waveform for histamine
was determined to be a triangular wave scanned between -0.4 and +1.4 V at a rate of 400
V/s applied at 10 Hz. They used a carbon fiber microelectrode with a diameter of 5 um
and approximately 80 um in exposed length. The histamine response was measured in rat
brain slices with an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. This study was able to detect histamine
reliably at a concentration of 100 nM, which is promising for the relevance of an allergy test.
The waveform is a good starting point to test, but it is worth noting that the scan rate for
example is not a magical number in any way but comes from the convention of other studies,
and traditionally from the limitations of instrumentation.
12
==PAGE:19==
2.4.4
Effects of pH
The pH can have a big influence on the measurements. A higher pH for example shifts the
oxidation peak to a lower voltage. Furthermore, the electrode fouling caused by histamine
oxidation was also found to be slower at a lower pH value [29]. Therefore, it is worth knowing
the pH value of the brain vs the skin when comparing results.
A study of 35 healthy men, calculated the intracellular pH value in the brain to be 7.07
or 7.08 comparing two methods [32]. The surface of the skin has an acidic pH mean value
which lies in the range 5.4-5.9 [33] due to a protective acetic mantle on the skin surface.
However, inside the body the pH is mostly neutral [34], and the pH value gradient exists
mostly across the stratum corneum (the outermost layer of the epidermis [35]). Thus, the
values are expected to be similar. However, it is worth noting that changes in the body such
as inflammation, can change the pH value. A study found a small lowering of 0.5 pH units
during inflammation [36]. Thus the peak for histamine might be different in the allergy test
due to pH shifts from inflammation which could affect the optimum scan rate and waveform.
2.5
In-plane silicon micro-needles
Micro-needles offer the advantage of being less painful than regular needles because of their
small size and low skin damage. Making these in a clean room with access to high-end
machines offers a range of benefits, such as low particle contamination, high control over the
size, and a reproducible result.
In-plane silicon microneedles refer to needles made from a silicon wafer in the hori-
zontal direction, which is typically done by etching through the wafer [37]. Out-of-plane
Si-microneedles are instead pointing out from the plane of the wafer and can also be made
by etching of the wafer as done by [38]. However, this poses limits on the length, due to the
thickness of the wafer.
For clean-room fabrication, In-plane micro-needles offer benefits compared with out-of-
plane micro-needles in being easier to adjust in length and thereby penetration depth [37].
Furthermore, to create a micro-needle working as an electrode and integrating it with other
devices, such as connecting a potentiostat, it is easier to make in-plane than out-of-plane.
This thesis is working with in-plane microneedles due to these benefits, and to build on
previous work done in the Biomic group.
13
==PAGE:20==
3
Method
3.1
Fabrication of 2D electrode chips
To investigate the effect of electrode size on FSCV, standard 2D/flat 3-electrode chips were
fabricated in DTU’s cleanroom, DTU Nanolab. Both pyrolyzed carbon and gold were used
as the working electrode in two separate but similar process flows. The electrode area is
carefully controlled to compare the two strictly. Carbon is the most studied material for
FSCV, but if gold works, it would save many fabrication steps and thereby make the chips
cheaper to produce. In both cases, the chip included a gold counter electrode and a gold
reference electrode for characterization.
3.1.1
Design variations
It is proposed to control the effective size and shape of the working electrode, by covering it
with a passivation layer and making a hole with the desired dimensions. Maskless lithography
allows making iterations in this approach relatively quickly.
Figure 7: a) Design variations for flat microelectrode chips, showing a close-up of four carbon
chips with different numbers of holes in the passivation and the same total exposed electrode
area. b) cross-section illustration of a carbon electrode. c) cross-section illustration of a gold
electrode.
The first objective of the thesis is to figure out the optimal size of the working electrode
concerning FSCV in the case of a single circular electrode. One advantage of small electrodes
14
==PAGE:21==
is that the current density can be higher due to diffusion effects. However, the challenge
is that the peak current will be smaller as described by Eq. 1. Thus, by having multiple
microelectrodes acting together as one, they might give a higher current than a single large
electrode of the same area. Thus, the second objective is to figure out if the diffusion effects
of small electrodes have a role in FSCV (see Figure 7 a)) and find the optimum number of
’holes’. In the design for carbon microelectrodes, gold was added under the passivation close
to the holes as a form of collector ring to get the advantage of the high conductivity of gold
as shown in Figure 7 b).
In this work, two design variations were therefore investigated:
1. A range of sizes of single holes that both relate to the design limitations and include
the typical size of a carbon fiber microelectrode (see table 1).
2. Varying the number of holes while adjusting the hole area to keep the total WE area
constant (see table 2). In addition, the pattern is kept similar, by having a constant
diameter of the pattern (distance across the longest part). Thus, the period is adjusted
according to the number of holes.
Single hole wafer design 1 (10-350 um)
Design name
Design 1
Design 2
Design 3
Design 4
Design 5
Design 6
Diameter (um)
350
200
100
50
20
10
Area (umˆ2)
96211
31416
7854
1963
314
79
Single hole wafer design 2 (30-350 um)
Design name
Design 1
Design 2
Design 3
Design 4
Design 5
Design 6
Diameter (um)
350
200
150
100
65
30
Area (umˆ2)
96211
31416
17671
7854
3318
707
Table 1: Overview of the two single-hole wafer designs with the diameters and areas of
microelectrodes included on each wafer.
This was done for both gold and carbon electrodes to compare them. (Note two different
variations were used for the single-hole design after testing the first batch to adjust for
relevance). The designs were randomly distributed across the wafer to limit any effects of
variation across the wafer from fabrication steps. One wafer yields a total of 38 chips (7 for
designs 1& 2, and 6 for designs 3-6). An overview of a wafer can be seen in Figure 51 a) in
Appendix H where the design numbers are annotated.
The design ranges were chosen for the single-hole chips to include the size of the reference
carbon fiber of the equivalent area as a 65-um diameter circle used in [27]. The upper limit
15
==PAGE:22==
Multi-hole wafer design (same total area)
Design 1
Design 2
Design 3
Design 4
Design 5
Design 6
Diameter [um]
225
130
85
52
37
29
Area [umˆ2]
39761
13254
5680
2093
1075
652
Number of holes
1
3
7
19
37
61
Table 2: Overview of the multi-hole wafer design used for the 2D microelectrode chips. All
chip designs have the same total area.
is chosen for relevancy to the penetration depth of the needles. 10 um was chosen as the
smallest design to find the lower limit of getting a signal. For the multi-hole design, the area
was based on 200 um of the needles being exposed, and combining all three as one electrode,
which would correspond to a 225 um circle.
3.1.2
Original carbon electrodes
Figure 8: Top view of the processing steps of making the flat electrode chips. a) Resist
patterning. b) pyrolysis c) gold deposition and lift-off. d) resist patterning for passivation.
The original recipe from Nicolai Støvring [8] was first used, but a few steps were added after
troubleshooting. The most recent version is attached as an appendix.
Silicon oxide
The process for the carbon electrodes starts with a single side-polished Silicon < 100 >
wafer of 100 mm diameter (an overview of the process seen from the top can be seen in Figure
8). The cheapest wafer n-type, phosphorous-doped 525 um was used, but is unimportant.
16
==PAGE:23==
An insulating oxide layer is grown by wet oxidation in a dedicated anneal oxide horizontal
furnace from Tempress where the surface is oxidized at 1100 °C for 3 h and 30 min with an
anneal time of 20 min, yielding approximately 1000 nm oxide thickness. The thickness is
measured by an ellipsometer for process quality control. However, the exact thickness is not
of high importance, since it is simply an insulating layer.
Mr-DWL photolithography
Before spin coating, a syringe of photoresist must be prepared at least 24 h before spin
coating to reduce the amount of bubbles on the coating. Here, the negative-tone resist mr-
DWL 5 is spin-coated on a S¨uss MicroTec RCD8 T spin coater to give a thickness of 10 um.
A soft-bake is done at 50 °C on a hotplate for 15 min with a temperature ramp of 2 °C/min.
Next, the pattern is exposed by a maskless aligner (Heidelberg Instruments MLA150) at 50
mJ/cm2 and defocus of 1. A post-exposure bake is done at 50 °C for 1 h. The polymer
is developed by 3 cycles of 1 min puddle in 1-Methoxy-2-propanyl acetate (PGMEA) and
spinning off the liquid on a S¨uss MicroTec Gamma 4M spin coater. The development is then
checked by an optical microscope and more cycles are added if needed. The wafers are then
hard-baked for 15 h at 90 °C.
Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis is done using a 5-step recipe that includes temperature ramp-up steps until
1050 °C for 2 h on a PEO-604 furnace (ATV Technologie). The recipe uses a flow of 20 slm
N2 gas and takes around 18 h in total. The recipe is as follows: temperature ramp for 60
min to 200°C, rest for 30 min, ramp for 40 min to 320°C, rest for 60 min, temperature ramp
for 40 min to 360°C, rest for 60 min, temperature ramp for 90 min to 450°C, rest for 60 min,
temperature ramp for 120 min, rest at 1050°C for 120 min, cooling down to 100°C for 320
min, cooling down to 50°C for 20 m.
It can be seen that most of the time is spent at low temperatures.
This is because
the outgassing primarily happens at these temperatures, so doing slow ramping and having
many resting points is done to avoid bubbling and damage to the pyrolyzed structures. The
choice of temperatures is based on a thermogravimetric analysis to optimize the pyrolysis of
Mr-DWL photoresist by Nicolai Støvring (Biomic group member) and his recipe is therefore
used.
Photolithography for metal contacts
Next, the lift-off pattern for the gold electrodes is made through photolithography. The
pyrolysis has the effect of shrinking the carbon, but a thick resist is still needed since the
surface is now structured. First, the wafer is HMDS primed for better adhesion, and a layer
of around 8 um of the reversible photoresist, AZ-5214E, is made by spin coating twice with
a recipe that gives 4.2 um for a single layer. This photoresist is specifically designed for
17
==PAGE:24==
lift-off processes due to negative sidewalls [39]. The pattern is then exposed using a maskless
aligner, a dose of 80 mJ/cm2, and a defocus of 4. A post-exposure bake is then done to
reverse the image, for 180 s at 110 °C. Baking activates a crosslinking agent in the exposed
areas that together with the photoactive compound, makes these areas almost insoluble.
A flood exposure is then done to expose the other areas (where the resist still works as a
positive resist [39]) for 20 cycles of 49.5 mJ/cm2 (totaling 1000 mJ/cm2) with 20s waiting
time in-between exposures, using a S¨uss MicroTec MA6/BA6 aligner. Lastly, development
is done using Tetramethylammoniumhydroxid (TMAH) at the automatic S¨uss MicroTec
Gamma 2M developer by depositing a puddle for 60 s cycles (around 7 cycles needed) with
a short spin at high speed in between cycles to remove the developer and lastly rinsing by
DI water, and drying using nitrogen [40].
Metal contacts deposition and lift-off
20 nm Cr is first deposited at 2˚A/s (to aid adhesion), followed by 300 nm Au at 10˚A/s
using a thermal evaporator tool, Temescal FC-2000 e-beam evaporator from Ferrotec. The
pattern is then released in a lift-off bath of MicropositTM Remover 1165 for as long as
needed and while applying a low ultrasound setting (to protect the carbon electrodes from
delaminating). Once the structures are lifted, the wafers are placed in an Isopropanol bath
for 3 min and lastly rinsed in water for 4 min.
Mr-DWL photolithography for passivation layer
After making the electrodes and contacts, the passivation layer needs to be made. Here,
the negative-tone resist mr-DWL 5 is again spin-coated to give a thickness of 10 um. The
thick passivation layer is chosen to be able to coat the structured surface. This is followed
by a soft bake of 50 min at 40 °C with a temperature ramp-up of 2 °C/min. The exposure
is again done on a maskless aligner at a Dose of 40 mJ/cm2 and a defocus of -1, determined
by a dose and defocus test (see Figure 45 in Appendix C). A post-exposure bake is done at
50 °C for 2 h, again with a temperature ramp-up of 2 °C/min. The polymer is developed by
3 cycles of 1 min puddle in 1-Methoxy-2-propanyl acetate (PGMEA) and spinning off the
liquid on a S¨uss MicroTec Gamma 4M spin coater. To fully crosslink the polymer, a flood
exposure of 500 mJ/cm2 is done, this time, using an aligner tool without a mask. A final
hardbake is done at 90 °C for 15 h to fully evaporate any leftover solvent.
Dicing
Lastly, the wafers are diced using a Disco, Automatic Dicing Saw, (DAD 3241), yielding
38 chips per wafer by the recipe: 6 slices on one side with 16mm spacing and 9 slices with
10.15mm spacing on the other side at a speed of 10mm/s. The height of the blade is adjusted
for the tape used.
18
==PAGE:25==
3.1.3
Gold electrodes
To make the gold electrodes the process is simplified a lot, by essentially skipping the pyroly-
sis. However, there are some minor changes made to the other steps as explained below. The
recipe again starts with a single side-polished Silicon < 100 > wafer of 100 mm diameter,
with a 1000 nm oxide layer. The process then jumps straight to making the gold electrodes
and contacts, around 7 tool steps are skipped (without counting characterization steps), and
this is thus a big advantage compared with carbon.
Photolithography for metal contacts and electrodes
This time, the resist for the lift-off pattern does not need to be as thick since the wafer
does not have any structures yet. A layer of 2.2 um AZ5214E resist is used this time. The
pattern is done by maskless aligner at 50 mJ/cm2 and defocus 0. The post-exposure bake
is now only 60 s at 110 °C due to the thinner layer. A flood exposure is then done at 500
mJ/cm2. Lastly, development is done using Tetramethylammoniumhydroxid (TMAH) at
the automatic S¨uss MicroTec Gamma 2M developer by depositing a puddle for 60 s followed
by a short spin at high speed to remove the developer and rinsing by DI water, and dried
using nitrogen [40] (only one cycle is needed).
The rest of the recipe is the same as for carbon, and the same passivation thickness was
used for better comparability.
3.2
Electrode characterization using CV and EIS
Before employing electrodes in advanced electrochemical techniques such as fast-scan cyclic
voltammetry (FSCV), they are characterized by CV and EIS to optimize their fabrication
and check design limitations more simply.
In order, not to waste too many chips before doing FSCV, only 1 copy of each design
was initially used for CV, leaving chips for the main purpose, which was optimizing FSCV.
3.2.1
Plasma treatment
Doing a plasma treatment using a low-power oxygen plasma before experiments is a way to
activate the surface and get a higher signal and lower charge transfer resistance [41]. This
was done at a very low power to not damage the electrode. The plasma treatment also
had the purpose of ensuring proper wetting of the electrode surface. This was necessary
to get any signal at all since the design used a relatively thick passivation with small holes
which can increase the hydrophobicity. To make SU-8 highly hydrophilic, an oxygen plasma
treatment is reported to induce CO and COO groups on the surface [42]. Mr-DWL, being
19
==PAGE:26==
very similar to SU-8, is likely to experience a similar process.
3.2.2
Electrolyte preparation
A redox electrolyte solution, commonly referred to as Ferro/Ferri, was prepared for the CV
and EIS tests.
The solution contained 0.2 M of potassium nitrate (KNO3) to maintain
the ionic strength. Additionally, a redox couple was introduced using 10 mM of potassium
hexacyanoferrate(II) trihydrate (K4[Fe(CN)6]·3H2O) and 10 mM of potassium hexacyano-
ferrate(III) (K3[Fe(CN)6]). All the chemicals were of analytical grade and were used without
further purification.
Distilled water was used as the solvent, and the constituents were
dissolved under stirring to ensure a homogenous solution. Thus yielding a 10 mM Ferro/fer-
ricyanide solution.
3.2.3
Cyclic voltammetry (CV)
Electrodes were characterized using cyclic voltammetry. The measurements were performed
using a potentiostat/galvanostat from PalmSense (PalmSens4) and analyzed in the PStrace
software (version 5.9).
A potential sweep was applied from -1 V to 1 V at a scan rate of 200 mV/s for both gold
and carbon. In retrospect, this range was quite large but was kept the same throughout the
work for consistency. For each electrode, 6 sweeps were done to get some statistics on the
peak current. The first data point was discarded since the first scan often has some artifacts
that can stem from irreversible reactions of surface groups, and the first scan is thus used to
stabilize the surface.
3.2.4
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
Impedance measurements were conducted directly after the CV measurements. The EIS
measurements were taken over a frequency range from 10000-1Hz with 100 frequency steps
and an amplitude of 10 mV. The impedance data was recorded as Nyquist plots, where the
real component of the impedance is plotted against the imaginary component.
The Randles circuit model (shown in Figure 5 b)) was employed to fit the EIS data and
extract the charge transfer resistance. An example of the fitting can be seen in Figure 4 b).
3.3
FSCV measurements of dopamine
One main motivation of the thesis is to optimize electrode designs for histamine detection.
However, considering the limited literature available for histamine measurements, dopamine
20
==PAGE:27==
was used to have more literature for comparison. In addition, dopamine has fewer fouling
problems and is thus easier to work with.
The goal of the measurements was to establish a calibration curve for each design. From
this, several metrics can be extracted such as the limit of detection (LOD), sensitivity,
linear range, and saturation limit, which can be used for comparing electrode performance.
Subsequently, the optimal electrode design determined through this methodology would
be adapted and implemented on micro-needle-based electrodes, with the ultimate aim of
histamine detection.
To ensure the robustness and reproducibility of the findings, FSCV was done on each
electrode design thrice. The measurements started with the lowest dopamine concentrations,
progressing incrementally to higher concentrations. This strategy was adopted to mitigate
the impact of electrode fouling, and that leftover dopamine from higher concentrations could
impact the lower ones. To further safeguard against fouling, the number of voltammetric
cycles during each measurement was deliberately kept minimal. A broad range from 0.05-
100 uM of dopamine concentrations was selected for the study to ensure that the limit of
detection (LOD) was included in the spectrum.
The chosen waveform was inspired by the methodologies detailed in a prior publication
[43] with a scan rate of 400 V/s, a holding potential of -0.4 V, and a switching potential of
+1.3 V. The software, PS Trace 5.9, was utilized for background current subtraction of the
FSCV measurements. When possible, its automatic peak detection feature was used and
validated visually. However, some measurements had to be done by manually drawing the
baseline, because the feature wasn’t always working perfectly.
Dopamine stock solutions were prepared by dissolving the dopamine powder (Molar
weight: 189.64 g/mol) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). During preparation and storage,
nitrogen gas was bubbled through the solution, ensuring protection from oxidative degrada-
tion.
3.4
Needle electrode design considerations
The mechanical stability of different micro-needle shapes, their penetration ability, and their
ability to deliver molecules have already been extensively researched by (Stephanie Bisgaard,
[7]). In this Ph.D. thesis, the optimal shape of in-plane microneedles, of the ones tested,
was found to be a pencil-shaped needle with dimensions: thickness 180±15 um, width: 400
um, and length: 1000 um in total and 600 um of the triangular part (See Figure 9) a). The
needle design is only modified by adding thin layers of electrodes on top. It is hypothesized
that these will not affect the mechanical stability significantly since the electrode layer is
21
==PAGE:28==
much thinner than the bulk of the needle.
Figure 9: Illustrations of needle design and dimensions. a) a single needle with annotated
measurements. b) a finished needle chip after all processing steps are completed. The light
grey shows etched through parts. The dark grey is silicon with a 1000 nm SiO2 layer. The
blue parts are covered by a 10-um mr-DWL-5 resist for passivation. The black needle tips
are pyrolyzed carbon, and the yellow is gold.
c) close-up of needle tip before and after
passivation.
One finding by [7] was that the penetration depth was only 100-300 um because the
skin was indented simultaneously when a force was applied. This should be kept in mind
for the electrode design.
Thus, placing all electrodes near the needle tip is important.
With the information from section 2.1 on the epidermal thickness of the volar forearm being
approximately 70 um, the electrode should preferably be within the 230 um mark (see Figure
10). Although an exposed electrode surface of 30-230 um is a bit to the low side, it is, clear
that the tip reaches the dermis where the mast cells reside.
Another finding was that the number of needles in the array greatly affects the penetration
depth. The more needles, the lower the penetration. This can be considered a bed-of-nails-
effect. Thus, if lowering the number of needles to one or two, it might be possible to get a
deeper penetration.
Each needle electrode chip in the current design is 19 mm long to facilitate easier handling
in a patient setting and one wafer only yields 16 chips. However, the number could easily
be expanded to yield 38 chips by halving the length of a chip (see Figure 51 b) and c) in
Appendix H). Easy handling can still be achieved by a holder for the chip. It would have to
be connected with a potentiostat anyway, which would likely include a holder already. This
would change the process steps a bit, so it was not done by this thesis for time management,
but it seems worthwhile to get a better yield for future work.
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 10: Illustration of penetration of a needle with a 100 um long electrode for left: the
minimum depth, and right: the maximum depth (reported by [7]). This yields respectively
30 um and 230 um of the tip length exposed to the dermis.
3.5
Fabrication of microneedle electrodes
The process for making the micro-needle electrodes is a bit more complicated, so it was not
done until the design had been finalized from the learning outcomes of the flat electrodes
(see the attached Appendix for the final version).
Figure 11: Process flow illustration of needle fabrication viewed from the side.
Step 1, Silicon oxide
As with the flat electrodes, the recipe starts by growing an insulating oxide layer of 1000
23
==PAGE:30==
nm using wet oxidation in a dedicated anneal oxide horizontal furnace from Tempress. Here,
however, a double-side polished batch of wafers is used. An n-doped 4-inch Si < 100 > wafer
was selected with a thickness of 350 ± 15 um. This time, the wafer is more important because
of the thickness affecting the final needle thickness. After oxidation, the oxide thickness is
checked by an ellipsometer (Ellipsometer VASE (J.A. Woollam)) with a pre-programmed
thickness recipe to work with a double-side polished wafer.
Step 2, Pattern frontside release (see Figure 12)
Figure 12: Top view, of the front-side processing steps of defining the micro-needles. a)
Resist-mask patterning. b) SiO2 etch, down to Si. c) Resist strip to remove the etch mask.
First, the front side pattern of the needles needs to be etched in the oxide layer. To do
this, hexamethyldisilazane (HDMS) priming of the surface is done to promote the adhesion
for photoresist, followed by spin coating of a 4.2 um layer AZ5214E using a Gamma 2M
cluster, S¨uss MicroTec tool with the recipe: 3 ml, 800 rpm; 60 s, 600 rpm; 10 s, 3500 rpm;
1 min, 100 °C. It is then exposed using a maskless aligner with a dose of 150 mJ/cm2 and
a defocus of -2. Afterwards, it is developed to form the etch-mask. A 5 min DRIE etch is
performed on an STS Multiplex ICP tool. The recipe works at a platen temperature of 0
°C (Coil Power 1300 W, Platen Power 200 W, He flow 174 sccm, C4F8 flow 5 sccm, H2 flow
4 sccm, pressure 4 mTorr, Etch time 5 min). Between each wafer, a 3 min cleaning of the
TDESC (Thick Dielectric ElectroStatic Clamp) platten electrode is performed. Once the
pattern has been etched, the mask can be removed by Plasma Asher (product name: TePla
model 300 Semi Auto Plasma Processor). A 30 min treatment is done with an O2 flow of
400 mL/min and N2 of 70 mL/min at a power of 1000 W.
Step 3, Pattern backside release (see Figure 13)
The process is repeated for the backside, using the backside pattern instead, and while
using backside alignment on the maskless aligner. The backside pattern is then etched in
silicon as well. This step determines the thickness of the needle so it is optimized to etch
around 170 um, yielding a thickness of 180 ± 15 um. However, due to the large uncertainty
of the wafer thickness, it is not important that the exact etch depth of 170 um is reached.
The Si etch is done on a SPTS Advanced Deep Reactive Ion Etching Pegasus - system
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 13: Top view, of the backside processing steps of the needle chip. a) Resist-mask
patterning. b) SiO2 etch, down to Si. c) Si-etch approximately halfway through the wafer.
d) Resist strip to remove the etch mask.
using a bosch process.
The etch recipe is divided into two similar etches, with slightly
different etch rates. Etch 1 is kept constant at 11 cycles and the cycles are then adjusted for
the desired depth in Etch 2. 1 cycle of Etch 1 has a deposition step of 4 s: C4F8 200 sccm,
pressure 25 mTorr, coil power 2000 W, platen power 0 W, and an etch step of 7 s: SF6 350
sccm for 1.5 s then 550 sccm, O2 5 sccm, pressure 25 mTorr for 1.5 s then ramped from 90
to 150 mTorr, coil 2800 W, platen power ramped from 120 to 140 W for 1.5 s then 45 W.
Etch 2 has a deposition step of 4 s: 200 sccm C4F8, pressure 25 mTorr, coil power 2000 W,
platen power 0 W, and an etch step of 7 s: SF6 350 sccm for 1.5s then 550 sccm, O2 5 sccm,
pressure 25 mTorr for 1.5s then 150 mTorr, coil power 2800 W, platen power 140W for 1.5
s then 45W. It is worth noting that factors such as etch load (% of the wafer area being
etched) and etch depth greatly influence the etch rate. The etch rate usually falls for each
cycle being etched, so the easiest way of knowing the required cycles is by using a dummy
wafer.
The etch mask here is simply the oxide layer since it has a large thickness. Photoresist
could also work but can create problems when being heated, so it was avoided in this step.
The structures in the oxide on the front side are facing down, and need to be clamped.
However, this is not a problem, since they have a relatively low height. For deeper structures,
the clamping might not work as intended, and a carrier wafer or very low flow of backside
cooling must be used.
Step 4-6, Mr-dwl 5 film photolithography (see Figure 14 a))
With the backside pattern fully etched, the electrodes on the front side can be made.
This is done in the same fashion as the 2D electrode chips. Ideally, this part of the process
flow is the same, and the same machines and settings are desired to be used. In practice,
however, the backside structures can provide a challenge when using automatic handling
in the equipment and when using backside vacuum clamping. This needs to be tested on
each step to see if it is possible. If not working, the wafer can be rotated slightly to try to
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 14: Top view of the processing steps of making the electrodes on top of the micronee-
dles. a) Resist patterning. b) pyrolysis c) gold deposition and lift-off (close-up). d) resist
patterning for passivation (close-up).
mismatch the backside structures with the holes from the vacuum clamping.
If not working either, there are two options. One is to use an alternative machine. For
example, a manual developer when it is possible. The second, (less favored option from
the author of this thesis) is to use a carrier wafer. This can be bonded to the sample by
thermal crystal bonding and be removed again through heating. It is, however, hard at times
to remove without breaking the wafer. There is already stress in the wafer due to etched
structures, so it can be fragile, and the more times the carrier wafer is used, the higher the
risk is of breaking.
Step 7, Pyrolysis (see Figure 14 b))
The backside structures should not pose any problems for the pyrolysis. However, it is
of course important that the carrier wafer, if any, is removed before this step. Since very
little material is pyrolyzed, it should be possible to load the furnace with more wafers than
for the 2D electrode chips.
Step 8-9, Front side metal contacts (see Figure 14 c))
The lift-off is done in the same manner as the flat electrodes except when a carrier wafer
is needed. For development, a manual TMAH developer is available in the cleanroom, where
a non-vacuum chuck can hold the wafer, and can be used if the vacuum fails on the automatic
one. There is no direct contact with TMAH, which is not allowed to be handled by users.
Thus a development in a beaker is not possible. The other option is using a carrier wafer
in the automatic developer. For the lift-off bath, a carrier wafer should again be removed if
used.
Step 10-11, Mr-dwl 5 film photolithography (see Figure 14 d))
The passivation layer is again done the same way as for the 2d electrode chips if possible.
Otherwise, alternative tools or a carrier wafer are used.
Step 12, Front side release
After the electrodes are made, a carrier wafer is, however, needed, for the front-side
26
==PAGE:33==
release of the needles. Here, the etching needs to be done on a system that allows for metals
on the wafer. The Advanced Silicon Etcher (ASE), STS, at DTU Nanolab, allows a small
amount of gold on the sample, so this system is used instead of the Pegasus tool. However,
to avoid overheating the wafer and thereby separate it from the carrier wafer by melting the
crystal bond, the recipe is split up into four rounds of 50 cycles each, with a downtime of
5 min in between. The etch rate can drift, so it is checked if the pattern looks fully etched
visually, before taking the wafer out of the machine. The SiO2 below will have a greenish
color.
Step 13, Backside electrodes
Lastly, a backside electrode is made by thermal e-beam evaporation of 20 nm Cr + 300
nm Au at a 45-degree tilt. Thus the whole backside is essentially one big counter electrode.
27
==PAGE:34==
4
Results
One of the main challenges compared to earlier fabrication projects was to ensure that the
small holes in the passivation layer of the microelectrodes remained open and accessible for
the electrolyte. This challenge had to be solved before FSCV could be done to optimize
them.
4.1
Optimization of gold microelectrodes
Wafers with gold microelectrodes were initially made to get faster results to use for CV, EIS,
and FSCV.
A wafer with Au microelectrodes was first made with a dose of 60 mJ/cm2 and a defocus
of 1 of the passivation layer. From both microscope images (see Figure 15) and an SEM
image (see Figure 16, on the next page), it looked as if the holes were open down to the
electrode surface. The average diameter was 2.4 ± 0.6 smaller than designed. However, even
though the diameters of the holes were slightly smaller than designed, it should not matter
for the measurements since the point is to test a range of hole sizes, and the exact size doesn’t
matter that much. The subsequent CV and EIS tests, however, showed no signal even after a
low-power oxygen plasma treatment to activate the surface and ensure a hydrophilic surface.
Figure 15: Microscope images of flat electrode chips. a) measurement of a hole with 200 um
diameter design, using the microscope software. b) & c) Overview of respectively a gold &
a carbon electrode chip with 37 holes in the passivation layer with the diameter of 37 um.
A dose and defocus test was completed after that (The result is shown in Figure 45 in
Appendix C.), showing that the best dose and defocus combination was 40 mJ/cm2 and
-1.
This finding was then applied to a second wafer, which turned out to work.
Here,
the diameter was 0.2 ± 0.4 um smaller than designed.
Subsequently, the same settings
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 16: SEM images of chip A1 from wafer 1 with a designed hole diameter of 350 um.
A) shows an overview, and b) shows a zoom-in on the working electrode. Both pictures
show strong charging in the passivation and less charging on the electrode surface, which
indicates, that the hole is fully developed.
and recipe were applied to a third gold electrode with the multi-hole pattern, which also
worked as expected. Here, the diameter was again 0.2 ± 0.4 um smaller than expected. A
comparison of the CVs for chips from the three wafers is shown in 17 a), showing that the
optimization from the dose and defocus test worked.
Figure 17: a) CV diagrams of Au microelectrode chips from 3 different wafers. Wafer 1 is
done with a dose of 60 mJ/cm2 and a defocus of 1, and wafer 2 & 3 are done with a dose
of 40 mJ/cm2 and defocus -1. All CVs are done after a low-power O2 plasma treatment for
activating the surface. b) CVs in ferro/ferri solution with the same electrode chip before
and after a low-power oxygen plasma treatment
29
==PAGE:36==
First, it was checked whether the electrodes could be used without the need for a plasma
treatment. As seen in Figure 17 b), the plasma treatment mattered a great deal, which
is not surprising when the passivation layer is so thick. Based on a few before and after
measurements, it was condemned necessary, and done for all chips.
Later in the process, three more wafers with gold microelectrodes were made with the
original recipe except for a plasma descum in the end, to see if the signal could be further
improved. For some reason, none of these worked. In addition, the diameter was worsened to
be 1.8 ± 0.4 um smaller than designed (averaged between the wafers). A possible explanation
is that a drift occurred on the defocus in the MLA in the time since the fabrication of the
first three. This drift was mentioned in a message to users of the equipment on the internal
mailing list by a lab technician. The drift would of course change the optimal dose/defocus
combination, so it seems a plausible explanation. The only other difference between them
and the two working wafers was that they had a plasma treatment, which would only be
expected to help increase the signal.
The technician reported a drift in defocus of -3 which was incorporated in all subsequent
steps that involved the maskless aligner. However, this indicates that the process is perhaps
not that stable, and making sure the holes are fully open, continues to be challenging.
4.2
Optimization of carbon microelectrodes
4.2.1
Pyrolysis
The electrode height after pyrolysis was measured by dektak to be 2.875±0.013 (4 mea-
surements), which means the height shrinkage is about 71 % (assuming 10 um photoresist
height). At the edge of the electrode, the height was measured to be 3.34 ± 0.06 um (4
measurements) due to uneven shrinkage.
The pyrolysis for all wafers was mostly successful with few of the electrodes experiencing
bubbles or delamination. Around 0-3 electrodes per wafer were experiencing delamination
as shown in Figure 48 in Appendix E.
4.2.2
Lithography
The best dose and defocus combination from the gold microelectrodes of 40 mJ/cm2 and -1
were applied to two wafers with carbon electrodes (w10 and w11) (made before the defocus
drift occurred).
However, they seemed to be short-circuited and had very distinct CVs
as shown in Figure 18 which is simply a straight line like a resister. Thus, the WE and
CE seemed somehow connected. These wafers had a diameter 0.4 ± 0.3 um smaller than
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 18: Example CV and EIS measurements of a short-circuited carbon Electrode.
designed, yet the CVs showed only a small indication of redox processes occurring in the
middle, which were too small to extract any information from. It, therefore, seemed to be
two issues that needed to be solved.
To attempt this, several descum steps were tested for implementation between process
steps. The short circuit was expected to be from scum after pyrolysis that needed to be
removed.
From the experience of other Biomic group members, this could give a short
circuit, with the hypothesis being that material is redeposited on the surface during pyrolysis
to create a thin conductive layer between electrodes. The low signal was speculated to come
from one or more of three different causes. First, it could be leftover photoresist on the surface
from the lift-off process blocking the signal. Secondly, it could be scum from the passivation
layer which would stay more easily on a carbon surface than a gold surface. Lastly, it could
be that the holes in the gold layer made it very difficult to do photolithography near the
edges (see figure 7 b). The edge of the hole in the gold layer, could be very reflective, scatter
the light, and thus cross-link part of the photoresist in the hole. A plan was then made
to investigate these causes and solve the issue. By testing four different wafers, different
combinations of plasma treatments could be tested.
Three of these wafers were given different plasma treatments, and the fourth one was
done with a safer design that did not have gold near the holes (see Figure 19). Out of these
four wafers, the safe design worked, and one of the plasma treatments worked as well. The
other two had no or a very low signal.
An overview of the plasma treatments can be seen in Table 3. The plasma after pyrolysis
was done at 1 min, O2: 500 ml/min and 200 watts power, which was reported on the internal
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 19: Pictures of flat electrode chips after dicing. a) gold electrode chips. b) carbon
electrode chips. c) carbon electrode chip with safe design. Notice: the passivation layer is
difficult to see since it is transparent.
Wafer 12
Wafer 13
Wafer 14
Wafer 15
Type
Multi
Single, safe design
Multi
Single
Plasma after Pyrolysis
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Plasma after Lift-off
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Plasma after Passivation
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Resistance
not measured
not measured
33+/- 9 Ω
8 +/- 3 KΩ
CV test
Fail
Pass
Pass
Fail
Table 3: Overview of plasma treatments tested on four wafers with flat carbon electrodes.
In the CV test, ’pass’ means oxidation and reduction peaks are visible, and ’fail’ means they
are not. The resistance was measured in the cleanroom as an extra test.
wiki for DTU Nanolab [44] to have etch 8.1 nm in AZ Mir 701 when starting at 21 °C. The
plasma after lift-off and passivation was done at a different plasma asher that allowed metals,
and using the recipe (2 min, O2: 70 ml/min, N2: 70 ml/min, 150 w), which was reported
to have an etch depth of 14.2 nm in AZ5214E resist, starting from a cold plasma asher.
In the data reported for both recipes and resists, it is noted that the etch rate follows an
exponential trend, where it rapidly increases after around 5 min. This is probably due to the
temperature increasing during the treatment, which is why starting from a cold plasma asher
is important for consistent results. The effect of too high plasma can be seen in Appendix
A.
Thus, the optimization for carbon worked by two methods (see Figure 20 for a CV
comparison), implementing plasma steps as one way to keep the original design, and also
by switching to a safer design (which includes plasma treatments as well). It is not clear
32
==PAGE:39==
Figure 20: CV diagrams of Carbon microelectrode chips from 4 different wafers with different
plasma treatments to fix low signal issues. All CVs are done after a low-power O2 plasma
treatment for activating the surface.
why exactly that combination of plasma treatment worked, and switching to a safer design
altogether seems like an easier solution, but both methods are possible. The variations from
the designed diameter can be seen in Table 5 in Appendix F.
4.2.3
Other factors influencing yield
Figure 21: Microscope images of various damages that can occur in the fabrication of the
electrodes. a) and b) showing particles. c) showing electrode peeling off.
Apart from some of the carbon electrodes delaminating in the pyrolysis, other factors meant
some electrodes were not successfully fabricated.
One factor that is hard to completely
avoid is particle contamination (see Figure 21 a) and b).
This can to some extent ruin
the electrodes, especially if happening near the holes in the passivation layer which would
obstruct the experiment where the size needs to be carefully controlled.
33
==PAGE:40==
Another factor that influenced the yield was the lift-off process where some of the carbon
electrodes experienced problems. Some had too much gold lifted, as shown in figure 21 c),
whereas others had too little gold lifted. The multi-hole carbon electrodes where the plasma
treatment worked, had a yield of about 50 %. The smallest holes were not completely lifted,
and the carbon electrode therefore wasn’t exposed. Thus, only design 1, 2, and 3 could be
tested for this wafer.
In summary, 2/6 gold microelectrode wafers, and 2/6 carbon microelectrode wafers were
successful (see Table 4 & 5 in Appendix F).
4.3
Preliminary CV and EIS measurements
As mentioned in the methods section, before testing the electrodes with FSCV, a few chips
from each of the working wafers were set aside to use for both CV and EIS measurements.
By testing one copy of all 6 designs, a preliminary view of any trends or design limitations
is obtained. To confirm any trends, it would of course be necessary to test multiple copies
of each design, but to not waste too many clean chips, a small sample is used. If none of the
6 chips worked, a few more of the safest designs (design 1) were used to check if the whole
wafer had issues. An overview of the number of working chips can be seen in Table 4 and 5
in appendix F.
4.3.1
CV and EIS on Au microelectrodes
For the Au, multi-hole electrodes, the preliminary CV and EIS tests indicated a decreasing
peak current and increasing charge transfer resistance for an increasing number of holes
(see Figure 22), which would indicate that the smaller holes are more closed off, or they
experience more hydrophobic issues.
The largest design (1 hole) had an expected size of 225 um and a measured size of 225.5
± 0.3 um corresponding to an area that is 0.5 % bigger than expected. The smallest design
(61 holes) had an expected diameter of 29 um and a measured diameter of 28.69 ± 0.12 um,
corresponding to an area that is 0.8 % smaller than designed. It is thus not a huge difference,
and it is more likely to be hydrophobicity, or due to too few samples tested.
The single-hole experiment with Au electrodes showed an increasing peak current and a
decreasing charge transfer resistance for an increasing electrode area as expected (see Figure
23). From the preliminary results, the 10 um diameter did not seem to work, and 20 um
had no signal on one chip and a very low signal on another that was tested.
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 22: Electrode characterization of Au electrodes with the same total area and different
numbers of holes. a) the peak currents extracted from CV plots as shown in Figure 4 a).
The error bars show the standard deviation of 5 scans. Each point is one chip. b) The
charge transfer resistance of the electrodes measured from an EIS scan by fitting a Randles
circuit to the Nyquist plot as described in Figure 4 b). The error bars are calculated from
the fitting uncertainty by the software.
Figure 23: Electrode characterization of Au electrodes with different hole areas in passivation
on the WE (wafer 2). a) the peak currents extracted from CV plots as described in Figure
4 a). The error bars show the SD of 5 scans. Each point is a chip. b) The charge transfer
resistance of the electrodes measured from an EIS scan by fitting a Randles circuit to the
Nyquist plot as described in Figure 4 b). The error bars are calculated from the fitting
uncertainty by the software.
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 24: a) Preliminary CVs of carbon single hole chips. b) Preliminary EIS measurements
of carbon single hole chips. Measurements in legends refer to hole diameter.
4.3.2
CV and EIS on carbon microelectrodes
The carbon single-hole chips showed an increasing peak current for increasing hole area
(Figure 24 a)), and a decreasing charge transfer resistance as shown in Figure 24 b). This
was the wafer with the less risky design (w13). If plotting the peak current against area (see
Figure 25 a)), it shows a very linear trend, which fits well with the Randles-ˇSevˇc´ık Equation
1.
Figure 25: Electrode characterization of carbon electrodes with different hole areas in pas-
sivation on the WE (wafer 13). a) the peak current from a CV plot as described in Figure
4 a). The error bars show the standard deviation of 5 scans. Each point is a chip. Best fit
line: y = 5.0 · 10−5 + 0.022. R2 = 0.9999. b) The charge transfer resistance of the electrode
measured from an EIS scan by fitting a Randles circuit to the Nyquist plot as described in
Figure 4 b). The error bars are calculated from the fitting uncertainty by the software.
The carbon multi-hole wafer had some issues in the lift-off process and only the 1-, 3-,
36
==PAGE:43==
and 7-hole chips were working. All chips were used for CV and EIS measurements. The
standard deviations overlap and show a very similar result for both peak current and charge
transfer resistance (see Figure 26). This is expected when having the same total area and
the number of holes is low.
Figure 26: Electrode characterization of Carbon electrodes with the same total area and
different numbers of holes (wafer 14). The error bars show the standard deviation of 5-7
different chips (5 1-hole chips, 7 3-hole chips, and 6 7-hole chips). a) the peak current from
a CV plot as described in Figure 4 a). b) The charge transfer resistance of the electrode
measured from an EIS scan by fitting a Randles circuit to the Nyquist plot as described in
Figure 4 b). The error bars are calculated from the fitting uncertainty by the software.
4.4
Flat electrode, FSCV
4.4.1
Dopamine LOD
It was first attempted to obtain the LOD curves of different chip designs by the method
described in section 3.3. The gold electrodes were first studied using a scan recipe described
in [22] (optimized for a carbon fiber with an Ag/AgCl reference), scanning from -0.4 V to
1.3 V at 400 V/s. However, as seen in Figure 27 a), the output had a large tail at high
potentials, which likely came from water oxidation since it persisted. Thus, the method for
carbon fiber electrodes does not seem optimal for gold electrodes.
A different method was then adopted from [26], which was optimized for an Au wire
electrode referenced to an Ag/AgCl.
Here, the scanned potentials are from -0.2 to 0.6,
scanning at 100 V/s. This proved to be much more suitable and the shapes of the FSCV
curves were similar to what [26] had obtained before background subtraction. There was,
however, a major challenge with background subtraction as seen in Figure 28. which shows
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 27: FSCV waveform comparison on Au electrode chips for two waveforms described
in the literature. For both scans, a chip with a single hole size of 350 um diameter was used
to scan a 100 uM Dopamine solution in PBS.
Figure 28: FSCV scans showing background subtraction problems on an Au multi-hole chip
with 37 holes (diameter 37 um). a) PBS scan and a 100 uM dopamine scan done shortly
after. b) PBS scan subtracted from the dopamine scan.
an example of bad background overlap and a background subtracted FSCV curve. This likely
has to do with the experiment design. It is possible that the time between taking the scans
in pure PBS and the dopamine concentrations is enough time for significant background
drift. Furthermore, when the PBS liquid is removed, the electrode is briefly exposed to air,
38
==PAGE:45==
which could alter some surface properties. In the literature, a flow cell is often used, which
makes the switch much quicker and can be set to occur while measuring. Therefore, the
study would benefit from having a flow cell.
In addition, as seen in the plots, there is quite a bit of noise on the FSCV curves. The
currents of the peaks measured by [26] after background subtraction are extremely low, less
than 5 nA, and are often only visible after background subtraction. For the carbon fiber
microelectrode presented in [22], the current of the anodic and cathodic peaks are even
lower than 1 nA. Thus, even if background subtraction is solved, there is a major challenge
with the noise, which is much higher than the signal that is wanted to be measured for low
concentrations. In Figure 27, the noise is for example on the scale of around 0.5 uA. To
reduce the amount of electronic background noise, it could be worth looking into shielding
the setup, for example by a faradaic cage (done by [26]) or at least shielded wires. It was
for example noted that a lab-top charging cable nearby would greatly distort the measured
current. However, the noise may also stem from limitations of the potentiostat at high scan
speeds and it is worth looking into potentiostats that may be better suited for FSCV.
Apart from the lack of a flow cell and the electronic noise, there is also a significant
limitation of the PStrace software, which prevented an optimal waveform from being used.
As mentioned in the theory section, the wait time between scans is very important in FSCV,
as it provides time for the adsorption of species to the surface. This was, however, not
possible to change in the software. The desired wait time was 90 ms for carbon, while the
actual one was 10 ms for a 100 V/s scan rate and 21 ms for a 400 V/s scan rate. This limits
the possibility of detecting low concentrations.
With these limitations, a LOD curve for dopamine or histamine detection using FSCV
seemed far out of reach.
As a substitute, it was attempted to simply measure a 100 uM dopamine concentration
to see how the electrodes behaved. This is shown in Figure 29 which shows a great spread
in the data. For the multi-hole gold electrode chips, all electrode designs were able to detect
the signal (however not all chips), but for the single-hole carbon electrodes, the smallest
diameter, 30 um, did not yield any signal.
This test was not conclusive but did at least aid in getting a practical understanding of
FSCV and method development. It was clear from the practical experience that optimizing
the electrodes might not be as simple as initially thought and that an improved setup would
help in doing so.
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 29: FSCV dopamine peak heights extracted from 100 uM measurements without
background subtraction. A) Peak heights from gold multi-hole chips, error bars show es-
timated error from the noise level. b) Peak heights from carbon single hole measurements
with error bars showing estimated error from the noise level.
4.4.2
Dopamine colorplots
To imitate a flow cell, dopamine can be added while measuring in PBS and the data can
be processed using color plots. To reduce the amount of noise, every scan was an average
of 20. The experiment design was the following. After mounting the plasma-treated chips,
150 uL PBS solution was added to each one, and the measurement was then started. While
monitoring the number of scans, 150 uL of 100 uM dopamine solution was added to the
solution at scan 20, thus resulting in a 50 uM dopamine solution. It was attempted to mix
the solution by using the pipette immediately after adding dopamine.
For both Carbon and gold, four chips from the single-hole design were used. However,
not all measurements turned out successfully, so one of each was selected as an example to
show here. For both gold and carbon, the dopamine peak did not show up before scan 50,
and an artifact peak was present in the first scans (see Figure 30 a)), which distorted the
color plot. The first 40 scans were, therefore discarded, which resulted in a better visual
representation of the dopamine peak (see Figure 30 b)). As seen in the figure, there was,
however, still a blue line for gold at around 0.6 V after discarding.
For carbon (see Figure 31), it mostly solved the issue of the artifact peak, so the color
plot turned out much nicer. The original color plots (where scan 1 is subtracted) can be
seen in Figure 46 in Appendix D.
This should only serve as example data, and not a comparison between gold and carbon
40
==PAGE:47==
where more measurements on a proper set-up would be needed.
Figure 30: FSCV data from a 200 um gold electrode measuring PBS with dopamine added
at around the 20th scan. Each scan is an average of 20. a) Sample scans from raw FSCV
data. b) color plot of scan 40-255 with background subtraction of scan 40.
Figure 31: FSCV data from a 200 um carbon electrode measuring PBS with dopamine added
at around the 20th scan. Each scan is an average of 20. a) Sample scans from raw FSCV
data. b) color plot of scan 40-255 with background subtraction of scan 40.
4.4.3
Background drift study
Apart from being able to detect a fast change, it is also worth considering the factor of
background drift. It is again hard to compare gold and carbon directly due to the different
waveforms used. Nevertheless, we can get an idea of the size of the drift by simply scanning
in PBS. This is shown in Figure 32 where annotated arrows indicate the change in the
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 32: Example of typical Background drift in PBS for a) a gold WE of diameter 350
um (scan rate: 100 V/s) and b) a carbon WE of diameter 350 (scan rate: 400 V/s). Notice
the different potential windows. Each scan is an average of 5.
background. We can see two distinct behaviors. For gold, the tails at low and high potentials
start small but continue to grow over the 255 cycles shown (each is an average of 5 scans).
For carbon, the tail at high potential starts fairly large and then falls rapidly, and seems
to stabilize relatively fast. There is, however, still some overall drift that happens. It looks
almost as if the capacitive current is growing.
Figure 33: Comparison of background drift of gold and carbon (raw data shown in Figure
32). a) the average change in current between scans per data point. b) the current at the
end of the scan (at 0.6 V for gold, and 1.3 V for carbon).
To quantify the drift, we can take a similar approach as [23] where the drift is quantified
by taking the sum of the absolute difference from the first scan. The purpose here is, however,
to study the change over time, so the absolute difference from the previous scan is instead
42
==PAGE:49==
plotted. To attempt to compare gold and carbon, we define the ”average drift” as the drift
per data point. This is shown in Figure 33 a), where we can see a higher drift for carbon for
the two chips compared. This might correspond to higher electronic noise for carbon and
could be higher due to a faster scan rate.
Another comparison, worth doing is the current at the end of the scan where we see the
largest change for both electrodes. In 33 b), we observe the same as in Figure 32, a growing
tail for gold, and a falling tail for carbon. The tail at the end can come from water oxidation
or temporary surface instability from plasma treatment. Plasma treatment might contribute
to artifact peaks that come from redox reactions from oxygen-containing groups [24]. For
gold, it seems to be water oxidation since it doesn’t disappear, but for carbon, it might be
an irreversible oxidation of surface groups from the plasma treatment.
4.4.4
Stability testing after FSCV
It is worth knowing whether or not the FSCV measurements impair the chips in some way.
In addition, this made it possible to get a bit more data points for the trends studied with
CV and EIS. The chips being compared had the same history of 10 scans in PBS and 15 in
100 uM Dopamine. They were then rinsed with DI water and dried by blowing N2 gas on
them to attempt to reuse them.
Figure 34: Electrode characterization after FSCV of Au electrodes with the same total area
and different numbers of holes (wafer 3). a) the peak current from a CV plot as shown in
Figure 4 a). The error bars show the standard deviation of 5 scans. Each point is a chip.
b) The charge transfer resistance of the electrode measured from an EIS scan by fitting a
Randles circuit to the Nyquist plot as described in Figure 4 b). The error bars are calculated
from the fitting uncertainty by the software.
Au multi-hole electrodes showed a small increase in peak current for more holes, and
43
==PAGE:50==
roughly the same charge transfer resistance for all the holes (see Figure 34). It would be
expected that the peak current would fall as initially shown in Figure 22. There might be an
effect of de-lamination of the passivation after multiple uses, which would indeed be greater
for more holes since they have a larger total circumference, and thus more points of attack
for delamination to occur. Most of the chips have peak currents higher than 2.5 uA whereas
the chips tested before, almost all have peak currents below 2.5 uA. However, the initial
findings also had fewer data points, and the chips have some variation even though they are
from the same wafer.
Figure 35: Electrode characterization of Carbon electrodes with different hole areas in the
passivation layer on the WE (wafer 13). The error bars show the standard deviation of 3-4
different chips. a) the peak current from a CV plot as described in Figure 4 a). Best fit
line: y = 5.2 · 10−5 + 0.025. R2 =0.998. b) The charge transfer resistance of the electrode
measured from an EIS scan by fitting a Randles circuit to the Nyquist plot as described in
Figure 4 b).
Carbon single-hole electrodes behaved as expected, as seen in Figure 35. It can be spec-
ulated that the carbon electrodes would experience less de-lamination because of a stronger
affinity for the passivation material to carbon.
The best fit line again shows a very good agreement with the Randles-ˇSevˇc´ık Equation
1.
4.5
Microneedle fabrication
4.5.1
DRIE etch depth in Si
The process step of the DRIE etch was changed to use a different tool than in the original
recipe from [7]. I used the tool Pegasus instead of the ASE since it is a cleaner equipment.
44
==PAGE:51==
Thus, the etch recipe had to be optimized to reach a depth of 170 um like the original one.
This was done by first using the recipe on a dummy wafer with the same pattern. Here,
11+25 cycles gave a depth of approximately 138 um, measured by a stylus profilometer
(Dektak). Thus, the etch rate was approximately 3.83 um/cycle, and 44 (11+33) cycles
would be expected to give 168.5 um depth.
The following 5 wafers were then done using this recipe, however, not all at the same
time. Two wafers, done one day, gave 167.5 ± 0.6 um (4 measurements), while the three
others, on a different day, gave 163.8 ± 1.3 um (6 measurements) where the center of the
wafer is 164.7 ± 0.8 um (3 measurements), and the edge is 163.0±1.2 um (3 measurements).
First of all, it can be seen that there is some day-to-day variation in depth, which could
perhaps be improved by using longer clean steps in between wafers. Secondly, there is a
higher etch rate in the middle of the wafer than near the edges. Both of these points are,
however, not a big issue. The wafer already has a thickness uncertainty of 15 um, so the
etch depth is not going to improve the overall uncertainty in the final thickness of the needle
unless the wafer thickness is measured before etching. The final thickness uncertainty of the
needles is an accepted variation in the fabrication process and is not expected to significantly
affect the performance. If it one day becomes important, a dummy wafer could be included
before etching the batch wafers.
4.5.2
Clamping problems
Due to clamping problems with backside structures, some of the steps in the process had to
be changed. The first challenge appeared for AZ5214 spin-coating for metal lift-off where
clamping problems kept occurring on the machine used. One out of four wafers clamped
successfully. The other three were then coated on another tool of the same model which
luckily worked. The tools do not allow a carrier wafer when using HMDS priming of the
surface, and if clamping fails, the alternative would then have been HMDS priming only,
then bonding to a carrier wafer, and then spin-coating.
The next issue occurred in the TMAH development of the pattern (step 8.6) where none
of the wafers could be clamped. A solution was tried by using a manual TMAH developer
tool, where the wafer chuck can be switched to a non-vacuum version. However, during
spin-drying of the first sample, the wafer broke in half, which put the machine ”out of use”
until a staff member was able to clean it. To keep up with the schedule, the other three
wafers were therefore bonded to carrier wafers and developed using the automatic tool. It is
possible that the first wafer was just an unlucky one, and that the others would have been
fine in the manual developer. However, it alludes to the fragility of the wafers from having
45
==PAGE:52==
backside structures.
The carrier wafers were removed before the lift-off bath (step 9.2).
After lift-off, it
was noticed that the inverted pattern on the mask-less aligner was confined to a square
containing the pattern. A big part of gold had therefore not been lifted as seen in Figure
49 in Appendix E. The extra gold was then covered with passivation in the next step, to
attempt to get permission to etch it on the ASE tool.
Afterwards, a carrier wafer was mounted again, to avoid any further clamping problems
and because it is needed for the final step in the front-side release.
4.5.3
Front-side etching
Unfortunately, the whole wafer was not allowed in the ASE tool due to too much gold on the
surface (to avoid cross-contamination of other users’ samples). The rule of thumb is that up
to 4 cm2 of metal on the surface is allowed on the surface even when most of it was covered
by passivation. The metal was especially problematic near the edges of the wafer, but even
without this extra metal, the wafer was still not allowed. To get some chips out, it was
agreed upon that 4 needle chips with the current design could be etched at once. They were
thus cut out using a diamond pen. Removing the carrier wafer, however, broke the wafer
for all three wafers left at this point, and thus the yield ended up being very low. Only 8
chips were processed in this fashion due to time constraints and the low yield of breaking off
chips.
Microscope images of the needles before and after frontside etching showed that it was
possible to keep the carbon electrode intact (see Figure 36)
Figure 36: Microscope images of needles. a) before etching. b) and c) after etching.
There was, however, a weird problem in the frontside etching, where the tip of the needle
46
==PAGE:53==
took longer than expected to etch free (see Figure 37 c) and Figure 38 c)). This part would
be expected to be etched faster since more open areas are normally etched faster. On the
contrary, the backside etching looked smooth as seen in the SEM images. The issue on the
front could be due to something in that area working as a mask. The oxide etching of the
front side seemed complete, as seen in the picture from Figure 47 in Appendix E, so it is not
likely to be oxide working as a mask. Perhaps it could be from the handling of the wafers
during the backside steps. Vacuum tweezers were mostly used to handle the wafers, and if
these were dirty, they could potentially leave residue in the holes.
Figure 37: SEM images of the front side of micro-needles. a) and b) showing a fully etched
microneedle, whereas, c) shows incomplete etching, resulting in a ’cap’ on the microneedle.
Figure 38: SEM images of the back-side of micro-needles, a) and b) showing fully etched
needles. c) showing incomplete etching.
Another possible explanation could be that the needle tip scattered some light which
crosslinked a small layer of resist that would then be pyrolyzed in that area and work as a
mask. Eventually, this mask would be etched as well.
4.5.4
Backside electrodes
Lastly, the chips had to be coated on the backside with gold as a counter electrode. There
was, however, no more gold on the Sputter-System (Lesker), which was initially intended
47
==PAGE:54==
used. An alternative was then the e-beam evaporator, which, is, however, depositing highly
directional in a line-of-sight manner, and thus the step on the backside of the needle would
not be coated. By coating at a 45-degree angle using a special holder, this problem was
solved. 8 chips could be coated at once, which was luckily the same number that had been
etched.
4.6
Microneedle electrode characterization
The real evaluation of the microfabrication is electrochemical measurements. Thus, CV and
EIS measurements were again done. An alternative home-built set-up had to be made using
crocodile junctions to connect to the contacts. A smart holder was envisioned to connect
the chips easily to a potentiostat (see Figure 50 in Appendix G). However, due to time
constraints, it was skipped. For the standard CV and EIS, an external RE had to be used to
avoid potential shifts and for the potentiostat to work. Here a silver/silver chloride electrode
was used as RE.
Figure 39: Cyclic voltammograms of microneedle electrodes. A) showing two examples of
short-circuited needles. B) Showing two examples of needles with a less obvious short circuit
but most like partly short-circuited.
Unfortunately, it quickly became clear that the needles were almost all short-circuited
(see Figure 39).
Even after double-checking the wires, and safeguarding them by using
insulating tape, the problem persisted. A check was also done by using both an external RE
and CE to compare the signal strength of the front and backside electrode (see Figure 40).
It is perhaps not surprising that the needles are short-circuited. Both the contacts and
48
==PAGE:55==
Figure 40: Microneedle electrode, short-circuit check. a) The set-up used to check whether
a needle is short-circuited. External RE (silver/silver chloride) and CE (platinum) are used
to compare the signal difference between the WE and CE of the needle electrode. b) CVs of
WE and CE of the microneedle, as well as combining the two as one electrode (WE+CE).
The CVs are of very similar peak height, indicating a strong short circuit.
the WE are very close to the edge. When depositing gold on the back side, the side walls
are also covered. An easy fix for the contact pads is to move them 20 um away from the
edge and add passivation around them just like the flat electrodes.
The same could be done with the WE. However, this would limit the design options even
further, and with the limited skin penetration, the WE should preferably be placed as close
to the edge as possible. A thin passivation layer could be applied, but it might again create
some hydrophobic issues, so it should be avoided if possible.
It was then attempted to pinpoint the short circuit by breaking off part of the chip
with a diamond pen. This would eliminate any short circuit between the contact pads and
the backside electrodes (see Figure 41). From the resulting CVs, it was possible to see an
improvement, and thus contact pads near the edge have part of the blame.
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 41: Attempt to fix a short circuit on the micro-needles by breaking off the end of the
chip to remove the connection between the frontside contact pads and the backside electrode.
a) and b) shows the CVs of two of the needles. c) shows a chip where the end is broken off.
50
==PAGE:57==
5
Discussion
There are many of the results from the experiments that can be discussed, but it is also
important to take a step back and look at the big picture and what is relevant to investigate
further or simply if a whole redesign of the experiment is necessary.
5.1
Optimization of microneedle design
One key assumption of the work was that the microneedle electrodes could be optimized by
studying a simpler, flat electrode system. The idea was that this would save time and be
easier to do since the microneedles take longer time to fabricate and have a smaller yield per
wafer.
This assumption can be challenged a bit by revisiting some of the fundamentals of
electrochemistry. One clear difference between the flat electrodes and an equivalent needle
electrode is that the diffusion paths are very different. The flat electrodes, because of the
passivation layer, experience a more linear diffusion path, whereas the needle electrodes have
a 3d diffusion path and would be expected to have higher current densities in simple CV
experiments with a ferro/ferri solution. Furthermore, the triangular shape of the needle
means a different diffusion path than a circle of the same size. However, for FSCV it could
be argued to not play a big role since the slow step is assumed to be adsorption and that
diffusion, therefore, doesn’t play a big role.
However, the thick passivation layer is also a bit of a challenge in terms of comparability.
The effect of hydrophobicity can mean that the effective electrode area in contact with the
liquid is smaller than designed, and will therefore give a misleading result if an optimum
exists.
Another part of the experiment design to consider is the relevance of testing multiple
holes in the passivation layer. The multiple holes could provide a higher total current because
of their higher current density in the case of a diffusion-limited case such as an ordinary CV.
However, for an adsorption-limited case, it likely does not make a difference. Multiple holes
simply act as multiple capacitors in parallel, and would thus have the same level of capacitive
background charging as one larger hole with the same total surface area. They would likely
take the same amount of time to stabilize as well.
Furthermore, the premise is to find out information relevant to the needle, and the
multiple holes therefore have to be integrated into the needle in a meaningful way. The
3-hole flat electrode chip has some relevance in that it represents the three needles if used
as one electrode, but the large number of holes would be difficult to integrate.
Based on these concerns, I recommended to shift tracks going forward. A suggested
51
==PAGE:58==
change would be a flat design that is more relevant to the needle, such as the one shown
in Figure 42. This way, the designs tested, will be much closer to what can be made in
the needle case. Since FSCV is expected to be adsorption-limited, the gain in current from
switching to a 3D needle would be small, and thus it seems to be a good representation.
It is also worth noting that effectively a much smaller counter electrode will have to be made
in the case of the needles. This might also be a good idea to test in the case of flat electrode
chips.
Figure 42: An illustration of an alternative design to optimize the needle electrodes with a
simpler version that is easier to fabricate. Where grey is the SiO2 surface, black is carbon,
yellow is gold, and blue is the passivation.
5.2
Needle fabrication
Although the fabrication of the needle electrodes is expected to work with some small changes
in the design, there seems to be a lot to improve on in terms of yield and having a stable
recipe. Additionally, knowing the exact design limitations is a good strategy before optimiz-
ing the flat electrodes.
This thesis had a short run making the needles since the focus was to optimize them
based on the flat electrodes.
Nevertheless, a lot of challenges and places with room for
improvement were noticed in this short run.
The problem with too much gold on the substrate for example needs to be fixed for a
whole wafer to be allowed in the ASE. Whether other materials such as aluminum should be
used instead or if the amount of gold can be reduced, would be worth figuring out. Similarly,
the issue with short circuits is worth figuring out to know more about design limitations.
These limitations provide inputs to the scope of what should be tested with flat electrodes.
If, for example, passivation is needed for it to work, this should probably be figured out as
52
==PAGE:59==
early in the process as possible since it would limit the possible electrode area.
Additionally, the many issues with needing carrier wafers or not, would be worth figuring
out.
From the perspective of the project as a whole, it is suggested to spend a bit more time
on needle fabrication since there are challenges that could be worth figuring out. Making
needles with electrodes would give a lot of knowledge even if the design isn’t final.
5.3
Scope of the allergy test
The principle of measuring histamine is that it is electroactive and released in high amounts
by the mast cells when encountering allergens. However, one has to remember that histamine
concentration is a proxy for the level of allergy, and eventually a scale is envisioned that
correlates histamine concentration with allergy level. The whole picture is, however, that
many changes happen during an allergic response.
Histamine is one of them, but other
electroactive molecules such as serotonin are for example also released. Furthermore, other
changes from inflammation, such as local temperature and pH changes can shift the redox
potentials of reactants. Additionally, increased amounts of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)
and Reactive Nitrogen Species (RNS) during inflammation [45] can also shift redox potentials
[46]. There are, thus, many changes that might be viewed as background noise, but should
perhaps instead be viewed as alternative proxies for allergy level. Histamine fouling might
even be a relevant change to measure allergies. Naturally, one might focus on an individual
change and use only that. However, a better proxy could be argued to be looking at the
combined effect of all these changes, because why throw away valuable information?
For this purpose, it makes a lot of sense to use image analysis on the color plots, since it
is a lot of data that might be difficult for humans to parse.
Having many analytes and a solution as complex might make it difficult to replicate ex
vivo in the lab. However, once the test is applied in vivo, it is important to not limit the
scope to only histamine.
Common to all the changes is that a good FSCV sensor, should be able to detect a small
change from the background. For that purpose, it makes sense to use a sample molecule such
as histamine or dopamine, to optimize the electrode design. If it works well with histamine
in PBS, the other changes will just be a bonus, but it is again crucial to not lose track of
the big picture, and remember that histamine is only a proxy.
53
==PAGE:60==
5.4
Penetration depth of needles
The penetration depth of the needles is perhaps not something that can be changed much
if the design needs to be kept constant. However, if it was deeper, the sensor design would
become less constrained. Knowing that the full WE area is exposed to the dermis, would
benefit the data analysis since the measurements would be more consistent.
For future
development, it is worth considering if the penetration depth can become deeper or at least
be more consistent by for example engineering a way to deliver the same force or depth
consistently. Alternatively, the data treatment might involve normalizing the background
subtracted FSCV curve to the background signal, since this would of course also be affected
by a smaller or bigger electrode area.
5.5
Aims of the thesis - were they accomplished?
Lastly, as part of the discussion, I’d like to address the objectives of the thesis. I set out
quite ambitious objectives at the beginning of the thesis, which is fair to say, are not yet
complete. The thesis has, however, still succeeded in a few things:
• The issue of the passivation/short circuits was solved. For the first time, it was possible
to conduct measurements on carbon microelectrodes.
• It was shown that FSCV measurements are possible with these electrodes, although
the setup is not optimized.
• By doing a multidisciplinary literature review, a better understanding of the relevance
of FSCV for an allergy test is given.
• Through both practical experiments and the literature review, it is now possible to
re-design the experiment for more relevance.
The outcomes were different than expected but have value for further research. The second
point is perhaps quite important and was an assumption that needed to be proven. The
literature studies are with carbon fibers and not pyrolyzed carbon. Thus there is value in
showing that this type of carbon electrode also works.
54
==PAGE:61==
6
Conclusion
This thesis has explored a method of optimizing a microneedle-based sensor meant for FSCV
to quantify allergies. It has considered many aspects of the test for design and optimiza-
tion. It has both considered the biological circumstances, and the complex electrochemical
measurements of FSCV, a technique that is (to my knowledge) new at DTU and which has
limited literature on the application of measuring histamine. Through a literature study, the
relevance of FSCV for an allergy test has been established.
In this thesis, a process flow from previous work was adopted and improved on to make
working 2D microelectrode chips with gold and carbon as the working electrode. These were
used for CV and EIS tests to characterize them and used for FSCV to measure dopamine.
This was able to show that pyrolyzed carbon electrodes are working for FSCV.
Furthermore, it was attempted to optimize the design of the needle electrodes using the
2D microelectrode chips. This gave an understanding of the equipment and set-up needed
for doing so: a flow cell, a different potentiostat with the possibility to change wait time
between scans, a different flat electrode design that is more relevant to the needles, and
possibly better electromagnetic shielding of the equipment.
In addition, a process flow for making the microneedle electrode chips was made by
building on top of previous knowledge of the Biomic group and combining previous process
flows.
This process flow has been tested out to make a batch of microneedle electrodes
which provided feedback for further improvements to the process and highlighted the value
of running needle fabrication and electrode optimization in parallel.
The thesis has suggested a plan for going forward and lines out the main challenges,
which gives a better starting point for future work.
55
==PAGE:62==
7
Outlook
To achieve an allergy test that utilizes FSCV and micro-needle electrodes, from my under-
standing, several tracks need to be solved:
1. A stable fabrication of the microneedles with a suitable electrode.
2. A proper understanding of the electrochemical measurements of FSCV which are rel-
evant to allergy-related changes in the body.
3. Consistency in allergen delivery and penetration depth of the microneedles.
Tracks 1 and 2 are interconnected for the final design, but can still be done mostly in
parallel. The optimization of the fabrication can easily be done without the final design
which can just be changed later. However, it would benefit the project to run some of these
in parallel since the knowledge from one track influences the other.
Track 2 should involve finding the electrode design with the smallest LOD for FSCV
experiments and a response time that is fast enough. Background fluctuations can be quan-
tified as part of these studies, and looked at without the need of a flow cell in the same
way that this thesis presents. The goal of a good FSCV sensor is to make a sensor that can
measure a fast and small change in analytes. The molecule measured is less important since
it is likely going to be different in vivo anyway, but dopamine and histamine would make a
lot of sense to use for the optimization because of the literature available for dopamine and
the relevance of histamine.
Track 3 is already pretty far and is not the focus of this work, but it is still worth
considering how variations in penetration depth would affect the measurements.
Once these three tracks are complete, the next step would likely be clinical testing and
data collection on allergic vs non-allergic cases. At this point, the output data is likely to
be color plots or large matrices of voltage and current. The treatment of the data could be
done in various ways, but image analysis would be a track worth considering.
Using FSCV is of course just one way that could be explored for making an allergy test.
From the results of this thesis, it is neither proven nor disproved if it could work in practice,
but there is a good indication based on the literature study. Nevertheless, a more suitable
method than FSCV may exist. FSCV would in theory work but it all comes down to what
works in practice where equipment limitations and electronic noise could pose a challenge.
This thesis, however, remains optimistic about the relevance of FSCV.
56
==PAGE:63==
A
Effect of too high plasma
Figure 43: Effect of too long Plasma. Pictures are all from the same wafer and show the
most severe effect near the etches of the wafer. a) Chip F4 (close to the center) b) Chip A2
(edge chip), and c) chip I1 (edge chip)
57
==PAGE:64==
B
Needle damages
Figure 44: Microscope images of damaged chips, a) showing a dirty backside and marks
from mounting in the e-beam evaporator for gold deposition. b) needles with a ’cap’, due to
incomplete etching. c) broken carbon working electrode
58
==PAGE:65==
C
Dose and defocus tests
To optimize the lithography of the passivation layer, dose and defocus tests were carried out
using a pattern similar to the desired one for the flat electrode chips. This was to ensure the
designed size of the electrode opening matched the actual one.
The dose and defocus are most critical for smaller structures, thus a large square with 10
um diameter holes was used for the test structure, corresponding to the smallest electrode
opening design. This pattern was then repeated at doses in the range 40-100 mJ cm−2 and
defocus in the range -3 to 5 for both a Si wafer with a 1000 nm SiO2 layer and one with
an additional 20 nm Cr + 300 nm gold layer since there could be a difference due to the
different reflectance of the substrates. Ideally, it should also be done for a substrate with
pyrolyzed carbon, but this was skipped to prioritize other parts of the work and because
carbon is not very reflective. Nevertheless, the one with 300 nm gold is considered to be
the most relevant, since most of the exposed area for the flat electrodes is covered with gold
(both in the case of carbon and gold electrodes).
It can be seen that the best dose and defocus combination is 40 mJ/cm2 and -1. However,
since this is the smallest dose in the tested range, it would be best to repeat the test with
a lower dose. However, the result was accepted to be good enough. Repeating it would
have been a lengthy process with too small a reward to be worth it. Furthermore, it can be
argued that a dose and defocus test using a microscope does not necessarily tell if there is
a full opening at the bottom of the electrode since this can be hard to tell from only a top
view.
Figure 45: Dose and Defocus tests of Mr-DWL-5 with the test structure being a 10 um
diameter hole inside a large square. Microscope images are used for measuring
59
==PAGE:66==
D
Raw color plots
Figure 46: Colorplots of background subtracted FSCV data in PBS with dopamine added
at around the 20th scan. All scans are an average of 20. A) 200 um carbon electrode. b) a
200-um gold electrode.
60
==PAGE:67==
E
Pictures from clean room
Figure 47: Picture of the microneedle frontside pattern after oxide etching.
Figure 48: Wafer after pyrolysis, showing carbon electrode delamination.
Figure 49: Picture of needle electrode wafer after lift-off.
61
==PAGE:68==
Type
Single
Single
Multi
Multi
Multi
Single
Design
10-350
10-350
multi
multi
multi
30-350
Wafer
1
2
3
4
5
6
∆D
-2.4
-0.24
-0.23
-2.0
-1.7
-1.7
Signal
None
Good
Good
None
None
None
Yield #
0
38
38
0
0
0
Yield (%)
0
100
100
0
0
0
Table 4: Overview of fabrication results for the gold electrodes, showing the number of
working chips from each wafer. ∆D is the difference of the measured diameter minus the
designed diameter.
Type
Single
Multi
Multi
Single*
Multi
Single
Design
10-350
multi
multi
30-350*
multi
30-350
Wafer
W10
W11
W12
W13
W14
W15
∆D
-0.45
-0.43
-2.8
-1.5
no data
no data
Signal
Short circuit
Short circuit
None
Good
Good
None
Yield #
0
0
0
35
20
0
Yield (%)
0
0
0
92
53
0
Table 5: Overview of fabrication results for the carbon electrodes, showing the number of
working chips from each wafer. ∆D is the difference of the measured diameter minus the
designed diameter. *Wafer 13 done with a special design without gold near the hole in the
passivation.
F
Overview tables of 2D microelectrode wafers
62
==PAGE:69==
G
Micro-needle holder
Figure 50: Concept cross-section illustration of the holder for a micro-needle electrode viewed
from the side (not to scale). The arrows indicate where the electrodes would be connected
to wires.
63
==PAGE:70==
H
Wafer overviews
Figure 51: Wafer overviews, of a) a flat electrode wafer with design numbers annotated. b)
a needle electrode wafer of the current design. c) an example of a needle electrode wafer
with more copies of a smaller needle chip.
64
==PAGE:71==
References
[1] American
Academy
of
Allergy
Asthma
and
Immunology,
Allergy
Statistics,
accessed
February
2024
at
https://www.aaaai.org/about/news/for-media/
allergy-statistics
[2] Copenhagen Center for Health Technology, InstaPatch: Instantaneous Allergy Test-
ing in the Skin,
accessed February 2024 at https://www.cachet.dk/research/
phd-projects/instapatch
[3] Rafi, H., & Zestos, A. G. (2021). Review—Recent Advances in FSCV Detection of Neu-
rochemicals via Waveform and Carbon Microelectrode Modification. Journal of The Elec-
trochemical Society, 168(5), 057520. doi:10.1149/1945-7111/ac0064
[4] White MV. The role of histamine in allergic diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1990
Oct;86(4 Pt 2):599-605. doi: 10.1016/s0091-6749(05)80223-4. PMID: 1699987.
[5] Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research,
Allergy skin tests,
in-
fopage, accessed February 2024 at https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/
allergy-tests/about/pac-20392895
[6] Cleveland Clinic,
Allergy Blood Test,
accessed February 2024 at https://my.
clevelandclinic.org/health/treatments/22345-allergy-blood-test
[7] Bisgaard, S, I., Evaluation of In-plane Silicon Microneedles for Allergy Diagnostics, March
(2023), PhD thesis, Biomaterial Microsystems Group, National Centre for Nano Fabri-
cation and Characterization, Research Group for Food Allergy, National Food Institute,
Technical University of Denmark
[8] Feldinger A., Lab Journal: Introduction to maskless photolithography and pyrolytic
carbon microfabrication (2023), DTU Internal
[9] Dinesen, C. S., Microfabrication of leaky optrode for cell replacement therapy in the
brain, February, (2023), M.Sc. Thesis, Physics and Nanotechnology, Technical University
of Denmark
[10] Yousef H, Alhajj M, Sharma S. Anatomy, Skin (Integument), Epidermis. [Updated 2022
Nov 14]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 Jan-.
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK470464/
65
==PAGE:72==
[11] Lintzeri, D.A., Karimian, N., Blume-Peytavi, U. and Kottner, J. (2022), Epidermal
thickness in healthy humans: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Eur Acad Der-
matol Venereol, 36: 1191-1200. https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.18123
[12] Cleveland Clinic, Dermis, accessed February 2024 at https://my.clevelandclinic.
org/health/body/22357-dermis
[13] Fong M, Crane JS. Histology, Mast Cells. [Updated 2023 May 1]. In:
StatPearls
[Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 Jan-. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499904/
[14] Metcalfe DD, Baram D, Mekori YA. Mast cells. Physiol Rev. 1997 Oct;77(4):1033-79.
doi:10.1152/physrev.1997.77.4.1033. PMID: 9354811.
[15] Maintz, L., & Novak, N. (2007). Histamine and histamine intolerance2. The American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 85(5), 1185–1196. doi:10.1093/ajcn/85.5.1185
[16] Lin RY, Schwartz LB, Curry A, Pesola GR, Knight RJ, Lee HS, Bakalchuk L, Tenen-
baum C, Westfal RE. Histamine and tryptase levels in patients with acute allergic reac-
tions: An emergency department-based study. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2000 Jul;106(1
Pt 1):65-71. doi: 10.1067/mai.2000.107600. PMID: 10887307.
[17] GRAHAM HT, LOWRY OH, WAHL N, PRIEBAT MK. Mast cells as sources of tissue
histamine. J Exp Med. 1955 Sep 1;102(3):307-18. doi: 10.1084/jem.102.3.307. PMID:
13252185; PMCID: PMC2136507.
[18] Scholz, F., Electroanalytical Methods - Guide to Experiments and Applications, (2010),
2nd, Revised and Extended Ed.
[19] Gerhardt G, Adams RN. Determination of Diffusion Coefficients by Flow Injection Anal-
ysis, (1982), Anal. Chem. 54:2618–2620.
[20] Bruus, H., Theoretical Microfluidics, (2008), Oxford Master Series in Condensed Matter
Physics.
[21] Warburg impedance, Palmsens, accessed January 2024 at https://www.palmsens.com/
knowledgebase-topic/warburg-impedance/
[22] Venton BJ , Cao Q . Fundamentals of fast-scan cyclic voltammetry for dopamine detec-
tion. Analyst. 2020 Feb 17;145(4):1158-1168. doi: 10.1039/c9an01586h. PMID: 31922176;
PMCID: PMC7028514.
66
==PAGE:73==
[23] Meunier CJ, McCarty GS, Sombers LA. Drift Subtraction for Fast-Scan Cyclic Voltam-
metry Using Double-Waveform Partial-Least-Squares Regression. Anal Chem. 2019 Jun
4;91(11):7319-7327. doi:
10.1021/acs.analchem.9b01083. Epub 2019 May 23. PMID:
31081629; PMCID: PMC7357255.
[24] Venton, B. J., FSCV and Electrochemistry Videos, Lecture series on FSCV, accessed
January 2024 at https://www.youtube.com/@jventon/playlists
[25] Takmakov, P., Zachek, M. K., Keithley, R. B., Walsh, P. L., Donley, C., McCarty,
G. S., & Wightman, R. M. (2010). Carbon Microelectrodes with a Renewable Surface.
Analytical Chemistry, 82(5), 2020–2028. doi:10.1021/ac902753x
[26] Zachek MK, Hermans A, Wightman RM, McCarty GS. Electrochemical Dopamine De-
tection: Comparing Gold and Carbon Fiber Microelectrodes using Background Sub-
tracted Fast Scan Cyclic Voltammetry. J Electroanal Chem (Lausanne). 2008;614(1-
2):113-120. doi:10.1016/j.jelechem.2007.11.007. PMID: 19319208; PMCID: PMC2659675.
[27] Samaranayake, S., Abdalla, A., Robke, R., Wood, K. M., Zeqja, A., & Hashemi, P.
(2015). In vivo histamine voltammetry in the mouse premammillary nucleus. Analyst,
140, 3759–3765. doi:10.1039/C5AN00313J
[28] A.R. Heiskanen, C.F. Sp´egel, N. Kostesha, T. Ruzgas, J. ´Emneus, Langmuir, 24 (16)
(2008), p. 9066
[29] Puthongkham, P., Lee, S. T., & Venton, B. J. (2019). Mechanism of Histamine Oxi-
dation and Electropolymerization at Carbon Electrodes. Analytical Chemistry, 91(13),
8366–8373. doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.9b01178
[30] Banerjee, S., McCracken, S., Hossain, M. F., & Slaughter, G. (08 2020). Electrochemical
Detection of Neurotransmitters. Biosensors, 10, 101. doi:10.3390/bios10080101
[31] Chang, S.-Y., Jay, T., Mu˜noz, J., Kim, I., & Lee, K. H. (2012). Wireless fast-scan
cyclic voltammetry measurement of histamine using WINCS – a proof-of-principle study.
Analyst, 137, 2158–2165. doi:10.1039/C2AN16038B
[32] Cichocka M, Kozub J, Urbanik A. PH Measurements of the Brain Using Phosphorus
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy ((31)PMRS) in Healthy Men - Comparison of Two
Analysis Methods. Pol J Radiol. 2015 Nov 21;80:509-14. doi: 10.12659/PJR.895178.
PMID: 26692912; PMCID: PMC4659444.
67
==PAGE:74==
[33] Braun-Falco O, Korting HC. Der normale pH-Wert der menschlichen Haut [Normal pH
value of human skin]. Hautarzt. 1986 Mar;37(3):126-9. German. PMID: 3700100.
[34] Ali, Saba M., and Yosipovitch, Gil, Skin pH: From Basic SciencE to Basic Skin Care,
(2013), Acta Derm Venereol 2013; 93: XX–XX.
[35] Murphrey MB, Miao JH, Zito PM. Histology, Stratum Corneum. [Updated 2022 Nov
14]. In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2024 Jan-.
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK513299/
[36] Punnia-Moorthy A. Evaluation of pH changes in inflammation of the subcutaneous air
pouch lining in the rat, induced by carrageenan, dextran and Staphylococcus aureus.
J Oral Pathol. 1987 Jan;16(1):36-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.1987.tb00674.x. PMID:
2435877.
[37] Mamun, A. A., & Zhao, F. (2022). In-Plane Si Microneedles: Fabrication, Characteri-
zation, Modeling and Applications. Micromachines, 13(5). doi:10.3390/mi13050657
[38] Roh, H., Yoon, Y.J., Park, J.S. et al. Fabrication of High-Density Out-of-Plane Mi-
croneedle Arrays with Various Heights and Diverse Cross-Sectional Shapes. Nano-Micro
Lett. 14, 24 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40820-021-00778-1
[39] Micro Chemicals, Technical Data Sheet, AZ 5214 E Photoresist, Image Reversal, ac-
cessed February 2024 at https://www.microchemicals.com/products/photoresists/
az_5214_e.html
[40] Specific
Process
Knowledge/Lithography/Development/Developer
TMAH
UV-
lithography processing
[41] Pereira, J. F. S., Rocha, R. G., Castro, S. V. F., Jo˜ao, A. F., Borges, P. H. S., Rocha, D.
P., . . . Mu˜noz, R. A. A. (2021). Reactive oxygen plasma treatment of 3D-printed carbon
electrodes towards high-performance electrochemical sensors. Sensors and Actuators B:
Chemical, 347, 130651. doi:10.1016/j.snb.2021.130651
[42] Kayaku
Advanced
Materials
®,
SU-8
Surface
Modification
–
Function-
alization,
accessed
January
2024
at
https://kayakuam.com/products/
su-8-surface-modification-functionalization/
[43] Puthongkham, P., & Venton, B. J. (2020). Recent advances in fast-scan cyclic voltam-
metry. Analyst, 145, 1087–1102. doi:10.1039/C9AN01925A
68
==PAGE:75==
[44] Urb´ankov´a,
J
&
Hanberg,
J.,
Specific
Process
Knowledge/Lithography/De-
scum,
(2019),
https://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php?title=Specific_
Process_Knowledge/Lithography/Descum
[45] Mittal M, Siddiqui MR, Tran K, Reddy SP, Malik AB. Reactive oxygen species in
inflammation and tissue injury. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014 Mar 1;20(7):1126-67. doi:
10.1089/ars.2012.5149. Epub 2013 Oct 22. PMID: 23991888; PMCID: PMC3929010.
[46] Griendling KK, Touyz RM, Zweier JL, Dikalov S, Chilian W, Chen YR, Harri-
son DG, Bhatnagar A; American Heart Association Council on Basic Cardiovascu-
lar Sciences. Measurement of Reactive Oxygen Species, Reactive Nitrogen Species,
and Redox-Dependent Signaling in the Cardiovascular System:
A Scientific State-
ment From the American Heart Association. Circ Res. 2016 Aug 19;119(5):e39-75.
doi: 10.1161/RES.0000000000000110. Epub 2016 Jul 14. PMID: 27418630; PMCID:
PMC5446086.
69
