==PAGE:1==
Exploring Bio relationships
through Counterfactual
Optimisation Analysis using VAE
Stefanos Rodopoulos
Master Thesis
February 2024
Department of Health and Technology
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Title:
Exploring Bio relationships through Counterfactual
Optimisation Analysis using VAE
Type:
Master Thesis
Date:
February 2024
Author:
Stefanos Rodopoulos
Supervisors:
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen
Georgios Arvanitidis
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department:
Department of Health and Technology
Division:
Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This thesis presents a detailed investigation into the application of
beta-Variational Autoencoders (beta-VAEs) and graph theory for
the analysis of microbiome datasets, specifically focusing on un-
derstanding the complexities of the human microbiome in relation
to Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD). The research primarily re-
volves around dimensionality reduction using beta-VAEs to trans-
form high-dimensional microbiome data into a two-dimensional la-
tent space, facilitating a more manageable and insightful analysis.
A significant part of the study involves the transformation of this la-
tent space into a graph structure using K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN)
with added constraints based on critical metadata factors such as
age, sex, antibiotic use, and smoking habits. This approach allows
for the application of constrained optimization algorithms, like Dijk-
stra’s algorithm, to navigate the latent space effectively, considering
these vital individual factors.
The findings from this research align with existing literature, high-
lighting the abundance of Bacteroides vulgatus in individuals with
IBD, a key insight that underscores the potential of deep learning
models in identifying microbiome patterns related to health and dis-
ease. The study further delves into the complexities of interpreting
the latent space due to the multitude of factors influencing the mi-
crobiome. Despite these challenges, the research demonstrates that
with appropriate constraints and model optimizations, deep learning
methodologies can effectively analyze microbiome data.
Furthermore, the thesis explores the novel application of counter-
factual analysis in healthcare, particularly in the context of fecal
microbiota transplantation (FMT) for treating IBD . The results
underscore the need for clinically vetted and approved deep learn-
ing applications in this emerging field, highlighting the importance
of data quality and comprehensive datasets for the effective appli-
cation of deep learning in microbiome research
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU Compute) in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master of Science degree in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology.
The thesis deals with the application of advanced computational
techniques, specifically deep learning and graph theory, to analyze
and interpret complex microbiome datasets.The master thesis was
assigned to a workload of 35 ECTS and it was supervised by Nicki
Skafte Detlefsen , Georgios Arvanitidis and Bjørn Sand Jensen.
Kgs. Lyngby, February 2024
Stefanos Rodopoulos
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors for
their invaluable support, guidance, and understanding throughout
the course of this research project. Their expertise and insights have
been fundamental to my work, and their encouragement has been a
constant source of motivation. Their commitment to academic excel-
lence and their willingness to share their knowledge have profoundly
influenced my learning experience and professional development. I
am sincerely thankful for their mentorship and for the opportunities
they have provided me to grow and excel in my field of study.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Variational Auto Encoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
History and Evolution of Fecal Microbiota Transplan-
tation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The Role of Counterfactuals in Medical Research
. .
6
3
Methodology
8
3.1
Data Collection and Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Microbiome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Description of the Deep Learning Models, problems
and solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Counterfactual Analysis Framework . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Distance metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.2
Graph Theory in Counterfactual Analysis
. .
19
4
Proposed Method
21
4.1
Experimentation with MNIST Dataset . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
MNIST Graph Theory Analysis . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Microbiome Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.2
Microbiome to a Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Discussion
50
6
Conclusion
52
References
53
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
3.1
List of microorganisms selected for the study and
their species count. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1
Absolute Difference Abundance . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
List of Figures
3.1
Mnist latent space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Original and decoded images.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
Comparative visualizations of the full MNIST dataset
and a selected subset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Euclidian CounterFactual
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Euclidian Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Source/Decoder/Auto-correlation . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Chebyshev distance metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6
Manhattan distance metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.7
MNIST graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.8
Distances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.9
Variance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.10 Scatter plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.11 Euclidian distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.12 Chebyshev distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.13 Manhattan distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.14 Microbiome Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:8==
vi
LIST OF FIGURES
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has significantly advanced various
fields through innovative enhancements. Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) are particularly notable for their widespread success across
numerous domains, including image generation, financial modeling,
and biological data analysis. VAEs are highly effective in processing
diverse datasets, especially those with multiple variables like micro-
biome data. Traditional methods like Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) and t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE),
among others, primarily employ dimensionality reduction to high-
light key variables that account for data variance. However, VAEs
offer a unique advantage in dimensionality reduction by considering
all variables, which is crucial in microbiome studies where the ab-
sence of certain organisms can be as informative as their presence.
The analysis of such data traditionally relied on various bioinfor-
matics tools, such as QIIME and MEGAN.
More recently, the use of counterfactuals has shown promising re-
sults. Counterfactuals, in this context, refer to the exploration of hy-
pothetical scenarios to understand causal relationships. They allow
researchers to ask "what if" questions, altering one or more variables
in the data while keeping others constant. This approach is particu-
larly useful in understanding complex systems like the microbiome,
where the interaction between various organisms and environmen-
tal factors plays a critical role. By employing counterfactuals, re-
searchers can gain insights into the potential impact of changes in
specific microbiome components, leading to a deeper understanding
of the system as a whole.
The complexity of biological datasets, particularly those pertaining
to the microbiome, poses a significant challenge, even in understand-
ing the latent space representations. To navigate this complexity
and validate our approach, we conducted parallel experiments using
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
the MNIST dataset, a well-established benchmark in the machine
learning community. This ’sanity check’ enables us to ascertain the
efficacy of our methods in a controlled, simpler context before ap-
plying them to the more intricate microbiome data.
Fecal Microbiota Transplantation (FMT) has garnered attention for
its potential to restore a healthy microbiome. Beyond merely rebal-
ancing gut bacteria, FMT has shown promise in treating a range
of conditions, including recurrent Clostridioides difficile infections,
inflammatory bowel diseases, and even neurological disorders. The
therapeutic benefits of FMT stem from its ability to introduce ben-
eficial microbes that can outcompete harmful pathogens, enhance
metabolic processes, and stimulate a healthy immune response. De-
spite its potential, the risks associated with FMT, such as the trans-
mission of pathogens, necessitate rigorous donor screening and care-
ful monitoring.
The primary objective of this thesis is to investigate the feasibility
of using deep learning models and counterfactual analysis in opti-
mizing FMT. The focus is on identifying the most beneficial gut
microbiome compositions while mitigating the potential adverse ef-
fects of FMT. Employing graph theory and constraints, this project
aims to identify the most suitable candidates for FMT. By leveraging
these advanced computational approaches, the goal is to enhance the
safety and efficacy of FMT, potentially revolutionizing treatments
for various gastrointestinal and systemic diseases.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Variational Auto Encoders
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) are a pivotal development in the
field of generative models, innovating upon the traditional autoen-
coder architecture by integrating probabilistic methods. Introduced
in the paper [26] by Kingma and Welling, VAEs represent a signif-
icant shift from conventional autoencoders. Rather than encoding
input data to a deterministic point in latent space, VAEs map inputs
to a distribution. This probabilistic encoding allows VAEs not only
to reconstruct inputs but also to generate entirely new data samples,
mirroring the distribution of the training data. This capability po-
sitions VAEs at the forefront of generative modeling, offering robust
applications in areas such as unsupervised learning, data augmen-
tation, and deep learning.
At its core, the architecture of a VAE consists of two primary compo-
nents: the encoder and the decoder, as elucidated in Auto-encoding
variational bayes [14] by Doersch. The encoder’s role is to process
the input data and map it to a probabilistic latent space.
This
is typically achieved by determining the parameters of a Gaussian
distribution—mean (µ) and variance (σ2). The decoder component
then reconstructs the input data from the latent space represen-
tation. The reconstruction process in VAEs is not a mere reverse
operation of the encoding but rather a sampling process.
Given
the probabilistic nature of the latent space, each reconstruction can
vary slightly, allowing the model to generate diverse outputs from
a single input representation. This aspect of VAEs is crucial for
understanding their potential in generating new, varied data while
staying true to the original data distribution.
Central to the operation of VAEs, as first introduced in Kingma and
==PAGE:12==
4
Background
Welling article[26] is their probabilistic framework. This framework
sets VAEs apart from traditional deterministic models by treat-
ing the latent space representation as a probability distribution.
The probabilistic nature of this representation captures the inher-
ent uncertainty and variability in real-world data. It enables VAEs
to model complex distributions effectively and generate data that,
while novel, maintains statistical fidelity to the training set. This
probabilistic modeling is particularly advantageous in scenarios where
data is scarce or noisy, as it allows for a more nuanced understanding
and generation of data.
The reparameterization trick is a pivotal aspect of VAEs, crucial for
their training through backpropagation, as detailed in both [27] ,
[26] This trick addresses the challenge of passing gradients through
a random node in the computational graph. By reparameterizing
the random variable z as a deterministic variable, z = µ + σ · ϵ,
where ϵ is an auxiliary noise variable, VAEs allow gradients to be
backpropagated through stochastic nodes. This reparameterization
not only preserves the stochastic nature of the model but also en-
sures its differentiability, a key requirement for effective training
using gradient-based optimization techniques. The implications of
this innovation extend beyond VAEs, influencing a range of models
in the broader field of probabilistic deep learning.
2.2
History and Evolution of Fecal Microbiota
Transplantation
The origins of FMT can be traced back to 4th century China, where
it was known as ’yellow soup’ and used to treat food poisoning and
severe diarrhea. Centuries later, in the 16th century, FMT found its
place in veterinary medicine among Bedouin groups, who utilized
camel feces to cure bacterial dysentery in their animals .
These
early applications of fecal transplantation laid the foundation for its
eventual introduction into modern medical practice [44].
==PAGE:13==
2.2 History and Evolution of Fecal Microbiota Transplantation
5
The resurgence of FMT in modern medicine began in the 20th cen-
tury, particularly in the context of treating antibiotic-resistant CDI.
Dr. Ben Eiseman is often credited with the first documented use of
FMT in the West in the 1950s, marking a pivotal point in its clin-
ical application [25]. The success of these early treatments spurred
further research and development in the field.
With subsection advent of the 21st century, FMT gained signifi-
cant momentum, driven by a deeper understanding of the human
microbiome and its impact on health.
The procedure’s effective-
ness in treating recurrent CDI has been well-documented, leading
to its endorsement by various medical authorities [25]. Furthermore,
research has expanded into exploring its potential in treating other
gastrointestinal disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD),
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), and even metabolic and neurological
conditions [1].
Recent years have seen advancements in the methodologies of FMT,
moving from rudimentary approaches to more sophisticated tech-
niques. The introduction of capsule-based FMT, for instance, has
revolutionized the procedure, offering a less invasive and more patient-
friendly option [49]. Moreover, the standardization of donor screen-
ing and stool processing has enhanced the safety and efficacy of
FMT treatments [6].
The evolution of Fecal Microbiota Transplantation from ancient
remedy to modern medical practice reflects a remarkable journey.
Its growing acceptance and application in treating a variety of con-
ditions underscore the critical role of the gut microbiome in overall
health. As research continues, FMT is likely to unveil further po-
tential in medical science, heralding new frontiers in therapeutic
interventions [40].
==PAGE:14==
6
Background
2.3
The Role of Counterfactuals in Medical Re-
search
Counterfactuals are "what-if" scenarios that provide insights into
causal relationships. In medical research, these hypothetical alter-
natives help in understanding the causal effects of treatments, in-
terventions, or environmental factors on health outcomes [23].
In epidemiology, counterfactuals aid in distinguishing between cor-
relation and causation, a critical aspect in disease etiology studies.
In clinical trials, they are used to estimate the effectiveness of in-
terventions by comparing observed outcomes with what would have
happened without the intervention [42].
The human microbiome plays a significant role in health and disease.
It influences various physiological processes, including digestion, im-
munity, and even mental health [30].
Counterfactual reasoning is instrumental in microbiome research,
particularly in understanding the impact of microbial composition
changes on health outcomes. It helps in hypothesizing the effects of
altering microbiome components and predicting outcomes of micro-
bial therapies [32].Discuss specific case studies where counterfactual
reasoning has been applied in microbiome research. For instance,
the use of counterfactuals in understanding the gut-brain axis or in
the development of probiotics for disease treatment.The complexity
of the human microbiome and its interactions with the host presents
significant challenges in establishing clear causal relationships using
counterfactuals.
The development of computational methods, such as machine learn-
ing and graphical models, has enhanced the application of counter-
factual thinking in microbiome research. These tools facilitate the
analysis of complex datasets, enabling researchers to construct and
test counterfactual scenarios with greater accuracy [29].The integra-
tion of counterfactual reasoning with machine learning algorithms,
particularly in predictive modeling, offers a powerful approach to hy-
==PAGE:15==
2.3 The Role of Counterfactuals in Medical Research
7
pothesizing and verifying causal relationships in microbiome studies.
This synergy allows for the exploration of vast and complex biologi-
cal data, paving the way for more personalized and effective medical
interventions [29].
Counterfactuals play a crucial role in advancing personalized medicine,
particularly through microbiome research. By understanding how
individual variations in microbiome composition affect health out-
comes, researchers can tailor interventions to the specific needs of
patients. This approach holds promise for improving the efficacy and
safety of treatments, especially in conditions linked to microbiome
dysbiosis [5].
The use of counterfactual reasoning in medical research, while ben-
eficial, raises ethical concerns. These include the potential for mis-
interpretation of data and the risk of over-reliance on hypothetical
scenarios. Ensuring that counterfactual analyses are grounded in
robust scientific evidence and ethical considerations is crucial for
maintaining the integrity of research [39].
The application of counterfactual thinking in medical research, par-
ticularly in microbiome studies, has opened new avenues for un-
derstanding complex causal relationships. While challenges remain,
advancements in computational methods and the integration of ma-
chine learning are enhancing the precision and applicability of coun-
terfactual scenarios. As this field continues to evolve, it promises to
significantly contribute to our understanding of human health and
disease, leading to more effective and personalized medical interven-
tions.
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1
Data Collection and Pre-processing
This chapter outlines the methodology adopted in the study, focus-
ing primarily on the data collection and preprocessing strategies.
Our research utilized two distinct datasets: the MNIST dataset for
initial sanity tests and a specialized microbiome dataset encompass-
ing both healthy individuals and patients with Inflammatory Bowel
Disease (IBD).
The MNIST dataset, a large database of handwritten digits com-
monly used in image processing and machine learning, served as
our initial testing ground. It comprises 60,000 training images and
10,000 testing images, each a 28x28 pixel grayscale representation of
digits ranging from 0 to 9. This dataset was pivotal in validating our
computational models and algorithms for accuracy and robustness
before applying them to more complex biological data. The MNIST
dataset’s simplicity and well-documented nature make it an ideal
choice for preliminary sanity checks in algorithm development.
The second dataset used in our study was a comprehensive micro-
biome dataset, which included samples from healthy individuals as
well as patients diagnosed with Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD).
IBD, encompassing conditions such as Crohn’s disease and ulcera-
tive colitis, is known for its impact on the gut microbiome. Prior
research has demonstrated significant differences in the microbiome
compositions of individuals with IBD compared to healthy controls
[16]
This dataset was processed by Morgan et al. [36] and Gevers et
al. [17], who meticulously curated and standardized the microbiome
data. From their extensive work, extracted only the taxonomic data
for our analysis.
==PAGE:17==
3.1 Data Collection and Pre-processing
9
In microbiome research, taxa refer to the classification of microor-
ganisms into groups such as species, genus, family, etc. Bioinfor-
maticians identify the taxonomy present in a sample through a pro-
cess called taxonomic assignment. This process involves comparing
the genetic sequences obtained from the sample to known reference
databases.
These databases contain genetic sequences of various
microorganisms, allowing researchers to determine the identity and
relative abundance of the taxa present in each sample.
This study leveraged the taxonomic data, which is crucial for un-
derstanding the composition of the microbiome and its potential
alterations in the context of IBD. The data provides insights into
the diversity and abundance of microbial life in the gut, essential for
our counterfactual analyses.
Additionally, utilized the database curated by Vangay et al. [46],
renowned for being a comprehensive microbiome database specifi-
cally tailored for machine learning tasks. This database provided a
rich source of comparative data, enhancing our study’s breadth and
depth, particularly in understanding the vast variability in micro-
biome compositions across different populations.
3.1.1
Microbiome
Bifidobacteria are a group of Gram-positive, non-motile, often branched
anaerobic bacteria that are ubiquitous inhabitants of the gastroin-
testinal tract, mouth, and vagina. They are key contributors to the
gut microbiome, known for their role in fermenting sugars into lac-
tic acid and are associated with numerous health benefits, including
immune system support and improved digestion [37].
Lactobacillus is another genus of Gram-positive, facultative anaero-
bic or microaerophilic, rod-shaped bacteria. They are a major part
of the lactic acid bacteria group, fermenting carbohydrates to pro-
duce lactic acid, which helps maintain the acidic environment in
the gut to prevent the growth of harmful bacteria. Lactobacillus
==PAGE:18==
10
Methodology
species are widely used as probiotics and are essential for a healthy
microbiome [22].
Akkermansia muciniphila is a mucin-degrading bacterium found in
the human gut microbiota that has a unique capability to degrade
mucin to produce energy. This organism has attracted significant
interest due to its association with healthy metabolic status and
reduced inflammation in the gut. It is considered a promising target
for ameliorating metabolic disorders and enhancing mucosal health
[12].
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is a species of bacteria that belongs
to the Firmicutes phylum and is one of the most abundant and
important commensal bacteria present in the human gut. It plays a
crucial role in maintaining gut health due to its anti-inflammatory
properties and is often found in reduced numbers in patients with
inflammatory bowel disease [35].
Roseburia spp.
are a group of butyrate-producing bacteria that
reside in the human colon. They are implicated in the protection
against colon cancer and inflammatory bowel diseases, largely due to
their butyrate production, which serves as a primary energy source
for colonocytes and exerts anti-inflammatory effects [31].
Clostridium is a diverse genus of Gram-positive bacteria that can
produce a range of outcomes in the gut, from beneficial effects to
harmful infections. Certain species within this genus are involved in
the fermentation process in the intestines, contributing to the gut
health and the production of important metabolites like butyrate
[31].
Bacteroides fragilis is a prominent species within the Bacteroides
genus. These Gram-negative, obligate anaerobic bacteria are part
of the normal microbiota of the human colon and are known for
their beneficial role in protecting the gut against colonization by
pathogens and in modulating the immune system. However, they
can also become pathogenic if they cross the intestinal barrier, lead-
ing to infections. B. fragilis is particularly adept at adapting to the
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Data Collection and Pre-processing
11
varied conditions in the gastrointestinal tract, contributing to its
resilience and prevalence within the human microbiome [48].
Escherichia coli, with only one representative species in this dataset,
is a Gram-negative, facultative anaerobic, rod-shaped bacterium
commonly found in the lower intestine of warm-blooded organisms.
While most E. coli strains are harmless and are an essential part
of a healthy human intestinal tract, certain strains can cause severe
foodborne disease. It serves as a fundamental model organism for
molecular and cellular biology [24].
Given the constraints of conducting this project independently and
the inability to evaluate medical outcomes directly, the focus was
placed on microorganisms that are well-documented in terms of their
importance to microbiome health. The following table lists the mi-
croorganisms selected for this study along with the count of species
present in the dataset:
Table 3.1: List of microorganisms selected for the study and their species count.
Microorganism
Number of Species in Dataset
Bifidobacteria
42
Lactobacillus
62
Akkermansia muciniphila
3
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
1
Roseburia spp.
10
Clostridium
23
Bacteroides fragilis
54
Escherichia coli
1
==PAGE:20==
12
Methodology
3.2
Description of the Deep Learning Models, prob-
lems and solutions
The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) employs a sigmoid activation
function in its decoder component. The sigmoid function is crucial
for modeling the probability of the input data and is formally defined
as:
σ(z) =
1
1 + e−z
(3.1)
Where z is the input to the function. This function maps any real-
valued number into the range (0, 1), which is ideal for binary cross-
entropy loss functions used in reconstruction loss calculations for
binary or normalized image data [19].
In Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), the loss function comprises two
terms: the reconstruction loss and the Kullback-Leibler (KL) diver-
gence. The reconstruction loss ensures that the VAE can accurately
reconstruct the input data from the latent variables. On the other
hand, the KL divergence acts as a regularizer, enforcing the distri-
bution of the latent variables to approximate the prior distribution,
typically a standard normal distribution.
The parameter β in the VAE loss function is introduced as a weight-
ing term for the KL divergence, which balances the contribution of
the two terms in the loss function. It modifies the standard VAE
objective as follows:
L(θ, ϕ; x, β) = Lrecon(θ, ϕ; x) + βLKL(θ, ϕ)
(3.2)
Here, L recon denotes the reconstruction loss, KL denotes the KL
divergence, θ and ϕ are the parameters of the encoder and decoder
networks, respectively, and ξ is the input data. The term β is a
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Description of the Deep Learning Models, problems and solutions
13
Figure 3.1: Mnist latent space
hyperparameter that controls the strength of the regularization im-
posed by the KL divergence. When β =1, the VAE loss function
corresponds to the standard VAE, where both the reconstruction loss
and the KL divergence contribute equally to the total loss. How-
ever, when β deviates from 1, it allows the model to either focus
more on the data reconstruction (β < 1) or on enforcing the latent
distribution to match the prior (β >1), which can help in learning
disentangled representations [9].
Increasing β beyond 1 puts more emphasis on the KL term, which
encourages the latent space to be more regularized and can poten-
tially lead to better disentanglement and more interpretable latent
representations. However, this may also lead to a trade-off where
the reconstruction quality is sacrificed. Thus, tuning β is crucial
for achieving a desired balance between reconstruction fidelity and
latent space regularization.
In Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), determining the dimensional-
ity of the latent space is crucial for the model’s performance. The
==PAGE:22==
14
Methodology
Elbow Method offers a heuristic to identify the point at which in-
creasing the number of latent dimensions yields diminishing returns
on model fidelity. This method involves plotting the reconstruction
loss and the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence for different latent
space sizes. Formally, the reconstruction loss can be defined as:
Lreconstruction = ||x −ˆx||2,
(3.3)
where x is the original input data and ˆx is the reconstructed data
from the VAE. The KL divergence, quantifying the difference be-
tween the approximate and true posterior distributions, is given by:
DKL(q(z|x)||p(z)) = −1
2
J
X
j=1
(1 + log(σ2
j) −µ2
j −σ2
j),
(3.4)
where q(z|x) is the approximate posterior, p(z) is the prior distribu-
tion over the latent variables, µj and σ2
j are the mean and variance of
the j-th latent variable, and J is the total number of latent variables.
The ’elbow’ is identified at the point where the graph of these metrics
versus the number of latent dimensions shows a clear inflection point,
indicating the optimal size for the latent space [14].
In a Variational Autoencoder (VAE), the decoder’s ability to recon-
struct input data is inherently imperfect. This imperfection arises
from the probabilistic nature of VAEs; they are designed to learn
the underlying probability distribution of the data rather than a de-
terministic mapping from inputs to outputs. Consequently, even the
best-trained VAE models will not achieve 100 present accuracy in
reconstructing the input data. This aspect of VAEs can be beneficial
for tasks such as data generation and denoising, where introducing
slight variations can lead to more robust and generalized models
[26].
The balance between the reconstruction loss and the regularization
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Description of the Deep Learning Models, problems and solutions
15
term introduced by the KL divergence is crucial. A higher weight
on the reconstruction loss will encourage the model to prioritize
accurate reconstructions over learning a well-formed latent space. In
contrast, a higher weight on the KL divergence will lead to a more
regularized model that might not reproduce the inputs as accurately
but will have a better-structured latent space, which is beneficial for
generating new samples [9].
For instance, when generating new digit images, a VAE that re-
produces its training images with some variability can lead to the
creation of a diverse set of realistic digits that do not simply replicate
the training set. For example :
(a) 2
(b) 4
(c) 0
Figure 3.2: Original and decoded images.
==PAGE:24==
16
Methodology
However, in projects where maximum possible accuracy in the re-
construction is paramount, such as in medical imaging where the
exact replication of input images is crucial, the inherent variability
introduced by the VAE can be a challenge
Autocorrelation matrix played a central role in establishing a sys-
tematic connection between latent space representations and the
original input data. The process unfolded through several distinct
steps. Initially, the latent data matrix was transposed, followed by
the computation of the dot product between this transposed ma-
trix and the original latent data. Subsequently, the auto-correlation
matrix underwent a normalization process to make it more manage-
able for analysis. This specialized matrix, notable for its ability to
uncover prevalent patterns within the latent space representations,
assumed a pivotal role in facilitating the inverse transformation pro-
cess.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Counterfactual Analysis Framework
17
3.3
Counterfactual Analysis Framework
Counterfactual analysis is a crucial aspect of interpretability in ma-
chine learning, particularly in understanding and explaining model
predictions. A counterfactual explanation refers to a minimal change
to the input data that would change the prediction to a predefined
output. In essence, it answers the question, "What would need to
be minimally and feasibly altered in an input instance for a desired
alternate outcome to occur?" [47].
At the heart of counterfactual analysis lies the concept of distance
metrics. These metrics are used to quantify the difference between
the original input and the counterfactual instance. The choice of a
suitable distance metric is critical, as it influences the nature of the
counterfactuals generated. The goal is to find the smallest change,
as measured by the chosen distance metric, that alters the model’s
prediction.
3.3.1
Distance metrics
The Euclidean distance, or L2 norm, is a fundamental metric in
geometry, measuring the "straight line" distance between two points
in Euclidean space. It is mathematically defined as:
dEuclidean(x, y) =
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
(xi −yi)2
Where ξ and ψ represent two points in an n-dimensional space [11].
In the field of microbiome analysis, this metric is crucial for quan-
tifying the overall differences in microbial abundance and diversity
between samples. The Euclidean distance can help identify signifi-
cant shifts in the microbiome, such as those associated with diseases
or health states. It provides a comprehensive measure of the mag-
nitude of change across all microbial species, making it a valuable
==PAGE:26==
18
Methodology
tool in studies aimed at understanding the broad impacts of envi-
ronmental or dietary changes on the gut microbiome [28].
Manhattan distance, also known as the L1 norm, sums the absolute
differences of their coordinates. It is defined as:
dManhattan(x, y) =
n
X
i=1
|xi −yi|
This metric is often used in scenarios where the sum of all changes
across each dimension is more pertinent than the shortest path be-
tween points . In microbiome studies, the Manhattan distance is
particularly useful for evaluating the effects of incremental changes
in the microbiome. It emphasizes the individual contribution of each
microbial species to the overall difference between health and dis-
ease states. This metric is ideal for exploring the effects of stepwise
interventions or treatments on the microbiome, such as gradual di-
etary modifications or the introduction of specific probiotics, and
assessing their cumulative impact [45].
The Chebyshev distance, or the L∞norm, is defined by the maxi-
mum absolute difference along any coordinate dimension:
dChebyshev(x, y) = max
i
|xi −yi|
This metric emphasizes the largest change in any single dimension.
In the context of microbiome analysis, Chebyshev distance can be
particularly informative when changes in specific microbial species
are more consequential than others. It is useful for identifying the
key species that drive the difference between healthy and diseased
microbiome states, thereby assisting in targeted research and inter-
vention strategies. This approach is beneficial when investigating
the impact of dominant pathogenic species or keystone taxa within
the microbiome that have disproportionate effects on overall micro-
bial community structure and function [15].
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Counterfactual Analysis Framework
19
3.3.2
Graph Theory in Counterfactual Analysis
Graph theory, a fundamental component of discrete mathematics,
offers significant insights and methodologies for counterfactual anal-
ysis, especially in the realm of biological data.
In graph theory,
data is conceptualized in terms of nodes (vertices) and edges (con-
nections), providing a versatile framework for exploring and under-
standing complex relationships within datasets [2].
The application of graph theory in counterfactual analysis lies in its
ability to represent and analyze complex systems through networks.
In these networks, nodes can represent individual data points or
features, and edges can signify the relationships or dependencies be-
tween them. This representation becomes particularly powerful in
counterfactual analysis, as it allows for the visualization and quan-
tification of not just direct relationships, but also indirect interac-
tions and pathways that might influence outcomes [4].
For instance, in the context of counterfactual reasoning, a graph can
be used to map out potential pathways of change from an actual
state to a desired counterfactual state.
The edges in the graph
can be weighted to reflect the difficulty or cost of changing one
feature (node) in relation to another. This approach enables the
identification of the most efficient path for achieving a counterfactual
outcome, respecting the constraints and dependencies inherent in
the data.
In the study of microbiomes and biological data, graph theory has
emerged as a powerful tool for modeling complex interactions within
biological systems. Microbial communities in the human body, for
instance, can be represented as intricate networks where each mi-
crobe (node) may have various interactions (edges) with others, in-
fluencing overall system behavior [15]. By applying graph theory,
researchers can uncover new insights into how changes in one part
of the system might impact others, which is essential for counter-
factual analysis aimed at understanding disease mechanisms or the
effects of therapeutic interventions.
==PAGE:28==
20
Methodology
Furthermore, graph-theoretical approaches allow for the incorpo-
ration of additional layers of data, such as genetic, metabolic, or
environmental information, into the analysis. This integration facil-
itates a more comprehensive understanding of the complex interplay
between different elements of the biological system.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
Proposed Method
4.1
Experimentation with MNIST Dataset
Encoder Architecture: The encoder part of the VAE is responsible
for compressing the input data into a latent space representation.
In this model, the encoder is a sequential neural network composed
of several layers:
• The input layer is a linear layer that takes vectors of dimen-
sion 784, catering to the flattened 28x28 pixel images from the
MNIST dataset.
• This is followed by a series of three linear layers, each reducing
the dimensionality further: the first layer maps 784 features to
512, the second compresses 512 to 256, and the third reduces
256 to 128.
• Each of these linear layers is followed by a ReLU (Rectified
Linear Unit) activation function, which introduces non-linearity
to the model, enabling it to learn more complex patterns in the
data.
• The final layer in the encoder is a linear layer that maps the 128
features to a 4-dimensional latent space. This layer is crucial
as it represents the bottleneck of the VAE, where the data is
compressed into a low-dimensional representation.
Decoder Architecture: The decoder is tasked with the reconstruction
of data from the latent space representation. Its architecture mirrors
the encoder, but in reverse, progressively upscaling the compressed
representation back to the original input dimension but added the
Sigmoid():
==PAGE:30==
22
Proposed Method
• A sigmoid activation function is employed at the end of the
decoder. This function ensures that the output values are in
the range [0, 1], which is particularly useful for reconstructing
images where pixel values are expected to be in this range
VAE(
(encoder): Sequential(
(0): Linear(in_features=784, out_features=512, bias=True)
(1): ReLU()
(2): Linear(in_features=512, out_features=256, bias=True)
(3): ReLU()
(4): Linear(in_features=256, out_features=128, bias=True)
(5): ReLU()
(6): Linear(in_features=128, out_features=4, bias=True)
)
(decoder): Sequential(
(0): Linear(in_features=2, out_features=128, bias=True)
(1): ReLU()
(2): Linear(in_features=128, out_features=256, bias=True)
(3): ReLU()
(4): Linear(in_features=256, out_features=512, bias=True)
(5): ReLU()
(6): Linear(in_features=512, out_features=784, bias=True)
(7): Sigmoid()
)
)
For this train the following hyper parameters where used :
learning_rate = 1e-4 # 1e-3
num_epochs = 100
batch_size = 128
beta_initial = 0.001
beta_step = 0.002
device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu")
model.to(device)
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Experimentation with MNIST Dataset
23
(a) 0-9
(b) 0-4
Figure 4.1: Comparative visualizations of the full MNIST dataset and a selected
subset
In Figure 4.1, two distinct visualizations of the MNIST dataset are
presented.
Figure 4.1a: This visualization represents the entire MNIST dataset
post-training. It illustrates the comprehensive spread and diversity
of all the digits (0-9), providing insights into the overall distribution
and variation within the full dataset. The representation of the en-
tire dataset is essential for understanding the general characteristics
and complexities inherent in the data.
Figure 4.1b: In contrast, the second visualization focuses on a sub-
set of the MNIST dataset, specifically comprising digits 0 through
4. This subset has been selected for further analysis due to its par-
ticular attributes or specific relevance to the research objectives. By
narrowing down to this subset, the study aims to delve deeper into
the characteristics and patterns of a more focused group of digits,
allowing for a more detailed and targeted exploration of the data.
Hence, while the full dataset provides a broad overview, the chosen
subset (Figure 4.1b) offers a more concentrated scope, aligning with
the specific aims and hypotheses under investigation in this study.
==PAGE:32==
24
Proposed Method
The visualization presented below offers an insightful representation
of the MNIST dataset, leveraging the concept of Euclidean distance
to elucidate the relationships within the data. Euclidean distance,
a linear metric, is fundamentally the straight-line distance between
two points in a multidimensional space. This metric is quintessential
in its simplicity and effectiveness, especially in contexts where linear
relationships are prevalent.
In this specific experiment, the Euclidean distance is employed to
identify the proximity between data points across different classes
within the MNIST dataset.
The focal point of the analysis is a
randomly selected point from class 0 (representing the digit ’0’). The
objective is to ascertain the closest point in class 1 (representing the
digit ’1’) to this randomly chosen reference point. This endeavor is
rooted in the concept of nearest-neighbor analysis, a critical aspect
in pattern recognition and classification tasks.
The Euclidean distance, by virtue of its linear nature, provides a di-
rect and intuitive measure of closeness. However, it’s worth noting
that in complex datasets like MNIST, where the underlying rela-
tionships may not always be linear, the interpretation of Euclidean
distances should be approached with a degree of caution. Despite
this, the experiment offers valuable insights into the spatial distri-
bution and separation of different digit classes in the dataset, po-
tentially revealing underlying patterns and connections that might
not be immediately apparent through other analytical lenses. This
analysis serves not only as a testament to the utility of Euclidean
distance in data exploration but also sets the stage for more ad-
vanced, non-linear methods that might be explored in subsequent
phases of the research.
The objective of the experiment was to identify the nearest point
in class 1 (digit ’1’) from a randomly chosen point in class 0 (digit
’0’) within the encoded latent space of a Variational Autoencoder
(VAE). However, an intriguing observation emerged during the anal-
ysis: despite targeting class 1, it was found that the variance of class
1 encompassed outliers, resulting in some samples from class 1 being
located within the cluster of class 2 (digit ’2’). This phenomenon is
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Experimentation with MNIST Dataset
25
Figure 4.2: Euclidian CounterFactual
==PAGE:34==
26
Proposed Method
markedly illustrated by the covariance ellipse centered around class
2, as observed in the scatter plot. Notably, the target sample from
class 1 resides near the center of this class 2 cluster, leading to a
significant challenge in accurate classification and reconstruction.
The optimization problem we are trying to solve is :
min
x∈X
λ · d(x, xtarget)
(4.1)
In the visualization of optimization paths influenced by varying val-
ues of λ, a clear pattern emerges regarding the optimizer’s behavior
relative to its starting position and the target.
For smaller val-
ues of λ, the optimizer remains notably closer to the source point.
This phenomenon can be attributed to the lower weight that such
λ values assign to minimizing the distance to the target point. Es-
sentially, a smaller λ increases the relative cost of departing from
the source point compared to the perceived benefit of approaching
the target. As a result, when the optimization process is less incen-
tivized to reach the target point due to a smaller λ, it exhibits a
preference for paths that diverge minimally from the origin. This
behavior is advantageous in contexts where the objective is to make
subtle modifications to the source point, ensuring that its essential
characteristics or its class identity are retained.
On the other hand, larger λ values significantly alter the optimizer’s
trajectory, compelling it to move more decisively towards the target
point, potentially necessitating a change in class within the latent
space. In this scenario, the larger λ effectively diminishes the cost of
moving away from the source point, thereby making it more bene-
ficial for the optimizer to undertake paths that lead to considerable
positional changes. This behavior is evident when the optimization
goal includes crossing decision boundaries or achieving a pronounced
shift in the properties associated with the source point. The aggres-
sive optimization strategy seen with large λ values is particularly
useful for applications that demand substantial alterations, under-
lining the critical role of λ in managing the balance between minor
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Experimentation with MNIST Dataset
27
Figure 4.3: Euclidian Optimization
and significant adjustments in the latent space.
The crux of the issue lies in the nature of VAEs as generative mod-
els, which typically assume a Gaussian distribution for the latent
space. As Kingma and Welling[26] elucidate in their seminal work
on autoencoding variational Bayes, VAEs are proficient in model-
ing complex, high-dimensional data through a probabilistic, latent
Gaussian space. However, this strength also presents a challenge;
the Gaussian assumption can sometimes lead to overlaps in the la-
tent representations of different classes, especially when these classes
are not distinctly separable in the latent space.
==PAGE:36==
28
Proposed Method
In the current context, this overlap manifests in the form of the
aforementioned proximity of class 1 samples to the center of the class
2 cluster. Consequently, when decoding this target point, the VAE
is prone to "misinterpret" it as belonging to class 2, rather than class
1. This is because the decoder, following its training, leverages the
Gaussian distribution of the latent space to reconstruct the input.
Given that the target point is closer to the centroid of class 2’s
Gaussian distribution, the decoder is more likely to reconstruct it
as a digit ’2’, albeit the original intent was to decode a digit ’1’.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Experimentation with MNIST Dataset
29
This scenario underscores a fundamental challenge in the application
of VAEs: the balance between a sufficiently expressive latent space
and the potential for class overlap due to the Gaussian assumption.
To address this challenge,particularly in projects where accurate de-
coding is paramount, the incorporation of an auto-correlation matrix
becomes essential. The auto-correlation matrix serves as a strate-
gic tool to discern and accentuate the distinctive features of each
class within the latent space 4.4 . By meticulously analyzing the
auto-correlations within the data, this approach aids in reducing
the likelihood of misclassification or decoding errors. It essentially
enhances the decoder’s ability to correctly interpret and reconstruct
the input data, aligning more closely with the true class distribution
Figure 4.4: Source/Decoder/Auto-correlation
In the context of this experiment, further visualizations using the
Chebyshev and Manhattan distance metrics were conducted to aug-
ment our understanding of the dataset. However, it is noteworthy
that these additional visualizations did not yield substantial new in-
sights beyond what was gleaned from the Euclidean distance metric
for this specific dataset.
The application of the Chebyshev and Manhattan distances served
primarily as a sanity test, ensuring the robustness and consistency of
our observations across different distance metrics. While these met-
rics offer distinct perspectives in measuring distances - with Cheby-
shev distance capturing the maximum absolute difference along any
coordinate axis, and Manhattan distance summing up the absolute
differences along each axis - their contribution in this particular
==PAGE:38==
30
Proposed Method
instance was limited in terms of providing additional clarity or dif-
ferentiation among the classes.
Figure 4.5: Chebyshev distance metric
Figure 4.5 illustrates the Chebyshev distance metric visualization.
Unlike the linear nature of the Euclidean distance, the Chebyshev
distance is inherently non-linear, capturing the essence of extremities
in the data distribution.
Similarly, Figure 4.6 showcases the Manhattan distance metric visu-
alization. This metric, also non-linear, emphasizes the cumulative
difference across all dimensions, offering a different perspective on
the data’s structure.
While these metrics have not provided substantial additional in-
sights in this specific instance, their non-linear nature can be ad-
vantageous in other contexts. As such, the Chebyshev and Manhat-
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Experimentation with MNIST Dataset
31
Figure 4.6: Manhattan distance metric
tan distances will be further explored in different segments of this
project, especially in scenarios where non-linear relationships are
more pronounced and could provide deeper insights into the dataset.
Their application serves as a complementary approach, broadening
the scope of our analysis and ensuring a comprehensive examination
of the data from multiple perspectives.
==PAGE:40==
32
Proposed Method
4.1.1
MNIST Graph Theory Analysis
In exploring the MNIST dataset, a graph-theoretical approach pro-
vides a nuanced perspective on the relationships between different
digits. This method is particularly beneficial when the relationships
are not immediately apparent. To construct a graph representation
of the MNIST dataset, each digit is treated as a node, and connec-
tions (edges) are established using the K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN)
algorithm with K set to 5. This approach, ensures that each node
is linked to its five nearest neighbors, based on a selected distance
metric [20]
The resulting graph is fully connected, with each digit intercon-
nected within a complex network. This network, allows for an in-
depth analysis of the dataset’s structure, revealing clustering pat-
terns and relational dynamics between the digits. By applying graph
theory, we gain insights into the MNIST dataset that transcend tra-
ditional analytical methods, uncovering deeper patterns and rela-
tionships inherent in the data [8]
Figure 4.7: MNIST graph
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Experimentation with MNIST Dataset
33
In the furtherance of our analysis of the MNIST dataset through a
graph theory lens, the next logical step involves employing Dijkstra’s
algorithm to ascertain the shortest path distances within the graph.
This algorithm, formulated by Edsger W. Dijkstra in 1959, is a
foundational tool in graph theory, renowned for its efficiency and
precision in finding the shortest path between nodes in a graph. As
elucidated in Dijkstra’s seminal paper, the algorithm operates by
iteratively selecting the node with the smallest known distance from
the start node and exploring its unvisited neighbors. This process
continues until the shortest paths from the start node to all other
nodes in the graph are established [13]
In the context of the MNIST graph, Dijkstra’s algorithm will be
pivotal in accurately determining the shortest distances between
digit representations, thereby illuminating the most direct connec-
tions within the dataset. The application of Dijkstra’s algorithm in
this setting is not only methodologically sound but also aligns with
the broader objective of extracting meaningful, data-driven insights
from complex graph structures
Algorithm 1 Dijkstra’s Algorithm
1: procedure Dijkstra(G, s)
2:
dist[s] ←0
3:
Q ←all nodes in G
4:
Initialize dist[v] ←∞for all v ∈G except s
5:
while Q is not empty do
6:
u ←vertex in Q with min dist[u]
7:
remove u from Q
8:
for each neighbor v of u do
9:
alt ←dist[u] + length(u, v)
10:
if alt < dist[v] then
11:
dist[v] ←alt
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
end while
15:
return dist[]
16: end procedure
In the present experiment, two distinct implementations of Dijk-
stra’s algorithm were utilized to investigate paths within the graph
==PAGE:42==
34
Proposed Method
constructed from the MNIST dataset.
This dual approach offers
a compelling comparative study, particularly in how different con-
straints and modifications to a standard algorithm can yield varied
results.
Standard Dijkstra’s Algorithm (Red Line Visualization): The first
implementation adheres to the traditional form of Dijkstra’s algo-
rithm. As visualized by the red line in the plot, this approach seeks
the shortest path from a starting node in class 0 to the nearest node
in class 1. The algorithm efficiently navigates the graph, minimizing
the total path length without regard for the class of intermediate
nodes. This direct approach, as seen in the plot, leads the path
straight towards the target class (class 1), often traversing through
clusters of other classes, including class 2.
Modified Dijkstra’s Algorithm with Class Avoidance (Blue Line Vi-
sualization): The second implementation introduces a novel con-
straint to the standard algorithm. This variant is specifically de-
signed to avoid nodes from class 2. In practical terms, when the
algorithm encounters a neighbor node belonging to class 2, it ar-
tificially increases the weight of the edge connecting to that node.
This increased weight effectively discourages the path from passing
through class 2 nodes, recalculating the route to find a less direct,
but class 2-avoidant path. The visualization of this path, marked
in blue, illustrates a distinctive detour around the class 2 cluster
(marked in green). Intriguingly, this constraint leads the algorithm
to identify an outlier from class 1 as the nearest point, a result
that diverges significantly from the path identified by the standard
Dijkstra’s method.
The comparison of these two algorithms sheds light on the impact
of introducing class-specific constraints in pathfinding algorithms.
While the standard Dijkstra’s algorithm provides the shortest path
in a classical sense, the modified version highlights how algorithmic
adjustments can cater to specific analytical needs, such as avoiding
certain data clusters. This experiment underscores the versatility of
graph-based algorithms in data analysis and their potential for cus-
tomization in response to specific research questions or constraints.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Experimentation with MNIST Dataset
35
It also demonstrates the nuanced understanding that can be gained
by examining data through the lens of graph theory and algorithmic
modifications.
Figure 4.8: Distances
The constrained approach to Dijkstra’s algorithm, as demonstrated
in the MNIST dataset experiment, has significant implications for
research in the field of human microbiome studies. In microbiome
research, where understanding the complex interactions and rela-
tionships between different microbial communities is paramount, the
ability to navigate these connections with specific constraints can be
highly beneficial. The application of this constrained pathfinding
approach allows for a more targeted exploration of the microbiome,
enabling researchers to delineate pathways that specifically avoid
==PAGE:44==
36
Proposed Method
or pass through certain microbial clusters. This methodology can
provide deeper insights into the symbiotic and antagonistic interac-
tions within the microbiome, thereby enhancing our understanding
of its role in human health and disease. The adaptability and preci-
sion of such an algorithmic approach underscore its potential utility
in advancing microbiome research, offering a sophisticated tool to
navigate its intricate and dynamic landscape.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Microbiome Experiments
37
4.2
Microbiome Experiments
In this chapter, the focus shifts to exploring microbiome experi-
ments. The model architecture, initially established in the preced-
ing chapter, is suitably adapted to suit the unique attributes of
microbiome datasets. This involves modifying the configuration of
the model’s layers to align with the specific dimensions and char-
acteristics of the microbiome data. Such customization is essential
to ensure the model’s effectiveness in processing and analyzing this
distinct dataset type.
The microbiome’s compositional nature necessitates the applica-
tion of specific data transformation methods to facilitate meaning-
ful analysis.
These transformations adjust for the relative abun-
dance of microbial taxa, a fundamental characteristic arising from
the methodology employed in microbiome studies [18] For this part
many different methods where applied to find the most suitable
transformasion for the dataset.
• Standardization: Standardization involves rescaling the data to
have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
zi = xi −µ
σ
(4.2)
• MinMax Scaling: MinMax scaling rescales the data to a specific
range, usually between 0 and 1.
xscaled =
xi −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(4.3)
• Robust Scaling: Robust scaling uses the median and the in-
terquartile range (IQR) to scale the data, thus diminishing the
impact of outliers.
==PAGE:46==
38
Proposed Method
xrobust = xi −median(x)
IQR
(4.4)
• Log Transformation is particularly relevant for microbiome data.
It can help stabilize variance and make the data more symmet-
rical.
xlog = log(xi + 1)
(4.5)
Prior to model training, a critical preprocessing step is the imple-
mentation of Zero-Inflated Transformation. This approach is crucial
in the context of microbiome data, where the prevalence of zeros
carries substantial biological meaning. The transformation is math-
ematically articulated as:
Xtransformed =
(
0
if X = 0
log(1 + X)
if X > 0
(4.6)
This transformation technique specifically addresses the inherent na-
ture of microbiome data. It preserves zeros, which often indicate the
genuine absence of certain microbes in a sample, reflecting a key bi-
ological aspect. For nonzero values, a logarithmic transformation is
applied, normalizing the data and addressing its common skewness.
The retention of zeros as is, while normalizing the other data points,
is underscored by its biological relevance in microbiome studies.Zeros
in microbiome datasets are not trivial and often represent true bio-
logical absence rather than mere non-detection. Zero-Inflated Trans-
formation, therefore, provides a nuanced approach to preparing mi-
crobiome data for analysis, ensuring an accurate representation of
both the presence and absence of microbial entities [33]
In the realm of microbiome research, unlike datasets such as MNIST
which are characterized primarily by digit labels, microbiome datasets
often come with a rich set of metadata that provides deeper insights
into the samples.
For this chapter, the chosen metadata include
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Microbiome Experiments
39
’AGE’, ’SEX’, ’ANTIBIOTICS’, and ’SMOKING’. Each of these
variables plays a significant role in influencing the composition and
diversity of the human microbiome. Here is a representation of the
metadata categories in a table format:
Metadata Category
Type
AGE
Categorical (0-18, 19-30, 31-50, 51+)
SEX
Binary (0, 1)
ANTIBIOTICS
Binary (0, 1)
SMOKING
Binary (0, 1)
In this schema:
• ’AGE’ is categorized into four groups: 0-18, 19-30, 31-50, 51+.
This categorization allows for the analysis of the microbiome
across different life stages.
• ’SEX’, ’ANTIBIOTICS’, and ’SMOKING’ are binary, indicat-
ing the presence or absence, or the yes/no status of these fac-
tors.
The impact of age on the human microbiome is particularly notewor-
thy. As research in the field has shown, the microbiome undergoes
significant changes throughout a person’s life [50]
In this study, the metadata, especially age, provide essential vari-
ables that can be correlated with variations in the microbiome. Un-
derstanding these relationships is pivotal for comprehending the dy-
namics of the microbiome and its influence on human health. The
inclusion of these metadata in the analysis enables a more compre-
hensive exploration of the factors that shape the microbial landscape
within individuals, offering valuable insights into the complex inter-
actions between human hosts and their microbial inhabitants.
In the exploration of the microbiome dataset, an intriguing pat-
tern emerged regarding the clustering of samples. These clusters
==PAGE:48==
40
Proposed Method
appeared to be inherently linked to the nature of the dataset itself,
suggesting a complex interplay of features influencing the microbial
composition. To gain deeper insights into the structure of these clus-
ters, a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was conducted. The
objective was to determine if a reduced dimensionality could reveal
distinct separations or groupings not initially apparent.
The PCA revealed that the explained variance plateaued around
200 components, as illustrated in the accompanying plot.
How-
ever, despite this reduction in dimensionality, the clustering of the
microbiome samples remained consistent with the original, high-
dimensional representation. This persistence of clustering post-PCA
indicates that the underlying factors contributing to these groupings
are complex and not merely a result of high-dimensional data struc-
ture.
Figure 4.9: Variance
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Microbiome Experiments
41
The observed clustering led to an intriguing hypothesis: it is plausi-
ble that elderly individuals with healthy microbiomes might cluster
closely with younger individuals experiencing diseased states, and
vice versa. This hypothesis stems from the notion that the state
of the microbiome may be more closely tied to its health or disease
status rather than age alone. To investigate this, it was decided to
utilize the original, non-PCA-transformed dataset. This approach
ensures that all the intricate details and nuances of the microbiome
data are preserved, providing a comprehensive foundation for test-
ing the hypothesis. The analysis aims to unravel the relationships
and correlations within the microbiome data, potentially revealing
patterns that link age, health status, and microbial composition in a
more nuanced manner than what dimensionality reduction through
PCA could unveil.
Figure 4.10: Scatter plot
==PAGE:50==
42
Proposed Method
4.2.1
Results
In this segment of the research, we extend the methodologies applied
in the MNIST dataset analysis to the realm of microbiome studies,
utilizing three distinct distance metrics: Euclidean, Chebyshev, and
Manhattan. These metrics, each with their unique method of quan-
tifying distances within a dataset, serve as counterfactuals to one
another, offering a multifaceted view of the microbiome data.
In the context of the MNIST dataset, an optimizer is employed to
determine the optimal distance metric for classification purposes,
leveraging the dataset’s inherent structure where different classes
(digits) are well-separated in the feature space. This approach relies
on the assumption that classes form distinct clusters, allowing the
optimizer to efficiently navigate towards a solution that maximizes
classification accuracy.
However, when applying similar method-
ologies to microbiome data, the underlying assumptions do not hold
due to the compositional nature and high dimensionality of the data,
which often result in overlapping clusters. The classifiers struggle
with poor accuracy as microbial communities from different classes
might cluster closely together, making it challenging to distinguish
between them based on the available features. Therefore, instead of
directly applying an optimizer to find the best path in a manner sim-
ilar to MNIST, it becomes essential to incorporate constraints that
account for the compositional structure and inter-taxa relationships
within the microbiome data. By doing so, one can tailor the analysis
to respect the unique properties of microbiome datasets, potentially
guiding the search towards more biologically relevant and discrimi-
native features, thereby improving the classification accuracy. This
approach underscores the importance of adapting machine learning
strategies to the specific characteristics of the data at hand, es-
pecially in complex and high-dimensional domains like microbiome
research.
However, the focus will be on utilizing a constrained version of Dijk-
stra’s algorithm. This approach, similar to what was implemented
in the MNIST dataset, involves modifying Dijkstra’s algorithm to
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Microbiome Experiments
43
incorporate specific constraints tailored to the nature of microbiome
data. The algorithm will be adapted to avoid certain classes or clus-
ters within the dataset, effectively adding a weighted penalty to
paths that traverse these specified regions.
This constrained Dijkstra’s approach aligns with the complex nature
of microbiome data, where certain microbial communities or condi-
tions might need to be circumvented or specifically targeted. By
applying this constrained pathfinding method, the experiment aims
to unravel the unique spatial relationships within the microbiome
dataset, providing insights into the microbial ecosystem that might
not be captured through traditional distance measures alone.
Figure 4.11: Euclidian distance
The results of the analysis on the microbiome data, particularly
when viewed through the lens of health status (healthy vs. IBD
patients), present some compelling observations. Initially, the la-
tent space representation of the data, as visualized in the scatter
plots, suggested a considerable degree of clustering between the two
classes. This clustering phenomenon indicates that, at a high level,
the microbiomes of healthy individuals and those with IBD have
==PAGE:52==
44
Proposed Method
Figure 4.12: Chebyshev distance
Figure 4.13: Manhattan distance
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Microbiome Experiments
45
overlapping characteristics, making them less distinguishable in the
latent space.
However, the scenario shifts intriguingly when constraints based on
metadata variables such as AGE, SEX, ANTIBIOTICS, and SMOK-
ING are applied. In this constrained environment, the latent space
is navigated with a specific focus on these factors, which are known
to influence the microbiome’s composition significantly. The appli-
cation of these constraints is particularly relevant in the context of
finding a matching donor sample for fecal microbiota transplanta-
tion (FMT), a therapeutic approach for IBD.
Upon incorporating these constraints, the analysis revealed that the
closest possible donor or matching sample for a patient is not nec-
essarily the one that is nearest in the original, unconstrained latent
space.
Instead, when factors like age, sex, antibiotic usage, and
smoking status are considered, the most compatible donor may be
located further away in the latent representation. This finding is
critical, as it underscores the importance of a multi-faceted approach
in donor selection for FMT, going beyond mere microbial similarity.
This outcome resonates with the growing body of research empha-
sizing the role of host factors in the microbiome’s composition and
function. Studies such as [10] highlight how individual-specific fac-
tors can shape microbial ecosystems. Consequently, in therapeutic
contexts like FMT, considering these broader host-related factors
becomes essential.
In conclusion, the results suggest that a comprehensive approach,
factoring in host metadata along with microbial similarity, is cru-
cial for optimal donor selection in FMT for IBD treatment. This
approach aligns with the holistic understanding of the microbiome
as an interplay between microbial entities and host characteristics,
moving towards more personalized and effective microbiome-based
therapies.
==PAGE:54==
46
Proposed Method
4.2.2
Microbiome to a Graph
For the subsequent phase of this research, the transformation of
the latent space into a graph structure is undertaken, paralleling
the approach used in the MNIST dataset analysis. However, a cru-
cial adaptation is made: the graph is constructed using K-Nearest
Neighbors (KNN) with K set to 5, and crucially, weights are added
to the edges based on individual-specific factors - AGE, ANTIBI-
OTICS, SEX, and SMOKING. This modification is instrumental in
facilitating the application of Dijkstra’s algorithm with constraints,
allowing for a more nuanced exploration of the data.
The integration of these individual factors as weights in the graph
fundamentally alters the nature of the connections within the la-
tent space. In a traditional KNN graph, edges represent closeness
or similarity based purely on microbial composition. By contrast, in
this modified graph, the edges also encapsulate the influence of crit-
ical host factors, providing a more holistic view of the microbiome’s
landscape
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Microbiome Experiments
47
Figure 4.14: Microbiome Graph
The results gleaned from this analysis reinforce the hypothesis that
the microbiome exhibits a strong relationship with individual-specific
factors, a notion increasingly supported by recent research that have
underscored the significant impact of host characteristics on the mi-
crobiome [7] [41] These papers affirm the idea that individual differ-
ences, including genetic, lifestyle, and environmental factors, play a
pivotal role in shaping the microbial communities within the human
gut.
The upcoming section delves deeper into the specifics of this micro-
biome analysis. It aims to elucidate the exact relationships between
different microorganisms and their association with health status
(healthy vs. unhealthy individuals) through a comprehensive liter-
ature review. This review will explore how various microbial taxa
are differentially represented or behave in healthy versus diseased
==PAGE:56==
48
Proposed Method
states, drawing on existing scientific literature to contextualize and
interpret the findings from the graph-based analysis of the latent
space. This approach not only confirms the interconnectedness of
the microbiome with personal health factors but also offers insights
into potential microbiome-based interventions and therapies.
Table 4.1: Absolute Difference Abundance
Organism
Abundance
Bacteroides vulgatus ATCC 8482
-272.0
Bacteroides vulgatus ATCC 8482.1
-272.0
Bacteroides vulgatus ATCC 8482.2
-272.0
Bacteroides
-147.0
Bacteroides.2
-147.0
In the realm of gastroenterological research, a significant focus has
been placed on the role of gut microbiota in the pathogenesis and
progression of Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) and Ulcerative
Colitis (UC). A pivotal aspect of this research highlights the genus
Bacteroides, particularly the species Bacteroides vulgatus, for their
notable abundance in individuals afflicted with these conditions
Studies have consistently demonstrated that the microbial landscape
of IBD and UC patients is distinctively characterized by an increased
presence of Bacteroides species. Bacteroides vulgatus, in particular,
has been identified as a key organism in these altered microbiomes.
Its proliferation in the gut is not merely a side effect but is increas-
ingly being recognized as a potential contributor to the inflamma-
tory processes inherent in these diseases.
This correlation posits
Bacteroides vulgatus as a microorganism of interest in understand-
ing the microbial mechanisms at play in IBD and UC.
Furthermore, the relationship between the severity of IBD or UC
and the abundance of Bacteroides vulgatus is a subject of ongoing
investigation. Emerging evidence suggests that the severity of the
disease might be directly proportional to the levels of these bacteria.
This implies that Bacteroides vulgatus does not only flourish in the
diseased gut environment but may also exacerbate the condition,
leading to a more severe disease course [34] [3] [43]
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Microbiome Experiments
49
These findings are pivotal as they open avenues for novel thera-
peutic approaches targeting the microbiome. By understanding the
specific roles and mechanisms of Bacteroides vulgatus in IBD and
UC, researchers could potentially develop strategies to modulate
these bacterial populations, thereby offering new ways to manage
or even treat these complex conditions. This microbiome-focused
perspective represents a significant shift from traditional treatment
modalities, embracing the intricate interplay between our body’s
own systems and the microbial world within.
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5
Discussion
In this research, the application of deep learning models to the mi-
crobiome dataset highlights the critical importance of data quality.
Deep learning models are inherently dependent on the quality and
comprehensiveness of their training data. For this project, while
the utilized dataset was sufficiently robust to provide meaningful
insights, it was not optimal for a highly refined training process.
This limitation is a significant factor in the performance and reli-
ability of deep learning models in complex biological contexts[38]
[21]
The effectiveness of deep learning methods in datasets like MNIST,
where results are generally reliable and consistent, does not directly
translate to the intricate and multifaceted nature of microbiome
data. This discrepancy is primarily due to the dynamic and diverse
factors influencing the human microbiome, such as age, smoking
habits, antibiotic usage, and overall health. These variables intro-
duce complexities in interpreting the latent space representation of
the microbiome, making it challenging to draw clear and definitive
conclusions.
However, the analysis did reveal that under certain constraints (like
age, smoking, etc.), healthy individuals tend to cluster in distance
to diseased individuals in the graph and latent space representation.
This finding suggests that with appropriate constraints and model
optimization, deep learning methodologies can be effectively applied
to microbiome data. The utilization of counterfactual analysis in
this context is novel, especially in healthcare, where it has not been
extensively explored.
The application of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) for treat-
ing IBD is a burgeoning area of research. The potential of deep
learning models in this domain is significant, yet it is a novel prac-
tice that requires thorough review and validation by clinical experts.
==PAGE:59==
51
As FMT and similar microbiome-related treatments gain traction,
the need for clinically vetted and approved deep learning applica-
tions becomes increasingly paramount.
The path forward in utilizing deep learning for microbiome research
and treatment involves not only improving the models and algo-
rithms but also focusing intensively on enhancing the quality and
depth of the datasets used. This dual approach of refining both the
computational tools and the data they analyze is crucial for advanc-
ing the application of deep learning in understanding and treating
complex diseases like IBD .
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this project, β-Variational Autoencoders were employed for di-
mensionality reduction, effectively compressing complex datasets
into a two-dimensional latent space. Additionally, the application
of counterfactual optimization with constraints played a pivotal role
in deriving insightful conclusions. The findings from this approach
align well with existing literature across both the MNIST and mi-
crobiome datasets.
A particularly noteworthy methodological advancement in this re-
search was the transformation of the latent space into a graph struc-
ture, followed by the application of optimization algorithms with
constraints, such as Dijkstra’s algorithm. This technique facilitated
a nuanced exploration of the data, revealing intricate relationships
and patterns that might otherwise have remained obscured.
The key output of this analysis was the absolute difference between
the source and target points in the latent space. This metric pro-
vided a quantitative measure of difference in organism abundance,
highlighting significant variations in specific microbial taxa.
No-
tably, there was a marked abundance of Bacteroides vulgatus, which
corroborates findings in current microbiome literature. Studies have
consistently shown that a heightened presence of Bacteroides vul-
gatus and its strains is prevalent in individuals with Inflammatory
Bowel Disease (IBD) and generally in those suffering from inflamma-
tions. This correlation underscores the relevance and applicability
of the methods used in this research to real-world biological phe-
nomena.
==PAGE:61==
References
[1] Olga C Aroniadis and Lawrence J Brandt. Fecal microbiota
transplantation: past, present and future. Current opinion in
gastroenterology, 29(1):79–84, 2013.
[2] David Bach and Abraham L Newman. Transgovernmental net-
works and domestic policy convergence: Evidence from insider
trading regulation. International Organization, 64(3):505–528,
2010.
[3] Tadao Bamba, Hiroshi Matsuda, Mamoru Endo, and Yoshi-
hide Fujiyama.
The pathogenic role of bacteroides vulgatus
in patients with ulcerative colitis. Journal of gastroenterology,
30:45–47, 1995.
[4] Albert-László Barabási. Network science. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and En-
gineering Sciences, 371(1987):20120375, 2013.
[5] Ava Behrouzi, Amir Hossein Nafari, and Seyed Davar Siadat.
The significance of microbiome in personalized medicine. Clin-
ical and translational medicine, 8:1–9, 2019.
[6] Stefano Bibbò, Carlo Romano Settanni, Serena Porcari, En-
rico Bocchino, Gianluca Ianiro, Giovanni Cammarota, and An-
tonio Gasbarrini. Fecal microbiota transplantation: screening
and selection to choose the optimal donor. Journal of Clinical
Medicine, 9(6):1757, 2020.
[7] Marc Jan Bonder, Alexander Kurilshikov, Ettje F Tigchelaar,
Zlatan Mujagic, Floris Imhann, Arnau Vich Vila, Patrick Dee-
len, Tommi Vatanen, Melanie Schirmer, Sanne P Smeekens,
et al. The effect of host genetics on the gut microbiome. Nature
genetics, 48(11):1407–1412, 2016.
[8] John Adrian Bondy and Uppaluri Siva Ramachandra Murty.
Graph theory.
Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated,
2008.
==PAGE:62==
54
REFERENCES
[9] Christopher P Burgess, Irina Higgins, Arka Pal, Loic Matthey,
Nick Watters, Guillaume Desjardins, and Alexander Lerch-
ner.
Understanding disentangling in β-vae.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.03599, 2018.
[10] Elizabeth K Costello, Keaton Stagaman, Les Dethlefsen, Bren-
dan JM Bohannan, and David A Relman. The application of
ecological theory toward an understanding of the human micro-
biome. Science, 336(6086):1255–1262, 2012.
[11] Per-Erik Danielsson. Euclidean distance mapping. Computer
Graphics and image processing, 14(3):227–248, 1980.
[12] Muriel Derrien, Clara Belzer, and Willem M de Vos. Akker-
mansia muciniphila and its role in regulating host functions.
Microbial pathogenesis, 106:171–181, 2017.
[13] Edsger W Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with
graphs. In Edsger Wybe Dijkstra: His Life, Work, and Legacy,
pages 287–290. 2022.
[14] Carl Doersch.
Tutorial on variational autoencoders.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.05908, 2016.
[15] Karoline Faust and Jeroen Raes. Microbial interactions: from
networks to models. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 10(8):538–
550, 2012.
[16] Eric A Franzosa, Alexandra Sirota-Madi, Julian Avila-Pacheco,
Nadine Fornelos, Henry J Haiser, Stefan Reinker, Tommi Vata-
nen, A Brantley Hall, Himel Mallick, Lauren J McIver, et al.
Gut microbiome structure and metabolic activity in inflamma-
tory bowel disease. Nature microbiology, 4(2):293–305, 2019.
[17] Dirk Gevers, Subra Kugathasan, Lee A Denson, Yoshiki
Vázquez-Baeza, Will Van Treuren, Boyu Ren, Emma Schwa-
ger, Dan Knights, Se Jin Song, Moran Yassour, et al.
The
treatment-naive microbiome in new-onset crohn’s disease. Cell
host & microbe, 15(3):382–392, 2014.
[18] Gregory B Gloor, Jean M Macklaim, Vera Pawlowsky-Glahn,
and Juan J Egozcue. Microbiome datasets are compositional:
and this is not optional. Frontiers in microbiology, 8:2224, 2017.
==PAGE:63==
REFERENCES
55
[19] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Convolu-
tional networks. In Deep learning, volume 2016, pages 330–372.
MIT press Cambridge, MA, USA, 2016.
[20] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome H Friedman, and
Jerome H Friedman. The elements of statistical learning: data
mining, inference, and prediction, volume 2. Springer, 2009.
[21] Ricardo Hernández Medina, Svetlana Kutuzova, Knud Nor
Nielsen, Joachim Johansen, Lars Hestbjerg Hansen, Mads
Nielsen, and Simon Rasmussen.
Machine learning and deep
learning applications in microbiome research. ISME Communi-
cations, 2(1):98, 2022.
[22] Daragh Hill, Ivan Sugrue, Conor Tobin, Colin Hill, Catherine
Stanton, and R Paul Ross. The lactobacillus casei group: his-
tory and health related applications. Frontiers in microbiology,
page 2107, 2018.
[23] Paul W Holland. Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the
American statistical Association, pages 945–960, 1986.
[24] James B Kaper, James P Nataro, and Harry LT Mobley.
Pathogenic escherichia coli.
Nature reviews microbiology,
2(2):123–140, 2004.
[25] Alexander Khoruts.
Fecal microbiota transplantation–early
steps on a long journey ahead, 2017.
[26] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.
Auto-encoding varia-
tional bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
[27] Durk P Kingma, Shakir Mohamed, Danilo Jimenez Rezende,
and Max Welling. Semi-supervised learning with deep genera-
tive models. Advances in neural information processing systems,
27, 2014.
[28] Rob Knight, Alison Vrbanac, Bryn C Taylor, Alexander Ak-
senov, Chris Callewaert, Justine Debelius, Antonio Gonza-
lez, Tomasz Kosciolek, Laura-Isobel McCall, Daniel McDonald,
et al. Best practices for analysing microbiomes. Nature Reviews
Microbiology, 16(7):410–422, 2018.
==PAGE:64==
56
REFERENCES
[29] Paola Lecca. Machine learning for causal inference in biological
networks: perspectives of this challenge. Frontiers in Bioinfor-
matics, 1:746712, 2021.
[30] Dachao
Liang,
Ross
Ka-Kit
Leung,
Wenda
Guan,
and
William W Au. Involvement of gut microbiome in human health
and disease: brief overview, knowledge gaps and research op-
portunities. Gut pathogens, 10(1):1–9, 2018.
[31] Petra Louis and Harry J Flint. Formation of propionate and
butyrate by the human colonic microbiota. Environmental mi-
crobiology, 19(1):29–41, 2017.
[32] Catherine A Lozupone, Jesse I Stombaugh, Jeffrey I Gordon,
Janet K Jansson, and Rob Knight. Diversity, stability and re-
silience of the human gut microbiota. Nature, 489(7415):220–
230, 2012.
[33] Paul J McMurdie and Susan Holmes. Waste not, want not: why
rarefying microbiome data is inadmissible. PLoS computational
biology, 10(4):e1003531, 2014.
[34] Robert H Mills, Parambir S Dulai, Yoshiki Vázquez-Baeza,
Consuelo Sauceda, Noëmie Daniel, Romana R Gerner, Lak-
shmi E Batachari, Mario Malfavon, Qiyun Zhu, Kelly Weldon,
et al. Multi-omics analyses of the ulcerative colitis gut micro-
biome link bacteroides vulgatus proteases with disease severity.
Nature microbiology, 7(2):262–276, 2022.
[35] Sylvie Miquel,
Rebeca Martin,
O Rossi,
LG Bermúdez-
Humarán, JM Chatel, H Sokol, M Thomas, JM Wells, and
P Langella. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and human intestinal
health. Current opinion in microbiology, 16(3):255–261, 2013.
[36] Xochitl C Morgan, Timothy L Tickle, Harry Sokol, Dirk Gevers,
Kathryn L Devaney, Doyle V Ward, Joshua A Reyes, Samir A
Shah, Neal LeLeiko, Scott B Snapper, et al. Dysfunction of
the intestinal microbiome in inflammatory bowel disease and
treatment. Genome biology, 13(9):1–18, 2012.
==PAGE:65==
REFERENCES
57
[37] Amy O’Callaghan and Douwe Van Sinderen. Bifidobacteria and
their role as members of the human gut microbiota. Frontiers
in microbiology, 7:925, 2016.
[38] Georgios Papoutsoglou,
Sonia Tarazona, Marta B Lopes,
Thomas Klammsteiner, Eliana Ibrahimi, Julia Eckenberger,
Pierfrancesco Novielli, Alberto Tonda, Andrea Simeon, Rajesh
Shigdel, et al. Machine learning approaches in microbiome re-
search: challenges and best practices. Frontiers in Microbiology,
14, 2023.
[39] John V Petrocelli. Pitfalls of counterfactual thinking in medical
practice: Preventing errors by using more functional reference
points. Journal of Public Health Research, 2(3):jphr–2013, 2013.
[40] Jayashi Rajapakse, Saroj Khatiwada, Anna Camille Akon,
Kin Lam Yu, Sj Shen, and Amany Zekry. Unveiling the com-
plex relationship between gut microbiota and liver cancer: Op-
portunities for novel therapeutic interventions. Gut Microbes,
15(2):2240031, 2023.
[41] Daphna Rothschild, Omer Weissbrod, Elad Barkan, Alexander
Kurilshikov, Tal Korem, David Zeevi, Paul I Costea, Anastasia
Godneva, Iris N Kalka, Noam Bar, et al. Environment domi-
nates over host genetics in shaping human gut microbiota. Na-
ture, 555(7695):210–215, 2018.
[42] Donald B Rubin. Causal inference using potential outcomes:
Design, modeling, decisions. Journal of the American statistical
Association, pages 322–331, 2005.
[43] Tadahiko Shiba, Yuji Aiba, Hiroki Ishikawa, Atsushi Ushiyama,
Atsushi Takagi, Tetsuya Mine, and Yasuhiro Koga. The sup-
pressive effect of bifidobacteria on bacteroides vulgatus, a pu-
tative pathogenic microbe in inflammatory bowel disease. Mi-
crobiology and immunology, 47(6):371–378, 2003.
[44] Joshua Stripling and Martin Rodriguez. Current evidence in de-
livery and therapeutic uses of fecal microbiota transplantation
in human diseases—clostridium difficile disease and beyond.
==PAGE:66==
58
REFERENCES
The American Journal of the Medical Sciences, 356(5):424–432,
2018.
[45] Peter J Turnbaugh and Jeffrey I Gordon. The core gut micro-
biome, energy balance and obesity. The Journal of physiology,
587(17):4153–4158, 2009.
[46] Pajau Vangay, Benjamin M Hillmann, and Dan Knights. Mi-
crobiome learning repo (ml repo):
A public repository of
microbiome regression and classification tasks.
Gigascience,
8(5):giz042, 2019.
[47] Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Coun-
terfactual explanations without opening the black box: Auto-
mated decisions and the gdpr. Harv. JL & Tech., 31:841, 2017.
[48] Hannah M Wexler. Bacteroides: the good, the bad, and the
nitty-gritty. Clinical microbiology reviews, 20(4):593–621, 2007.
[49] Koen Wortelboer, Max Nieuwdorp, and Hilde Herrema. Fecal
microbiota transplantation beyond clostridioides difficile infec-
tions. EBioMedicine, 44:716–729, 2019.
[50] Tanya Yatsunenko, Federico E Rey, Mark J Manary, Indi
Trehan, Maria Gloria Dominguez-Bello, Monica Contreras,
Magda Magris, Glida Hidalgo, Robert N Baldassano, Andrey P
Anokhin, et al. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and
geography. nature, 486(7402):222–227, 2012.
