==PAGE:1==
Reuse of Structural Concrete
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Reuse of Structural Concrete
In-situ Measurements with Non-Destructive Testing for Evaluation of The Properties of
Structural Concrete.
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By:
Jonathan Nimskov & Hannah Strunge Nissen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Kim Utzon Arkitekter
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn-
ingstorvet, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is performed by Jonathan Nimskov & Hannah Strunge Nissen, at the De-
partment of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
(DTU). The thesis was conducted during the period from the 30th of August 2023 to the
18th of February 2024, as a culmination of the degree Master of Science in Architectural
Engineering, MSc Eng. The thesis constitutes 60 ECTS points. The supervisors for the
thesis are Lisbeth Ottosen, Professor and head of section for Materials and Durability,
Katja Irene Møller Thygesen, Research Assistant, and Serkan Karatosun, PhD student.
It is assumed that the reader has a background knowledge equivalent to a master student
of Civil Engineering.
Jonathan Nimskov - s180639
Signature
Date
Hannah Strunge Nissen - s184497
Signature
Date
ii
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:4==
Nomenclature
b
Bottom
CV
Coefficient of Variation
EQL
Estimation of Quality Level
EXC
Exterior Column
ID
Investigation Domain
INTC
Interior Column
m
Middle
ND
Non-Destructive
NDT
Non-Destructive Test
NW
Northwest
RH
Rebound Hammer
sd
DT
sd
Standard Deviation
SE
Southeast
t
Top
TL
Test Location
TR
Test Region
TRP
Test Result Precision
UPV
Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity
Reuse of Structural Concrete
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The construction industry is currently recognized as the main contributor to Denmark’s
emissions with approximately one-third of these emissions stemming from cement produc-
tion. Additionally, the construction sector is a large consumer of the Earth’s resources,
many of which end up as waste at the end of a building’s lifespan. It is therefore crucial
that new solutions are continually developed to reduce this impact. Circular economy
will play an important role in this context by ensuring that all resources and building
materials become part of a continuous loop of reuse. However, this transition requires
the construction industry to rethink and redesign the way buildings are designed and
constructed.
This thesis aims to explore the possibilities for the direct reuse of concrete, which will
both minimize emissions from cement and reduce resource waste. In the thesis, concrete
strength will be estimated on both interior- and exterior columns using Non-Destructive
Testing (NDT) with Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity (UPV), Rebound Hammer (RH), and core
drilling. Simultaneously, there will be a focus on the economic aspect of this process,
examining the costs associated with NDTs and selective demolition.
Concrete columns from a now-demolished building in Copenhagen, Sundkrogsgade 30,
were examined. The interior columns with an original design strength of 35.0 MPa were
estimated to have a characteristic strength of 19.5 MPa with an RMSEpred of 6.7 MPa.
Conversely, the exterior columns with an original design strength of 30.0 MPa were esti-
mated to have a characteristic strength of 24.0 MPa and a RMSEpred of 2.4 MPa. Common
for both types of columns is that the measured core strengths were 1.5 to 2 times stronger
than the original design strength. However, due to the high CV in measurements and a
limited dataset for the interior columns, the characteristic strength was calculated notably
lower. Later, an alternative bi-objective conversion model with UPV data was employed to
estimate the strength of the exterior columns. This method demonstrated that using only
UPV data performed better than using multi-variate data, yielding a higher characteristic
strength of 25.4 MPa with a lower RMSEpred of 2.1 MPa. This strength investigation
demonstrated to be suitable for estimating strength for direct reuse purposes. Further-
more, the RH posed several challenges as the measurements showed much lower correlation
with measured core strengths compared to UPV, thus questioning the feasibility of utilizing
RH data.
Through the economic analysis, the pricing of selective demolition was discovered to be
highly complex: The removal of concrete elements today is both time-consuming and
expensive due to the lack of knowledge among demolishers regarding selective demolition
techniques and the unforeseen complications of building structures. It was estimated that
dismantling and reusing the interior concrete columns in the examined building would be
four times more expensive than using virgin concrete.
Overall, it was observed that it was possible to estimate and document the concrete
strength for both interior and exterior columns.
However, direct reuse was discovered
to be more expensive compared to new concrete elements, indicating the need for further
investigation of selective demolition to minimize resource waste and lower the emissions
of the industry.
iv
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We dedicate thanks to the supervisors of this project; Lisbeth Ottosen, Katja Irene Møller
Thygesen and Serkan Karatosun for their guidance and encouragement throughout the
past six months.
We would also like to thank Anders Riiber Høj and By & Havn for giving us the oppor-
tunity to utilize the building at Sundkrogsgade 30 for our studies.
For assistance with core drilling and chloride samples, thanks are dedicated to Jørn Lykke
Jensen and Ebba Schnell for their guidance and time.
We would also like to thank Tscherning for providing technical expertise regarding selec-
tive demolition, as well as assistance with the economic analysis.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Waste Resources in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Concrete Strenght
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Concrete Curing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Test Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Non Destructive Test Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Destructive Test Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Conversion Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Estimation of Quality Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Test Result Precision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
External Factors Affecting Concrete Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7.1
Chloride Ingress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7.2
Freeze/Thaw Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.7.3
Carbonation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Method and Equipment
15
3.1
Field Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Chloride Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Results
27
4.1
Field Study: Exterior Columns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
NDT Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Core Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.3
Develop and Access Conversion Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.4
Calculation of Strength Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.5
Chloride Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Field Study: Interior Colums
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.1
NDT Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.2
Core Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.3
Develop and Access Conversion Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.4
Calculation of Strength Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2.5
Economic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Further Strength Investigation with NDTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Discussion
56
5.1
Exterior Columns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2
Interior Columns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Reuse of Structural Concrete
vii
==PAGE:9==
5.3
Considerations of Concrete Recycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6
Conclusion
73
Bibliography
75
Appendix
81
A Building Materials and Geometry
81
B RH Data for Exterior Columns
82
C RH Data for Interior Columns
90
D UPV Data for Exterior Columns
92
E UPV Data for Interior Columns
96
F TRP Assesment for Exterior Columns
97
G TRP Assesment for Interior Columns
98
H Compression Failures
99
I
Compression Test Data
101
J
Matlab Code for Combined Conversionmodel
102
K Matlab Code for Leave-One-Out Method
103
L
Matlab Code for Leave-One-Out Method for Bi-Objective Approach and
Linear Regression model
104
M Extra NDT Investigation
105
N Price of New Columns
109
O CorePrice DiamantXperten
110
P Tendencies Between Strength and Rebound Data
111
viii
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
About 30% of Denmark’s total CO2 footprint is emitted by the still-growing construction
industry [1], calling for more sustainable alternatives to minimize the environmental im-
pact of constructions. An efficient way to reduce the environmental impact is to minimize
resource consumption, reduce material usage, and incorporate circular solutions to extend
the lifespan of materials and reduce waste. While the efficiency of heat and energy uti-
lization is well-developed within the industry, the same trend is not observed in the role
of materials [2]. Cement accounts for more than 8% of all emissions in the construction
industry [3] thus, making it easier to directly reuse concrete becomes crucial for enhancing
sustainability in the industry moving forward.
In Denmark, there is a considerable use of precast concrete in constructions, attributed to
its reliability, versatility, and long lifespan. Despite concrete’s durability, many buildings
are demolished before reaching the end of their lifespan, often due to economic reasons or
urban development. Demolition releases a large amount of materials, which are currently
not utilized very efficiently; for instance, concrete is primarily crushed and used as a
substitute for stabilized gravel. Being able to directly reuse concrete in new constructions
would extend their lifespan and thereby yield great environmental benefits.
The potential utilization of recycled concrete aligns well with especially two of the five
focus areas in the National Sustainability Strategies developed for the building industry:
More Sustainable Building and Construction and Durable High Quality Buildings. This
emphasizes the importance of transitioning from the traditional practice of demolishing to
a more sustainable approach that prioritizes the direct reuse of concrete elements.
Concrete requirements have been established in the first focus area More Sustainable Build-
ing and Construction, specifying that buildings over 1000 m2 must not emit more than
12 kg CO2 equivalents pr. m2/year. Over the next few years, the plan is to progressively
tighten these requirements until emissions reaches 7.5 kg CO2 eq. pr. m2/year in 2029.
Additionally, buildings can today voluntarily aim for a low-emissions class of 8 kg CO2
eq. pr. m2/year, which will decrease to 5 kg CO2 eq. pr. m2/year by 2029. In 2025, the
requirement of 12 kg CO2 eq. pr. m2/year will also apply to buildings under 1000 m2.
Despite the new climate requirements in the building industry, they may not necessarily
be ambitious enough. New calculations from the Reduction Roadmap [4] tool show that
new constructions should emit a maximum of 5.8 CO2 eq. pr. m2/year for Denmark to
succeed in meeting the goals of the Paris Agreement. This corresponds to a reduction
of about one-third compared to the current CO2 average in construction, which is 9.5
m2/year. Therefore, the construction industry is compelled to seek more sustainable so-
lutions, where material reuse and selective demolition will start to play a much larger role
in the sector.
The target of the second focus area is that climate-friendly building materials should be
promoted, and the potential for creating more sustainable structures should be explored,
including holistic assessments during renovations. There is a growing need for knowledge
about when it makes environmental and economic sense to reuse materials in constructions.
The potential use of recycled concrete could create opportunities for far more sustainable
concrete utilization [2].
The reuse of load-bearing concrete elements currently faces challenges including technical
complexities and economic constraints: There is no standardized documentation frame-
Reuse of Structural Concrete
1
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1: Introduction
work to ensure that recycled concrete elements maintain the required strength, and the
field is not well known for most demolishers, requiring the development of new and effi-
cient methods that do not compromise the integrity of the elements as well as solutions
for storage of the elements. This process is time-consuming, adding to the overall cost of
demolition and necessitating the demolition industry to look into a new business area of
re-selling used elements.
With a more standardized method for documentation and demolition of reused concrete
elements, there is considerable CO2 savings to be achieved. The construction industry
represents a resource pool of approximately 820 million m2, of which an estimated 35-60%
is concrete. Approximately 2-3 million m2 are demolished annually, indicating a growing
need for new and more effective methods of recycling materials [5].
This project aims to facilitate the reuse of load-bearing concrete elements, which is achieved
by gathering data through non-destructive testing methods. The data is then analyzed to
obtain an estimation of the strength of the tested elements and thus extend their lifespan.
Currently, a challenge in reusing load-bearing elements lies in the absence of standards,
certification, and documentation systems, creating increased uncertainty for the client. In
this project, the demolition site at Sundkrogsgade 30 has been used for the investigation of
its concrete structure, thereby contributing to finding a standardized method to bringing
the construction industry closer to structural reuse [6].
The reuse of load-bearing concrete elements contributes to Sustainable Development Goal
12, which focuses on responsible consumption and production. This project is directly
linked to the efficient utilization of resources, while simultaneously resulting in a consider-
able reduction in construction waste. Reusing the concrete elements reduces the demand
for new concrete production, thereby lowering the environmental impact within the con-
struction and manufacturing sectors.
Figure 1.1: Sustainable Development Goal 12.
2
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:12==
2
Theory
2.1
Waste Resources in Denmark
Approximately 1.7 million m2 are demolished annually in Denmark.
The reasons for
demolition are diverse: In some cases, buildings become obsolete, while in others, the
purpose of the structure may change.
Additionally, it could be more cost-effective to
demolish a building rather than renovate it. Consequently, buildings are often demolished
before reaching the end of their lifespan, presenting a considerable opportunity to reuse
materials in new construction projects [7].
The waste policy in Denmark is structured as a prioritization tool, with waste prevention
holding the highest priority, followed by recycling and other forms of recovery. Disposal of
waste should be minimized, and efforts to achieve this goal should be consistently main-
tained, as illustrated in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Waste hierarchy [8].
Today, 40% of Denmark’s total waste originates from the construction industry, corre-
sponding to approximately 5 million tons annually. This highlights the great potential for
more efficient resource utilization in the construction sector, aimed at reducing waste.
There are specific requirements for waste handling. Companies dealing with waste streams
exceeding one ton are obligated to conduct sorting. Currently, this sorting predominantly
occurs after the building has been demolished, leading to a considerable portion of the
waste being categorized as residual waste instead of being reused in new constructions [5].
This sorting approach is suboptimal, considering the future goal of incorporating more
recycled materials into construction practices to meet CO2 requirements.
In December 2023, the government proposed measures to enhance the efficient use of waste
resources in the construction industry, The proposal is expected to come into effect on July
1, 2024 [9]. The new initiative aims to promote increased recycling and reuse practices.
To achieve this, the proposed changes involve sorting during the demolition phase of the
Reuse of Structural Concrete
3
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.2.
Concrete Strenght
building, rather than after. This shift is expected to result in more careful demolition
processes, ensuring a greater extent of materials can be reused or recycled.
These regulations are applicable to companies and builders engaged in the demolition of
buildings exceeding 250 m2 [9]. According to the current Danish Minister of the Environ-
ment (February 2024), the goal is to reintegrate old building materials, with the aspiration
that 14% of high-quality concrete can be recycled and 12% can be reused.
2.2
Concrete Strenght
The following section is based on DS/EN 1992 FU 2021 [10], which is a shortened version of
DS/EN 1992-1-1 Eurocode 2: Betonkonstruktioner and Betonkonstruktioner by Brøndum
Nielsen [11].
The production of concrete varies depending on construction requirements, with options
including on-site mixing or prefabricated components. Concrete stands out as the preferred
construction material, known for its versatility, overall utility, and economically cost-
efficiency.
Many components influence the compressive strength properties of concrete, including the
type of cement, water-to-cement ratio, aggregate characteristics, casting conditions, and
curing time, where steel reinforcement are essential to enchane concrete’s resistance to
tension. Cement hydration, initiated by contact with water, is a crucial chemical process
that considerably contributes to the strenght.
Typically, concrete achieves substantial
strength gains rapidly, reaching 50-70% of its ultimate strength within the first four weeks.
The partial coefficient principle evaluates the safety of a construction by comparing nom-
inal loads against actual loads while considering probability factors. This principle advo-
cates employing reduced coefficients for static loads and prescribing distinct coefficients for
various load combinations. The strengths of concrete and reinforcement are calculated in
accordance with these coefficients. Characteristic strengths guarantee that a specified per-
centage of the material surpasses a predetermined threshold. The associated normalized
variable is established based on the test quantity, with a confidence level of 95%. Eval-
uation of concrete’s characteristic strength, fc,k, typically entails conducting compressive
strength tests on core samples, with the determination of fm using a 2:1 cylinder ratio.
The characteristic compressive strength is calculated using the equation:
fc,k = fm · (1 −κ · CV )
(2.1)
Where: CV is the coefficient of variation and κ is the values for Gauss’ distribution law
[12], normalized and with a confidence interval of 95% as found in Table 2.1.
Number of test
κ
Number of test
κ
Number of test
κ
Number of test
κ
5
4.29
13
2.59
41
2.05
201
1.80
6
3.72
15
2.49
51
1.99
301
1.77
7
3.38
17
2.4
61
1.96
401
1.75
8
3.14
19
2.34
71
1.93
501
1.74
9
2.97
21
2.29
81
1.91
601
1.73
10
2.84
26
2.19
91
1.89
801
1.72
11
2.74
31
2.13
101
1.87
1001
1.71
∞
1.64
Table 2.1: Value of κ depending of number of tests.
4
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.3.
Test Methods
The characteristic strength of concrete can be determined from NDTs, and the assessment
itself is divided into three main stages, see Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Strength assessment process.
Each step will be explained in the following.
2.2.1
Concrete Curing
Concrete curing is an essential process aimed at ensuring the optimal development of
strength and durability. The initial phase, referred to as initial curing, begins promptly
after the pouring of concrete into the mold. This stage emphasizes the prevention of rapid
water evaporation from the concrete surface, facilitating the material to retain sufficient
moisture for the initial stages of hydration [13].
Temperature control during curing is crucial for proper hydration. Maintaining an opti-
mal temperature range is essential, as too high or low temperatures can impact concrete
strength [14]: High temperatures during the curing process can accelerate the curing of
concrete, leading to a potential reduction in strength and durability, while too low temper-
atures could destroy the mixture and do permanent damage to the concrete. Furthermore,
consistent moisture levels are vital during curing. Techniques like wet burlap covering,
curing compounds, or membrane-forming materials prevent moisture loss, supporting the
ongoing hydration process [15].
As investigations are conducted for exterior columns, it is anticipated that external factors,
such as weather and chloride content, could potentially impact the concrete curing process.
Therefore, understanding the process and evaluating whether external parameters may
have influenced is important.
2.3
Test Methods
The methods for testing the load-bearing concrete structures contain one destructive test
(DT) method and two non-destructive test (NDT) methods. The DT’s is generally more
expensive and involves a higher loss of materials, which is why the aim is to do as few
DTs as possible. NDT’s avoids material loss and are also more cost-efficient. NDT’s are
part of a strategy for the long-term assessment of a building’s stability and the durability
of its components.
With a more generalized testing procedure, it will be possible to
test load-bearing concrete components for direct reuse without any material loss, thereby
contributing to a circular economy. Profits can be gained from the ”end of life” of building
materials if the materials can be disassembled and recycled [16].
Reuse of Structural Concrete
5
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.3.
Test Methods
An overview of the concrete elements to be tested, referred to as Investigation Domain
(ID), is provided before the tests are conducted: Within the ID, there is one or more Test
Regions (TR), which are identical concrete elements expected to have the same strength
and design. Each TR is analyzed separately. Within each TR, there are individual Test
Locations (TLs). Figure 2.3 is used as an example to provide an overview of ID, TR, and
TL at this project’s ID Sundkrogsgade 30.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of ID, TRs and TLs.
The following section provides a summary of the test methods employed to estimate con-
crete strength. These methods involve two NDTs, SonReb [17], as well as the concrete
core extraction and compression DT.
2.3.1
Non Destructive Test Method
Rebound Hammer
To assess the hardness of the concrete elements, a Schmidt Rebound Hammer [18] (RH)
is utilized. The RH was invented in 1948 by Ernst O. Schmidt, a Swiss civil engineer.
The hardness of the concrete surface is determined by examining the rebound number
generated by the hammer. The surface hardness is measured on a scale ranging from 10
to 100 and is documented as a numerical value corresponding to its position on the scale.
The hammer rebound index is a dimensionless number.
The RH consists of several components, including the outer body, the plunger, the hammer
mass, and the main spring, see Figure 2.4. The RH test can be applied from various angles,
as long as it is perpendicular to the surface, and allows the assessment of beams, columns,
walls, slabs, etc.
6
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.3.
Test Methods
Figure 2.4: Conceptual drawing of Rebound Hammer.
When using the RH, the plunger is released from a locked position by moving it close to the
concrete and then away from it. The plunger should be gently pushed into the concrete.
The latch will release, and the energy stored in the spring will propel the hammer mass
toward the plunger tip, causing it to rebound. It is important to inspect whether the
concrete surface remains intact; if not, the test must be repeated at another location.
All tests should be conducted under approximately the same temperature and moisture
conditions to ensure that these variables do not impact the results [16] [15].
Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity
The Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity (UPV) is the other used NDT method. In UPV testing,
an ultrasonic transducer generates a pulse in the concrete, which then travels a known
distance. Another transducer converts these vibrations into an electrical signal, enabling
the measurement of the pulse’s travel time. It is possible to test the concrete directly,
semi-directly, and indirectly with UPV, see Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Direct (left), semi-direct (middle), and indirect (right) UPV test.
The ultrasonic equipment used for this test typically includes a pulse generator, trans-
ducers (E for emitter and R for receiver), an amplifier, and a timing device. The latter
measures the time interval between pulse generation and reception, establishing the in-
strument’s zero point or velocity reference with the help of a reference bar or prism.
In regular situations, the frequencies of the transducers should fall within the range of 20
to 150 kHz. However, these frequencies can be adjusted within the range of 10 to 1000
kHz, depending on the thickness of the material.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
7
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.4.
Conversion Model
The velocity is generally proportional to the concrete strength (assuming the concrete to
be homogenous and uniform) and the relationship between them can be approximated via
simple models [19]. The UPV relies on Dynamic Young’s Modulus, density, and Poisson’s
ratio of the material:
v =
√
E(1 −µ)
ρ(1 + µ)(1 −2µ),
(2.2)
where E is Dynamic Young’s Modulus, ρ is the density of the material, and µ is Dynamic
Poisson’s ratio.
To obtain the most precise measurements, the only material between the concrete and the
transducers should be a layer of coupling medium. By measuring the transit time and
knowing the path length, it is possible to calculate the velocity using the formula:
v = L
T ,
(2.3)
where v is the pulse velocity, L is the path length, and T is the transit time [15].
2.3.2
Destructive Test Method
The DT involves the extraction of concrete core samples. These samples allow for the as-
sessment of the compressive strength and whether there are differences in concrete quality
between the TLs. These assessments are conducted through compression tests.
Core Extraction Test
The equipment employed in this process may show slight variations depending on the
specific project; however, it typically includes a core drill, hammer, grinding machine,
vacuum extraction device, wet saw, and chisel.
The choice of equipment depends on
whether the drilling is going all the way through the concrete element or only partially
into it. The cores extracted should not be less than three times the diameter of the largest
aggregate type; however, as this information is often not available, a core diameter of 100
mm is recommended [20]. An initial assessment is conducted to detect any reinforcement
or other objects embedded within the concrete before core drilling begins. Afterward, the
core drill is attached, and the core is drilled to a sufficient length. When the core is removed
it is important to ensure that it remains intact and does not contain any reinforcement or
foreign objects. Finally, the edges are grounded to ensure conformity in accordance with
[21], and the core diameter is measured to ensure accuracy [16].
Compression Test
The required equipment to test the core samples is a compression test machine as specified
in [22]. The cores are placed into the machine, and a load rate of 0.6 MPa/s is applied.
Subsequently, the cores are loaded until failure, and the maximum load is recorded. In case
of any mistakes or issues, the test may need to be repeated using new cores. A reference
strength, fc,m, can be found from the obtained results.
2.4
Conversion Model
The relationship between core strength and NDT data can be explained via conversion
models, which require a dataset of paired NDT and DT data at different TLs to be
established. There is to this date, unfortunately, no universal conversion model that can
be applied to all types of concrete, so a project-specific conversion model will be used to
estimate the strength at the TLs where only NDTs have been performed [23].
8
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.4.
Conversion Model
A set of univariate and multivariate conversion models will be examined, including a linear,
exponential, and power model. The univariate models will be obtained by regression of
core strength data on data from either the RH or UPV:
Linear model:
fc = a · x + b
(2.4)
Exponential model:
fc = a · eb·x
(2.5)
Power model:
fc = a · xb,
(2.6)
where the model parameters a and b are obtained via regression, and x represents the
NDT data.
A rough outlier detection and -removal process is necessary before establishing the multi-
variate conversion model. The multivariate models will be obtained by regression of core
strength data on both RH and UPV data [17]:
Linear model:
fc = a + b · x + c · y
(2.7)
Exponential model:
fc = a · eb·x · ec·y
(2.8)
Power model:
fc = a · xb · yc
(2.9)
where the model parameters a, b, and c are obtained via regression, and x and y represents
the NDT data.
In addition to the abovementioned method, there are several different approaches to derive
conversion models. The bi-objective approach differs from the others by considering the
variation of compressive strength. It considers the average of the measured strength and
its standard deviation (sd). In this method, only univariate data is examined, and the
model is described by following two equations:
a =σ(fc,m)
σx
and
b = fc,m −a · x,
(2.10)
where σx is the standard deviation of the NDT data.
The accuracy of the conversion model is assessed via the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
between the estimated strength calculated based on the conversion model, fc,est, and the
DT data. It is calculated according to
RMSE =
√∑N
i=1(fc,est −fc,m)2
N
,
(2.11)
where N is the number of datasets/the number of core samples.
Another quantity,
RMSEpred, is introduced, which represents the conversion model’s ability to predict core
strengths from NDT data only.
This is accomplished through a leave-one-out cross-
validation analysis, where a model is obtained by regression by including all data except
one data point. The performance of the model is then evaluated at the data point that
was left out. Doing this iteratively makes it possible to choose the conversion model that
is best at predicting the missing strength data.
RMSEpred is always larger than RMSE, so it is important to consider both to obtain a
clearer picture of how well the model is performing [17].
Reuse of Structural Concrete
9
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.5.
Estimation of Quality Level
2.5
Estimation of Quality Level
The first step in the core strength assessment is to define the Estimation of Quality Level
(EQL) level [17]. This quantifies the certainty of the estimated concrete strength for the
specific TR by linking uncertainties in NDT data with a specific certainty level. To achieve
the highest possible accuracy of concrete strength, it is important to have an adequate
number of core samples; extraction of more cores leads to greater precision, but as they
are relatively expensive to acquire it is important to limit the number of extracted cores.
Concrete strength is divided into three levels: EQL1, EQL2, and EQL3, each represent-
ing the precision of the concrete strength estimation. Table 2.2 outlines the anticipated
target tolerance interval, which defines the expected uncertainty range for each estimated
quantity, accompanied by a confidence level denoted as (1−α). The α value serves as an
indicator of the risk level, representing the probability that the true value falls outside the
tolerance interval. Notably, the RMSE, is always positive, leading to a one-sided tolerance
interval. The uncertainty range for sd and RMSE can be expressed in either relative or
absolute terms [17].
Estimated Property
EQL1
EQL2
EQL3
Mean Value of Local Strength
±15%
±15%
±10%
Local Strength
Relative
Not adressed
±50%
±30%
Absolute
± 4 MPa
± 2MPa
Error on Local Strength
Relative
20%
15%
Absolute
6 MPa
4.5MPa
Table 2.2: Estimation Quality Levels.
2.6
Test Result Precision
The evaluation of Test Result Precision (TRP) plays an important part in ensuring the
accuracy and dependability of strength assessments. The variability in NDT data directly
influences strength estimates [23]. The TRP assessment is performed by repeating the
NDTs three to five times at two to five TLs. Subsequently, sd and CV are calculated
based on these repeated measurements [17].
It is emphasized that sd and CV are calculated from the repeated NDT tests and not
the initial measurements. This distinction is essential as it ensures that the evaluation of
TRP is anchored in the consistency and reproducibility of the overall test outcomes. TRP
classification relies on the sd or CV derived from the repeated NDT tests, assigning them
to one of three defined TRP categories shown in Table 2.3 [17].
TRP1
High precision
TRP2
Medium precision
TRP3
Poor precision
RH
CVrep ≥3%
3% <CVrep ≥7%
CVrep >7%
sdrep ≥1
1 <sdrep ≥3
sdrep >3
UPV
CVrep ≥1%
1% <CVrep ≥3
CVrep >3%
sdrep ≥50 m/s
50 m/s <sdrep ≥125 m/s
sdrep >125 m/s
Table 2.3: Test Result Precision.
In the broader context of the strength investigation, the TRP assessment is an essential
step in determining the appropriate number of core samples required to obtain reliable
10
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.7.
External Factors Affecting Concrete Strength
core strength estimates [17].
2.7
External Factors Affecting Concrete Strength
Concrete comes in various strength classes, determined by material choices, composition,
and construction practices. When concrete elements are exposed to external factors, con-
crete must have a higher strength to prevent damage. The primary external degradation
mechanisms include chloride ingress, frost/thaw effects, and carbonation. These degrada-
tion mechanisms require the presence of water and the transport of water and/or aggressive
substances into the concrete [24] This highlights the importance of awareness regarding
specific considerations when utilizing or testing exterior concrete structures, given the
multitude of influences that come into play in outdoor environments.
2.7.1
Chloride Ingress
Strength and durability are crucial properties in hardened concrete, and chloride is one
of the chemical substances that affect these properties negatively. It typically comes from
the environment in the form of de-icing salts, seawater, etc. and severe corrosion may take
place if present in too high concentrations. [25] [24].
Chloride is, however, also naturally present in small quantities in the components of con-
crete, including cement, sand, and water, but it must be limited according to DS/EN
197-1 standards [26].
Most chlorides in concrete come from salts that have infiltrated
the concrete after it has cured, implying that structures located close to seawater or ar-
eas where de-icing salts are used in the winter will be exposed to a higher degree. As
such concrete elements must be carefully designed to avoid chloride ingress, concrete is
categorized into three categories of exposure: Moderate, aggressive, or highly aggressive
environmental exposure. Suitable requirements will be imposed on the water-to-cement
ratio, compressive strength, potential air entrainment, and aggregate quality. Failure to
adhere to these requirements poses a risk of chloride ingress from the surroundings [24].
There are different ways that chloride can ingress into concrete, but similar for all cases
is that the transport rate is crucial in determining the extent of its impact over time.
The chloride ingress is divided into an initiation phase and a propagation phase. The
chloride does not affect the concrete strength or durability during the initiation phase, but
the load-bearing capacity severely deteriorates as the propagation phase begins and the
reinforcement is exposed to a critical amount of chloride [27], see Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Chloride ingress
Corrosion induced by chloride can lead to various consequences, including the formation of
hardening cracks, localized scaling, or delamination, and the cross-section of the reinforce-
ment may be reduced in cases of localized corrosion, thereby impacting its load-bearing
Reuse of Structural Concrete
11
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.7.
External Factors Affecting Concrete Strength
capacity. Chloride transportation is influenced by various factors, including concrete prop-
erties, moisture content, and the concentration of chloride in the environment [28]. The
transport can occur in four different ways: Via diffusion, capillary suction, permeation,
and migration mechanisms.
Diffusion: Chlorides penetrate water-filled pores in the hydrated cement paste when the
concrete surface comes into contact with a chloride-containing solution. This is also ex-
pressed by Fick’s second law [29], see Equation (2.12).
Capillary suction: Liquid is drawn into holes or cracks in the concrete due to a lower
pressure present in these voids.
Permeation: This involves the penetration of liquid due to a pressure difference. When
water penetrates saturated concrete under pressure, the flow through the pores is defined
by Darcy’s law.
Migration: Chloride can be transported through migration, occurring only in the vicinity
of electric fields. It is carried by charged ions present in the pore solution [30].
A characteristic of chloride ingress is that the concentration is high near the surface and
decreases deeper into the element [27].
There are different methods for determining the chloride content in concrete, which can be
categorized into laboratory and non-destructive in-situ techniques. Laboratory techniques
analyze concrete samples or core drillings, whereof the most commonly used technique is
the leaching method: Here, chloride is extracted from the powdered concrete samples, and
the chloride content is determined using various titration methods. The chloride content
depends on several factors such as the fineness of the concrete powder, powder-to-water
ratio, contact time, and temperature. Other methods for determining chloride content
include extracting pore water under pressure and X-ray fluorescence, among others [31].
Non-destructive in-situ techniques cover methods such as electrical resistivity [32], fiber
optic sensors [33], and chronopotentiometry [34].
Furthermore, there are also methods for estimating the chloride diffusion coefficient rate,
of which the application of Fick’s second law is the most used one [35] [36] [29]. It is given
by the following equation:
∂c
∂t = D( ∂2c
∂x2 ),
(2.12)
where D is the diffusion coefficient, c is the concentration, x is the spatial coordinate, and
t is the time.
2.7.2
Freeze/Thaw Cycles
There are two types of frost damage: Internal cracking due to freeze/thaw cycles and
surface scaling. Water is a prerequisite for both cases and proportional to the risk of frost
damage.
Internal Cracking
Internal damage has a considerable impact on the strength, load-bearing capacity, thermal
conductivity, and lifespan of the concrete. Frost damage may occur if the pores of the
concrete become saturated with water and subsequently freeze: Water expands by approx-
imately 9% when freezing to ice, which causes a pressure that no concrete can withstand,
leading to the formation of cracks [37]. In Denmark, there are periods of heavy rain every
12
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.7.
External Factors Affecting Concrete Strength
year followed by periods of temperatures below 0°C [38].
This combination can cause
considerable damage to concrete elements.
Different theories have been proposed to explain the degradation of concrete due to frost.
The theory by Powers [39] is the most well-known and considers three different types of
pores: The finest of these are called gel pores, which are located within the dense packing
of cement hydration products. Water in these pores rarely freezes under normal freezing
conditions for concrete. The second pore type is called capillary pores, which are larger
and come from the original water in the fresh concrete mix. Water in these pores freezes
under normal freezing conditions. The third and largest type is air bubbles, which are
assumed to be empty. Only capillary and gel pores are filled with water according to
Powers. During freezing, ice can only form in capillary pores of a certain size. When ice
forms in a capillary pore, it expands more than the pore space can accommodate, and
ice is forced out through the nearby gel pores, moving either to the empty air bubbles or
the surface of the concrete, see Figure 2.7. Pressure develops on the surfaces during this
process where the water is moving, and if the pressure becomes too high it can damage
the concrete [40] [41]. Freeze-thaw damage is not expected to occur when the degree of
saturation is less than 91.7% according to Powers’ theory. In reality, however, damage still
occurs to concrete at saturation rates of 70-80% [42].
Figure 2.7: Pore expansion.
Freeze/thaw cycles are typically repeated multiple times during winter. The empty spaces
formed within the concrete due to the expansion of frozen water expand further within
each cycle, implying that the damage to the concrete increases within every freeze-thaw
cycle [43] [24]. However, designing the concrete with a system of entrained air voids can
provide the space for water to expand without destroying the concrete, thus preventing the
risk of frost damage [40] [39]. Studies of concrete structures indicate that to achieve a high
concrete lifespan, the incorporated air void volume should be around 25% of the cement
paste. The specific surface area of the air bubble system should be above 25 mm2/mm3,
and the spacing factor between air bubbles should be below approximately 0.16 mm [40].
Surface Scaling
In addition to causing internal cracking, freeze/thaw cycles of the concrete in the presence
of de-icing salt can lead to surface scaling, effectively meaning that the surface is being
flaked off. The surface of concrete elements is often composed of hydrated cement paste,
which is more porous than the concrete itself, making the surface more prone to damage
thorugh multiple frost-thraw cycles [39]. Research on salt frost damage on concrete has
been ongoing for a long time, but while certain characteristics of such damages are widely
recognized, there is still no consensus on the actual mechanism behind the deterioration.
This lack of knowledge poses a challenge in assessing concrete quality. Two recognized
existing theories will be explained in the following [44].
The first theory describes how flakes of cement paste crack from the surface to a depth
of around 1 mm when a solution freezes in contact with concrete [45]. This phenomenon
is referred to as salt frost scaling. Valenza and Scherer argue that salt frost scaling is
Reuse of Structural Concrete
13
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2: Theory
2.7.
External Factors Affecting Concrete Strength
associated with the physical properties of ice, as ice has a considerably higher thermal
expansion coefficient, αi ≈50 ppm/°C, compared to concrete, αc ≈10 ppm/°C. This
results in the development of tensile stresses in the ice when the temperature drops below
the melting point. If the ice cracks, the crack may penetrate the surface of the concrete
and cause damage.
The second theory is provided by Lindmark, but is based on Powers and Helmuth’s theory
that the deterioration is due to the growth of ice crystals.
The theory describes that
ice crystals form beneath the surface when concrete is subjected to salt-frost damage.
Such crystals create a vacuum that attracts the external liquid phase, for example, a salt
solution into the concrete. On the surface of the concrete, the growth of micro ice bodies is
accelerated, resulting in the destruction of the concrete surface, known as salt-frost scaling
[46].
2.7.3
Carbonation
Carbonation describes the chemical process between carbon dioxide (CO2) and calcium
hydroxide (Ca(OH2)) to produce calium carbonate (CaCO3) in the pore solution of con-
crete. The formation of calium carbontae is the result of the following simplified reaction
equation:
Ca(OH2) + CO2 →CaCO3+ H2O
(2.13)
Carbonation occurs on the surface of concrete exposed to CO2, and the depth of carbon-
ation increases over time if the concrete surface is sufficiently permeable. For carbonation
to occur, the concrete needs to be neither completely dry nor completely wet, and the rate
of carbonation is highest around a relative humidity of 40-70%. This process alters the pH
value in the concrete from 12-14 to 7-9, changing the pore solution from strongly alkaline
to nearly neutral. Such shift in pH can lead to corrosion of the reinforcement [47] [48].
Corrosion can generate strong forces that may exceed the tensile strength of the concrete,
resulting in cracks and spalling.
In the context of NDT with RH, carbonation can also have a large impact, as the movement
of carbon dioxide can alter the concrete structure. Concrete becomes less porous when
carbonation occurs inside, because CaCO3 occupies more space than Ca(OH2), and as a
result the hardness and strength of the concrete increase [49]. The hardness of concrete
on the surface is typically higher than in the inner region, and the difference in hardness
increases with the degree of carbonation. Consequently, the strength of concrete might be
overestimated. Data collected from in-situ buildings aged 1 to 40 years also show that the
hardness measurements in buildings are 4 times higher than in laboratory-tested samples
of the same concrete class. This is because the concrete in buildings is often more exposed
to prolonged carbonation [50].
These effects of carbonation have initiated research into correction procedures for RH data,
and S. Katalin et al. have developed a model using Fick’s law of diffusion to describe the
influence of concrete’s carbonation depth on the rebound index [51].
14
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:24==
3
Method and Equipment
The following sections will go through details about the equipment and methods used in
the field work.
3.1
Field Study
The fieldwork aims to investigate the strength of the load-bearing concrete columns in
Sundkrogsgade 30 in Nordhavn, Copenhagen via NDTs and DTs. The scope of the work
includes five interior and ten exterior columns.
3.1.1
Equipment
The equipment used to conduct the tests described in Section 2.3 is described in Table 3.1.
Item name
Description
Quantity
1 RH
Silver Schmidt OS8200
A device to measure the elastic
properties or strength of concrete
1
Batteries
AAA
3 pcs.
2 UPV
Pundit (+) UPV instrument
A device to measure the
compressive strength
1
Couplant
Ensures a smooth testing
surface
1 l
Calibration rod
Calibration of the UPV
instrument
1
Rechargeable batteries
and battery charger with
a USB cable
Power to the instrument
1
3 Core extraction and compression test
Extension cord, 20 m
Electricity
1
Hose, 50 m
Water
1
Core drill machine
Machine for concrete coring,
100 mm
1
Compression machine
Determination of compressive
strengths,
FRA037Toni Technik300Ton
1
Ruler and angle meter
Measuring diameter, height, and to
ensure right angles of cores
2
4 Others
Scraping tool
Ensures a smooth surface for the
RH tests and remove paint
1
Luxi paint
Paint removal
0.5 l
Concrete scanner
Mapping the reinforcement grid
1
Marker
Drawing the reinforcement grid
2
Tape measure
Measurement of different lengths
at the construction site
1
Table 3.1: Test equipment for conducting the NDTs and DTs.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
15
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
3.1.2
Method
The strength estimation process is divided into six phases, which are briefly described in
Figure 3.1, and will be described in greater detail in the following.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the strength investigation process.
Building Analysis
Before carrying out the NDTs, it was necessary to gather relevant information about
the investigated building. Sundkrogsgade 30 houses the former auction house Bruun Ras-
mussen, shown in Figure 3.2. The building is designed by Kim Utzon and has been hosting
art, design, and jewelry sales since 2003. Bruun Rasmussen relocated in September 2023,
and the building was scheduled for demolition at the end of October same year. Due to
the building’s relatively recent construction and its considerable remaining lifespan, the
objective of the demolition is to optimize the reuse of its components.
According to information from the demolition company Tsherning; stairs, window sections,
and floors are expected to find new lives in a different construction. However, having not
reached the end of their lifespan yet, the concrete columns in the building will undergo
NDTs to determine the potential for reuse and to assess their current strength.
16
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
Figure 3.2: The building at Sundkrogsgade 30.
A comprehensive understanding of the building at Sundkrogsgade 30 was attained through
on-site visits, documentation of the building, and a thorough examination of drawings and
records obtained from Copenhagen Municipality’s Construction Archive.
The building is an administrative building comprising four floors, housing offices, meeting
rooms, and shared facilities. It is connected to a production hall by a glass band. The
building consists of two towers with a rectangular footprint, designed as pyramids, accom-
modating functions such as stairs, elevators, and wet rooms. The load-bearing facades are
constructed with concrete sandwich panels, and the roof utilizes TT-ribbed deck elements
with an additional concrete topping. The central tower in the administration building is
constructed with a load-bearing steel framework, while the roof is made of wood. The
building’s geometry is illustrated in Figure 3.3 [52].
Figure 3.3: Building geometry for Sundkrogsgade 30.
Additionally, the primary construction materials of the building can be found in Ap-
pendix A.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
17
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
The analysis has concentrated on both exterior and interior columns. The examination
of exterior columns is particularly interesting due to their exposure to external factors as
opposed to interior columns. A general overview of the columns in the building is provided
in Table 3.2 and Table 3.3.
Exterior columns
Quantity
10[pcs]
Column length
4450 [mm]
Compressive strength
30 [MPa]
Cross-section width
200 [mm]
Cross-section depth
2-500 [mm]
Concrete type
Precast
Reinforcement
10 [mm]
Table 3.2: Properties of Exterior columns.
Interior columns
Quantity
5[pcs]
Compressive Strength
35 [MPa]
Cross-section width
480 [mm]
Cross-section depth
480 [mm]
Concrete type
Precast
Reinforcement
10 [mm]
Table 3.3: Properties of Interior columns.
Prior to conducting NDTs, a review of the building’s history was undertaken. This inves-
tigation showed that the interior columns had not been subjected to factors such as fires,
moisture, or high heat that could compromise their strength. By contrast, the exterior
columns were exposed to weather and chlorides from de-icing salt and airborne salt parti-
cles from the nearby ocean. All concrete elements were examined for damage or signs of
altered strength, indicating no signs of deteriorating strength across TLs. As the building
has primarily been used for storage and sales, it exhibits a history without substantial
deterioration or damage, highlighting the value of regular maintenance practices.
Crafted by Spæncom, the prefabricated columns are designed with an 8-bar reinforcement
method for optimized strength as depicted in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Placement of reinforcement in an interior column.
18
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
EQL
The main goal of the field study was to achieve EQL3, which makes it possible to estimate
the concrete strength with a certainty of ±10%. However, it was unsure whether this
quality level could be maintained, as it depends on the extent of uncertainty in the NDT
measurements: If high, there may be a need to downgrade to a lower EQL level. EQL
levels and their respective certainty intervals are found in Table 2.2.
NDT Data
With the relevant information and knowledge obtained about the investigated building,
the subsequent step in the process was to outline the plan for the NDT investigation. The
ID had been determined to be the entire building, and the two TRs are the interior and
exterior columns.
The building comprises ten exterior columns with a height of 4.5m, and TLs are positioned
on all ten columns. The TLs are placed at three varying heights: bottom [30-60 cm], middle
[140-170 cm], and top [210-240 cm]. This approach is adopted to test multiple TLs on
each column and thereby obtain more representative data.
Within the building, direct access was limited to five interior columns spread across two
stories. The remaining columns were either enclosed by walls or access limited by wooden
cabinets. Five TLs were placed in the middle of the interior columns. The reason for
not testing at multiple heights indoors is that access to the building was limited to a
defined time interval, and having multiple TLs on the exterior columns was prioritized.
An overview of the TLs is found in Figure 3.5 and Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.5: Plan drawing with marked TLs of Sundkrogsgade 30 at ground floor.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
19
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
Figure 3.6: Section drawing with marked TLs of Sundkrogsgade 30.
RH test
A concrete scanner was employed to mark the reinforcement pattern. To ensure direct
contact with the RH and the concrete, any existing paint on the column was removed to
create a smooth surface for the RH testing, see Figure 3.7. Specific markings were made
on the concrete to indicate where the RH should be applied to ensure the correct distance
between points and the reinforcement. Overall, the RH tests were conducted in accordance
with DS/EN 12504-2 2021 [53].
Figure 3.7: RH measurements on both TRs.
UPV test
Direct UPV measurements were made according to the standard DS/EN 12504-4 2021
[54]. Prior to the UPV measurements, the transit time was assessed on a reference bar to
ensure accurate calibration.
Plenty of coupling gel was used on each TL to ensure an adequate coupling between
the concrete and the transducer, ensuring precise measurements, see Figure 3.8a. It was
possible to do direct tests on all TLs, see Figure 3.8b.
20
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
(a) Markings for UPV measurements.
(b) Direct UPV measurements.
Figure 3.8: UPV measurements.
Measurements were iterated until stable readings were achieved, and five measurements
were documented subsequently. The minimum stable transit time was then utilized to
calculate the velocity.
Core data
TRP plays a crucial role in determining EQL, and the investigation must be categorized
as having medium or high TRP, with intervals defined in Table 2.3 to achieve EQL3. The
TRP was examined by performing the same NDT on chosen TLs, which were selected to
cover the entire TR. The sd and CV were calculated based on TRP data.
The recommended number of cores is based on TRP precision and two key assumptions
regarding the concrete: the mean strength and the CV of the concrete strength. Since
values for this were not disclosed at this point, it was assumed that the mean strength
would be the design strength of 30 MPa for exterior columns and 35 MPa for interior
columns. The CV was expected to be relatively low (less than 10) given the narrow range
of NDT data.
The decision on the number of core samples to be extracted was made after the TRP
examination was conducted, where the lowest TRP level defines the precision. The rec-
ommended number of cores needed can then be deduced from Figure 3.9 [17].
Figure 3.9: Required number of cores for EQL3 with TRP2 data.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
21
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
According to the assumptions on strength and CV for the two TRs, it was determined
that eight core samples should be extracted from the exterior columns and nine from the
interior columns to obtain EQL3 with a medium precision level (TRP2). Therefore, the
interior columns were downgraded to EQL2, which complies with the required five core
samples as indicated in Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Required number of cores for EQL2 with TRP2 data.
Core Extraction and Compression Test
When selecting locations for core extraction, guidelines ensuring coverage across the entire
TR were followed while maintaining a sufficient distance from joints, corners, and steel
reinforcement.
Although the building was scheduled for demolition, there was an intention to preserve
the floors. Consequently, measures were implemented to reduce the risk of damage to the
floor, including the adoption of solutions to minimize water and sludge generated during
wet saw drilling. A plastic cover was employed to create a channel directing present water
into a wheelbarrow and buckets as illustrated in Figure 3.11. Approximately 20l of water
is used for every core.
Figure 3.11: Core extraction on exterior columns.
22
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
The core extractions and compression tests were conducted according to the standard
DS/EN 12504 2019 [21]. All cores were extracted from the middle TL, approximately 1.5
meters above the ground. The cores obtained measured 100 mm in diameter and 250 mm
in length. An example of the cores is shown in Figure 3.12.
Figure 3.12: A core sample.
The core samples were stored at DTU’s workshop and cut to the selected length of 200
mm as illustrated in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: Cutting of core samples in DTU workshop.
Following this, UPV measurements were conducted on all cores in accordance with DS/EN
12505-4:2021 [54].
Reuse of Structural Concrete
23
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.1.
Field Study
The compression tests were then conducted according to the standard DS/EN 12504-1:2021
[21]. The surface area of the core samples was measured at 7694mm2. The compression
machine applied a force rate of 4.6 kN/s to achieve a pressure rate of 0.6 MPa/s, see
Figure 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Compression test in DTU workshop.
Conversion Model
Model parameters were determined through a regression approach. To assess the model
performance and choose the best one, RMSEpred was calculated using the leave-one-out
method. The model with the lowest RMSEpred was selected, as it was deemed the most
accurate in estimating the strength for the remaining data points where reference strength
from core samples were unavailable.
Strength Parameters
The objective of strength estimation was to predict the average strength within an ac-
ceptable certainty level, deemed credible enough to serve as a certification benchmark for
the reuse of concrete elements. The characteristic strength was calculated based on the
results from the conversion model.
24
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.2.
Chloride Content
3.2
Chloride Content
The purpose of the chloride testing was to estimate the chloride content of the exterior
concrete columns at Sundkrogsgade 30, and the equipment used is described in Table 3.4.
3.2.1
Materials
The materials used for the chloride tests are described in Table 3.4.
Item name
Description
Quantity
Chloride test
Drill
Collecting concrete powder from the columns
1
Small plastic bags
Storage of the powder from each TL
30
Precision weight
Measurement of powder
1
Distilled water
-
450 ml
Plastic bottles
Mixture of powder and distilled water
30
Dropper
Measuring and adding distilled
water to powder
1
Filter
Filtering powder from water.
New filter for each sample (TL)
30
Shaker table
Stirring the samples
1
DIONEX ICS-1100
Determination of chloride content
1
Table 3.4: Material list for chloride test
3.2.2
Method
The first step in assessing the chloride content was to extract concrete powder from each
exterior column using a concrete drill at the construction site. Extraction occurred at all
TLs within the TR to enhance sample accuracy,
The samples were subsequently brought back to the DTU laboratory, where they were
transferred to containers with the addition of 15 mL of demineralized water. The containers
were then placed on a table and shaken thoroughly overnight. The following day, the water
of the samples was forced through a pipette with a filter attached to remove the concrete
powder from the water ending up with a mineral/water mixture. The samples were then
transferred to new containers and analyzed in the Dionex ICS-1100, Figure 3.15.
Figure 3.15: Dionex ICS-1100.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
25
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3: Method and Equipment
3.2.
Chloride Content
The Dionex ICS-1100 operates through a series of steps to analyze ions in samples. The
process begins with sample injection, introducing the sample into the chromatograph for
analysis. This sample comprises various ions that require separation, which is achieved
using an ion exchange column. The stationary phase within the column contains charged
groups that interact with the ions, facilitating their separation based on charge.
During elution, a mobile phase, typically an electrolyte solution, is pumped through the
column. Ions in the sample interact with the stationary phase and are separated based
on their affinity for the charged groups. As the separated ions elute from the column,
they pass through a detection system. The Dionex ICS-1100 often employs a conductivity
detector, which measures the electrical conductivity of the eluent. This is possible because
ions conduct electricity, and the conductivity detector is sensitive to changes in ionic
concentration.
The signals from the conductivity detector are then analyzed by the system’s software.
This software processes the data and generates chromatograms representing the separation
of different ions in the sample. Ultimately, the concentrations of ions in the sample are
determined, providing insights into the composition of the analyzed substances [55].
26
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:36==
4
Results
NDTs have been conducted on two TRs: The interior- and exterior columns at Sundkrogs-
gade 30. The tests have been conducted in accordance with the standards and methods
described in Section 3.1.
4.1
Field Study: Exterior Columns
4.1.1
NDT Data
UPV and RH tests have been conducted on the selected TLs during the fieldwork, and
the results are displayed in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 with the abbreviations EXC and
b, m, and t for Exterior Column, bottom, middle, and top of the columns respectively.
The full dataset is found in Appendix B, and the chart is color-coded as follows: blue
represents columns facing north-west (NW), green represents columns facing south-east
(SE), and grey represents columns located in the extension. It should be noted that the
NDTs conducted on the columns in the extension were carried out indoors unlike the NDTs
on the other columns, which were done outside. This naturally poses a difference in water
content on the surface and temperature of the different columns.
Figure 4.1: UPV data of exterior columns with the mean (black line) of each column group.
The UPV data show that the highest average velocities are measured on columns located
NW of the building, with the highest one measuring 4.96 km/s (EXC4_t). The lowest
velocities are measured SE of the building, although the lowest velocity was measured at
4.33 km/s on EXC10_t.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
27
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
Figure 4.2: RH data of exterior columns with errorbars representing the sd, and with the
mean (black line) of each column group.
It is observed that the lowest R numbers are measured on the columns placed on the SE
side, with the lowest value being 53.9 (EXC6_b). The highest value is measured among
the columns located in the extension of the building (EXC8, EXC9, and EXC10) at 70
(EXC8_b). Furthermore, it is observed that the R number is lowest at the bottom for half
of the columns. To assess the variation in the RH results, the sd and CV were calculated
for all RH measurements. The highest CV was 8.9%, which complies with the standard.
Linear, power, and exponential regression have been applied to the RH and UPV data, and
the corresponding models are visualized in Figure 4.3 to illustrate the correlation between
the two datasets, where a triangle indicates a TL at the bottom, a square a TL in the
middle, and a circle a TL at the top of the columns.
Figure 4.3: Correlation between RH data and UPV data.
28
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
As indicated by the R2 value of ≈0.04, there is a low correlation between the two NDT
datasets. The low R2 value may be attributed to potential measurement uncertainties
within the NDTs, given that all exterior columns share the same design strength. Addi-
tionally, weather conditions and the chloride content of the concrete could contribute to
this difference, which is elaborated on in Section 5.1. Since most of the TLs deviate from
the trendlines, no outliers have been identified in Figure 4.3.
TRP Assessment
The TRP assessment for the exterior columns was conducted through three repetitions of
UPV and RH measurements, including five TLs for RH and three TLs for UPV. Multiple
RH measurements were chosen due to the higher variability observed in those readings.
Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.5 illustrate the TRP estimates from the RH and UPV measure-
ments respectively. The full TRP dataset is found in Appendix F.
Figure 4.4: TRP assessment for RH measurements.
Figure 4.5: TRP assessment for UPV measurements.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
29
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
There was a considerable variation in the measurements with RH: The lowest R number
was measured at 50, the highest at 74, and the mean was 63.9. The variation among the
individual TLs was sd of 4.21, corresponding to a CV of 6.7%, thus meeting the standard
for TRP2. For the UPV measurements, the measurements were between 4.40 km/s and
4.96 km/s. The measurements also vary when compared across TLs, but the sd and CV fall
within TRP2 within each TL. The sd and the CV are shown for each TL in Table 4.1. It is
observed that many of the TLs fall within the high-precision TRP1 range, but since some
TL fall within TRP2, representing lower precision, this influences the overall assessment
of the data.
RH
UPV
TL
Mean [-]
sdrep [-]
CVrep [%]
Mean [km/s]
sdrep [m/s]
CVrep [%]
EXC2_b
66.1
4.21
6.70
-
-
-
EXC3_m
66.2
1.83
2.73
-
-
-
EXC6_t
60.6
4.15
6.95
-
-
-
EXC7_b
58.3
4.01
6.85
-
-
-
EXC8_t
71.8
2.01
2.90
-
-
-
EXC3_b
-
-
-
4.94
49.6
1
EXC7_m
-
-
-
4.47
61.5
1
EXC8_m
-
-
-
4.63
20.8
0.4
Mean
63.3
3.24
5.23
4.68
44.0
0.94
Table 4.1: Mean, sd, and CV for TRP assessment using RH (left) and UPV (right) data.
4.1.2
Core Data
From the NDTs, it was discovered that the TRP level falls within TRP2, thus it is used
for selecting the number of cores.
UPV tests were performed on all core samples before the compression tests were conducted.
The UPV results can be seen in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: UPV data from core samples.
There is a large variation in the UPV measurements with a minimum and maximum
velocity of 4.47 km/s and 4.88 km/s, and an average velocity of 4.68 km/s. The dataset
has a sd of 0.13 km/s, corresponding to a CV of 3%. The column chart is color-coded as
30
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
in Section 4.1.1 with blue representing columns facing NW, green representing columns
facing SE, and grey representing columns located in the extension.
Compressive strength testing was conducted in accordance with DS/EN 12390-3:2019 [21].
All failures were acceptable, see Figure 4.7 for an example. The rest of the failures can be
found in Appendix H.
Figure 4.7: Acceptable failure EXC2.
The results of the compression tests are shown in Figure 4.8. The compressive strength
data can be found in Appendix I.
Figure 4.8: Measured compressive strength on core samples.
There is a considerable variation in the measured strengths, but they all have a much
higher strength level than the original design strength of 30 MPa for exterior columns.
The strength of these columns ranges from 37 MPa to 71 MPa, with the strength of EXC5
being notably higher (71 MPa) than the other TLs. It can also be seen that the SE-facing
columns demonstrate less strength in comparison to the other TLs, while the strongest
columns are those facing NW.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
31
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
4.1.3
Develop and Access Conversion Model
NDT data has been gathered from one TR comprising a total of 30 TL. Additionally, the
core strength has been examined through compression tests, resulting in a total of seven
core samples. There is a difference between the number of NDTs and core strengths con-
ducted, whereas the application of a conversion model opens the possibility of extracting
further insights into the concrete strength of TL where direct core testing has not been
performed. The script for obtaining the conversion models is found in Appendix J.
The relationship between measured strength and NDTs establishes the foundation for the
conversion model. Through an examination of univariate data, the correlations between
variables were identified, enabling insights into the connections between the DT and NDT.
This method serves to obtain an understanding of the relationship between the data,
revealing correlations and identifying outliers that may adversely impact the results. To
do this, linear, power, and exponential regression of the concrete strength, Fc,m, on the
NDT data was performed. Figure 4.9 shows the concrete strength versus the UPV data
along with the estimated models, which all have an R2 value larger than 0.7, suggesting a
decent fit.
Figure 4.9: Correlation between UPV data and measured strengths
On the other hand, the results for the correlation between the RH and concrete strengths
are less convincing with R2 values around 0.1, indicating a poor fit of the model to the
data, see Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Correlation between RH data and measured strengths.
32
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
Especially one point stands out from the others according to all of the models: EXC5. The
measured core strength of EXC5 is 71.8 MPa stands out and diverges by 19.8 MPa from
the mean strength (52 MPa). Additionally, the R number is considerably low compared to
the high measured strength, and the UPV measurement stands out as the one deviating
the most from all models.
To achieve more reliable models and improve data quality, it was decided to exclude data
from column EXC5, as it was considered an outlier distorting the normal distribution.
Regression was performed once again after removing this data point, and the results can
be seen in Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12.
Figure 4.11: Correlation between UPV data and reference strength for corrected for outlier.
This results in a stronger correlation and a much better fit in terms of a R2 value of
≈0.96. The conversion models between the RH data and measured concrete strengths also
improve slightly with an R2 value of 0.4. The fit is, however, still not convincing.
Figure 4.12: Correlation between RH data and reference strength corrected for outlier.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
33
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
Following the examination of conversion models on univariate data, a script in MatLab
is utilized to obtain conversion models of multivariate data to describe the correlation of
the measured strength and both datasets simultaneously. Strength estimates have been
calculated for all TLs where a measured strength was available. As previously, a linear,
power, and exponential conversion model is obtained. Figure 4.13 shows the true strength
versus the estimated strength according to the different multi-variate conversion models.
Additionally, the coefficients of the conversion models are shown in the legend along with
the R2 and RMSE values.
Figure 4.13: Measured strengths versus estimated strengths according to a linear (cross),
power (circle), and exponential (star) multivariate conversion model.
First of all, the models seem to capture the relationship between the measured strengths
and NDT data quite well with all models having a R2 value larger than 0.96. Further
examination of the coefficients of the multi-variate data compared to the coefficients of
the univariate models shows two things: The coefficients regarding the UPV data is almost
similar for the uni- and multivariate models, and the coefficients regarding the RH data
are close to zero, indicating that the model does not utilize the information from the RH
data. The model coefficients for all models are shown in Table 4.2.
Conversion model
Linear
Power
Exponential
Uni variate (UPV)
-205.76+55.14·v
0.01·v5.34
0.23·ev·1.16
Multivariate
−204+53.78·v+0.08·R
0.01·v5.04·R0.29
0.23·ev·1.087·eR·0.005
Table 4.2: Comparison of model coefficients.
Furthermore, the findings indicate a high degree of similarity among the three conversion
models, as the data points are distributed in similar locations.
34
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
Following this, the leave-one-out method was used to evaluate the RMSEpred for the various
models, as illustrated in Table 4.3. The leave-one-out script are found in Appendix K.
Conversion model
Linear
Power
Exponential
RMSEpred [MPa]
2.58
2.42
2.39
Table 4.3: RMSEpred for the three conversion models.
The table shows that the exponential conversion model has the best fit to the data, and
this model will thus be used to estimate the strengths in the following. The exponential
conversion model is defined as:
fc,est = 0.023 · ev·1.087eR·0.005
(4.1)
Reuse of Structural Concrete
35
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
4.1.4
Calculation of Strength Parameters
Based on the conversion model, the estimated strengths for the entire TR are calculated.
The results are presented in Table 4.4 with the color codes being similar to previously; blue
represents columns facing NW, green represents columns facing SE, and grey represents
columns located in the extension.
TL
R [-]
v [km/s]
fc,m [MPa]
fc,est [MPa]
EXC1_b
61.5
4.762
55.13
EXC1_m
62.8
4.811
58.53
EXC1_t
63.3
4.789
57.29
EXC2_b
64.9
4.912
66.01
EXC2_m
63.1
4.817
59.48
EXC2_t
64
4.872
62.92
EXC3_b
66
4.93
67.69
EXC3_m
65.4
4.762
58.25
EXC3_t
65.1
4.714
53.28
EXC4_b
61.7
4.682
50.59
EXC4_m
65
4.698
50.74
EXC4_t
63.7
4.959
69.05
EXC5_b
63.2
4.784
56.95
EXC5_t
61.5
4.735
53.54
EXC6_b
53.9
4.444
37.57
EXC6_m
58.5
4.421
38.67
EXC6_t
56.9
4.444
38.13
EXC7_b
58.8
4.421
37.55
EXC7_m
57.3
4.426
37.82
EXC7_t
58.6
4.473
39.69
EXC8_b
70
4.709
54.31
EXC8_m
68.5
4.636
52.48
EXC8_t
69.8
4.641
50.39
EXC9_b
65.7
4.575
45.95
EXC9_m
67.4
4.58
45.17
EXC9_t
68.7
4.565
46.14
EXC10_b
66.8
4.361
36.61
EXC10_m
67.5
4.37
37.1
EXC10_t
68.5
4.334
35.86
Mean
63.7
4.65
49.7
sd
4.19
0.2
9.8
CV [%]
0.07
0.04
19.7
0.85 Mean
42.2
Characteristic strength
24
Table 4.4: Calculations of strength parameters using an exponential multi-variate conver-
sion model.
36
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
The previously unknown parameters CV and mean strength are now known, and it is
therefore now possible to make a new assessment of recommended cores. As the CV and
mean strength are much higher than initially assumed (≈20% and 50 MPa), the previous
eight core samples will not be sufficient to meet EQL3 with TRP2 data. Instead, 14 cores
would be required and therefore it is necessary to downgrade to EQL2, see Figure 3.10.
As the EQL2 level introduces an uncertainty of ±15%, the mean strength was chosen to
be the lower limit of the certainty interval, see Table 2.2. The characteristic strength is
calculated from Equation (2.1), where κ is estimated to 2.19 from the number of TLs via
Table 2.1. The characteristic strength was then calculated to 24.0 MPa. It is noted that
the characteristic strength is considerably lower than the original design strength and the
measured strengths. Furthermore, it is discovered that the NW-facing columns exhibit the
highest estimated strength with a mean of 58 MPa. Conversely, the SE-facing columns
display the lowest strength, averaging 38 MPa.
Possible reasons for this discrepancy
include effects from weather and chloride content in the concrete, which are explored in
more detail in Section 5.1.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
37
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
4.1.5
Chloride Content
By examining the theory on chloride impact on concrete, it became clear that there might
be a correlation between the concrete strength and its chloride content. The anticipation
was that increased strength would correspond to a lower chloride content, taking into
account the permeation of chloride into the concrete. In this context, concrete powder
samples were taken on Sundkrogsgade 30 at each TL. An overview of the chloride content
for each TL can be seen in Table 4.5.
Column
Concrete powder [g]
Chloride content [mg/L]
Chloride content [%]
EXC1
Top
Mid
Bot
0.68
0.78
0.30
7.0
6.8
7.0
1.03
0.87
2.33
EXC2
Top
Mid
Bot
0.26
0.30
0.63
5.6
6.4
6.4
2.14
2.12
1.01
EXC3
Top
Mid
Bot
0.37
0.54
0.52
5.3
5.9
6.0
1.45
1.08
1.15
EXC4
Top
Mid
Bot
0.65
1.01
1.01
6.2
8.1
5.4
0.95
0.81
0.53
EXC5
Top
Mid
Bot
0.83
0.62
0.98
8.6
9.2
15.6
1.03
1.48
1.59
EXC6
Top
Mid
Bot
0.96
1.08
0.61
7.0
7.4
6.4
0.73
0.69
1.05
EXC7
Top
Mid
Bot
0.52
0.74
0.42
6.9
1.1
8.3
1.33
1.48
1.97
EXC8
Top
Mid
Bot
0.19
0.61
0.41
5.4
5.3
5.7
2.86
0.87
1.40
EXC9
Top
Mid
Bot
0.44
0.45
0.85
6.1
5.3
5.6
1.39
1.18
0.66
EXC10
Top
Mid
Bot
0.46
0.67
0.79
6.5
7.0
5.7
1.42
1.04
0.72
Table 4.5: Chloride content on all TLs.
It can be seen that the range of the chloride content varies a lot between TLs, also even
within the same column. It is observed that the highest chloride content is almost 3%,
and the lowest content is below 1%. A higher chloride concentration is observed on the
top of the column for six of the columns.
A linear, exponential, and power model obtained by regression is displayed in Figure 4.14
to show the correlation between concrete strength and chloride content. The low R2 value
of 0.02 quantifies what is easily observed: None of the models fit the data particularly well,
38
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4: Results
4.1.
Field Study: Exterior Columns
indicating that there is no immediate correlation between chloride content and concrete
strength.
Figure 4.14: Correlation between chloride and strength.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
39
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
4.2
Field Study: Interior Colums
4.2.1
NDT Data
The UPV data and RH data for the interior columns are shown in Figure 4.15 with light
orange representing the ground floor and dark orange representing the 1st floor.
This
color-code will be used during the rest of the section. The full dataset can be found in
Appendix C.
(a) UPV data of interior columns.
(b) RH data from interior columns.
Figure 4.15: Interior column NDT data,
The recorded velocities range from 4.38 km/s to 4.53 km/s. Notably, the lowest velocities
were observed on the 1st floor while the highest values were recorded on the ground floor.
From the RH data, the 1st floor showed the highest R numbers, with the highest value
being 70.2. The lowest R number was measured at 62.5 on the ground floor. The variation
in the RH measurements is assessed through sd and CV, which were calculated for all RH
measurements. The highest CV was found to be 6.2%, demonstrating compliance with
the standard.
As for the exterior columns, the correlation between the two NDT datasets is estimated
via linear, power, and exponential regression illustrated in Figure 4.16.
Figure 4.16: UPV data versus RH data along with a linear, exponential and power model
obtained via regression.
The negative correlation is somewhat unexpected, as the theory states the correlation
should be positive. The reason for this deviation is likely an error or the presence of large
uncertainty in either the UPV or RH measurements.
40
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
TRP Assessment
The TRP assessment for the interior columns was conducted through three repetitions of
UPV and RH measurements at two TLs for UPV data and three TLs for RH data. The
results from the TRP are displayed in Figure 4.17a and Figure 4.17b. The TRP data can
be found in Appendix G
(a) TRP assessment for UPV measurements.
(b) TRP assessment for RH measurements.
Figure 4.17: TRP assessment.
The RH measurements vary from 61 to 75 with a mean of 68.8. The variation across
different TLs adheres to TRP2, with the highest sd being 4.45, corresponding to a CV of
6.2%.
The sd and CV are shown for each TL in Table 4.6. It can be seen that many of the TLs
fall within the high-precision TRP1 range for the interior columns. However, since some
TLs fall within TRP2, this influences the overall assessment of the data.
RH
UPV
TL
Mean [-]
sdrep [-]
CVrep [%]
Mean [km/s]
sdrep [m/s]
CVrep [%]
INC3
66.3
3.55
5.26
-
-
-
INC4
69.1
1.81
2.62
4.52
27.75
0.61
INC1.3
69.9
3.93
5.63
4.38
58.31
1
Mean
68.8
3.1
4
4.452
43
0.97
Table 4.6: Mean, sd, and CV for TRP investigation of interior columns.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
41
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
4.2.2
Core Data
From the NDTs, it was discovered that the TRs fall within TRP2, which is therefore used
for selecting the number of cores: Five.
UPV tests were performed on all core samples before the compression tests were conducted.
The UPV results can be seen in Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: UPV data from core samples.
The data showed that the sd is considerably lower than that of the exterior columns: 0.05
km/s, equivalent to a CV of 1%.
Compressive strength testing was conducted in the same way as for the exterior columns.
All failures were once again acceptable, with an example shown in Figure 4.19.
Figure 4.19: Acceptable failure of INTC1.1.
42
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
The results of the compression tests are shown in Figure 4.20, and the compression test
data is found in Appendix I.
Figure 4.20: Measured compressive strength on core samples for interior columns.
The interior columns measured a considerably higher compressive strength compared to
the original design strength of 35 MPa, ranging from 39 MPa to 59.5 MPa.
The two
strongest columns, INTC1 and INTC4, were from the ground floor.
4.2.3
Develop and Access Conversion Model
The five core samples were taken from all TLs where NDTs had been conducted. The
correlation between the measured strengths and the NDT data is estimated by linear,
power, and exponential regression between the datasets. Figure 4.21 presents the esti-
mated correlation between measured core strength and the UPV data, revealing a positive
correlation with an R2 value of ≈0.4.
Figure 4.21: Correlation between UPV data and measured strength.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
43
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
The estimated correlation between measured core strength and the RH data is shown
in Figure 4.22, suggesting an unexpected negative correlation. It was expected that an
increase in core strength would be associated with higher R numbers, as these typically
correlate with greater material hardness.
Figure 4.22: Correlation between RH data and measured strength.
Due to this unexpected, negative correlation, it was decided to not use the measurements
obtained with RH in the following analysis.
Despite the core strengths being measured through core samples at all TLs, it was decided
to estimate the strength based on two conversion models: One based on an alternative
bi-objective approach and a linear regression model.
The models are based on the dataset provided in Table 4.7.
Column
fc [MPa]
v [m/s]
INTC1
59.47
4.50
INTC3
39.09
4.49
INTC4
56.15
4.53
INTC1.1
46.97
4.38
INTC1.3
39.48
4.39
Mean
48.2
67.1
sd
8.4
2.6
Table 4.7: Identification of Model Parameters from UPV data
The conversion model obtained via the bi-objective approach is determined from Equa-
tion (2.10) and is shown below:
fc,est = 139.1 · v −572.1
(4.2)
44
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
Both the linear regression model with univariate data and the model obtained from the
bi-objective approach is shown in Figure 4.23. It is noted that the bi-objective conversion
model deviates from the linear regression model with a steeper slope.
Figure 4.23: Measured strength versus UPV measurements along with a linear regression
(black) and bi-objective (orange) conversion model.
By using the leave-one-out method, the calculated RMSEpred for the bi-objective approach
is 10.5 MPa and 6.7 MPa for the linear regression. The Matlab script can be found in
Appendix L
4.2.4
Calculation of Strength Parameters
The two conversion models were then used to calculate the estimated strengths compared
to the measured strengths presented in Table 4.8.
Column
fc,m
fc,est,bio [MPa]
fc,est,lin [MPa]
INTC1
59.5
54.2
51.8
INTC3
39.1
51.0
50.4
INTC4
56.2
58.4
54.3
INTC1.1
47.0
37.7
41.9
INTC1.3
39.5
38.9
42.7
Mean
48.2
48.2
48.2
CV [%]
17
19
12
0.85 mean
40.1
40.1
40.1
RMSEpred [MPa]
-
10.5
6.7
Char. strength
10.9
8.9
19.5
Table 4.8: Calculations of strength parameters.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
45
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
Figure 4.24 shows the true strength versus the estimated strength according to both con-
version models.
Figure 4.24: Measured strengths versus estimated strengths according to a linear (black),
and bi-objective (orange) conversion model. The gray line represents a perfect conversion
model.
The correlation between the measured strengths and the predicted strengths by the two
conversion models is not very convincing with an R2 value of 0.36 for both models.
The characteristic strength was calculated via Equation (2.1), where the mean value is
found from the univariate and bi-objective data. The EQL2 level entails a certainty of
±15%, sd, and CV are calculated for the estimated strengths, see Table 4.8. κ is found
from Table 2.1 as 4.29. The characteristic strength is calculated to be 8.9 MPa with the
bi-objective model, and 19.5 MPa with the uni-variate linear model, and 10.9 MPa with
the measured core strength.
It is observed that there is a larger sd and CV associated with using the bi-objective
approach and core strengths, resulting in a lower characteristic strength. All characteristic
strengths are considerably lower than the design strength of 35 MPa and the measured
strengths, which is due to the small number of samples and high CV.
4.2.5
Economic Analysis
One of the challenges of using recycled load-bearing concrete elements is the financial risk
for the building owner. Reused structural elements are not a commonly adopted solution
today, leading to considerable uncertainty regarding the associated costs. Building owners
most often make the final decisions and are generally unwilling to pay an extra cost for
materials; however, this may change if the materials are more sustainable or have any
marketing value. The major challenge is that it requires sorting, processing, handling, and
storage when materials need to be reused, all while requiring necessary documentation of
the quality. This, in turn, contributes to the overall cost [56].
The economic analysis aims to examine the economic impacts of two established scenarios
based on the interior columns at Sundkrogsgade 30, considering their respective life cycle
costs. As the pricing process for the reuse of load-bearing concrete elements is rather
new, there have been made numerous estimations and assumptions, including work hours
associated with the NDTs. Furthermore, it is assumed that the concrete elements must
46
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
be reused in the new building at Sundkrogsgade 30. The reason for this is the current
logistical challenge in storing larger reused concrete elements, which is elaborated on in
Section 5.3.
Scenario 1 - Regular demolition: In the first scenario, the existing concrete columns are
demolished and replaced with new concrete elements.
Figure 4.25: Regular demolition.
Scenario 2 Selective demolition: In the second scenario, the concrete columns have been
tested as described in Section 3.1. Subsequently, a selective demolition by the demolition
company Tscherning has been carried out, with the columns being preserved.
Figure 4.26: Selective demolition.
Operating and maintenance costs are not included in the calculations since it is assumed
that concrete columns do not require ongoing operation or maintenance. The construction
costs for setting up new concrete columns and reused columns is assumed to be the same.
The prices for demolition and selective demolition have been determined in collaboration
with Tscherning at Sundkrogsagde 30. The prices for the new concrete columns are ob-
tained from Spæncom, while the prices for concrete disposal are obtained from RGS Nordic.
The costs for NDTs and DTs are calculated based on own experiences, desk research, and
guidance from DiamantXperten.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
47
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
Concrete Disposal [DKK]
If concrete elements are not directly reused, it is necessary to sort the waste in accordance
with the Ministry of the Environment’s instructions. Concrete must be managed in a way
that minimizes environmental damage to conserve resources [57]. The demolishers can
ensure proper disposal by delivering the concrete to RGS Nordic. The cost for sorting
one ton of concrete is DKK 124 [58]. At Sundkrogsgade 30, there are five columns with
dimensions of 0.48m x 0.48m x 3.2m, corresponding to a total volume of 2.8m3 concrete.
One m3 concrete weighs 2.4 tons [59]. It is thus expected that approximately seven tons
of concrete can be disposed at a cost of DKK 868. However, it should be noted that the
costs for concrete removal may vary depending on the location of the demolition within
Denmark.
New Concrete Columns [DKK]
As described in the previous section, the scenarios involve the reuse of five interior columns,
measuring a total of 16m in height with a cross-section of 0.48m x 0.48m. Complete reuse is
dependent upon the successful execution of selective demolition, ensuring that no columns
are accidentally destroyed during the process. The price of new concrete columns should
therefore correspond to the price of the quantity of what can be reused. Prices for new
concrete columns were determined from Spæncom, see Appendix N: The total price of five
columns each measuring 3.2 meters is noted to be DKK 24.000 [60]. There is no charge
for transportation, as Spæncom provides free delivery up to 75 km from the factory.
Testing of Concrete Columns [DKK]
Price for NDT: Based on personal experience with NDTs as well as input from other
students from the Structural Reuse project, it was possible to provide an estimate of the
time required to conduct NDTs on all TLs: It takes approximately 30 minutes to perform
the tests on one TL. However, it should be noted that if paint, wallpaper, or similar
materials need to be removed before the tests are conducted, the time consumption may
double. Additionally, it is expected that an engineer or similar educated personnel will
conduct these tests in the future, compensated at around 950 DKK per hour [61]. With
these assumptions, the total price of conducting the NDTs on the interior columns is
provided in Table 4.9.
Test locations
Time [h]
Hourly rate [DKK]
Total [DKK]
15
7.5
950
4.750
Table 4.9: Estimated price of NDTs on interior columns.
It is assumed that 15 NDTs are required in the above cost estimate, i.e., three tests on each
column: one at the top, bottom, and middle. This is to ensure a sufficiently large dataset
is obtained such that proper analysis can be conducted afterwards, instead of having to
disregard the entire dataset, as was the case in Section 4.2.1. Furthermore, it is assumed
that the consulting firm possesses all the NDT equipment and does not need to purchase
it.
Price for concrete cores: The cost of extracting concrete cores has been obtained from
DiamantXperten Appendix O, which is an expert in diamond drilling and cutting of all
types of hard materials. The price for concrete core extraction is 4200 DKK ex. VAT for
five cores. However, as the price includes setup and dismantling, transportation, technician
time, and possibly covering, it was discovered that the price per core will decrease if more
cores are to be made [62].
48
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
Price for compression tests: It takes approximately 10 minutes to conduct a compres-
sion test. Thus, it will take approximately one hour to conduct five tests. Additionally,
approximately one hour is needed to trim the core samples to the correct length. It is
expected that an engineer or similarly educated personnel will perform these tests with an
hourly rate of approximately 950 DKK, as indicated in Table 4.10.
Test elements
Time [h]
Hourly rate [DKK]
Total [DKK]
5
2
950
1.900
Table 4.10: Estimated price of compression tests.
Strength estimation: Experience from utilizing the conversion models to estimate strengths
suggests that the characteristic strength can be calculated within an hour, depending on
the familiarity with the models. It is expected that an engineer or similarly educated
personnel prepares a note on the concretes quality and characteristic strength, which is
estimated to take approximately five hours.
With these assumptions, the price of the
strength estimation are provided in Table 4.11.
Time [h]
Hourly rate [DKK]
Total [DKK]
6
950
5.700
Table 4.11: Estimated price of strength estimation.
Demolishing and Selective Demolishing [DKK]
The following section is written with consultation from Tscherning.
It is challenging to estimate the overall cost of selective demolition due to the diverse com-
position of each building, making pricing highly complex. Furthermore, demolitions are
inherently unpredictable, and the structure may appear differently when dismantled than
initially assumed. In a selective demolition, the process is similar to a reverse construction,
where all elements to be reused must be braced, cut, and lifted down to minimize dam-
age, making it costly and time-consuming. Pricing, therefore, entails considerable effort
and largely depends on the specific project. Since no bid was provided for the selective
demolition of the columns at Sundkrogsgade 30, it was an almost impossible task for the
demolisher to give a complete price estimate. However, through ongoing conversations
with Tscherning, the demolisher could offer a generalized bid for a selective demolition,
where all columns needed to be preserved. This would typically cost between 20-25% more
than regular demolition.
In this analysis, a specific focus is directed toward the selective demolition of five interior
columns at Sundkrogsgade 30. To comprehend the pricing, a description of the construc-
tion joint and the demolition process is essential. According to the drawing materials, the
interior concrete columns are centrally positioned within the building, extending from the
ground floor to the 1st floor. Beams are situated on top of the columns, supporting the
flooring. To secure the fixation of the beam on the column, anchors are drilled into the
column. Reinforcement is then added, connecting to the existing reinforcement from the
beam and the newly drilled anchors. Subsequently, everything is cast around the anchors
and the reinforcement. A small steel plate, onto which the beam has been cast, supports
the beam. This design ensures that no concrete element rests directly on top of another.
A set of concept drawings is presented in Figure 4.27.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
49
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
Figure 4.27: Concept drawing of joints between beam and column
A typical demolition process begins by initiating the demolition on one side of the building
and progressing through the structure. Once the demolition reaches the columns situated
in the middle of the building, the overhead decks can be removed. When this approach was
applied to Sundkrogsgade 30, it was discovered that the columns had a double floor height
instead of the anticipated one-story height, as illustrated in Figure 4.28. This discovery
added complexity to the demolition process as the demolisher found themselves dealing
with a column of approximately 7m instead of the anticipated 3m. The discovery is further
discussed in Section 5.3.
(a) Interior columns before demolition.
(b) Interior columns after demolition.
Figure 4.28: INTC 1, 1.1, 3 and 1.3 before and after demolition.
The process of dismantling and removing the two-story columns was carried out by first
removing the TT deck/roof around the column, which was removed at the top of the
columns in this case. The TT deck/roof was removed using an excavator with a long
arm. Subsequently, the column was gripped and toppled using an excavator equipped
with a hydraulic clamp. The toppled column was then placed on a pallet that could be
easily moved around. To achieve uniformity, the columns were cut to the wanted length
using a diamond cutter. For this process, it was essential to perform the cutting carefully
to ensure precise edges. Additionally, a large I-beam was also attached to the concrete
50
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
columns, which required removal after dismantling - and internal steel plates complicated
the cutting of the elements even further, see Figure 4.28. This is just one example of how
the demolition might be more complex than first anticipated from building drawings and
other information.
The selective dismantling of the column was executed relatively cost- and time effectively,
but the elements incurred scars and indentations during the process, see Figure 4.29.
Figure 4.29: Selective demolition of INTC3.
This made it both aesthetically challenging for direct reuse and could potentially affect the
strength of the columns. A selective demolition process with a requirement for minimal
damage to the elements would necessitate a more careful approach. In such a scenario,
the column would be braced, carefully severed, and subsequently lifted down. The cost
for such a method would be considerably higher, approximately 25,000 DKK per column.
As it became evident that the columns were of double height, it would only require three
dismantlings to obtain the five columns, and they could subsequently be cut to the desired
height of three meters. However, unforeseen complications could cause the price to vary
given the columns would have had to be dismantled differently.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
51
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4: Results
4.2.
Field Study: Interior Colums
Economic Analysis Results
A comparative analysis of three pricing scenarios is presented in Table 4.12. The prices are
structured with a regular demolition as the baseline, denoted as 0 DKK since the price is
unknown. Next, the presented figures show the additional costs based on the requirements
of each specific scenario. The first scenario reflects the cost of a regular demolition, the
second involves a selective demolition with elements showing signs of damage, and the
third illustrates a selective demolition where the columns were dismantled without any
damage.
1: Regular demolishing
[DKK]
2: Selective demolishing
(with some damage)
[DKK]
3: Selective demolishing
(with no damage)
[DKK]
Demolishing
0
NDT
4,750
NDT
4,750
Concrete
disposal
868
DT
6,100
DT
6,100
New concrete
columns
24,000
Strength
estimation
5,700
Strength
estimation
5,700
Transport
0
Selective
demolishing
0
Selective
demolishing
75,000
Storage
0
Cutting
15,000
Cutting
15,000
-
-
Transport
0
Transport
0
-
-
Storage
0
Storage
0
Total
24,868
Total
31,550
Total
106,550
Table 4.12: Estimated cost of the three scenarios.
The results indicate that the third scenario is more than four times more expensive than
the other two scenarios. If the columns with minor damages could be reused instead,
the cost would not be much higher compared to using new columns. Additonally, the
comparative analysis indicates that destructive tests are the most costly, emphasizing the
need to minimize their use.
It is important to consider that the selective demolition cost is an estimate provided by
the demolisher and can vary considerably depending on the construction case and scope.
Additionally, it should be noted that it was a challenging task for the demolisher to
provide a precise cost, as demolition bids are typically given for an entire building rather
than individual elements.
52
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4: Results
4.3.
Further Strength Investigation with NDTs
4.3
Further Strength Investigation with NDTs
Strength Comparison of Double Height Columns
From the selective demolishing of the interior columns in Sundkrogsgade 30, it was dis-
covered that the columns expanded to double height. The considered columns are INTC1,
INTC1.1 and INTC3, INTC1.3, and their placement in the building is shown in the floor
plan, see Figure 2.3.
NDTs and DTs have been conducted on two TLs on each of the two interior columns
instead of just one TL, and these columns are the only ones where two DTs have been
performed, thus allowing for a comparison of the strength measurements in Figure 4.30.
(a) NDT and DT on INTC1 and INTC1.1
(b) NDT and DT on INTC3 and INTC1.3
Figure 4.30: Tests made on the two double-height columns where the ground floor is (light
orange) and the 1st floor are (dark orange).
The tests of the two TLs for each of the interior columns are similar for INTC3 and
INTC1.3, while they are more different for INTC1 and INTC1.1. The strength difference
between the tests in INTC1 and INTC1.1 can be explained by several factors, which will
be discussed in Section 5.2
Reuse of Structural Concrete
53
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4: Results
4.3.
Further Strength Investigation with NDTs
Further Investigation of INTC3
Following the dismantling of the interior columns at Sundkrogsgade 30, Tscherning pro-
vided an opportunity for the project to acquire one of the interior columns (INTC3). The
column was dismantled using the previously described method, cut to 2.95m, and relo-
cated to the construction site. The column was then left uncovered on the building site
and exposed to external factors for approximately one month, potentially affecting the
strength. Therefore, additional NDTs were conducted on the column after dismantling to
investigate if the strength had changed during the process. The entire NDT dataset is
found in Appendix M.
The new NDTs were performed on three TLs instead of just one to gather additional data.
The comparison between the new and old measurements is found in Figure 4.31
Figure 4.31: Further NDTs conducted on INTC3 after exposure to external factors.
It is observed that both the R number and the velocity have decreased slightly.
The
velocity is measured to be 0.12 km/s lower, with a sd of 4.41 km/s and a CV of 0.1%,
while the R number is 3.3 lower with a sd of 3.1 and a CV of 5%.
Furthermore, it was observed that the three TLs show very similar measurements, with
UPV data of 4.29 km/s, 4.41 km/s, and 4.41 km/s, respectively, and RH data of 64.4,
64.8, and 64.7.
54
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4: Results
4.3.
Further Strength Investigation with NDTs
TRP Assesment of INTC3
TRP assessment was conducted for both NDTs, which can be found in Figure 4.32.
Figure 4.32: TRP assessment on INTC3.
For INTC3, the RH measurements range between 59 to 71. The CV and sd for the two
TLs adheres to TRP2 with the highest sd being 4.8, corresponding to a CV of 7%. The
UPV measurements vary from 4.23 km/s to 4.45 km/s and thus also remain within TRP2
for both TLs. The sd and CV are shown for each TL in Table 4.13.
RH
UPV
TL
Mean [-]
sdrep [-]
CVrep [%]
Mean [km/s]
sdrep [m/s]
CVrep [%]
INTC_b
64.7
3.08
5
4.407
42.0
1
INTC_t
66.1
3.74
6
4.229
60.0
1
Table 4.13: Mean, sd, and CV for TRP assessment.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
55
==PAGE:65==
5
Discussion
The field study of two different TRs has resulted in different outcomes with diverse focus
areas and perspectives. For this reason, the discussion is divided into three main sec-
tions: one section for the discussion of TR1 (interior columns), another for TR2 (exterior
columns), and a third section with further considerations related to the direct reuse of
concrete. Within the first two sections, the focus will be on the presented data and re-
sults, as well as learnings and challenges during the fieldwork. In the third section, the
discussion will shift towards a more general approach to structural reuse, encompassing
issues related to the reuse of concrete elements today and the necessary steps for it to
become an integrated part of the building industry.
5.1
Exterior Columns
The NDT data collected from the exterior columns was more reliable in determining
the concrete strength compared to the same data from the interior columns. The most
prominent reason for this is the much larger dataset of 30 TLs. However, other challenges
were encountered during this field study.
Conducting NDTs on exterior columns was greatly influenced by weather conditions and
the challenges they entail: Conducting the NDTs in October added difficulties due to daily
changes of wind, humidity, and rain - and it happened several times during the fieldwork
that it was not possible to carry out the NDTs. Such challenges can potentially increase
the costs of testing, as fieldwork is planned according to the varying weather. To ensure
consistency and minimize potential influences from external factors, the NDTs should be
conducted on the same day. These considerations were essential, not only for the current
investigation but also for any future testing of exterior columns.
The planning of TLs also proved to be a challenge. The exterior columns were approxi-
mately 5 meters tall, making it difficult to utilize TLs throughout the entire TR. It was
thus decided only to test up to a height of 2.4 meters, potentially introducing uncertainty
to the results as the tests may not be representative of the entire TR.
RH Data
The RH data showed a slightly stronger correlation between RH data and compressive
strength with an R2 value of 0.4 for the exterior columns compared to the interior columns.
The measurements might have been influenced by rain and temperature since most of the
TLs were located outside. Additionally, some of the measurements were taken at a height
of 2.4 meters, making it difficult to ensure that the RH was held perfectly perpendicular
to the surface.
RH Strength Investigation
A multivariate conversion model was used to estimate the concrete strength in Sec-
tion 4.1.3, and this section will evaluate a univariate conversion model obtained using
the bi-objective approach. From the multi-variate conversion model, the choice of model
(linear, exponential, or power) was not of considerable importance, Figure 4.13, and the
linear model is used for simplicity.
During the field study, it was discovered that the RH data met the requirements for
belonging to TRP2. This was used to determine that eight core samples were enough to
achieve EQL3, with the assumption that the average strength was 30 MPa and a CV of
10%.
56
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1.
Exterior Columns
EXC5 was previously identified as an outlier because of its high compressive strength and
was therefore not included in the investigation. With the removal of EXC5 and the limited
dataset of only seven cores, the investigation was downgraded to EQL2, see Figure 5.1
Figure 5.1: Number of cores required to obtain EQL3 (left) and EQL2 (right) with TRP2
data.
The dataset used for the bi-objective approach is displayed in Table 5.1.
Column
R [-]
fc,m [MPa]
EXC2
63.1
59.5
EXC3
65.4
58.3
EXC4
65
50.7
EXC6
57.3
37.8
EXC7
58.5
38.7
EXC8
68.5
52.5
EXC9
67.4
45.2
Mean
63.6
49.0
sd
4.3
8.7
Table 5.1: Identification of model parameters from RH data.
The bi-objective conversion model was determined with Equation (2.10) and the data from
Table 5.1.
The resulting linear model is given below:
fc,est = 2.02 · R −79.52
(5.1)
The bi-objective conversion model is compared to a linear conversion model obtained by
linear regression with uni-variate data and is illustrated in Figure 5.2.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
57
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1.
Exterior Columns
Figure 5.2: Conversion model through bi-objective approach.
The models are very similar; however, the bi-objective approach indicates a slightly steeper
slope compared to the linear regression model. The RMSEpred of the bi-objective model is
calculated to 8.6 MPa and 6.7 MPa for the linear model using the leave-one-out method
specified in the Matlab script found in Appendix L.
The characteristic strength was calculated using Equation (2.1), where the mean value was
calculated through the estimated strengths based on the bi-objective conversion model.
The EQL2 level introduced a certainty level of ±15%, which was subtracted from the
mean strength. Sd and CV were calculated based on the same estimated strengths, with
a sd of 8.6 MPa and CV of 18%. κ is determined to be 2.19 based on the number of TLs
(+26) via Table 2.1. The characteristic strength was calculated to 25.6 MPa. Following
the same procedure, but with the linear model, the sd was calculated to 5.4 MPa with a
CV of 11%, resulting in a characteristic strength of 31.5 MPa.
UPV Data
Being two people conducting the UPV tests proved to be a considerable advantage, since
the columns were large, making it challenging to precisely align the transmitter and receiver
directly opposite to each other for the direct UPV test.
Another observation was that it was challenging to get a stable signal through the concrete.
This might be due to the exterior columns having a rougher surface and therefore the
coupling gel may have struggled to fill out all pores in the concrete and create a smooth
surface for testing. This challenge required conducting measurements up to 10 times on
each TL, which made the process more time-consuming.
The measurements demonstrated a strong correlation between the measured core strengths
and UPV data, with an R2 value of 0.96. These results suggest minimal variance or error
in UPV measurements.
UPV measurements were also performed on the extracted core samples and were carried
out in a more controlled environment (DTU, Building 128), possibly allowing for more
precise data. Figure 5.3 illustrate the correlation between UPV measurements on core
samples and measured core strength.
58
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1.
Exterior Columns
Figure 5.3: Measured core strength versus UPV data along with three correlation models.
It can be seen that the R2 value for the linear model is slightly lower for the core samples
(0.76).
Additionally, the velocity from the core samples are slightly higher, see Figure 5.4. This
could be attributed to factors such as the velocity increasing for smaller samples, tem-
perature or humidity changes, which may potentially introduce larger uncertainty in the
UPV measurements [63].
Figure 5.4: Comparison between UPV measurements on cores and columns.
Overall, both the UPV measurements from the field study and the core samples demon-
strate a strong correlation between measured core strength and UPV. However, it could be
considered whether UPV measurements on core samples were necessary given their lower
R2 value. The additional UPV measurements are also time-consuming, contributing to an
overall higher cost.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
59
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1.
Exterior Columns
UPV Strength Investigation
Similarly to the RH investigation, this section will apply the bi-objective approach to the
UPV data. The TRP assessment with UPV data was evaluated to TRP2. At this stage,
the average compressive strength and CV were not known, and a design strength of 30 MPa
and CV of 10% was used to determine that eight cores were necessary. It should be noted
that the TRP data with UPV was very close to meeting TRP1, indicating high precision.
If this was the case, it would have been possible to only use six cores. The dataset from
EXC5 was removed due to the high compressive strength, and the investigation was once
again downgraded to EQL2. The dataset used for the bi-objective approach is found in
Table 5.2.
Column
v [km/s]
Fc,m [MPa]
EXC2
4.82
59.48
EXC3
4.76
58.25
EXC4
4.70
50.74
EXC6
4.42
38.67
EXC7
4.43
37.82
EXC8
4.64
52.48
EXC9
4.58
45.17
Mean
4.62
48.94
sd
0.16
8.7
Table 5.2: Identification of model parameters from UPV data.
The following conversion model is obtained via the bi-objective approach using Equa-
tion (2.10):
fc,est = 56.3 · v −211.2
(5.2)
The correlation between the measured core strength and the UPV data is displayed in
Figure 5.5, where both a linear model, based on univariate regression, and the bi-objective
conversion model are shown.
Figure 5.5: Measured core strength versus UPV and correlation models.
60
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1.
Exterior Columns
As can be seen, the conversion models are extremely similar, and the leave-one-out method
was used to assess the RMSEpred to 2.1 MPa for the bi-objective approach and 1.6 MPa
for the linar model. The script is found in Appendix L.
The characteristic strength was then calculated using Equation (2.1), where the mean
value was derived from the estimated strengths based on the bi-objective conversion model.
The EQL level introduced a certainty level of ±15% which was subtracted from the mean
strength. Sd and CV was calculated based on the estimated strengths, resulting in a sd of
8.7 MPa and CV of 17.8%. κ was found from Table 2.1 and read as 2.19. The characteristic
strength was calculated to 25.4 MPa. Following the same procedure, but with the linear
regression model, the sd was calculated to 8.5 MPa with a CV of 17.5%, resulting in a
characteristic strength of 25.7 MPa.
Comparative Discussion of Conversion Models
The characteristic strengths and corresponding RMSEpred are displayed for the multivari-
ate conversion model and the two bi-objective conversion models in Table 5.3.
Multi
RHBio
UPVBio
RHLin
UPVLin
Char. Strength [MPa]
24.0
25.6
25.4
31.5
25.7
Pred. error [MPa]
2.4
8.6
2.1
6.7
1.6
Table 5.3: Comparison between the exponetial multi-variate conversion model and both
bi-objective models.
Based on the various conversion models, it is observed that the linear model yields the
highest characteristic strength and the lowest RMSEpred, thus being better at describing
the correlation between core strength and NDTs.
However, the bi-objective model is
better at describing concrete variability, resulting in more reliable strength estimates. The
measured core strengths on the exterior columns vary greatly from each other, making it
more sensible to utilize the bi-objective model, which accounts for this variation.
Disregarding the linear models, the comparison between the methods in Table 5.3 indicates
that the bi-objective model with the UPV data has the lowest RMSEpred, and the second-
highest characteristic strength. The bi-objective model with RH data yields the highest
characteristic strength, but with a higher RMSEpred, making the estimated characteristic
strength more unreliable than the other models.
The bi-objective model is the least time-consuming as it only requires one type of NDT and
core strength, Additionally, it was understood that the UPV data almost met the require-
ments of TRP1, which would have necessitated fewer core samples and thus even lower
costs, based on these results, the characteristic strength, and RMSEpred, the bi-objective
model with UPV data seems to have great potential for conducting cost-effective and re-
liable strength estimates. However, it should be noted that the multivariate conversion
model hardly utilizes the RH data, making the bi-objective model with UPV data and
the multi-variate model very similar to each other when considering the two linear models
(Table 4.2).
Based on this analysis, it becomes quite evident that the RH data does not provide con-
siderable value in relation to strength estimation. It should thus be considered whether it
makes sense to invest time and resources in these measurements.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
61
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1.
Exterior Columns
External Factors Affecting Concrete Strength
The columns EXC8, EXC9, and EXC10 are situated in a partially covered area and the
measurements were therefore conducted indoors. They were consequently not exposed
to chloride or influenced by weather, so the subsequent analysis focuses specifically on
EXC1-EXC7. An overview of the examined columns and locations are found in Figure 5.6
Figure 5.6: Top-down overview of the exterior columns.
The found literature suggested that chloride from seawater and chloride from de-icing salt
constitute the primary sources of chloride ingress in concrete. During the field study, it was
observed that EXC1-5 were positioned at the NW side of the building in a grassy area.
For this reason, it was assumed that they were not exposed to de-icing salt. However,
these columns were located approximately 130m from the seawater, suggesting a potential
influence of airborne salts transported from the sea.
In contrast, EXC6 and EXC7 were located on either side of a driveway leading to the
building, which was utilized for delivering antiques to Bruun Rasmussen. Traces of road
salt were observed on the ground during the field study, indicating salting during winter
seasons. This side of the building is approximately 150 meters from the sea.
The lowest compressive strength was observed in EXC6 and EXC7. There is no correlation
between chloride content and core strength from the chloride tests, see Table 4.5. However,
all chloride tests indicate a chloride content exceeding the 0.10% chloride limit permitted
in the cement standard DS/EN 197-1[26]. This implies that the exterior columns were con-
taminated by chloride, yet the absence of a positive correlation suggests that the concrete
is likely designed to resist environmental influences. Consequently, the observed chloride
levels may not have permeated the concrete and compromised its structural integrity.
There is an uncertainty in the chloride tests given that the tests were conducted on the
surface, restricted within specific TLs. This approach only considers the amount of chloride
present on the concrete surface, without assessing whether it has penetrated the concrete
and influenced its strength.
To obtain a more comprehensive assessment, alternative
62
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.1.
Exterior Columns
testing methods could be employed or a repetition of the chloride test could be undertaken,
involving a collection of larger samples from multiple TLs with varying depths.
Another explanation for the lower strength in EXC6 and EXC7 could be attributed to
their location on the sunny side of the building. This may have had an impact on the
curing process of the concrete, which possibly occurred more rapidly on the SE side where
there was more exposure to sunlight. The faster curing process in these columns may
not have achieved an equivalent level of strength as the columns that underwent a slower
curing process on the NW side.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
63
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.2.
Interior Columns
5.2
Interior Columns
The investigation of the interior columns proved to pose several challenges. Firstly, there
was a challenge in planning and localizing TLs. Despite the building’s floor plan showing
four interior columns on each floor (basement, ground floor, and 1st floor), there was
only available space and access to test five columns. The remaining columns were either
concealed behind built-in cabinets or surrounded by concrete walls, limiting the scope of
testing possibilities.
Furthermore, the limited data with only one TL on each interior column resulted in a
restricted amount of data. This posed a great challenge during the strength investigation,
which indicated an unexpected negative correlation, and an entire RH data set was disre-
garded for this reason. With the limited amount of data, it was not possible to determine
outliers or to draw any conclusions. The low number of TLs and high CV also had a large
impact on the calculated characteristic strength (8.9 and 19.5 MPa), which were much
lower than the initial design strength (35 MPa).
Strength Investigation of Interior Columns
After the collection of NDT data, the demolition of Sundkrogsgade 30 was monitored
through communication with Tscherning. This gave valuable insights into selective de-
molition practices while understanding the possibilities for preserving structural elements.
During the dismantling of the building at Sundkrogsgade 30, it was discovered that the
initially presumed one-floor height interior columns were interconnected as one single col-
umn extending from the ground floor to the roof (approximately 7m), see Figure 4.28 and
Figure 5.7. This was unexpected, as the building material and drawings had shown that
the column was supposed to be only one floor height.
Figure 5.7: Section drawing of interior columns.
The primary distinction between a double-floor-height concrete column and a one-floor-
height column lies in their structural composition and load-bearing characteristics.
A single height column operates independently and may be designed to support different
loads or serve distinct purposes, and the connection between the two columns becomes
crucial, necessitating careful consideration to ensure effective load transfer and overall
stability.
This configuration introduces complexity in design and construction due to the need to
address the interaction between the individual columns. On the contrary, a uniform column
64
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.2.
Interior Columns
indicates a single, continuous structure with consistent specifications throughout its entire
length. This design simplifies both the analysis and construction processes, as there is
uniformity in load distribution and structural requirements along the column’s length. The
absence of distinct sections reduces the complexities associated with connecting separate
columns.
Strength Comparison of Interior Columns
To investigate the strength distribution of the two-story high column, DT and NDT data
from the interior columns were compared in Section 4.3. A large variation in strength was
observed for column INTC1 and INTC1.1 in Figure 4.30. The variation among the columns
was expected when testing on two different TLs/floors within the same column.
The
strength variations observed can be due to several factors, including material variability,
water/cement ratio, aggregates, age, and admixtures during construction. Additionally,
curing conditions can contribute to the non-uniformity of the strength. Considering that
these columns are prefabricated, a presumption of more optimal conditions than the above
mention is expected compared to an in-situ column.
With a 7m long column, the distribution of loads throughout the columns is also important
to consider as concentrated or irregular loads can cause internal stress. Since more load is
transferred through the columns on the ground floor, larger internal stress contributing to
higher strength is expected in those columns. This assumption is supported by the data
in Figure 4.30a, whereas Figure 4.30b does not provide supporting evidence.
Despite various factors that can contribute to the distributed strength disparity within the
columns, the observed difference in strength depicted in INTC1 and INTC1.1 is substantial,
with a fractional difference of 27%. This disparity impacts strength investigations and
emphasizes that the extracted core samples serve as representative specimens. The location
from which each individual core sample is taken can considerably influence the estimated
strengths derived from the conversion model.
Further Strength Investigation of INTC3
To examine the interior column further, NDTs were conducted on INTC3 (which were
transported from the construction site to DTU), see Section 4.3. Here, a slight change of
strengths for both the RH and UPV measurements was observed, with both NDT data
sets being slightly lower compared to the initial tests from the field study.
An explanation for the lower measurements could be attributed to the fact that the new
NDTs were taken outdoors at a considerably lower temperature of 4 °C, whereas the
temperature during the fieldwork was approximately 22 °C. Additionally, it could be due
to the element being stored outdoors for more than one month (December to January)
after dismantling and thus being exposed to rain, humidity, frost, and chloride. Finally, the
strength reduction might be attributed to the impacts sustained during the dismantling
process, since the dismantling was not carried out with particular care.
This discovery emphasizes the importance of ensuring proper storage of concrete elements
before reuse, as improper storage can lead to minor strength loss. However, it should be
noted that the tests were conducted on a single column, and thus, more data would be
needed to generalize and quantify the loss of strength.
RH Data
The RH data showed unexpected results, indicating that higher R numbers correspond to
lower measured strength, contradicting the known theory. Therefore, the RH data cast
doubt on the test precision and reliability of the method.
An explanation for the observed negative correlation could be attributed to potential
Reuse of Structural Concrete
65
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.2.
Interior Columns
malfunctions or calibration inconsistencies in the RH equipment. Inaccuracies stemming
from calibration issues have the potential to considerably alter the data. Furthermore,
studies have shown that the performance of RH equipment degrades over time and may
become unstable after repeated use [64]. However, it should be noted that the RH was
calibrated before use and that its performance is regularly checked at DTU. The probability
of this being the cause is therefore minimal.
Another explanation might be ascribed to the manual execution of the RH tests. Variations
in how the RH was positioned against the concrete and whether it was held completely
horizontally against the element might have influenced the measurements.
The lack of a clean and smooth surface may also have influenced the measurements. It
was challenging to remove all the paint on the columns, leaving dust particles and calcium
on the TLs. Additionally, uneven surfaces were observed on INTC1.1 and INTC1.3, see
Figure 5.8, and it should probably have been considered whether this surface should have
been tested at all, as honeycombing, scaling, rough texture, and highly porous surfaces
should be avoided [65].
Figure 5.8: Example of a rough surface.
Examination of the datasets in Figure 5.9 show that INTC3, INC1.1, and INTC1.3 con-
siderably influence the distortion of the trendline towards lower strength compared to the
high RH data. It would therefore have been valuable to revisit the building and retest
those columns multiple times at additional TLs, as a larger dataset could have mitigated
potential outliers, thereby offering more accurate insights into the concrete properties. Ad-
ditionally, it should be noted that the RH only pertains to the first 30 mm and does not
account for internal changes in the concrete properties. The most recognized influencing
factor for this is carbonation, whose progression creates a harder layer near the surface,
potentially introducing errors in strength assessment of up to 40-50% [66]. This might be
66
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.2.
Interior Columns
part of the explanation for why the columns INTC1.1, INTC3, and INTC3.1 exhibit high
RH values but low strengths. The RH is also very sensitive to aggregates, the surface of
the concrete, and the presence of air bubbles or voids near the surface [67].
For future reference, it could be beneficial to have a detailed guide explaining the required
surface condition and outlining the correct utilization of RH. Participation in additional
supervised practice sessions for RH use before its implementation would also enhance the
quality of test outcomes.
Negative Trendline
In Section 4.2.3 it was decided to disregard the entire RH dataset. To justify this decision,
the RH data from Sundkrogsgade 30 and the RH data collected in the Nauticon building
(another building in the Structural Reuse project) were compared, see Figure 5.9. This
comparison was made to emphasize that a negative correlation was not normal and must
have been due to measurement uncertainties or any of the previously explained error
sources.
Figure 5.9: Comparison of RH data from Sundkrogsgade 30 (orange) and Nauticon (blue).
The figure clearly illustrates that the results from Sundkrogsgade are entirely contradic-
tory to those from Nauticon. To further illustrate the differences in the results, an inquiry
was made into whether others have encountered similar results with RH. However, such
evidence was not available. A detailed overview of how the correlation between RH and
measured strength should ideally appear is provided in Appendix P, highlighting the like-
lihood of inaccurate measurements with RH on Sundkrogsgade 30.
Alternative testing methods to the low-quality RH measurements are available, such as
an NDT method combined with a pull-out test [66] [67] [68]. The pull-out method has
revealed consistent results and the cost of the equipment is in the same range as UPV
equipment.
Another option is to use a Windsor probe, which is a third NDT method: This test mea-
sures surface hardness similar to the RH, but additionally measures the internal strength of
concrete components. Windsor probes are relatively simple according to theory, accurate,
and quick to use [69] [70].
While those additional techniques might enhance the data quality, they may not be optimal
considering added cost and further work needs to be carried out to validate their statistical
Reuse of Structural Concrete
67
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.2.
Interior Columns
robustness in estimating concrete strength. It could also be explored whether UPV data
alone would suffice for estimating strength.
UPV Data
The UPV data had a large impact on the strength investigation of the interior columns,
considering that the RH data was disregarded.
The UPV data and the measured strengths acquired from the interior columns are some-
what correlated with an R2 of 0.4, introducing a level of complexity to the strength as-
sessment. Given the limited number of datasets available, it is crucial to emphasize that
the overall trendline aligns with the initially anticipated results, suggesting a correlation
between UPV data and measured core strength. The low R2 value could be attributed to
factors such as natural material diversity or local variations in concrete composition.
With the UPV data, a strength estimation was conducted using both a linear model with
univariate data and a bi-objective model.
Here, it was observed that the linear model resulted in a considerably lower CV, which also
had a substantial impact on the characteristic strength (19.5 MPa). This was calculated to
be more than two times higher than with the bi-objective model (8.9 MPa), see Table 4.8.
This low estimate might not be representative of the strength of the TR, and a data set of
30 TLs would have increased the characteristic strength to 25.5 MPa for the uni-variate
linear model and 29.5 MPa for the bi-objective model, given data was distributed in the
same way.
The investigation supports employing the linear regression, which resulted in a consider-
ably lower CV and consequently a higher characteristic strength. Due to the low calculated
characteristic strength compared to the measured strength, it is expected to be reasonable
to use the linear model, despite not taking the variation of concrete strength into account.
68
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.3.
Considerations of Concrete Recycling
5.3
Considerations of Concrete Recycling
Economic Analysis and Selective Demolition
In the economic analysis, it was discovered that pricing is currently a highly complex
matter.
This is partly because load-bearing concrete elements are not directly reused
today, and as a result, demolishing companies are not accustomed to handling them.
Therefore, there is a lack of knowledge about the most efficient and cost-effective methods
for handling and reusing concrete elements. The challenge was emphasized during the
dismantling of the interior columns at Sundkrogsgade 30, where an interior column was
taken down most cost-effectively and practically. However, the columns still received minor
damages, which was suboptimal for both testing purposes and direct reuse.
To dismantle all the columns in the building without any damages would have required
a modification of Tscherning’s standard demolition procedure, leading to an increase of
20-25% in the demolition costs. Furthermore, Tscherning assessed that dismantling each
column more carefully would incur a cost of 25,000 DKK per column, estimated to be four
times more expensive compared to using new concrete elements.
Moreover, a considerable challenge with selective demolition today is that each building
is constructed differently, and unforeseen challenges frequently arise during demolition.
Such complexity within each project makes it difficult for demolishers to plan selective
demolition. Something that would make the dismantling process easier is to have gen-
eralized methods for selective demolishing of different structures, while ensuring effective
knowledge sharing.
In this section, two proposals for a generalized method for dismantling columns are pre-
sented - however with additional costs and non-resolved uncertainties. These were iden-
tified in collaboration with Tscherning and can be applied to most cases concerning the
dismantling of columns.
The method entails detaching the beams and deck/roof from the column by cleanly cutting
off the column at the top, as indicated by the red markings on Figure 5.10. Formwork
support is placed beside the column to support the deck during the dismantling process.
Figure 5.10: Cutting of concrete columns.
The column will then be removed using an excavator equipped with a hydraulic shear and
then placed on a pallet which can easily be moved around. By placing the column on a
pallet, wear and tear on the column from gripping it directly with an excavator or with
ropes is avoided.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
69
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.3.
Considerations of Concrete Recycling
The generalized method ensures a concrete column of the requested height, which can be
customized based on demand. While there may be a small amount of waste due to the
cutting process, it is necessary to provide a standardized dismantling and pricing model
applicable to most concrete columns across the industry.
If there was a desire to preserve all concrete columns, another dismantling approach could
be used where the regular demolition process was reconsidered Section 4.2.5: Instead of
beginning the demolition at one end of the building, it would commence from the top of
the structure, systematically removing elements layer by layer.
Another considerable challenge associated with the selective demolishing of concrete ele-
ments is the potential breakage or fracture of concrete during dismantling. The cementi-
tious bonds forming an interconnected network in the concrete provide strength but also
render concrete vulnerable to damage when exposed to forces intended for disassembly.
According to Tscherning, it was anticipated that if 10 columns were dismantled, approxi-
mately 2-3 of them would sustain damage, making them unsuitable for reuse.
These challenges will probably be solved once circular economy is more prevalent, where
knowledge sharing in selective demolition between demolishers play a larger role, thus
enhancing the quality, usability, and cost reduction of recycled materials.
Storage Challenges
Another issue addressed during the dismantling of the interior columns was related to
storage. As there was no agreement with Tscherning regarding the storage location for the
column after dismantling, it was placed on the construction site and exposed to external
factors. Only after one month was the column transported to DTU, where there was also
no storage opportunity, and it was once again placed outdoors.
Concrete elements are typically large and take up a considerable amount of space. More-
over, the elements should ideally be stored in a dry environment to prevent damage.
Finding suitable storage space is both expensive and challenging, and the easiest and
most cost-effective solution would therefore be to reuse the dismantled materials from
the construction directly into the new building, as demonstrated by Lendager in the case
of Gladsaxe School [71]. Here, dismantled elements from the old building were directly
used in the new one. Another option could be to directly utilize the demolished materi-
als in a new construction project, allowing materials to be transported directly from the
demolition site.
Today, Tscherning resells their dismantled, recycled materials to Greendozer, which is a
dealer specializing in buying and selling recycled goods. However, Tscherning notes that
not all materials are worth reselling, as the time and cost of dismantling may exceed the
resale value of the items. It is therefore crucial for direct reuse that demolishers identify
potential recipients for the materials before dismantling begins, ensuring that materials are
not damaged but instead preserved. Creating a platform where demolishing companies can
showcase the buildings scheduled for demolition along with the available materials would
be advantageous. This would allow potential building owners, architects, engineers, etc.
to look up potential recycled materials suitable for integration into their new construction
projects. Platforms like BygCirkulært [72] exist for a similar purpose, serving as a tool
among professional construction stakeholders to establish connections and facilitate the
restoration of recycled materials. This platform could be further developed to incorporate
the above-mentioned.
70
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.3.
Considerations of Concrete Recycling
Documentation and Risk
In Denmark, there are no requirements for the degree of recycling and reuse in construc-
tions. This is a barrier preventing the entire construction industry from taking the cir-
cular economy more seriously and reducing material consumption. In addition, there are
economic, practical, quality, and safety considerations that need to be considered when
reusing directly.
It was demonstrated through the economic analysis of the interior columns and through
discussions with Tscherning that recycled materials come with a higher price compared
to virgin products. Construction owners constitute key candidates in this context, and
their willingness to take risks becomes essential in confronting the economic challenges
and uncertainties associated with repurposing concrete elements.
Additionally, there is considerable uncertainty and risk associated with using recycled
materials, as there may not always be the necessary documentation to meet Danish stan-
dards. Developing such documentation involves a considerable amount of work[73]. For
concrete to be reused directly in the future would require someone to take responsibility
for the documentation. Structural engineers and entrepreneurs are essential for assessing
the feasibility and safety of reusing concrete structures due to their competencies in con-
ducting thorough documentation. Entrepreneurs currently have the main responsibility
when it comes to the use of recycled materials, and distributing the risk among several
stakeholders in the construction process would not only enhance safety but also provide a
greater incentive to adopt such practices [56].
Government engagement is another important factor manifested through regulations and
initiatives that advocate recycling in construction.
Potential economic advantages for
reusing elements in new constructions would further advocate the reuse of materials.
Tscherning Headquarters
In the context of concrete reuse, an interview with the CEO of Tscherning, Søren Tsch-
erning, was conducted. During the last year, he showed commitment to material reuse
by opting to reuse concrete elements directly in the construction of his new headquarters
in Hedehusene.
In collaboration with a structural engineer, (Arne, certified structural
engineer for construction class 2, AKI Rådgivning) it was possible to finish the project.
The direct reuse process implemented in Hedehusene demonstrated an innovative approach
utilizing concrete elements to optimize resource efficiency. As this area is still undeveloped,
the process necessitated careful consideration and comprehensive assessment to guarantee
the structural integrity and safety of the reused elements. To address the uncertainties
associated with reused materials, such as diverse loads and exposure to environmental
conditions, Tscherning used over-dimensioning and recalculations on the concrete elements.
Furthermore, a comprehensive inspection was conducted before reuse to detect any cracks,
holes, or insufficient reinforcement. Addressing these issues was imperative to ensure the
reliability of the reused elements. Subsequently, repairs were implemented to rectify any
structural flaws, ensuring that the reused elements meet the required standards.
The overall process followed a holistic approach, encompassing over-dimensioning, rein-
forcement assessment, and thorough inspection for cracks or holes. With these measures
in place, Tscherning could confidently vouch for the safety and documentation of the
concrete.
It is crucial for structural reuse to have building owners and structural engineers like
Tscherning and Arne actively embracing the challenge of reusing concrete elements. Tsch-
Reuse of Structural Concrete
71
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5: Discussion
5.3.
Considerations of Concrete Recycling
erning’s new headquarters illustrates that direct reuse of concrete can be applied in new
buildings without compromising safety or strength. However, using NDTs to asses con-
crete strength can mitigate material waste through over-dimensioning. It is essential to
share knowledge and challenges from these projects, showcasing possibilities and paving
the way for others in the construction industry to reuse concrete elements.
It should be noted that the success of this project also lies in the absence of problems
regarding changing responsibilities among building stakeholders during the process. In the
construction of the Headquarters, Tscherning was both the demolisher and the building
owner, while also taking responsibility for ensuring that the precast concrete elements met
the required standards. This meant that he was alone with the risks, and no other building
stakeholders could be held accountable.
Remaining Service Life
Transitioning to a circular economy through direct reuse of concrete is crucial for reducing
resource consumption, emissions, and waste production.
The method to achieve this,
whether through the approach outlined in this thesis or through over-dimensioning, may
not have a considerable impact as long as the transition is initiated.
In this context, it is important to assess the remaining service life before concrete is
reused. This is especially key for cases involving outdoor concrete, where various factors
such as carbonation, frost-thaw cycles, and chloride can degrade the concrete. If any of
these influences are present, it could considerably shorten the lifespan of the concrete, and
therefore testing for chloride and carbonation, and examining for surface damage should
be prioritized.
In the investigation of Sundkrogsgade 30, a characteristic strength of 24.0 MPa was deter-
mined for the exterior columns with all cores measuring a strength between 37 MPa and
71 MPa. Regarding the interior columns, the characteristic strength was assessed at 18.5
MPa, although all compression test measurements exceeded 39 MPa. The low character-
istic strength was attributed to the high CV in the dataset, coupled with the very limited
dataset for the interior columns, consisting of only 5 TL. Despite the low characteristic
strengths, the high measured compressive strengths indicate a considerable potential of
the concrete, as all measurements surpass the original design strength. This also supports
the theory that concrete undergoes further hardening beyond the 28-day maturity pe-
riod, where the measurements for the core samples are 1.5-2 times greater than the design
strength. Finally, it is noted that the concrete in Sundkrogsgade 30 is only 20 years old
and thus far from reaching the typical lifespan of concrete, which is typically determined
to be over 100 years [74].
72
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:82==
6
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to assess the strength of load-bearing concrete elements
through two Non-Destructive Test methods (NDTs) and measured strengths from core
samples.
The strength was estimated for two Test Regions (TRs); exterior and interior load-bearing
columns with a design strength of 30 MPa and 35 MPa respectively, located in the old
Auction House ”Bruun Rasmussen” at Sundkrogsgade 30, Copenhagen. Data was collected
from 30 Test Locations (TLs) on exterior columns and five TLs on interior columns.
A linear, power, and exponential conversion model was obtained by regression of the
measured strengths on NDT data to estimate the strengths of the TLs where no measured
strength was available.
The resulting characteristic strength was deemed reliable for reuse via Estimation Quality
Level (EQL), which relates uncertainties in the test data to uncertainty on the estimated
mean strength within a TR.
For the exterior columns, the best-performing conversion model was a multivariate expo-
nential resulting in an RMSEpred of 2.4 MPa and a Coefficient of Variation (CV) on the
collection of estimated and measured strengths of 20%. This model was used to estimate
the mean strength of the TR to 49.7 MPa.
EQL2 was achieved based on the Test Result Precision (TRP) of repeated NDT data, the
number of available core samples, the CV of estimated strengths, and the estimated mean
strength, yielding a certainty level of ±15%. The large CV of the estimated and measured
strengths combined with EQL2 resulted in a characteristic strength of 24.0 MPa for the
TR, which is only slightly lower than the original design strength. The columns are thus
considered suitable for reuse.
The high CV among the exterior columns could be attributed to their exposure to external
factors like weather, chloride, and carbonation. Chloride ingress was, however, dismissed
as the cause of strength discrepancies, and attention was shifted toward factors such as
curing time and the indoor placement of three columns.
For the interior columns, the best-performing conversion model was a univariate linear
model based on Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity (UPV) data, resulting in an RMSEpred of 6.7
MPa and a CV on the collection of estimated strengths of 12%. This model was used to
estimate the mean strength of the TR to 48.2 MPa. EQL2 was also obtained for this data.
The small dataset of only five TLs lead to a characteristic strength of only 19.5 MPa,
which is probably not prudent to reuse considering the high RMSEpred. The characteristic
strength might, however, be increased by using more test data.
The high mean strength of both the exterior (49.7 MPa) and interior (48.0 MPa) columns
confirms that concrete strength increases over time, highlighting the potential of extend-
ing the lifespan of concrete elements through direct reuse to avoid resource waste and
unnecessary emissions.
Challenges associated with utilizing Rebound Hammer (RH) data were observed.
For
the interior columns, the uncertainty in the RH data was so high that the entire dataset
was disregarded and the strength was thus estimated from UPV data alone.
For the
exterior columns, RH data was utilized but hardly employed by the multivariate conversion
Reuse of Structural Concrete
73
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6: Conclusion
models.
Further analysis showed that a bi-objective conversion model based on UPV
data had a lower RMSEpred of 2.1 MPa with a higher characteristic strength (25.4 MPa)
than the multi-variate conversion model, signifying that RH data is redundant for such
investigations. Overall, the bi-objective model provided more reliable strength estimates
requiring less NDT data, and it is thus recommended as the primary model for strength
assessment. The investigation emphasizes that the combination of RH and UPV data is
only effective when the quality of both NDT data is comparable.
The economic analysis conducted in cooperation with the demolition company Tshcerning
revealed that a selective demolition of all columns would cost approximately 20-25% more
than a regular demolition, and that each recycled concrete column would be four times
more expensive than a virgin concrete column. The analysis disclosed some of the com-
plexities associated with selective demolition, including economy, time, and storage, each
of which requires further work to make direct reuse an integrated part of the construction
industry.
74
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1]
Klimapartnerskabet for bygge- og anlægssektoren. 2229190.pdf. 2019. URL: https:
//www.ft.dk/samling/20191/almdel/KEF/bilag/393/2229190.pdf.
[2]
Ministri of housing. NationalStrategyforSustainableConstruktion.pdf. 2021. URL:
https://im.dk/Media/637602217765946554/National_Strategy_for_Sustainable_
Construktion.pdf.
[3]
Thomas Djursing. Byggeri-fest: CO2 fra cement fordoblet og produktionen bliver
stadig mere klimaskadelig | Ingeniøren. da. June 2022. URL: https://ing.dk/artikel/
byggeri-fest-co2-fra-cement-fordoblet-og-produktionen-bliver-stadig-mere-klimaskadelig.
[4]
Reduction Roadmap. Reduction Roadmap. dk. URL: https://reductionroadmap.dk/.
[5]
Teknologisk Institut. “TEMAARK1”. da. In: (2021).
[6]
DTU. Enabling business by reuse of basic building components – documentation of
quality for second use. en. URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/projects/enabling-business-
by-reuse-of-basic-building-components-documenta.
[7]
Ulrik Andersen. Vil du genbruge, skal du næsten begynde, før du går i gang | Build-
ingTech (PRO). da. Nov. 2023. URL: https://pro.ing.dk/buildingtech/artikel/vil-du-
genbruge-skal-du-naesten-begynde-foer-du-gaar-i-gang.
[8]
EU. Waste Framework Directive - European Commission. en. URL: https://environment.
ec.europa.eu/topics/waste-and-recycling/waste-framework-directive_en.
[9]
da. URL: https://via.ritzau.dk/pressemeddelelse/13727502/miljoministeren-gamle-
byggematerialer-skal-bruges-igen?publisherId=13560422.
[10]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 1992 FU 2021.pdf. 2021. URL: https://sd.ds.dk/Viewer/
Standard?ProjectNr=M346878&Status=60.60&VariantID=&Page=0.
[11]
Troels Brøndum-Nielsen. “BETONKONSTRUKTIONER I”. da. In: (1969).
[12]
Morton Glantz and Robert Kissell. “Chapter 2 - A Primer on Risk Mathematics”. In:
Multi-Asset Risk Modeling. Ed. by Morton Glantz and Robert Kissell. San Diego:
Academic Press, Jan. 2014, pp. 21–61. iSBN: 978-0-12-401690-3. DOi: 10.1016/B978-
0-12-401690-3.00002-0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780124016903000020.
[13]
Adam M. Neville. Properties of concrete. en. 5th Edition. Harlow Munich: Pearson,
2011. iSBN: 978-0-273-75580-7.
[14]
Steven Kosmatka, Beatrix Kerkhoff, and William Panarese. Design and Control of
Concrete Mixtures. Jan. 2002. iSBN: 978-0-89312-217-1.
[15]
V M Malhotra and Nicholas J Carino. “Handbook on Nondestructive Testing of
Concrete”. en. In: (2014).
[16]
Katja Thygesen. Field Study IP3. 2023.
[17]
Non-Destructive In Situ Strength Assessment of Concrete: Practical Application of
the RILEM TC 249-ISC Recommendations. en. Vol. 32. RILEM State-of-the-Art
Reports. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021. iSBN: 978-3-030-64899-2.
DOi: 10.1007/978-3-030-64900-5. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-
64900-5.
[18]
en. URL: https://www.screeningeagle.com/en/products/silver-schmidt-os8200.
[19]
en-US. URL: https : / / ndtconcrete . com / non - destructive - testing / ultrasonic - pulse -
velocity-test/.
[20]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 12504-1:2019.pdf. 2019. URL: https://sd.ds.dk/Viewer/
Standard?ProjectNr=M316811&Status=60.60&VariantID=&Page=0.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
75
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[21]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 12390-3:2019.pdf. 2019. URL: https://sd.ds.dk/Viewer/
Standard?ProjectNr=M316812&Status=60.60&VariantID=&Page=0.
[22]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 12390-4:2000.pdf. 2000. URL: https://sd.ds.dk/Viewer/
Standard?ProjectNr=M322967&Status=92.20&VariantID=&Page=0.
[23]
Maitham Alwash, Zoubir Mehdi Sbartaï, and Denys Breysse. “Non-destructive as-
sessment of both mean strength and variability of concrete: A new bi-objective ap-
proach”. In: Construction and Building Materials 113 (June 2016), pp. 880–889. iSSN:
0950-0618. DOi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2016.03.120.
[24]
Aalborg Portland. cementogbeton.pdf. URL: https://www.unicon.dk/media/1455/
cementogbeton.pdf.
[25]
Concrete Aggregates Australia Cement. “ChlorideResistanceofConcrete”. en. In: (2009).
[26]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 197-1.pdf. 2012. URL: https://sd.ds.dk/Viewer/Standard?
ProjectNr=M261096&Status=90.20&VariantID=46&Page=0.
[27]
Jens Mejer Frederiksen. “19.3 Chloridindtrængning”. da. In: ().
[28]
Farhad Pargar, Dessi Koleva, and Klaas Van Breugel. “Determination of Chloride
Content in Cementitious Materials: From Fundamental Aspects to Application of
Ag/AgCl Chloride Sensors”. en. In: Sensors 17.11 (Oct. 2017), p. 2482. iSSN: 1424-
8220. DOi: 10.3390/s17112482.
[29]
Michael Jansson and Ruth Sørensen. lbm198.pdf. 1989.
[30]
Luca Bertolini. “Steel corrosion and service life of reinforced concrete structures”.
en. In: Structure and Infrastructure Engineering 4.2 (Apr. 2008), pp. 123–137. iSSN:
1573-2479, 1744-8980. DOi: 10.1080/15732470601155490.
[31]
Esben Østergaard Hansen, Martin Riis Iskau, and Marianne Tange Hasholt. “Chlo-
ride Ingress in Concrete with Different Age at Time of First Chloride Exposure”. en.
In: ().
[32]
M. Torres-Luque et al. “Non-destructive methods for measuring chloride ingress into
concrete: State-of-the-art and future challenges”. In: Construction and Building Ma-
terials 68 (Oct. 2014), pp. 68–81. iSSN: 0950-0618. DOi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2014.
06.009.
[33]
Francine Laferrière et al. “A new system for early chloride detection in concrete”.
en. In: Smart Materials and Structures 17.4 (Aug. 2008), p. 045017. iSSN: 0964-1726,
1361-665X. DOi: 10.1088/0964-1726/17/4/045017.
[34]
Saroj R. Tripathi et al. “Measurement of chloride ion concentration in concrete struc-
tures using terahertz time domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS)”. In: Corrosion Science
62 (Sept. 2012), pp. 5–10. iSSN: 0010-938X. DOi: 10.1016/j.corsci.2012.05.005.
[35]
Tae-Kyun Kim et al. “Prediction of Chloride Penetration Depth Rate and Diffu-
sion Coefficient Rate of Concrete from Curing Condition Variations due to Climate
Change Effect”. In: International Journal of Concrete Structures and Materials 13
(Dec. 2019). DOi: 10.1186/s40069-019-0333-4.
[36]
Lingjie Wu, Wei Li, and Xiaoniu Yu. “Time-dependent chloride penetration in con-
crete in marine environments”. In: Construction and Building Materials 152 (Oct.
2017), pp. 406–413. iSSN: 0950-0618. DOi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.07.016.
[37]
Marianne Tange. Frostangreb Betonhåndbogen 19.4. 2020. URL: https://betonhaandbogen.
dk/media/bogen/kap_19.4_frostangreb_20200422.pdf.
[38]
da-DK. URL: https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/normaler-danmark.
[39]
Michel Pigeon, Jacques Marchand, and Richard Pleau. “Frost resistant concrete”. In:
Construction and Building Materials. Durability of Reinforced Concrete Structures
10.5 (July 1996), pp. 339–348. iSSN: 0950-0618. DOi: 10.1016/0950-0618(95)00067-4.
76
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[40]
S. Chatterji. “Freezing of air-entrained cement-based materials and specific actions
of air-entraining agents”. In: Cement and Concrete Composites 25.7 (Oct. 2003),
pp. 759–765. iSSN: 0958-9465. DOi: 10.1016/S0958-9465(02)00099-9.
[41]
T. C. Powers and R. A. Helmuth. “THEORY OF VOLUME CHANGES IN HARD-
ENED PORTLAND-CEMENT PASTE DURING FREEZING”. In: Highway Re-
search Board Proceedings 32 (1953). URL: https://trid.trb.org/View/102368.
[42]
San Luo et al. “Impact of Freeze–Thaw Cycles on the Long-Term Performance of
Concrete Pavement and Related Improvement Measures: A Review”. In: Materials
15.13 (June 2022), p. 4568. iSSN: 1996-1944. DOi: 10.3390/ma15134568.
[43]
National Institutes of Health. “The Freeze-Thaw Cycle in Concrete and Brick As-
semblies”. en. In: (2019).
[44]
Matthias Müller, Horst-Michael Ludwig, and Marianne Tange Hasholt. “Salt frost
attack on concrete: the combined effect of cryogenic suction and chloride binding
on ice formation”. en. In: Materials and Structures 54.5 (Oct. 2021), p. 189. iSSN:
1359-5997, 1871-6873. DOi: 10.1617/s11527-021-01779-7.
[45]
John J. Valenza and George W. Scherer. “Mechanism for salt scaling of a cementitious
surface”. en. In: Materials and Structures 40.3 (Apr. 2007), pp. 259–268. iSSN: 1871-
6873. DOi: 10.1617/s11527-006-9104-1.
[46]
Sture Lindmark. “Mechanisms of Salt Frost Scaling of Portland Cement-bound Ma-
terials: Studies and Hypothesis”. en. In: (1998).
[47]
Jens Majer Frederiksen. 19.2 Chloridtæthed. 2018. URL: https://betonhaandbogen.
dk/media/bogen/kap_19.2_karbonatisering_18092018.pdf.
[48]
Svenska Miljöinstitutet. Carbonation of concrete. en. text. 2021. URL: https://www.
ivl.se/projektwebbar/co2-concrete-uptake/carbonation-of-concrete.html.
[49]
Jin-Keun Kim et al. “Effect of carbonation on the rebound number and compressive
strength of concrete”. In: Cement and Concrete Composites 31.2 (Feb. 2009), pp. 139–
144. iSSN: 0958-9465. DOi: 10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2008.10.001.
[50]
Hemraj R. Kumavat, Narayan R. Chandak, and Ishwar T. Patil. “Factors influencing
the performance of rebound hammer used for non-destructive testing of concrete
members: A review”. In: Case Studies in Construction Materials 14 (June 2021),
e00491. iSSN: 2214-5095. DOi: 10.1016/j.cscm.2021.e00491.
[51]
Katalin Szilágyi, Adorján Borosnyói, and István Zsigovics. “Rebound surface hard-
ness of concrete: Introduction of an empirical constitutive model”. In: Construc-
tion and Building Materials 25.5 (May 2011), pp. 2480–2487. iSSN: 0950-0618. DOi:
10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2010.11.070.
[52]
en. 2003. URL: https://kimutzon.dk/United-Exhibits-Domicil-2003.
[53]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 12504-2:2021.pdf. 2021. URL: https://sd.ds.dk/Viewer/
Standard?ProjectNr=M335544&Status=60.60&VariantID=&Page=0.
[54]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 12504-4 2021. 2021. URL: https : / / sd . ds . dk / Viewer /
Standard?ProjectNr=M335548&Status=60.60&VariantID=&Page=0.
[55]
Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. 73269-Man-IC-ICS1100-Operators-Oct2012-DOC065289-
03.pdf. 2012. URL: https://tools.thermofisher.com/content/sfs/manuals/73269-Man-
IC-ICS1100-Operators-Oct2012-DOC065289-03.pdf.
[56]
Teknologisk Institut. Cirkulær økonomi hele vejen rundt i byggebranchen.pdf. 2019.
[57]
Miljøministeriet. Vejledning om håndtering af bygge- og anlægsaffald. Vol. VEJ nr
9139 af 25/02/2019. Feb. 2019. URL: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/retsinfo/
2019/9139.
[58]
RGS Nordic. Priser. da-DK. URL: https://rgsnordic.com/priser/.
[59]
da-DK. URL: https://www.serviceindeogude.dk/praktiske-goremal-udfores/affaldstyper-
sorteringsvejledning-affaldsfraktioner/guide-hvad-vejer-affald/.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
77
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[60]
Dansk Industri. beregn-selv-prisen-2012.pdf. 2012. URL: https://www.danskindustri.
dk/siteassets/medlemsforeninger/dansk-beton/betonelementforeningen/dokumenter/
beregn-selv-prisen-2012.pdf?v=231205.
[61]
Redaktionen. Byggerådgiver: Priser tilbud til privat rådgivning i 2023. da-DK. Jan.
2022. URL: https://primabolig.dk/byggeraadgiver/.
[62]
URL: https://www.teknologisk.dk/laboratorier/beton/proevning/39906.
[63]
Bayram Ercikdi et al. “Core size effect on the dry and saturated ultrasonic pulse
velocity of limestone samples”. In: Ultrasonics 72 (Dec. 2016), pp. 143–149. iSSN:
0041-624X. DOi: 10.1016/j.ultras.2016.08.006.
[64]
Mostafa M. Geriesh et al. “Developed Schmidt hammer based on jerk measurement”.
en. In: Nondestructive Characterization and Monitoring of Advanced Materials,
Aerospace, Civil Infrastructure, and Transportation XV. Ed. by Tzu-Yang Yu and
Andrew L. Gyekenyesi. Online Only, United States: SPIE, Mar. 2021, p. 51. iSBN:
978-1-5106-4013-9. DOi: 10.1117/12.2597105. URL: https://www.spiedigitallibrary.
org/conference- proceedings- of- spie/11592/2597105/Developed- Schmidt- hammer-
based-on-jerk-measurement/10.1117/12.2597105.full.
[65]
Ferhat Aydın and Mehmet Saribiyik. “Correlation between Schmidt Hammer and
destructive compressions testing for concretes in existing buildings”. In: Scientific
research and essays 5 (July 2010).
[66]
Denys Breysse and Juan Luis Martínez-Fernández. “Assessing concrete strength with
rebound hammer: review of key issues and ideas for more reliable conclusions”. en.
In: Materials and Structures 47.9 (Sept. 2014), pp. 1589–1604. iSSN: 1359-5997, 1871-
6873. DOi: 10.1617/s11527-013-0139-9.
[67]
D. Breysse. “Nondestructive evaluation of concrete strength: An historical review
and a new perspective by combining NDT methods”. In: Construction and Building
Materials 33 (Aug. 2012), pp. 139–163. iSSN: 0950-0618. DOi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.
2011.12.103.
[68]
E. Pereira and M. H. F. de Medeiros. “Pull Off test to evaluate the compressive
strength of concrete: an alternative to Brazilian standard techniques”. en. In: Revista
IBRACON de Estruturas e Materiais 5 (Dec. 2012), pp. 757–780. iSSN: 1983-4195.
DOi: 10.1590/S1983-41952012000600003.
[69]
Kursat Esat Alyamac et al. “Estimation of concrete strength combining rebound
hammer and Windsor probe test methods”. en. In: ().
[70]
Raffaele Pucinotti. “The Use of Multiple Combined Non Destructive Testing in
the Concrete Strenght Assessent: Applications on Laboratory Specimens”. In: (Jan.
2007). URL: https://www.academia.edu/67537349/The_Use_of_Multiple_Combined_
Non_Destructive_Testing_in_the_Concrete_Strenght_Assessent_Applications_on_
Laboratory_Specimens.
[71]
Svanemærket. Cirkulært børnehus opnår licens til Svanemærket – læs mere. da.
URL: https://www.svanemaerket.dk/nyheder/cirkulaert-boernehus-opnaar-licens-til-
svanemaerket.
[72]
BygCirkulært. BygCirkulært.dk. da-DK. URL: https://www.bygcirkulaert.dk/.
[73]
Videnscenter for Cirkulær Økonomi i Byggeriet. 2690257.pdf. 2022. URL: https://
www.ft.dk/samling/20222/almdel/kef/bilag/115/2690257.pdf.
[74]
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 206. 2023. URL: https : / / sd . ds . dk / Viewer / Standard ?
ProjectNr=M375862&Status=92.20&VariantID=&Page=0.
[75]
Katja Thygesen. Non destructive strength estimation of concrete elements for di-
rect reuse. en. 2022. URL: https://dtudk.sharepoint.com/sites/Structuralreuse463/
Delte%20dokumenter/General/Litteratur/Non_destructive_strength_estimation_of_
concrete_elements_for_direct_reuse.pdf?CT=1705914808390&OR=ItemsView.
78
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[76]
A. Çavdar and Ş. Bingöl. “Suggestion of New Formulations for Schmidt Hammer
and UPV Test Methods for Concrete”. en. In: Acta Physica Polonica A 125.2 (Jan.
2014), pp. 402–404. iSSN: 0587-4246, 1898-794X. DOi: 10.12693/APhysPolA.125.402.
[77]
Mostafa Abd Elrazek and Yasser Abdel Shafy Gamal. “The Reliable Concrete Com-
pression Strength Assessment by SCHMIDT Hammer for Different Concrete Grades”.
en. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 1171.1 (July
2021), p. 012004. iSSN: 1757-8981, 1757-899X. DOi: 10.1088/1757-899X/1171/1/
012004.
[78]
Mostafa Kazemi et al. “In-situ strength estimation of polypropylene fibre reinforced
recycled aggregate concrete using Schmidt rebound hammer and point load test”. en.
In: Journal of Sustainable Cement-Based Materials 9.5 (Sept. 2020), pp. 289–306.
iSSN: 2165-0373, 2165-0381. DOi: 10.1080/21650373.2020.1734983.
Reuse of Structural Concrete
79
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
Bibliography
80
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:90==
A
Building Materials and Geometry
The geometry of the building at Sundkrogsgade 30 is shown in Table A.1, while Table A.2
and Table A.3 describe the primary construction materials used for different elements of
the building.
Hall [m]
Administration Building [m]
Building Area [m2]
Length
38.4
22.5
-
Width
21.6
13.5
-
Height
11.5
17.0
Total
-
-
2000
Table A.1: Building geometry
Hall, primary part
Type
Roof
TTD78
Floor Deck
PX
Ground Level Slab
150 mm valsebeton, 150 mm jernbeton
Facades
Sandwich Elements
Columns
Concrete: RS
Beams
Concrete: KB and RB
Table A.2: Hall structures
Administration building, primary part
Type
Roof
Rafter
Floor Deck
PX32
Ground Level Slab
250 mm jernbeton
Facades
Sandwich elements
Foundation
Pile foundation
Table A.3: Materials of the administrative building
Reuse of Structural Concrete
81
==PAGE:91==
1
63
25%
2
68
15,5
3
58
Min
4
62
46,5
5
69
Max
6
63
77,5
7
54
# of OK
8
62
10
9
59
OK?
10
57
YES!
1
68
25%
2
64
15,9
3
61
Min
4
64
47,6
5
63
Max
6
68
79,4
7
60
# of OK
8
65
10
9
59
OK?
10
56
YES!
1
64
25%
2
66
15,9
3
60
Min
4
66
47,6
5
68
Max
6
65
79,4
7
60
# of OK
8
63
10
9
62
OK?
10
59
YES!
4,8%
3,9
6,1%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC1
Top
63,3
63,5
3,0
62,0
4,7
7,6%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC1
Mid 
62,8
63,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC1
Bottom
61,5
R [-] Mean [-] Median [-]
Sd [-]
CV Control
Floor
Type
Surface 
condition
Element 
name
Test 
placement Gridpoint
B
RH Data for Exterior Columns
==PAGE:92==
1
70
25%
2
61
15,9
3
59
Min
4
71
47,6
5
71
Max
6
69
79,4
7
61
# of OK
8
64
10
9
63
OK?
10
60
YES!
1
65
25%
2
62
15,9
3
64
Min
4
65
47,6
5
63
Max
6
62
79,4
7
68
# of OK
8
65
10
9
58
OK?
10
59
YES!
1
70
25%
2
66
16,1
3
60
Min
4
59
48,4
5
62
Max
6
64
80,6
7
61
# of OK
8
67
10
9
66
OK?
10
65
YES!
1
68
25%
2
63
16,3
3
67
Min
4
63
48,8
5
61
Max
6
74
81,3
7
63
# of OK
8
69
10
9
62
OK?
10
70
YES!
6,4%
3,5
5,4%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC3
Bottom
66
65,0
4,2
63,5
3,0
4,8%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC2
Top
64
64,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC2
Mid 
63,1
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC2
Bottom
64,9
63,5
4,8
7,5%
==PAGE:93==
1
65
25%
2
68
16,4
3
66
Min
4
60
49,1
5
63
Max
6
70
81,9
7
62
# of OK
8
66
10
9
69
OK?
10
65
YES!
1
61
25%
2
59
16,4
3
65
Min
4
62
49,1
5
61
Max
6
71
81,9
7
68
# of OK
8
68
10
9
70
OK?
10
66
YES!
1
58
25%
2
65
15,4
3
61
Min
4
65
46,1
5
69
Max
6
62
76,9
7
60
# of OK
8
56
10
9
64
OK?
10
57
YES!
1
72
25%
2
69
16,0
3
62
Min
4
60
48,0
5
63
Max
6
62
80,0
7
69
# of OK
8
64
10
9
64
OK?
10
65
YES!
5,8%
4,1
6,7%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC4
Mid 
65
64,0
3,8
65,5
4,2
6,4%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC4
Bottom
61,7
61,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC3
Top
65,1
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC3
Mid 
65,4
65,5
3,1
4,8%
==PAGE:94==
1
69
25%
2
62
15,5
3
60
Min
4
62
46,5
5
69
Max
6
62
77,5
7
60
# of OK
8
64
10
9
62
OK?
10
67
YES!
1
60
25%
2
62
15,9
3
59
Min
4
64
47,6
5
67
Max
6
64
79,4
7
63
# of OK
8
66
10
9
66
OK?
10
61
YES!
1
63
25%
2
59
15,5
3
68
Min
4
63
46,5
5
61
Max
6
63
77,5
7
62
# of OK
8
61
10
9
61
OK?
10
62
YES!
1
59
25%
2
65
15,4
3
62
Min
4
59
46,1
5
63
Max
6
63
76,9
7
60
# of OK
8
61
10
9
63
OK?
10
60
YES!
3,3%
2,4
3,8%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC5
Top
61,5
61,5
2,0
63,5
2,7
4,3%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC5
Mid 
62,3
62,0
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC5
Bottom
63,2
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC4
Top
63,7
62,0
3,4
5,4%
==PAGE:95==
1
65
25%
2
49
13,4
3
49
Min
4
54
40,1
5
54
Max
6
54
66,9
7
52
# of OK
8
57
10
9
52
OK?
10
53
YES!
1
58
25%
2
62
14,6
3
59
Min
4
68
43,9
5
53
Max
6
62
73,1
7
55
# of OK
8
60
10
9
50
OK?
10
58
YES!
1
56
25%
2
52
14,1
3
58
Min
4
56
42,4
5
64
Max
6
51
70,6
7
56
# of OK
8
59
10
9
60
OK?
10
57
YES!
1
51
25%
2
56
14,6
3
70
Min
4
60
43,9
5
60
Max
6
63
73,1
7
57
# of OK
8
60
10
9
57
OK?
10
54
YES!
8,9%
3,8
6,6%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC7
Bottom
58,8
58,5
5,2
58,5
5,1
8,7%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC6
Top
56,9
56,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC6
Mid 
58,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC6
Bottom
53,9
53,5
4,6
8,5%
==PAGE:96==
1
58
25%
2
64
13,9
3
56
Min
4
68
41,6
5
54
Max
6
55
69,4
7
56
# of OK
8
55
10
9
52
OK?
10
55
YES!
1
52
25%
2
57
14,6
3
60
Min
4
67
43,9
5
56
Max
6
60
73,1
7
55
# of OK
8
63
10
9
55
OK?
10
61
YES!
1
69
25%
2
70
17,4
3
72
Min
4
73
52,1
5
65
Max
6
69
86,9
7
67
# of OK
8
69
10
9
73
OK?
10
73
YES!
1
69
25%
2
69
17,3
3
64
Min
4
70
51,8
5
70
Max
6
68
86,3
7
70
# of OK
8
69
10
9
67
OK?
10
69
YES!
2,7%
2,7
3,9%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC8
Mid 
68,5
69,0
1,8
58,5
4,5
7,6%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC8
Bottom
70
69,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC7
Top
58,6
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC7
Mid 
57,3
55,5
4,9
8,6%
==PAGE:97==
1
71
25%
2
73
17,5
3
70
Min
4
71
52,5
5
70
Max
6
71
87,5
7
68
# of OK
8
69
10
9
67
OK?
10
68
YES!
1
69
25%
2
66
16,9
3
68
Min
4
69
50,6
5
70
Max
6
69
84,4
7
67
# of OK
8
64
10
9
52
OK?
10
63
YES!
1
67
25%
2
72
16,8
3
68
Min
4
67
50,3
5
69
Max
6
67
83,8
7
66
# of OK
8
67
10
9
67
OK?
10
64
YES!
1
70
25%
2
72
17,3
3
67
Min
4
64
51,8
5
70
Max
6
68
86,3
7
68
# of OK
8
66
10
9
72
OK?
10
70
YES!
3,8%
2,1
3,1%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC9
Top
68,7
69,0
2,6
67,5
5,3
8,1%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC9
Mid 
67,4
67,0
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC9
Bottom
65,7
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC8
Top
69,8
70,0
1,8
2,6%
==PAGE:98==
1
63
25%
2
70
16,4
3
71
Min
4
65
49,1
5
65
Max
6
66
81,9
7
65
# of OK
8
65
10
9
69
OK?
10
69
YES!
1
74
25%
2
69
17,0
3
57
Min
4
66
51,0
5
67
Max
6
70
85,0
7
68
# of OK
8
69
10
9
68
OK?
10
67
YES!
1
67
25%
2
69
16,9
3
72
Min
4
73
50,6
5
69
Max
6
67
84,4
7
67
# of OK
8
68
10
9
67
OK?
10
66
YES!
2,3
3,4%
68,0
4,3
6,4%
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC10
Top
68,5
67,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC10
Mid 
67,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC10
Bottom
66,8
65,5
2,7
4,0%
==PAGE:99==
1
66
25%
2
64
15,6
3
64
Min
4
63
46,9
5
62
Max
6
61
78,1
7
62
# of OK
8
59
10
9
60
OK?
10
64
YES!
1
69
25%
2
69
16,8
3
67
Min
4
67
50,3
5
79
Max
6
61
83,8
7
64
# of OK
8
61
10
9
69
OK?
10
62
YES!
1
67
25%
2
67
16,9
3
66
Min
4
68
50,6
5
64
Max
6
69
84,4
7
70
# of OK
8
62
10
9
68
OK?
10
70
YES!
3,8%
5,4
8,1%
Ground
Concrete
painted
INC4
Middle
67,1
67,5
2,6
62,5
2,1
3,4%
Ground
Concrete
painted
INC3
Middle
66,8
67,0
Ground
Concrete
painted
INC1
Middle
62,5
R [-]
Mean [-]
Median [-] Sd [-]
CV
Control
Floor
Type
Surface 
condition
Element 
name
Test 
placement
Gridpoint
C
RH Data for Interior Columns
==PAGE:100==
1
66
25%
2
74
16,9
3
68
Min
4
64
50,6
5
66
Max
6
74
84,4
7
63
# of OK
8
74
10
9
67
OK?
10
71
YES!
1
68
25%
2
69
17,5
3
73
Min
4
68
52,5
5
66
Max
6
70
87,5
7
70
# of OK
8
73
10
9
75
OK?
10
70
YES!
70,0
2,7
3,9%
1st
Concrete
painted
INC12
Middle
70,2
1st
Concrete
painted
INC11
Middle
68,7
67,5
4,2
6,2%
==PAGE:101==
1
420
88,3
61%
2
420
88,1
85%
3
420
88,3
100%
4
420
88,2
100%
5
420
88,2
100%
1
420
87,4
67%
2
420
87,3
100%
3
420
87,1
100%
4
420
87,3
100%
5
420
87,2
100%
1
420
87,8
100%
2
420
87,8
100%
3
420
87,7
100%
4
420
87,7
100%
5
420
87,7
100%
1
420
85,6
100%
2
420
85,5
100%
3
420
85,7
100%
4
420
85,8
100%
5
420
85,5
100%
1
420
87,3
100%
2
420
87,3
100%
3
420
87,3
100%
4
420
87,2
100%
5
420
87,2
100%
1
420
86,2
85%
2
420
86,2
100%
3
420
86,2
100%
4
420
86,2
100%
5
420
86,2
100%
1
420
85,3
100%
2
420
85,2
100%
3
420
85,2
100%
4
420
85,3
100%
5
420
85,2
100%
1
420
88,7
83%
2
420
88,4
100%
3
420
88,2
100%
4
420
88,2
100%
5
420
88,3
100%
420
88,2
4,762
Bottom
420
85,2
4,930
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC3
Mid 
EXC2
Top
420
86,2
4,872
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC3
4,912
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC2
Mid 
420
87,2
4,817
87,7
4,789
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC2
Bottom
420
85,5
420
87,3
4,811
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC1
Top
420
Bottom
420
88,2
4,762
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC1
Mid 
Avg(length) 
[mm]
Time 
[μs]
Accuracy 
[%]
Min time 
[μs]
v 
[km/s]
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC1
Floor
Type
Surface 
condition
Element 
name
Test 
placement
Grid 
point
Length 
[mm]
Ground Concrete
Clean
D
UPV Data for Exterior Columns
==PAGE:102==
1
420
89,2
82%
2
420
89,1
100%
3
420
89,1
100%
4
420
89,1
100%
5
420
89,1
100%
1
420
90,1
90%
2
420
89,8
100%
3
420
89,8
100%
4
420
89,7
100%
5
420
89,7
100%
1
420
89,6
100%
2
420
89,4
100%
3
420
89,4
100%
4
420
89,6
100%
5
420
89,5
100%
1
420
84,8
74%
2
420
84,7
100%
3
420
84,7
100%
4
420
84,7
100%
5
420
84,7
100%
1
420
87,8
84%
2
420
87,8
100%
3
420
87,7
100%
4
420
87,8
100%
5
420
88
100%
1
420
88,8
100%
2
420
88,7
100%
3
420
88,6
100%
4
420
88,7
100%
5
420
88,7
100%
1
420
89,2
100%
2
420
88,9
100%
3
420
89
100%
4
420
88,7
100%
5
420
88,7
100%
1
420
94,5
65%
2
420
94,5
84%
3
420
94,4
78%
4
420
94,5
89%
5
420
94,6
76%
420
94,5
4,444
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC6
Bottom
4,735
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC5
Top
420
88,7
4,735
87,8
4,784
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC5
Mid 
420
88,7
420
84,7
4,959
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC5
Bottom
420
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC4
Top
4,682
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC4
Mid 
420
89,4
4,698
89,1
4,714
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC4
Bottom
420
89,7
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC3
Top
420
==PAGE:103==
1
420
95
81%
2
420
95
77%
3
420
94,9
95%
4
420
94,6
94%
5
420
94,5
100%
1
420
94,6
61%
2
420
94,6
65%
3
420
94,5
75%
4
420
94,6
79%
5
420
94,5
77%
1
420
95
100%
2
420
95
100%
3
420
95
100%
4
420
95
100%
5
420
95
100%
1
420
94,9
63%
2
420
94,8
80%
3
420
94,9
73%
4
420
94,7
77%
5
420
94,6
84%
1
420
93,9
60%
2
420
94
65%
3
420
93,9
67%
4
420
93,9
72%
5
420
94
65%
1
420
89
83%
2
420
89,2
100%
3
420
89,2
100%
4
420
89,1
100%
5
420
89,2
100%
1
420
90,6
84%
2
420
90,6
100%
3
420
90,5
100%
4
420
90,6
100%
5
420
90,6
100%
1
420
90,7
100%
2
420
90,5
100%
3
420
90,5
100%
4
420
90,4
100%
5
420
90,7
100%
420
90,5
4,641
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC8
Top
4,709
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC8
Mid 
420
90,6
4,636
93,9
4,473
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC8
Bottom
420
89,2
420
94,9
4,426
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC7
Top
420
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC7
Mid 
4,444
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC7
Bottom
420
95
4,421
95
4,421
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC6
Top
420
94,5
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC6
Mid 
420
==PAGE:104==
1
420
91,9
68%
2
420
92,1
85%
3
420
91,8
94%
4
420
91,8
100%
5
420
91,6
79%
1
420
91,5
93%
2
420
91,6
77%
3
420
91,8
93%
4
420
91,7
91%
5
420
91,7
100%
1
420
92,3
70%
2
420
92,2
88%
3
420
92
97%
4
420
92,1
98%
5
420
92
92%
1
420
96,3
70%
2
420
96,3
73%
3
420
96,4
79%
4
420
96,3
83%
5
420
96,4
78%
1
420
96
71%
2
420
96,4
76%
3
420
96,1
86%
4
420
95,9
92%
5
420
96,1
92%
1
420
96,8
86%
2
420
97
79%
3
420
97
91%
4
420
96,9
85%
5
420
96,9
96%
4,334
96,1
4,370
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC10
Top
420
96,9
420
96,3
4,361
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC10
Mid 
420
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC10
Bottom
4,580
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC9
Top
420
92
4,565
91,8
4,575
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC9
Mid 
420
91,7
Ground Concrete
Clean
EXC9
Bottom
420
==PAGE:105==
1
480
106,6
61%
2
480
106,6
69%
3
480
106,2
100%
4
480
106,1
100%
5
480
106
100%
1
480
107
100%
2
480
106,8
100%
3
480
107
100%
4
480
107,2
100%
5
480
106,8
100%
1
480
105,8
93%
2
480
105,9
48%
3
480
105,8
70%
4
480
105,9
48%
5
480
105,7
93%
1
480
109,5
63%
2
480
109,5
79%
3
480
109,3
97%
4
480
109,4
87%
5
480
109,2
100%
1
480
109,9
66%
2
480
109,2
100%
3
480
109,4
90%
4
480
109
100%
5
480
108,9
100%
4,39
4392,39
4,38
4383,56
1st
Concrete
Painted
INC12
Middle
480
109,28
4,53
4532,58
1st
Concrete
Painted
INC11
Middle
480
109,5
4,49
4485,98
Ground
Concrete
Painted
INC4
Middle
480
105,9
4,50
4502,81
Ground
Concrete
Painted
INC3
Middle
480
107
v 
[mm/μs]
v [m/s]
Ground
Concrete
Painted
INC1
Middle
480
106,6
Gridpoint Length 
[mm]
Avg(length) 
[mm]
Time 
[μs]
Accuracy 
[%]
Min time 
[μs]
Floor
Type
Surface 
condition
Element 
name
Test 
placement
E
UPV Data for Interior Columns
==PAGE:106==
Medium precision
Medium precision
EXC2_bottom
EXC3_Mid
65
MEAN
66
MEAN
62
MEAN
56
MEAN
71
MEAN
66
66,1
66
66,2
61
60,6
56
58,3
72
71,8
63
MEDIAN
68
MEDIAN
67
MEDIAN
58
MEDIAN
72
MEDIAN
67
66,5
69
66
63
60,5
57
56,5
69
72
69
STD
63
STD
57
STD
60
STD
70
STD
62
2,806738
64
1,8737959
58
3,0258149
55
4,270051
72
1,549193
67
CV
68
CV
60
CV
69
CV
74
CV
63
4,25%
65
2,83%
57
4,99%
56
7,32%
72
2,16%
69
66
60
55
72
70
67
61
61
74
59
MEAN
67
MEAN
59
MEAN
49
MEAN
70
MEAN
55
61,9
66
68,3
57
59,6
67
58,1
71
70,4
61
MEDIAN
71
MEDIAN
57
MEDIAN
60
MEDIAN
68
MEDIAN
63
61,5
70
68
59
59
60
58
72
70,5
62
STD
65
STD
60
STD
57
STD
70
STD
66
3,95671
71
2,0027759
59
3,1340425
59
4,532598
69
1,264911
68
CV
68
CV
59
CV
56
CV
72
CV
59
6,39%
69
2,93%
66
5,26%
60
7,80%
71
1,80%
60
68
64
57
71
66
68
56
56
70
60
MEAN
67
MEAN
55
MEAN
56
MEAN
71
MEAN
59
60,5
66
67,2
69
59,5
63
60,5
70
69,6
58
MEDIAN
68
MEDIAN
58
MEDIAN
60
MEDIAN
71
MEDIAN
55
59,5
67
67
50
59,5
57
60,5
64
70,5
66
sd
69
sd
53
sd
57
sd
69
sd
65
3,865805
67
0,9189366
65
5,8547227
60
3,02765
69
2,503331
60
CV
68
CV
59
CV
61
CV
67
CV
57
6,39%
67
1,37%
60
9,84%
64
5,00%
71
3,60%
59
66
61
64
72
66
67
65
63
72
v1 [m/s] v2 [m/s]
v3 [m/s] Mean
sd
CV
TRP level
EXC3_Bottom
4794,52
4878,05
4964,5
4879,04
85,014
2% Medium precison 
EXC7_Mid
4468,09
4525,86
4402,5
4465,49
61,714
1% Medium precison 
EXC8_Mid
4610,32
4635,76
4651,2
4632,41
20,627
0% High precision
TRP assesment for RH data
TL
TRP assesment for UPV data
Medium precision
EXC6_Top
EXC7_bottom
EXC8_Top
High
High
F
TRP Assesment for Exterior
Columns
==PAGE:107==
68
Mean
66,30
66
Mean
69,40
70
Mean
68,40
61
Median
66,50
70
Median
69,50
62
Median
69,00
66
Sd
4,00
69
Sd
2,07
69
Sd
3,27
67
CV
6,04%
71
CV
2,98%
72
CV
4,78%
70
69
66
73
72
69
61
69
69
62
71
65
66
71
69
69
66
73
69
Mean
67,60
68
Mean
68,40
75
Mean
71,60
66
Median
69,00
68
Median
68,00
69
Median
72,50
69
Sd
3,84
67
Sd
1,07
75
Sd
4,45
71
CV
5,67%
68
CV
1,57%
71
CV
6,22%
72
70
76
63
67
65
70
68
65
61
69
77
71
70
74
64
69
69
72
Mean
68,70
69
Mean
69,50
68
Mean
65,26
63
Median
68,50
72
Median
70,00
70
Median
70,50
68
Sd
2,58
70
Sd
2,07
72
Sd
3,68
69
CV
3,76%
70
CV
2,98%
74
CV
5,64%
68
70
65
71
67
68
68
71
74
71
65
63
70
70
72
67
71
71
TL
v1 [m/s]
v2 [m/s]
v3 [m/ Mean
Median
sd
CV
INC4
4515
4494
4549 4519,333333
4515 27,75
1% High precision
INC12
4452
4351
4351 4384,666667
4351 58,31
1% Medium precision
TRP
TRP assesment for RH
UPV assesment for RH
INC3
INC4
INC12
Medium precision
High precision
Medium precision
G
TRP Assesment for Interior
Columns
==PAGE:108==
EXC2_m
EXC3_m
EXC4_m
EXC5_m
EXC6_m
EXC7_m
EXC8_m
H
Compression Failures
==PAGE:109==
EXC9_m
INTC1
INTC3
INTC4
INTC1.1
INTC1.3
==PAGE:110==
Column
h [mm]
h_avg
 [mm]
d [mm]
d_avg
 [mm]
A_cross 
section [mm^2]
F [N]
fc,ref [Mpa]
203
99
203
99
203
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
203
99
203
99
203
99
203
99
203
99
203
99
200
99
200
99
200
99
201
99
201
99
201
99
203
99
203
99
203
99
203
99
204
99
203
99
202
99
202
99
202
99
201
99
201
99
201
99
EXC6
202
99
7693,785
297480,2
38,67
EXC4
202
99
7693,785
390387
50,74
EXC5
202
99
7693,785
552647
71,83
EXC2
203
99
7693,785
457660,88
59,48
EXC3
202
99
7693,785
448128,8
58,25
INTC13
201
99
7693,785
303785,2
39,48
INTC11
202
99
7693,785
361394,8
46,97
INTC3
203
99
7693,785
300772
39,09
INTC1
201
99
7693,785
457568,5
59,47
INTC4
203,33333
99
7693,785
431969,7
56,15
EXC8
203
99
7693,785
403748,2
52,48
EXC9
200
99
7693,785
347514,7
45,17
EXC7
203
99
7693,785
290989,5
37,82
I
Compression Test Data
==PAGE:111==
J
Matlab Code for Combined
Conversionmodel
102
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:112==
K
Matlab Code for Leave-One-Out
Method
Reuse of Structural Concrete
103
==PAGE:113==
L
Matlab Code for Leave-One-Out
Method for Bi-Objective Approach
and Linear Regression model
104
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:114==
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC12
Top1
480
112,1
112
4,29 4285,714286
112,4
112,5
112
112,2
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Top2
480
110,6
110,2
4,36 4355,716878
110,3
110,2
110,6
110,5
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Top3
480
113,6
113,3
4,24 4236,540159
113,3
114,1
114,3
113,9
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Mid1
480
108,4
108,4
4,43
4428,04428
108,4
108,6
108,4
108,8
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Mid2
480
109,3
108,9
4,41 4407,713499
109,3
108,9
109,5
109,4
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Mid3
480
109,8
109,3
4,39
4391,5828
109,5
109,3
109,5
109,3
v 
[mm/μs]
v [m/s]
length 
[mm]
Time 
[μs]
Min time 
[μs]
UPV DATA
Column
Type
Surface condition
Element 
name
TL
M
Extra NDT Investigation
==PAGE:115==
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Bot1
480
108,1
107,8
4,45 4452,690167
108,4
108,1
107,8
108
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Bot2
480
109,3
109
4,4 4403,669725
109,3
109
109,2
109,6
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Bot3
480
110,4
109,9
4,37 4367,606915
109,9
110
110,3
110,2
68
68
62
66
64
67
68
64
70
64
68
70
63
63
62
62
61
62
67
59
Top
RH DATA
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
63,7
62,5
3,5
5,40%
66,5
2,5
3,90%
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Top
64
==PAGE:116==
62
69
61
68
72
62
61
72
69
60
63
67
60
60
67
66
72
67
60
65
63
62
61
64
68
68
64
66
67
64
63
65
62
62
65
67
60
66
67
70
65,5
65
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Mid
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Mid
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Mid
65
3
4,60%
64,7
3,9
6,10%
64,7
64
2,5
3,80%
65,6
65
4,8
7,40%
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Top
==PAGE:117==
66
65
63
61
66
60
70
68
67
66
66
61
65
61
67
64
69
66
69
62
65
61
66
65
62
64
64
66
65
62
64,5
1,8
2,80%
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Bot
64
65,2
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Bot
INC3
Concrete
Removed paint
INC3
Bot
4,70%
65
65,5
3
4,60%
3,1
66
==PAGE:118==
N
Price of New Columns
Reuse of Structural Concrete
109
==PAGE:119==
O
CorePrice DiamantXperten
110
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:120==
P
Tendencies Between Strength and
Rebound Data
[76]
[77]
Reuse of Structural Concrete
111
==PAGE:121==
Chapter P: Tendencies Between Strength and Rebound Data
[75]
[76]
112
Reuse of Structural Concrete
==PAGE:122==
Chapter P: Tendencies Between Strength and Rebound Data
[78]
[17]
Reuse of Structural Concrete
113
==PAGE:123==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
