==PAGE:1==
Thomas Aamand Witting
Developing an Empirically Based
Walkability Index
From Large-Scale Data
Master Thesis
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Walkability and pedestrian-oriented urban design has gained increasing interest in
recent decades. With its varying definitions, walkability is a broad topic with many
focus areas. This thesis investigates relations between the built environment and the
desirability index, a walkability measure describing systematic deviations from the
shortest path seen in pedestrian trajectories.
Previous studies have mostly worked with low granularity resolutions or on smaller ge-
ographical areas, often with survey or field recorded data. We use large-scale data from
Strava and OpenStreetMap, covering the region of Copenhagen and Northern Zealand
on a street-specific resolution. Multinomial logistic regression models and a walkabil-
ity index used in existing research are trained on our data, complemented by a gradient
boosted tree model which were found to outperform the former. Utilizing explainabil-
ity techniques for black box models, we quantify the found importance of the built
environment attributes and relate them to current research.
I thank those who have provided guid-
ance, support, reassurance, company, and
supervision through the past five months.
28th of January, 2024
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Walkability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Quantifying Walkability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Measuring the Built Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Spatial Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Data
8
3.1
Strava Metro
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.1
Strava as a Proxy for Pedestrian Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Built Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Global Human Settlement Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
GeoDanmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.3
OpenStreetMap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Methods
13
4.1
Computing Desirability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.1
O-D Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.2
Synthesizing Activities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.1
Labelling Desirability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.2
Baseline Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2.3
eXtreme Gradient Boosting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Model Training and Explanation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.1
Treating Class Imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.2
Model Tuning on Subset of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.3
K-Fold Cross Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Feature Importance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.1
Permutation Feature Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4.2
Model Explanation Using SHAP-Values
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Results
29
5.1
Modelling Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Hyperparameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.2
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:4==
5.1.3
Permutation Feature Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.4
Feature Impact on Model Outputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.5
Spatial Model Generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Discussion
36
6.1
Limitations of the Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.1
Strava . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.2
OpenStreetMap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Limitations of the Thesis and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2.1
Lack of Actual Trajectories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2.2
Sociodemographics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.3
Frank’s Walkability Index and Land Use Mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2.4
Collecting Built Environment Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Interpretations of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3.1
Model Complexity versus Explainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3.2
How the Built Environment Influences Desirability . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3.3
Generalizability Across Geographical Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Conclusion
44
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Planning walkable places have been a strategy to address a number of problems which impact the
quality of urban environments and to facilitate active transportation and sociable communities.
Following the car-centric planning of the 20th century, an increased interest for including soft
mobility, like walking and cycling, into urban planning has emerged in the more recent decades.
A look into the popularity of walkability related terms, as shown in figure 1.1, reveals this trend.
This interest is also reflected in public organization. Copenhagen Municipality proposed a strat-
egy in 2011 to promote pedestrian activity, encapsulating it with the words1 [24]:
Copenhagen has great ambitions for prioritizing pedestrians with the aim of achieving
an even better city life for all, healthier Copenhageners, and a better environment. It is
crucial for us to create an even more exciting, immersive, and safe city.
While the report itself does not enforce any new policies, it functions as a guide and handbook
for the policymakers with a proposed set of focus areas for the healthy city along with specific
recommendations that can be implemented for each area. The strategy report also surveyed res-
idents to better understand what factors they consider when walking in their local neighbour-
hood. Most agreed that green trails and environment, perceived safety and visibility to traffic,
and a lively community with shops and cafés were important topics for a walkable neighbour-
hood. Understanding the residents wants and needs is an important step towards building an
urban city for everyone.
Strategy reports, like the one above, and research projects from a variety of institutions try to
capture exactly these elements or to apply them into the actual urban design. Approaching the
topic of walkability with different methods allow researchers to gain insights of both the qualita-
tive and subjective measures as well as the quantitative and empirical measures. What residents
say is important may not be identical to what is observed to be important - but both are very
relevant for improved urban designs.
A number of aspects may help motivate people to walk - the desire to be active, to explore the
local area, as a mode of transportation from A to B, or simply to relax. But elements of the
infrastructure and built environment, e.g. sidewalks, accessibility, amenities, can also act as a
motivational source. Research have repeatedly highlighted the relations between the built envi-
ronment and physical activity, supporting the notion that urban design significantly influences
the health and well-being of residents [22, 18]. The motivation behind this thesis comes from
1Translated from Danish
1
==PAGE:6==
the awareness that walkable places contribute not only to improved physical health but also fa-
cilitate sociable communities, reduce traffic congestion, and enhance overall urban livability [2].
This thesis will address the quantitative and empirical aspect of the interplay between pedes-
trians and the built environment, applying it in a larger geographical context. Where the ma-
jority of previous methods used are difficult to apply for both high granularity and large spatial
scopes, we hope that our approach driven by large-scale quantitative data sources will fill in this
gap and help us to understand the scalability of past results. We will utilize data provided by the
social media and physical exercise tracking app Strava which contains pedestrian counts for the
vast majority of streets in most of Northern Zealand [44]. Information about the built environ-
ment data is collected from OpenStreetMap, an open-source geographic database and mapping
project. This thesis will additionally focus on why some streets are more or less travelled than
would be expected and we hope to quantify how each built environment attribute impacts this
with explainable modelling.
Fig. 1.1. Popularity of Relevant Terms: A popularity measure of four of the terms
most relevant to this thesis have been collected from the Google Ngram Viewer
project [30]. A positive trend through the most recent decades is seen for all terms,
implying increasing interests in the topics.
Thesis Scope
In order to properly address the context of walkability and gaps in current research explained in
the introductory section, we have constructed a set of research questions we aim to answer:
• What key urban features are correlated with pedestrian activity and to what extent?
• How do the identified key urban features compare with traditional walkability index mea-
sures in assessing urban desirability?
• Is the generalization capability of our predictive model consistent across different spatial
locations?
2
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
As part of this thesis we conducted a literature review to gather a sense of the existing topics of
research within walkability and gain the fundamental insights needed to work in the intersection
of walkability, urban design, and data science. In this chapter we will give a non-exhaustive walk-
through of both recent and past works within this intersection.
2.1
Walkability
Many studies have been published within the field of walkability and its sub-topics through the
years. As such, a number of definitions for walkability have been proposed through the years.
The authors of one study defined walkability as [42]:
The extent to which the built environment supports and encourages walking by providing
for pedestrian comfort and safety, connecting people with varied destinations within a
reasonable amount of time and effort, and offering visual interest in journeys throughout
the network.
They also stated six criteria which a walkabale neighbourhood should have. We found this defi-
nition of walkability especially fitting for capturing the overall essence of the numerous studies
published within the field.
Walking has been shown to be the most popular and accessible physical activity among US adults
across all demographics, with 29% of men and 38% of women reporting to engage in it weekly
during leisure-time indicating that walkable places could benefit a large portion of a popula-
tion [6]. Another study found a 72% increased likelihood for transit walkers to attain 30 minutes
or more of daily walking if they lived in urban areas with over 1 million people and a rail system
than those who lived in a city with no rail system [14]. Results for two large, US cities supports
these claims by showing a positive trend between time spent walking as a transportation mode
and walkable neighbourhoods, while a Swedish study linked public transit density to reduced car
ownership implying an increase in use of alternative modes of transports [1, 20].
A study done in Brussels investigated how individuals perceived the neighbourhood walkability
based on a number of qualities. They conclude the impact that perceived safety, cleanliness,
pavement quality, and the surrounding aesthetics has on the perceived walkability, suggesting
policymakers to mainly focus on those items when promoting walkability [36]. Quantifiable fac-
tors thought to impact walking and cycling patterns have also been proposed, including street
3
==PAGE:8==
connectivity and density, land use mix, presence of bike and pedestrian paths, and the proxim-
ity of parks, recreation centers, and similar amenities [37]. They also conclude that substantial
evidence exist for the relation between environmental factors, assessed both objectively and
subjectively, and physical activity, but emphasizes that significant progress in the field is still
needed as an improved understanding could lead to policy changes that will facilitate more ac-
tive lifestyles.
It is evident that papers, like the ones above, have discussed and investigated the links between
physical health, walkability, and urban design with a variety of approaches. While they agree
that the surrounding elements in a neighbourhood influences its walkability, the specifics of
and methodologies to measure these vary. Efforts to objectively quantify walkability into an
index were put forward in a study by combining land-use mix, intersection density, retail floor
area ratio, and residential building density [13]. They defined the index on data available on a
census block group level, corresponding to units with 600-3000 inhabitants, and correlated it
with physical activity for residents in these groups. They found a positive relation between the
walkability index and the number of daily self-reported walk trips, with a mean of 0.24 daily
walks in the lowest walkability decile increased to 1.55 in the highest walkability decile.
2.1.1
Quantifying Walkability
Previous research with empirical approaches for the physical activity data have utilized differ-
ent types of data sources: a Dutch study used country-wide surveys to correlate environment
variables with the frequency of walk trips, finding a significant and positive coefficients in a lin-
ear regression analysis between walk frequency and e.g. closeness of supermarkets or land use
mix [25]. A potential issue with survey-based approaches is self-reporting bias, people tend to
overreport physical activity - especially if an active lifestyle is an important part of the respon-
dents identity [4]. Another study equipped 227 Parisians with GPS receivers and accelerometers
for seven days, using linear and logistic regression analyses to quantify the relations between
measured activity and Walk Score® [8]. This approach removes the self-report bias but is difficult
to scale to larger sample sizes - just like surveys.
Walk Score is a commercial and publicly available walkability index launched in 2007, assigning
a numerical score from 0 to 100 to assess the pedestrian-friendliness of a location [38]. Taking
into account proximity to select amenities, block lengths, and intersection densities, it serves as
a valuable tool for individuals, homebuyers, and city planners in evaluating walkable communi-
ties. A review of the use of Walk Score in research found that most studies incorporating Walk
Score in their analysis also includes other measures thought to relate to walkability. Some of the
studies included in the review found Walk Score to be a significant predictor of active transport
or physical activity, while others only partially concluded so - e.g. positive correlation for men
but negative for women, or as a significant predictor for purposive walking only [17].
A similar approach to ours of using physical activity patterns sourced from the Strava smart-
phone application have also been used earlier. An analysis of Metro Vancouver, British Columbia,
looked into the relationships between running patterns from Strava, socioeconomic status, and
urban environment [19]. They described the urban environment with categorical variables for
the population densities, greenness, and presence of bodies of water within predefined dissem-
ination areas and found that high values for all these were associated with increased running
activity. The authors indicate the limits of using only a few categorical variables for the built
environment, suggesting possible future research to expand with a more in-depth urban analy-
sis. They also hint at the biases of Strava as a proxy for running data as it tends to favor younger
men with higher socioeconomic status and that individuals with a lower socioeconomic status
are likely underrepresented in the data. Although the study uses a physical activity data source
4
==PAGE:9==
available at a street-segment resolution, they aggregate the results into dissemination areas los-
ing potentially interesting street-specific patterns in the progress.
2.2
Measuring the Built Environment
While the previously mentioned studies have worked with both objective, perceived, and subjec-
tive evaluations of the environment, they do not represent the attributes used in the whole field
of walkability. Attempts to gather and create an overview of the specific elements and behaviour
of the built environment have been done to collect and summarize the consensus. These works
have primarily been in the form of review articles, as the features thought to impact walkability,
and the methods to measure these, have been as diverse as the amount of authors. One review ar-
ticle classified 81 walkability variables based on either objective or subjective measurements [39].
They found two-thirds of those to be objective, the remaining third subjective. Additionally, they
highlight how more attention on demographic diversity within pedestrians could provide better
knowledge on social walkability. While this study gives a sense of the many variables believed
to relate with walkability, it does not provide specific assessment methods for them.
The many different-but-similar definitions of walkability have been summarized into a concep-
tual framework consisting of 3 clusters with 9 themes in total in a study by Ann Forsyth, as seen in
figure 2.1 [11]. The benefit of this framework is to distinguish the definitions from each other in
other to highlight the differences and conflicts between them. This is important for urban design
as two different definitions of what a walkable place is could lead to two substantially different
designs. Forsyth highlights the importance of better definitions of walkability and proposes the
need for urban planning to consider the range of walking purposes as this may impact what is
considered walkable. The nine themes and their clusters presented as important elements for
walkability can be summarized as:
Traversable, mean
The basic physical infrastructure used by
pedestrians such as continuous paths, surface
types, and lack of major hazards.
Compact or close, mean
The proximity and density of destinations and
density of the infrastructure. Destinations can
be defined as shops, parks, transport, work
places, and similar facilities.
Safe, mean
Perceived and actual safety for pedestrians
with regards to crime and traffic incidents.
Physically enticing, mean
Presence of good pedestrian facilities like side-
walks and crossings. Also describes how en-
gaging the environment is for a pedestrian -
interesting architecture, nice scenery, or pres-
ence of greenery.
Lively and sociable, outcome
A mixture of a pleasant environment with an
interesting mix of people and possibilities - e.g.
shopping areas or mixed-use neighbourhoods.
Sustainable transportation options, out-
come
An environment where walking as a mode of
transport is both possible and encouraged -
perhaps coupled with good public transit op-
tions.
Exercise-inducing, outcome
Presence of features in an environment which
motivate people to engage in physical activity.
Multidimensional in terms of means, proxy
The increase seen in indicators of livability and
sustainability in a walkable environment.
Holistic solution, proxy
Using the walkability concept as a holistic solu-
tion to improving urban areas - often focusing
on human scaled and slower paced designs.
5
==PAGE:10==
Fig. 2.1. Conceptual Framework for Walkability Definitions: Based on the ap-
plications and outcomes of existing literature, Ann Forsyth developed a conceptual
framework which groups them into clusters and themes [11]. Means relate to the en-
vironment and what makes a place walkable. Outcomes relate to the effect of walkable
places on society. Proxies relate to using walkability for better urban design - how can
planners create a better place to live and how do we measure this?
The overview of the 32 most important attributes, and 63 measures of these, found by another
review article could work as a great foundation to build empirical research on [10]. They give each
attribute along with one or more measurements for it and possible assessment methods for each
measurement. The benefit of their review approach is to highlight the variety of measurements
between studies allowing readers to select those relevant to them, yet also emphasizing the lack
of structure and need for standardization for proper comparison of results. With the implica-
tions of this in mind, we will use this review article as the primary source for built environment
measures for our thesis going forward.
2.2.1
Spatial Resolution
As briefly mentioned earlier, the majority of literature has worked with the concept of walkability
in the spatial scope of neighbourhoods, census block groups, and similar resolutions. Addition-
ally, the impact of walkability and measure for physical activity is most often based on total
pedestrian flows or the amount of time spent walking per unit area. As such, their walkability
indices often favour areas with dense infrastructure the most. This could lead to a hypotheti-
cal scenario where the city center of a large city is wrongly deemed more walkable than a small
town even though the town may see significantly more pedestrian activity than would be ex-
6
==PAGE:11==
pected based on population density.
A study divided a part of Lisbon’s streets into one-meter points for which a walkability mea-
sure were computed [23]. This creates an index with very high granularity, which the authors
correlate with pedestrian flow data estimated from anonymized mobile phone geolocated data
provided by a national telecommunications company. They found correlations between the built
environment and pedestrian flow, supporting that previous results at lower resolutions also ex-
tend to higher granularities. They propose the usage of their method to detect specific sections
of streets with low walkability such that a more targeted intervention can be done - something
which would not be possible using the lower resolution approaches.
A Boston paper aimed to isolate the factors making a route from A to B more attractive than the
shortest path from A to B, working on a street-specific resolution [31]. They construct a desir-
ability index describing whether pedestrians tend to avoid or seek specific streets. It therefore
needs prior knowledge or assumptions of the individual pedestrian trajectories. Where walka-
bility studies most often found relationships between aggregated physical activity measures and
the built environment, the authors used the desirability index as a proxy for physical activity.
As our scope share the same spatial resolution and has similar research questions as this paper,
we will primarily extend upon their approach.
2.3
Summary
This chapter has presented a variety of works within the field of walkability. While many re-
searches have explored, discussed, and published on the topic and generally agree on what walk-
ability is and what may impact it, the individual contributions are not always directly comparable
or have identical conclusions. The lack of standardization and reproducible methods may be a
cause of this, along with data quality, resolution, and availability which is highly dependent on
the location the study. However, there is a strong agreement that the built environment does
influence walkability and pedestrian behaviour which have been showed to be true on varying
spatial resolutions too [13, 31, 23]. We explained the strength of review studies to collect and
represent the many suggested built environment attributes, which will work as a great founda-
tion for this thesis to choose relevant measures from. This thesis will work on a street-specific
spatial resolution and will use the concepts of desirability and deviations from the shortest path
to identify correlations with the built environment. We will utilize large-scale data from Strava
to address the issue with self-reported bias seen in survey-based studies. Additionally, we will
address the issue of data availability by using globally available data sources for both physical
activity and the built environment.
7
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 3
Data
This chapter will summarize and introduce the datasets used for this paper. The main dataset for
this study containing the empirical activity data, is provided by the Strava Metro project, while
data about the built environment have been gathered primarily from OpenStreetMap but also
from some complimentary infrastructure datasets.
3.1
Strava Metro
The Strava Metro project gathers and aggregates data from public user-logged activities on their
Strava platform. Their data is available for organizations and projects working with urban design
and active transportation infrastructure. On this basis, they have granted us access to data for
the Copenhagen region for this thesis.
The data set contains trip counts for street segments aggregated in increments of 5. Trip counts
for specific demographics or trip types is provided as well as the total count. The data is provided
in hourly, daily, and monthly time resolutions for varying date intervals. The monthly data is
available for all months of 2022 and we have aggregated them into one dataset containing trip
counts for the street segments for the whole year. As relations between physical activity and
demographics and socioeconomic statuses or the purpose of the trips are out of the scope for this
thesis, we will only consider the total number of recorded trips for each street for our analysis
and disregard the trip counts for specific demographics or purposes.
Due to Strava Metro’s data policies the dataset has been normalized to contain the fraction of
total trips for each street. This obscures information about their user base size with no implica-
tions on the methods used and results derived from them in this thesis.
The distribution of trips for 2022 can be seen in figure 3.2 - the minority of streets account for
the majority of pedestrian flow. Figure 3.1 shows the spatial distribution of trips for 2022.
3.1.1
Strava as a Proxy for Pedestrian Activity
As true pedestrian counts are not available for all streets, and no feasible and scalable method
exist to record these continuously and for all streets, we will use the described Strava Metro data
as a proxy for pedestrian activity. Existing literature has found Strava Metro data to be an ac-
ceptable measure of actual counts. A study in Oslo found a spatial correlation between combined
8
==PAGE:13==
Fig. 3.1. Spatial Distribution of Pedestrian Activity: Note the logarithmic scale.
Most pedestrian activity occur in Central Copenhagen, often along the Lakes, harbour
or in Fælledparken. Additionally we see that major and larger roads seem to get more
raw pedestrian activity than smaller, residential streets.
Strava foot and bike activities and counter station data of R2 = 0.9 but with a decreasing tem-
poral correlation as the granularity increases. On a daily, weekly, and monthly basis the linear
correlations are R2 = 0.123, R2 = 0.404, and R2 = 0.51 respectively. Annually it is R2 = 0.9.
They recommend using data aggregated on a monthly, seasonal, or yearly basis when possible to
reduce bias from seasonal and weather trends [46]. Notably, they found that Strava tends to have
higher representativity of actual counts during summer and lower during winter. A report by the
Colorado Department of Transportation supports these results, as they found linear correlations
between R2 = 0.815 and R2 = 0.997 for bicycle activity across analysed locations on the annual
basis [21]. It is with this basis that we have decided to aggregate our dataset from monthly to the
whole year.
9
==PAGE:14==
Fig. 3.2. Distribution of Street Fraction Trips: When visualizing the fraction of total
trips on a histogram we notice a heavy-tailed distribution with a significantly higher
mean than median, note the logarithmic x-axis. A minority of streets account for the
majority of trips. An exploration of the data reveals that the most busy streets are found
around Fælledparken and The Lakes.
3.2
Built Environment
A number of data sources for the built environment features have been used. We aimed to gather
data from sources with world-wide data for better reproducibility in other locations.
3.2.1
Global Human Settlement Layer
The Global Human Settlement Layer is a global spatial information database supported by the
European Union. The datasets are provided in a 100 meters by 100 meters cell resolution with
coverage for the entire area of interest. They produce a number datasets of which the following
have been selected:
• GHS-BUILT-S - Built-up surface measurement for residential and non-residential purposes.
• GHS-POP - Spatial distribution of population.
3.2.2
GeoDanmark
GeoDanmark provides high-quality high-resolution geographical information about parts of the
infrastructure and built environment in Denmark. We will use data from GeoDanmark for the
location of singular trees in urban areas in order to describe the greenness of specific streets.
10
==PAGE:15==
Table 3.1: Attributes and Methods of Selected Built Environment Features: Densi-
ties are measured as the count of features within a buffer of the street divided with the
buffer area. Distances are measured as the euclidean distance between the geometric
centroid of the street and the closest amenity. The listed attributes are not sorted in a
particular way.
Attribute
Method
Description
Type
Amenity
Density
Number of amenities per unit area
Float
Distance
Distance to closest amenity
Float
Retail
Density
Number of shops per unit area
Float
Parking
Distance
Distance to closest parking spot
Float
Tree
Density
Number of trees per unit area
Float
Intersections
Density
Number of intersections per unit area
Float
Water
Presence
Water present near street
Boolean
Sidewalk
Presence
Sidewalk present on street
Boolean
Park
Presence
Street located within park
Boolean
Pavement
Presence
Pavement present on street
Boolean
Lanes
Count
Number of lanes on street
Integer
Public Transit
Distance
Distance to closest public transit stop
Float
Residency
Density
Density of residential buildings per unit area
Float
Non-Residency
Density
Density of non-residential buildings per unit area
Float
Land Use Mix
Entropy
Entropy of Residency and Non-Residency attributes
Float
Population
Density
Density of population per unit area
Float
Length
Distance
Total length of street
Float
Max Speed
Type
Maximum vehicular speed allowed
Integer
3.2.3
OpenStreetMap
Further data about the built environment and features have been collected from OpenStreetMap
(OSM), a crowd-source mapping project. OSM contains a very wide range of tags describing the
built environment, of which we need to identify and select the relevant tags for walkability and
desirability. Similarly, the underlying OSM map is represented as a graph allowing for traditional
network measures as well, which to some extent may describe the topology of the environment.
As discussed in section 2, previous works have tried to narrow down features of the built envi-
ronment into categories which may impact the walkability or perceived walkability of an area.
Those deemed relevant to the scope of this thesis and to the study area of Copenhagen are shown
in table 3.1 - which also includes the selected features from the GeoDanmark and Global Human
Settlement Layer dataset. Finally, a description of the collected continuous and categorical at-
tributes are seen in table 3.2 and table 3.3 respectively.
11
==PAGE:16==
Table 3.2: Description of the Numerical Attributes Gathered (no missing data):
Attribute
Mean
SD
Min
25%
50%
75%
Max
nres_proportion
0.04
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
1.00
res_proportion
0.18
0.12
0.00
0.07
0.18
0.27
0.63
population_density
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06
amenity_density
0.07
0.27
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.05
19.44
public_transit_distance
254.28
298.70
0.00
73.06
163.30
315.25
7081.21
amenity_distance
87.56
143.72
0.00
9.62
34.13
112.20
6497.28
parking_distance
130.91
182.29
0.00
21.17
73.15
174.44
6538.57
intersection_density
0.16
0.35
0.00
0.03
0.07
0.16
33.36
street_density
7.80
18.01
0.00
1.12
2.88
7.77
2201.96
lanes
1.88
2.09
0.00
0.00
1.00
5.00
5.00
length
59.05
84.45
0.12
14.43
33.78
70.01
1001.89
tree_density
0.31
0.80
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.33
77.05
retail_density
0.01
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.76
land_use_mix
0.14
0.23
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.21
0.69
Table 3.3: Description of the Categorical Attributes Gathered:
Attribute
Missing%
#Unique
Mode
#Mode
paved
16.31
2
1
132141
sidewalk
73.87
2
1
44452
lanes
30.05
5
2
67794
max_speed
61.60
14
50
50182
near_water
0.00
2
0
167415
park
0.00
2
0
152286
12
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 4
Methods
This chapter serves as an overview of the methods and tools used throughout the thesis. We will
first focus on the construction of a desirability index, followed by an introduction of the machine
learning models we will use. Lastly, we will cover the concepts used during the model training
phase and how we will perform model explainability on a complex model.
4.1
Computing Desirability
Looking at the visualization of how many pedestrians have used each street, figure 3.1, a clear
pattern of more populous or urban areas getting the most activity is seen. As we are interested
in what makes streets more or less travelled than they hypothetically should be, we will con-
struct a desirability index for all streets. A positive desirability value indicates that it has been
travelled more than would be expected if pedestrians always took the shortest path, while a
negative desirability value indicates that it has been travelled less than expected. This measure
accounts for the raw pedestrian flow, and thus makes streets in different areas more comparable.
We will use an approach for modelling pedestrian behaviour in urban regions which constructs
this desirability index by measuring systematic deviations from the shortest paths for all street
segments [31].
4.1.1
O-D Vectors
This method is traditionally done by synthesizing the shortest path trajectories based on the
exact observed origin and destination locations. However, the Strava Metro dataset has aggre-
gated the exact origin and destination locations into spatial hexagonal bins, in transportation
modelling known as O-D vectors, and omitted the pairwise links between origin and destination
cells. The spatial distribution of trip origins can be seen in figure 4.3. A very high correlation
between trip origins and destinations is visualized in figure 4.1.
4.1.2
Synthesizing Activities
The potential of a street segment is related with the number of activities passing through it if
the paths of the activities is the shortest path. Thus a street segment lying on the shortest path
from many As to many Bs will have a high potential.
13
==PAGE:18==
Fig.
4.1. Correlation Between Trip Origin
and Destination Counts: A clear linear corre-
lation is seen, indicating that the popularity of a
location as the starting point relates to its pop-
ularity as an ending point - and vice versa.
Computing this potential requires knowledge of specific activity start and end locations in the
form of an OD matrix where an entry (i,j) contains the number of activities starting at location i
and ending at location j. However, we only know the total number of activities starting at each
location (the O vector) and the total number of activities ending at each location (the D vector).
A doubly-constrained gravity model have been used to approximate the OD matrix, also known
as T, with the following equation [7]
Tij = AiOiBjDjf(cij)
(4.1)
Where O and D are the previously mentioned vectors, A and B are balancing factors and f(c) is
an impedance function indicating the cost of travelling between locations. A and B are found
iteratively by initially setting all Bj = 1, and then repeatedly solving for A and B using equations
below until convergence:
Ai =
1
P
j
BjDjf(cij
(4.2)
Bj =
1
P
i
AiOif(cij
(4.3)
With A and B found, a matrix T can be found using equation 4.1. With T as input, a synthetic
dataset with the potential trip counts for all street segments are computed according to algo-
rithm 1. We used the impedance function f(cij) = exp −β ∗cij, where the optimal β value were
found by repeating the process for a range of values, choosing the one with highest correlation
between synthetic and actual data. The results from this search is seen in figure 4.2.
Generating coordinates
The T matrix suggests a spatial aggregation into N cells. For our data N = 2143 with cells being
hexagonal, also visualized in figure 4.3. To capture the variation in routes from cell i to j, we
sample random coordinates within each cell for each trip to be synthesized. The coordinate
sampling is done by repeatedly generating a random point within the bounding box of the cell’s
hexagon until it is within the hexagon itself too.
14
==PAGE:19==
Algorithm 1 Synthesizing Data
Require: TN×N
D ←dict()
for i = 0..N do
for j = 0..N do
for k = 0..Tij do
o ←randInCell(i)
d ←randInCell(j)
P ←shortestPath(o, d)
for way ∈P do
D[way] += 1
end for
end for
end for
end for
return D
Fig.
4.2. Searching
for
the
Optimal
Impedance:
A linear search for the opti-
mal β value in the impedance function were
performed, choosing the value where the corre-
lation between synthetic and actual pedestrian
flows is the highest.
Computing shortest path
When an origin and destination coordinate has been generated for a trip to be synthesized, the
shortest path are found using the Open Source Routing Machine (OSRM) project, specifically us-
ing their libosrm C++ library as opposed to the traditional container environment where routing
requests are sent through HTTP requests [28]. The choice of using libosrm were made as it gives
a significant speedup of ∼250x due to more efficient parallelization and no HTTP overhead. The
framework which implements algorithm 1 can be seen in figure 4.4. The OSRM instance has been
configured to compute the shortest path distance-wise for pedestrians where i.e. highways are
not allowed while bi-directional travel is allowed on one-way streets.
Computing Desirability
Using the approach of [31], the desirability index are defined as the residuals of the regression
of observed street counts with the potential street counts.
Desirability Indexi = Log Observed Passesi −γ0 −γ1 × Log Potential Passesi
(4.4)
15
==PAGE:20==
Fig. 4.3. Spatial Distribution of Trip Origins: The more central parts of Copenhagen
tend to be the source location of most trips - specifically Fælledparken is very popular.
This figure visualizes the origin distribution, but the destination distribution would be
very similar as implied by figure 4.1.
This index can thus be thought of as a measure of the unexplained variance in the data when
only modelling with the potential passes. The modelling in this thesis thus aims to explain the
desirability index from the built environment.
16
==PAGE:21==
Fig. 4.4. Efficient Routing Framework
for Shortest Paths: The graph shows
the framework for the framework that
computes the shortest paths from the T
matrix. Within a Jupyter Notebook the
A-B pairs are generated and saved to a
file. A Podman instance running OSRM
is then provoked, computing the shortest
paths for all A-B pairs saved in coords.csv.
The synthesized dataset is then saved to
synth.csv which then can be loaded back
into the Jupyter environment.
4.2
Modelling
In this section we will present the methods we use to prepare our data set for modelling. We will
convert the concept of a continuously measured desirability for streets into a categorical, with
three distinct classes. This conversion enables a distinct separation of streets, more intuitive
interpretation of results, and is consistent with previous research which tend to order walkability
into low and high classes [13, 31]. Then we give an introduction to the chosen models, with a
more thorough explanation for our main model, XGBoost, along with the techniques we will use
for model explanation.
4.2.1
Labelling Desirability
In section 4.1.2, the method for computing desirability was introduced, giving a continuous mea-
sure for the desirabilities of the streets. However, we will divide the streets into 3 categories -
streets which pedestrians use significantly more than would be expected, streets which pedestri-
ans use significantly less than would be expected, and streets which pedestrians use an expected
amount, when compared with the shortest path trajectories. These 3 classes will be referred to
as High Desirability, Low Desirability, and Expected Desirability.
We compute such a labelling by estimating the 95% confidence interval (CI) for the desirability
of each street. Desirability values for each street is computed for each of the 12 months in 2022
matching the temporal resolution of the provided activity data. Activity data was also available
in a daily or hourly temporal resolution, but these are subject to substantially higher variation
due large differences in pedestrian activity patterns in weekdays versus weekends, and night
time versus day time. Figure 4.5 visualizes the found desirability errors.
17
==PAGE:22==
Fig. 4.5. Spatial Distribution of Desirability Errors: The standard deviation visual-
ized spatially. Most streets only vary slightly in desirability, but some do vary greatly.
The errors seem spatially uniformly distributed, and as such no systematic patterns
emerge from this visualization (although some curiosities regarding sports events are
discussed further in section 6.1.1).
Streets with its CI lying solely above 0 will be labelled with High Desirability, those with its
CI crossing 0 are labelled with Normal Desirability, and those with its CI lying solely below 0
are labelled with Low Desirability. The confidence intervals and the result of this labelling is
visualized in figure 4.6 and 4.7. Finally, the distribution of classes is imbalanced as shown in
figure 4.8.
18
==PAGE:23==
Fig. 4.6. Desirability Confidence Intervals and the Resulting Labels: Confidence
intervals for all streets are derived from desirability indices constructed for each month
of 2022. Streets with a confidence interval that overlaps 0 are labelled as having an
expected desirability, while those with intervals solely above or below zero are labelled
with a high or low desirability respectively.
4.2.2
Baseline Models
We will use a simpler, explainable model using all features as a baseline along with classification
using just a well-established walkability index. These will provide the basis to which we compare
results and performance for the main model of ours, XGBoost.
Multinomial Logistic Regression
We will use a multinomial logistic regression model using all features as a baseline for model
performance and comparison for feature importance. It extends binary logistic regression to
handle multiple outcome categories, making it suitable for our walkability classification task.
We will standardize the input features to a mean of zero and standard deviation of one, but will
not extend the model to consider feature interactions. Similarly, we will not optimize the model
any further than what is provided by the default settings in the provided implementation by
scikit-learn.
Existing Walkability Index
The walkability index developed by L.D. Frank incorporates z-scores for retail floor area, resi-
dential density, intersection density, and land use mix [13]. These are generally understood as
being important measures of walkability, while the index itself has repeatedly been used as a
predictor variable, as a baseline model, or subject to further analysis in research [12, 1, 10, 43].
The index is defined as such:
19
==PAGE:24==
walkability = 2 · z-intersection density
+z-residential density
+z-retail floor area
+z-land use mix
(4.5)
We will use the walkability index as the predictor variable in a multinomial logistic regression
model.
Fig. 4.7. Streets Classified by Desirability: The map shows the desirability labels for
all streets. A 95% desirability confidence interval have been found for all streets. A
street is assigned the desirability class Low if the interval is solely below 0, Expected if
it contains 0, and High if it is solely above 0. At first glance we notice that major streets
as well as streets in Central Copenhagen tend to be labelled High.
20
==PAGE:25==
Fig. 4.8. Distribution of Desirability
Classes: Using the labelling method de-
scribed in section 4.2.1 we end up with
the shown class distribution. The low de-
sirability class presents the majority of
labels, followed by the high desirability
class. The expected class is only assigned
to 13.39% of streets.
4.2.3
eXtreme Gradient Boosting
eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) is a powerful and versatile machine learning algorithm
widely used for classification tasks. It belongs to the family of gradient boosting algorithms and
is known for its efficiency and effectiveness in handling complex datasets [16, 41]. It uses an
ensemble of decision trees with an additive approach, each individual tree can be considered
as a weak learner: its prediction is not very meaningful in itself - but the sum of the ensemble
becomes strong [5]. Below, we outline the key components and functionalities of the XGBoost
classifier.
Objective Function
We use the cross-entropy loss function during the internal model training. The cross-entropy
loss is defined as such:
l(y, p) = −1
N
N
X
i
M
X
j
yij log (pij)
(4.6)
Where N is the number of data points, M is the number of classes, yij is a binary indicator of
data point i belonging to class j, and pij is the predicted probability of data point i belonging to
class j. Intuitively, the loss will be low when the model is predicting the correct class confidently
(i.e. with high probability) and the loss is high when the model is assigning a low probability with
the correct class. However, XGBoost also penalizes for model complexity which is measured as
such:
ω(f) = γT + 1
2λ
T
X
j=1
w2
j
(4.7)
Where f is a tree, T is the number of leaves, and w is a vector of the scores outputted by f. γ and
λ are regularization terms - large γ values will penalize a tree with many leaves, large λ values
will penalize a tree with aggressive updates when compared. Combing the loss and complexity
functions, our objective function is defined as [5]:
obj = l(y, p) + ω(f)
(4.8)
21
==PAGE:26==
Incorporating the model complexity into the objective function is also known as regularization.
The intent of regularization is to avoid overfitting the model to the training data by penalizing
large and complex models.
Decision Trees
Each individual tree in the ensemble is a decision tree. Decision trees aim to minimize some
objective function by learning simple decision rules based on the training data. A hypothetical
example of a decision tree is shown in figure 4.9 where a tree has inferred patterns between the
built environment and popularity of a street. While a single decision tree may not capture the
whole essence of our data - e.g. not all streets with sidewalk and less than two lanes deemed
to be popular - XGBoost combines the outputs of many individual trees for a more confident
prediction.
Fig. 4.9. Decision Tree for Classifying Streets: An arbitrary decision tree for a bi-
nary classification problem of the popularity of streets. The decision tree is formed
after training on data to minimize the number of wrong predictions. In this instance,
it has learned that streets with no sidewalks that reside in parks tend to be popular,
while streets with sidewalks, many lanes, and not in the proximity of water are unpop-
ular.
Boosting Trees
As hinted, XGBoost implements an ensemble of sequential decision trees. An initial prediction
of the data is made, typically the mean of the target variable. The first tree in the ensemble
is then trained: it fits the error residuals from the initial prediction to counteract the mistakes
made during the initial prediction while minimizing the objective function, equation 4.8. The
prediction of the ensemble at this point is then the sum of the initial prediction plus the first
tree’s prediction of the error residuals. This process generates a new set of error residuals, re-
flecting the remaining disagreements between the ensemble’s predictions and the true target
values.
The second tree in the ensemble is then trained on these updated error residuals, addressing the
mistakes after the first tree’s contribution. The prediction of the ensemble at this point is the
22
==PAGE:27==
sum of the initial prediction, the first tree’s prediction, and the second tree’s prediction of the
error residuals. This iterative procedure continues with the addition of each new tree, refining
the model’s predictions and minimizing the remaining errors. The generation of new trees stops
after a set amount of trees have been grown or when the predictions are no longer improving.
In a more mathematical formulation, the prediction of an ensemble at iteration t can be ex-
pressed as:
ˆy(t) = ¯y + η
t
X
k=1
fk(x)
(4.9)
Where ¯y is the initial prediction (mean of y), fk(x) is the prediction of the k-th tree, and t is the
iteration of interest. η is the learning rate - a variable controlling the contribution size of each
tree. Large eta values increases the speed which the ensemble learns at, while lower eta values
makes the ensemble more conservative. Usually lower eta values result in better generalization
capabilities of the model but requires a higher number of iterations, while larger values are faster
to train at the risk of overfitting.
4.3
Model Training and Explanation
In this section we will present how we approached the training our XGBoost model and what
methods we will use for model explanation.
4.3.1
Treating Class Imbalance
Due to the imbalanced nature of our classification labels, as has been illustrated in figure 4.8,
an appropriate training and evaluation strategy must be considered. The three classes are all
important descriptors of streets, hence we believe each should be weighted equally during the
model training as we want some degree of explainability for all classes. We achieve this by as-
signing sample weights according to the inverse of their class frequency during the training.
However, the evaluation of our model should take basis on its capability to generalize on real
data - as such the scoring metric should weigh each class by its total contribution. We have cho-
sen the weighted F1 metric for evaluation purposes as it assesses both the quality and quantity
of predictions in each class with a weighted average:
WeightedF1 =
C
X
i=1
ni
PC
i=1 ni
× F1i
(4.10)
F1i = 2 × Precisioni × Recalli
Precisioni + Recalli
(4.11)
Where C is the number of classes and ni is the number of samples belonging to class i. Precisioni
and Recalli are computed per-class using a one-vs-rest approach. For the rest of the thesis we
will use the terms weighted F1 and F1 interchangeably for brevity - both always refer back to the
weighted F1 in equation 4.10
23
==PAGE:28==
4.3.2
Model Tuning on Subset of Data
The hyperparameter tuning is done on a smaller subset of the training data to decrease training
time. We found an acceptable subset size by comparing average training times with model per-
formance on subset data with a fractional size of the original training data in the range [0.025, 1].
The results of this experiment is seen in figure 4.10, from which we decide to do hyperparameter
tuning on 30% of the available data.
Fig. 4.10. XGBoost Model Performance and Efficiency Over Data Subset Size: The
performance, with 95% confidence intervals, and mean training time is visualized here
over the fractional size of the available data. As the size of a model’s training data in-
creases so does the training time. In our case, the performance of our model does not
increase significantly past a fractional size of 0.3. The following model hyperparame-
ters were used: n_estimators = 300, learning_rate = 0.1, max_depth = 5.
4.3.3
K-Fold Cross Validation
K-fold cross validation is a machine learning technique to assess a model’s ability to generalize to
unforeseen data. After performing an initial train-test split, we can further separate the training
data into K parts. K different train-validate splits can then be constructed from these through
which each of the K parts will be used as the validate set. The general approach has been outlined
in algorithm 2. Training and assessing a model on the train-validate splits allow us to compute
a mean and standard deviation for the model’s generalization error.
While K-fold cross validation is useful to estimate the generalization error of an already estab-
lished model, it is also suitable for hyperparameter tuning. If we construct a set of classifiers C
we can choose the best classifier Cbest for our problem as such:
Cbest = arg min
C∈C
(K-Fold(C))
However, given the spatial nature of our data we must consider whether spatial autocorrelation
24
==PAGE:29==
could impact our generalization error. Tobler’s first law of geography states that “everything
is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things”, a hint at a
potential issue with such correlation in our data [45]. Looking back at figure 4.7 we notice that
our classes tend to appear in spatial clusters. For example, streets labelled as desirable are often
situated in a cluster with other desirable streets. This pattern is seen at various locations: Cen-
tral Copenhagen, Kalvebod Fælled, Frederiksberg Have, Jægersborg Dyrehave, and at a number
of other places. If the built environment also exhibits spatial autocorrelation the generalization
error estimated with K-fold cross validation would be overly optimistic. Intuitively, the built en-
vironment would be autocorrelated with our chosen attributes - i.e. streets close to each other
would likely have similar values for the distance attributes or have similar proportion of residen-
tial buildings. The Moran’s I measure computes exactly that. It takes a weight-matrix w, which
for our use case will be computed with a K-nearest method. That is, wij = 1 if street j is one of
the K-nearest neighbours of street i, otherwise wij = 0. The equation for Moran’s I is then [33]:
I = n
W
Pn
i=1
Pn
j=1 wij (xi −¯x) (xj −¯x)
Pn
i=1 (xi −¯x)2
(4.12)
Where n is the number of samples and W is the sum of w. Looking at figure 4.11 we have calcu-
lated Moran’s I at different K-values for our attributes, ranging from 2-nearest to 1024-nearest.
Spatial autocorrelation appears for all attributes at smaller cluster sizes with the distance at-
tributes along with attributes gathered from GHSL exhibiting the greatest spatial autocorrela-
tions. As the GHSL attributes are gathered from a coarser spatial resolution than the OSM at-
tributes, the higher autocorrelation is expected.
To combat data leak from the spatial correlation doing model training and testing, we will im-
plement a variant of the K-fold technique which uses spatial blocking to ensure that the train-
validate-test splits are more spatially independent [35]. This variant is described in algorithm 3.
The intuition is to first divide the data into squares of equal area and then randomly assign
squares to each fold. While this creates some variation in the samples size of each fold, it creates
more independent validation and test sets which will provide us with more accurate generaliza-
tion errors.
Algorithm 2 K-Fold Cross Validation [15].
1: Randomly split D into K partitions with
almost equal sizes.
2: for k from 1 to K do
3:
R ←Partition k from D.
4:
T ←D \ R.
5:
Use T to train the model.
6:
Errk
←Use the trained model to
predict R.
7: end for
8: Err ←
1
|K|
PK
k=1 Errk
Algorithm 3 Spatial K-Fold Cross Valida-
tion adapted from 2. Only the first step has
changed.
1: Randomly split D into K spatial parti-
tions with equal area.
2: for k from 1 to K do
3:
R ←Partition k from D.
4:
T ←D \ R.
5:
Use T to train the model.
6:
Errk
←Use the trained model to
predict R.
7: end for
8: Err ←
1
|K|
PK
k=1 Errk
25
==PAGE:30==
Fig. 4.11. Spatial Autocorrelation at Different Cluster Sizes: The Moran’s I value
for attributes at different cluster sizes of a K-neighbours scheme is visualized. The
distance and GHSL-gathered attributes exhibit the strongest spatial autocorrelations
across all cluster sizes, but all attributes have some autocorrelation at most cluster
sizes.
4.4
Feature Importance
This section will cover the methods used to measure the importance of each feature for the model
performance and output. First we introduce Permutation Feature Importance which systemat-
ically shuffles the values of a particular feature to observe the change in model performance.
Lastly, we will introduce SHAP-values which we use to more thoroughly explain how our models
output is impacted by different feature values. Understanding the significance of each feature
is essential for model interpretation and is thus very relevant for this thesis in order to better
understand how the built environment impacts desirability. Both methods are model agnos-
tic approaches for measuring feature importance, a useful attribute for complex or inexplicable
models - like XGBoost, if grown large enough.
4.4.1
Permutation Feature Importance
The intuition of Permutation Feature Importance (PFI) is to measure the change of a fitted
model’s scoring on test data when permuting the feature values. Firstly, PFI computes a reference
score which is the model’s score on the input data with no permutations. Then, PFI permutes
first feature on the input data and computes the new score N times - the difference between the
reference score and the mean of these N scores is the importance of the first feature. Repeat
for all features and we have an estimate for the importance of each [3]. If the score decreases
26
==PAGE:31==
Fig. 4.12. The Train, Validate, and Test Sets Using Spatial K-Fold: Using the spa-
tial variant of K-fold cross validation with K = 5, described in algorithm 3, produces
the 5 folds above. The chosen block size is 1000m by 1000m. The test set is selected
before the cross validation and is only used for a final prediction estimate outside of
the cross validation process.
significantly when a given feature is permuted, it is an indicator that the feature is important.
Similarly, if the score does not decrease it is in indicator that it is redundant. Mathematically,
the PFI for a feature k is given as:
Permutation Importancek = 1
N
N
X
i=1
 score (X) −scorepermuted (Xk)

(4.13)
Where N is the number of permutations, X is the input data and scorepermuted(Xk) is the score
27
==PAGE:32==
when permuting feature k on the input data. The scores derived from this approach are easy
to interpret, and as we compute them on unseen data they are an estimate of which features
actually matters when generalizing on new data. However, the derived scores are not directional:
they do not indicate how and why they impact the models specific predictions, merely its overall
performance.
4.4.2
Model Explanation Using SHAP-Values
Where PFI addresses the model performance, SHAP-values provides a detailed breakdown of
the impact each feature has on specific predictions. It is based on a game theoretic approach,
assessing the value of players in a coalition. In machine learning context, it treats features as
players and SHAP-values describe the contribution of each feature for each prediction [26, 32].
The SHAP-value is defined as the average marginal contribution of a feature value across all
possible coalitions - a solution searching all possible coalitions will have an exponential time
complexity. Monte-Carlo approximation can be used to keep the execution time low [32, 47]:
ˆϕj = 1
M
M
X
m=1

ˆf(xm
+j) −ˆf(xm
−j)

(4.14)
j is the feature of interest and ˆf(xm
+j) is the model prediction on the instance of interest, x, with
a random number of features replaced with values from a randomly sampled instance - feature
j is not replaced. ˆf(xm
−j) is identical to this, except feature j is also replaced. Repeating this
M times results in an estimate for the SHAP-value for feature j on instance x. It must follow
from the definition that a positive SHAP-value for a given feature value pushed the prediction
to a higher value while a negative SHAP-value would push it to a lower value. Similarly, the
magnitude of the SHAP-value is an indicator of the feature importance.
The above introduction to SHAP-values is meant to give the intuition and reasoning behind the
method. In practice, modern implementations use slightly different approaches for the estima-
tion than the Monte Carlo method described - namely the model-agnostic KernelSHAP approach
or TreeSHAP which is tailored for tree-based models, like XGBoost. As these are more complex
and out of scope of this thesis, we refer to the original papers for details [26, 27].
28
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5
Results
This chapter is dedicated to the results found when applying the methods described previously
in chapter 4. Initially we show the immediate results from the hyperparameter tuning of the
XGBoost model followed by a look into the performance and feature importance of our models.
Finally we will present the spatial generalization capability of our model.
5.1
Modelling Results
This section will present the results derived from our various models. We will first present the
performance of the different models on the test data, when assessing their ability to predict
the desirability class, as explained in section 4.2.1, on test data. This is followed by the results
concerning feature importance and feature impact on model output.
5.1.1
Hyperparameter Tuning
We used a randomized search for the XGBoost hyperparameters in the search space seen in ta-
ble 5.1, which also displays the optimal values found. A total of 500 iterations were done. Hyper-
parameters not included in the table were left at their default value. We found the learning rate
η = 0.03, a max depth of 12, regularization parameters λ = 2.89, γ = 0.55, and subsample = 0.95.
The number of boosting rounds, equivalent to the number of estimators/trees in the ensemble,
were found to be 423 when early stopping after 50 rounds of no progress on validation data.
Table 5.1: Hyperparameter Search Space and Found Values
Low
High
Optimal
max_depth
3
15
12
learning_rate
0.001
0.3
0.03
reg_lambda
1
5
2.89
gamma
0
5
0.55
subsample
0
1
0.95
29
==PAGE:34==
Table 5.2: Weighted F1 Score Estimates from Spatial 5-Fold CV
Model
Mean Test F1
SD Test F1
Mean Train F1
SD Train F1
XGBoost (Tuned)
0.57
0.01
0.87
0.00
XGBoost (Untuned)
0.52
0.01
0.63
0.00
Logistic Regression
0.52
0.01
0.53
0.01
Frank’s WI
0.36
0.04
0.36
0.04
Random, Stratified
0.42
0.00
0.42
0.00
5.1.2
Performance
We implemented three models: one based on a well-established walkability index (WI) by L.D.
Frank as introduced in section 4.2.2, one based on multinomial logistic regression, and a more
complex model based on XGBoost, explained in section 4.2.3. The generalization error has been
estimated using spatial 5-fold cross validation with the weighted F1 metric, the results are seen
in 5.2 with confusion matrices from one fold visualized in figure 5.1. We also included a dummy
model which uses a random stratified approach, to assess whether the other three models have
a meaningful performance. Frank’s WI has a generalization error of F1 = 0.36 with standard
deviation 0.04. Multinomial logistic regression, using a standardized version of the features used
in XGBoost, has a generalization error of F1 = 0.52 with standard deviation 0.01. Finally, a tuned
XGBoost has a generalization error of F1 = 0.57 with standard deviation 0.01, while an XGBoost
with default parameters achieves F1 = 0.52.
The baseline given by a stratified random approach has a performance of F1 = 0.42 - which the
XGBoost and logistic regression models outperform, but Frank’s WI does not. Limitations with
the implementation of Frank’s WI in this thesis, which may impact its performance, is discussed
further in section 6.2.3. Additionally, the XGBoost results indicate some overfitting as its train-
ing score is much higher than its test score.
(a) XGBoost
(b) Logistic Regression
(c) Frank’s WI
Fig. 5.1. Normalized Confusion Matrices for the Three Models on Test Data: The
class-wise performance between XGBoost and logistic regression is mostly similar, but
XGBoost has slightly more true positives and slightly less false negatives. Frank’s WI
has significantly worse prediction accuracy across all classes.
30
==PAGE:35==
5.1.3
Permutation Feature Importance
The PFI score, as explained in section 4.4.1, have been used to measure the impact of each feature
on the model performance. Figure 5.2 shows the PFI score for each feature, as computed with 10
permutations using the weighted F1 metric. The presence of sidewalks is found to be the most
important feature, followed by the vehicular speed limit, and proportion of residential buildings
- with a mean contribution to the scoring metric of 0.026, 0.024, and 0.019 respectively. On the
contrary, the density of retail shops, land use mix, and proportion of non-residential buildings
are found to be the least important features with near-zero contributions to the score.
Fig. 5.2. Permutation Feature Importance for XGBoost: Mean importance scores
and their standard deviations for our XGBoost model found with 10 permutations per
feature when using the weighted F1 metric. The proportion of residential buildings,
maximum vehicle speed, and presence of sidewalks are the three most important fea-
tures found for the XGBoost model. Land use mix, retail density, and proportion of
non-residential buildings are the least important.
5.1.4
Feature Impact on Model Outputs
The coefficients for the multinomial logistic regression model for each class, figure 5.3, shows
an approximate opposite-sign behaviour between the low and high desirability classes. Presence
of water, sidewalks, and parks have strong impact on a high desirability classification and neg-
atively impacts the probability of a low desirability prediction with similar magnitudes. Built
31
==PAGE:36==
environment features such as distance to parking, retail density, pavement, and amenity dis-
tance have a smaller impact on low or high predictions, albeit still plays a role. Land use mix and
vehicular speed limit have near-zero coefficients for all three classes, while longer streets and
longer distances to public transit and amenities are correlated with a higher probability of a low
desirability label. The coefficients for the expected desirability class have relatively low magni-
tude for all features, but is most negatively related with presence of water and most positively
related with distance to public transit.
Fig. 5.3. Multinomial Logistic Regression Coefficients: The logistic regression co-
efficients plotted and sorted by value on the High Desirability class. Presence of water,
sidewalks, and parks increases the chance of a High Desirability prediction and de-
creases the chance of a Low Desirability prediction. Land use mix and max vehicle
speed has little to none impact on the output. Finally, for all features the coefficient
for Low and High Desirability have similar absolute values but opposite direction.
We will use the SHAP-values, as introduced in section 4.4.2, to investigate the XGBoost model
due its complex nature. The mean absolute importance of each feature on each class is seen
in figure 5.4, where the population density, sidewalk presence, and vehicular speed limit is the
top three features. Land use mix and retail density is found to have the least importance, and
the importance magnitude of features for labelling as expected desirability tends to be smaller
than that for the low and high desirability cases. While the plot gives a general sense for which
features are important for which classes, they are non-directional and does not consider the
feature values themselves.
The three-part visualization in figure 5.5 gives a more detailed breakdown of the feature im-
pacts on the output from XGBoost. The patterns for the low and high desirability cases tend to
32
==PAGE:37==
Fig. 5.4. Summary of SHAP Value Importance Per Class: Mean importance scores
and their standard deviations found with 10 permutations per feature when using the
weighted F1 metric. The proportion of residential buildings, maximum vehicle speed,
and presence of sidewalks are the three most important features found. Land use mix,
retail density, and proportion of non-residential buildings are the least important.
have the opposite direction, as similar to the regression coefficients. For example, high amenity
densities increases the probability of a high desirability prediction but decreases the probabil-
ity of a low desirability prediction. Looking at the three features which had the highest overall
importance from figure 5.4, namely population density, sidewalk presence, and speed limits we
see the following: feature values for population density does not impact the low and high desir-
ability in an opposite direction, but the expected desirability class tends to be associated with
lower population densities. The presence of sidewalks is associated with high desirability, while
a lack of sidewalks is associated with low desirability. Higher speed limits is associated with
low desirability, while the relations between speed limit and high desirability is more unclear.
A high residential density is related with low desirability, while low densities relate with high
desirability.
5.1.5
Spatial Model Generalization
An important aspect of any modelling is the ability to generalize to unseen test data. While
section 5.1.2 showed the performance of our various models on test data in general, we will here
present the XGBoost model’s bias (if any) towards specific spatial regions. Using the spatial K-
fold cross validation variant, algorithm 3, we can simulate predictions of the desirability class
on unseen data for all streets. These have been visualized in figure 5.7 for reference. Figure 5.6
contains the difference between weighted F1 score per block and the overall weighted F1 score,
showing a somewhat uniform distribution of scores - although more extreme cases of both low
and high scores tend to occur in the suburban areas rather than more central parts of the Capital
Region. The Moran’s I, with k = 16, gives a value of 0.075 - indicating a low, albeit some, spatial
autocorrelation for the model generalization.
33
==PAGE:38==
Fig. 5.5. Feature Impact on Output from SHAP Values: The by-class opposite fea-
ture impact found with logistic regression is also found with SHAP values on the XG-
Boost model. Most feature values that increase the probability of a prediction being
High Desirability decrease the probability of a prediction being Low Desirability. How-
ever, this is not always the case: e.g. the population density feature has a similar impact
on both low and high desirability predictions. Red colors correspond to high feature
values, blue to low feature values.
5.2
Summary
We found that a tuned XGBoost model had the best performance at F1 = 0.57, closely followed
by an untuned XGBoost and multinomial logistic regression which performed similarly to each
other at F1 = 0.52. The model based on Frank’s WI performed poorly with F1 = 0.36, worse
than a random stratified model, likely due to implementation limitations. The results for the
importance and impact of each built environment attribute were shown, with sidewalks, speed
limits, water presence, pavement, and distance and density for amenities being important pre-
dictors for our models. We found that the attributes surrounding tree density, street density and
land use mix consistently contributed the least on model output and performance. Lastly, we
presented the generalization capability of the XGBoost model to be decent, although with the
highest variation in suburban or rural areas.
34
==PAGE:39==
Fig.
5.6. Generalization Capability of
XGBoost Model:
The spatial distribu-
tion in difference between the weighted F1
scores per spatial block on unseen data and
the overall weighted F1 score is somewhat
well-distributed. Some clusters of both low
or high performance occur, e.g. the model
generalizes well to Kalvebod Fælled and not
so well to many of the suburban areas on
western edge of our data.
Fig.
5.7. XGBoost Pre-
dictions on All Streets
with K-Fold: The predic-
tions on all streets is gath-
ered from the spatial K-
fold approach. Most no-
tably, the model seems
to make high desirability
predictions in natural ar-
eas and the city center.
35
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the results and constraints from our thesis. We will start with a dis-
cussion on the limitations that occur from our data sources, primarily with regards to the user
base of Strava and coverage of OpenStreetMap. Then we cover some shortcomings that occur as
a result of our approach or focus and how this effects the outcome of the project. Finally, we will
look at interpretations of the results from chapter 5 and how these relates with existing research.
Throughout we propose possible directions for future research.
6.1
Limitations of the Data
Before we interpret the results from the analysis, it is important to discuss possible limitations
or shortcomings with the data it is based upon. As the physical activity data is sourced from
Strava and built environment data primarily from OpenStreetMap, possible biases may exist.
OpenStreetMap data is globally available and Strava data is available for for research through
request. While they are both globally available they are not globally covering. OpenStreetMap is
well-mapped for most urban areas in developed countries, but entering rural areas or countries
outside the Western world both quantity and quality of data drops significantly. Similarly, Strava
is a very popular sports application for Western users, but is not used at a sufficient scale in many
parts of the world.
6.1.1
Strava
The use of data from Strava for physical activity in an area is, as discussed earlier in section 3.1.1,
a good measure for the actual activity happening when aggregated in coarser temporal resolu-
tions, such as monthly or annually [46]. On this basis we performed our analysis on data for the
year of 2022, as aggregated from the provided monthly data. However, certain biases also occur
in the Strava data.
Representativity Bias
The demographics of Strava users have been found to be biased relative to the actual recreation-
alist population. Surveys showed that the proportion of Strava users that were male were 15.7%
higher relative to the actual population while the age representativity were skewed towards a
younger bracket of 20 −35 year old [46].
36
==PAGE:41==
Fig.
6.1. Route for the Copenhagen Half
Marathon 2022: As Strava is a very popular app
among athletes, runners included, this event in-
troduced significant deviations from the usual
traffic along the route. These deviations may
have made the desirability index unstable for
some streets, leading to misclassification when
compared with normal pedestrian traffic. Figure
from [29].
The observed biases in gives implications for the generalizability and inclusivity of walkability
models based on such data. For our models, it could imply that the overrepresentation of males
will introduce a preference towards urban features associated with men. Similarly, wrong prior-
itization of features could also occur from the skewed age representativity - e.g. a difference in
accessibility requirements exist between age groups where older age groups value proximity of
shops to their homes more than younger age groups [40].
Although these biases exist, this thesis have not considered how to address or mitigate them any
further than interpreting our results with it in mind. Improving the inclusivity of the modelling
phase to account for these representative imbalances could be a topic for future improvement. It
is especially important to be aware of this representation when communicating with legislators
or urban planners.
Noise from Sport Events
Looking at the standard error for the desirability index visualized in figure 4.5, an interesting
route appears in the Central Copenhagen part. Some of the streets with highest error were inves-
tigated further, where we found some to have a 10x increase in pedestrian traffic during Septem-
ber. This sudden influx of recorded activity were due to the Copenhagen Half Marathon, its route
seen in figure 6.1. While this event only affected a limited number of streets, it still introduces
noise to the data and more or larger events will amplify these even further. In the rather large
spatial context of our thesis, we believe that events like these have a negligible impact on the
results, but a study focusing on e.g. just Inner Copenhagen would be more impacted by them.
37
==PAGE:42==
6.1.2
OpenStreetMap
The open-source nature of OpenStreetMap may also be associated with bias. While we chose it
as a data source partly due to it being globally available, transparent, and covering a large span of
built environment attributes, it has been proven to contain significant geographical bias. Anyone
can contribute with information to OpenStreetMap, but with 20% of users contributing with over
80% of the data [34].
Biased Data Coverage
A general agreement exist between power users of OpenStreetMap (top 20% contributors) and
the crowd (bottom 80% contributors) with regards to what is being mapped - they map similar
points of interest to a similar degree. On the contrary, the two groups of users have significantly
different patterns when looking at where they map. The crowd contributes to the mapping project
in a uniform fashion across countries and in intra-urban areas. The power users have been found
to be significantly biased towards major urban areas and specific areas within those [34].
The preference for the urban areas was also noticed during this thesis. While we found little to
no issues with geometrical data which can be transcribed from satellite images (such as roads,
forests, and buildings), the semantic information were much more prevalent and accurate in
the central parts of Copenhagen. For example, we exploratively found that buildings in the city
center had accurate descriptions for their usage or type: residential or commercial, apartments
or townhouses. Moving away from the city center, many buildings are identified as just that - a
building. Similarly, tags relating to sidewalks or number of lanes had more prevalence on major
roads or urban areas.
The bias towards better data, both quantitatively and qualitatively, in the urban areas could have
an impact on the accuracy and results from our modelling. If a feature that naturally occurs at
similar levels in rural and urban areas but is mostly unmapped at the rural level (that is, no
information on its occurrence or not is available), a model could learn a non-existent pattern.
Information about a feature’s occurrence could be associated with a specific class only because
it is largely unmapped outside of a specific geographic area.
6.2
Limitations of the Thesis and Future Work
Below we will list some of the shortcomings of this thesis and our approach. These relate to issues
that are mostly out of our control and shortcomings that result from wrong decisions or lack of
attention. Awareness of such limitations is important to understand how further development
based on the approach used in this thesis may look.
6.2.1
Lack of Actual Trajectories
Our workflow extended that of [31], constructing a desirability index from pedestrian trajecto-
ries and the shortest paths they could have taken. While they had access to the exact trajectories
for each pedestrian, we were limited to pedestrian flows aggregated on each street with no iden-
tification for the individually walked paths nor their origins and destinations. As introduced in
section 4.1, aggregated data for the start and ending locations in hexagonal bins is available in
the Strava dataset. This enabled us to synthesize an approximate dataset if all pedestrian trips
had taken the shortest path. One issue with the limited knowledge of the true trajectories and
our shortest path computations, is that we work under the assumption that all trips ends at a dif-
ferent location than where they started - thus not accounting properly for round trips. If more
38
==PAGE:43==
accurate data for the start and end locations of the trajectories were available - or a better syn-
thesizing algorithm constructed - we believe it could significantly enhance the credibility of the
desirability index and accuracy of the modelling and its interpretations.
6.2.2
Sociodemographics
Following the explanation of the representative bias in the Strava data in section 6.1.1, it is nat-
ural to briefly disclose the interplay between sociodemographics, walkability, and their relation
to this thesis. While the provided Strava data contains information for male and female activity
in addition to age group data, we have not explored these in-depth. No other demographic or
societal information, such as educational level or income bracket, is known of the users. Some
preliminary insights of the available data for gender and age have been gathered.
Figure 6.2 and figure 6.3 shows the very clear difference in geographical distribution of recorded
activity between the age group of 18 to 34 and 35 to 54. The younger users are active in the most
urban parts of Copenhagen where houses are few and apartments are plenty - meanwhile the
older age bracket have dispersed into the suburban areas, likely a result of home ownership and
not a sudden preference for strolls in residential streets. However, the different locations of their
homes would likely lead to a change in pedestrian behaviour as the surrounding environment and
their life situation changes. Our modelling approach does not consider the different behaviour
of age groups, instead it models the aggregated version where such detail is lost. No immediate
difference in activity patterns between men and women were noticed, although men contributed
with 66.3% of the recorded trips and women with 29.2%.
Studies within walkability have also highlighted perceived elements such as safety from traffic
or crime [11]. This thesis did not consider those directly, as they proved hard to capture accu-
rately and at sufficient scale. Similarly, many other attributes - both societal and for the built
environment - have also been proposed as indicators for walkability, including or researching
them all was deemed out of scope for this thesis.
6.2.3
Frank’s Walkability Index and Land Use Mix
Looking back at the definition of the walkability index established by L.D. Frank in section 4.2.2,
we note that it consists of four built environment attributes: intersection density, residential
density, retail floor area, and land use mix [13]. As we implemented this and explored the re-
sulting performance and behaviour, we noticed limitations with our adaptation which takes his
index from neighbourhoods to street segments.
Intersection and residential densities are fairly straight forward to adapt, as they can be extracted
from OpenStreetMap and the GHSL datasets with little issue. When adapting retail floor area and
land use mix we were presented with trouble. Computing the floor area of buildings solely used
for retail is simple in OpenStreetMap, but in the vast majority of cases retail shops only use a part
of a buildings area. For example, this is the case with most retail stores in multi-level buildings
where they usually reside solely on the ground floor - inhabiting part or all of that area. These
shops are tagged as a Node in OpenStreetMap - containing no information with regards to their
floor area. As such, we gave all retail shops an identical unit floor area - meaning a small corner
store contributes the same as a large supermarket.
Looking at the land use mix, they defined it as the entropy between the floor area for five cat-
egories of land use: residential, retail, entertainment, office, and institutional. The issue of
computing the floor area for each of these remains the same as just discussed. Furthermore, our
spatial resolution being on the street level imposes further difficulties for the land use mix: little
39
==PAGE:44==
Fig.
6.2. Activity Patterns for Ages 18-34:
Strava users in this age group is generally clus-
tered to Copenhagen. Specifically, high activ-
ity is seen in the city center along with "bro"-
neighbourhoods of Nørrebro, Østerbro, Vester-
bro, and Amagerbro. No apparent activity oc-
curs in the suburbs, but parks and forests is also
subject to a decent amount of activity. Darker
colors are associated to a higher activity level.
Fig.
6.3. Activity Patterns for Ages 35-54:
While the younger age group were concentrated
around the most urban parts, these have spread
out to the suburban areas. This is likely the re-
sult of a natural transition from rental apart-
ments to ownership of houses, and not a con-
sequence of a sudden preference for walking
in an suburban environment. However, as the
environment of their place of residence have
changed they may value the built environment
features differently. Darker colors are associated
to a higher activity level.
inclusion of multiple categories on the same street. To address this, we engaged in a too naive
approach when constructing the land use mix variable, by computing it as the entropy between
40
==PAGE:45==
residential and non-residential buildings from the GHSL datasets. This gave a land use mix with
minimal variability, as the non-residential data were scarcely distributed geographically. These
issues with floor area and land use mix impacts the credibility of our implementation of this
otherwise well-established walkability index.
6.2.4
Collecting Built Environment Attributes
The information about the built environment has primarily been gathered from OpenStreetMap -
a very useful and transparent resource. We have primarily worked on an aggregated level of these
attributes, e.g. where all amenities are considered as a single group. More nuanced results could
be achieved with attributes grouped into smaller subcategories, or with irrelevant information
removed. For instance, schools, restaurants, and ATMs are likely to have different contributions
towards walkability which our approach fail to capture as they all fall in the amenity category.
Future research could benefit from an investigation into the details of the large-scale data from
OpenStreetMap and how they relate with walkability.
6.3
Interpretations of Results
We trained a few models with the intent of achieving decent predictive performance and getting
an overview of the built environments relation with pedestrian behaviour. In the process we
introduced a reproducible method to extract relations between the built environment and phys-
ical activity at a street-specific resolution. The method uses the concept of desirability which
accounts for the raw pedestrian flow, allowing the results to be nuanced and inclusive across
areas of interest with wildly different population densities.
6.3.1
Model Complexity versus Explainability
The results of our models performance were presented in section 5.1.2. XGBoost achieved the
best with a generalization error of F1 = 0.57, followed by multinomial logistic regression with
F1 = 0.52, and lastly the the logistic regression using just Frank’s WI as a predictor with F1 =
0.36 - performing worse than a random stratified approach. Some, although little, difference in
performance exist between a simpler regression approach and complex boosted tree approach.
While XGBoost proved the best, it is essential to consider the trade-off between model complex-
ity and explainability. XGBoost, being a complex ensemble model, tends to capture intricate
patterns in the data, leading to higher predictive accuracy. However, this complexity comes at
the cost of reduced interpretability - which we address using SHAP-values. The multinomial
logistic regression, while not as good in predictive performance as the tuned XGBoost model (al-
though quite close), naturally offers a more interpretable model with clear coefficients for each
built environment attribute.
In urban planning and walkability studies, interpretability is often crucial as the understanding
of influential factors is the focus. This is reflected in previous studies that often relied on linear
models or simple correlation measures between walkability indices and physical activity [31,
19, 25]. Our thesis extends this by focusing on building and evaluating a complex model, using
SHAP-values and PFI for explainability. These explainability techniques also enables us to do
some comparison between the two models.
41
==PAGE:46==
6.3.2
How the Built Environment Influences Desirability
The PFI done on the XGBoost model revealed some importance for most of our included built
environment attributes. Attributes such as sidewalks, lane count, and pavement were found to
be import for our classification model, supporting previous results [10]. Given possible streets
for their journey, pedestrians may favour the ones with sidewalks, a reliable pavement, or fewer
lanes. The converse may also be true: a more interesting path could be off-the-beaten path with
no sidewalk, through a park with a gravel surface, or next to a road with many lanes because
it offers better connectivity. Attributes directly related to connectivity and proximity were also
found to be of importance. Residential and intersection density, measures included in Frank’s
WI, were found to be important. Similarly, distance to public transit, amenities, and parking also
contributed about equally to the performance of XGBoost. These are all attributes and predictors
used and discussed as important in previous studies to various degrees [13, 10, 11]. We find little
influence from attributes related to retail, non-residential buildings, and land use mix.
Looking at the directional impact of each feature on the model output, both the coefficients from
logistic regression and SHAP analysis on XGBoost find an opposite direction between the low and
high desirability classes. This is consistent across all features, implying that that the classes re-
side in separate parts of the feature space and are associated with different attributes of the built
environment. We found that features describing a street’s location in the environment were the
most dividing between classes. If a street is next to a body of water, the models highly associate
this with a high desirability. This is also applicable for whether a path lies in a park. Interestingly
we also found that a high presence of non-residential buildings were more likely to be associated
with a low desirability, perhaps an indicator of strolls in industrial areas tending to be boring,
repetitive, or with little purpose. However, a low presence of non-residential buildings were not
an indicator of an areas desirability. Areas with a high proportion of residential buildings were
generally associated more with low desirability than high desirability.
If a street is paved the model slightly increases the probability of a high desirability prediction.
If a street known to not be paved, it increases the probability for a low desirability prediction.
But interestingly, for streets where information about pavement is missing the XGBoost model
is more likely to predict low desirability, than if it was an unpaved street. This is an interesting
observation, which may relate to the previously discussed biases seen in OpenStreetMap contri-
butions: power users map urban and popular areas to a greater extent and detail than elsewhere.
As a result, information - such as the pavement type - is more likely to be missing on curious
streets.
The results generally convey a relation between high street desirability and environmental aes-
thetics, connectivity, accessibility, and amenities. Similarly, the lack of these measures are found
among the less desirable streets.
6.3.3
Generalizability Across Geographical Areas
The spatial generalizability of our XGBoost model were presented in section 5.1.5. It general-
ized the worst in the less urban areas, where often little activity were recorded by Strava and
OpenStreetMap data may be lacking. Similarly, our model seems slightly biased towards the
urban areas, and the pattern of higher accuracy in figure 5.6 does resemble Fingerplanen, fig-
ure 6.4, the main ideology behind the urban expansion of Copenhagen [9]. However, the bias
towards these areas is also an indicator of it accurately modelling the behaviour of the mass if it
has sufficient information of both physical activity and urban environment. As walkability and
pedestrian behaviour is a part of our day-to-day lives and culture, applying the model in other
countries should ideally train it on Strava and built environment data specific to those regions
42
==PAGE:47==
as their urban planning and culture will differ. Nonetheless, a potential area of future research
could be the applicability of e.g. a model trained on data for Copenhagen in predicting desirabil-
ity for a similar city, such as Aarhus.
Fig. 6.4. Fingerplanen: Fingerplanen is the main ideology behind the urban devel-
opment and expansion of Copenhagen. It’s been the primary plan for Copenhagen, and
has seen several iterations since its origin in 1947. Figure from [9].
6.4
Summary
In summary, both limitations and strengths exist within this thesis. Further research could look
into possible differences in the desirability and built environment patterns between sociodemo-
graphic groups or how to build a more inclusive model which address the biases in Strava and
OpenStreetMap data. Our thesis addressed the empirical gap in current research by combining
multiple large-scale data sources while maintaining high granularity - a modelling approach ap-
plicable in larger geographical contexts although with slight bias towards more populous areas.
Finally, we discussed the results of our model explanation, relating it to both possible interpre-
tations and existing research.
43
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Through an initial literature study a lack of focus on walkability research working on large ge-
ographic regions with high granularity was noticed. This thesis introduced a scalable and em-
pirical approach for assessing relations between built environment and pedestrian activity. The
method we use is an extension of the desirability concept introduced in [31], applying it on large-
scale data from Strava as a proxy for physical activity and built environment information from
OpenStreetMap with a focus on capturing relations between the two. A primary gradient boosted
tree model is built and its hyperparameters tuned using a spatial variant of the K-fold cross val-
idation technique to minimize data leak from spatial autocorrelation. It performed better than
simpler models or established walkability indices, with a weighted F1 score of 0.57. Multino-
mial logistic regression achieved a score of F1 = 0.52 while Frank’s walkability index achieved
F1 = 0.36.
The attributes, as identified by the gradient boosted tree model, of the built environment that
relate with street desirability the most, were about the environmental aesthetics, connectivity,
accessibility, and amenities of the streets and infrastructure. The most desirable streets were
associated with high values for these, while less desirable streets would lack these attributes.
These results were largely in agreement with the coefficients from the multinomial logistic re-
gression
The use of both Strava and OpenStreetMap as the primary data sources introduces bias to-
wards certain demographics or geographic regions. Users of Strava has an overrepresentation
of younger males relative to the actual active population, introducing a bias in the modelling
phase towards the patterns for that demographic. Similarly, OpenStreetMap has been found to
have better coverage for urban or popular regions, both quantitatively and qualitatively, which
may give the models better accuracy in those regions. We have not addressed these limitations
directly in our methods, but discussed the potential impacts they may have and presented the
geographical generalizability of our main model. Future studies could benefit from specific at-
tention to these areas in order to build a more inclusive and representative model. Similarly,
we suggest that studies working on smaller geographical scopes with Strava as their data source
remains aware of the potential data pollution from large events.
44
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1] Adams, M. A., Todd, M., Kurka, J., Conway, T. L., Cain, K. L., Frank, L. D., and Sallis, J. F.
Patterns of walkability, transit, and recreation environment for physical activity. American
Journal of Preventive Medicine 49, 6 (Dec. 2015), 878–887.
[2] Baobeid, A., Koç, M., and Al-Ghamdi, S. G. Walkability and its relationships with health,
sustainability, and livability: Elements of physical environment and evaluation frame-
works. Frontiers in Built Environment 7 (Sept. 2021).
[3] Breiman, L. Machine Learning 45, 1 (2001), 5–32.
[4] Brenner, P. S., and DeLamater, J. D. Social desirability bias in self-reports of physical ac-
tivity: Is an exercise identity the culprit?
Social Indicators Research 117, 2 (June 2013),
489–504.
[5] Chen, T., and Guestrin, C. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system.
[6] Dai, S., Carroll, D. D., Watson, K. B., Paul, P., Carlson, S. A., and Fulton, J. E. Participation
in types of physical activities among us adults—national health and nutrition examination
survey 1999–2006. Journal of Physical Activity and Health 12, s1 (Jan. 2015), S128–S140.
[7] de Dios Ortúzar, J., and Willumsen, L. G. Modelling Transport. Wiley, Mar. 2011.
[8] Duncan, D., Méline, J., Kestens, Y., Day, K., Elbel, B., Trasande, L., and Chaix, B. Walk score,
transportation mode choice, and walking among french adults: A gps, accelerometer, and
mobility survey study. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 13,
6 (June 2016), 611.
[9] Erhvervsstyrelsen. Fingerplanen 2019. Erhvervsstyrelsen (2019).
[10] Fonseca, F., Ribeiro, P. J. G., Conticelli, E., Jabbari, M., Papageorgiou, G., Tondelli, S., and
Ramos, R. A. R. Built environment attributes and their influence on walkability. Interna-
tional Journal of Sustainable Transportation 16, 7 (Apr. 2021), 660–679.
[11] Forsyth, A. What is a walkable place? the walkability debate in urban design. URBAN
DESIGN International 20, 4 (Oct. 2015), 274–292.
[12] Frank, L. D., Appleyard, B. S., Ulmer, J. M., Chapman, J. E., and Fox, E. H. Comparing walk-
ability methods: Creation of street smart walk score and efficacy of a code-based 3d walka-
bility index. Journal of Transport and Health 21 (June 2021), 101005.
[13] Frank, L. D., Sallis, J. F., Saelens, B. E., Leary, L., Cain, K., Conway, T. L., and Hess, P. M. The
development of a walkability index: application to the neighborhood quality of life study.
British Journal of Sports Medicine 44, 13 (Apr. 2009), 924–933.
45
==PAGE:50==
[14] Freeland, A. L., Banerjee, S. N., Dannenberg, A. L., and Wendel, A. M. Walking associated
with public transit: Moving toward increased physical activity in the united states. American
Journal of Public Health 103, 3 (Mar. 2013), 536–542.
[15] Ghojogh, B., and Crowley, M. The theory behind overfitting, cross validation, regulariza-
tion, bagging, and boosting: Tutorial, 2023.
[16] Grinsztajn, L., Oyallon, E., and Varoquaux, G. Why do tree-based models still outperform
deep learning on tabular data?, 2022.
[17] Hall, C. M., and Ram, Y. Walk score® and its potential contribution to the study of active
transport and walkability: A critical and systematic review. Transportation Research Part D:
Transport and Environment 61 (June 2018), 310–324.
[18] Handy, S. L., Boarnet, M. G., Ewing, R., and Killingsworth, R. E. How the built environment
affects physical activity. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 23, 2 (Aug. 2002), 64–73.
[19] Harden, S. R., Schuurman, N., Keller, P., and Lear, S. A. Neighborhood characteristics as-
sociated with running in metro vancouver: A preliminary analysis. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health 19, 21 (Nov. 2022), 14328.
[20] Holmgren, J. The effect of public transport quality on car ownership – a source of wider
benefits? Research in Transportation Economics 83 (Nov. 2020), 100957.
[21] Iltis, A. Department of Transportation, 2018.
[22] Jackson, L. E. The relationship of urban design to human health and condition. Landscape
and Urban Planning 64, 4 (Aug. 2003), 191–200.
[23] Jardim, B., de Castro Neto, M., and Barriguinha, A. A street-point method to measure the
spatiotemporal relationship between walkability and pedestrian flow. Computers, Environ-
ment and Urban Systems 104 (Sept. 2023), 101993.
[24] Københavns Kommune, M. o. T. Flere gÅr mere, fodgængerstrategi for københavn, 2011.
[25] Liao, B., van den Berg, P. E., van Wesemael, P., and Arentze, T. A. Empirical analysis of
walkability using data from the netherlands. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment 85 (Aug. 2020), 102390.
[26] Lundberg, S., and Lee, S.-I. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions, 2017.
[27] Lundberg, S. M., Erion, G. G., and Lee, S.-I. Consistent individualized feature attribution
for tree ensembles, 2018.
[28] Luxen, D., and Vetter, C. Real-time routing with openstreetmap data. In Proceedings of
the 19th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2011), GIS ’11, ACM, pp. 513–516.
[29] Marathon,
C.
H.
Cph
half.
https://worldsmarathons.com/marathon/
copenhagen-half-marathon, 2022. [Accessed 26-01-2024].
[30] Michel, J.-B., Shen, Y. K., Aiden, A. P., Veres, A., Gray, M. K., Pickett, J. P., Hoiberg, D.,
Clancy, D., Norvig, P., Orwant, J., Pinker, S., Nowak, M. A., and Aiden, E. L. Quantitative
analysis of culture using millions of digitized books. Science 331, 6014 (Jan. 2011), 176–182.
[31] Miranda, A. S., Fan, Z., Duarte, F., and Ratti, C. Desirable streets: Using deviations in pedes-
trian trajectories to measure the value of the built environment. Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems 86 (Mar. 2021), 101563.
46
==PAGE:51==
[32] Molnar, C. Interpretable Machine Learning, 2 ed. 2022.
[33] Moran, P. A. P. Notes on continuous stochastic phenomena. Biometrika 37, 1/2 (June 1950),
17.
[34] Quattrone, G., Capra, L., and De Meo, P. There’s no such thing as the perfect map: Quanti-
fying bias in spatial crowd-sourcing datasets. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work; Social Computing (Feb. 2015), CSCW ’15, ACM.
[35] Roberts, D. R., Bahn, V., Ciuti, S., Boyce, M. S., Elith, J., Guillera-Arroita, G., Hauenstein, S.,
Lahoz-Monfort, J. J., Schröder, B., Thuiller, W., Warton, D. I., Wintle, B. A., Hartig, F., and
Dormann, C. F. Cross-validation strategies for data with temporal, spatial, hierarchical, or
phylogenetic structure. Ecography 40, 8 (Mar. 2017), 913–929.
[36] Saadi, I., Aganze, R., Moeinaddini, M., Asadi-Shekari, Z., and Cools, M. A participatory
assessment of perceived neighbourhood walkability in a small urban environment. Sus-
tainability 14, 1 (Dec. 2021), 206.
[37] Saelens, B. E., Sallis, J. F., and Frank, L. D. Environmental correlates of walking and cycling:
Findings from the transportation, urban design, and planning literatures. Ann. Behav. Med.
25, 2 (Apr. 2003), 80–91.
[38] Score, W. walkscore.com. https://www.walkscore.com. [Accessed 28-12-2023].
[39] Shields, R., Gomes da Silva, E. J., Lima e Lima, T., and Osorio, N. Walkability: a review of
trends. Journal of Urbanism: International Research on Placemaking and Urban Sustainability
16, 1 (June 2021), 19–41.
[40] SHIGEMATSU, R., SALLIS, J. F., CONWAY, T. L., SAELENS, B. E., FRANK, L. D., CAIN, K. L.,
CHAPMAN, J. E., and KING, A. C. Age differences in the relation of perceived neighborhood
environment to walking. Medicine; Science in Sports; Exercise 41, 2 (Feb. 2009), 314–321.
[41] Shwartz-Ziv, R., and Armon, A. Tabular data: Deep learning is not all you need, 2021.
[42] Southworth, M. Designing the walkable city. Journal of Urban Planning and Development
131, 4 (Dec. 2005), 246–257.
[43] Stockton, J., Duke-Williams, O., Stamatakis, E., Mindell, J. S., Brunner, E. J., and Shelton,
N. J. Development of a novel walkability index for london, united kingdom: cross-sectional
application to the whitehall ii study. BMC Public Health 16 (2016).
[44] Strava. strava.com. https://www.strava.com. [Accessed 28-12-2023].
[45] Tobler, W. R. A computer movie simulating urban growth in the detroit region. Economic
Geography 46 (June 1970), 234.
[46] Venter, Z. S., Gundersen, V., Scott, S. L., and Barton, D. N. Bias and precision of crowd-
sourced recreational activity data from strava. Landscape and Urban Planning 232 (Apr.
2023), 104686.
[47] Štrumbelj, E., and Kononenko, I. Explaining prediction models and individual predictions
with feature contributions. Knowledge and Information Systems 41, 3 (Aug. 2013), 647–665.
47
