==PAGE:1==
Perceptual Evaluation of Irregular Loudspeaker Arrays
Discrimination threshold of azimuthal displacement in a 5.0 loudspeaker reproduction system
Department of Health Technology
Hearing Systems Section
==PAGE:2==
Perceptual Evaluation of Irregular Loudspeaker Arrays
Discrimination threshold of azimuthal displacement in a 5.0 loudspeaker reproduction
system
Master Thesis
18th of February, 2024
By
Felipe Blanco Ricco
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Hearing Systems Section, Ørsteds Plads, Building 352, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/about
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The ﬁdelity of home audio reproduction systems is crucial for delivering an immersive
experience across various audio content. However, deviations from established loudspeaker
reference standards can lead to irregular reproduction systems, aﬀecting users’ auditory
perception. The development of diﬀerent production and reproduction systems in
the audio industry increase the need for adaptive audio rendering systems, that aim
to optimize audio reproduction based on local system information and environmental
factors. In contrast, limited research exists on the perceptual impact of irregular
reproduction systems and when these adaptive algorithms are required to improve
the listeners’ perception.
Irregular systems can be consisted of a displacement in either radius, azimuth or
elevation. A literature review was done on previous research, where the eﬀect of
azimutal displacement on multichannel reproduction systems still has questions to be
answered. Studies by Sawaguchi et al. 2012, Sawaya et al. 2013, Moulin et al. 2019,
and Cieciura et al. 2020 oﬀer insights into the eﬀects of loudspeaker displacement
on multichannel reproduction systems. Despite these studies, a lack of information
on the listeners’ ability to discriminate an azimuthal displacement in a 5.0 array
still remain. Which would complement the evaluations with both, higher channel
number systems (e.g., 22.2, used in the Sawaya et al. 2013 study) and evaluation with
only one of way of displacing the loudspeaker azimuthally (as done by Sawaguchi
et al. 2012). The current project focus on creating a methodology to explore the
discrimination ability for azimuthal displacement in a home-like room with as many
displacement types as possible.
A methodology was developed to study the discrimination threshold of azimuthal
displacement in a 5 loudspeaker reproduction setup in a home-like room.
The
experiment’s methodology involves a discrimination experiment where participants
are tasked with discriminating irregular reproduction system from the reference
system for six types of displacement, aiming to cover several possible locations
that the listener could position its loudspeaker.
By addressing these gaps, the
experiment’s data was able to indicate that a 20° azimuthal displacement can be
overlooked by the listener. In addition the location of the speaker (e.g., front or
back hemisphere), the programme material and type of displacement are signiﬁcant
factors in the listeners’ discrimination ability, having a asymmetrical displacement
can be discriminate easier by the listener.
Page ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Felipe Blanco Ricco, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
The biggest thanks to Regina and Celso, the parents that even through a long
distance, diﬃcult decisions and hard time supported me with energy and patience,
who have also provided me with love and good education through out my life, and
who I will always be thankful.
To Kamilla, who gave me love and support through the thesis and helps making
everywhere a home.
To both my supervisors Oliver Scheuregger and Axel Ahrens for the patience and
support through my development as a master student, both in this thesis and in
previous projects.
Page iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction and Motivation
1
1.1
Audio Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Audio Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Audio Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
Audio Reproduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.4
Spatial Audio and Audio Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background Theory
8
2.1
Spatial Hearing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Sensory Evaluation of Sound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Discrimination Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Sound Sensory Evaluation Ingredients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Assessors Inﬂuence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.2
Programme Material Inﬂuence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Virtual Auditory Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.6
Azimuthal Displacement Perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Methods
19
3.1
Displacement Type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Evaluation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Listening Room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Programme Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.1
Programme Material Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4.2
Programme Material Rendering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Assessor Panel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Calibration and Loudness Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.7
Final Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results
31
4.1
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Contents
5
Discussion
37
5.1
Assessor Panel and Results Reliability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Signiﬁcant Factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Front vs Back Hemisphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Asymmetric Lower Azimuth Threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.5
Front Single and Symmetric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A
46
A.1 Appendix 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 Appendix 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.3 Appendix 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Page v
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction and Motivation
The aim of a home audio reproduction system is to create a faithful experience of the
audio production (e.g., sport events, studio music content, live concerts and movies).
To that end, loudspeaker reference standards (e.g., ITU standard, MPEG-H) were
created to facilitate faithful reproduction of audio between locations (e.g., the studio
and the home). The problem arises when these standards are not followed, creating
irregular reproduction systems which diﬀer from the systemintended by the producers.
These irregular reproduction systems can aﬀect the users’ auditory perception of
the content delivering a non-faithful experience and even decreasing perceived Basic
Audio Quality as showed by Francombe et al. 2017.
This problem is especially
challenging today due to the rise of diﬀerent production systems (input) and diﬀerent
reproduction systems (output) in the audio industry, leading to numerous combinations
of audio reproduction chains. Adaptive audio rendering systems process the output
signals based on local information of the reproduction system used and its environment.
One example of this technology is on the Sony’s HT-A9® home theater system that
has a technology called Sound Mapping, to adapt the loudspeakers based on their
positioning and on the room characteristics. These solutions have been growing in
interest and are also being developed integrated with object-based1 formats such
as Dolby Atmos® (e.g.,Flex Connect® ) that optimizes the reproduction system.
Limited research is available on whether irregular reproduction systems actually
degrade the listerners’ perception of spatial audio quality, and consequently if those
adaptive audio rendering systems are necessary or when they start to impact the
listeners’ experience positively.
Following the current status of the industry and academic research this project aims
to understand if listeners can discriminate irregular reproduction systems which
diﬀer from the standards.
The project will focus on systems that are irregular
1Object-based audio is a representation for audio content, designed for the content to be a
reproduction-format-agnostic, produced for diﬀerent audio reproduction devices and systems.
1
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1. Introduction and Motivation
1.1. Audio Chain
exclusively due to loudspeaker azimuthal displacement, aiming to determine the
sensory threshold of loudspeaker displacement for a multichannel reproduction system
in a home-like setup. Furhtermore, the experiment will not focus on any speciﬁc
attribute, as it is complex to determine which attributes are aﬀected by an azimuthal
displacement. This has laed to the following research question:
What is the discrimination threshold of azimuthal loudspeaker displacement?
This report details the theoretical background, methodology, results, and analysis
of a discrimination experiment. Listeners were asked to discriminate a displaced
setup from the reference reproduction system that has diﬀerent azimuth angles
compared to the reference system. A brief introduction to the audio industry chain
and literature review will be presented in the following.
1.1
Audio Chain
The audio signal chain comprises the production of a recorded content, transmission
and reproduction of the content.
1.1.1
Audio Production
The audio production is the process of mixing and rendering the recorded signals
into a standard format to be further distributed. The mixing process is dependent of
the intended reproduction system. This means that the producer mixes the content
according to the type of audio format2 to be distributed. The most common and
well known audio format is the channel-based audio, which is created by routing
speciﬁc recordings to speciﬁc channels relative to a speciﬁc loudspeaker layouts3.
1.1.2
Audio Transmission
The audio transmission is the medium of distributing audio content. The development
of diﬀerent transmission technologies started from the ﬁrst audio transmissions from
Alexander Graham Bell inaugurating the telephone in 1876, and Blumlein’s patent
in 1931 establishing what we understand as stereophonic eﬀect, where multiple
loudspeaker are used to create a phantom image. Diﬀerent transmission technologies
were used throughout the development of the audio industry including, cassette
2The audio format here is deﬁned how the audio content is mixed to be distributed (e.g.,
channel-based format and object-based format)
3Usually deﬁned as loudspeaker arrangement in ITU standards such as ITU-R Rec.-BS.775-2
2006. It is the predeﬁned positions of the loudspeakers for a speciﬁc standard.
Page 2
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1. Introduction and Motivation
1.1. Audio Chain
tapes, radio, Compact Discs (CD), Digital Versatile Discs (DVD), Blue Ray and
streaming services. Currently streaming, most often done by the use of internet
network, is the most used audio transmission in a variety of diﬀerent contents (e.g.,
sports events, music, movies), especially after the development and accessibility
of 5G networks (Gomez-Barquero et al. 2022). Today, streaming platforms have
the ability to stream audio in diﬀerent audio formats and for diﬀerent loudspeaker
layouts, which increases the likelihood of the problem stated in the previous section.
1.1.3
Audio Reproduction
The audio reproduction system is often deﬁned by one or more loudspeakers. For
diﬀerent numbers of loudspeakers (outputs) a loudspeaker layout is usually deﬁned.
A plethora of diﬀerent loudspeaker layouts exist including but not limited to 2.0,
5.1, 7.1.4 and 22.2., where the ﬁrst number denotes the number of loudspeakers in
the middle layer (ear height), the second value to the number of Low Frequency
Eﬀects channels (LFE) and the last number to the height channels in the upper
layer (which can be deﬁned by diﬀerent angles). Diﬀerent loudspeaker layouts are
deﬁned in standards by loudspeaker positions relative to the listener. Perhaps the
most well known layout is stereo.
The audio reproduction system as explained above deﬁnes the output format, and
in most cases audio rendering is necessary to adapt the received transmission to the
output. This is done by routing the number of channels/objects to loudspeaker feeds.
The audio rendering process includes, but is not limited to, downmixing/upmixing
which is the process of collapsing or expanding the number of channels of the
transmitted content to the speciﬁc number of loudspeakers used. These processes can
aﬀect basic audio quality as suggested by Lawomir et al. 2003 and change spatial
cues from the input format (usually with a higher number of channels/objects).
Similarly Herre et al. 2015 also suggested that can be a source of spectral changed
and comb-ﬁltering eﬀect.
1.1.4
Spatial Audio and Audio Formats
Creating a faithful listening experience is one of the goals inside the music industry
and consumer electronics development.
Since the late 1950s when two channel
stereo vinyls began commercialization with extended mono versions4, the search
for a faithful audio reproduction has been an on-going process.
In the current
stage the technologies are being developed to reach spatialization, which often is
done by increasing the number of channels/objects and consequently the number of
loudspeakers to be used as output.
4Mono recordings processed to be reproduced in 2 channels with a stereophonic eﬀect.
Page 3
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1. Introduction and Motivation
1.1. Audio Chain
To replicate complex scenes and create an immersive5 experience, several audio
formats and reproduction layouts have been developed. Among the most important
audio formats developed are channel-based audio (e.g., 2.0, 5.1, 7.1.4), scene-based
audio (e.g., Ambisonics) and object-based audio (e.g., MEPG-H and Dolby Atmos).
The latter two being proposed to ﬁll the gap that channel-based audio creates, as it
assumes that the intended loudspeaker layout and the actual loudspeaker layout to
be identical. In the channel-based audio, each channel carries a speciﬁc component of
the audio signal, contributing to the overall auditory experience. These channels are
often associated with spatial or directional information, allowing for the creation of
a three-dimensional auditory environment. Researchers and engineers often explore
advanced signal processing techniques and psychoacoustic principles within the
realm of channel-based audio to enhance the spatial accuracy, localization, and
overall ﬁdelity of reproduced sound.
This involves considering factors such as
inter-channel time delays, amplitude diﬀerences, and spectral characteristics to
simulate the way humans perceive sound in real-world environments.
Conventional channel-based layouts includes stereo layout and the 5.1 surround
(derived from 3/2 by ITU-R Rec.-BS.775-2 2006).
Furthermore, new so-called
immersive loudspeaker layouts, such as 7.1.4 (ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29 2022) includes
an upper layer of loudspeakers that are positioned higher in the elevation plane 6 to
add height information. These diﬀerent audio formats and loudspeaker layouts are
being delivered in diﬀerent reproduction systems such as headphones, sound theater
systems, soundbars and irregular (non-standard) loudspeaker layouts. This creates
a need for processing steps to convert the audio signal produced and intended for
a speciﬁc loudspeaker layout (e.g., 7.1.4) to a irregular loudspeaker array (e.g.,
soundbar, 2.0 layout or miss-placed 7.1.4).
Inside the conversion process, two
main steps can be identiﬁed: down/upmixing and adaptive position rendering. The
adaptive rendering is the process of modifying the signal based on the information
of the local reproduction system (e.g., position of loudspeaker, directivity patterns,
max SPL, etc.). Technologies such as the MPEG-H® standard and Dolby Atmos®,
apply gains and ﬁlters to“correct” the loudspeaker positioning and maintain the
scene intended by the artist. Such technologies have been showed to provide some
improvement in spatial attributes, as showed by Moulin et al. 2019.
5Immersion is deﬁned as suggested by Agrawal et al. 2020, p. 407: ” Immersion is a phenomenon
experienced by an individual when they are in a state of deep mental involvement in which their
cognitive processes (with or without sensory stimulation) cause a shift in their attentional state
such that one may experience disassociation from the awareness of the physical world.”
6In spherical coordinates the position of a point can be described be a tuple of 3 elements (r,θ,
φ), where the elevation plane is deﬁne by the plane formed by the vertical axis and the radial line
(line between the origin and point being described)
Page 4
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1. Introduction and Motivation
1.2. Literature Review
1.2
Literature Review
Sawaguchi et al. 2012 performed a study to investigate the tolerance of loudspeaker
placement using 5.0 loudspeaker setup layout7 as reference. The goal was to perform
a perceptual experiment comparing the reference layout with layouts where loudspeakers
were displaced in azimuth and elevation. The methodology consisted of a 5-point
scale paradigm where the subjects had to rate (i) listener environment (similar
deﬁnition as listener envelopment) (ii) sound image localization, and (iii) sensation
of movement.
The results of the study consisted of these ratings of 7 diﬀerent
loudspeaker layouts. The loudspeaker layouts used in the experiment to impose the
perceptual degradation were deﬁned based on a survey from home theater installers
and owners. A cluster analysis of that survey uses information on placement of
previous systems in houses, this resulted in 7 diﬀerent layouts. The subjects (audio
specialists) rated the 7 layouts on 3 attributes for 3 diﬀerent programme material
(instrumental music, outdoor environment recording and a moving source track).
From the results, the authors discussed a set of guidelines that could guide home
installations and among them is that rear loudspeakers can have a tolerance of
± 15 degrees from the reference position. This work indicates the degradation of
the listener’s perception for diﬀerent attributes when changing the position of the
loudspeakers in a listening room. Furthermore it provides ecological information
on the positions that listeners often use for such a system, which can be used as
benchmark. On the other hand, the experimental design makes it diﬃcult to draw a
precise conclusion of when the degradation starts to happen as it compares layouts
with ﬁxed displacements. In addition, there is little information on the selected
programme material, which can inﬂuence the results heavily depending on what
information each channel portraits.
Sawaya et al. 2013 conducted a discrimination study on loudspeaker positions in a
22.2 system, which aims to understand when azimuthal and elevation displacement
starts to degrade spatial attributes for the listener.
The study consisted of two double-blind triple-stimulus with hidden reference paradigms
ITU-R BS.1116-3 2015. Here the participant was instructed to rate the diﬀerence
grading (compared to the reference) of sound envelopment and sound direction.
The ﬁrst experiment aimed to evaluate the eﬀects of changing the azimuth of
loudspeakers. The azimuth of the loudspeakers were varied symmetrically, in pairs
7deﬁned in ITU-R Rec.-BS.775-2 2006
Page 5
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction and Motivation
1.2. Literature Review
at a time (e.g., Left and Right channels). The evaluation was repeated for each
layer (upper, middle and bottom). As for the second experiment, the goal was to
evaluate the eﬀects of changing the elevation angles of loudspeakers. Which was done
by varying the elevation angle of the whole top layer (expect for one loudspeaker).
During the experiment the author demonstrates that, for a speciﬁc range, no spatial
audio quality diﬀerence was perceived when varying both azimuth and elevation
angle.
As the author also commented, not the full range of displacement was
presented, therefore it cannot be discarded that in a diﬀerent scenario there could
be a degradation by varying the position (azimuth and/or elevation). This paper
is important benchmark as it uses a very well know paradigm for determining the
perceptual threshold in loudspeaker displacements. Furthermore, the results could
be a consequence of the loudspeaker layout used.
This relates to 22.2.
having
a high number of loudspeakers, which could decrease the inﬂuence of loudspeaker
displacement on the spatial quality. For a loudspeaker layout with fewer number of
loudspeakers, the loudspeaker displacement could represent a bigger impact in the
spatial quality, as previously showed by Sawaguchi et al. 2012.
Moulin et al. 2019 performed a study to evaluate the compensation algorithm
introduced by MPEG-H ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29 2022. This was done to evaluate,
(i) the potential eﬀect of angular displacement on the listener’s Basic Audio Quality
(BAQ) perception and (ii) the potential eﬀect of applying compensation algorithms
on the listener’s perception of BAQ.
The experiment consisted of a MUSHRA test where the reference layout 5.0, was
compared to (i) layout with displacement and (ii) layout with displacement and
compensation algorithm applied, all in listening rooms.
In this work, only one
displacement layout was studied, where both the loudspeaker distance (radius to the
listener) and the loudspeaker azimuth were varied. Results showed that the displaced
version of the loudspeaker layout with and without the compensation algorithm had
a signiﬁcant lower rating for all programme material when compared to the reference
layout. This indicates that for a loudspeaker layout with 5 loudspeakers there is
a spatial quality degradation. This is in contrast to what Sawaguchi et al. 2012
showed for the 22 loudspeaker system. The MUSHRA test in this case also showed
a degradation of spatial attributes for a speciﬁc misplaced loudspeaker layout. On
the other hand, only one misplaced layout was tested during the experiment, thus
leaving questions on when the angular misplacement starts to degrade spatial quality
or when the listener detects the misplaced loudspeaker.
Cieciura et al. 2020 performed an experiment to understand what the most common
loudspeaker placements in the listener’s house are. In this study, participants were
Page 6
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1. Introduction and Motivation
1.2. Literature Review
asked to freely place a certain number of loudspeakers inside their living room, while
also asking some descriptive questions on why and how the participant placed them
as they did. Inside the test, diﬀerent reproduction devices were used, such as using
the TV. The participants consisted of audio experts and non-experts, to ensure that
not only acoustic oriented decisions were taken.
The results showed that for 2 loudspeakers, the devices were positioned in each-half
of the room, and even with more loudspeakers, a certain symmetry was identiﬁed
in the positionings. In the experiment analysis Cieciura et al. 2020 describes three
categories in which all participants were concerned when placing the loudspeakers:
spatial balance, functionality and aesthetics. The authors suggests that non-experts
are more prone to favor aesthetics and functionality over spatial balance, which is
more related to spatial audio quality.
This study will provide important information to the experiment design in this
project, aiding to deﬁne which positions are more commonly used by regular listeners
and whether the position are acoustically appropriated or not.
Cieciura et al.
2020 also comments that most of the participants were surprised with the task
of positioning eight loudspeaker in their living-room, which indicates that is very
unlikely (even among audio trained listeners) for one customer to have high number
of channel reproduction systems (e.g.,7.1.4).
With this brief history of diﬀerent studies regarding the eﬀect of loudspeaker displacement
in multichannel reproduction systems, it can be observed that there are still unanswered
questions on the eﬀect of azimuthal displacement in the perception of spatial audio
to the listener, speciﬁcally in 5.0 reproduction systems and in diﬀerent types of
azimuthal displacement. Thus, this study aims to ﬁll some of the holes and potentially
determine discrimination thresholds that can clarify when a degradation becomes
audible for the listener including more azimuthal displacement types.
Page 7
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Background Theory
2.1
Spatial Hearing
Spatial hearing is the ability of the auditory system to locate a sound source. Spatial
hearing is also deﬁned as “the capacity of the auditory system to interpret or exploit
diﬀerent spatial paths by which sounds may reach the head”(Culling et al. 2010,
p.123). This ability is important to locate sources spatially and is also important
for the following reasons: the location itself is important information, to aid visual
localization and to aid sound separation (Plack 2018). Furthermore the sound source
coordinate system often used in spatial hearing and in this project is deﬁned in p.
157 of Plack 2018. It consists of an horizontal plane and median plane. The human
hearing is composed by two discrete channels, our two ears, thus we deﬁne it as
binaural hearing. The sound arrival at the ears have cues that helps the auditory
system to locate the source: interaural time diﬀerences (ITDs), interaural level
diﬀerences (ILDs).
ITD is the time diﬀerence of arrival between both ears. When a source is located
toward your right side the sound wave will travel both directly to your right ear
and around your head to go to your left ear. Apart when the source(s) is straight
ahead or directly behind you (0◦and 180 ◦). This number is diﬀerent than 0, which
can aid the auditory system to locate a source in the horizontal plane. This cue
is specially important for low frequencies sounds. The ITD of 10 µs correspond
to approximately 1 degree in azimuth.
This cue has some points that leads to
ambiguity, if a sound source is placed at around 180◦from the listener, above a
speciﬁc frequency (depending on the head diameter) the time diﬀerence may be
negligible and the auditory system will consider the time of arrival the same, even
though the sound might come from one side. This problem is often solved by the
8
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.2. Sensory Evaluation of Sound
ability of the auditory system to follow envelope ﬂuctuations(Plack 2018). A second
issue concerning ITDs and their inﬂuence in spatial hearing is that the auditory
system has a poor resolution tracking variations of ITDs.
Tis is the case when
the sound source is changing its placement, which was showed for pure tones by J.
Blauert 1972. This lead us to believe that the auditory system can only follow slow
changes of the sound source.
ILDs is the second binaural cue and it represents the sound pressure level diﬀerence
between the to ears. This happens due to the head behaving like a barrier specially
at higher frequencies, where the sound waves do not diﬀract as much as in lower
frequencies. When a sound source is positioned more to one side, the ear position
in the same side will receive a sound wave with higher intensity, as explained by the
inverse square law. That is if the sound source comes from the left side, the right
ear is furthest away and will receive the sound wave at a lower level. This eﬀect is
minimized when the distance between the source and the head is larger than the
head width.
The head, torso and the pinnae all inﬂuence the sound is arriving in the middle
ear to be transduced into signals to our brain. The Head Related Transfer Function
(HRTF) is the function that summarizes the spectral and phase inﬂuence of the
shape and size of the head and torso as well as the shape of the pinnae in the
sound, inclusing the ITDs and ILDs, Plack 2018. All of the body parts mentioned
will reﬂect and diﬀract sound in a very speciﬁc and unique way, that also varies
according to the source angle in relation to listener’s head position. For every single
individual, there is a speciﬁc HRTF (a transfer function) that acts like a ﬁlter to the
received sound. When the source moves, the transfer function will also change, and
the auditory system can recognize speciﬁc frequency cues in the transfer function
that corresponds to a speciﬁc position.
Section 2.6 will brieﬂy touch on speciﬁc perception eﬀects that can be used as
spatial cues in multichannel reproduction setups.
2.2
Sensory Evaluation of Sound
Sensory evaluation is deﬁned as “... a scientiﬁc discipline used to evoke, measure,
analyze, and interpret reactions to those characteristics of foods and materials as
they are perceived by the senses of sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing.” (Stone et
al. 2021, p.15). It is usually applied in tasks that cannot be summarized by physical
measurements and has the inﬂuence of the subject psychological process. This is the
Page 9
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.2. Sensory Evaluation of Sound
case for sound, where preference, past experiences and other psychological factors
can inﬂuence the perception of sound for a listener.
Perceptual evaluation has proven to be a valuable approach to evaluate audio quality
in sound systems ITU-R BS.1534-1 2003.
To understand the information that
sensory evaluation extracts from the listener performing a speciﬁc task, a review of
the ﬁlter model will be presented. The ﬁlter model deﬁnes psychoacoustic processes
as reviewed by Zacharov 2019 and shown in Figure 2.1. This model describes the
connection between the physical stimulus and the listener subjective response, going
through diﬀerent ”ﬁlters” that can alter the ﬁnal subjective response of the listener.
The goal of a perceptual evaluation is to evaluate how ﬁlter 1 and ﬁlter 2 interact,
thus relating non acoustical parameters to physical and objective parameters. The
ﬁlter model is applicable to diﬀerent sensation evaluations, such as tone, taste and
sound quality evaluation. It also deﬁnes diﬀerent types of measurement: perceptual
measurement and aﬀective measurement.
From this discussion it can be concluded that the goal of the experiment will
determine the sensory evaluation used, which measurement will comprise the experiment
(e.g., only perceptual) and what is the attribute to be measured. Thus, deﬁning the
attribute and method will contribute to answering the research question correctly,
and thereby enhances the chance of the evaluation success.
Furthermore, it is
essential to always deﬁne the research question and use it as input to deﬁne the
perceptual evaluation method and attribute(s) being assessed.
Figure 2.1: Filter model diagram from Zacharov 2019.
Page 10
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.2. Sensory Evaluation of Sound
Sensory evaluation results are often looked at with care, and can be considered less
objective than physical measurements, as stated by Zacharov 2019. This can be due
to the fact that individuals can be non-reliable and provide diﬀerent results based on
their subjective opinion, or even have an opinion that changes through time. Thus,
it is the job of the experiment designer to plan and create an experiment to minimize
these factors and produce a reliable scientiﬁc research. Zacharov 2019 underlines
the steps of designing a listening test while reducing the variability coming from the
individual and experimental design.
Sensory evaluation encompasses a range of methods designed to assess the sensory
attributes of products (e.g., headphones, loudspeakers). Among them, ﬁve tests
families can be mentioned as explained by Zacharov 2019: (i) integrative methods,
(iI) discrimination methods, (iii) descriptive analysis methods, (iv) temporal methods
and (v) mixed methods. Integrative methods involve a holistic evaluation where
assessors provide an overall judgment of a product regarding heir perception of a
attribute. One judgement or attribute that is often used in the sensory evaluation of
sound is the Basic Audio Quality assessment, deﬁned by ITU-R BS.1534-1 2003, to
describe the overall quality of an audio reproduction method. Descriptive analysis
involves trained sensory panels1 carefully quantifying and/or describing attributes
such as envelopment transparency, ﬂavor, aroma, texture, and appearance. These
are often the attributes used in descriptive analysis, which is deﬁned by measuring
M2 in the ﬁlter model, depicted in ﬁgure 2.1. Hedonic or aﬀective measurements,
on the other hand, focus on consumer preferences and overall liking, oﬀering a more
subjective evaluation based on personal tastes/opinions. Aﬀective testing includes
emotional responses, mood, and past experiences to products, aiming to understand
the impact on consumers beyond objective sensory attributes, this is deﬁned by
measuring M3 in ﬁgure 2.1. Temporal methods consider how sensory perceptions
evolve over time, assessing attributes like ﬂavor release or changes in texture during
consumption. Mixed methods involve a combination of these approaches, allowing
for a more nuanced and multifaceted evaluation.
Discrimination testing focuses on identifying diﬀerences or similarities between products.
Common methods include triangle tests, duo-trio tests, and paired comparison tests.
This is the type of test the will be conducted in this project with the goal of answering
the research question. There are a multitude of methods to extract information on
the subject’s perception. Zacharov 2019 goes into detail on the diﬀerent types of
methods and when to use them. For a complete overview go to ﬁgure 5.1 in page 110
1A panel is the group of listeners that will undertake the test. It will be further explained in
section 2.4.1.
Page 11
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.3. Discrimination Methods
of Zacharov 2019 the most common tests methods under these families are shown.
The selection of the method for this project was based on the research question.
As explained in the introduction is to understand when or even if compensation
algorithms are necessary, when a irregular loudspeaker array is used. For that, the
primordial question for the experiment, is if the listeners can tell a diﬀerence between
a irregular loudspeaker array and the reference loudspeaker array. Furthermore,
there is no one speciﬁc attribute of interest of this test as it is plausible for the
consumer to use the amalgamation of diﬀerent attributes to evaluate a multichannel
reproduction method. In this case it is interesting to understand ﬁrstly when the
listener can identify an irregular array, which ﬁts the description of an indirect
discrimination method. Today there are several discrimination methods and some
of them will be described and discussed in the next section to justify the ﬁnal choice
for the experiment.
2.3
Discrimination Methods
Discrimination methods are used to identify a threshold of perceptual discrimination
between products with diﬀerent characteristics, where the level of a certain characteristic
inﬂuences the perception and will determine when it is possible to be identiﬁed by
the listener. There are two types of discrimination methods, direct and indirect
methods.
Direct methods are based on a speciﬁc attribute, (e.g., which sound
has more bass), while indirect methods are based on comparisons made without
specifying any attribute to the listener.
The direct methods can yield a higher
correct responses percentage, as they have been proven to be more sensitive when
comparing a 3-AFC test with a triangle test, as explained by the review done in
Ennis et al. 2011.
Indirect methods should be used when it is unknown or hard to determine which
attribute (or more than one) is directly inﬂuenced by the impairment applied,
causing diﬀerence between products.
Although direct methods can yield higher
percentages of correct responses, for this experiment it is interesting to use an
unspeciﬁed or indirect method. This is the case because the research question relates
to understanding when azimuthal displacement in a multichannel reproduction audio
can be perceived by the listeners.
Furthermore, the goal of the experiment is
to understand the validity of compensation algorithms in environmentally valid
situations. As a consequence, to determine an attribute for the test becomes something
rather diﬃcult, especially when the programme material is a song or a movie excerpt,
due to the fact that the displacement of a loudspeaker could alter diﬀerent attributes
Page 12
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.4. Sound Sensory Evaluation Ingredients
such as, localization, frontal image, envelopment, basic audio quality (BAQ) and
others.
To design an experiment considering all these diﬀerent attributes would
be extensive, expansive and create a complexity in the analysis stage.
For this
reason, it was decided for this project, that no attribute would be analyzed, but the
ability of the listener to perceive a diﬀerence between reference reproduction system
and the irregular reproduction system, as it would include all attributes that the
listener would judge relevant. This is important as diﬀerent types of displacement
(independent variable for this experiment, explained in 3.1), diﬀerent eﬀects on the
listener perception could arise, that will be explained in section 2.6.
Golden et al. 2010 does a brief explanation of often used unspeciﬁed discrimination
methods, where the main ones are the Diﬀerence Paired-Comparison, Duo-Trio,
Triangular and Tetrad. For this experiment, the Triangle test was selected, due to
its lower guessing probability (1/3) compaired with Diﬀerence Paired-Comparison
(1/2) and Duo Trio (1/2), and the accessibility of a developed interface, which will be
described in detailed in the section 3. For discrimination tasks, the power calculation
is important to minimize the type II error, and to understand the probability of not
ﬁnding a diﬀerence when there is actually one. As described in chapter 4 of Golden
et al. 2010, the statistical power of a discrimination method can be used to guide the
sensory specialist in determining a large enough assessor panel. The problem is that
estimating the power a priori can be a challenging specially with novel studies where
several assumptions need to be made. Chapter 5 of Golden et al. 2010 goes into
detail about the risks of deﬁning assumptions for the power calculation, specially
when estimating the diﬀerence magnitude to be found in the experiment. Thus, for
this experiment, no power calculation will be made, considering the novelty of the
study. Furthermore, there are ﬁnancial and time limitations to the project that will
constrain the number of participants lower than recommended statistically .
2.4
Sound Sensory Evaluation Ingredients
Designing a sound sensory evaluation is a complex task, and every test component
or external factor can inﬂuence the results of the test, so it is the job of the sensory
specialist to analyze all the factors that are of interest for the test and make sure
they are stable through out it, to prevent the generation of skewed data. With a
stable test and good documentation, all the external factors can be documented
and published, thus enabling the experiment to be repeated or improved, when all
the variables are accounted for. Zacharov 2019 goes into details on all important
ingredients for the test and important aspects for the sensory specialist to consider.
In the following sections the two main ingredients that are specially complex in this
Page 13
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.4. Sound Sensory Evaluation Ingredients
experiment will be discussed: Assessors and Programme Material.
2.4.1
Assessors Inﬂuence
The assessor is the listener that is submitted to the experiment, while a assessor
panel is referred to a group of those listeners. The assessor panel can be selected for
diﬀerent reasons in a sensory evaluation. The selection of an adequate assessor panel
aims to obtain quality and reliable data, which relates to the ability of the listener
to make consistent subjective evaluation. An assessor panel is desired to be formed
by the same type of listeners (homogeneous group of assessors, which has similar
elements among each other such as, normal-hearing and listening experience), so
conclusions can be made in the data analysis.
The selection of a panel can be
summarized as the trade-oﬀbetween the most adequate panel to the experiment in
question and available resources, as deﬁned by the ISO standard on sensory assessors
InternationalOrganizationforStandardization2012SensoryAssessors.
Some standards (e.g., ITU-R BS.1116-3 2015) requires expert panels, which are
comprised by assessors that perform subjective testing routinely, who can describe
in detail an auditory event, has technical knowledge about the device-under-test
(DUT) and knowledge about the sensory evaluation being applied. This panel has a
high discrimination skill, good level of repeatability, also requiring a smaller2 panel
size. In other tests (e.g., ITU-R BS.1534-1 2003), experienced panels are required,
which include participants who routinely participate in subjective testing and can
describe with in detail a auditory experience, but have no technical knowledge of the
DUT and its inﬂuence on the auditory experience, as well as no speciﬁc knowledge
about the sensory evaluation being applied. Even yielding more reliable results,
experienced and expert listeners usually represent a higher investment, both in time
and ﬁnancially for the experiment. Finally, there is the consumer panel, formed
by untrained/na¨ıve listeners. This listener is not required to have experience on
subjective testing or training whatsoever, and is often used to represent the end-user
of a product. They can also be from a speciﬁc demographic (e.g., location, age)
to represent a market that the study is aimed to.
The consumer panel has a
low investment, as no training is involved and recruiting can be easier, but this
can require in a bigger panel size. Zacharov 2019 goes into detail about what the
advantages and disadvantages are of using one of the two types of panels for speciﬁc
methods. For this project a consumer panel will be used, as e explained in section
2.4.1.
2There is no rule to decide the panel size for any type of panel, these are recommendations by
standards and by analyzing past experiments, more information about assessor panel in Zacharov
2019
Page 14
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.5. Virtual Auditory Environment
2.4.2
Programme Material Inﬂuence
The program material can inﬂuence the experiment result signiﬁcantly and it is an
important factor in a perceptual evaluation, as sometimes it is the main inﬂuence
on a subject’s response, as studied by Ronan et al. 2017. For experiments regarding
multichannel reproduction systems, the programme material is extremely important.
One point to be observed is that having a very diﬀuse sound, uncorrelated across all
channels can present diﬃculty for the listener’s auditory system to obtain some
spatial cues.
On the other hand, very isolated sounds (e.g., a voice routed to
one channel) can be easily localized by the user.
This can ultimately inﬂuence
envelopment, localization and spatial quality.
Nonetheless, it will inﬂuence the
attributes that will be used by the listener intuitively in discrimination tasks and
the magnitude of change in these attributes caused by the studied impairment in the
system. Selecting an environmentally valid programme material can be a challenge
due to the amount of diﬀerent audio content being consumed by listeners, thuys it is
important to point out that the study results are bound to the programme material
selected and should be repeated for diﬀerent programme materials to understand
the generalization of the results. The selection process of this project is further
explained in section 3.4.1.
2.5
Virtual Auditory Environment
A virtual auditory environment is used to recreate realistic auditory experiences,
where the goal is for the listener to hear virtual sources in a virtual room from any
loudspeaker array, often in a anechoic chamber. This is a tool that can be very
useful to enable experiments and research in perceptual evaluation, that physically
would be impractical or too expensive.
A virtual auditory environment can be created by designing a virtual acoustic room,
where the boundaries an objects will be speciﬁed by its acoustic properties (e.g.,
absorption coeﬃcient), then used in an acoustic simulation to extract information
about the interaction of the sources, boundaries and the listener. Afterwards, this
information can be used to derive impulse responses that can be convolved with a
stimuli. Furthermore, the convolved stimuli can be auralized with a loudspeaker-based
methods such as High-order Ambisonics, the process is explain in detail by Buchholz
et al. 2009 and will be showed in section 3.4.2. Some of the Ambisonics advantages
is described by Buchholz et al. 2009 are that it is a method optimized for a listener
in the center of the array, and being able to render three dimensional sources, which
is suitable for this experiment.
Page 15
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.6. Azimuthal Displacement Perception
High-order ambisonics is the decomposition of sound ﬁeld (considered as plane
waves) into spherical harmonics. This can be done given a order as also showed by
Daniel et al. 2003. The decomposed sound ﬁeld is then rendered and reconstructed
according to a speciﬁc loudspeaker array, where each loudspeaker will have a speciﬁc
signal to auralize the virtual environment. Daniel 2004 provides more details on
high-order ambisonics implementation.
Virtual auditory environments are powerful in perceptual evaluations but with its
own limitations. The auditory experience is limited, by the directivity and spectral
artifacts, that can be perceived by the listener, as results of the auralization process.
These eﬀects are reduced for reverberant environments, as it masks some of the
frequencies for the listener, as shown by Jens Blauert 1997, which suggests that
localization accuracy is reduced in reverberant environments, making the virtual
environment of reverberant room more feasible for perceptual evaluation research.
Buchholz et al. 2009 showed that a 4th order Ambisonic provided less speech intelligibility
than a single loudspeaker and that the Ambisonic order signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the
speech intelligibility of the listener, which will also be an input for the programme
material rendering process described in section 3.4.2.
2.6
Azimuthal Displacement Perception
Displacing the azimuth of a loudspeaker to understand its perceptual eﬀect for the
auditory system is something that has been studied before. There are some eﬀects on
the listeners’ perception that are expected to happen when you vary the loudspeaker
azimuth angle: change in ITDs and ILDs (frequency dependent), change in phantom
image and comb-ﬁltering.
The change in ITD is one of the spatial cues on low frequencies that will be altered
when a loudspeaker azimuth is varied, as it will shorten the time of arrival to one
ear and increase it to the other, this will reach the auditory system and provide a
spatial cue where the listener will understand that the source is closer to one ear
than the other. In a multichannel reproduction setup this could be masked by the
other channels if they have correlated sounds, decreasing the eﬀectiveness of this
spatial cue. With an increasing number of channels with a correlated sound, it will
be harder for the auditory system to understand the change of ITD of one source, as
the signal to noise ratio tends to decrease3. This is all depends on the programme
material, type of signal in each channel, and how correlated each channel is with
3Signal is the level of the channel in question and the noise is the level of other highly correlated
channels.
Page 16
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.6. Azimuthal Displacement Perception
the others.
The virtual source/phantom image is the product of a stereophonic eﬀect when
two or more sources are played with correlated signals, and the listener perception
is that the audio source is in the middle of the two sources. This has been primordial
in the development of multichannel audio reproduction and dates back to Blumein’s
patent. It can be used to change the listener’s localization perception by introducing
phase diﬀerences between the two loudspeakers (Rumsey 2001). This eﬀect is present
until this day in audio content especially pop music, one of the selected programme
materials, as will be described in section 3.4.1. When the loudspeaker azimuth is
changed, the place of the phantom image created by a pair of loudspeakers (e.g.,
front right and front left, back right and back left) may be aﬀected, becoming a
possible cue for the listener to discriminate an irregular array. This eﬀect can alter
the localization perception of instruments for the listener in songs and of characters
in a movie. In addition, Lee 2017 has shown that increasing the angle diﬀerence of
two loudspeakers can create the illusion of elevation of the phantom image, especially
for higher frequencies, which adds to the cues regarding phantom image that the
listener can perceive.
The Haas eﬀect (precedence eﬀect) can play a major role in the localization perception
of the listener, meaning that the earliest sound arrival can dominate the listener
location perception for diﬀerent sources. On the other hand, Toole 2006 explains
how short diﬀerence time of arrival (<40ms) can enlarge the perception of the source.
This will cause a wider image and it can also be explained by a decorrelation between
the two signals that will be reﬂected in the Inter Aural Cross Correlation (IACC).
In music mixing, it is common to route two mono signals to left and right and add
some decorrelation in one of the sides to produce a wider stereo eﬀect. When a
loudspeaker azimuth inside a multichannel reproduction setup is changed, it can
create dominating sources by having diﬀerent times of arrivals between a pair of
loudspeakers, which is not the case when left and right are symmetrically positioned
(often the case for reference loudspeaker arrays).
Furthermore, by moving one
loudspeaker azimuth in a two loudspeaker setup, creating a diﬀerence of less than
40ms, can increase the width of the phantom image, making the task of localization
harder. Finally, depending of the azimuth angle of the loudspeakers, a comb ﬁltering
eﬀect can also occur, where the reﬂected sound and the direct sound have a very
small diﬀerence, thus creating spectral artifacts that can be perceived by the listener.
Altering the azimuth of one or more loudspeakers inside a multichannel reproduction
setup will cause several eﬀects that can be perceived by the listener and ultimately
Page 17
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Background Theory
2.6. Azimuthal Displacement Perception
degrade the listening experience. Understanding all the eﬀects and using them to
predict the outcome is extremely complex, this is why a perceptual evaluation will
serve as the main tool to understand when the listener is aﬀected by these changes
and eﬀects. Nonetheless, it is important to understand these psychoacoustic eﬀects
to aid the analysis and be the background for arguments to produce recommendation
to the listener.
Page 18
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Methods
As discussed in the previous chapter the research question will be addressed by a
discrimination experiment. More speciﬁcally a Triangle experiment as described by
InternationalOrganizationforStandardization2021Sensory4120:2021. This
chapter will describe the method used in the experiment as well as the technical
details used in the setup.
The test consisted of an indirect question to discriminate one irregular loudspeaker
layout from the reference one.
In this experiment the loudspeaker layout used
as reference is the 3/2 deﬁned in the ITU-R Rec.-BS.775-2 2006.
The irregular
loudspeaker layouts were comprised of an altered version of the reference. These
were done according to the goal of the research question, thus varying the azimuth
angles in 6 diﬀerent ways, that will be explained in section3.1. The experiment was
performed in an anechoic chamber, where a virtual environment was simulated as
explained in section 3.4.2. In the end, the data produced 6 discrimination thresholds,
one per displacement type, with the goal of providing insights about the positioning
of loudspeaker in a common listening room.
3.1
Displacement Type
The impairment applied in the discrimination experiment was the loudspeaker position,
more speciﬁcally the loudspeaker azimuth.
The diﬀerence was between one or
more loudspeaker azimuth of the irregular layout to the reference layout.
The
displacement applied to the irregular layout can be seen as the most sensitive
decision of the experiment, as it inﬂuences the experiment environmental validity,
the complexity and the duration of the experiment itself. As driven by the research
question the goal is to understand the discrimination threshold of the azimuth angle
in a environmentally valid room, such as the ones used by listeners at home. As
19
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.1. Displacement Type
explained earlier, the reference setup used was a 3/2 loudspeaker layout from ITU-R
Rec.-BS.775-2 2006, deﬁned as 5.0 surround layout, as shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: 5.0 (3/2) loudspeaker array divided by hemispheres.
There are diﬀerent ways, other than the reference, that one listener can position a
5 loudspeaker setup in their room using criteria such as, aesthetics and furniture
placement.
One criteria that is often followed is maintaining symmetry in the
room, as concluded in the experiment done by Cieciura et al. 2020. On previous
experiments, discussed in the literature review, the azimuth was varied symmetrically
(e.g., +15 in the Right channel and -15 in the Left Channels), while the center
channel was ﬁxed. The current project also ﬁxed the center channel, as it simulated
a television in a living room, which is often what listeners take into consideration
when positioning the loudspeakers, as according to Cieciura et al. 2020. Attempting
to emulate all diﬀerent irregular arrays would signiﬁcantly increase the experiment’s
duration, potentially posing an issue due to listener’s fatigue and focus. Zacharov
2019 recommends a test between 1 - 2 hours with breaks when the assessor sees
it ﬁt, to avoid fatigue and concentration loss. This project proposed 6 diﬀerent
displacement types, resulting in 6 diﬀerent ways to vary the azimuth from the
reference setup in the discrimination tasks. The 6 diﬀerent displacements, shown
in Figure 3.2 are: front single, front symmetric, front asymmetric, back single,
back symmetric and back asymmetric.
The ﬁrst word refers to the sector from
which the loudspeaker(s) that are being displaced (deﬁned here as: Displacement
Page 20
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.2. Evaluation Procedure
Hemisphere) and the last word to how the loudspeaker(s) will be displaced (deﬁned
here as:Displacement Type).
(a) Front single
(b) Front symmetric
(c) Front asymmetric
(d) Back single
(e) Back symmetric
(f) Back asymmetric
Figure 3.2: Displacements used for each discrimination threshold estimation.
As it can be seen in Figure 3.2, these types did not cover all positions. For example
in the front/back single, if the direction is changed to counter clockwise, other
angles would be used.
The same happens with the others displacement types.
During the experiment design some displacement types had to be removed from
the experiment to limit the length of the experiment. However, this experimental
design proposes testing 6 diﬀerent displacements, which cover more positions than
the aforementioned studies.
3.2
Evaluation Procedure
The Triangle test was conducted using the Matlab® AFC framework developed by
Ewert 2013.
The evaluation procedure consists of tasks that ask the listener to
select the one diﬀerent sound among three presented. Each experiment consisted
of 12 sessions, for a full factorial design, considering 2 programme material and 6
displacements. Each session consisted of several trials that were determined by a 1 up
2 down transformed staircase method, which was used to estimate the discrimination
threshold. Pilot tests were conducted by the author to evaluate the experiment
parameters and the staircase rule chosen. The pilot test is exempliﬁed in Figure
3.3. In each plot it can be seen the staircase procedure and how the azimuth is
Page 21
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.2. Evaluation Procedure
being varied. This was done to determine the rules that would eventually ﬁnalize
the run and declare that a threshold could not be found. The rules are: the run will
terminate if a speciﬁc number of reversals is reached or if the participant failed
to recognize the odd option in the maximum impairment (maximum azimuthal
displacement). In the pilot tests it was decided that the test would stop with 6
reversals, and that the experiment would stop if the participant failed to recognize
the odd option twice in a row in the maximum impairment. Furthermore, the initial
position and azimuth range for the discrimination task for each test was decided as
shown in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Displacement type boundaries, where L, R, sL and sR respectively are,
Left, Right, Surround Left and Surround Right channels.
Displacement
Channel
Initial Angle
Azimuth Range
Loudsp. 1
Loudsp. 2
Front single
L
60°
30° to 90°
N/a
Front symmetric
L and R
+60° and -60°’
30° to 90°
-30° to -90°
Front asymmetric
L and R
+15° and -45°’
30° to 0°
-30° to -60°
Back single
sL
80°
110° to 50°
N/a
Back symmetric
sL and sR
±80°
35° to 90°
-110° to -50°
Back asymmetric
sL and sR
+95° and -125°’
110° to 80°
-110° to -140°
Figure 3.3: Pilot test for the discrimination task of front symmetric displacement
for both programme material.
During the experiment, the participant was not informed which attribute or characteristic
was being varied, as this is intrinsic to an indirect discrimination test. The instructions
were summarized in an instruction sheet, displayed in Appendix A.1, which was
handed out to the participants keeping the instructions given to all participants were
Page 22
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.3. Listening Room
homogeneous. The graphical user interface (GUI) interface can be seen in Figure
3.4. The interface was displayed on a tablet where the user could use touchscreen to
choose the correct answers. Furthermore, no feedback was given whether the answer
provided by the listener was correct or not.
Figure 3.4: 3-AFC GUI interface for this experiment using the framework developed
by Ewert 2013.
3.3
Listening Room
Selecting an environmentally valid listening room can also be a challenge. From
a consumer perspective most rooms where the loudspeaker setup would be used,
would not have any acoustic treatment. Furthermore, diﬀerent sizes, furniture and
materials can drastically change the room modes and reverberation time of the
room. Especially in rooms that have not been treated, room modes can result in
sound colouration. Furthermore, reﬂections that are present in such a room can also
decrease the direct to reverberant ratio and reduce speech ineligibility and increase
the diﬃculty of the auditory system to perceive spatial cues, which may be present
on audio contents (movie, radio). In this experiment a listening room from the IEC
1998 was used, because it represents a acoustically good, but normal living room,
and it was developed to serve in the development research of loudspeakers for home
use. This was the room virtually simulated by the process shown in the next section.
The virtual sound environment where the experiment was performed is the Audio
Visual Immersive Lab (AVIL) at the Technical University of Denmark, which is an
anechoic chamber (7 m*8 m*6 m) with with a spherical loudspeaker array that can
Page 23
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.3. Listening Room
be seen in Figure 3.5, where the programme material rendered in the virtual auditory
environment was played. The room is considered anechoic above 100 Hz according to
ISO 26101 InternationalOrganizationforStandardization2021TestEnvironments.
The loudspeakers had its positions calibrated and mapped to a channel from 1 to
64, as can be seen in loudspeakers map in appendix A.2. Furthermore the spherical
layout consists of 64 loudspeakers mounted in seven rings by ±80 , ±56, ±28 and
0 ° of elevation and with 2, 6, 12 and 24 loudspeakers uniformly distributed on the
respective rings.
The loudspeakers used are KEF ®LS50 model, which has suﬃcient power and
adequate frequency response to reproduce the stimuli in a homogeneous and neutral
manner.
It has a response of ±3dB over the frequency range of 79Hz - 28kHz
and a maximum output of 106 dB SPL. The full speciﬁcation can be found in,
KEFLS50Brochure. The signal chain is comprised of three sonible d:24 ampliﬁers
(sonible GmbH, Graz, Austria), two biamp TESIRA Server digital signal processing
(DSP) units and sixteen TESIRA SOC-4 digital-to-analog converters (biamp Systems
Inc., Beaverton, USA), as described by Ahrens et al. 2019.
Figure 3.5: Audio Visual Immersive Lab at the Technical University of Denmark.
Page 24
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.4. Programme Material
3.4
Programme Material
3.4.1
Programme Material Selection
As stated in section 2.4.2, the programme material selection can interfere with
the complexity of the task and the results of the experiment. Thus, selecting an
appropriate programme material is crucial for the success of an experiment. At
one hand, selecting programme material that has an easily identiﬁable object (e.g.,
guitar on the left loudspeaker), will make the task easier for the listener, on the
other hand, if there is no object, panned to one loudspeaker or a couple, the task
might become too diﬃcult for the listener. This raises the question of which is more
environmentally valid. To attend this requirement, 9 excerpts were rendered among
popular songs and movies, to represent audio content that would be played often by
the listen. To attend the experiment design, 2 out of the 9 excerpts were selected
for the experiment. For this, all the tracks were rendered and played in the test
room to be evaluated by the author. During the pilot tests the author found that
for very diﬀuse excerpts (highly correlated channels) the task became diﬃcult, even
for the author who was biased and aware of the diﬀerences between setups. The
tracks were all played in pilot tests done by the author, where the diﬃculty of the
task in hand was evaluated. Thus, one of the programme material, named ”S-id”
selected for the test was a clean speech identifying each loudspeaker, where the name
of each channel was said ”front left, front right, center, back left, back right”. This
was used as a control condition programme material for the test. This programme
material was used in the analysis to evaluate the listener performance, in order to
access if the task was understood correctly or if the task was too complex. It was
compared with a second programme material in the experiment that represented an
environmentally valid audio content, which was a piece of the song ”What’s Going
On” by Marvin Gaye. It was not considered the hardest task on the 9 excerpts
tested as it had some localization cues. Thus, the two programme materials selected
were considered by the author a reasonable task for an average listener. In Figure
3.6 and 3.7 the magnitude Root Mean Square (RMS) is displayed for each channel
and for both programme materials, where it can be seen that for the pop track
What’s Going On there is more energy in the front sector, and that Left and Right
are almost of identical values.
Page 25
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.4. Programme Material
Figure 3.6: RMS of the magnitue in each channel of the programme material S-Id.
Page 26
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.4. Programme Material
Figure 3.7: RMS of the magnitude in each channel of the programme material
What’s Going On.
3.4.2
Programme Material Rendering
All excerpts were decoded Dolby Atmos bitstreams (Dolby Digital plus Joint Object
Coding) to a 7.1.4 layout using a MacBook Pro and Apple Music. Furthermore,
the excerpts were downmixed to 5.0 using the procedure deﬁned by ISO/IEC JTC
1/SC 29 2022 to obtain the input ﬁle for the acoustic environment rendering. The
acoustic environment rendering consists in convolving the programme material with
multichannel impulse responses of a listening room and use the Ambisonics format
to play it back in a spherical loudspeaker array. In Figure 3.8 the rendering process
is showed in detail. A model in ODEON® of the listening room (IEC 1998) was
developed, as shown in Figure 3.9. Here the listener is positioned in the center of
the room and 360 sources were positioned in a 2.4 meter radius 1 degrees azimuth
apart.
For each source an acoustic simulation was conducted to extract room
acoustic information. From each simulation early reﬂections and an energy curve
Page 27
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.4. Programme Material
were extracted. These were used as input to estimate room impulse responses for
the individual sources using the a Loudspeaker Room Auralization (LoRA) toolbox,
developed by Favrot et al. 2010 that includes High-Order Ambisonics.
For this
project, all stimuli were rendered in 5th order Ambisonics.
Each source had a
mRIR.wav with 64 channels that were convolved which each channel of the original
mix (e.g., mRIR.wav for the source at 30 degrees convoluted with Left channel of the
programme material). Afterwards, all the channel signals convoluted with the room
impulse response were summed, obtaining the programme material played through
a 5 loudspeaker setup in a room.
Figure 3.8: Programme material rendering process diagram.
Figure 3.9: Odeon model of the project’s virtual listening room.
Page 28
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.5. Assessor Panel
3.5
Assessor Panel
The assessor panel for this test is a consumer panel of 9 listeners with a mean
average age of 25 years oldand , no hearing impairment.
All were engineering
students.
This project’s assessor panel represents a consumer panel, formed by
naive listeners, with no training or experience. It usually comes closer to represent
the consumers of the product, that are not specialists or trained listeners and that
could consequently beneﬁt from the ﬁnal product in question. With a discrimination
method, a consumer panel is adequate because the task has low complexity, and no
attribute rating is used. A consumer panel is also less expansive to recruit than an
expert panel, as no training is required.
3.6
Calibration and Loudness Matching
The loudness matching was performed through the EBU-OperatingEurovisionandEuroradio2
recommendation to -23 LUFS1.
All loudspeakers were calibrated to the same level and had frequency response
corrected by a FIR ﬁlter. In addition the global output gain was calibrated listening
to both programme material reaching a comfortable level. The programme materials
”S-id” and ”Whats going on” had A weighted equivalent continuous level of 63.5
and 67.8 dB respectively, measured by a Norsoni Nor139 using fast averaging.
3.7
Final Experimental Design
The ﬁnal experiment consists of a Triangle discrimination test, conducted six times
for 6 diﬀerent displacement types. The full experiment summary can be found below,
and will consist of 6 3-AFC sessions, where each session will use a displacement type
as impairment. Each session will vary with variable number of trials, consequence
of the staircase procedure describe in section 3.2.
Downmixing: Downmixing procedure deﬁned in the MPEG-H standard, ISO/IEC
JTC 1/SC 29 2018. Compensation Algorithms: No compensation algorithm
used.
Listening Room: Anechoic chamber with 64 loudspeaker in a spherical array.
Virtual Environment Room:listening room IEC 1998.
Loudspeaker Orientation: On axis (0 degrees).
Reproduction Devices: LS50 KEFs Speakers.
1loudness units full scale
Page 29
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.7. Final Experimental Design
Assessor Panel: Consumer panel, English speaking, with no hearing impairment.
Number of Loudspeakers(Sources): 5.
Output Format: 5th order Ambisonics.
Loudspeaker Displacement types:
• Single
• Symmetric
• Asymmetric
Displacement Hemisphere:
• Front
• Back
Input Content:
• Excerpt 1 - Control Condition (S-Id);
• Excerpt 3 - Pop music (What’s Goind On);
Page 30
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Data Analysis
The results of the experiment consists of azimuth threshold angles relative to the
reference azimuth position, enabling a direct comparison between all displacement
types, even though each displacement type has its own initial position and maximum
displacement. For the data treatment, it was important to ﬂag which runs could
not determine a threshold, as consequence of the rules determined in section 3.2.
For visualization purposes each data point that represents a threshold not found
was marked as the maximum azimuthal displacement for each displacement type
described in section 3.1 (e.g., 60° for front displacement relative to the reference
angle for that speciﬁc channel).
The ﬁrst step is to analyse the data reliability by plotting the assessors thresholds.
This is done to identify if there was any participants that had not understood the
task correctly and the diﬃculty level of the experiment. To measure the performance
of the assessor the percentage of threshold not found for each displacement type
and for each assessor was calculated, as shown in ﬁgure 4.2 and in ﬁgure 4.1.
As mentioned in section 3.4.1 the programme material S-Id was used as control
condition and will be the reference.
First observation is that assessor Id01 only had 1 run where a threshold was found,
resulting in 100% for the S-Id and 80% for What’s Going On.
Thus, the ﬁrst
participant data was removed from the analysis. There is no correct threshold of
the amount of violations for one participant, the value is decided based on the pilot
tests that the author has conducted and several listening tests of the diﬀerent tracks
with and without displacement. Only this single participant was removed.
31
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 4. Results
4.1. Data Analysis
Considering all diﬀerent displacement types, it can be seen that overall the S-Id
had more thresholds not found than What’s Going On. This was unexpected, as
the S-Id was used as a control condition, thus representing an easier task for the
listener. This could be a sign that the listener did not identify the channels that
had the azimuth varying in each test. If the listener identiﬁed that the Left channel
for the front single displacement was the one being varied, it could focus on that
channel to base its decision. If that was not the case, it could make the task more
diﬃcult.
Figure 4.1: Percentage of runs that the threshold was not found by assessor.
Figure 4.2: Percentage of runs that the threshold was not found by displacement
type.
Page 32
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4. Results
4.1. Data Analysis
As a next step, an exploratory analysis on the data was done. In ﬁgure 4.3 and 4.4
a box plot with the azimuth threshold value 1 for each boxplot can be seen. The red
dots represent the data points where the test was unsuccessful in determining the
threshold due to the stop rules. For both programme materials it can be observed
that both asymmetric displacement had a lower threshold. On the other hand, it
can be seen that for both asymmetric displacements, few (3 and 4) data points were
used. This could mean that the asymmetric displacement posed a harder task for
the listener, or it could be due to the fact that the maximum azimuth displacement
for the asymmetric type was only 30°, lower than single and symmetric and close to
the threshold found by the remaining data.
Figure 4.3:
Azimuth threshold box plot per displacement type for the S-Id
programme material.
1This value is relative to the reference angle (e.g., for the Left channel it would represent the
number above 30°.
Page 33
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4. Results
4.1. Data Analysis
Figure 4.4: Azimuth threshold box plot per displacement type for the What’s Going
On programme material.
To understand the signiﬁcant eﬀects of the experiment an ANOVA was performed.
The ﬁrst ANOVA model had all the eﬀects and all interactions. The non-signiﬁcant
eﬀects were removed iteratively to increase the statistical power of the model as
suggested by Zacharov 2019. The ANOVA tables for the full and simpliﬁed models
can be found in Appndix A.3. The residuals of the ANOVA were plotted and also
resembled to be normally distributed. From the p-values considering an α = 5% the
signiﬁcant eﬀects and interactions were: Programme Material, Displacement Type
and the interaction between Programme Material and Displacement Hemisphere.
A post hoc analysis consisting of pairwise tukey test was performed within the
levels of Displacement Type to evaluate which levels were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, the
tukey test table can be found in appendix A.3. The results showed that Single and
Asymmetric are the only signiﬁcantly diﬀerent group and the respective means can
be seen in ﬁgure 4.5. The programme material was also a signiﬁcant factor in the
ANOVA, with What’s Going On 10.7° higher than S-id, as can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6.
Page 34
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4. Results
4.1. Data Analysis
Figure 4.5: Azimuth threshold mean across all data for each displacement type.
Figure 4.6: Azimuth threshold mean across all data for each programme material.
In addition the interaction between Displacement Hemisphere and Programme Material
was evaluated conducting two tukey test between Back and Front for each programme
material, also shown in table A.6 in appendix A.3, where it showed that for both
programme material the Displacement Hemisphere was signiﬁcant, the interaction
can be seen by the plot in ﬁgure 4.7. While the mean average values for azimuth
threshold for Back hemisphere is very similar between programme materials, the
front hemisphere had diﬀerence of 19.6° degrees, which can be explained by the fact
that S-Id represents an easier task for the listener.
Page 35
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4. Results
4.1. Data Analysis
Figure 4.7: Interaction between Programme material and Displacement Hemisphere.
.
Page 36
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Assessor Panel and Results Reliability
The ﬁrst step of the data analysis was to understand how many times the evaluation
procedure was unsucessful in determining a threshold.
This parameter can be
interpreted in three diﬀerent ways: (i) the task was diﬃcult, (ii) the threshold
was likely outside of the range presented to the listener and (iii) the task was not
understood correctly. Apart from listener 1, that was removed from the study, the
rest of the listeners had a mean average of 36% of thresholds not found through
out the experiment. Looking at the results it can be seen that the those situations
happened more in the Back hemisphere especially for the S-id programme material.
This could be the result of the listeners inexperience and to the fact that this track is
temporally separated, with the identiﬁcation for the back channels being presented
later than the front channels. So, if the listener could not identify that the one of the
back channels was varied and focused only on the front channels, the discrimination
would become a very diﬃcult task.
A high value of thresholds not found for the front asymmetric displacement was also
noticed. This can be due to the fact that the range of azimuths for the asymmetrical
displacement were limited to 30°. This is supported by the fact that the valid results
are close to the maximum displacement of the front asymmetric displacement, with
the mean value being 15.1°. This is a limitation of the study, as the front asymmetric
displacement was limited to a range of 30° so the Left channel does not cross the
center channel.
The task and the experiment is simple and it is designed for a naive listener, but
level of diﬃculty of listening to the cues can increase in diﬃculty if the listener
37
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.2. Signiﬁcant Factors
does not maintain the focus through the entire duration of the programme material.
Apart from Front symmetric and Front single, the number of Thresholds not found
is high and can be an indicative that the azimuth for this speciﬁc stimuli is not
easily identiﬁable by the listener.
5.2
Signiﬁcant Factors
Diﬀerent programme materials can aﬀect the discrimination performance on loudspeaker
azimuthal displacement, as supported by section 3.4.1 and shown in the results of
the ANOVA presented in table A.3 in appendix A.3. This suggests that having
audio content with varying degrees of inter-channel correlation can yield diﬀerent
discrimination thresholds.
This happens because a very uncorrelated sound can
create spatial cues for the listener, such as having more prominent ITDs and ILDs,
from the diﬀerent content of the channels. This creates a complexity in the research
question as there is no one environmentally valid programme material, and each type
could have diﬀerent results. For this project a track was used with high channel
correlation that being What’s Going On, and it did present higher threshold in
the Front hemisphere than the S-Id track, which can indicate that when speech is
played and routed to a speciﬁc channel, it can make an easier programme material
to discriminate an azimuthal loudspeaker displacement. While a more correlated
signal, will present a more diﬃcult task to the listener.
Displacement types was another signiﬁcant factor in the ANOVA showed in Appendix
A.3 .
It shows that displacing the loudspeakers in a 5.0 loudspeaker array, can
be discriminated by the listener.
This indicates that loudspeaker displacement
inside a typical listening room is a factor that should be investigated further. In
addition, the way the loudspeakers is displaced can inﬂuence the discrimination
ability from the listener in diﬀerent ways, which could alter the content producer
design. Furthermore, looking at the thresholds in ﬁgure 4.5, all displacement types
showed a azimuthal displacement discrimination threshold of at least 20°, which
support the data and conclusion in the study made by Sawaguchi et al. 2012. For
single and symmetric displacements, the threshold was higher, coming up to 40°,
suggesting that these types of displacement are less noticable for the listener than
asymmetric.
5.3
Front vs Back Hemisphere
Analyzing results from Figure 4.7 it is possible to see that for What’s Going On the
front hemisphere had a smaller azimuth threshold than in the back. This may be the
Page 38
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.4. Asymmetric Lower Azimuth Threshold
result of some cues in the back channels, speciﬁcally some claps and backing vocals,
which could be used by the listeners to distinguish the odd sound in the trials. For
the S-id it is possible to observe the reverse eﬀect. Which can be the result of
inexperienced listeners only focusing on the ﬁrst part of the stimuli, where only the
front channels are used. This stimuli requires a short term auditory memory from
the listener, which naive listeners could lack, that may have increased the azimuth
threshold, as discussed in the previous section, and comprises one limitation of this
experimental design, to improve the control condition for the experiment.
From this experiment it could be seen, speciﬁcally for the What’s Going On track,
that changes in the front hemisphere inﬂuences the listener discrimination ability
more than the back hemisphere.
A limitation of the experimental design is the
limited programme material presented to the listener, and as shown in Figure
3.7, there is more energy in the front section than in the back (only comparing
Right and Left with Surround Right and Left), thus, representing a higher energy
movement for the listener. Nonetheless, it is environmentally valid for a 5.0 setup
often the surround channels receive more ambience sounds and less energy in the
back hemisphere, which indicates that it is better for the listener to only displace
azimuthally the back hemisphere loudspeakers than the front hemisphere.
5.4
Asymmetric Lower Azimuth Threshold
For both programme materials, the asymmetric displacement type had very low
azimuth thresholds when compared with symmetric and single. During the data
analysis it was observed that asymmetric displacement types presented a mean
average of 58% of threshold not founds across both programme materials, which
consequently resulted in less valid thresholds for the statistical analysis. While single
displacement had 34% of error and symmetric 22% of error. As mentioned in the data
reliability analysis, the thresholds that could not be found, can represent a threshold
that is outside of the azimuth range presented to the listener, this can explains the
high percentage of threshold not found for the asymmetrical displacement. This
happens because the maximum azimuth presented is very close to the threshold of
the valid points, this was a limitation in the experiment design, which caused a
higher number of thresholds not found for asymmetrical displacement. This can
be investigated in a future experiment using a stereo (2.0) setup, where the center
channel would not limit the range of this type of displacement. Nonetheless, the
azimuth threshold average mean for asymmetrical displacement across all programme
Page 39
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.5. Front Single and Symmetric
material for What’s Going On for 17.3°. This could be a result of the phantom image
shifting, which is caused by dislocating the pair of loudspeakers in a hemisphere
(e.g., front left and front right), as explained in section 2.6. For What’s Going On
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the azimuth thresholds for asymmetric between
front and back was found, showing that the center channel was not a major factor
used as cue.
5.5
Front Single and Symmetric
From Figure 4.5, it is also possible to notice that single and symmetric did not
present any diﬀerence at all, nor any interaction containing it. This could be due to
the fact that both displacement types could have the eﬀect of stereo image widening,
as the loudspeakers are moving further apart from each other.
The symmetric
displacement type is being azimuthally displaced twice as much for each step, but
according to the experiment done by Frank 2013, doubling the aperture angle from
the loudspeaker pair, does not double the apparent width of the phantom image,
which would support this argument.
Furthermore, on the experimental design,
to reduce the experiment duration, not all displacement types were inserted, as
mentioned in section 3.1, thus leaving some questions outside the scope of this
experiment. For example the asymmetric type of displacement is the only one where
the loudspeakers moves towards the center channel, not the other way around. This
is a limitation of the experimental design, due to the length of the experiment and
should be investigated further. In future experiments diﬀerent displacement types
should be included where the loudspeaker would move towards the center channel,
to then evaluate that potential eﬀect.
Page 40
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This project was able to create a methodology to determine the discrimination
threshold for azimuthal displacement in a 5 loudspeaker reproduction system. Furthermore,
an experiment was conducted where 6 displacement types had its discrimination
threshold found for the speciﬁc programme material used.
6 3-AFC tests were
conducted to determine the threshold. From the analysis it was possible to conclude
that azimuthal displacement is a signiﬁcant factor in the listeners’ discrimination
ability, as well as the programme material used.
In addition the data suggests
that an asymmetrical displacement has a lower discrimination threshold than single
and symmetric, thus being the type of displacement that the listener should most
avoid when positioning a 5 loudspeaker setup. From the programme material Whats
Going On the data suggests that the discrimination threshold is higher for the
front hemisphere, giving a higher range of loudspeaker displacement in the front
hemisphere for the listener. As for the S-id control condition programme material,
which is a speech, a displacement in the front hemisphere was found to be easier to
identify than in the back hemisphere. Overall, this experiment shows that for the
programme materials tested, the listener can displace the loudspeaker up until 20°
before discriminating any diﬀerence, considering all displacement types tested.
This project was a novel study to understand the perception eﬀect of loudspeaker
azimuthal displacement. Although the test was successful in estimating the thresholds
for diﬀerent displacement types, the methodology presented three main limitations:
(i) asymmetrical displacement has a lower range, thus yielding a higher number
of threshold not found, (ii) the control condition programme material S-id had a
temporally separated channel use, which might have interfered and been reﬂected in
the results, if the listener short auditory memory was fatigued during the test, and
(iii) the experiment did not present the listener with all displacement possibilities,
which limit the amount of possible conclusions in the analysis.
On the other
41
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
hand, this project contributed to the ﬁeld by showing that diﬀerent azimuthal
displacements in a 5 loudspeaker setup can yield diﬀerent discrimination threshold
for the programme material used. Providing a methodology for future experiment
repetitions and adaptation using diﬀerent programme material and displacement
types.
In addition, the project suggested some guidelines for the listener when
positioning its loudspeakers at home.
Moreover this projects presents an experimental foundation for future research, as a
valid experimental method together with techniques to simulate diﬀerent loudspeaker
reproduction systems in diﬀerent rooms, where the sensory scientist can easily
change acoustical variables (e.g., room and layout). Furthermore, it ﬁlls the gap
explained in the motivation, where the research so far has not established a thorough
way of varying the azimuth. This project showed that the impairment of azimuthal
loudspeaker displacement is a signiﬁcant factor, that can have diﬀerent behaviour
for diﬀerent poisitions, and proposed a speciﬁc manner to understand diﬀerent
loudspeaker displacement in a multichannel reproduction system. This methodology
can be used to conduct similar experiments with a higher number of channels, for
diﬀerent programme materials and diﬀerent listening rooms.
Page 42
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
Agrawal, Sarvesh, Ad`ele Simon, SØren Bech, Klaus BÆrentsen, and SØren Forchhammer
(June 2020). Deﬁning immersion: Literature review and implications for research
on audiovisual experiences. doi: 10.17743/jaes.2020.0039.
Ahrens, Axel, Marton Marschall, and Torsten Dau (June 2019). “Measuring and
modeling speech intelligibility in real and loudspeaker-based virtual sound environments”.
In: Hearing Research 377, pp. 307–317. issn: 18785891. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.
2019.02.003.
Blauert, J. (1972). “On the lag of lateralization caused by interaural time and
intensity diﬀerences”. In: International Journal of Audiology 11.5-6, pp. 265–270.
issn: 14992027. doi: 10.3109/00206097209072591.
Blauert, Jens (1997). Spatial hearing: the psychophysics of human sound localization.
MIT press. isbn: 0262024136.
Buchholz, J¨org M. and Sylvain Favrot (2009). “Perceptual eﬀects of ambisonics on
room auralization”. In: International Symposium on Audiological and Auditory
Research. Danavox Jubilee Foundation. isbn: 8799001322.
Cieciura, C, R Mason, P Coleman, and J Francombe (2020). Understanding users’
choices and constraints when positioning loudspeakers in living rooms. Tech. rep.
London, United Kingdom: BBC. url: http://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/pubs/whp.
Culling, John F. and Michael A. Akeroyd (Jan. 2010). Spatial hearing. Oxford
University Press, pp. 123–144. doi: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199233557.013.
0006.
Daniel, Jerome (2004). Further Study of Sound Field Coding with Higher Order
Ambisonics. Tech. rep. url: www.aes.org..
Daniel, Jerome, Rozenn Nicol, J´erˆome Daniel, and S´ebastien Moreau (2003). Further
investigations of high order ambisonics and waveﬁeld synthesis for holophonic
sound imaging. Tech. rep. url: www.aes.org..
Ennis, John M. and Virginie Jesionka (Oct. 2011). “The Power Of Sensory Discrimination
Methods Revisited”. In: Journal of Sensory Studies 26.5, pp. 371–382. issn:
08878250. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-459X.2011.00353.x.
43
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
Bibliography
Ewert, SD (2013). “AFC - A modular framework for running psychoacoustic experiments
and computational perception models”. In: International Conference on Acoustics
AIA-DAGA 2013. Merano, Italy, pp. 1326–1329.
Favrot, S. and J. M. Buchholz (Mar. 2010). “LoRA: A loudspeaker-based room
auralization system”. In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica 96.2, pp. 364–375.
issn: 16101928. doi: 10.3813/AAA.918285.
Francombe, Jon, Tim Brookes, Russell Mason, and James Woodcock (Mar. 2017).
“Evaluation of spatial audio reproduction methods (Part 2): Analysis of listener
preference”. In: AES: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 65.3, pp. 212–225.
issn: 15494950. doi: 10.17743/jaes.2016.0071.
Frank, Matthias (2013). “Source width of frontal phantom sources: Perception,
measurement, and modeling”. In: Archives of Acoustics 38.3, pp. 311–319. issn:
01375075. doi: 10.2478/aoa-2013-0038.
Golden, David A, Richard W Hartel, Hildegarde Heymann, Joseph H Hotchkiss,
Michael G Johnson, Joseph Montecalvo, S Suzanne Nielsen, and Juan L Silva
(2010). Food Science Text Series. Tech. rep. url: http://www.springer.com/
series/5999.
Gomez-Barquero, David, Jordi J. Gimenez, Gabriel Miro Muntean, Yiling Xu, and
Yiyan Wu (June 2022). “IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting Special Issue on:
5G Media Production, Contribution, and Distribution”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Broadcasting 68.2, pp. 415–421. issn: 15579611. doi: 10.1109/TBC.2022.
3163818.
Herre, J¨urgen, Johannes Hilpert, Achim Kuntz, and Jan Plogsties (Aug. 2015).
“MPEG-H 3D Audio - The New Standard for Coding of Immersive Spatial
Audio”. In: IEEE Journal on Selected Topics in Signal Processing 9.5, pp. 770–779.
issn: 19324553. doi: 10.1109/JSTSP.2015.2411578.
IEC (1998). Sound system equipment - Part 13: Listening tests on loudspeakers.
1998.
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29 (2018). Information technology — Coding-independent code
points — Part 1: Systems (ISO/IEC 23091-1:2018). Tech. rep.
— (2022). Information technology — High eﬃciency coding and media delivery in
heterogeneous environments — Part 3: 3D audio (ISO/IEC 23008-3:2022). Tech.
rep. Geneva, Switzerland. url: www.iso.org.
ITU-R BS.1116-3 (2015). Methods for the subjective assessment of small impairments
in audio systems. Tech. rep. url: http://www.itu.int/ITU-R/go/patents/en.
ITU-R BS.1534-1 (2003). Method for the subjective assessment of intermediate quality
level of coding systems. Tech. rep. Geneva, Switzerland.: Int. Telecom Union.
ITU-R Rec.-BS.775-2 (2006). Multichannel stereophonic sound system with and without
accompanying picture BS Series Broadcasting service (sound). Tech. rep. Geneva,
Page 44
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
Bibliography
Switzerland: Int. Telecom Union. url: http://www.itu.int/ITU- R/go/
patents/en.
Lawomir, S ⁄, K Zieli´nski, Zieli´ Zieli´nski, Aes Member, Francis Rumsey, Aes Fellow,
and Søren Bech (2003). “Eﬀects of Down-Mix Algorithms on Quality of Surround
Sound*”. In: J. Audio Eng. Soc 51.9.
Lee, Hyunkook (Sept. 2017). “Sound source and loudspeaker base angle dependency
of phantom image elevation eﬀect”. In: AES: Journal of the Audio Engineering
Society 65.9, pp. 733–748. issn: 15494950. doi: 10.17743/jaes.2017.0028.
Moulin, Samuel, Gr´egory Pallone, No´e Faure, and Søren Bech (2019). Perceptual
evaluation of loudspeaker misplacement compensation in a multichannel setup
using MPEG-H 3D Audio renderer. Application to Channel-Based, Scene-Based,
and Object-Based audio materials. Tech. rep. url: http://www.aes.org/e-lib.
Plack, Christopher J. (2018). The Sense of Hearing. Routledge.
Ronan, Malachy and Robert Sazdov (2017). “Identifying and validating program
material: a hyper-compression perspective”-Exploring Immersive Sound, Intimacy
and Recording Technology View project ORPHEUS View project”. In: 139th
Convention of the Audio Engineering Society. Audio Engineering Society. url:
http://www.aes.org/e-.
Rumsey, F (2001). Spatial Audio. Taylor & Francis. url: http://www.York.ac.
uk/inst/mustech/dspmm.htm.
Sawaguchi, Mick M, Shinji Koyano, Kazuhiko Terui, Satoshi Suzuki, Atsushi Marui,
Sam M Toyoshima, and Bike H Suzuki (2012). Investigation into Tolerance of
Home-theaters’ Surround Speaker Placement for Acceptable Perception of Reproduced
Sound. Tech. rep.
Sawaya, Ikuko, Kensuke Irie, Takehiro Sugimoto, Akio Ando, and Kimio Hamasaki
(May 2013). “Discrimination of Changing Loudspeaker Positions of 22.2 Multichannel
Sound System Based on Spatial Impressions”. In: Rome, Italy: Audio Engineering
Society. url: www.aes.org..
Stone, Herbert, Rebeecca N. Bleibaum, and Heather A. Thomas (2021). Sensory
Evaluation Practices. 5th. Elsevier. isbn: 9780128153345. doi: 10.1016/C2017-
0-03038-0.
Toole, Floyd E (2006). “Loudspeakers and Rooms for Sound Reproduction-A Scientiﬁc
Review*”. In: J. Audio Eng. Soc. Vol. 54.No. 6.
Zacharov, Nick (2019). Sensory Evaluation of Sound. 1st Edition. Boca Raton,
Florida, USA: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group.
Page 45
==PAGE:52==
46
==PAGE:53==
Appendix A.
A.1. Appendix 1
Appendix A
A.1
Appendix 1
 
Experiment Instructions 
 
Thanks very much for taking part in this listening experiment on spatial audio. Please note that there are no 
right or wrong answers, and you are not under test; we are interested in your responses to the sounds that we 
present. The experiment will last approximately 90 minutes. 
 
Familiarisation 
 
Before the main experiment there will be a familiarisation run where you can get used to the interface. This 
should help you to learn the full range of magnitudes of preference that you are likely to experience, helping 
you to use the scale.    
 
Experiment 
 
In this experiment you will be comparing multichannel audio with different loudspeaker positions. The 
experiment consists of six measurements of several multiple-choice trials. In each measurement there will be 
2 runs. In each run your task is to identify which stimuli is the different one among the three. When the 
experiment starts press one any key of the keyboard, there will be an initial delay of maximum 15 seconds 
between the time you press, and the first run. When the run starts three stimuli will be played uninterrupted. 
After the 3rd stimuli stops, you can press in the keyboard which one of the alternatives you believe to be the 
different. At the end of each run, raise your hand or communicate verbally that the run has ended to the 
conductor, that will instruct you for the next run. Is important to remember you can take a brake at any time 
you want, let the conductor know you need a break. It is important to keep your head straight through the 
comparisons between the three stimuli. 
Figure 1 – Main Experiment Interface
 
Figure A.1: Instructions sheet given to all participants.
Page 47
==PAGE:54==
Appendix A.
A.2. Appendix 2
A.2
Appendix 2
Table A.1: AVIL loudspeakers map.
Chn AVIL
Azimuth
Elevation
Chn AVIL
Azimuth
Elevation
1
0
80
33
180
0
2
180
80
34
-165
0
3
0
56
35
-150
0
4
60
56
36
-135
0
5
120
56
37
-120
0
6
180
56
38
-105
0
7
-120
56
39
-90
0
8
-60
56
40
-75
0
9
0
28
41
-60
0
10
30
28
42
-45
0
11
60
28
43
-30
0
12
90
28
44
-15
0
13
120
28
45
0
-28
14
150
28
46
30
-28
15
180
28
47
60
-28
16
-150
28
48
90
-28
17
-120
28
49
120
-28
18
-90
28
50
150
-28
19
-60
28
51
180
-28
20
-30
28
52
-150
-28
21
0
0
53
-120
-28
22
15
0
54
-90
-28
23
30
0
55
-60
-28
24
45
0
56
-30
-28
25
60
0
57
30
-56
26
75
0
58
90
-56
27
90
0
59
150
-56
28
105
0
60
-150
-56
29
120
0
61
-90
-56
30
135
0
62
-30
-56
31
150
0
63
90
-80
32
165
0
64
-90
-80
Page 48
==PAGE:55==
Appendix A.
A.3. Appendix 3
A.3
Appendix 3
Table A.2: Full ANOVA model
Eﬀects
Sum of Sq.
df
F
p-value
Prog. Mat.
1705.999
1.000
13.305
0.001
Disp. Type
1982.019
2.000
7.729
0.001
Disp. Hemisp.
2.510
1.000
0.020
0.889
Prog. Mat. * Disp. Type
95.946
2.000
0.374
0.690
Prog. Mat. * Disp. Hemisp.
1735.459
1.000
13.535
0.001
Disp. Hemisp. * Disp. Type
4.149
2.000
0.016
0.984
Disp. Hemisp. * Disp. Type * Prog. Mat.
273.917
2.000
1.068
0.350
Residual
7308.471
57.000
Table A.3: Simpliﬁed ANOVA model, with signiﬁcant eﬀects and interactions only
Eﬀects
Sum of Sq.
df
F
p-value
Prog. Mat.
1770.695
1.000
14.513
0
Disp. Type
1982.019
2.000
8.122
0
Prog. Mat. * Disp. Hemisp.
1812.578
2.000
7.428
0.001
Residual
7686.708
63.000
Table A.4: Displacement type Tukey pairwise HSD test
Group 1
Group 2
Mean Diﬀ.
p-adjusted
Reject Ho
Asymmetric
Single
14.254
0.003
TRUE
Asymmetric
Symmetric
12.835
0.009
TRUE
Single
Symmetric
-1.420
0.916
FALSE
Table A.5: Programme Material Tukey pairwise HSD test
Group 1
Group 2
Mean Diﬀ.
p-adjusted
Reject Ho
S-id
What’s Going On
10.704
0.001
TRUE
Table A.6: Displacement Hemisphere Tukey pairwise HSD test for each Programme
Material
Prog. Mat
Group 1
Group 2
Mean Diﬀ.
p-adjusted
Reject Ho
S-Id
Back
Front
9.442
0.013
TRUE
What’s Going On
Back
Front
-12.133
0.026
TRUE
Page 49
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/about
