==PAGE:1==
Reading the Reader
An intelligent system for optimizing typography
for central vision loss readers
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Reading the Reader
An intelligent system for optimizing typography for central vision loss readers
Et intelligent system til at optimere typografi for personer med centralt synstab
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Aamir Ahmad Farooq
Lars Kristian Burchard Refsgaard
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Bygning 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Individuals with central vision loss (CVL) often face difficulty in reading as they can only
use their peripheral or parafoveal vision to read. The Reading the Reader (RTR) project, a
collaboration between the Technical University of Denmark and the Royal Danish Academy
and led by Prof. Per Bækgaard, aims to address these challenges. Unlike existing read-
ing apps with manual text adjustments, the RTR project envisions using Adaptive User
Interfaces (AUIs) with eye-tracking and machine learning to make personalized text pre-
sentation adjustments based on user needs. Our project supports the RTR project’s goal
by developing a flexible reading app and data collection platform for researchers to col-
lect and analyze readers’ gaze data from eye-trackers. In doing so, we conduct a deep
dive into accessibility guidelines and existing apps to define requirements for our project.
Subsequently, we designed experiments and included 23 participants to collect interaction
data and use that to conclude with a discussion on the UI and platform’s feasibility.
ii
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to Professor Per Bækgaard and Chaudhary Muham-
mad Aqdus Ilyas for their continuous guidance, advice, and supervision, as well as often
offering expertise in the area of the project.
We are also thankful to Alex Oláh for his support and advice in times of need. Furthermore,
we would like to thank Professor Jakob E. Bardram for providing a calm and professional
environment to work in, as well as our colleagues at the Copenhagen Center for Health
Technology for accommodating us.
Lastly, we would like to thank our friends and family for participating in our experiments
and providing us encouragement and support throughout our project.
Reading the Reader
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Adaptive user interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Goal of this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Key concepts and related work
5
2.1
Key terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Existing solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Structure of eye-tracker data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Accessibility Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
State of the art eReaders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.6
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3
Methodology
27
3.1
Discover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2
Define . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3
Develop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.4
Deliver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4
Requirements specification
31
4.1
Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2
User stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.3
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Testing with Experimental study design
39
5.1
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Experimental study design methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
System architecture
47
6.1
Frontend
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.3
Eye-tracker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7
Work packages
62
7.1
Work package 1: Initial prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7.2
Work package 2: Prototyping and initial experimental design
. . . . . . . . 67
7.3
Work package 3: Tweaking the prototype for experimental setup . . . . . . 72
7.4
Work package 4: Updating backend issues related to time synchronization
77
8
Experimental result and analysis
79
8.1
Analysis and algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
8.2
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
8.3
Exploratory observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Reading the Reader
v
==PAGE:8==
9
Discussion
97
9.1
Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
9.2
Data quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
9.3
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
9.4
Feasibility of the platform and the UI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
10 Conclusion
113
10.1 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
Bibliography
115
A Appendix
119
A.1 Under the Tuscan Sun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
A.2 Leveraging Blockchain Technology for Supply Chain Transparency and Ef-
ficiency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
A.3 Chasing Sunsets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
A.4 Answer sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
A.5 Results UX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
A.6 Example of a gaze data packet from Tobii eye-tracker
. . . . . . . . . . . . 126
A.7 Gaze data around some data that is problematic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
A.8 Handbook PDF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
A.9 Special project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
vi
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The ability to read is an essential skill that most people need to navigate their daily lives,
from reading the news, interacting with a smartphone, examining nutritional information
and ingredients on a box of food, to reading signs on the road for directions. For people
with vision impairment diseases such as central vision loss (CVL), however, this ability to
read is affected which disrupts their daily lives to a large degree.
CVL is primarily caused by age-related macular degeneration and typically induces the
presence of a scotoma, which is a blurred or dark spot depending on the type of CVL, in the
center of the patient’s vision [1]. One example of how this might look is seen in Figure 1.1.
As can be seen, CVL patients cannot read from the central area of their point of regard,
and are therefore forced to read from the peripheral of their vision. While reading is often
a trivial task for most, it becomes extremely difficult for those who develop this condition.
People with other forms of disabilities have various tools at their disposal to cope with
their condition in their daily lives. For those with difficulty walking, they have wheelchairs,
canes, and walkers. Blind people have screen readers and braille. Those with hearing
loss can use hearing aids. However, central vision loss patients have few tools at their
disposal — common approaches include increasing the font size if reading a piece of text
in digital format, or using a handheld magnifier.
1.1
Adaptive user interfaces
In recent years, some research has been conducted in the direction of Adaptive User
Interfaces (AUIs), also known as Intelligent User Interfaces (IUIs) [3, 4]. “Traditional” UI
design methodology has a fundamental flaw: its one-size-fits-all approach. This is espe-
cially true with, for example, e-readers and e-reading applications that ship with default
settings which the vendor or manufacturer determines will work for the vast majority of
people. It is becoming increasingly apparent that one UI design does not necessarily
work for all users [5, 6].
A user interface must accommodate the context in which it is used. This context is not al-
ways static, however, and furthermore, designers cannot design for every possible context
Figure 1.1: An illustration of how a scotoma might affect one’s ability to read [2].
Reading the Reader
1
==PAGE:10==
a UI can be used in advance [6]. Therefore there must be a way to customize and adjust
the UI to better fit the context or the needs of the user [5]. Several approaches have been
proposed as solutions, from completely manual controls [5], to rule-based systems [6] or
fully automated solutions that use a machine learning model to predict a way to adapt or
change the presentation of the application [5, 7, 6]. These changes are made to better
suit the user, help them achieve their goals in a more efficient way given the context, fit
the user’s preferences or requirements, or otherwise improve the user’s quality of life —
in each case, aiding the user in their task [4, 8, 5, 6].
Kumaran et al. discuss how social networks can have a negative psychological impact
on users when, for example, they consume negative content and hate speech [7]. They
investigate how their system can use a smartphone’s front-facing camera to identify the
user’s emotional state, i.e. “angry”, and gradually adjust the colors of their own chat app
UI, EChat, to guide them towards a target emotion such as “neutral” or even “happy”. The
authors conduct studies with several users and conclude that their evidence shows the
intervention can successfully influence the users’ emotional state in a positive way [7].
Khan and Shah ponder the example of smart TV UIs, which are typically extremely clut-
tered and complex, leading to cognitive overload and a poor user experience. Most im-
portantly, these UIs are designed with a one-size-fits-all approach with little customiza-
tion. They investigate how this interaction can be improved by taking into account users’
age, gender, skills, and other factors to create a “real-time adaptive UI framework”, that
they call “personalized adaptive UIs for smart TV” (PAUIs), which they implemented on
an Android TV. The authors conducted a study with 75 household members where they
installed the custom Android TV UI and asked the participants to interact with it. The
authors present evidence that their participants perceived it positively and improved their
“attitude, usability, user experience, learnability, and reduced cognitive load” [5].
Integrated development environments (IDEs) are used by software developers to write
and debug code. As IDEs also often have highly complex UIs and there is a risk of “over-
whelming” the user, Weber et al. postulate that “automation and adaptation could help
the users focus” on the actual development. The authors demonstrate success in devel-
oping an IDE extension to adapt its UI layout automatically. They attempt to resize the
UI panels to make some smaller and some bigger by predicting the developer’s intent
and what is most relevant at the moment based on gaze data from eye-trackers and a
machine-learning model. With some qualitative evaluation of the system with a small set
of developers, they showed that it is possible to make “meaningful adaptations” to the UI,
and it is also received well by users. They also discuss some of the challenges associated
with this, for example striking a balance between automation and user control. One way
they do this limiting the amount of changes that are made per minute so as not to disrupt
the users’ workflow [6].
1.2
Goal of this project
Although AUIs are not currently designed to assist those who suffer from impairments
or disabilities such as “intellectual, cognitive or physical impairments”, some focus has
begun shifting in this direction [4]. The use of AUIs for people with disabilities is particularly
challenging because not everyone with the same condition will interact with the system in
the same exact way, and the conditions under which the system is being used may differ
in terms of location, noise, social environment, lighting, and other factors [3].
However, this is a promising application of this technology which, if done correctly, could
improve the quality of life of people suffering from disabilities by adopting the UI in a way
2
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: An overview of how the Reading the Reader system architecture is envisioned.
This diagram shows the interaction between the user, eye-tracker, the reading app, and
the model which classifies reading behavior and generates personalized interventions to
adapt text presentation [9].
that helps them cope with their conditions and improve accessibility.
The Reading the Reader project 1 is a multi-year long research project led by Professor
Per Bækgaard in a collaboration between the Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
and the Royal Danish Academy. In this project, they would like to apply the principle of
AUIs to assist patients with central vision loss. As we previously discussed, reading is
particularly challenging for them. We would like to explore how an AUI could be used
to substitute their current reading application, be it PDF viewers like Adobe Reader, or
eReader applications such as Apple Books, Amazon Kindle, or Mofibo. Particularly, we
would like to adapt the presentation of the font such as the size and weight of the letters,
colors, and contrast, and various aspects of spacing.
While existing applications do support miscellaneous ways to adjust the text presentation,
they are designed to fit the mass market, i.e. people who can read without any disabil-
ity. Often the default presentation is reasonable enough to be used by the vast majority
of people without any changes. The options presented to the user are also limited in
granularity, and most importantly, all adjustments are performed manually by the user.
As previously discussed, AUIs study the user’s habits and how the user is using the ap-
plication by analyzing contextual data, and then automatically intervening by adapting
the UI. In this case, the application could intelligently adjust the presentation of the text to
improve reading performance by studying the user’s reading habits with the use of an eye-
tracker. Eye-trackers have sensors on them which can be used to collect a large amount
of detailed data on oculomotor behavior. This data could be fed into a machine learning
model, which, based on various predetermined signals, could interpret whether the user
is facing difficulty reading the shown text, and suggest a change to the text presentation.
An overview of how this system would work is shown in Figure 1.2.
The end goal of the overall Reading the Reader project is to build a functional AUI; how-
ever, before that can be achieved, the groundwork must be established — some of which
we will tackle in this thesis project. Firstly, the reading application needs to be developed
with a sufficient amount of flexibility so that every paradigm that needs to be adjustable
1https://novonordiskfonden.dk/en/news/artificial-intelligence-will-help-to-improve-reading-opportunities-
for-millions-of-people/
Reading the Reader
3
==PAGE:12==
can be manipulated. It also needs to be designed with the target demographic, i.e. low
vision persons, in mind and therefore needs to be designed in a way that is accessible
to them. Furthermore, to train machine learning models, we need to collect training data
and examine what information can be extracted by analyzing the data.
Our project therefore investigates how we can design and implement a platform that can
display text in the form of eBooks, allow the users to manipulate the presentation, and
integrate with an eye-tracker to collect and store data as well as various other logs that
are useful for the background research for this project. The effectiveness of the data
collection system must also be evaluated to ensure that we receive accurate and precise
data, and most importantly that we collect all of the data which enables the researchers
to successfully implement the project.
4
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:13==
2
Key concepts and related work
In this section, we will introduce some of the relevant background knowledge required for
understanding the context of our project. Leading up to this project, we conducted a deep
dive into a collection of articles related to vision impairment with a focus on central vision
loss, that gave us the necessary knowledge to introduce the key terms, concepts, and
existing research in this section. Following the research we conducted, we wrote a report
which summarizes our findings, which can be found in section A.9. We refer to this report
as our background knowledge for our thesis project.
We will also investigate state-of-the-art solutions by identifying the strong points that we
can include in our application, as well as gaps where we can improve things.
2.1
Key terms
How do we read?
Reading starts with the eye and the eye consists of a pupil, which is a
hole in the center of the iris where light enters the eye, which allows us to see. Muscles in
the eye regulate the size of the pupil, and therefore how much light is allowed to enter [10].
The fovea is the part of the sight that is the clearest and accounts for the central 2° of the
vision. The parafovea describes the next 5° out from the fovea and the peripheral is the
region beyond that. Parafoveal vision describes the ability to do vision-based activities
like reading in the parafovea. Perceptual span is a term for the region of effective vision,
which for normal-sighted people will be the fovea and some of the parafovea, however,
for CVL patients this will specifically not include the fovea. [11].
The process of reading is seen as a sequence of saccades between fixations, with an
occasional regression.
Figure 2.1: Fixations as colored dots, and normal saccades and regressions as black and
red arrows respectively. The color of the fixations represents time, where green repre-
sents earlier points and it progresses to yellow section A.9.
Saccades are rapid, jerky movements of the eye at up to 500° per second, used to shift
focus between fixation points, for example when reading a passage of text or looking at
a scene [12, 11, 13]. When reading the saccades usually last around 30ms [11]. The
main function of saccades is to fixate on a new region of text and put that region into the
fovea because reading is much more difficult in parafoveal and peripheral vision. During
saccades, we do not perceive information, a phenomenon known as saccadic suppres-
sion [11].
Fixations is the state at which the eye remains still over a point for a period of time ranging
from 200-300ms. Fixation count is the number of fixations around an area of interest. A
Reading the Reader
5
==PAGE:14==
longer fixation duration is associated with deeper cognitive processing [10].
For the average person without any reading issues, about 10-15% of saccades are re-
gressions, which are saccades where the eyes move back to previously read lines. Short
intra-word regressions usually indicate problems processing the currently fixated word.
Longer regressions, which are more than 10 characters, suggest the reader had prob-
lems understanding the text. Good readers are generally accurate at backtracking their
eyes to the point they do not understand [11]. A visualization of these reading concepts
can be seen in Figure 2.1.
Now, for CVL patients these factors do not change, but the way they achieve them does
change. A person with normal vision will read by sitting straight and looking at their book,
monitor, or other medium. However, people suffering from central vision loss will use ec-
centric strategies such as moving their heads from side to side and forward and backward
to be able to read the text. This is because they cannot read from the center of their vi-
sion, and thus they will develop a preferred location in their peripheral vision which acts as
a pseudofovea that takes over tasks that require high-resolution vision such as reading.
The location will typically be close to the border of the scotoma but may change depend-
ing on the amount of light or the task at hand. This is the most common compensatory
oculomotor strategy for patients. They will use a strategy called saccadic rereferencing
to direct their preferred retinal location on the target instead of the fovea [12, 14].
Cognitive load and readability
When talking about reading, an important concept is
readability, which means the design of reading material. A change in readability can
greatly impact the flow of information from the reading medium to the reader, making it
either easier or harder to extract information. Optimal readability can be achieved by
optimizing the fit between the user and the text presentation to produce better reading
outcomes [13].
Reading speed is a function of moving the eyes across the content being read in saccades.
In general, reading speed is measured in “words per minute” but the notion of a word is not
always the same, as some words will have more characters in them. Beier notes that there
is an increasing tendency to focus on reading speed, and particularly, increasing it [13].
However, a higher reading speed can negatively impact comprehension, and therefore
readability is not just a question of increasing speed.
A significant factor influencing readability is the cognitive load, denoting the mental effort
necessary for tasks like reading. This load can be categorized into three distinct types,
as enumerated below.
Intrinsic load embodies the inherent complexity associated with acquiring knowledge, ir-
respective of instructional methodology. Sweller posits that this dimension remains
“fixed and unalterable” among learners with similar expertise, only subject to change
by adjusting their knowledge levels [15]. Furthermore, he argues that certain mate-
rial inherently presents difficulties regardless of instructional approaches [16].
Extraneous load encompasses the cognitive effort expended in processing information
irrelevant to the learning task, such as grappling with confusingly presented infor-
mation.
Germane load is deeply linked to intrinsic load, and focuses on “schema acquisition and
automation.” This aspect contributes to a higher understanding and the establish-
ment of long-term memory for the material [16].
6
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:15==
Sweller remarks that extraneous and intrinsic loads are additive, and together they are
termed the total cognitive load [16]. A confusing layout or format of the content could result
in a high extraneous load, causing readers’ working memory capacity to be exceeded and
a high total cognitive load [16]. Therefore, the format of the instruction should be such
that extraneous load is decreased and efforts are not wasted by, for example, a confusing
UI or layout.
Similarly, blinking serves the function of maintaining moisture in the eyeball, and the fre-
quency of blinks per second has been correlated with mental workload, as noted by Zhan
et al. [10].
In our earlier discussion, we explained the role of the pupil in vision. Pupil size may offer
insights into the cognitive load, with a larger pupil size potentially indicating increased
cognitive effort [17].
Cognitive load significantly influences reading speed and readability. Readability is not
solely determined by increasing reading speed, as higher speed can hinder comprehen-
sion. Additionally, factors like the frequency of blinks and pupil size can also provide in-
sights into the cognitive load experienced during reading. Overall, optimizing readability
by managing cognitive load is essential for effective information extraction and compre-
hension.
Typography and its adjustable dimensions
In our findings, Sofie Beier goes into an
in-depth discussion regarding reading performance and font preferences. Through exper-
imentation, she discovers that font preferences are highly individual, and one font does
not fit all users. Furthermore, users may be so accustomed to a “bad” font which causes
them to read slower, that switching to a “better” font may negatively impact their reading
performance, at least initially [13].
Users therefore may be reluctant to try new font settings as they are unfamiliar to them
and they may feel they read slower at first — however, Sofie hypothesized that after an
initial learning curve, their reading performance would improve [18]. Therefore, a system
like ours makes sense in that it guides users towards a font that will work for them and
improve their reading performance.
Below, we provide a discussion of what dimensions of fonts are adjustable, and in some
cases what effect Beier found that it had on reading performance.
Typeface is defined as a collection of fonts, and it defines the style of text, i.e serif fonts
such as Times New Roman, which have slight line extensions at the end of letters, and
sans-serif such as Helvetica which does not have these extensions [19]. A visualization
of this can be seen in Figure 2.2. Beier discusses that although the presence of serifs
decreases reading performance, it improves letter recognition, which is especially impor-
tant for reading performance, especially when reading in the peripheral as CVL patients
might.
On the same lines, Beier describes the phenomenon of letter crowding, which is when
neighboring letters seem to “morph” into the letter being focused on, which can affect let-
ter recognition, especially in the peripheral [20]. Letter spacing and inter-word spacing
are two aptly-named phenomena that can cause this, and Beier also contends that in-
creased letter spacing can therefore reduce letter crowding [19]. However, there needs
to be a balance here as Chung writes that increasing it to extremes will harm reading
performance [20].
Reading the Reader
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.2: “Stylistic elements of font styles highlighted for the sans serif font Helvetica
(top) and the serif fonts Times Roman (middle) and Courier (bottom).” [19]
Letter weight, also known as font weight, is thought of as the thickness of the letters, or in
other words how bold it is. A visualization of different weights in the same typeface can be
seen in Figure 2.3. Normally, they are quantified from 100-900 with 100 increment steps.
400 is considered a “regular” weight, whereas “100” is “ultra-light” and “900” is “black”.
Sofie discusses that having afont weight that is too light or too black induces additional
cognitive load, regardless of the font size [20, 21]. Therefore it can negatively impact
reading performance as extra effort is spent trying on word recognition. A similar paradigm
is the stroke contrast of a font, which is the differences in the thickness in different parts of
letters. Having too high of a stroke contrast can also negatively impact letter recognition
so the stroke contrast should be relatively uniform [19].
Figure 2.3: Visualization of different letter weights in the same typeface [22].
2.2
Existing solutions
As part of our special project section A.9, we also researched the existing solutions that
central vision loss patients use to improve their reading performance and experience. This
will include both hardware and software, analog and digital solutions.
The simplest and probably most used solution for people with central vision loss is magnifi-
cation. This includes both physical magnifying glasses and software-based magnification,
such as the operating system’s accessibility settings.
Hardware-based solutions
For reading newspapers and books, examples of magni-
fication tools could be simple handheld magnifying glasses, some of which have built-in
LEDs to illuminate the text. The pros are the low cost and portability, as well as ease
of use. The cons of magnifying glasses are that they offer no adjustment of the text, for
example adjusting the contrast or the font size [23]. Depending on the type of magnifier,
readers may have to dedicate one hand to holding the magnifying glass, which can make
things like turning pages awkward. For these reasons magnifying glasses might be most
effective for small pieces of text.
More complicated solutions include video-based magnifiers which are designed for low-
vision people specifically. These allow for much more control of parameters like contrast
8
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:17==
and zoom level. But, the drawback of these magnifiers is that they are usually much more
expensive than a magnifying glass, ranging from $500-$3000. Also, these are usually
much larger devices that are best suited for a stationary position like on a desk, and not
meant to be portable.
In general, enlarging text has a major downside: it reduces the field of view and can be
inconvenient to operate. Users must constantly adjust the material to keep it within the
magnifier’s view. This requires more eye and hand movements, which may make reading
less comfortable, especially for elderly people who tend to have reduced motor control.
Software-based solutions
As an alternative to optical magnifiers, there are software-
based solutions found in common operating systems like macOS, iOS, and Windows. In
most reading applications users can also modify certain font properties. However, these
methods also have the drawback of reducing the field of view, and the range of properties
that can be adjusted may be limited depending on the software used.
Additionally, text-to-speech software provides an alternative, enabling readers to listen to
the text instead of reading it. The advantage here is that reading is made easier, and
there is no need for any eccentric strategies such as excessive head movements to read.
However, it will become much more cumbersome to “re-read” (or re-listen) a passage of
text. When using the text-to-speech feature that many operating systems offer, you may
only be able to jump back and forth by scrubbing, jumping a few seconds before or after, or
not able to jump around at all. Being able to skim through a piece of text and quickly jump
around when you need to re-read something is a valuable part of the reading experience,
and text-to-speech software makes this cumbersome.
There are alternative software options that enable users to adjust contrast and other text
properties. Nevertheless, users may not be certain about the ideal settings for their indi-
vidual comfort and improved reading performance.
2.3
Structure of eye-tracker data
The eye-tracker we are using is the Tobii 4C eye-tracker, which is a USB eye-tracker that
is designed to be used with a computer. This eye-tracker was chosen because it was
made available to us for the purpose of this project by our supervisor.
The eye-tracker gives gaze packets with a sample rate of 90Hz [24]. An example of the
gaze packets is given in section A.6. Here, we will briefly give an overview of what each
gaze packet contains.
2.3.1
Timestamps
Each gaze packet received from the Tobii SDK contains two timestamps, a device_-
time_stamp and system_time_stamp, both of which are measured in nanoseconds. Ac-
cording to the Tobii documentation, the source of the device_time_stamp is an internal
clock within the Tobii eye-tracking device, and therefore it can be thought of as the time
elapsed since an arbitrary point in time such as when the device was first powered on or
manufactured [25]. The system_time_stamp, conversely, uses the host computer that the
device is connected to as the source, and this measures the time in nanoseconds since
the computer was powered on [25].
Notably, neither of these timestamps is universally recognizable compared to, for ex-
ample, a UNIX timestamp, which is in terms of seconds or milliseconds elapsed since
00:00:00 Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) on January 1, 1970 (known as the epoch),
Reading the Reader
9
==PAGE:18==
which can easily be interpreted to get the current date and time. This presents a chal-
lenge since the timestamps contained in the events generated from the frontend are UNIX
timestamps, and therefore the two-time series need to be synchronized. This challenge
will be addressed in subsection 8.1.3.
2.3.2
Coordinate systems
The Tobii SDK documentation outlines the various coordinate systems that their eye-
trackers support [26]. In this project, we are dealing with an eye-tracker here and not
a head-mounted display (which requires additional coordinate systems). The coordinate
systems supported, and therefore of interest to us, are the Active Display Coordinate Sys-
tem, Track Box Coordinate System (TBCS) and the User Coordinate System (UCS). An
overview of the coordinate systems can be seen in Figure 2.4.
The Active Display Coordinate System (ADCS) is a 2D coordinate system where (0, 0)
represents the upper left corner of the screen and (1, 1) represents the bottom right corner;
this area excludes the frame or bezel of the monitor, according to the documentation. In
practice, it is possible for the eye-tracker to detect gaze points outside of the screen if it
is still within the track box (the volume in which the eye-tracker can track a user’s eyes),
and therefore it is possible to get points with coordinates greater than 1, for example. The
x and y coordinates can be multiplied by the resolution of the screen (i.e. 1920 and 1080)
to discern which pixel on the monitor the user was looking at, which is useful for plotting
the gaze data.
Conversely, the User Coordinate System (UCS) and Track Box Coordinate System (TBCS)
provide us with coordinates in a 3D space. As seen in Figure 2.4, the UCS has an x-
axis towards the “right” of the user, a y-axis pointing vertically up (perpendicular to the
eye-tracker’s surface), and a z-axis pointing through the user (also perpendicular to the
eye-tracker’s surface). The coordinates we receive are in terms of millimeters. The TBCS
is similar, however, we receive coordinates in terms of the volume of the trackbox, where
(0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 1), and so on, represent the various corners of the trackbox. These two
coordinate systems can be used for working in the 3D space, i.e. for observing the user’s
posture; when leaning towards the monitor, we would expect the z coordinate to decrease
as the user’s eyes get closer to the eye-tracker.
It is important to note that for each of the 3 coordinate systems, we get data for each
eye. For the purposes of our experiments, we have collected information on each user’s
dominant eye, and so when we run our data analysis scripts we make sure to use the
data from the dominant eye.
In the gaze data packet, the ADCS has two keys: left_gaze _point_on_display_area
and right_gaze_point_on_display_area, each of which is an array with 2 values repre-
senting the x and y coordinates. Similarly, for UCS and TBCS we get the following, each
of which contains an array of 3 values representing the x, y, and z coordinates:
• left_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system
• right_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system
• left_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system
• right_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system
In the exceptional case that the eye-tracker is not able to track one or both eyes, the array
will contain 2 or 3 null values, and the left_gaze_point_validity or right_gaze_-
point_validity will have a value of 0 instead of 1.
10
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:19==
(a) Active Display Coordinate System
(b) User Coordinate System
(c) Track Box Coordinate System
Figure 2.4: The two coordinate systems as outlined by the Tobii SDK documentation [26]
2.3.3
Pupil size
The Tobii eye-tracker also gives us data on the diameter of each pupil, measured in mil-
limeters, in the keys left_pupil_diameter and right_pupil_diameter. This measure
may not necessarily be completely accurate, however, this does not matter as much as
the precision. As outlined in the Tobii documentation, the reading observed by the eye-
tracker device can be influenced by factors such as scratches or dirt on glasses, and
there could be additional factors such as the use of certain drugs which can affect pupil
size [27]. What matters, however, is the change of the pupil size over time relative to an
established baseline, rather than what the actual size is. For example, it is important to
measure how the pupil size changes in response to changing lighting conditions (i.e. we
would expect that changing our reading app from light mode to dark mode would cause
the pupil to constrict). Pupil size can also be used as an indicator for the reader’s cognitive
load, and so we can see how it reacts to the difficulty of the task at hand or words being
read.
2.4
Accessibility Guidelines
As stated earlier, we intend to create a reading application for low-vision people. A major
consideration in the design and development of this project is therefore the accessibility
of the reading application’s interface. As the application is meant for low-vision people it
also needs to be accessible for these people, to give them a suitable user experience.
For this, we turn to the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), which is one of the most major
international organizations that develop “standards and guidelines to help everyone build
a web-based on the principles of accessibility, internationalization, privacy, and security” 1.
1https://www.w3.org/
Reading the Reader
11
==PAGE:20==
One such standard developed by the W3C is the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines,
which defines how to create accessible user interfaces. Its purpose is to provide a “single
shared standard for web content accessibility” to be used by web content developers,
developers of tools for authoring content and evaluating accessibility, and those who want
to adhere to a standard for accessibility [28].
When searching for WCAG recommendations specifically for users who have central vi-
sion loss, we came across a document entitled “Accessibility Guidelines for People with
Low Vision” written by a group operating under the W3C. This document is currently a
work-in-progress editor’s draft and although the authors do not expect the document to
become a W3C recommendation, the document provides many useful insights and rec-
ommendations for those creating web content to make it accessible for people with low
vision, targeting specific groups of people — one of them being those with “visual field
loss” [29]. The document makes specific suggestions for user needs related to each of
the identified visual impairments, as well as general recommendations for all visually im-
paired people. User needs related to field of vision are described with regards to tracking
and Point of Regard and Proximity.
2.4.1
Tracking
Tracking is defined by the document as “following along lines of text, including getting
from the end of one line to the beginning of the next line of text” [29].
One aspect of tracking to consider is the “rewrap” of content when the size of text is
adjusted. In some applications, when the font size is increased, text may overflow in the
horizontal direction rather than reflowing to the next line, which means the user is forced
to scroll horizontally as well as vertically to read the content. The group recommends
that blocks of text wrap so that users only have to scroll in one direction, usually vertically
— although most reading applications do not require you to scroll, rather you navigate
between “pages”.
The document also makes recommendations to allow users to have single-column layouts
for text, rather than multiple columns, citing the significant level of attention and effort it
takes to go from the bottom of the column to the top of the next one which “degrades
reading flow and comprehension” [29]. Furthermore, they recommend that users can set
their own desired line length, or in other words the ability to adjust the size of the margins
on the sides of pages. This is because it is harder for most people to read very long lines
of text from start to end, and even harder for those with field of vision issues [29]. Lastly,
they recommend an option to disable hyphenation (when words are split between lines to
fit more characters on a line).
2.4.2
Point of Regard and Proximity
The document also states that since people with field loss may only see a small portion
of the UI at a time, it is easy for them to lose their place when, for example, they hover
over something that opens a popup but moves their mouse to scroll causes them to lose
focus on the element they were hovering, which closes the popup. The authors recom-
mend considering the experience to ensure the user can maintain their point of regard.
Furthermore, they comment on the proximity of related information. They suggest that
elements such as feedback, pop-up messages, or dialogs show up over the user’s point
of regard, as they may not otherwise see it. If something does happen outside what the
user would immediately see, for example, a new tab opening, they should be informed
that this is happening [29].
12
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:21==
2.4.3
Other recommendations and remarks
For people with macular degeneration, they note that they have “poor visual acuity, low
contrast sensitivity and high light sensitivity”, adding that people with low vision face issues
with fatigue when reading text. As there is also some evidence that those reading white
text on black backgrounds tend to read faster, together with the fact that CVL patients
are particularly light sensitive, the interface could be designed with only a dark mode,
meaning black/dark backgrounds with lighter foregrounds for things like text and icons —
although of course, performance is not the only metric to consider, user satisfaction is
also important.
Aside from the sections specifically for people with field loss, the document also makes
general recommendations for those with low vision. It is mentioned that there should be
options to adjust the font size for the UI without zooming in the interface, and they also
mention considering text in images, maps, and similar. If there is an option to choose
a font, the font names should be presented in the font itself to serve as a preview, and
they suggest including a wide range of fonts, including serif and sans-serif fonts. They
further suggest options to adjust the leading (line spacing), letter spacing, word spacing,
justification, margins, and space between elements.
2.5
State of the art eReaders
In this section, we will be looking at different e-book reader applications and discuss what
we like and dislike to gain insight into how we might be able to design our reading appli-
cation. We will first introduce the applications we will be evaluating.
To find the applications that are the subject of our evaluation, we searched for “popular
ebook applications” and picked out the most commonly mentioned ones. Apps such as
ComiXology which is primarily suited for reading comic books and not for reading long-
form text in the form of books, were filtered out. We also filtered out apps that are not
available internationally such as Barnes & Noble Nook.
We landed on a list of a list of 3 apps. This included Apple Books, Amazon Kindle, and
Google Play Books. We further added a couple of applications to our list to come to a total
of 5 apps, including Storytel for iOS, which is one of the top apps under the Books category
of the Apple App Store in Denmark, and Calibre because it is an ebook management
software that offered more flexibility than any other application, and therefore felt there
was value in including it due to the nature of our study.
2.5.1
Scoring framework
To objectively assess different e-book reading applications, we have developed a scoring
framework based on specific parameters that we want to do really well in our applica-
tion. This framework considers both accessibility and user experience aspects, ensuring
a comprehensive evaluation. Each parameter is rated on a scale of 1 to 4, with clear
definitions for each score.
In addition to the objective scoring, we also add subjective assessments for some of the
UI/UX design and features implemented by each application. This is done to cover as-
pects of the application that may not quite fit into one specific box in our scoring framework.
In the end, we analyze the various strengths and weaknesses of each application to come
to a conclusion about gaps that the most widely used reading apps have, and areas where
we can innovate.
Reading the Reader
13
==PAGE:22==
Feedback
This parameter evaluates the presence and quality of feedback features, in-
cluding progress tracking, and reading performance such as speed, comprehension, and
progress. Higher scores indicate more effective feedback mechanisms. Complex feed-
back like reading performance will count much higher than progress tracking.
• Score 1: Minimal or no feedback features available.
• Score 2: Simple feedback features such as progress tracking.
• Score 3: One reading performance feature as well as progress tracking.
• Score 4: More than one reading performance feature.
Accessible text
This parameter assesses the application’s support for accessible text,
including font size adjustability, text-to-speech functionality, customizable text colors, line
spacing, and other readability-enhancing attributes.
• Score 1: Text accessibility features are lacking.
• Score 2: Basic text accessibility options available.
• Score 3: Comprehensive text accessibility features provided.
• Score 4: Exceptional text accessibility with customization options.
Accessible UI
This parameter evaluates the user interface’s accessibility, considering
screen reader compatibility, compatibility with OS accessibility settings, and intuitive nav-
igation options (e.g., buttons and keyboard shortcuts).
• Score 1: UI lacks accessibility support and adaptability.
• Score 2: Limited UI accessibility with some basic features.
• Score 3: User-friendly and adaptable UI for accessibility.
• Score 4: Outstanding UI accessibility, fully integrated with OS settings.
Navigation and Usability
This parameter assesses the ease of navigation and overall
usability of the application, taking into account factors like menu structure, search func-
tionality, bookmarking, chapter selection, and overall user experience.
• Score 1: Poor navigation and usability, causing frustration.
• Score 2: Some navigation and usability issues need improvement.
• Score 3: Smooth and efficient navigation, user-friendly interface.
• Score 4: Exceptional navigation and usability, intuitive and efficient.
Features
This parameter explores the presence and quality of additional features that
contribute to the overall user experience. Features may include built-in dictionaries, trans-
lation tools, annotation options, synchronization across devices, and more.
• Score 1: Minimal additional features, lacking in functionality.
• Score 2: Some useful features but room for improvement.
• Score 3: A range of valuable features enhancing the user experience.
14
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:23==
• Score 4: Comprehensive and innovative features for an enriched reading experi-
ence.
Application
Feedback
Accessible
text
Accessible
UI
Navigation
& Usability
Features
Apple
Books
2
3
3
3
4
Kindle for
Mac
2
2
2
4
3
Storytel for
iOS
1
2
1
3
3
Google
Play Books
for iOS
2
2
2
3
4
Calibre
1
2
2
1
3
Table 2.1: A scoring of the state of the art based on a benchmark described in subsec-
tion 2.5.1
2.5.2
Apple Books
What could be seen as the default offering for users of the Apple ecosystem is Apple
Books. The main selling points of this application are the Book Store and Audiobook
Store (although users can also import their own files), tracking and setting of “reading
goals”, personalized recommendations, and the syncing of progress and books across
devices through iCloud — there is support for iPhone, iPad and macOS [30]. Notably,
there is no support for Windows or Android devices.
In the Apple Books app, we notice that the layout is very minimal with a focus on the text
being read. The top bar includes chapter navigation, bookmarks, options, and search
functions among others. This bar is only visible once the user hovers over it. Clicking the
options menu, which is indicated by a AA shows basic theming options with a customize
button for more advanced controls as well as accessibility options.
Things we like
The main thing that we like about this design is that it is simple and has
the text in focus. There is no visual clutter beside the text, except for important information
like the page you are on and the number of pages left in the chapter. When clicking the
text presentation menu, we like that we can change the font size quickly as this is the
parameter that most people want to change. We also like the number of options that are
present in the customized theme menu that you get when clicking Customize. Here there
are options for spacing of lines, characters, and words, which will cover most options for
accessibility. We also like that there are multiple ways of changing pages, as the user can
move the cursor to either side of the page to reveal buttons that will turn the page, and
the user can use the arrow keys on the keyboard.
Things we dislike
The clean look of this Apple Books design is beautiful, but it might be
a hindrance to people who are visually disabled. For example, having the buttons hidden,
while it looks good, it might not be obvious to everyone that that is how to customize the
text presentation.
Reading the Reader
15
==PAGE:24==
(a) Reading the book as normal. There is a
large emphasis on the text and information
related to the text. There are no visible but-
tons without moving the cursor to the top or
the sides.
(b) The text presentation options menu
shows basic controls like font sizing, back-
ground, and text colors, and a light/dark
theme switch.
(c) The customize button from Figure 2.5b
being clicked reveals more advanced con-
trols of the text, like font selection, bold, and
accessibility options.
(d) The accessibility options of the advanced
menu offer granular control of features such
as line spacing, character spacing, and
word spacing.
Figure 2.5: Four side-by-side images of the Mac version of Apple Books while reading
George Orwell’s book “1984”.
16
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:25==
The most pressing concern is that changes made in the “Customize” menu seen in Fig-
ure 2.5d do not reflect the content being shown underneath the dialog. Instead, you can
only see it on the small bit of text within the dialog, which is a rather small piece of text
without line breaks. It is therefore not possible to interpret the full context of how the
changes actually affect the text you are reading until you close the dialog. If you want to
change it again, you have to re-open the customization menu.
In the first text presentation options menu we feel that the buttons for changing the font
size are not as clear as they can be, and they might not be understood by everyone. Here
some form of text accompanying the buttons would increase accessibility. Also, we dislike
the seemingly unnecessary complexity of having two levels of options menus, instead, it
could simply be that the advanced menu was the one that showed up on clicking the
options menu and that then also contained the font size and text theme options at the top.
With this solution, we could also have descriptive text alongside the font size options, more
akin to the Storytel app that will be discussed below. We also do not like the animation
that occurs when changing pages, as we find it distracting and unnecessary.
Scoring
This app is given a 2 on Feedback because you can see how many pages are
left in a chapter, and on what page we are on, but there is no feedback on the performance
of the reading. The text is very accessible, with many features for adjusting spacing and
sizing of the text, like character spacing and word spacing, therefore it is given a 3 in
Accessible Text. The UI is also very accessible on macOS, with many of the operating
system’s accessibility options being compatible with the UI. For example, the Hover Text
feature, which zooms in on whatever text is hovered with the cursor, works well, and
therefore it is given a 3 in Accessible UI. The Navigation & Usability score is 3, however,
it is very close to a perfect 4. Apple Books has an innovative feature where you can
scrub through the pages with a slider. When you jump to a new page with the slider,
buttons appear to quickly jump back to the page you were originally on, so you do not
need to remember where you were if you want to quickly jump around to check something.
It also has a history to remember what pages you have jumped to, in case you jump
multiple times. However, although the application is easy to use with options for navigating
pages, the two-level menu structure mentioned in subsection 2.5.2 makes the options
menu slightly convoluted, and for this reason, it is not given a 4 in this category. We do
acknowledge that this is an innovative feature for navigation, and so for the Features
category, we have given it a perfect score of 4. It also has translation tools, dictionary
lookups, note-taking, colored highlighting, and cloud synchronization.
Takeaways
We like this UI, but for the product that we are building, where one of the
requirements is a focus on accessibility, we have to reject most of the design of the Apple
Books app, as we feel it is compromising on accessibility in favor of aesthetics. Particu-
larly, the flow for customizing the text presentation was really unintuitive and a poor user
experience, especially for the project’s target group. This is something we can learn from
and improve on.
2.5.3
Amazon Kindle for Mac
One of the most successful e-book reading platforms and a major driver of the e-reading
industry, the Amazon Kindle is a popular device for consuming e-books. The main selling
points of the Kindle devices are their high-resolution e-ink displays which allow for “weeks-
long” battery life and great portability due to the small weight and size of the devices [31].
Amazon also offers a store for e-books, a subscription called Kindle Unlimited which gives
subscribers access to “4 million books”, or alternatively, users can also import their own
Reading the Reader
17
==PAGE:26==
files [32]. Books can be synchronized across devices, and they support applications for
iOS (including an optimized version for iPadOS), Mac, Android, and PC [33]. Here we
investigate the features of the Mac application.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: Amazon’s Kindle app for Mac. On the left, we have the main view, with just the
e-book’s text. On the text, the popover with the text presentation style options is shown.
In the Kindle app, we notice that there is a bar at the top with several customization options,
such as the text presentation styles and options to switch between single-column, two-
column, and automatic column adjusting layouts. This bar is always visible to the user
while reading, as opposed to Apple which only exposes the top bar on hover.
Pages can be changed using the arrow keys or by clicking on the left or right grey margins
beside the text. The margins can be resized by dragging on the border between the text
and the margin.
Things we like
The Kindle app has many customization options for text presentation,
as seen in Figure 2.6b. Although the popover for this is not as clean as, for example, the
one in Apple Books, we appreciate that they make more use of clear text headers such as
“Font:” and “Font size:” rather than relying on just icons to convey what the controls do.
The “color mode” buttons also use the colors of the themes as a preview of what it would
look like. Furthermore, playing with the adjustment options works immediately, so you
can see the font change behind the popover immediately. As there are so many options
that can be customized, we also like that they are hidden behind a button that only opens
the popover when you click it. The buttons for navigating between pages are also clearly
colored, have icons and have contrast from the rest of the UI.
Things we dislike
On the top bar near the text presentation control button, there are
the column layout options which we think could be combined into the text presentation
popover, because as it is there may be too much visual clutter and reliance on icons,
which may be less accessible for low-vision readers. We also think that it is not intuitive
or obvious that one can resize the margins by dragging, this could simply be corrected
with a small pill-shaped bar on the border.
Scoring
This app has a reading performance feedback metric that shows the user how
many pages are left in the book, and this is also shown as a percentage. There is also
18
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:27==
a progress bar to visualize your progress, which you can also slide to quickly navigate
many pages at once, and therefore it is given a 2 in Feedback. Kindle scored a 2 in the
Accessible Text category because it leaves something to be desired; the options do not
include important accessibility options like line and character spacing. For the Accessible
UI category, we have given it a 2 as it does not support native accessibility options like
Hover Text on Mac, or OS-level text size adjustments, meaning UI elements can be difficult
to find. For Navigation & Usability, we have given it a perfect score of 4 because they
have both keyboard and mouse options for changing pages, also the options menu is very
easy to find and navigate with clear labels and icons. We find that the Kindle for Mac app
has good features such as dictionaries, translation tools, and annotation options which is
why we are giving it a score of 3 in the Features category.
Takeways
We did not like the use of sliders by Amazon Kindle, however, the use of clear
labels and icons for the adjustments was well-designed. We also like that the buttons for
“color mode” used the background and font color of the theme itself. There was also a
clear contrast between the navigation buttons and content.
2.5.4
Storytel (Mofibo) for iOS
Mofibo was founded in 2013 as a subscription-based e-book platform and quickly rose to
become the most popular distribution and e-reading platform in Denmark [34], accounting
for 70% of the Danish market share in 2014 [35]. In 2016, they were acquired by Storytel,
a Swedish counterpart, which accounted for 5% of the global market in 2020 [36]. While
Mofibo still sells their Mofibo reader, an e-ink reading device which is an alternative to
the Amazon Kindle, there is also the Storytel application which can be used to purchase
books and audiobooks from the Storytel store and read on the app. This app is available
on iOS and Android [37].
Investigating the iOS app, which can be seen in Figure 2.7, the text presentation style
option button is visible at the bottom of the screen. Tapping that button takes you to a
popover with the options. This UI is quite similar to that of Kindle’s with slight differences,
namely that they trade sliders for buttons that you tap to control settings (which is better
suited for mobile, since sliding with a finger is not as precise), and you can also see the
values that you set (for example “font size 100%”).
Things we like
We generally like the UI for the text presentation settings. We think it
makes good use of space, and we also like that it shows you the value that you chose.
The design of the popover is tasteful as well — it is similar to that of Kindle’s, but more
modern looking.
Things we dislike
Although we think it is nice to see the value that you choose, it might
not be good for the user psychologically. For example, if the central vision loss patient has
to set their font to “300%” before they can comfortably read, they may feel ashamed about
this. In that regard, perhaps having a slider is also not an appropriate solution, because
they may feel bad about having to slide all the way to the end. We also did not like that
the font adjustment setting did not preview what the font looks like as other apps did, by
having the name of the font be in the font itself.
Scoring
The only feedback is a progress tracker that tells you how much of the total
book you have read, therefore it is given a 1 for Feedback. In the Accessible Text
category, we give it a 2 because the text is somewhat adjustable, with typeface, font
size, and layout, but it is lacking in accessibility parameters like the spacing of words
Reading the Reader
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.7: An image from the iPad version of Storytel, with the fonts options menu shown.
20
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:29==
and lines. For Accessible UI, we give it a 1 because it does not support any of the iOS
accessibility options like Larger Text, a vision impairment accessibility tool baked into the
operating system. For Navigation and Usability, it is given a 3 because the options
menu is very easy to get to and has clear labels for the different settings, however, the
app does not have any search functionality. For Features, it gets a 3 because of the lack
of annotation and dictionary features that are found in the other options. Although it does
have translation, it relies on the built-in translation feature from iOS, which at the time of
writing, supports only 19 languages (which does not include Danish). However, there is
an interesting feature where you tap on a word, and it highlights the word you tapped on
and some of the words around it, as a gradient. This can be used to help readers track
what they were focusing on, similar to how you would hover your cursor over something
you are reading on a desktop computer. This is a feature the other apps do not support,
therefore it wins an extra point for this category.
Takeaways
Although we like the overall design of this text presentation settings popover
we think there are some careful considerations to be made here about what style of con-
trols we use and whether we display the values being used. Ultimately, we believe the
optimal settings UI could look like a hybrid between Amazon’s and Storytel’s UIs.
2.5.5
Google Play Books
Another app is Google Play Books, Google’s take on an e-reading application. As with
the other apps, Google has its own store to purchase e-books and also offers cloud syn-
chronization to its various apps, which are available on iOS, Android and the web [38, 39,
40].
In Figure 2.8 we have the web version. The UI here feels like a mix between that of
Apple Books and Storytel, in that the UI is quite clean and minimal, but similar to Storytel
they use a popover with buttons for controls which also show the values for what is being
changed.
Figure 2.8: Google Play Books app for the web.
Reading the Reader
21
==PAGE:30==
Things we like
Unlike Storytel, the font options show a preview of the font. Overall, we
like the general idea of this UI for many of the same reasons mentioned in the evaluation
of Storytel, and we think it has many good qualities over the apps previously listed.
Things we dislike
We could of course make minor adjustments to the layout of the
buttons, for instance, we think the percentage does not necessarily have to be in the
middle of the buttons and there could be better use of the space available. In the web
version, the page number along with the total amount of pages is shown in the bottom
right by the page-turning buttons. However, on the mobile version, we noticed that to
check the remaining pages in the chapter or determine the current page’s percentage of
the entire book, the user must click in the bottom left of the book. Unfortunately, there is
no visible button in that area. This means that the user either has to already know there
is a button at that position or accidentally click that area to realize its functionality.
Scoring
The same amount of feedback is given in this app as in Apple Books, therefore
it gets the same score of 2 for the Feedback category. Unfortunately, as noted in Things
we dislike, on mobile versions this feature is rather hidden and inaccessible. Similarly,
for the Accessible Text category, we have given it a score of 2 because it has the same
options for adjustment as Kindle for Mac. We have given it a 2 for Acessible UI as
the app is able to correctly scale the UI text with iOS’s Larger Text feature, however,
the app has page-turning animations and no other exceptionally innovative accessibility
feature. Google Play Books scores a borderline 2 in Navigation & Usability because the
menu structure is slightly unorganized, with lighting options being in another tab separate
from the rest of the menu options, creating unnecessary complexity. Furthermore, the
column layout (selecting between 1 and 2 column layouts) is hidden behind changing the
flowing text option to “Original page images” before you can choose the layout, and that
disables the other typography settings. The only reason that it gets a 2 compared to a 1,
is because the page navigation is on par with the other apps. Feature-wise, they get a
perfect 4 because they have a lot of features like built-in Google Translate, text coloring,
note-taking/annotations, bookmark support, cloud synchronization, and dictionary lookup.
Takeaways
We like the general idea of this UI and we will take inspiration from the
button design of the font size. However, we think there are some adjustments to be made
especially the layout of the buttons and the organization of the menu. We also think that
the page number and percentage of the book should be more visible on the mobile version
of the app.
2.5.6
Calibre
Another application with an e-book reader function is Calibre. As opposed to the other
software we introduced, Calibre is a free and open source software, and it is described as
an “e-book manager... [which] takes things a step beyond normal e-book software” [41].
It is a complete suite of software that allows you to manage and edit e-books, and even
export them to a physical e-reader device such as an Amazon Kindle, in addition to having
a feature to view e-book files within the app [41]. It comes with options for adjusting many
different aspects of the text presentation, in a much more advanced manner than other
applications. The authors claim that “you’re never more than three clicks away from your
goal”.
Things we like
We appreciate that unlike some of the other applications shown, this is a
very minimal approach with no UI clutter — at least for the reading view. As we previously
22
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:31==
(a) The right-click menu is shown at the top
of the program, above the book.
(b) A small window to change the book’s font
size, that only changes the preview text and
shows the font size in pts, but does not pre-
view the font size on the book behind it.
(c) The advanced options menu.
Figure 2.9: Three side-by-side photos of Calibre, with various options menus shown.
discussed, page-turn animations can be disorienting, so we appreciate that there are no
page-turn animations in Calibre. This application also features a pinch-to-zoom feature,
which we did not seem to find on any of the other applications — and those with central
vision loss may appreciate this when they are struggling to read one word in particular.
As Calibre is a suite of tools for managing e-books and reading is rather a secondary
function of the application, we found that it handles the managing of e-books very well
too. It allows the user to get books from different sources like Amazon Kindle, Google
Play Books, and Barnes and Noble and download the books you have bought on those
platforms directly to Calibre to read in a centralized place. Also, Calibre offers many other
e-book management tools like generating ePub files from PDFs, Word documents, and
many other formats, as well as the other way around, as well as converting between
various formats. One can also edit e-book file metadata to change the author, rating, year
published, etc. There is also integration with physical devices to sync e-book files to them.
Overall, Calibre is a great utility for managing e-books.
Things we dislike
While you can navigate with the arrow keys on the keyboard, there
are also usually buttons on the screen to navigate between pages — and in this case, they
are very small and almost invisible; you need to hover on the very edge of the window
to even see them. Furthermore, there are many options for configuration — however,
the way you access them is very hidden. You need to right-click somewhere on the text
to bring up the options shown in Figure 2.9a. The configuration for font size is shown
in Figure 2.9b, but there is no live updating of the text behind the dialogue box, only of
the sample text within the dialogue box. As can be seen in Figure 2.9c, there are many
more customization options, but maybe even too many — it is very easy to get lost in the
Reading the Reader
23
==PAGE:32==
menus, and as stated before, there is no way to preview the changes.
Scoring
This application has no feedback except a percentage indicating how much of
the whole book you have read so far, therefore it is given a 1 in Feedback. We are giving
it a 2 in Accessible Text, mostly because there are so many options for adjusting the text,
however, the application also necessitated us to change some of those settings to be able
to even read a book; in one of our test cases, the background was set to black and so was
the text, so we had to adjust the color settings to make the text visible. Even though there
are many options for adjusting the text, it does not always work out of the box. For the
Accessible UI, we are giving the application a 2 because it does support OS accessibility
options like Hover Text, but none of the dialogues are closeable by tapping Escape and
the navigation is generally not intuitive at all. For the category Navigation & Usability,
we are giving it a 1. Even getting to the options menu required us to look up how to do
so on Google. The buttons for changing pages are very difficult to find and see because
you have to hover on the very edge of the page to see them, and the menu structure
is very disorientating and overwhelming, as can be seen in Figure 2.9c. The only place
that Calibre is scoring well is in the Features category where it gets a 3, because it has
many features like searching Google or a dictionary for words, highlighting and searching
features, but also less ordinary features like finding ebooks across different platforms
like the Amazon Kindle store, and “archive.org”. Every minute detail of the book and
application experience is customizable, from the keyboard shortcuts used for navigation
to margins, colors, and text-to-speech. It even has a reference mode that highlights each
paragraph with a unique number. You can also create ePub files from within Calibre and
convert them to other formats. As mentioned in paragraph 2.5.6, this is a complete suite
of e-book utilities that make it great for manipulating e-book files, but not so much for
reading.
Takeaways
This application could be used as an example of “right idea, wrong exe-
cution”, at least for the purpose of reading. We liked how many options there are for
customization but the UX of this leaves much to be desired as the menus are confusingly
designed and there is an overload of information.
2.5.7
Summary
We investigated 5 different e-reading applications and now we will attempt to summarize
our key findings, as well as identify gaps where we can innovate with our solution. We
are not so concerned with features like cloud synchronization or storefronts, and niche
features like translation or bookmarking. We are more concerned with the experience of
adjusting settings and improving readability.
There were many different approaches to the settings menu. Several apps use sliders
for their controls, which we prefer to avoid because it could be a hindrance for those with
poor motor skills. Clicking and dragging with a mouse button may be difficult, especially
considering that CVL patients are typically older people. The WCAG directly addresses
the use of dragging movements such as the one required by sliders, and sets a goal to
not rely on dragging movements entirely [42].
Apple Books and Amazon Kindle both make use of sliders for their settings menus. How-
ever, we have seen many examples of applications where the same effect is achieved
without sliders. We really liked the settings adjustments from Storytel and Google Play
Books. Their use of icons and labels with clear purposes, as well as the selected value
always being shown and adequate spacing between options made for a pleasant user
experience. This is something we can take inspiration from for our design.
24
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:33==
From our experience with Apple Books, we also realized that it is very important to be able
to easily preview the changes you are making. The dialog in Apple Books (Figure 2.5d)
where you can adjust text presentation settings covers the content, and you cannot pre-
view the changes live on the text being read. This means that when you change a setting,
you have to close the dialog to see how it affects the content. We want to make sure you
can see the settings alongside the content, and the effect of the changes immediately on
the actual text you are reading, not just a sample paragraph.
Furthermore, the settings menu needs to be easily discoverable. All apps hide their ad-
justment menu behind a button. However, in the case of Apple Books, you have to hover
your cursor over a particular spot in the UI to be able to reveal this button. This is a prob-
lematic interaction, especially considering the demographic of our target users. Calibre
had the same problem but it was even less discoverable — you have to right-click to reveal
the settings dialog, which we did not discover until we Googled how to do this.
While every app has features for adjusting the settings, none of them actually guide how
to adjust them, i.e. what the effect of each setting does to the readability. The users
are therefore left to figure it out for themselves by playing around with them, without any
meaningful feedback on how it affects their reading performance or what the best settings
are for each person — which are highly personal. This is an interaction we want to improve
with the Reading the Reader project, by guiding the user to their optimal text presentation
settings.
Reading the Reader
25
==PAGE:34==
2.6
Research questions
In the context of our study on improving reading accessibility for individuals with central
vision loss, we have identified a significant gap in reading applications. Several reading
applications cater to general users, but there is limited research on designing interfaces
that are specifically accessible and optimized for individuals with CVL. To address this
gap, and enhance the reading experience for this user group, we have formulated the
following research questions:
• What are the essential design considerations and guidelines for developing an inclu-
sive and accessible user interface that caters to individuals with low vision, specifi-
cally those with central vision loss?
• How can we develop a reading application with an extensible user interface and
architecture that allows us to make an adaptive user interface and collect the users’
gaze and interaction data from it?
• What experimental setup and methodology should be employed to accurately cap-
ture eye gaze data and interactions with the prototype?
• To which degree is the data collection platform feasible for collecting data to gener-
ate insights on oculomotor and reading behavior?
26
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:35==
3
Methodology
Having established what the problem is, we will now give an overview of how we ap-
proached coming up with a solution, including what methods we used, the tools we chose,
and how we will engage with users to validate our solution.
The approach we chose for ideating, designing, and prototyping our solution was the
Double Diamond process model 1. This model is a structured design process to go from
a problem and its analysis to a validated solution as the final product. It emphasizes the
importance of understanding the problem and a shared understanding among a team [43].
As can be seen in Figure 3.1, there are two major “stages” in the Double Diamond model,
visualized by the 2 diamonds. It begins with an initial problem that is not clearly defined —
it is more of an idea. From there, the team will diverge during the “discover” phase, and
then converge to one problem definition in the “define” phase. Then, the team will diverge
once again during the “development” phase and finally converge to the final deliverable
solution in the “deliver” phase.
In this section, we outline each phase of the diamond and the associated activities we will
undertake. It is important to note that in the case of our project, however, our problem was
already somewhat defined due to the fact that we conducted our background research in
the special project, as discussed in section 2.1. As a result, the activities in the first
diamond are not as heavily emphasized. Nevertheless, important decisions were made
in these phases to further narrow down the scope of our project and define its role in the
overall Reading the Reader project.
3.1
Discover
The purpose of this phase is to “identify, research and understand the initial problem” [43].
The problem solved by the overall Reading the Reader project is clearly defined based
on the research outcome of our previous project section 2.1. That knowledge is highly
relevant and is still considered in our thesis, however, in the context of the Reading the
Reader project we are focusing on a small part, namely the development of the data
collection platform and its UI. This has slightly different concerns and considerations.
As a result, we conduct a few more activities to further define the problem in the context
of the data collection platform. The special project was reviewed, and the knowledge
gained was condensed in a form that fits the scope of what we want to achieve in this
thesis project. The stakeholders of this project are identified and their needs are noted
down. We also conducted informal interviews with our product owner and a researcher
to validate and identify some of their additional needs.
As one of the problems we identified is that the reader app must be made accessible, we
needed to conduct background research into what makes a UI accessible and how it can
be achieved.
We also wanted to draw inspiration from similar applications to not only draw inspiration
for the UI design and features but also identify flaws and gaps where we can innovate
with our UI.
1https://innovationenglish.sites.ku.dk/model/double-diamond-2/
Reading the Reader
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.1: Double Diamond model. This image portrays the 2 major phases and 4 stages
of the model. It also signifies the thinking behavior that is characteristic of this model, i.e
how from the initial problem the team will diverge, converge onto a problem definition,
diverge again during the development, and then converge to deliver the final product [43].
The sticky notes on top represent the activities that took place in each phase.
Based on the information we collected from the guidelines and existing apps, one major
activity we conducted was that each project member sketched their vision of how the
reader app should look like individually, as low-fidelity prototypes of the UI. These will be
evaluated in the define phase.
3.2
Define
This phase is concerned with “limiting and defining a clear problem to be solved” [43].
The knowledge we collected from the previous phase will be condensed and limited to
the scope of this project, and by the end of this phase, we should evaluate various ideas
and select a clear scope of what needs to be achieved in this project.
Firstly, we will write down user stories for the stakeholders we had previously identified
in the “Discover” phase. We will also evaluate the low-fidelity sketches and pick out the
design elements we liked from each prototype, to combine them into one low-fidelity pro-
totype that would guide the rest of the process.
This, together with the knowledge we gained from the special project, review of accessi-
bility guidelines, and existing reading apps, are instrumental in creating one of the major
deliverables from this phase: the requirements. The requirements will define the direc-
tion of all future development and activities we will undertake in this project. They will
be prioritized and divided using the MoSCoW principle, which helps define what is most
important as well as what is and is not in the scope of our project.
It is worth noting, however, that the requirements are not set in stone — as we delve
deeper into the project it may happen that we identify additional requirements or limita-
tions, and as such the requirements can be iterated upon.
The requirements will also be shown to the product owner and researcher to gather their
28
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:37==
input and iterate on it if necessary.
Furthermore, based on the requirements frameworks and technologies must be carefully
considered and selected.
By the end of this phase, we will have addressed our first research question (section 2.6).
3.3
Develop
The problem is now clearly defined and validated by relevant key stakeholders. At this
point, we can begin the technical implementation of the data collection platform and UI —
developing the solution.
There are several key stages that we will undergo. Firstly, the low-fidelity prototypes
must be turned into a high-fidelity prototype, using design software such as Figma. This
is an iterative process and key stakeholders should be involved in this process. The
requirements will be key in guiding this process as well.
Once the high-fidelity prototype is done, we can begin the implementation in code. We had
previously converged on the frameworks and technologies we would use in the previous
phase. As far as the software development process goes, we will create cards on Trello
and implement them in work packages. After each iteration, we should also validate
the prototype both with our internal stakeholders and external participants, for example
through usability testing.
The suitability of the data platform needs to be carefully evaluated and validated as well. In
parallel to the implementation of the software, we will co-evolve our experimental method-
ology, which will be used to collect some sample data from participants — addressing our
third research question (section 2.6).
It may occur that as we develop each component, namely the platform and the experi-
mental methodology, our requirements need to be adjusted to accommodate technical or
experimental limitations, and therefore we may iterate on the requirements.
3.4
Deliver
At this stage, we expect to have the minimum viable product (MVP), and so now we are
focused on evaluating and testing the platform and the quality of data that can be collected
with it.
In the previous phase, we will have developed an experimental methodology. We should
therefore run the experiments, extract the data and analyze it in order to address our
fourth research question (section 2.6).
We will also discuss what went right and what went wrong, thus helping us to address our
second research question. We should also discuss what work may need to be done in
the future to continue evolving the product. This is because what we deliver will be further
worked on by other researchers on the project once we hand it off.
Reading the Reader
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:39==
4
Requirements specification
Having investigated the background of the area we want to innovate in, we can now move
to the define phase of the Double Diamond model. Here, we will take the knowledge
gained from our literature review, study of existing applications, as well as our definition
of the problem area to define requirements on our own solution. This can then be used
as the basis for designing the prototype and eventually the actual platform.
4.1
Stakeholders
When designing a system that people will use, it is important to enumerate who those
people are, how they will be affected by the system, and what their interests are, to design
a system that will truly fit their needs. After a discussion with our product owner, we have
identified the following stakeholders for this project.
• Product owner: this would be our supervisor, Professor Per Bækgaard. Per has a
vision of how we can use such a system to help people with central vision loss, and
therefore he has some requirements that need to be satisfied to turn this into reality.
Furthermore, as stated before, the purpose of this project is to design a UI that is
effectively a data collection tool for research on how CVL patients interact with such
a system, and therefore the design of the study needs to be taken into account.
• Researchers: this refers to the researchers working on the Reading the Reader
project who will take our work forward. As we are developing a tool for data collection
that the researchers can use to conduct experiments with and further analyze, we
need to take their needs into account when developing the system. Furthermore,
the system should be made extensible, so they can continue to expand it as their
requirements evolve.
• Readers: people who have a desire to read who are also suffering from central
vision loss. Central vision loss patients have some requirements as to how they
want this system to work, and because this is a heterogeneous group of people the
requirements will vary, but we need to find a common ground that works for most
people and focuses on that. It is important to note that although the Reading the
Reader project as a whole aims to focus their attention on the reader, at this stage,
we are focusing on the preliminary research, and therefore the readers are not the
primary consideration.
4.2
User stories
As a precursor to the requirements discovery, we aimed to put ourselves in the shoes
of the various stakeholders. We wrote the following user stories from the perspective of
each stakeholder. This helps us to identify their pain points and their needs in the solution
that we develop.
It is important to note that these user stories include the overall goals of the entire Reading
the Reader project, and we will not be able to achieve everything, as the scope of our
project is a small part of it.
As the product owner, ...
• I want to help people with central vision loss read better.
Reading the Reader
31
==PAGE:40==
• I want to build a reading app that feels familiar to whatever app the user currently
uses to read.
• I want the system to be accessible for central vision loss users.
• I want the system to support fine-grained adjustments to the text presentation.
• I want the system to support automatic changes to the text presentation.
• I want the system to support manual controls over the text presentation.
• I want the system to suggest the user make changes to their reading conditions (i.e.
posture, going indoors, taking a break, etc.).
As a researcher, ...
• I want to collect data and statistics on readers’ oculomotor behavior, both those with
and without vision loss.
• I want to log how users interact with the system, i.e. when a session is started and
ended, typography setting is changed, page turns, etc.
• I want to see what the user is looking at when they interact with the system
• I want to synchronize the gaze data on readers’ oculomotor behavior with the user
interactions with the UI
• I want to be able to anonymously identify which data belongs to which participant.
• I want the system to support a small selection of typography options to change, so
I can conduct some experiments on how users interact with them.
• I want the system to be easily extensible for further development, such as additional
typography settings and integrating with a backend.
• I want the system to support various predefined configurations for the typography
settings, and choose which participant gets what configuration.
• I want the system to support adding multiple excerpts of text to conduct our experi-
ments with.
As a reader, ...
• I want to be able to read my content and literature.
• I want to improve my reading experience.
• I want to provide the system with positive feedback if it improved my reading.
• I want the UI to feel natural and familiar and be clutter-free.
• I want settings to personalize the UI and make it more suitable for my own reading
preferences.
• I want to be able to reset all font settings and forget all my patterns.
4.3
Requirements
Now that we have examined the state of the art and studied relevant literature and guide-
lines, we can now establish the requirements to build a user interface and the underlying
data collection system, which we can then use in the testing phase.
32
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:41==
We have created the requirements following the MoSCoW method, which prioritizes the
requirements based on what the product must have (absolutely necessary requirements),
should have (which are important, but not absolutely necessary), could have (nice-to-
haves) and won’t have, (what we decide is outside of the scope of our project).
4.3.1
Must have
Under the must-have requirements, we focus on the requirements that are absolutely
necessary for collecting gaze data and interaction logs for research purposes.
• The system must have a view to read text or literature
One objective of the app is to serve as a reading application, and therefore the
application should support a feature that allows the user to read literature.
• The system must support fine-grained adjustment of the text presentation
In order to improve the user’s reading experience, they need a way to adjust various
properties of the font. This can range from completely manual controls over each
property we want the user to be able to control, to completely automated adjust-
ments from the system with no user input whatsoever.
• The system must log all user interactions with the system
The researchers would like to collect data on what settings the users adjust and
when and match it up with the user’s reading behavior in order to generate conclu-
sions.
• The system must record users’ oculomotor behavior while reading
The researchers would like to collect data on the users’ eye movement behavior
while reading the text and interacting with the system. This should take into account
the format of the gaze data as discussed in section 2.3.
• The system must support a unique identifier for each participant that interacts
with the system
As the researchers will be conducting experiments with many different participants,
there has to be a way to distinguish which data belongs to which participant. This
can be done using a unique ID, such as a sequential number.
• The system must record all logs in a format where it is easy to look up infor-
mation
It should be possible for the researchers to look up all of the events for a particular
participant. Therefore, the data must be stored in a way that enables this.
• The system must log what the user sees in the application
As the researchers need to derive insights based on the gaze data, they need to also
be able to see what the user was looking at on the screen. Therefore, the system
should record what the user sees at all times.
• The system must support synchronization of the user interaction logs with
the gaze data from the eye-tracker
Since this data is stored in two separate formats, in order to be able to link the gaze
data to what the user is seeing on the screen, there must be a way to synchronize
this data so that the researchers can extract insights based on what the user is
looking at in the reading application.
• The system must be easily extensible so that the researchers can add new
text presentation adjustment options and change the architecture
For this project, it is likely we will only select a small subset of adjustment options.
Reading the Reader
33
==PAGE:42==
However, eventually, the researchers will add more options and the system’s imple-
mentation should allow for this easily.
• The system must use high contrast colors, conforming to Level AAA from the
WCAG
According to the W3C document, certain people suffer from reduced contrast sen-
sitivity as they age, and therefore they need high contrast between the foreground
and background [29]. The W3c designed the Level AAA of conformance to provide
enough contrast for people with low vision [44]. Therefore, we should conform to
Level AAA. Conformance should be tested using contrast checking tools, such as
the A11y - Color Contrast Checker extension for Figma1.
• The system must support the ability to preview text presentation adjustments
live
As we discovered in the State of the art eReaders, not being able to preview the
changes being made to the text you are reading provides for a suboptimal experi-
ence. We can learn from this and make it so you can see the settings menu as well
as the effect on the page you are reading.
• The system must avoid the use of sliders for controls
As we discussed in section 2.5, the dragging action needed to interact with sliders
may be difficult for those with poor motor control, especially considering the de-
mographic of those who typically suffer from CVL are elderly people. We should
therefore take examples from alternatives, such as buttons to control values rather
than sliders.
4.3.2
Should have
These are UI implementation details that we should have to make the UI suitable for the
purpose we are developing it for, however not all of them are absolutely necessary for the
purpose of developing a data collection research platform.
• The system should have an accessible design that is easy to use for people
with low vision
With our solution, we should aim to satisfy as many suggestions from the W3C
document as possible.
• The system should have an intuitive interface which is easy to understand for
new users
We want to prevent a learning curve from using our application as much as possi-
ble. This could mean that the user interface should look familiar to applications that
people are already using, such as the reading applications we previously provided
overviews of. Furthermore, as we discussed in section 2.1, the UI design should be
as simple as possible so as to maintain a low extraneous cognitive load.
• The system should have different options for navigating between pages, like
keyboard shortcuts and buttons
In doing so, we satisfy the earlier requirement of creating an application the user
will be familiar with. Many reader applications support turning pages with on-screen
buttons and arrow keys on keyboards, and so should our system.
• The system should have a single-column text layout by default
According to the W3C document, there is a large amount of cognitive effort needed
1https://www.figma.com/community/plugin/733159460536249875
34
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:43==
to go from the bottom of one column to the top of another column [29], and to reduce
this we opt for a single-column layout in the view where literature is presented.
• The system should support resizing the margins and text pane.
According to the W3C document, certain users struggle with tracking text to the end
of the line when lines of text are very long, and therefore we should allow the user
to adjust this so they can strike a comfortable balance with the amount of content
on the screen and readability.
• The system should have a dark interface by default, i.e. dark background and
light text
According to the W3c document, people with central vision loss are sensitive to
high light [29], and therefore to prevent overloading their senses, we opt for a dark
interface as the default.
• The system should support a light interface
According to the W3c document, “some read better with dark text on light back-
ground”, and therefore we must provide the option for a light theme as well [29].
• The system should have a one-level options menu
Certain reader applications such as Calibre include multi-sub-level menus for ad-
justing various properties of text presentation. To reduce cognitive load and the
learning curve for new users, we would like to present all adjustment options in one
flat list.
• The system should have both icons and labels for adjustment options
As we discovered in the State of the art eReaders, a great alternative to using sliders
for text presentation controls is buttons that update a value. We can draw inspiration
from the applications that implemented something similar to satisfy this requirement.
• The system should have options for:
– font size
– typeface
– line spacing
– character spacing
– hyphenation
– font weight
– word spacing
– column layout
– capitalization
– size of elements
– justification
– spacing between elements
– color adjustments for background and text
Reading the Reader
35
==PAGE:44==
This is an enumeration of many of the possible adjustments that could be made to
improve the text presentation. For the purposes of experimentation, we will select
a subset of these properties.
• The system should have popups and dialogue boxes over the user’s point of
regard
The W3C document raises a point of concern that people with vision loss may not
notice a popup if it is not in their view, i.e. when a browser tab opens in the back-
ground. Therefore, any dialog or popup should appear in the center of the screen
with a significant contrast to the background so as to draw the user’s attention to it.
• The system should have a button to reset all settings to default
The user may realize they do not like the settings they have adjusted to, and there-
fore there should be a quick option to reset everything back to the default.
• The system should have a UI that does not disorient the user.
Features such as animations could confuse or possibly even disorient a low-vision
user. Therefore, we will completely avoid their use.
• The system should scale its elements to maintain readability on different
screen resolutions.
Typically on higher-resolution screens, UI elements and text appear much smaller
than they do on smaller-resolution screens. We want the experience to be as con-
sistent as possible across all screen resolutions.
4.3.3
Could have
These are nice-to-have features that we could implement if we have time, but if not they
could be implemented as future work.
• The system could have feedback about reading speed, like pages left in a
chapter
This could be a nice feature for longer texts.
• The system could have a profiles feature that allows the user to store their
text presentation settings and switch between them.
This is another nice-to-have feature, as certain font settings might be better suited
for one form of literature but not so much for other forms of literature. Therefore, it
would be nice if you could save them and easily switch between them. Apple Books
has something like this.
• The system could have the option for text-to-speech
This is a nice-to-have feature that some of the other reading applications support.
• The system could have a dictionary and translation
This is a nice-to-have feature that some of the other reading applications support.
• The system could have scrubbing, bookmarking, chapter selection, and search
functionality
This is a nice-to-have feature that some of the other reading applications support.
• The system could integrate with operating system-level vision accessibility
options
An example could be Hover Text on Mac, which requires implementing the applica-
tion in a way such that the text elements are accessible by OS accessibility features,
which some applications do not support.
36
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:45==
4.3.4
Won’t have
These are features that are strictly outside the scope of our project.
• The system won’t have automatic adjustments in the text presentation using
data provided by the eye-tracker
Our application will serve as a basis that will enable the Reading the Reader re-
searchers to implement this in the future, however for this project it is strictly outside
of our scope. We will not attempt to do this.
• The system won’t provide the user suggestions on how to choose the set-
tings
The system could eventually suggest what changes to make in the form of a di-
alogue, and users can choose whether to apply them or not. But this is another
feature that is not in the scope of our project.
Reading the Reader
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:47==
5
Testing with Experimental study design
This section will explain the general setup that we have for all of the experiments that we
are going to conduct. In the section after, we will specify the precise studies that we want
to conduct.
As part of validating and testing our requirements, we will conduct some experiments. In
reality, these have been co-evolving with the system and the requirements, and in the
interest of clarity and brevity we will, in this section, only present the final variation of the
experiments. However, there will be explanations and history of the different changes
these have undergone in chapter 7.
5.1
Research objectives
First off, we will present some overall objectives of this research.
• Research Objective 1: The primary research objective is to establish the viability
and usability of our platform as an effective tool for conducting research studies.
This encompasses validating the technical robustness of the platform and ensuring
that it can accommodate a diverse range of research scenarios. Additionally, we
aim to enhance the user experience, making the platform intuitive and accessible
for both researchers and participants.
• Research Objective 2: The second key objective is to develop a comprehensive
methodology and experimental set-up to ensure the accuracy and reliability of the
data collected through our platform. This involves designing systematic approaches
to gather data, engage with users, and validate the effectiveness of our UI design.
Specifically, we aim to assess how well the platform accommodates individuals with
visual impairments, including those with central vision loss. By devising structured
experiments and methodologies, we seek to not only guarantee precise data outputs
but also demonstrate the flexibility of the platform in catering to diverse user needs.
5.2
Experimental study design methodology
The overall methodology for these studies is to have participants sit in front of a computer
that has an eye-tracker attached to it and then for the participants to read a few long-form
texts while recording their gaze on the monitor.
Research Design
The research design for this study is primarily exploratory, augmented
by qualitative methods. We aim to investigate user behavior in different scenarios, such
as when the look of the text is poor for readability in the application to enhance the reading
experience for users with varying degrees of visual impairment, including central vision
loss. Additionally, we seek to develop a comprehensive methodology and experimen-
tal set-up to systematically collect data, engage with users, and validate our UI design’s
effectiveness.
Literature generation
We want the texts that the participants will read in the experi-
ments to be around two-and-a-half pages long on our specific setup and platform, which
equates to around six to eight hundred words at the “default” settings of 18pt withfont
weight 400.
Reading the Reader
39
==PAGE:48==
The goal of our literature selection was to generate a passage for the participant to read,
and in some cases test their comprehension. GPT 4 is good at creative writing (this part
needs to be developed a bit...). We, therefore, utilized the gpt-4-0613 model.
We generated 3 kinds of texts; one was an autobiography for a made-up character, one
was a technical report, and one was a novel-style passage with some creative elements.
We aimed to generate the texts at a high-school level of English such that they could
be understood comfortably by a wide range of participants. This approach is inspired
by standard college entrance exams such as the SAT and English language proficiency
exams such as TOEFL® and IELTS™. Furthermore, the goal was to have passages of
around 500 words to meet our guideline of having around two-and-a-half pages to read
through — however we figured out that GPT 4 is not great at meeting this estimate, so it
was better to give a lower estimate, as it would typically generate more words than what
it is prompted to.
The prompts are detailed below:
• Please write a fictional passage of approximately 400 words. Your writing should
exhibit standard high school-level English proficiency with creative narrative ele-
ments. the passage should be an autobiography of a made-up person and include
the related facts and events.
• Please write a technical report of approximately 400 words. Your writing should
exhibit standard high school-level English proficiency.
The passage should de-
scribe an innovative business idea and contain the potential solution and proposed
methodology.
• Please write a fictional passage of approximately 400 words. Your writing should ex-
hibit standard high school-level English proficiency with creative narrative elements.
The passage should intrigue the reader’s curiosity and emotions deeply. The story
takes place in Italy and features 3 characters.
We also asked it to generate simple titles using the prompt “Generate a title for this pas-
sage.”. For the third passage, we also prompted comprehension questions using the
prompt “Give me 5 multiple-choice and 5 fill-in-the-blank questions to evaluate the reader’s
understanding of the paragraph. The questions should only have one correct answer.
Mark the correct answers.”
Participants
Participants in this study will encompass individuals with varying degrees
of visual impairment, especially central vision loss. We will recruit participants from di-
verse backgrounds, including different age groups, genders, and levels of visual impair-
ment. The selection criteria will focus on individuals who use reading applications or
have an interest in reading accessibility. Additionally, as part of our preliminary research
efforts, we plan to conduct initial studies involving Product Owners (PO) and students.
These studies serve several purposes, including gathering feedback from Product Own-
ers to align the project with its objectives and conducting usability testing with students
to identify early design flaws and usability issues. The insights gained from these initial
studies will inform iterative design improvements before involving participants with visual
impairments, ensuring the application’s foundational usability and design aspects are re-
fined and optimized for the main participant cohort.
Variables
40
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:49==
• Independent Variable: The independent variable depends on the experiment, but
common for all is the text presentation that we initially presented to the participants.
The variables are, therefore, the font size, thefont weight, the size of the margins,
and the color scheme.
• Dependent Variables: Reading performance, user satisfaction, text comprehension,
and subjective preferences.
• Control Variables: Lighting conditions, seating conditions; height of the chair, dis-
tance to monitor. And also the eye-tracker has to be calibrated.
Data Collection
• Eye Tracking: We will employ eye-tracking technology to monitor participants’ gaze
patterns and gather data on reading behavior. This data will provide insights into
reading performance and visual attention.
• UI Interactions: The system will generate behavioral data alongside screenshots of
every user interaction, to monitor participants’ actions in the application.
• User Testing: Participants will interact with the reading application, where they can
read a standardized text and answer comprehension questions. We will collect
quantitative and qualitative data on their reading experiences during this process.
• Surveys and Interviews: After the reading sessions, participants will be asked to
complete surveys and participate in semi-structured interviews to gather their opin-
ions, preferences, and feedback.
Procedure
• Participant Recruitment: Participants will be recruited through our network. At first,
we will conduct the studies on peers to notice any potential flaws, before conducting
the studies on patients who have visual impairment.
• Experimental Setup: Participants will be seated at a consistent distance (60cm,
approximately arm’s length) from the monitor, ensuring a standardized environment.
Lighting conditions will be controlled and maintained constant throughout the study,
using blinds at our lab.
• Text Presentation: Participants will interact with the reading application, adjusting
text parameters based on their assigned experimental group. The severity of vision
impairment will be recorded as part of the initial assessment.
• Data Collection: Eye tracking data, user interaction data, and responses to compre-
hension questions will be recorded. Participants’ subjective feedback will also be
collected.
• Analysis: Data will be analyzed using appropriate statistical and qualitative tech-
niques to address the research questions, including investigating whether the sever-
ity of vision impairment influences participants’ responses to text presentation is-
sues.
Limitations
Limitations of this study may include potential biases in participant recruit-
ment, variations in prior experience with reading applications, and the need to consider
the severity of vision impairment as a potential influencing factor. These limitations will
Reading the Reader
41
==PAGE:50==
be addressed through rigorous data analysis and interpretation, including a specific focus
on the hypothesized impact of vision impairment severity on text adjustment behavior.
Handbook
In preparation for our experiments, we’ve put together a detailed handbook
to guide us through the entire process – from the moment a participant walks into the room
to the post-experiment discussions. This handbook acts as a practical checklist, making
sure we cover essential aspects like backend functionality, frontend display, participant
setup, and experimental conditions consistently. Our goal is to ensure a standardized
and efficient environment for the experiment. This handbook is a set of instructions that
serves as a tool to help us stick to our research protocols, thus enhancing the reliability
of our findings. The full handbook is shown in section A.8 for reference.
5.3
Experiments
In this section, we will go over specific experiments we will conduct.
First, we will assign each participant a split that determines which experiments they will
participate in. Table 5.1 shows this configuration. For experiments 1 and 2 they will be
further subdivided into groups.
Split
Experiments
1
1, 4
2
2, 3, 4
Table 5.1: Experiments that the participants will go through.
5.3.1
Experiment 1 – Obvious Problems
Hypothesis
We hypothesize that individuals with visual impairments will be more in-
clined to adjust the text presentation when confronted with a clear problem compared to
individuals with normal vision. This inclination is based on the observation that individuals
with low vision often need to customize text presentation settings more frequently when
using typical applications like Microsoft Word or Apple Books. A ”clear problem” in this
context could refer to issues such as excessively large margins relative to the text size,
which can make it challenging to track the beginning of the next line.
Setup
For this experiment, there will be 4 treatments with different “obvious problems”.
Table 5.2 shows a table of the different treatments.
Group
Font size
Font weight
Margin
Theme
1
14pt
100
Small
Dark
2
24pt
100
Small
Dark
3
24pt
700
Small
Dark
4
14pt
700
Small
Dark
Table 5.2: Experimental Groups for Obvious Problems
We believe that for the scaling and monitors we have at our disposal, the optimal reading
for a normal-sighted person would be with a font size of 18pt andfont weight 400. This is
the reason we have chosen the settings we have (in Table 5.2), as they are the deviating
settings from optimal, and will therefore be more or less problematic for the reader. These
42
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:51==
problems are designed to disrupt the reading experience and create a clear need for
adjusting the text presentation settings.
This experiment will be using the text that is in section A.1.
Each group will be presented with a standardized text passage (section A.1) to read on
the prototype application. The procedure will be run in a laboratory with a controlled light
setting, and using monitors that are 27 inches and with a screen resolution of 2560×1440
pixels with 150% scaling.
Procedure
• Participants will be seated in front of the reading application, with the lighting con-
ditions held constant, and readers at a comfortable seating position.
• All participants will be informed that they are about to read a text passage.
• They will now engage in the eye-tracker calibration tool, to make sure that it is cali-
brated to their specific gaze patterns.
• The eye-tracker will start recording their gaze data once the participant opens the
text.
• The prototype application will monitor user interactions, such as whether partici-
pants attempt to change the color theme to their preference or adjust other text
presentation settings.
5.3.2
Experiment 2 – Color Theme and Settings Adjustment
Hypothesis
For this experiment, there are two hypotheses. First, participants will be
more inclined to adjust settings if informed that they can do so. The question is whether,
when introducing the study procedure to the participants, informing them that they can
change settings will increase the likelihood of doing so. Secondly, different participants
will have varying preferences for color themes, and some color themes may result in better
readability than others.
Setup
Participants will be randomly assigned to one of six groups, each associated with
a specific color theme and whether or not they have been informed of the ability to change
settings. The three color themes are sepia, light mode, and dark mode.
Group
Color Theme
Participant Informed
1
Sepia
Informed
2
Light Mode
Informed
3
Dark Mode
Informed
4
Sepia
Not Informed
5
Light Mode
Not Informed
6
Dark Mode
Not Informed
Table 5.3: Experimental Groups for Color Theme and Settings Adjustment
Each group will be presented with a standardized text passage (section A.1) to read on
the prototype application. The procedure will be run in a laboratory with controlled lighting
conditions, using 27-inch monitors with a screen resolution of 2560×1440 pixels and 150%
scaling.
Reading the Reader
43
==PAGE:52==
Procedure
• Participants will be seated in front of the reading application, with lighting conditions
held constant, and positioned comfortably.
• All participants will be informed that they are about to read a text passage.
• Participants will engage in the eye-tracker calibration tool to ensure it is calibrated
to their specific gaze patterns.
• Participants in Groups 1-3 will be informed that they can change the settings after
calibration.
• The eye-tracker will start recording gaze data once the participant opens the text.
• The prototype application will monitor user interactions, such as attempts to change
the color theme or adjust other text presentation settings.
Data Analysis
The data collected will be analyzed to assess preferences and interac-
tions within each group. The study will determine if participants within each group made
adjustments to the color theme or other settings or stayed with the default setting. Partici-
pants’ actions will be analyzed to identify the preferred color theme and whether informing
participants about their ability to adjust settings increases their inclination to do so. It will
also assess the impact of different color themes on readability and user satisfaction.
5.3.3
Experiment 3 – Reading Behavior
Hypothesis
For the third experiment, we aim to investigate whether participants’ read-
ing behavior differs when reading another text, as the participant potentially could be more
accustomed to the system.
Setup
The participants will stay seated and be presented with a new text (section A.2).
Procedure
• Participants will be informed that they will read another text passage.
• The eye-tracker will record gaze data as participants read the text.
Data Analysis
The data collected will be analyzed to compare reading behavior be-
tween the first and second time reading a text. This will help determine if participants
exhibit different behaviors when reading being exposed to the same platform and settings
for a longer period of time.
5.3.4
Experiment 4 – Comprehension Questions
Hypothesis
For the fourth experiment, we hypothesize that when people are told that
there are questions at the end, they will change the way they read, by either skimming to
then go back and forth between the questions or by reading slowly for comprehension and
answering all of the questions at once, or even a completely different reading strategy.
Setup
The participants will stay seated and be presented with a new text (section A.3),
but this time we will be using the accompanying comprehension questions.
44
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:53==
Procedure
• The researchers will inform the participants that they will once again read a text, but
this time there will be some questions at the end of the text. The participants will be
informed that they are free to go back and forth between pages as they please.
• The participants will be handed an answer sheet that is presented in section A.4,
and told that they should answer on it.
• The eye-tracker will record gaze data as participants read the text.
Data Analysis
The data collected will be analyzed to assess participants’ comprehen-
sion scores and identify any correlation between reading behavior when comprehension
questions are involved, and color theme preferences, and comprehension.
Reading the Reader
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:55==
6
System architecture
Having identified the requirements, we now move to the implementation phase of the
project. An overview of the system architecture is given in Figure 6.1.
One major component of our research platform is the frontend, which consists of a reader
app built in React, based on the epub.js library. This is the UI that the user will see and
interact with when reading text.
We also have the backend, a Python web server built using FastAPI. The backend stores
event logs generated by the frontend in an SQLite database. It also interacts with the
Tobii 4C eye-tracker using the Tobii Pro Python SDK to collect gaze data from the eye-
tracker, which is dumped into .json files. The interaction between the backend and the
eye-tracker is done in a separate process.
This section will give an in-depth explanation of the implementation of each component
that makes up the whole system. We will also discuss how these components tie into the
overall system requirements from section 4.3.
6.1
Frontend
We were able to successfully implement the design we created in Figma and fully support
the planned features for our MVP. Below, we will give an overview of the UI implementa-
tion.
6.1.1
Technology selection
The implementation of the reader app research tool was built as a web app. As one of our
requirements was that the system “must have a way to adjust the presentation of the text
in a fine-grained manner”, we decided that a web-based application was the best option.
This is because every element can be styled with CSS which is a great styling system
for adjusting even the most minute details of text presentation, such as line height, letter
spacing, font weight, etc.
React was chosen as the framework to build the web app in. Although any Javascript
framework could be used to build the app, React was chosen because we already had
prior experience with it and in the interest of saving time, we chose to stick with it. React
offers a good developer experience; one reason for this is its component-based way of
working, which affords reusability and separation of concerns. Furthermore, it is very
easy to inspect and debug the rendered UI due to the widely available developer tools
built into most browsers, and Hot Module Reload (HMR) allows us to quickly adjust the UI
and preview the changes almost instantaneously. As one of the requirements is that the
system must be extensible, another advantage of using a web app is that also very easy
to import new fonts through services such as Google Fonts, or even local font files.
For displaying the text, we initially considered a custom solution but quickly realized there
were many challenges associated with this. One such challenge is the reflowing of text.
eReaders typically display text as pages that you can flip between, and it must be calcu-
lated what content to show on which page. This is further complicated by the fact that the
way text is split up depends on several factors — namely the font size. If the font size is
increased, decisions have to be made on how to shift the content accordingly.
Reading the Reader
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.1: Overview of the system architecture. Everything runs on one machine, which
is the computer we chose to run the experiments on in the laboratory provided to us
by Professor Per Bækgaard. The frontend refers to the reader app we designed and
implemented in React. It sends events through our REST API to the backend, which is a
FastAPI REST server. The REST server can communicate with the Tobii eye-tracker via
the Tobii Pro SDK. The eye-tracker is connected to the computer via USB and tracks the
user’s gaze when the frontend sends a start experiment event. User interaction logs are
stored on an SQLite server, and gaze data is stored in a .json file for each experiment.
48
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:57==
We instead realized that there are already solutions that handle these situations for us,
and there is no need to reinvent the wheel. The W3C has a comparison of various e-
book formats — namely EPUB, Apple iBooks, Amazon’s KF8, and Adobe PDF. In their
assessment, they detail that Apple and Amazon’s formats are proprietary — thus not
making them useful for our purposes, as we cannot utilize them to build an eReader app.
Adobe’s PDF format is typically designed for fixed page-based content and as the W3C
notes, it is therefore typically not used for reflowable content. EPUB, on the other hand,
is a free and open standard that is “used by most e-book readers”, and it is specifically
designed for reflowable content [45].
In essence, EPUB files are just websites. It includes HTML files, images, CSS stylesheets,
and other assets, and it is compressed into one single archive file with the .epub file
extension. The fact that CSS is used to render styles for the content means that it is easy
to manipulate the styles in any way that CSS allows us to. This flexibility is a major selling
point for our use case.
Furthermore, EPUB libraries such as epub.js 1 are easily available for Javascript, which
abstract a large amount of the logic we would have to otherwise handle manually, such
as loading and displaying the file and navigation (page turning). The reflowing of text is
automatically handled by the library as well, and the text can be easily manipulated by
injecting CSS.
To use as a base for our implementation, we used the Flow Reader 2 application, which
is an open-source React eReader web app based on epub.js.
We opted to fork Flow Reader because it already had a base architecture for many of
the features we required in the implementation, such as importing epub files, font adjust-
ments, support for themes, a cache so that settings could persist across sessions, and
more. The website with information regarding features Flow Reader supports can be seen
in Figure 6.2 and the default UI can be seen in Figure 6.3.
As can be seen, Flow Reader contained some features that we do not need for our MVP
as defined in our requirements, such as annotations, a search functionality, a table of con-
tents view, and cloud synchronization with Dropbox, and we were easily able to remove
them for now. If the researchers eventually wanted to add any of these features back,
they can rest assured that it could easily be done.
It can also be seen that the UI of Flow Reader is quite different from our Figma designs.
However since it was built using React and TailwindCSS, we were easily able to adjust the
presentation of the UI to fit our prototype and extend it with new components — thus sat-
isfying our requirement for the system to be easily extensible. The default implementation
of the UI did give us a very good base which allowed us to quickly add new UI elements,
such as the sidebar layout and the controls for adjusting the text presentation.
6.1.2
Onboarding and experimental flow
To satisfy the requirement that the system must log all user interactions and the require-
ment for logs to be associated with a unique participant ID, we have built-in support col-
lecting logs and having them associated with an ID. Each participant should be assigned
a numeric ID before the experiment begins. As seen in Figure 6.4, when the researcher
opens the application, they are first prompted to enter a participant ID. The ID is stored in
the browser cache to be used for future logs generated by the frontend and is also sent
1https://github.com/futurepress/epub.js
2https://github.com/pacexy/flow
Reading the Reader
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.2: Website of Flow Reader (https://flowoss.com/)
Figure 6.3: Book view in the default implementation of the Flow Reader app
50
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.4: View when starting our reader application
to the backend to be stored there so that the gaze data logs are also identifiable with the
same ID.
On the same screen, we also have a list of treatments, which are different enumerations
of default text presentation settings that are pre-assigned to each participant. This was
a feature needed to conduct our experiments so we could see how different participants
react to different defaults and how it affects their interaction with the system. Treatments
are defined in a treatments.json file, and they contain the default values that are set up
for the participant when they use the reader. An example of a treatment is shown below:
1 {
2
"name": "Treatment 1",
3
"options": {
4
"fontSize": "18",
5
"fontWeight": 700,
6
"marginSize": "small",
7
"colorScheme": "dark"
8
}
9 }
Upon entering the ID and selecting a treatment, the researcher is shown the view to select
which book the participant should read, as seen in Figure 6.5. By default, there are no
books imported, so the researcher should set up the reader beforehand and import the
books they wish to show participants — these are stored in the browser cache for all future
sessions. Clicking the “Import” button will open the system file picker, and from there they
can select any .epub file they wish.
After selecting the book, the system will show the screen as seen in Figure 6.6. It is here
where the researcher should invite the participant into the room, read out any instructions
to the participant, run the eye-tracker calibration, and then tell the user to click the “play”
button once they are comfortable and ready to begin. Upon doing so, they will be taken
Reading the Reader
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.5: Researcher book view to select what text to show the participant and import
more books
to the reader view where they can actually read the text, as seen in Figure 6.8. Clicking
the play button also sends a command to the backend which triggers the eye-tracker to
start collecting gaze data.
The participant should also be instructed to click the “X” button in the top-right corner when
they are finished reading — clicking it will display the confirmation dialog in Figure 6.7 to
allow the participant to cancel if they clicked it by accident. If they confirm, the application
will go back to the list of books, and send a command to the backend to end gaze data
collection and save the output to a .json file.
6.1.3
Reader view
The descriptions refer to the screenshot shown in Figure 6.8.
One of our requirements was that the UI should have a natural and familiar UI. As many
people have used reading apps in one form or another before, we drew inspiration from
existing apps as we described in State of the art eReaders. As such, our UI combines
some of our favorite aspects of different apps.
On the top of the page, as with most reading apps, we have a title bar that shows which
book the user has selected to provide them with some context. The left has a sidebar
that features our text presentation adjustment settings, and to the right of that is the book
view along with controls for navigating between pages (left and right buttons), however,
pages can also be navigated using the arrow keys on the user’s keyboard, satisfying our
requirement for multiple options to navigate pages.
One of our requirements was that there should be a single-column layout as low-vision
readers face difficulty shifting their eyes from the bottom of the first column to the top of the
second column. As the original Flow Reader implementation had a default two-column
layout, we removed this feature and our reader only supports single-column. The two-
column layout could easily be re-added. Furthermore, we had a requirement of resizable
margins, and this is implemented using the “Margin size” text presentation control.
None of the UI features any animations such as when turning pages or adjusting the text
52
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.6: Reader onboarding screen
Figure 6.7: Confirmation dialog before ending the experiment
Reading the Reader
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.8: Reader view where participants can read the selected book. The text presen-
tation adjustments are shown on the left.
presentations, with the exception of the theme selection. This is because we have the
requirement of the default theme being the dark mode and additional options for light
themes. Although we previously required no animations, we also have a “should have”
requirement of not disorienting the user. We felt that an instantaneous change from dark
to light colors would be startling or jarring for the user. Therefore, there is a slight transition
for the colors when changing the color scheme of 300ms.
Under the “could have” requirements, we proposed a feature for showing the user feed-
back on their reading progress. As we are working with short-form text of about 300 words
in our experiments, we decided it did not make sense to keep this as a feature as there
would only be about 3-4 pages at most. The original Flow Reader application did support
this feature, so it could easily be added back.
6.1.4
Text presentation adjustment
We previously discussed that one of the requirements was to have fine-grained controls
over the text presentation, and we specifically chose an epub.js-based UI because of this,
as CSS enables this. The MDN Web Docs from Mozilla outlines many of the possible
ways to adjust font and text presentation, including fonts, sizes, spacing adjustments,
alignment and more [46]. We chose a selection of 4 settings that the user can adjust in
the text presentation, namely the font size, font weight, margin size, and theme, so as to
limit the number of dimensions we had to analyze in our experiments. This can easily be
extended to support many more settings, as discussed in Extensibility.
We aim to achieve a high level of customizability in the presentation of the text, and a
large factor of this is whether the font used is versatile in the aspects it can be altered.
For example, the font needs to support all the font weights we wanted as options in the UI.
For this reason, we chose Noto Serif from Google Fonts, as it supports the 3 font weights
we chose for the experiments, but it is also a variable font that be adjusted in 3 axes,
providing for a great deal of flexibility in how it can be adjusted [47, 22]. For example, you
can use an arbitrary font weight, anywhere between 100 and 900 in increments of 1, or
the width of the text to make it narrower or wider.
54
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:63==
We have 3 themes that users can choose from light, dark, and sepia. The themes color
all aspects of the UI differently depending on what is selected, including the accent colors,
which are carefully chosen to provide contrast from the background colors. The themes
are pictured in Figure 6.9.
The light mode has black text on a white background, mirroring the common appearance
of books and papers. Sepia also has black text but uses a warmer background resembling
aged paper, intended to provide enhanced readability under indoor lighting conditions.
The dark theme uses dark colors like black and gray as certain readers, such as low-vision
people, prefer that due to the lower light intensity. This also follows our requirements.
(a) Light theme
(b) Sepia theme
(c) Dark theme
Figure 6.9: All 3 themes supported by our reader app
Bringhurst’s book “The Elements of Typographic Style” states that “Anything from 45 to
75 characters is widely regarded as a satisfactory length of line for a single-column page”,
and that 66 CPL is regarded as the ideal in most situations. Based on this information,
we chose to support 2 different margin sizes to regulate the characters per line (CPL).
The large margin size was 512px, so the CPL would be approximately 45, and the small
margin size was 448px for a CPL of roughly 66. These margin sizes were chosen so that
there was a significant difference between them, with one closer to the ideal CPL of 66.
The two margin sizes are shown in Figure 6.10.
(a) Small margins
(b) large margins
Figure 6.10: Comparison of the 2 margin sizes we chose
Since we have the requirement of not using sliders for the controls, we came up with our
own controls, drawing inspiration from the Storytel and Google Play Books applications
which we reviewed in section 2.5. For the options with a numeric value, i.e. font size
and boldness, the buttons have “increase” and “decrease” buttons which increment and
decrement the value respectively. This is more accessible than a slider because rather
than having to hold and precisely drag the slider knob, users simply have to click the button
once, which requires far less motor control. We have defined the possible values in an
array and so the application will only allow you to select from those predefined values,
and the buttons are disabled when the minimum and maximum values are selected. The
Reading the Reader
55
==PAGE:64==
current value is also shown next to the control. Together, these eliminate the need for a
slider control as all the same functionality is supported.
For options where you have to select one from a set of options, i.e. the margin size or
theme, we have designed other buttons, each of which holds a certain value. Clicking on
one button will set the setting to whatever value that button holds, i.e. “small” or “large”
in the case of margins. The button is highlighted when its value is the currently selected
one.
Additionally, the sidebar with text presentation controls is always visible and the changes
are reflected in the text almost instantly, and this satisfies our requirement for being able
to preview changes made to the text presentation live on the actual text being read.
Under the hood, the values are stored in the global state management system imple-
mented using recoil 3, which was provided by the original Flow Reader implementation
but we were able to extend for new values such as the margin size property. When a
button is clicked, it updates the value in the global state, and the corresponding CSS is
automatically generated and injected into epub.js, so the text presentation adjustments
are visible instantly.
One requirement was to make the UI accessible for low-vision readers. We therefore
follow the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines. As one of the requirements was to use
high-contrast colors, as per the WCAG recommendation, the buttons have been designed
with thick borders and bright accents to meet this requirement. The colors were tested to
ensure they met the A11Y color contrast test, to increase visibility for low-vision patients.
Furthermore, the buttons are made large and with sufficient gaps between them so as to
avoid confusion between them. The icons are also designed by us, as we felt that existing
icons in icon packs such as Font Awesome 4 would not sufficiently convey the purpose of
the buttons in the context of our domain.
6.1.5
Extensibility
For the purposes of our experiment, we chose to make only 4 text presentation properties
available to limit the enumerations that we would need to test in our experiments. Fol-
lowing our “Should have” requirements, we made it so that the researchers could easily
take this forward and add more adjustable properties, and included some examples of
additional options that are simply commented out.
Researchers will simply need to add the name of the CSS property they want to adjust
to the global state that we previously mentioned, give it a default value, and copy one
of the UI elements that we have commented out, which contains examples of how they
could add more controls. They can choose minimum and maximum values in the case of
numeric properties, or give an enumeration of which properties they would like. We have
also created a dropdown menu, which can be used to adjust the font family, for example.
Further details will be given to the researchers in a handover document.
Examples of extra text adjustment options the researchers may want to add are line height
and font; screenshots of these are shown in Figure 6.11 and Figure 6.12. It can be seen
that by opening the dropdown for selecting the font, you are also shown the name of the
font in the font itself, which was one of the requirements. Furthermore, to emphasize that
the dropdown is opened, a backdrop is added “behind” the dropdown to signify that there
is something to interact with on the surface.
3https://recoiljs.org/
4https://fontawesome.com/icons
56
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.11: Preview of the text presentation sidebar extended with extra options
Reading the Reader
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.12: Preview of the font selection dropdown opened
Although we are not making automated adjustments to the text presentation in our appli-
cation, this is still possible. We envision that the backend could expose a socket that the
reader could subscribe to, and the backend could send messages when there are new
suggestions for text presentation adjustments. This can easily be implemented using
packages for both the frontend and backend, and details will be provided in the handover
document.
Once the frontend receives an adjustment suggestion event over the socket, it could then
display a popup as in Figure 6.13. We created the base implementation of the format for
the suggestions to make, a preview of the adjustments side-by-side, and a button that will
make the actual adjustments. This required some modification of the architecture built into
the flow so that the presentation adjustments could be made “globally” in the application.
The dialog is made to appear over everything, “directly above the user’s point of regard”
as per our requirements and the WCAG document, so it could not be missed.
6.2
Backend
One of our “must have” requirements was that the system needed to log all interactions
with the system. We previously described that the reader app generates logs whenever
the user interacts with the UI, such as when a text presentation adjustment is made or
when an experiment begins (the book is opened) or ends (the book is closed). This section
describes the other side of the story: the implementation of the backend that receives the
events from the frontend. The backend also collects gaze data by interacting with the
eye-tracker. Our backend was implemented in FastAPI, a Python framework for quickly
scaffolding REST APIs.
6.2.1
Technology selection
The reason we chose FastAPI specifically was that it is built on top of Starlette, a lightweight
ASGI framework, and Pydantic, a data validation library. This means that it is very fast,
and it has built-in support for data validation and serialization, which is very important for
our use case as we need to validate the logs we receive from the frontend and store them
in a database. FastAPI also has built-in support for generating OpenAPI documentation,
which is very useful for us as we can easily see what endpoints are available to align the
frontend and backend expectations, and we can also use it as a UI to test the endpoints.
58
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.13: Preview of text presentation adjustment suggestion dialog
6.2.2
Frontend log collection
Our backend has an endpoint at /capture-screenshots/, where the logs are received
from the frontend. In Figure 6.14, we can see the single endpoint for capturing screen-
shots and logging events from Swagger UI. The logs contain information such as what
action was taken, what value was changed, and who initiated the interaction since we
can have actions that the user initiates, as well as ones that the system initiates since font
adjustments could be made automatically by the system. Events in the log also contain
the “participant ID” field to be able to identify who the log belongs to.
Once the logs are received, they are stored in an SQLite database file called events.db.
An example of a few records can be seen in Figure 6.15a.
6.2.3
Participant metadata
Also pictured in Figure 6.15b is an example of how we store metadata related to each
participant, in a JSON file. This contains information about what treatment the participant
got, their age, dominant eye, and any conditions they had. This file can be read and used
in our data analysis scripts to, for example, only show the gaze data from the participant’s
dominant eye. Here it can also be seen that the metadata for each participant is pseudo-
anonymized by assigning each participant a sequential ID starting at “1”.
6.3
Eye-tracker
In this section, we will present the specification of the eye-tracker and how we interact
with it.
6.3.1
Gaze data collection
We also need to collect the gaze data from the participants. When the user first loads a
book, a request is sent to the backend which triggers the logging module, which communi-
cates with the Tobii eye-tracker through the Tobii SDK to collect the data. This is collected
and stored in a JSON file, one for each book. These are stored under a folder called
eye_tracker_data and are named as [participant ID]-YYYY-MM-DD_HH-MM-SS.json,
Reading the Reader
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 6.14: The endpoint for capturing screenshots and logging events from Swagger
UI
where the timestamp corresponds to the time the participant started reading the book —
the OPEN_BOOK event in the database.
The interaction with the Tobii SDK occurs in a separate process so as not to block the
main thread and allow the FastAPI web server to continue to receive and log the events
received from the frontend. This process is spawned when an experiment starts (a book
is opened) and is killed after an experiment ends (a book is closed).
6.3.2
Use of eye-tracker in the experiment flow
In the experiments, the participants will be using the built-in calibration tool to ensure
accurate gaze tracking before they are going to read the aforementioned short-form texts.
This calibration process consists of a small visualization where the onlookers’ eyes are
shown as well as the position of their. Thereafter, the participants will be instructed to
fixate on a series of calibration points displayed on the monitor while the eye-tracker is
capturing gaze data. This calibration process helps to establish a mapping between the
participant’s eyes, their position relative to the monitor, and the eye-trackers sensors.
Now with this calibration process completed, the eye-tracker is ready to collect gaze data
from the participants.
60
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:69==
(a) Example of some event logs in our SQLite
database
(b) participants.json file containing metadata
about the participants
Figure 6.15: Examples of our data storage
Reading the Reader
61
==PAGE:70==
7
Work packages
In this section, we present how the development process of our data collection platform
took place. This includes the design phase, as well as the implementation of the frontend
and backend, and the choices that were made along the way.
We typically split up the work into 3-4 week work packages, where in each work package
we focused on one major part of the project. For example, the first package mainly had
to do with lo-fi and hi-fi prototyping, whereas the later work packages were focused more
on iteratively adding more features to the platform as the requirements evolved.
As the experiment design and implementation of the data collection platform were done
in parallel, some changes were made on both sides depending on limitations or extra
features needed on either side. We therefore have a co-evolution of these two major
parts of our project, and some of the iterations needed to accommodate each part are
described in the work packages.
7.1
Work package 1: Initial prototyping
At this point, we have already established the requirements, as previously defined in sec-
tion 4.3. Therefore, we began this work package by ideating how we wanted to build the
prototype.
7.1.1
Lo-fi sketches
To begin, we (Lars and Aamir) split up to individually create sketches for how we thought
the UI for the prototype should look. We tried to annotate the sketches with specific
features that would not translate to a static drawing such as ”show on hover?” for the
margin pills. The sketches are seen in figs. 7.1 and 7.2. Despite their similarities, minor
differences emerged during this ideation phase.
For instance, when considering how to adjust line spacing, Lars opted for a slider akin
to Apple Books, while Aamir favored buttons to align with the other options. However,
the most notable distinction lies in the presentation of the options menu. Aamir’s design
incorporated a larger menu that covered the text when opened, while Lars’s design fea-
tured a pane that shifted the text pane to the right when opened, although both options
were made toggleable.
These design concepts were explored simultaneously, allowing us to compare and de-
termine which one worked best for our prototype. Additionally, visualizing the sketches
in Figma provided further insights, helping us in making an informed decision about the
optimal user interface design, while also seeking validation from our product owners.
7.1.2
Hi-fi prototype
Having established a common overall vision for what we wanted the prototype to look like,
we started making it in Figma.
This phase involved some key decision-making regarding how we wanted the UI to look.
For example, a major consideration was whether we wanted the sidebar with the text
presentation controls to always be visible, as in Figure 7.3, or be hidden behind a button,
as in Figure 7.4.
62
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:71==
Figure 7.1: Aamir’s sketches of the prototype with different panes showing different views
of the application and with notes in yellow.
Figure 7.2: Lars’ sketch of the prototype with just one pane showing the application when
reading and a button for showing and hiding the options menu
Reading the Reader
63
==PAGE:72==
We considered the use case of the low-vision reader and, with the help and validation of
our PO, we decided that in this context, the version with the sidebar always visible was
the most sensible approach to take.
Firstly, this allows the user to adjust the text presentation on the fly, rather than having
to scan the screen for the button to reveal the sidebar, and then have to shift their focus
onto the sidebar itself.
Furthermore, it allows for better previewing of how the text would actually look after making
the changes, as opposed to the sidebar that opens over the content which not only covers
part of the content but also creates a haze over it, which was needed to create a sense
of “depth” to indicate that something was open.
An option could have been to have the button reveal the sidebar and shrink the margins
of the text and the buttons beside it, but we felt this would not accurately depict how the
text would look once the user closed the sidebar again. An argument could be made
that having the sidebar always visible shrinks the size of the text that can be displayed,
but we also considered that the W3C document recommended short line lengths to help
low-vision readers track the lines [29].
Therefore, for the sake of consistency, we went with the option where the sidebar is always
visible.
Figure 7.3: The application with the sidebar always being visible.
Another crucial consideration we made during this prototype was that the UI needed to
have large, legible text and icons that could easily be distinguished from one another,
as well as high contrast. We ensured that points of interest, such as buttons and other
interactable elements, had thick borders, yellow accents, or both.
The icons for the sidebar were inspired by those found in Storytel Mofibo and were mod-
ified to exaggerate the effect of changing them even more, to make it more clear what
each button does. We also decided to display a value under each label for, for example,
the text size. To reduce visual clutter and unnecessary confusion, we decided against
64
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:73==
Figure 7.4: The application with a button to toggle the sidebar.
Figure 7.5: The application’s options menu when clicking the dropdown menu to set the
typeface of the text.
showing a unit such as “pt” or “px” next to it, because in the end, this does not convey
much additional information to the average reader.
We further ensured that there was enough contrast by using the “A11y checker” plugin
for Figma 1 to ensure elements and text had enough contrast from one another. In the
case where the font dropdown is clicked, we ensured that there was sufficient contrast
between the selected font, the other options, as well as the background (the sidebar it-
self) by highlighting the selected option in yellow and dimming the background, as seen
in Figure 7.5.
A final key decision was made regarding how the margin resizing should work, which is
done by dragging either of the 2 pills that are alongside the text area. There were 2 ways
of doing this, which can be seen in Figure 7.6. One option was to resize the margins
around the text (the black part) and keep the line length the same, which has the effect of
creating more “breathing room” and less visual clutter around the text. The other option
1https://www.figma.com/community/plugin/733159460536249875/a11y-color-contrast-checker
Reading the Reader
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 7.6: The application with different sizes of the margin, is adjusted by dragging on
the pills in the border between the text and the grey margin.
was to keep the margin around the text the same and vary the line length. Ultimately, this
is the option we went for, after looking at how other applications (such as Kindle for Mac)
handled this and validation with our PO.
Finally, we created a mockup for how the dialog would look if we wanted automated sug-
gestions for text presentation adjustments. One consideration was the requirement that
the dialog had to appear “over the point of user’s regard”, as suggested by the W3C doc-
ument, and therefore we made sure to make it prominent and in the center of the user’s
display. To minimize disruption to the user’s flow, however, we would like to display this
dialog only after a page turn.
We realized that if we were to simply say “we suggest increasing the font size” without
previewing how it would look, it would not be so helpful. Therefore, taking inspiration from
the diff view in Git, we created the dialog in Figure 7.7 where you can see what the text
looked like before and how it would look after the changes. The user then has the option
to either accept or decline the changes.
7.1.3
Validation
To validate our prototype, we presented the Hi-Fi prototype to our product owners, who
were satisfied with the design and the decisions we had made. They were particularly
pleased with the decision to have the sidebar always visible, as well as the decision to
have the dialog appear directly over the point of the user’s regard. They also suggested
that we could add a feature to the dialog to allow the user to see how the text would look
with the changes applied, and then decide whether to accept or decline the changes. This
was a feature that we had already considered, and we were glad to have it validated by
our product owners.
66
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:75==
Figure 7.7: Mockup for a dialog to adjust text presentation.
7.2
Work package 2: Prototyping and initial experimental
design
We have established some high-definition sketches in Figma that we can use to design a
working prototype. Therefore, we began this work package by validating our design with
our PO and starting an implementation in React. Also, we have created experiments we
can conduct to gain valuable insights into how the Reading the Reader project should
progress forward.
7.2.1
Experimental design
In this phase, our focus was on planning our participant experiments. To begin, we refined
our research questions by establishing comprehensive objectives that pertained to the
experiments. Subsequently, we compiled a checklist encompassing various aspects that
required consideration during the experiment setup process. This included determining
the variables we could manipulate in the experiments, such as font styles, and identifying
the factors that needed to remain consistent across all experiments, such as lighting and
background noise.
These considerations were derived from various sources, with valuable input primarily
coming from discussions with our Product Owner (PO). Additionally, we acknowledged the
constraints imposed by our laboratory environment, where we would conduct the studies.
In this controlled setting, we could manage only those variables that the room allowed
us to control. For instance, we could adjust blinds to regulate external light, but we were
limited to the fixed fluorescent lighting within the room, preventing us from controlling
factors like light temperature.
Following this initial groundwork, we proceeded to outline specific experiments aimed at
validating or disproving our hypotheses. During the early stages of the project, we re-
ceived conceptual guidance on designing experiments. At this point, we decided to con-
duct two distinct experiments. The first experiment was designed to assess the readability
and user preferences associated with different text presentation configurations, serving
Reading the Reader
67
==PAGE:76==
as an exploratory study. The second experiment aimed to explore user behavior during
reading, specifically investigating whether users would adjust text presentation settings
to enhance their reading experience when confronted with an obvious problem.
With a preliminary framework in place for the setup and procedure of these experiments,
we submitted our plans to our PO for validation. During the review process, we recognized
that our initial set of parameters for the first experiment, such as typeface, font size, letter
spacing, and line spacing, might not be the most influential factors for low-vision readers.
Furthermore, we understood that some of these parameters could be too abstract for the
average user to easily comprehend. Consequently, we redefined our parameter set to
incorporate more tangible elements, including font size, font weight, color theme, and
margins.
With margins in particular, we decided to scrap the idea of draggable margins from the
prototyping. Instead, we decided to only support 2 margin sizes: “small” and “large”. This
is to further reduce the dimensional space of the parameters, and also to ensure we could
control the number of characters that were shown on each line.
With the new parameter set, we needed to make significant adjustments to our proto-
types to accommodate these new parameters. The introduction of color theme options,
in particular, prompted the creation of new designs using the new color schemes. Our
selection included three distinct color themes: one featuring white text on a black back-
ground, which we already had, another with black text on a white background, mirroring
the common appearance of books and papers, and a third warmer theme resembling
aged paper, which was intended to provide enhanced readability under indoor lighting
conditions.
7.2.2
Hi-fi prototypes
New icons needed to be designed for the new parameter set, including font weight, dif-
ferent margins, and color themes. These icons are shown in Figure 7.8.
As we discussed in the experimental design changes above, we are changing away from
the draggable margin size design towards button controls for the margins, with two options
for the margin sizes — “small” and “large”. We added controls for this to the sidebar.
Having decided to make the theme adjustable, we now had to create the color palettes
for the new themes. Therefore, the next step was to make all of the components that we
had for the dark UI in different colors.
We predefined the colors by first picking a background color that matched the specifica-
tions that we gathered talking with our PO. From there, we picked a color for the text that
should match the temperature of the background and finally, we picked a contrasting color
using the aforementioned “A11y” accessibility contrast checking tool using trial and error.
From then on we had a color palette that we could use for the components.
From then on we went to change the settings overlay that we had from the first iteration, by
including the new parameter set. This also simplified the component structure in Figma,
as we suddenly did not require a dropdown menu option. The difference between the old
sidebar/settings overlay component and the new one is shown in Figure 7.9. The new
design no longer features the dropdown menu, however, we keep its design so that in the
future, if the researchers want to implement a dropdown, they can use that as a reference.
Next, we needed to create different color variations of all the components that we already
had, using the color palette that we chose above for all of the components that make
up the UI. This includes the individual icon buttons that are seen in the sidebar, the text
68
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:77==
(a) Font size icons.
(b) Font weight icons.
(c) Margin size icons.
(d) Theme icons.
Figure 7.8: The new icons for the revised set of parameters.
content component which is where the reading material goes, and the margins beside the
text content are all components that need to be redesigned for these new themes.
After implementing the colors in the application we realized that the sepia theme was off.
It was not what we had intended at first, which was a pleasant indoor reading experience.
This theme was simply too yellow, to the point where it was distracting to read on. This
meant we had to go back to the Figma design to rethink the sepia color theme. We ended
up taking inspiration from Apple Books’ theme called calm, which had a pleasant warmth
that was exactly what we wanted for this theme. It uses a bright brown or tan color as
the background along with an almost black text color that has a hint of brown in it. These
two colors together give the look of aged paper that we were looking for, which is why we
ended up using these exact colors for our second iteration of the “sepia” color scheme.
In Figure 7.11 we can see the difference between the old and new color schemes.
7.2.3
Backend
In this iteration, we also realized we would need a backend, in order for us to keep track
of what the users were doing at every step of the way. We had originally intended to do a
recording of the monitor using software like OBS Studio and events from the frontend to
start a recording, but we refrained from doing this as it would be a lot of footage to look
through and it would quickly become overwhelming compared to still images.
Therefore, we quickly scaffolded a backend in Python using FastAPI and an SQLite
database that would be able to take screenshots of the screen using a Python library
for Windows called mss. The backend has a single endpoint that takes a screenshot of
the monitor and also saves an event from the frontend to the database along with the
screenshot filename. For example, if the user increases the font size we would be able
to save a screenshot and have an event in the database that exactly tells what the action
was, when it was performed, and who performed it.
One thing that was important for us was to make sure these events were safe, meaning
that the frontend would not be able to generate events that were not aligned with the
structure of the database. To achieve this we created pydantic models to validate every
request and response sent to and from the backend. Here is the model that is responsible
for validating the requests.
1
class EventData(BaseModel):
Reading the Reader
69
==PAGE:78==
(a) The old settings overlay with all the different variants.
(b)
The
new
settings
overlay in the dark color
scheme with no title.
(c)
The
new
settings
overlay in the dark color
scheme with a title.
Figure 7.9: The difference between iterations 1 and 2 of the settings overlay.
70
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:79==
(a) The UI in a dark color scheme.
(b) The UI in a white color scheme.
(c) The UI in a sepia color scheme.
Figure 7.10: The UI in all new different color schemes.
(a) The UI in the old sepia color scheme.
(b) The UI in the new sepia color scheme.
Figure 7.11: Comparison of the old and new sepia color scheme.
Reading the Reader
71
==PAGE:80==
2
Time: str
3
Agent: str
4
Event: strs
5
Participant_ID: int
6
Old_Value: int | str = None
7
New_Value: int | str = None
8
Screenshot_file: str = None
FastAPI can then easily validate that the requests body follows this structure with a simple
type annotation def take_screenshot(event_data: EventData): in the method defi-
nition.
Lastly, we used an Object Relation-mapping library called PeeWee to have IntelliSense
and type annotations on our SQL queries with the SQLite database, using a very similar
model to the one above.
7.2.4
Validation
Since we had validated the last work package’s hi-fi prototype with our PO, we were more
concerned with validating the experimental design and the considerations that entails. We
presented our initial ideas for the experiments to our PO, who helped us refine and make
the experiments more concrete, and especially how to narrow down the workload required
to conduct the experiments, as we had initially planned to test a lot of different parameters.
To accommodate the experiments we discussed different ways to gather proper data and
how to store it with our PO, and together we came to the conclusion that we would need
a backend in some capacity to record and store the data. This was a crucial part of the
validation, as it was a new requirement that we had not considered before. Of course, we
also presented the new themes, parameter changes, and the new icons to our PO, who
was satisfied with the changes and the new designs. Part of the validation also included a
discussion about the sepia color scheme, which we had to change after the initial design,
and our PO was satisfied with the new design.
7.3
Work package 3: Tweaking the prototype for
experimental setup
At this point, we have developed the MVP with all of the features we would like to support.
For the purpose of the experiment, we realized that one set of default settings would not
suffice, as we have designated several participants to separate groups — each of which
requires separate settings that are pre-set for the participant. As such, we made changes
to the system to accommodate this. Furthermore, we made some changes to the general
flow of the experiment from start to end and some adjustments to the logging and backend.
7.3.1
Experimental design
The experiments evolved significantly in this iteration. Specifically, we removed the ex-
periment that we mentioned in the last iteration that was meant to assess the readability
and user preferences with different text presentations. Instead of this experiment, we
have added a new experiment that is more simple, has a more clear purpose, and re-
quires fewer participants to succeed. This experiment will test whether or not people are
more likely to change settings when they are informed that they can do so, by dividing
participants into two groups. To test our hypotheses, we will provide one group with a hint
that they can change the settings in the platform, and the other group will not get this hint
when we are introducing our study.
72
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:81==
Originally, we wanted to test our participants’ comprehension of the text by asking them
questions about some of the details of the text after they had read it. After talking to our
product owner and supervisor, we realized that reading just one passage of text would
not give us enough valuable eye-gaze data. We decided to modify the experiments so
that each participant reads 2 or 3 texts, and the comprehension questions are after the
last text that the participant reads. This approach ensures that they are comfortable with
the platform and have warmed up their reading ability. Furthermore, this will provide us
with far more gaze data which means we can analyze it more to come up with more
interesting conclusions, and it may also induce different reading behaviors of interest in
our participants.
To divide these new experiments we introduced different splits that a participant can par-
take in. This means that split 1 contains experiments 1 and 4, that is the experiment
about an obvious problem mentioned in the last work package and the experiment with
comprehension questions at the end. The second split contains experiments 2, 3, and 4,
that is the experiment with or without the hint, an experiment to observe differing read-
ing behavior, and lastly the experiment with the comprehension questions. Split 1 was
further subdivided into 4 groups and Split 2 was subdivided into 6 groups, depending on
what settings the participant will receive once they start the experiments. The groups are
only interesting for experiments 1 and 2, as they are the commencing experiments and
they determine which set of settings the participant will receive. Each split and group
constellation is called a treatment.
7.3.2
Prototype
For researchers, we now have an updated start screen. In addition to setting the partici-
pant ID, the researcher must also select which “Treatment” the user gets. Details of how
treatments are implemented are given in subsection 6.1.2.
The updated start screen can be seen in Figure 7.12.
Figure 7.12: Updated start screen with treatment selection and participant ID
Furthermore, we added a screen between the book selection view and the reader view,
Reading the Reader
73
==PAGE:82==
as shown in Figure 7.13. When the participant walks into the room, this is the first screen
they will see. This is where we have decided we will give the participant their introduction
and instructions, and before starting the experiment we will run the Tobii calibration. Once
that is done, the participant will be instructed to click the play button, which takes them to
the reader’s view. Clicking the play button sends an event to the backend to trigger the
start of gaze data collection from the eye-tracker as well.
Figure 7.13: Experiment start page, what the participant will see when they walk into the
room. Clicking the start button triggers the start of the experiment and they will be taken
to the reader’s view.
As seen in Figure 7.14, the reader view has also been updated to include a “stop experi-
ment” button in the top right corner, which the participant is instructed on how to use during
the introduction. Clicking that button will open a confirmation dialog, and if accepted, it
sends an event to the backend which stops the gaze tracking.
7.3.3
Validation
At the end of this iteration, we conducted some user experience testing. Up until this
point, we had conducted all of our validation with people internal to our team. We needed
to ensure that the UI was user-friendly and fit for the purpose we set out on. Furthermore,
we needed to ensure that our system worked in a practical context, as well as do a dry
run of the experiments that we had designed up until this point to iron out minor details.
Lastly, this allowed us to collect some gaze data to practice our analysis ahead of the
actual experiment. Therefore, we needed to conduct some experiments with external
participants.
We recruited 3 of our colleagues and classmates to conduct the experiments with. The
experiments were treated the same as if we were running the real experiment, meaning
we put them under the same conditions and employed the same methodology. The only
difference was that after the experiments, we also had a small questionnaire in the form of
a quantitative “scale of 1-5” questions, as well as semi-unstructured follow-up questions.
We asked the following questions:
On a scale of 1-5...
74
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:83==
Figure 7.14: Updated reader view, with the “stop experiment” button in the top right corner
1. How intuitive did you find the system?
2. How familiar were you with the user interface (UI) compared to similar applications?
3. How intuitive did you find the controls for text presentation?
4. How clear was the purpose of the controls based on their icons and labels?
5. How reasonable were the default values for the text presentation settings?
After each question, we also asked them why they gave it that score to get some insight
as to what factors influenced their decision. We wrapped up each session by asking
each participant if they had any additional thoughts, i.e. pain points or unsatisfactory
experiences that were not covered in our earlier discussions.
Results
The results of these questions that we asked our participants are shown in section A.5. A
brief summary of each question is given in the below list.
1. Users generally found the system very intuitive, with an average score of 5. We re-
ceived positive feedback on the size of the buttons, contrast, and general navigation
of the UI. One participant experienced an issue with how the application reflowed
text when changing the font size in the middle of a text — an issue that is further
addressed in chapter 9.
2. Users generally found the UI of the application familiar, giving the familiarity of the
app an average score of 4.33. All 3 participants had used applications such as
Adobe Reader and other PDF viewers to read literature for university, and 2 partic-
ipants had used e-reading applications or devices such as Kindle or Google Play
Books. The participants commented on how the purpose of the buttons could be
easily identified with the icons, based on their experience with other applications.
One participant commented that the buttons to change pages left and right were
also easily recognized based on the context of the application. 2 participants did
not like the “tall” aspect ratio of the reader view; 1 commented on how far they had
Reading the Reader
75
==PAGE:84==
(a) Old “Reset settings” button color
(b) New “Reset settings” button color
Figure 7.15: Mini iteration on the color of the “Reset settings” button color
to move their eyes from the bottom of one page to the top of the next, and the other
said that as they usually read on an iPad in landscape mode, likely with a 2-column
layout, they found the presentation of the text odd.
3. 2 of the 3 participants interacted with the settings adjustment sidebar and they had
positive feedback for the design of the icons and they were able to easily recognize
their purpose, and appreciated the large size of the icons. One participant noticed
the sidebar but did not interact with it as the participant was not sure if they should,
since we did not explicitly tell him to, and similarly, another participant, whom we
suggested to adjust the settings, said they might not have changed the participant
if we had not explicitly suggested that they could. We received an average score of
4.33 in this question.
4. Users generally responded positively to the design of the icons and the correspond-
ing labels for text presentation controls. One commented how they were not sure
about what the margin size adjustment buttons did, but after interacting with them
they realized what they did. One participant did not change anything, but looked
at the sidebar and felt the purpose of the controls was clear from the icons. We
received an average score of 4 in this question. One participant commented that
they were not sure if they could use the “Reset settings” button as the color was red.
This is something we changed as a minor iteration.
5. We received an average score of 5 for the chosen defaults for the 2 users who liked
the default settings, but one of them commented that if the default theme was not
dark, they likely would have changed it to that. That participant also decreased the
font size. Another participant did not like the default settings, therefore giving it a
score of 3, as they were a part of the “obvious problem” split where we intentionally
gave them suboptimal settings to see if they would change it — and this participant
did because, according to them, they did not like the default settings they were given.
7.3.4
Backend
In this second iteration of the backend, we realized that we would need some way to
automatically start the eye-tracking from the backend, rather than starting it manually in
a separate terminal instance. Therefore, we created a class that was responsible for
starting and stopping the eye-tracking, alongside the backend. To reflect this change we
updated the backend to initialize the class variables once the participant id and treatment
had been selected. The eye-tracking would then commence at the time the participant
clicked the play button from Figure 7.13, and stop the eye-tracking once the participant
stopped the experiment by clicking the top right ‘X’ button shown in Figure 7.14.
76
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:85==
7.4
Work package 4: Updating backend issues related to
time synchronization
In this final work package, we resolved issues from the previous validation and we settled
some issues that we realized after conducting some of the experiments and dug deeply
into the data that we received from the eye-tracker.
7.4.1
Frontend
During the validation from the previous work package, we received some miscellaneous
feedback outside of the questions we asked as well, such as additional customization
options — brightness and font family. We did not add these settings as we intentionally
wanted to keep the number of settings that can be changed to a minimum, but adding
these options would be easily possible as we designed our platform with this extensibility in
mind. We did, however, change the color of the “Reset settings” button following feedback
from one of the participants. This was changed to match the “primary” color of the UI, as
seen in Figure 7.15.
7.4.2
Experimental design
After these aforementioned UI validation, we also realized that because the eye-tracker
gives us data for each eye individually it would be a good idea to henceforth record each
participant’s dominant eye. We therefore updated our experiment methodology to include
the Miles test to find each participant’s dominant eye.
This is important as when we are analyzing the data at a later point it will be more accurate
if we use data from their dominant eye compared to assuming that all participants are using
the left eye for example, when for example drawing a scan path or pupil dilation graph.
7.4.3
Backend
In our experiments, conducted in waves with different sets of participants on different
days, we initially assumed that the eye-tracking started immediately. This assumption
would have allowed us to use the timestamps from the frontend and the first gaze packet
to synchronize the data. However, we encountered a challenge due to a delay from the
command to start the eye-tracker to its actual start. This delay made it difficult to con-
sistently synchronize the still images with the eye-tracker data. To overcome this, we
calculated the time difference between the eye-tracker and the frontend using an algo-
rithm similar to the Network Time Protocol. This solution enabled us to align the time from
the events generated by the frontend with the eye-tracker’s time format.
Reading the Reader
77
==PAGE:86==
78
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:87==
8
Experimental result and analysis
In this section, we will analyze the results of our experiments. This starts by explaining the
hardware, software, and algorithms required for analyses. After we will go over each ex-
periment we conducted, analyze the data that we have gathered, and test the hypotheses
as well as try to extract other conclusions from the gaze and event-based data.
8.1
Analysis and algorithms
In this section, using all of the information we laid out about the data we have at hand in
section 2.3, we will give an overview of the methodology we use to analyze the data, and
how we address certain challenges in the process.
An important note is that the goal of our analysis is not to achieve perfect and highly
accurate results, rather it is to show that our system can be used to collect the data re-
quired to perform further analysis. To do so, we demonstrate some ways in which our
data can be used to create visualizations and extract some statistics. Finally, we discuss
how the visualizations generated can be used to prove or disprove our hypotheses from
our experiments.
8.1.1
Identification of saccades and regressions
As previously outlined, the eye-tracker gives us samples at a rate of 90Hz, and the raw
data can be used to calculate the x and y coordinates of where it approximated each eye
to be looking on the monitor in each sample.
However, when discussing reading patterns, performance, and behavior, it is often dis-
cussed in terms of “fixations” and “saccades”, which the eye-tracker does not provide us.
In fact, the raw eye movement data points are not nearly as informative as the labeled
data. Salvucci and Goldberg explain that this is for two reasons: one being that little to no
visual processing is done during a saccade, and so the data points that are read during
a saccade have little use for our purposes [48]. Secondly, there are smaller eye move-
ments within a fixation, like tremors and drifts [48], and this is because the oculomotor
control of the nervous system is not perfect [11]. To compensate for this, the eye makes
“microsaccades”, which are small saccades to correct the position of the eye to bring it
back to where it should be [11]. These small movements should be seen as noise, and
we need a way of filtering it out to get the data that we actually want, which is the fixation.
The raw data can be filtered and aggregated to estimate where the fixations are. Below,
we discuss some options for algorithms that can be used to identify and label the raw data
as fixations and saccades.
Threshold-based algorithms
These are the simplest algorithms that can be used to identify fixations. Two threshold-
based algorithms are the velocity threshold identification (I-VT) and dispersion threshold
identification (I-DT) algorithms.
The underlying principle of the velocity threshold algorithm is that the eye may make
small saccades (known as microsaccades) as it is fixated on one stimulus (for example a
word), however, it makes proper saccades when moving to a different fixation. These can
be discerned using the point-to-point velocity of the eye’s movement, measured in deg/s,
by deciding on a threshold to distinguish microsaccades from full saccades [48]. For
example, we could decide that the threshold is 100 deg/s, and therefore any movement
Reading the Reader
79
==PAGE:88==
below that is within the same fixation, whereas movements faster than that are saccadic
movements. Fixations points are collapsed together and groups are mapped to a point at
the centroid [48].
A similar approach is the dispersion threshold algorithm, where the raw gaze data is con-
densed into clusters utilizing the fact that gaze points within a fixation are typically located
close together, and it also utilizes a moving window to group together consecutive points,
making use of the fact that fixations typically span around ~100-200ms [48].
Alternatives
Alternative algorithms exist such as the hidden Markov model identification (I-HMM),
which utilizes probabilistic analysis to identify the most likely fixations, and area-of-interest
identification (I-AOI), which identifies fixations within specified areas of interest which can
be designated as rectangular regions [48].
In Salvucci and Goldberg’s evaluation of the algorithms, they found that I-DT and I-HMM
“provide accurate and robust fixation identification”, and I-AOI performed poorly both in
terms of computational performance and actual identification of fixations [48]. However,
they found that although I-VT suffered from “blip” events, it was the simplest algorithm,
and it had a low computational overhead as a result that, while still performing relatively
well [48]. For this reason, we opt to use this algorithm for our analysis, as we intend to
purely demonstrate that our data collection functions as it should.
Distinguishing between saccades, regressions, and return sweeps
Saccades are one of the many movements the eye can perform, and as previously dis-
cussed saccades are the movement from one fixation to another. 3 types of saccades
include:
• regular saccades, which typically occur from left to right when reading within the
same line
• regressions, which are saccades that occur opposite to the direction that the text
should be read in — i.e when the reader skips back in the text to re-read something
they just read
• return sweeps, which are saccades from the end of one line to the beginning of the
next line
Given the x and y coordinates of 2 consecutive fixations, a rather unsophisticated ap-
proach to identify the type of saccade between the 2 fixations is to use trigonometry. By
calculating the values of ∆x and ∆y between the two points and calculating the arc tan-
gent of them, we can determine the angle of the line between the fixations. Then, applying
appropriate thresholds, one could make an educated guess as to what kind of saccade
it is. We then draw an arrow between the fixations with a color based on the identified
saccade type.
In Figure 8.1a we give the thresholds that we utilized in our analyses, which were adequate
for our purposes, and these are visualized in Figure 8.1b. It is important to note that the
thresholds may need to be tweaked depending on the font size used, however, the shown
values work well for size 16px.
A demonstration of how our algorithm would color arrows in a small example can be seen
in Figure 8.2.
As this is a very simple and naive algorithm, we do not expect this to be an accurate way to
characterize saccadic movements. For that, a more sophisticated approach would have
to be used including more advanced heuristics, such as the height of a line and saccadic
80
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:89==
(a) Algorithm for identifying saccades using
the angle in degrees
(b) Thresholds for algorithm visualized
Figure 8.1: Overview of our saccade classification algorithm
Figure 8.2: An example of how our saccadic identification algorithm colors arrows be-
tween fixations. As can be seen, most movements are correctly identified, including re-
gressions, return sweeps, and one regression.
Reading the Reader
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure 8.3: An outline of the angle that we need to calculate to determine the constant
value for degrees per pixel. 0.6m represents the distance from the participant or reader
to the screen, and 0.168m is half of the height of a 27-inch monitor. The angle we need
to calculate is θ.
length, which we propose as a future work. Furthermore, there are other eye movements,
such as drift, tremor, smooth pursuit, and tracking which can also be identified [49].
8.1.2
Conversion between pixels and degrees
We discussed in section 2.3 that eye-tracker gives us the gaze position as a value between
0 and 1. We can multiply this by the resolution of the screen to give us the x and y
coordinates as pixels. However, the fixation and saccade identification algorithms do not
work with the sizes in pixels, they work with degrees. We therefore need a way to convert
between pixels and degrees, which can be done using trigonometry.
According to the authors of OpenSesame, a program to create experiments for psychol-
ogy, neuroscience, and experimental economics, we need three pieces of information to
calculate the deg/px constant value [50]:
• the height of the monitor in meters, h
• the distance of the participant to the monitor in meters, d
• the vertical resolution of the monitor in pixels, r
Using this information, we can calculate the angle θ as shown in Figure 8.3. The equation
for this is shown in Equation 8.1.
θ = tan−1
(0.5 × h
d
)
(8.1)
Now that we know the value for θ, we can calculate the degrees/pixel constant value by
dividing it by the vertical resolution r:
82
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:91==
θ
0.5 × r
(8.2)
According to the OpenSesame article, this value should be between 0.1 and 0.3 [50],
and in our case we got a value of ≈0.22. This value can be multiplied by the x and y
coordinates to convert the size into pixels.
In our case, we chose a value of d = 0.6, following our experimental setup guide in chap-
ter 5 where we instructed participants to sit approximately arm’s length from the monitor
— roughly 60cm away. We do not account for the participant moving forward or back-
ward throughout the length of an experiment as we do not require anything more than an
approximation. We also do not account for geometric distortion that occurs as the par-
ticipant looks towards the edges of the screen. For a more accurate assessment of the
degree/pixel value, these would need to be taken into account.
8.1.3
Time synchronization
A technical challenge that arose is that we deal with multiple heterogeneous streams of
time from the eye-tracker and the frontend, and these originate from different clocks. The
events in the database are stored as UNIX timestamps in milliseconds since 01-01-1970.
In contrast, as previously discussed, the gaze data from the Tobii eye-tracker stores data
packets using timestamps from the device clock (nanoseconds since an arbitrary point in
time, possibly when the device was first powered on). The system clock (nanoseconds
since the host PC the eye-tracker was connected to was booted) [25].
As such, the timestamps in the two forms of logging are in completely different time se-
quences, however, they are still monotonic and relative to each other, and furthermore,
the data from each source starts and ends at approximately the same time. As such, we
can align the data by identifying a common start time in both the epoch and system time
series and adding offsets to it to identify data between two points of interest or a packet
at a specific time, to a degree of accuracy within a few milliseconds.
Below is an explanation of how we can calculate the common start time.
In the gaze data .json file, we have the following timestamps of relevance, and everything
is converted to microseconds:
• TstartS: The initial system timestamp, when the command was sent to the Tobii eye-
tracker to start recording data.
• TstartE: The initial epoch timestamp, when the command was sent to the Tobii eye-
tracker to start recording data.
• Td0: The system timestamp from the first gaze data packet. This is needed to cal-
culate the latency between the command being sent to the Tobii eye-tracker to start
data collection and it actually collecting the data, so we can adjust the time series
accordingly.
These variables can be used in the following way.
• ∆latency = TstartS −Td0, the latency between the start command and the first gaze
data packet
• TE0 = TstartE + ∆latency, the common start time in the epoch time series.
TE0 can be used to calculate an offset to add to TstartS to get data from a point of interest
in the gaze data. For example, if we wanted to get data between two NEXT_PAGE events,
Reading the Reader
83
==PAGE:92==
where the first one has timestamp Tx and the second one has timestamp Ty, we could do
the following:
lower bound = Td0 + (Tx −TE0)
upper bound = Td0 + (Ty −TE0)
We can now use list comprehension in Python to get all the data between the lower and
upper bound, which gives us all the gaze data between any timestamps of interest. Sim-
ilarly, if we wanted to get a singular gaze packet at a timestamp of interest, we could use
just a lower bound and get the first packet that satisfies a condition (i.e. that the packet
must have valid coordinates).
8.2
Experimental results
In this section, we detail and analyze the results of the experiments we previously de-
scribed in sections 5.3.1 to 5.3.4.
8.2.1
Participant analysis
We recruited 23 participants in the range of 17 to 73 years old with a mean of 38.27 (SD
= 18.99). This relatively high standard deviation is because we had recruited two groups,
one of which was the author’s parents’ friends who represent an older group in the range
58 to 73 with a mean age of 62.88 (SD = 4.43) and another group of the author’s peers
and colleagues who represent a younger group in the range 17 to 32 with a mean age of
24.21 (SD = 3.43). This unintentional division allows us to explore potential age-related
differences in reading speed, comprehension, and general gaze differences. By exam-
ining these two distinct age groups, we aim to capture a comprehensive understanding
of the impact of age on our research outcome. This segmentation enables us to draw
nuanced insights into how variables may vary across different age groups, contributing to
a more thorough analysis of our findings.
8.2.2
Experiment 1
Recall our hypothesis from subsection 5.3.1 which stated that visually impaired people
would be more likely to change parameters when presented with an “obvious problem”.
There were 8 participants in the split that was assigned to this experiment. Of those 8
participants, 4 actually ended up changing the settings, and their changes can be seen
in Figure 8.4.
As demonstrated by the graphs, Participant 1 was the most explorative of the participants
in this split and tried out many of the various options before eventually reverting everything
to the default as they felt this was the most optimal presentation for them. The two par-
ticipants who changed the font size decided size 14 was optimal for them, and similarly,
2 participants tried the light theme and eventually changed it to the dark theme. Each of
the participants who changed the margin size preferred the smaller margin size.
It is also notable that any changes the participants made were within the first ∼30 seconds
of them starting the experiment, and they proceeded to read both texts with the same
settings.
In Figure 8.5, we can see the distribution of the participants’ settings, before the exper-
iment (meaning with the default settings, depending on what treatment each participant
was given), and after the experiment where they may or may not have made changes. It
84
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:93==
is clear that most participants stuck with the default settings that they were given in most
aspects.
Unfortunately, due to an oversight 2 the participants (IDs 2 and 6) were not given the
appropriate default settings we had planned in Table 5.2 as we had accidentally changed
them in the treatments.json file. Instead, they were given the light theme and large
margins by mistake, rather than the dark theme and small margins. Additionally, there
was a bug with the reader app where every participant was given font size 16px as default
rather than what we had planned in the treatments.json file. These issues led to some
unexpected results, nevertheless, we were still able to derive some interesting insights
from it regardless. We also learned from our mistakes and made the prototype more
robust as a result.
Of the 4 treatments for experiment 1 (Table 5.2), Participant 6 was given Treatment 2,
in which one of the planned “obvious problems” was that the font size was rather large
(24px), but due to the aforementioned bug they got 16px instead. Despite being given
16px to start, as demonstrated in Figure 8.4, Participant 6 cycled through several font size
options, including the size 24px as we had planned. This participant decided to change it
from 24px and eventually settled on size 14px. This could suggest that other participants
may have changed it from 24px if they had been given it as planned.
Similarly, another “obvious problem” was that the font weight was a rather low 100, and
Participant 6 changed it to 400. Although Participant 1 (who received Treatment 1) also
had a font weight of 100, they experimented with a weight of 400 but then decided they
preferred a weight of 100 and changed it back.
As mentioned earlier, Participant 2 was given Treatment 2 in which the default theme
was “light” by mistake rather than “dark” as we had planned, however, they changed
it to dark. Participant 1 was given “dark” by default, but experimented with all 3 themes
before reverting back to “dark”. 2 participants (1 and 7) were given “small” margins, which
means they could see more text in a single line by default and experimented with “large”
margins but eventually changed it back to the “small” margins. Note that Participant 1
clicks “small” when the chosen setting is already “small”, and therefore there is a second
point at t = ∼14s for that. 6 was also given “large” margins by mistake rather than “small”,
however, they experimented with both and ultimately decided to change it to “small” which
we expected to be the most preferred setting.
As Participant 1 and 7 experimented with other settings but eventually reverted back to the
default, it can therefore be seen that only Participant 6 solved their “obvious problems”,
and Participant 2 simply stuck with their defaults as well apart from the color scheme.
The participants were also questioned about why they did not change any of the settings,
most responded that even though they felt the text was a little difficult to read, they simply
pushed through it and eventually got used to reading with the default settings, even if it
was a “worse” experience.
This is surprising because 4 of the 8 participants actually changed the settings but just
went back to the default settings with which they were presented at the start of the exper-
iment. This suggests that there is no issue with the presentation of the settings that are
available to the participants, as we demonstrated that half of the participants did manage
to find the options and interact with them. But rather than optimizing the settings to ones
that work for them, they ended up sticking with the default we gave them.
After the experiments, we informally questioned the participants on why they did not make
any changes; some of the participants who did not change anything said they were not
Reading the Reader
85
==PAGE:94==
sure whether or not they should change the settings as we, as the experimenters, had
provided them with default settings. However, between the first and second text, we did
provide the users with a hint that they could change the settings, by way of asking them if
they had noticed the sidebar with adjustable options. Some said they had not noticed, but
interestingly even after pointing out the sidebar the users still did not change any of the
settings, and therefore we believe we had adequately nudged them into trying to solve
the problems they were presented.
Other subjects said they had noticed the sidebar but they did not feel like changing any-
thing and instead said they got used to the text as it was, even though they acknowledged
it was a bit hard to read at first.
Part of the reason for most participants sticking with the defaults could be due to the fact
that most people were given a “normal” font size of 16px. If the font settings had been
applied properly as we had planned, perhaps the “obvious problem” would have been
more “obvious” and made the participants more willing to adjust the settings.
We would suggest redoing this experiment with the improved reader app which is now
fixed to further explore this problem, however, it is not possible to make a definitive con-
clusion on the hypothesis at this stage. We can, however, say that it is not because
participants did not find the settings or know how to interact with them to change them.
Our results could suggest an unwillingness of the participants to manipulate text presen-
tation settings from the defaults and it could be worth exploring this behavior further, for
example in different settings. Participants may behave differently if they were doing this
experiment in the comfort of their homes without the pressure of being in a laboratory
without the feeling of researchers watching over them, or if they had more time to inter-
act with the system, e.g they could realize after a longer time of reading with such poor
settings that they should change the presentation to make it easier.
8.2.3
Experiment 2
Recall that our experiment had two hypotheses; one posited that participants would be
more likely to adjust settings if informed about the option to do so. However, our findings
challenged this expectation, revealing that, despite being informed, a majority of partic-
ipants did not engage in parameter adjustments. As mentioned in subsection 8.2.1 we
had recruited 23 participants belonging to two separate age groups. 15 of those 23 par-
ticipants were assigned to the second split which included experiment 2. Of those 15
participants 8 were informed that they could adjust the parameters, while the remaining 7
were not informed.
Interestingly, only 2 of the 8 participants who were informed actually ended up changing
the parameters, while none of the uninformed participants did. The 2 participants who
did change the parameters were both in the younger age group (aged 23 and 24) and
both had previous experience with similar applications. While this would suggest that the
younger age group is more likely to change parameters, we also had five other participants
in the age range 18 – 25, of which two were informed but did not change parameters. This
suggests that the age group is not the only factor at play here.
Moreover, the participants who engaged in parameter adjustments displayed a proactive
and exploratory approach. They demonstrated a lack of hesitation in trying out various
options, indicating a willingness to experiment with different settings. This observation
suggests a potential correlation between age and the inclination to actively explore and
customize features within the application.
86
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:95==
(a) Font size changes
(b) Font weight changes
(c) Theme changes
(d) Margin changes
Figure 8.4: Experiment 1: participant text presentation changes over time. The first point
of each plot represents the participant’s “initial” theme, which depends on the treatment
they received. The results highlight that few participants actually changed the settings,
and most of the participants that did change them ended up reverting back to the default
settings they were given in the treatment. These are exhaustive plots, meaning that they
show all of the participants who made changes to each of the four adjustable settings.
Reading the Reader
87
==PAGE:96==
(a) Font size distribution
(b) Font weight distribution
(c) Theme distribution
(d) Margin distribution
Figure 8.5: Experiment 1: distribution of each parameter in the text presentation settings
space, with “initial” representing the participants’ default settings and the “final” represent-
ing the participants’ settings after making their changes. It can be noted that in all cases,
the distribution of settings only changes by 1 from the initial.
88
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:97==
The second hypothesis, which proposed varying preferences for color themes among
participants, did not hold true due to the nature of the results of the first hypothesis. Par-
ticipants 98 and 11 were initially assigned to groups 1 and 3 from Table 5.3, respectively.
This meant they started with the sepia and dark themes, and after experimenting with
various options, they ultimately chose the light and dark themes, respectively. If more
participants had been willing to change parameters we might have been able to observe
a trend in color theme preferences among participants who made adjustments, however,
since only those two participants ended up changing parameters, we were unable to draw
any meaningful conclusions from this.
While we had hypothesized that participants would be more likely to explore the different
text presentation settings when they were told that they could do so, the results do not
majorly support this hypothesis. However, the experiment provides valuable insights into
user interaction dynamics and especially how age affects user interactions. Notably, al-
most all of the participants exhibited a reluctance to change settings manually, except 2 of
the 7 younger participants. These findings emphasize the significance of the Reading the
Reader project, which aims to adjust parameters based on user gaze data, addressing
the observed user hesitation to make manual adjustments.
To improve this experiment the researchers would have to increase the nudging hap-
pening at the beginning of the experiment, where they tell the participants that they can
change the settings on the settings menu on the left-hand side.
Instead, an interesting approach would be to tell the participants something along the lines
of “There will be some settings on the left-hand side, and you are encouraged to try out
these settings to better suit your reading or try a different text presentation”. When talking
informally to some of the participants after the experiment, we asked why they did not feel
the need to change the parameters and they said they did not feel the need to do so.
This phrasing would hopefully encourage participants to try different settings more ac-
tively. However, this is a balancing act of how much you want to influence your partici-
pants to gain the desired results. This different approach would most likely focus more
on the second part of the experiment where the goal was to figure out what the preferred
color theme among most people was.
8.2.4
Experiment 3
This experiment focused on understanding reading behavior and whether it would change
from the first text to the second text for participants in the second split. To revisit our
hypothesis from subsection 5.3.3, we aimed to explore potential differences in reading
behavior between the first and second readings.
For instance, we might anticipate that more comfortable reading would result in longer
saccades, reflecting the participant’s familiarity with the system around the text. Of course,
the difficulty of the text also plays a role, as a more challenging text may necessitate more
frequent saccades.
To do this we will use the mean saccadic length and compare them between the two
readings, as shorter saccadic length has been shown to be correlated to higher cognitive
load [51, 52, 53, 54, 55] and generally means a conceptually more difficult text [11]. This
means that we would expect that the saccadic length would increase in most cases from
reading book 1 to reading book 2.
In Table 8.1 we can see the mean saccadic length for each participant for both the first
and second text, as well as the difference between the two.
Reading the Reader
89
==PAGE:98==
Mean saccadic length (degrees)
Participant
First text
Second text
Difference
9
4.104
4.106
0.002
10
6.760
4.206
-2.554
11
5.622
4.335
-1.287
12
7.686
7.699
0.013
13
4.576
3.285
-1.291
14
5.988
4.984
-1.004
15
5.109
4.290
-0.819
16
5.117
4.710
-0.407
17
3.912
3.552
-0.360
18
5.561
4.730
-0.831
19
3.530
2.924
-0.606
20
5.448
4.804
-0.644
21
3.452
3.276
-0.176
Mean
5.143
4.377
-0.766
Table 8.1: Mean Saccadic length in degrees rounded to 4 significant digits of participants
reading the first book and the second book.
Interestingly, we notice that the mean saccadic length is shorter for the second text for 9
of the 11 participants, and the mean difference is 0.766 with a standard deviation of 0.677
degrees.
We mostly expected that most participants would have a longer average saccadic length
in the second text compared to the first. This is because as we noted in paragraph 5.2, we
tried to normalize the difficulty in the text generation using the phrase “Your writing should
exhibit standard high school level English proficiency.” in all of the literature generation
prompts. Now, when the factor of reading difficulty is eliminated we would expect that the
participants will be more comfortable with the experiment process as well as reading on
this particular system. This would usually result in a longer saccadic length.
Our participants did informally tell us that the first text from subsection 5.3.2 was a rather
difficult read due to the more complex and often unknown words, as well as the longer
sentences. Especially, since our participants were not native English speakers, this could
have been a factor in the difficulty of the text. But, that would further oppose the hypothesis
that the saccadic length would increase from book 1 to 2.
However, there are an almost infinite amount of different reasons that could result in most
of the participants having shorter saccades in the second book on average. It is impossible
to come up with a reasonable guess for what the cause of this is.
From this simple analysis, we can conclude that there is some difference in reading be-
havior between the first and second texts, but it is not possible to make any meaningful
conclusion on exactly what the cause of the difference is.
To further improve on this experiment we could have had the participants read texts of
more equal difficulty. This would have removed the confounding factor of the text difficulty,
and we could have made a meaningful conclusion. Also, if we had had more time we might
have been able to find the reason why the difference is as stark as it is in some of the
participants.
90
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:99==
8.2.5
Experiment 4
The participants that were assigned to the second split were given comprehension ques-
tions at the end of the third text they were shown. This was done to see if we could induce
skimming in the participants’ reading behavior and identify this in the data. We hypothe-
sized that we could observe this skimming behavior in the data when the user scans the
text for relevant information when attempting to answer each question.
One way to identify this is by using the saccadic length. As the user is not reading each
word as they would when they are reading a text normally and instead they are scanning
over it, we expect their fixations to be further apart — thus increasing the saccadic length.
In Table 8.1, we showed the average saccadic length for each of the first two books each
participant was shown. Table 8.2 shows the average across both books to determine a
baseline value for the participants’ saccadic length, which we can compare against when
the participants skim for the answers to a question.
Participant
Mean saccadic length (degrees)
9
4.105
10
5.483
11
4.978
12
7.692
13
3.930
14
5.486
15
4.700
16
4.914
17
3.732
18
5.146
19
3.227
20
5.126
21
3.364
Table 8.2: Mean saccadic length in degrees of participants across the first book and the
second book.
If we take Participant 14 as an example, their average saccadic length was ~5.486 across
Books 1 and 2. When approaching the third book, this participant initially read it as normal
as seen in Figure 8.6a, with an average saccadic length of 3.189; the fact that the saccadic
length decreased could be an indication that the user read the text more carefully as they
knew they had to answer questions about it at the end. Figure 8.7a shows the user’s
behavior when answering the first comprehension question. As seen in Figure 8.6b, the
participant first reads the question and then skips back to the first page of the book where
the answer was. After an initial scan, the user can be seen reading over the first couple of
sentences in the second paragraph in Figure 8.7a. There are hardly any fixations outside
of the relevant part of the text that the participant is looking at, compared to when the user
was simply reading the text in Figure 8.6a, but it can also be observed that the reading
follows less of a regular pattern than earlier, as the fixations appear to be scattered around.
Notably, the average saccadic length has nearly doubled on this page to ~5.594, which
is a significant increase from when the user was reading, and coupled with the irregular
pattern of saccades, this gives us a strong indication that the user is skimming over the
text. Lastly, they jump back to the question they were attempting to answer, scan over
the options, and can be seen to clearly fixate on option B as seen in Figure 8.7b, which
Reading the Reader
91
==PAGE:100==
is the answer they ended up writing on the answer sheet.
(a) Participant 14 reading the text initially. Notice how the fixations follow a regular pattern as the
reader reads from left-to-right, line by line. The fixations are also generally close together.
(b) Participant 14 reading the question. Here we can observe the fixations are not as close together
as when the participant was carefully reading, and it would appear the participant is skimming over
the question. The fixations also do not follow the regular left-to-right pattern as before.
Figure 8.6: Demonstration of Participant 14 reading behavior
We observe similar behavior with Participant 11, whose average saccadic length was
~4.978 across Books 1 and 2, and an average saccadic length of ~3.253 during the read-
ing of the first page of book 3. This participant appears to attempt answering questions
1 and 2 together, as they read the question for both at first, then skimmed the first page
as Participant 14 did, but then also skimmed the second page, with an average saccadic
length of ~4.728 and ~5.629 respectively, which is a clearly significant increase. We also
observed similar behavior with Participant 15, however, due to the lack of resolution in
the remaining participants, we were unable to ascertain this for the rest.
92
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:101==
8.3
Exploratory observations
To further illustrate the reading behavior of the participants in the experiments, we have
included some visualizations of the raw data from the eye-tracker in Figure 8.8 and Fig-
ure 8.9. In Figure 8.8, we can see the raw reading data with the pupil size plotted as the
color of the gaze data. It is interesting to look at the word ‘thaumaturgy’ in the second para-
graph. As we will discuss later, this data is slightly skewed, thus the large amount of data
points just above the word is when the participant was reading the word ‘thaumaturgy’,
and because this is a rather difficult word to read we can see that that the participant’s
pupil size increased because of the color getting lighter.
In Figure 8.9, we can see the pupil size vs. time with participant interactions plotted
as vertical bars. These were made to show what is possible with the data that we have
gathered but were not related to any specific experiment and they were not able to support
or deny any of our hypotheses.
Reading the Reader
93
==PAGE:102==
(a) Participant 14 can be seen to be skimming the text for the answer. Note that the participant’s
gaze jumps around and then quickly jumps to the interesting part of the text that contains the
information they need for the question they are answering. It also does not follow a regular left-
to-right pattern as the participant scans the paragraph for the answer.
(b) Participant 14 reading the options to answer the question; the participant can be seen to be
skimming over every multiple-choice response to find the one with the correct keyword, and then
they focus on option (b) to read it more carefully, as that is the correct answer.
Figure 8.7: Demonstration of Participant 14 skimming behavior
94
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:103==
Figure 8.8: Raw reading data with the pupil size plotted as the color of the gaze data.
Figure 8.9: Pupil size vs. time with participant interactions plotted as vertical bars. Note
how the pupil size rapidly changes as the participant changes the theme from dark to
sepia; as the sepia theme is much brighter, the participant’s pupil size decreases almost
immediately.
Reading the Reader
95
==PAGE:104==
96
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:105==
9
Discussion
In this section of the report, we will reflect on the contributions we made in this project and
analyze them from the perspective of the research questions we defined in section 2.6.
9.1
Platform
Our goal was to develop and implement the research platform which the researchers could
then take forward, and we conducted experiments to validate whether it was suitable for
this purpose.
9.1.1
Requirements
The requirements we defined were written from the point of view of two of our key stake-
holders: the readers and the researchers. For the readers, we focused more on the
accessibility of the UI for low-vision persons and ensured it was rooted in the sugges-
tions from the Web Content Accessibility Guide. Researchers are more concerned with
the data collection of the platform, and ensuring that the data collected is accurate and
contains all the relevant information to conduct their analyses.
As we progressed further with the project, the requirements underwent some iterations as
we realized additional requirements had to be met in order to make our platform suitable
for its data collection purposes. An example is the time synchronization between the
frontend and backend, which is something we had not accounted for until after the third
iteration, leading to data quality issues with the experiments we had conducted with earlier
versions of the platform, as we discuss in section 9.2. The issues were fully resolved in
the final version of the platform and we are confident in its data collection abilities.
Must-have
We discussed in depth how various requirements were met in our final MVP
in chapter 6. To summarize, we met all 12 of our must-have requirements, which were
the absolutely essential requirements for the data collection platform.
Should-have
The should-have requirements were primarily concerned with the imple-
mentation of the UI, which was more of a secondary consideration because it could be
changed at any stage later down the line. Nevertheless, we addressed 11 out of the 13
requirements.
There are 2 should-have requirements we satisfied that are worth highlighting. Firstly,
we had a requirement that the UI should be accessible for people with low vision. Our
review of the Web Content Accessibility Guideline in section 2.4 was instrumental in this,
which helped us come up with additional requirements that would help us satisfy this. This
includes the following:
• use of high contrast colors
• large fonts for the UI
• the use of single-level menus
• lack of animations
• opening dialogs over the user’s point of regard
• single-column layout for the text view
Reading the Reader
97
==PAGE:106==
• lack of sliders for controlling text presentation
• the use of icons and labels with clear purposes suitable for each control
...and more.
The second requirement of note is that the UI should be intuitive and easily understood by
new users, with the overarching goal of not having our reading app have a major learning
curve to use as well as to maintain a low extraneous cognitive load level.
We were able to validate that we satisfied both of these requirements through our usability
studies with 3 participants, as we discussed in subsection 7.3.3. The results from this
study indicate that all 3 participants found the UI intuitive with a familiar feeling to similar
apps they had used previously. Users also generally agreed that the purpose of the text
presentation controls was clear based on the design with icons and labels.
One of the requirements that we did not satisfy was related to the amount of text presen-
tation controls we had. We had previously identified a large list of possible controls we
could have, which was based on the work we had previously done in our special project
(section 2.1). Although many of the given options were implemented and support for the
rest of the controls could easily be added, we did not do so because we decided to limit the
number of controls we showed to 4, to reduce the number of variables in our experiments.
The other requirement that we did not satisfy was that the UI had to scale to work on
different screen resolutions. Although this would have been a nice-to-have feature, we
decided that it was unnecessary in the scope of our experiments, as we would be con-
ducting the experiment on a controlled setup with one screen resolution. Nevertheless,
this could be a future extension of the UI.
Could-have
Our analysis of state-of-the-art reading apps in section 2.5 led us to dis-
cover many interesting and useful features that other app developers had implemented.
If our reading app is ever going to be used by actual people, there are a lot of features
it would need to have parity with the functionality present on other apps, otherwise, they
would not be willing to use our app. Therefore, we noted down some features as “could-
have” requirements that would be nice to have, such as the “profiles” feature, feedback
about reading speed or bookmarking and highlighting. However, due to time constraints,
we were not able to satisfy these requirements. Nevertheless, if this project is taken for-
ward these are features that should be explored and implemented.
Won’t-have
We decided that features related to the actual adoption of the UI based on
the data provided by the eye-tracker would be strictly outside the scope of our project.
For this to work, we would have had to train a machine-learning model, which would have
come with additional concerns and overhead to the project, and would not have added
anything to our goal of developing a stable research platform that could be used to collect
data. Therefore, we did not attempt to implement these features. We did incorporate the
project supporting these features in the future during our design process, however. For
example, we wrote that we will not support providing the user with suggestions on how to
choose settings, but we added the suggestion dialog in Figure 6.13 which currently serves
no purpose and is not displayed in the UI, but demonstrates that implementing this feature
will be possible once the backend implements support for suggestions.
9.1.2
Implementation of the MVP
On the basis of satisfying all of our must-have requirements, we firmly believe the imple-
mentation of the frontend and data collection backend was a success. The UI is accessi-
98
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:107==
ble, integrates well with our data collection backend, and most importantly, is extensible.
We will provide a handover document to the product owner (Professor Per Bækgaard) to-
gether with the submission of this project so that future work can continue on this project.
Similarly, the backend is able to correctly receive events and commands from the frontend
and record logs in an SQLite database. It can also trigger the eye-tracker to start and stop
recording of gaze data and output that to a JSON file.
During the usability testing phase in subsection 7.3.3, we discovered an issue with the
reflowing of text in the reader app when the text presentation settings such as font size
are changed, which causes content to shift around. This causes the user to lose track of
where they were reading before changing the settings. We were unfortunately unable to
resolve this issue due to time constraints, however, this issue will be documented in the
handover document as a future work.
9.2
Data quality
In this section, we will discuss different issues we encountered with the data and trying to
assess the quality of the data we gathered from the eye-trackers.
9.2.1
Time synchronization
As discussed in subsection 8.1.3, a major part of our algorithm for aligning the gaze data
recorded from the Tobii eye-tracker with the events generated by the frontend has to
do with calculating the latency between the eye-tracker being told to start when the ex-
periment began and the eye-tracker recording data. This was done by calculating the
difference between the system timestamp in the first gaze data packet and the system
timestamp recorded when the eye-tracker was told to start recording.
Unfortunately, for some of the experiments we had not realized that this was required to
accurately align the data, and so for those gaze data files, we are missing the latter time-
stamp. We investigated whether we could estimate a constant value to compensate for
this by looking at the statistics for this delta value across the data where we had correctly
recorded this timestamp, as seen in Table 9.1. The standard deviation is quite high, at
roughly 340ms, and there is quite a range of possible delta values considering the mini-
mum and maximum values found. Therefore, it would be quite difficult to align the gaze
data with the events from the frontend. However, the gaze data collected is still accurate
and can be used for other forms of analysis.
mean
0.790s
min
0.436s
max
1.170s
standard deviation
0.341s
Table 9.1: Statistics on the delta value between system_start_time_mono and system_-
time_stamp from the first gaze data packet
Furthermore, the timestamps recorded in the events database are of a lower resolution
(seconds rather than milliseconds) due to a bug in the events generated by the frontend.
The data with poor resolution are marked accordingly in the participants.json file with
the key low_resolution: true.
9.2.2
Frontend events
As mentioned in section 6.2, we extended the Flow application to generate events and
take screenshots every time the user performed an action in the UI, using a backend
Reading the Reader
99
==PAGE:108==
created in Python. However, from our initial user testing, we realized that due to the non-
existent delay between the event being generated and the backend taking the screenshot,
the screenshots would end up being inaccurate. Sometimes, the screenshots would cap-
ture the state before the user action occurred on the frontend, sometimes just after, and
sometimes during the transition.
In Figure 9.1, a clear example of how the screenshots would sometimes turn out is shown.
This particular example showcases the user transitioning from a dark theme to a light
theme. Note that the labels beside the theme button changed immediately, as well as the
text in the buttons, whereas the borders of the buttons and the margin’s background color
did not.
Figure 9.1: A transition from the dark theme to the light theme. The whole UI is transi-
tioning and therefore the buttons, the settings menu labels, and the text content fell out of
sync with one another.
Unfortunately, we identified this issue after our first set of experiments, which means that
8 participants have this particular issue. However, this is not a major problem for anal-
ysis, because if we need a specific screenshot we have the actions that the participant
performed in a database and we can replay those to get the exact scenario the participant
was looking at. We did however manage to correct this problem by inserting a small delay
of half a second before taking the screenshot when the frontend would call the endpoint
to do so. However, this introduces another potential concern in scenarios where the user
rapidly performs multiple actions one after another. For instance, if the user changes
three pages forward in less than half a second, the first action will trigger the screenshot
after all three actions have occurred. Consequently, the screenshots may not accurately
represent the sequence of events. Nevertheless, this is not a significant issue either,
as there will not be any useful gaze data collected during that brief timeframe between
subsequent actions.
9.2.3
Gaze data quality analysis
In this section, we will assess the overall quality of the data collected by our platform from
the eye-tracker. Several methods can be employed to analyze the quality of the data, and
100
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:109==
here we explore a few of them. One key concept for data quality is the main sequence
plot, which involves plotting the saccade amplitude or length (the distance between the
start and end points of a saccade) against the peak velocity of the saccade. The main
sequence plot is unique to each person’s eyes.
This plot is a useful tool for analyzing the quality of the data, as it allows us to identify
outliers and potential issues with the data, that we can then take a closer look at with
other tools.
Figure 9.2: Example of a main sequence plot with saccade amplitude on the x-axis and
peak velocity on the y-axis. The “staircase” shape is due to the eye-tracker’s refresh rate
of 90Hz, recording data every 11 milliseconds. The red line represents the fitted data to
a linear model.
In Figure 9.2, we see an example of a good main sequence, where most of the saccades
are closely related to the fitted line. However, in some of the main sequence plots, there
are extreme outliers, especially in the third text, likely because of the questions at the end,
that the participants went back and forth from. An example of this is shown in Figure 9.3.
The time dimension is also plotted as the color, where more yellow is earlier and more
blue is later in the data collection. There seems to be some problematic data in the area
at the top left of the plot and one problematic data point around the bottom right as can
be seen in Figure 9.4. Let us try and plot the timestamps versus x and y data for each
page of this particular book to get a closer look at this data.
In Figure 9.5 we can see the timestamps versus the x coordinate of the raw reading data
for a few of the different pages read, to get a sense of the problematic data. We have
annotated the interesting points by matching the timestamps of the outliers of Figure 9.4
with the data in Figure 9.5. These plots allow us to see if there are any consistency
between the outliers and potentially what causes them.
In Figure 9.5c, we can see three of the annotations, which are all just before a rapid
increase or decrease in the coordinate values. This indicates that all of these noisy points
in the main sequence diagram come from the participant doing a sharp saccade across
Reading the Reader
101
==PAGE:110==
Figure 9.3: An example of a problematic main sequence from a participant reading book
3, where the upper limits of the axes extend to 60 seconds and 0.6 for the x and y-axis
respectively.
the screen, which does not resemble reading like the rest of the saccades in the book,
and therefore they will be classified as outliers. It is simply the participant doing a different
kind of eye movement, perhaps looking for the close button at the end or wondering what
they should do now.
In Figure 9.5b, there are another interesting few points from the main sequence that we
can look at. Particularly, the point with the timestamp 1566685.959, which lies at the
bottom right of the main sequence plot and the plot of the timestamp vs x-axis. Now in
this plot, it is not immediately clear what is going on, and why this data point is so far away
from the others, so we will have to go into the raw data files and look at the surrounding
data points to see.
In section A.7, we see the raw data with the uninteresting parts cut away and it quickly
becomes clear why this one data point is behaving differently than the rest.
There are two reasons for this, both of which stem from the same human-eye interaction.
First, look at the second to last packet in section A.7, which is the one that we highlighted
before in the plots. In this packet, the left and right eyes are not looking at the same thing,
as seen by the coordinates of the eyes. The left eye is at (0.01, 0.31) and the right eye
is at (0.59, 1.06) which are two wildly different coordinate sets. Compare this to the
last packet where the eyes are back to looking at the same object on the screen.
Secondly, notice the second packet in the dataset. Here, one eye is closed, indicated by
the coordinate set null, null, while the other is open. Now compare this to the very
first packet that shows that both eyes are closed, which means that the participant was
blinking.
This indicates that the participant was simply blinking before this outlying data point and
the eye-tracker tried to track the eye just as it was opening again and that caused it to
102
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:111==
Figure 9.4: Another example of a main sequence plot. The red line represents the fitted
data to a linear model. It can be seen that some data points are very far off the main
sequence fit, which indicates problematic data. These points of interest have been labeled
with a timestamp that can be cross-referenced later on.
get a reading where the eye was halfway open and therefore very inaccurate to what the
user was looking at.
Now, if one wanted to clean this data and remove these outliers, several techniques can
be employed to do just that. In scenarios where either eye is closed, we can assume that
the other eye is closed as well, as it is very atypical for a human to blink with just one eye
when they are not consciously thinking about it. Also, it can be helpful to look at how far
the eyes are from each other on the monitor and remove data points where the eyes are
not close to each other by using a simple dispersion threshold.
Using these two simple techniques we would be able to remove all of the scenarios that
led to this one outlier with timestamp 1566685.959.
In conclusion, we have seen what correct data looks like, what erroneous data looks like
and we have also explored ways to correct erroneous data.
9.2.4
Gaze data skew analysis
For some of the participants, we also noticed something else when overlaying the gaze
data on screenshots of what the user was reading. As seen in Figure 9.6 the reading
pattern is heavily skewed towards the bottom left of the text.
The reason for this is most likely that the participant did not calibrate the eye-tracker
properly before starting the experiment, and therefore the eye-tracker was not able to ac-
curately track the participant’s gaze. A misrepresentative calibration can occur when the
participant is not looking exactly at the calibration points, or if the participant is slouch-
ing in their chair, causing their head to be at an askew angle to the eye-tracker. Also,
this participant in particular was wearing glasses, which can also cause issues with the
calibration because the eye-tracker’s IR light can reflect off the glasses and cause the
eye-tracker to lose track of the eyes.
Reading the Reader
103
==PAGE:112==
(a) A plot of the participant reading page 2.
(b) A plot of the participant reading page 3.
(c) A plot of the participant reading page 5.
Figure 9.5: Time versus x-axis of raw reading data from the same participant from Fig-
ure 9.4, with annotations of points of interest that were found in the main sequence plot.
The x-axis is the horizontal position of the participant’s gaze on the screen. The y-axis
is the timestamp of the data in an arbitrary timeframe meaning that the first gaze is not
necessarily at time 0.
104
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:113==
Figure 9.6: Reading data that is heavily skewed, meaning that the data is not aligned
properly with what they were actually looking at. The skew can be due to a number
factor, but most likely is that the participant did not calibrate the eye-tracker properly before
starting the experiment.
Another possibility is that the participant did their calibration properly, sitting upright and
looking at the calibration points, but then slumped in their chair during the experiment,
causing the eye-tracker to miscalculate the angle of the eyes.
To remedy this issue several things can be done. First, the participant could have been
told to sit upright and move as little as possible during the experiment to ensure that
the calibration was not skewed. Secondly, if the skewed data is still present after the
experiment, one approach to correct the data would be to apply a transformation to the
data to skew it back to the correct position. However, this is a future work and was not
implemented in this project.
9.2.5
Gaze data integrity analysis
We will now answer research question 4 about the accuracy and effectiveness of our
platform in collecting data. First we can look at the difference between the timestamps of
each consecutive gaze packet and plot that as a histogram. This will allow us to see if
the data is consistent with the Tobii 4C eye-tracker’s specifications, which states that the
refresh rate is 90Hz. This corresponds to one gaze data packet every 11ms.
If the data collected from our platform has a large number of dropped packets, we would
expect there to be many packets where inter-packet time differences are greater than
11ms. However, a miniscule of amount of dropped packets is to be expected because of
factors such as system load and interrupts, or other miscellaneous issues.
In Figure 9.7 we see the histogram of the difference between the timestamps of each
consecutive gaze packet for all of the participants. We can see that the majority of the
data is centered around 11ms, which conforms to the refresh rate of 90Hz eye-tracker.
Notice that the y-axis goes from 0 to 1.4 × 106.
Reading the Reader
105
==PAGE:114==
However, there are some data points that are above this value which can not be seen at
this scale of this plot. In Figure 9.8 we have plotted the same data but we have limited
the y-axis to go from 0 to 1000. This allows us to see the data points that are above 11ms
more clearly because there are so few of them. In the plot, the bar representing a 22ms
delay is slightly taller than the surrounding bars. This suggests that those particular delays
of 22ms delay are likely caused by a single dropped packet because 22 is a multiple of
11 which is the refresh rate. A similar thing happens at 33ms as well where two packets
from the eye-tracker are dropped consecutively. However, the rest of the histogram will
be due to some noise or load that causes the eye-tracking system to briefly interrupt.
To further quantify this we can sum the differences in the data points that are in the 11ms
stick and those that are above 11ms to get the percentage of data points that are lossy.
We have in total 1.4 × 106 data points and all of those are 11ms apart except for 4044 of
them. This means that the percentage of data points that are accurate and effective is
1 −
4044
1.4×106 = 99.72% across all of the participants.
Figure 9.7: The difference between the timestamps of each consecutive gaze packet for
all of the participants. Note that the plot goes from 0 to 1.4 × 106 on the y-axis. These
data points are centered around 11ms, which is the refresh rate of the eye-tracker.
Second, we can take a look at the number of packets that we expect simply from the
duration of the experiment along with the sampling rate of the eye-tracker and compare
that to the number of packets the eye-tracker picks up.
In Table 9.2 we see the number of packets we expect to have collected from each par-
ticipant from book 1. This is calculated by calculating the duration of the experiment and
dividing that by the time we expect between each packet, which is 11ms. For example, if
we have a 200-second experiment, we would expect to have 200 000/11 ≈18200 packets.
We then compare this to the number of packets we collected and calculate the percentage
of packets we collected. Last, we calculate the amount of time that is missing from the
experiment by subtracting the duration of the experiment from the amount of time that we
would expect to have collected data.
From this data, we can see that we are getting a very high percentage of the data that we
106
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:115==
Figure 9.8: Same graph from Figure 9.7 but zoomed in on the y-axis from 0 to 1000. This
plot allows us to see the data points that are above 11ms more clearly, which are the lossy
ones.
ID
Number
of
packets ex-
pected
Length
of
experiment
(s)
Amount
of
time
miss-
ing (s)
Percentage
recorded
1
15102
166.13
1.53
99.08
2
16444
180.89
1.67
99.08
4
13135
144.49
1.33
99.08
5
18440
202.85
1.87
99.08
7
19743
217.18
2.01
99.08
8
19451
213.97
1.98
99.08
10
17750
195.25
1.80
99.08
11
21241
233.66
2.16
99.07
12
20017
220.19
2.30
98.95
13
17151
188.67
2.30
98.78
14
19211
211.33
1.98
99.06
15
21496
236.47
2.19
99.07
16
22716
249.88
2.31
99.07
17
20757
228.33
2.11
99.07
18
16759
184.36
1.78
99.04
19
36581
402.40
3.76
99.07
20
21906
240.97
2.23
99.07
21
22517
247.70
3.27
98.68
Table 9.2: In this table, we look at the gaze data collected from the first book each
participant was shown. Using the length of the experiment, we calculate how many gaze
packets we expect to collect based on the 90Hz refresh rate of the eye-tracker, vs. the
number of packets the system actually collects. As seen by the results, the number of
packets collected is very close to the amount we expect. In most cases, the loss is < 1%.
Reading the Reader
107
==PAGE:116==
ID
Length
of
experiment
(s)
Left
gaze
point valid-
ity (%)
Right gaze
point valid-
ity (%)
1
166.13
98.89
98.40
2
180.89
98.55
98.43
4
144.49
94.44
91.04
5
202.85
96.12
96.96
7
217.18
99.62
99.70
8
213.97
98.76
98.56
10
195.25
97.43
97.32
11
233.66
96.99
97.32
12
220.19
86.25
69.71
13
188.67
92.43
94.25
14
211.33
98.21
98.57
15
236.47
99.51
99.72
16
249.88
98.18
98.31
17
228.33
98.75
99.01
18
184.36
95.55
96.51
19
402.40
96.58
97.05
20
240.97
99.30
99.15
21
247.70
91.13
90.15
Table 9.3: In this table, we look at the left and right gaze point validity recorded from
the eye-tracker while each participant reads the first book. The gaze point validity is an
indicator of whether it was able to track the given eye at a certain point in time when the
packet was recorded. Not having a valid gaze point indicates that the eye-tracker could
not track where the user was looking on the screen, which could be due to a variety of
reasons, such as blinks or the user looking away from the monitor.
108
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:117==
expect to get, with the lowest percentage being a staggering 98.69% of the data that we
expect to get. This is a very good result and indicates that the eye-tracker is very effective
at collecting data.
Now look at the validity of the gaze points in Table 9.3. The gaze point validity is the
percentage of data points that have a valid gaze point for each eye. Invalid gaze points
are data points where the eye-tracker was not able to track the eye for whatever reason.
This could be because the participant is blinking, the participant was looking away from
the monitor, or because the eye-tracker is somehow unable to capture the eye of the
user. The validity of the gaze points is consistently high across almost all participants,
with similar percentages for each eye. There is however one particular participant that
sticks out in this table, participant 12 has the lowest validity on the right eye at 69.71%.
This is a very low percentage and means that the eye-tracker was not able to track the right
eye for a large portion of the experiment. Let us take a look at this particular participant’s
gaze data to see if we can find a reason for this. In Figure 9.9 we see the reading pattern
of this participant. Immediately, it is clear that something is interesting happening in the
middle and towards the end of the data, as there are large gaps. Now, we are not able
to see any definitive reason for this in this plot, so we can try to see if the participant was
exhibiting similar behavior for the rest of the books to if this is a consistent issue.
They got a validity of 88.76% for the left eye and 83.74% for the right eye for the second
book 79.71% for the left eye and 68.87% for the right eye for the third book. This is
an outlier compared to the rest of the results that we got and indicates that there was
something wrong with the eye-tracker for this particular participant. Unfortunately, this
particular participant is one of the participants with whom we can not accurately align the
gaze data with the events from the frontend, so we can not say for sure what is happening
here more precisely. Although we can not come to a definitive conclusion as to why this is
happening, we hypothesize that because the participant was wearing glasses there could
be glare from the monitor or smudge on the glasses that caused the eye-tracker to lose
track of the eye. It is also possible that the participant either got distracted a lot or that
their calibration did not register properly.
However, as we can see compared to the rest of the participants is that this is a rare
occurrence and this participant is an outlier compared to the rest of the results that we
got.
In conclusion, we have seen that the data collected from the eye-tracker is of high quality
and that the eye-tracker is very effective and accurate at collecting data.
9.3
Experiments
We refer to both the usability tests that we conducted early on as pilot experiments and
the larger-scale experiments we conducted with 20 participants. We conducted these
experiments for 3 major reasons:
1. to investigate the quality of the data collected from our data collection platform
2. to see if it could be used to generate insights into the oculomotor behavior of the
participants we tested with
3. to validate the usability of our UI design
Performing the experiments provided us with many insights into aspects of our platform
architecture and design that we had overlooked earlier and led to many refinements, as
we discuss in chapter 7. We were also able to conduct many useful analyses of the gaze
Reading the Reader
109
==PAGE:118==
Figure 9.9: Time vs x-axis of raw reading data from both eyes of participant 12. There
are noticeable gaps in the data in the middle and towards the end of the experiment.
data we collected from the frame of the experiments and research objectives we laid out
in chapter 5.
A key step in the analysis was the alignment of the gaze data with events and screenshots
from the frontend, so we could use what the user was looking at to guide our analysis of
the participants’ oculomotor behavior. Having successfully achieved that, we demonstrate
that the raw data can be used to create many interesting and insightful visualizations, as
well as extract useful information.
We were able to identify fixations and saccades by applying the I-VT algorithm. We also
created our simplistic approach to classify different types of saccades, i.e. regular sac-
cades, return sweeps, and regressions based on the saccades identified by the I-VT al-
gorithm. Furthermore, we were able to extract statistics such as the saccadic length and
fixation duration and use that to identify behaviors such as skimming over text.
Aside from the gaze data, the platform also recorded events such as the changing of text
presentation settings and navigating pages. This also proved to be instrumental to our
analyses and we have demonstrated that this is possible and works well. The frontend
events can be used to obtain insights on, for example, how many people changed settings,
where they were in the text when they made the changes, and align the gaze data with
still images of the participant actions. Being able to assign different participants different
“treatments” which gave each participant a pre-specified set of default settings, as well
record as other metadata like participant age and dominant eye, were also important
additions to our system.
By creating these visualizations and extracting the information we found from the gaze
data, we have demonstrated that the data collected by our platform can be viably used to
conduct far more advanced analyses.
The earliest forms of experiments we conducted were usability testing and pilot experi-
ments. This helped us to make some minor tweaks to the UI, as well as refine our experi-
mental methodology. An example of a change the pilot experiments led to was the testing
110
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:119==
of participants’ dominant eyes, since the gaze data contains separate coordinates for each
eye and the dominant eye provides us with more useful information — thus improving our
analysis methodology.
Further issues with the data quality were identified during our experiments with our 20
participants, which we discussed in depth in section 9.2. As we conducted the experi-
ments in waves, rather than all in one day, we were able to identify many of the issues
early on and rectify them for later experiments.
In the Experimental results section, we discussed an issue we identified with the font size
not being set correctly for all participants. Unfortunately, this is an issue we were not able
to identify until we began analyzing the data and therefore we were unable to rectify it. As
a result, our experimental results, particularly for Experiment 1, suffered.
However, we can confidently say that this issue has been rectified for future experiments
with our platform. With the final product, we believe the platform is stable and robust
against all of the previously identified issues. We are therefore confident in the abilities of
the platform to be used to collect data that can be used to, for example, train a model or
be used to conduct further analyses.
One issue that is not a shortcoming of our platform but rather how our eye-tracker of
choice was used was the skewing of gaze data in rare cases, which we discussed in sub-
section 9.2.4. We discuss possible reasons for this issue, as well as potential solutions.
This ranged from additional checks during the calibration stage of each experiment ses-
sion to ensure the calibration was successful to rectifying the data in post by transforming
the gaze data points.
9.4
Feasibility of the platform and the UI
From the sections 9.2.1 to 9.2.5 we have assessed that our platform and system have
very high overall effectiveness and quality in the collection of data. In terms of the UI,
we were able to satisfy all of the must-have requirements we had initially set out to im-
plement in section 4.3. We were mainly concerned with the accessibility of the UI and
tight integration with the backend to collect interaction logs and gaze data. The backend
also served its purpose of receiving events from the frontend, storing them in a database,
and handling interactions with the eye-tracker to store gaze data. Through our analysis,
we find that the data recorded by the platform is of high quality and it can therefore feasi-
bly be used by the researchers who will work on the Reading the Reader project for the
purposes of training models for the adaptive UI and collecting data to analyze.
The oversights and issues with data collection we previously discussed have all been
alleviated, and the remaining issues are caused by the sensors in the eye-tracker, and
as such are outside the scope of this project, or they are issues that can be corrected by
improving the experimental methodology as discussed in their respective sections. We
would not consider the UI of the reader app to be complete enough to be used as a default
reading app; as we discussed previously that it would need more features to have parity
with existing apps it would compete with. It is, however, a solid foundation which was
designed with extensibility in mind, so that it could be enhanced by the researchers.
Reading the Reader
111
==PAGE:120==
112
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:121==
10
Conclusion
Central vision loss is a debilitating condition that significantly affects the daily lives of those
who struggle with it in many ways. One of its most notable manifestations is how it affects
one’s ability to read, and currently, little attention is given to designing accessible reading
software for CVL patients. We believe that automatically adaptive UIs based on gaze data
from eye-trackers are one possible solution. Although few have attempted using AUIs to
improve the accessibility of a UI, we believe this is a suitable approach to the problem.
In section 2.6, we defined the objectives of our thesis project in terms of 4 research ques-
tions.
The first question had to do with researching design guidelines needed to build an acces-
sible user interface for low-vision readers when building the reading application. In sec-
tion 2.4, we reviewed the World Wide Web Consortium’s recommendations and high-
lighted our key findings. This gave us insights into things such as tracking, color contrast,
point of regard, proximity, and more, which helped us to build a framework of how to
build a UI accessible for low-vision readers. Also, we conducted a deep dive into existing
reading applications with a focus on accessibility, usability and what features they sup-
port. The review of existing apps was especially useful as it allowed us to assess their
strengths and shortcomings, which gave us valuable insights that ultimately led us to de-
fine the requirements as stated in section 4.3, and served as inspiration for designing our
own UI to accommodate the requirements.
In the second question, we were concerned with the implementation of the reader app and
data collection platform. With the goals of the Reading the Reader project in mind, we
wanted to build a platform with a high degree of flexibility in terms of the text presentation
adjustments that could be made, as well as extensibility such that work could continue
to be carried out on it once we hand off the project. To that end, we discuss the system
architecture and design choices of our platform, which consists of a reading app built with
React in TypeScript and a backend built with FastAPI in Python, which interacts with a
Tobii eye-tracker to collect gaze data in chapter 6. Interactions with the reading app are
also recorded and stored into a database. We also investigate how our solution satisfies
our requirements in chapter 6, before further reflecting on our choices and how well we
did in satisfying our requirements in section 9.1.
The objective of our third research question was to define an experimental setup and
methodology that would help us to evaluate and test the feasibility of the platform for
recording readers’ oculomotor behavior. In chapter 5, we laid out our design of 4 experi-
ments designed as a way to collect a large amount of gaze data from our 23 participants
while they read 2-3 short-form texts on our reader UI, as well as to induce certain be-
haviors in the participants and to see if we could observe those behaviors in the data. By
conducting the experiments using our platform, we were also able to identify several short-
comings and issues with our design, which we were able to rectify in the fourth iteration
to make the platform more robust overall.
Finally, we intended to investigate the feasibility of the platform designed and to see if we
could generate insights on oculomotor and reading behavior. Making use of the outcomes
of both research questions 2 and 3, the data collected was analyzed to prove or disprove
our hypotheses and our research objectives defined in chapter 5. This led to a discussion
on the feasibility of the platform based on the quality of the data that was collected, as
Reading the Reader
113
==PAGE:122==
well as some shortcomings in the data collection methodology section 9.2. Based on the
analysis of the outcomes of our experiment, as well as a detailed data quality assessment,
we find that with the improvements we made, our platform is feasible both as a flexible
reading application UI and as a data collection platform for research.
We set out to build a system that would be the foundation of the adaptive user interface
application for central vision loss readers. All-in-all, we believe our research platform can
feasibly be used to conduct the preliminary research required to reach the overall goals
of the Reading the Reader project. We now address some of the work that remains to be
done.
10.1
Future work
The Reading the Reader project needs much more work to be done before central vision
loss patients can use it as their default reader app.
Using the data collected from our platform, we expect that researchers working on this
project will be able to use it to train the models which will make suggestions on how to
adjust the user interface. For the system to identify when to make these suggestions,
it must be able to identify various signals from the gaze data that suggest that the user
is struggling to read. These signals need to be identified and enumerated. Although
we provide a couple of simple examples of different behaviors we were able to identify
through the gaze data, much more work needs to be done on this.
Another aspect that should be researched further is the optimal level of system interven-
tion. This is something that Weber et al. also carefully considered in their implementa-
tion of the IDE extension which automatically resizes panels based on context and gaze
data [6]. If too many changes are made too fast, the user may become annoyed, disori-
ented, or feel like they are losing control over the application and stop using the system as
a result. They realize that there needs to not only be a balance between manual user con-
trol and automatic system intervention, but the system should also provide explainability
as to why a change was made, and provide the user with the option to undo the changes
if they feel necessary. This is a usability question that needs to be carefully considered
in any adaptive user interface.
Research should also be done into which text presentation parameters are most helpful
to adjust for people with central vision loss, as well as what the effect is of changing each
dimension on the readability of text. Furthermore, more features should be added to the
reader app so that it has feature parity with other common reader apps, which we explored
in section 2.5.
114
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
[1]
Sofie Beier et al. “Increased letter spacing and greater letter width improve read-
ing acuity in low vision readers”. In: Information Design Journal 26.1 (Apr. 2021),
pp. 73–88. DOI: 10.1075/idj.19033.bei. URL: https://doi.org/10.1075/idj.19033.bei.
[2]
Age Related Macular Degeneration (AMRD) – Envision Eye Centre. https://envisioneye.
com.au/eye-conditions/macular-degeneration/. (Accessed on 29/01/2024).
[3]
Lamia Zouhaier, Yousra Ben Daly Hlaoui, and Leila Ben Ayed. “A Reinforcement
Learning Based Approach of Context-driven Adaptive User Interfaces”. In: 2021
IEEE 45th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC).
IEEE, July 2021. DOI: 10.1109/compsac51774.2021.00217. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1109/compsac51774.2021.00217.
[4]
Lamia Zouhaier, Yousra BenDalyHlaoui, and Leila Ben Ayed. “Adaptive user inter-
face based on accessibility context”. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications (Apr.
2023). DOI: 10.1007/s11042-023-14390-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-
023-14390-5.
[5]
Mumtaz Khan and Shah Khusro. “Towards the design of personalized adaptive user
interfaces for smart TV viewers”. In: Journal of King Saud University - Computer and
Information Sciences 35.9 (2023). Cited by: 0; All Open Access, Gold Open Access.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jksuci.2023.101777. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
uri?eid=2-s2.0-85173275176&doi=10.1016%2fj.jksuci.2023.101777&partnerID=40&
md5=bee6c8a769eddcbc932f87fd9747975c.
[6]
Thomas Weber, Rafael Vinicius Mourao Thiel, and Sven Mayer. “Supporting Soft-
ware Developers Through a Gaze-Based Adaptive IDE”. In: Proceedings of Men-
sch Und Computer 2023. MuC ’23. <conf-loc>, <city>Rapperswil</city>, <coun-
try>Switzerland</country>, </conf-loc>: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023,
pp. 267–276. DOI: 10.1145/3603555.3603571. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.
dk/10.1145/3603555.3603571.
[7]
Radha Kumaran et al. “EChat: An Emotion-Aware Adaptive UI for a Messaging
App”. In: Adjunct Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User In-
terface Software and Technology. UIST ’23 Adjunct. , San Francisco, CA, USA,
Association for Computing Machinery, 2023. DOI: 10.1145/3586182.3616698. URL:
https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1145/3586182.3616698.
[8]
Antonino Ferraro and Marco Giacalone. “A Review About Machine and Deep Learn-
ing Approaches for Intelligent User Interfaces”. In: Advanced Information Network-
ing and Applications. Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 95–103. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-030-99619-2_9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007%2F978-3-030-99619-2_9.
[9]
Reading the Reader | DTU/Per Bækgaard. https://people.compute.dtu.dk/pgba/
research/reading-the-reader/. (Accessed on 03/02/2024).
[10]
Zehui Zhan et al. “Online Learners’ Reading Ability Detection Based on Eye-Tracking
Sensors”. In: Sensors 16.9 (Sept. 2016), p. 1457. DOI: 10.3390/s16091457. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3390/s16091457.
[11]
Keith Rayner. “Eye movements in reading and information processing: 20 years of
research.” In: Psychological Bulletin 124.3 (1998), pp. 372–422. DOI: 10.1037/0033-
2909.124.3.372. URL: https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.124.3.372.
[12]
Marcello Maniglia et al. “We don’t all look the same; detailed examination of pe-
ripheral looking strategies after simulated central vision loss”. In: Journal of Vision
Reading the Reader
115
==PAGE:124==
20.13 (Dec. 2020), p. 5. DOI: 10.1167/jov.20.13.5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1167/
jov.20.13.5.
[13]
Sofie Beier et al. Readability Research: An Interdisciplinary Approach. 2021. DOI:
10.48550/ARXIV.2107.09615. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.09615.
[14]
Susana T. L. Chung. “Dependence of Reading Speed on Letter Spacing in Cen-
tral Vision Loss”. In: Optometry and Vision Science 89.9 (Sept. 2012), pp. 1288–
1298. DOI: 10.1097/opx.0b013e318264c9dd. URL: https://doi.org/10.1097/opx.
0b013e318264c9dd.
[15]
John Sweller. “Cognitive Load Theory”. In: Psychology of Learning and Motivation.
Elsevier, 2011, pp. 37–76. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-387691-1.00002-8. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-387691-1.00002-8.
[16]
John Sweller. “Cognitive Load Theory: Recent Theoretical Advances”. In: Cognitive
Load Theory. Cambridge University Press, Apr. 2010, pp. 29–47. DOI: 10.1017/
cbo9780511844744.004. URL: https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511844744.004.
[17]
Constantina Ioannou et al. “Towards a tool for visualizing pupil dilation linked with
source code artifacts”. In: 2020 Working Conference on Software Visualization (VIS-
SOFT). 2020, pp. 105–109. DOI: 10.1109/VISSOFT51673.2020.00016.
[18]
Sofie Beier and Kevin Larson. “How does typeface familiarity affect reading perfor-
mance and reader preference?” In: Information Design Journal 20.1 (Sept. 2013),
pp. 16–31. DOI: 10.1075/idj.20.1.02bei. URL: https://doi.org/10.1075/idj.20.1.02bei.
[19]
Katsumi Minakata et al. “The effect of serifs and stroke contrast on low vision read-
ing”. In: Acta Psychologica 232 (Feb. 2023), p. 103810. DOI: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2022.
103810. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2022.103810.
[20]
Sofie Beier and Chiron A.T. Oderkerk. “High letter stroke contrast impairs letter
recognition of bold fonts”. In: Applied Ergonomics 97 (Nov. 2021), p. 103499. DOI:
10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103499. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103499.
[21]
Shaun Wallace et al. “Towards Individuated Reading Experiences: Different Fonts
Increase Reading Speed for Different Individuals”. In: ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction 29.4 (Mar. 2022), pp. 1–56. DOI: 10.1145/3502222. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3502222.
[22]
Fonts Knowledge - Google Fonts — fonts.google.com. https://fonts.google.com/
knowledge. [Accessed 26-01-2024].
[23]
with contributions Marilyn Haddrill and review by Mary Lou Jackson. Guide to buying
low vision magnifiers. Feb. 2019. URL: https://www.allaboutvision.com/buysmart/
magnifiers.htm.
[24]
What’s the difference between Tobii eye-tracker 4C and 5? – Tobii Help Center.
https://help.tobii.com/hc/en- us/articles/360008539058- What- s- the- difference-
between-Tobii-Eye-Tracker-4C-and-5-. (Accessed on 25/12/2023).
[25]
Timestamps and timing - Tobii Pro SDK documentation. https://developer.tobiipro.
com/commonconcepts/timestamp-and-timing.html. (Accessed on 19/12/2023).
[26]
Coordinate systems - Tobii Pro SDK documentation. https://developer.tobiipro.com/
commonconcepts/coordinatesystems.html. (Accessed on 25/12/2023).
[27]
Measuring pupil size. https://connect.tobii.com/s/article/measuring- pupil- size?
language=en_US. (Accessed on 26/12/2023).
[28]
W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI). WCAG 2 Overview — w3.org. https://www.
w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/#intro. [Accessed 15-09-2023].
[29]
Accessibility Requirements for People with Low Vision — w3c.github.io. https://
w3c.github.io/low-vision-a11y-tf/requirements.html. [Accessed 15-09-2023].
[30]
Apple Books - Apple. https://www.apple.com/apple-books/. (Accessed on 03/01/2024).
116
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:125==
[31]
Kindle Paperwhite, Oasis, Scribe & More E Readers | Amazon. https : / / www .
amazon . com / Amazon - Kindle - Ereader - Family / b ? ie = UTF8 & node = 6669702011.
(Accessed on 04/01/2024).
[32]
Digital Subscription Sign Up. https://www.amazon.com/kindle-dbs/hz/subscribe/ku.
(Accessed on 04/01/2024).
[33]
Free Kindle Reading Apps for iOS, Android, Mac, and PC. https://www.amazon.
com/b?ie=UTF8&node=16571048011. (Accessed on 04/01/2024).
[34]
Mofibo - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mofibo. (Accessed on 04/01/2024).
[35]
MOFIBO - Dansk Vækstkapital. https://www.danskvaekstkapital.dk/dvk1/?post_
type=case&p=1491. (Accessed on 04/01/2024).
[36]
Storytel aims to own 20% of the global audiobook market by 2030 - The New Pub-
lishing Standard. https://thenewpublishingstandard.com/2021/02/22/storytel-aims-
to-own-20-of-the-global-audiobook-market-by-2030/. (Accessed on 04/01/2024).
[37]
E-bøger - Læs som du vil - Mofibo. https://mofibo.com/dk/ebooks. (Accessed on
04/01/2024).
[38]
Google Play Books. https://play.google.com/books. (Accessed on 04/01/2024).
[39]
Google Play Books & Audiobooks on the App Store. https://apps.apple.com/us/
app/google-play-books-audiobooks/id400989007. (Accessed on 04/01/2024).
[40]
Google Play Books & Audiobooks - Apps on Google Play. https://play.google.com/
store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.apps.books&hl=en&gl=US. (Accessed on
04/01/2024).
[41]
calibre - E-book management. https://calibre-ebook.com/. (Accessed on 05/01/2024).
[42]
Understanding Success Criterion 2.5.7: Dragging Movements | WAI | W3C. https:
//www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/Understanding/dragging-movements. (Accessed on
29/01/2024).
[43]
DOUBLE DIAMOND – Innovation and entrepreneurship in education. https://innovationenglish.
sites.ku.dk/model/double-diamond-2/. (Accessed on 02/04/2024).
[44]
Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.6: Contrast (Enhanced) | WAI | W3C. https:
//www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/contrast-enhanced.html. (Accessed
on 29/01/2024).
[45]
epub format. https://www.w3.org/AudioVideo/ebook/. (Accessed on 05/02/2024).
[46]
Fundamental text and font styling - Learn web development | MDN. https://developer.
mozilla.org/en- US/docs/Learn/CSS/Styling_text/Fundamentals. (Accessed on
26/01/2024).
[47]
Noto Serif - Google Fonts. https://fonts.google.com/noto/specimen/Noto+Serif?
stroke=Serif&query=serif. (Accessed on 26/01/2024).
[48]
Dario D. Salvucci and Joseph H. Goldberg. “Identifying Fixations and Saccades in
Eye-Tracking Protocols”. In: Proceedings of the 2000 Symposium on Eye Tracking
Research & Applications. ETRA ’00. Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, USA: Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery, 2000, pp. 71–78. ISBN: 1581132808. DOI: 10.1145/
355017.355028. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/355017.355028.
[49]
A.P. Kruchinina and A.G. Yakushev. “Parametrization of Saccade Trajectories”. In:
Moscow University Mechanics Bulletin 73.4 (2018). Cited by: 1, pp. 97–100. DOI:
10.3103/S0027133018340052. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=
2-s2.0-85052642480&doi=10.3103%2fS0027133018340052&partnerID=40&md5=
b6da4ef7ba9dc94c099790a38734996b.
[50]
Degrees of visual angle // OpenSesame documentation. https://osdoc.cogsci.nl/4.
0/visualangle/. (Accessed on 17/02/2024).
[51]
Johannes Zagermann, Ulrike Pfeil, and Harald Reiterer. “Studying Eye Movements
as a Basis for Measuring Cognitive Load”. In: Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI
Reading the Reader
117
==PAGE:126==
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’18. <conf-loc>,
<city>Montreal QC</city>, <country>Canada</country>, </conf-loc>: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2018, pp. 1–6. ISBN: 9781450356213. DOI: 10.1145/
3170427.3188628. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188628.
[52]
Johannes Zagermann, Ulrike Pfeil, and Harald Reiterer. “Measuring Cognitive Load
using Eye Tracking Technology in Visual Computing”. In: Proceedings of the Sixth
Workshop on Beyond Time and Errors on Novel Evaluation Methods for Visualiza-
tion. BELIV ’16. Baltimore, MD, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016,
pp. 78–85. ISBN: 9781450348188. DOI: 10.1145/2993901.2993908. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2993901.2993908.
[53]
Els Stuyven et al. “The effect of cognitive load on saccadic eye movements”. In:
Acta Psychologica 104.1 (2000), pp. 69–85. ISSN: 0001-6918. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0001-6918(99)00054-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0001691899000542.
[54]
Kerri Walter and Peter Bex. “Cognitive load influences oculomotor behavior in nat-
ural scenes”. In: Scientific Reports 11.1 (June 2021). ISSN: 2045-2322. DOI: 10.
1038/s41598-021-91845-5. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-91845-5.
[55]
Gary E. Raney, Spencer J. Campbell, and Joanna C. Bovee. “Using Eye Movements
to Evaluate the Cognitive Processes Involved in Text Comprehension”. In: Journal
of Visualized Experiments 83 (Jan. 2014). ISSN: 1940-087X. DOI: 10.3791/50780.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3791/50780.
118
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:127==
A
Appendix
A.1
Under the Tuscan Sun
In the charmed woodlands of Tuscany, there reclined a quaint hamlet where staturesque
oaks kissed the heavens, and the atmosphere was redolent of dew-touched foliage, as
serene as it was surreal. Among the humble, weather-beaten cottages, there dwelt three
distinct souls: Isabella, an eccentric and valiant widow, Giulio, an introspective cobbler
and Angela, a child of profound curiosities.
Isabella, wearied by seasons of solitude, had etched upon her visage an expression of
congenial warfare – a benevolent matriarch, yet a dauntless warrior who had gazed into
the eyes of life’s melancholy. Her verdant eyes, reminiscent of the splendour of the lush
thaumaturgy that encased the hamlet, gleamed with dormant dreams, tightly held beneath
layers of fortitude. Long had she mapped the contours of grief, thereby possessing an
innate understanding of human sorrow.
Giulio, on the other hand, was an ardent lover of silence and solitude, existing in harmony
with his own musings and muted contemplations. In his eyes shone the ethereal light of
wisdom, as if his gaze could penetrate the shroud of the obvious, dissecting the essence
beneath. His nimble fingers, aged by weather and toil, embraced the worn-out leather,
mending decayed dreams into tangible hopes, hidden within the stitches of each shoe he
mended.
Young Angela, the last of the trio, was naught less than an embodiment of infinite cu-
riosities. Everything piqued the child’s interest, every moment was a marvel waiting to
unfold, every notion was a mystery waiting to be unraveled. Her lively eyes sparkled with
yearning, the unquenched thirst for knowledge nigh palpable.
The latent harmony between these three diverse souls was as entrancing as the Tuscan
morning, where the sun arose with a soft timidity, yet burned bright and luminous, warming
the earth beneath with its fierce affection. Their paths intertwined not by mere chance,
but for a purpose profound than their understanding, their lives mirrored the intertwined
roots of towering oaks, unobservable yet essential, supporting each other.
Hidden beneath the surface etched by ordinary days were riveting secrets, lores buried
deep within the chests of time passed. Whispering echoes spoke of an impending time
when a shrouded truth would unfurl, tying the threads of their destinies together. A widow
with a warrior spirit, a cobbler with an arcane wisdom, and a child whose curiosities knew
no bounds were about to embark on an odyssey draped in intrigue, mystery, and the
beautiful entanglement of shared destinies within the heart of rural Italy.
So in the rustic woodland hamlet, enshrined in all its idyllic beauty, commenced a homely
narrative that held the allure of thrumming adventure. Inscribed within this folktale were
the timeless strokes of hope, intrigue, and friendship—the arresting drama of intersecting
human lives under the Tuscan sun.
Reading the Reader
119
==PAGE:128==
A.2
Leveraging Blockchain Technology for Supply Chain
Transparency and Efficiency
1. Introduction:
The advent of technology has revolutionized various sectors, with the
agricultural industry being no exception. An innovative business idea that harnesses the
power of technology to improve agricultural productivity and sustainability involves the
utilization of Smart Farming Technologies (SFT). This report explores this idea, outlining
its potential solution and proposed methodology.
3. Solution:
Smart Farming Technologies juxtapose agricultural expertise with advanced
technologies such as Internet of Things (IoT), Machine Learning (ML), Artificial Intelli-
gence (AI), and Big Data Analytics. The goal is to optimize agricultural operations, im-
prove crop yield, and eliminate resource wastage. A significant element of this innovation
is the incorporation of automation and predictive models in farming procedures. In doing
so, agricultural practices can be fine-tuned in real-time, which enhances efficiency and
productivity, thus leading to a robust supply of food products.
5. Proposed Methodology:
The implementation of the blockchain-based supply chain
solution involves several key steps:
• IoT Enabled Devices: Internet of Things allows farmers to monitor and control their
equipment remotely. These devices collect data on various parameters such as soil
moisture, temperature, humidity, and plant health, thereby allowing farmers to make
informed decisions and optimize operations.
• AI and ML Techniques: These are used in predictive modeling to anticipate dis-
eases, pests, and weather alterations. Algorithms analyze historical data and pro-
vide actionable insights, helping farmers to deal proactively with any upcoming chal-
lenges.
• Use of Drones: Drones equipped with multispectral imaging sensors can scan large
agricultural areas quickly, easing the monitoring process. Drones help in crop scout-
ing, irrigation management, and mapping agricultural lands, thereby increasing ef-
ficiency.
• Precision Farming: This concept focuses on managing farms with satellite and
aerial imagery, aiding in fertilizers and irrigation management. It enhances crop
growth while reducing water and input use, thus promoting sustainable agricultural
practices.
• Big Data Analytics: The data gathered through various sources is processed using
Big Data Analytics to provide insights on crop pattern, soil condition, and climate
change. This information is crucial for effective farm management and planning.
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, the innovation of Smart Farming Technologies aims to
modernize traditional methods and bring a data-driven approach to agriculture. Through
automation, predictive modeling, and real-time optimization, SFT seeks to reduce the
challenges farmers face, eventually leading to increased agricultural productivity and sus-
tainability. As this technology becomes more prevalent, not only does it hold promise
for the revolution of the agri-business sector, but it also contributes to the global aim of
achieving food security with reduced environmental impact.
120
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:129==
A.3
Chasing Sunsets
Born amid the metropolis’ hum, I’ve christened myself Edward Eastwood. Ironically, as it
turns out, I yearned for the West. I was a strange ebb in New York City’s ceaseless flow.
The honking horns and stone-faced pedestrians were my lullaby, but in my dreams, I was
always chasing the setting sun.
I first discovered my captivation for the world beyond the skyscrapers when I received a
scrapbook for my eighth birthday. It was a kaleidoscope of places and cultures, criss-
crossed with the postmarked echoes of the East, West, North, and South. My parents,
polyglot travel enthusiasts, filled me with tales of their adventurous voyages across the
globe. Every night before bed, my mother’s stories ferried me across the seven seas.
Each morning, I would rush to the world map fastened to my bedroom wall, letting my
small fingers trace the mystical cities she had described. The sound of foreign cities’
names, like magical incantations, sparked a restless wanderlust in me.
School was an opportunity to escape the confines of the city, albeit with my mind. Miss
Janice became my favorite teacher. Her history lessons were like seat-gripping chronicles
uprooting me from my third-floor classroom and hurling me into the wild tapestry of human
civilization. I still feel my heart flutter at the resonance of the past. I found extraordinary
solace in these imaginary sojourns, filled with knights, explorers, myths, and mysteries.
As a teenager, I continuously battled the concrete boundaries of my beloved city. I re-
placed comic books with travelogues, sketching maps of unfound lands in the margins
of my textbooks. Despite the constricting city skyline, I painted vibrant sunsets with my
words onto the blank pages of a journal, each entry ending with an earnest promise:
”Someday, I’ll chase those sunsets for real.”
A turning point arrived when I won a school-organized essay competition. The prize? A
fully sponsored trip to the Grand Canyon. On my sixteenth birthday, instead of the familiar
hum of city traffic, I stood, breathless, before the yawning chasm of nature’s masterpiece.
I felt the ancient earth whisper tales of strength and endurance through the wind that toyed
with my hair. I was small but free, a tiny speck facing the immeasurable expanse of the
world.
That day, I returned home with a tiny fragment of the West in me and my heart blooming
with a new understanding. It was in that moment that my journey began. I, Edward
Eastwood, a boy from New York City, discovered his destiny to be an explorer.
I may have been nourished from the energy of the East, but it was the mysterious allure of
the West that gently nudged me forward. Today, as an adult, I journey across the world,
quenching a thirst that will never be satiated.
A.3.1
Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions:
1. How did Edward first discover his love for places beyond his city?
a. Through TV shows
b. Through his parents’ travel stories
c. Through his travel experiences
d. Through his friends
2. Who was Edward’s favorite teacher and why?
a. Mr. Johnson, because he was very kind
Reading the Reader
121
==PAGE:130==
b. Miss Janice, because she made history lessons interesting
c. Miss Smith, because she taught him Maths
d. Mr. Green, because he taught him how to write
3. What was the prize Edward won in the essay competition?
a. A new bicycle
b. A trip to Disney World
c. A fully-sponsored trip to the Grand Canyon
d. A new computer
4. How did Edward express his yearning for travel when he was a teenager?
a. By going on trips with his family
b. By writing in his journal
c. By joining a travel club
d. By taking part in exchange programs
5. Who gifted Edward the scrapbook that introduced him to different cultures and places?
a. His favorite teacher, Miss Janice
b. His polyglot travel enthusiast parents
c. His classmates
d. His neighbor who was a traveler
Fill-in-the-Blank Questions:
1. Edward was born in __________________________.
2. Edward’s parents were _______________________ enthusiasts, who filled him with
tales of their voyages.
3. Edward was rewarded with a trip to the __________________________ for winning
an essay competition.
4. Edward’s favorite teacher, Miss Janice, taught ________________________ in a
way that made it interesting to him.
5. Edward discovered his destiny to be an _________
122
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:131==
A.4
Answer sheet
Reading the Reader
123
==PAGE:132==
Answer Sheet
Participant ID
1.
⃝
A ⃝
B ⃝
C ⃝
D
2.
⃝
A ⃝
B ⃝
C ⃝
D
3.
⃝
A ⃝
B ⃝
C ⃝
D
4.
⃝
A ⃝
B ⃝
C ⃝
D
5.
⃝
A ⃝
B ⃝
C ⃝
D
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
1
==PAGE:133==
A.5
Results UX
A.5.1
98
• Didn’t know what one of the words meant in the text —
• Took maybe a bit long to read?
• We should give an answer sheet before the final text
• Adobe reader - zoom in, stuff like that. Reading university stuff not ebooks
• She has myopia
1. (5) Was intuitive, no problems. She changed the letter size and then the reflow
confused her.
2. (4) The icons were familiar and she didn’t have any problems recognizing it. She
doesn’t have experience with the others though.
3. (5) She knew the controls were there because we told her. But maybe she wouldn’t
change it if we hadn’t told her that it was there, maybe after the second page if she
was curious. but since we told her she went straight to it.
4. (4) Font size was intuitive, also the theme made sense. She didn’t know what the
margins did at first, so she wanted to try it to see what they did. She didn’t know
what the buttons did (make it wider or narrower)
5. (3) Didn’t really use the defaults, because she changed it. Didn’t notice the reset
button, thought maybe the red meant don’t do it. But she changed the settings
almost immediately because Lars told her to. She didn’t like the default because
she changed it.
She felt it was hard to read from the top to the bottom because the screen was so tall.
Have to move eyes from the bottom to the top
A.5.2
97
1. Has used [partner]’s Kindle, not sure if you can change the settings
2. Good eyes
3. Got tired of the texts halfway through
4. Didn’t feel like he wanted to change the settings
5. One of the questions didn’t have a correct answer? Question 8.
1. (5) - just needed to click a button to go back and forth
2. (5) - just had to click right and left
3. (3) - Didn’t know if he should change anything - he wasn’t told that he should, but
also didn’t feel like he wanted to.
4. (3) - Looked at them, seemed intuitive. Recognized text size, didn’t remember the
rest. Realized that from the large A and small a.
5. (5) - because he didn’t need to change it.
Reading the Reader
125
==PAGE:134==
A.5.3
99
• Kindle web reader, Google Play Books
• Nearsighted, weak eyesight
1. (5) - big buttons, default contrast was pretty good (dark mode), would have switched
it to dark if it wasn’t already
2. (4) - usually reads on iPad, found it weird it was cropped to portrait mode
3. (5) - buttons were big
4. (5) - didn’t consciously think about it. Remembers font size, theme, margins, reset
settings button, and boldness, but didn’t work(?)
5. Found the defaults okay, decided to change at some point but didn’t know why
(maybe the font size was smaller) but otherwise kept with the defaults. Probably
would have changed to dark if it wasn’t already dark.
The system maybe skipped pages when he went back and forth, maybe after he played
with the settings. Suggested a font selection, brightness for the text (how white it is)
A.6
Example of a gaze data packet from Tobii eye-tracker
1 {
2
"device_time_stamp": 94315432672,
3
"system_time_stamp": 94301144555,
4
"left_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
5
0.5351349711418152,
6
0.3208913207054138
7
],
8
"left_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system": [
9
20.885467529296875,
10
231.43487548828125,
11
76.18951416015625
12
],
13
"left_gaze_point_validity": 1,
14
"left_pupil_diameter": 3.75152587890625,
15
"left_pupil_validity": 1,
16
"left_gaze_origin_in_user_coordinate_system": [
17
-39.098655700683594,
18
46.82033157348633,
19
702.3104248046875
20
],
21
"left_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system": [
22
0.5825417637825012,
23
0.3877723515033722,
24
0.609908938407898
25
],
26
"left_gaze_origin_validity": 1,
27
"right_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
28
0.5632007718086243,
29
0.3415330946445465
30
],
31
"right_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system": [
126
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:135==
32
37.66197204589844,
33
224.9128875732422,
34
73.81573486328125
35
],
36
"right_gaze_point_validity": 1,
37
"right_pupil_diameter": 3.647216796875,
38
"right_pupil_validity": 1,
39
"right_gaze_origin_in_user_coordinate_system": [
40
26.921804428100586,
41
43.62430953979492,
42
702.8864135742188
43
],
44
"right_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system": [
45
0.44848477840423584,
46
0.3986353874206543,
47
0.6095066070556641
48
],
49
"right_gaze_origin_validity": 1
50 }
A.7
Gaze data around some data that is problematic
1 [
2 {
3
"system_time_stamp": 156668926588,
4
"left_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
5
null,
6
null
7
],
8
"right_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
9
null,
10
null
11
]
12 },
13 {
14
"system_time_stamp": 156668948794,
15
"left_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
16
0.00819218810647726,
17
0.30955958366394043
18
],
19
"right_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
20
null,
21
null
22
]
23 },
24 {
25
"system_time_stamp": 156668959899,
26
"left_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
27
0.00819218810647726,
Reading the Reader
127
==PAGE:136==
28
0.30955958366394043
29
],
30
"right_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
31
0.587161660194397,
32
1.057605266571045
33
]
34 },
35 {
36
"system_time_stamp": 156668993208,
37
"left_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
38
0.6744175553321838,
39
0.8604663610458374
40
],
41
"right_gaze_point_on_display_area": [
42
0.6925712823867798,
43
0.764336347579956
44
]
45 }
46 ]
A.8
Handbook PDF
128
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:137==
Handbook
1
Handbook
Checklist - before participant enters room
 Ensure backend is running
 Ensure frontend is open, in full-screen
 Input participant ID, select treatment
 Ensure books are imported
 Select the correct book (first one is Echoes of Tuscan Tales)
Checklist - invite participant into room
 Make sure it’s only us 3 (participant, Lars and Aamir)
 Close the door
 Close the blinds
 All lights on
 Tell user to get comfortable in the chair
 Then, ensure participant is sitting arms length away from the monitor
 When doing experiment 4, make sure the participant has the answer sheet in front of them
 Make sure the user has a pen
Introduction - split 1
Hi 🙂
We are going to conduct a small experiment on you about reading, while tracking where your eyes are 
looking on the monitor. We are going to show you two small pieces of text for you to read. We would like for 
you to read through the texts carefully, but at a comfortable pace for you.
First off, we are going to calibrate the eye-tracker for you specifically, so please sit about arm’s length from 
the monitor and follow the on-screen instructions. 
<click CTRL+SHIFT+F10>
When you’re ready to read, click the PLAY button here to read the first text. Once you’re done, there will be 
an X in the top right corner, simply click that to end the experiment and let us know and we will switch the 
text.
Any questions?
<they read the first text, Under the Tuscan Sun Tapestry>
<select the second text, Chasing Sunsets Eastwood Journey>
Thank you so much. Did you notice that you were able to change how readable the text was? 
Now, for the second text there are some questions at the end. We would like for you to read through the text 
like before, and then answer those questions on the answer sheet. You’re free to go back and forth between 
pages and questions as you please.
Again, when you’re ready to read, click the PLAY button to read the second text, and use the X to end.
==PAGE:138==
Handbook
2
Introduction - split 2
Hi 🙂
We are going to conduct a small experiment on you about reading, while tracking where your eyes are 
looking on the monitor. We are going to show you three small pieces of text for you to read. We would like for 
you to read through the texts carefully, but at a comfortable pace for you. 
First off, we are going to calibrate the eye-tracker for you specifically, so please sit about arm’s length from 
the monitor and follow the on-screen instructions. 
<click CTRL+SHIFT+F10>
When you’re ready to read, click the PLAY button here to read the first text. Once you’re done, there will be 
an X in the top right corner, simply click that to end the experiment and let us know and we will switch the 
text.
Any questions?
(FOR GROUPS 1-3) By the way, there will be some settings on the left-hand side that you can adjust, and 
you’re free to adjust them to your preference.
<they read the first text, Under the Tuscan Sun Tapestry>
<select the second text, Smart Farming Technologies>
Again, when you’re ready to read, click the PLAY button to read the second text, and use the X to end.
<they read the second text, Smart Farming Technologies>
<select the third text, Chasing Sunsets Eastwood Journey>
Thank you so much. Now, for the third and last text there are some questions at the end. We would like for 
you to read through the text like before, and then answer those questions on the answer sheet. You’re free to 
go back and forth between pages and questions as you please.
Again, when you’re ready to read, click the PLAY button to read the second text.
After experiment
Have you ever read a text on a digital application with the ability to change text parameters before?
Do you have any visual impairments?
How old are you?
We need to figure out which eye is your dominant eye, so please hold out your hand like this and look at the 
duck. Then close one eye and then the other, and whichever eye you can still see the duck with is your 
dominant eye. 
<UX questions>
Dominant eye test
==PAGE:139==
Handbook
3
==PAGE:140==
A.9
Special project
132
Reading the Reader
==PAGE:141==
Reading The Reader
Special project — Spring 2023
Aamir Farooq
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby
s220035@student.dtu.dk
Lars Refsgaard
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby
s183947@student.dtu.dk
1
INTRODUCTION
Reading is an essential skill for many people. However, millions
suffer hardship navigating their daily lives due to vision impair-
ment, and in particular reading is the most common clinical com-
plaint and primary goal for people seeking visual rehabilitation [8,
9].
Central vision loss (CVL) is a form of vision impairment primar-
ily caused by age-related macular degeneration (AMD), resulting in
a blurred or dark spot in the central part of the afflicted patient’s
sight, known as a scotoma [7]. An example can be seen in Figure 1.
For individuals with CVL, reading can be difficult and slow because
they can only read from their peripheral vision [9].
Some studies indicate that AMD is projected to affect 248 mil-
lion people by 2040 [12]. In 2015, a total of 217 million people had a
moderate or worse visual impairment, up from 160 million in 1990.
Functional presbyopia affected over a billion people above the age
of 35, and the estimated number of blind people increased by 17.6%
in the same timespan, caused by generally growing population, ag-
ing, and a reduction in age-specific prevalence [6].
These figures highlight a growing need to increase efforts to
alleviate visual impairment to improve patients quality of life, as
well as to reduce the growing economic pressure on public health
systems and budgets caused by disability benefits that need to be
given to the visually impaired. We would therefore like to under-
stand the factors that hinder reading in the peripheral and develop
solutions to help CVL patients improve their reading performance.
1.1
The Reading the Reader project
Affective computing is when a computer system or software studies
and interprets human behavior and can then make an intervention
or some sort of change to, for example, make the user’s life a bit
easier.
The goal of the Reading The Reader project1, proposed by Profes-
sor Per Bækgaard, is to use affective computing to improve reading
performance for CVL patients in the context of education, where
students need to read large amounts of material to go along with
their lectures.
People afflicted by CVL can still read, using a number of “eccen-
tric” reading strategies and behaviors to cope with their condition.
For example, Many CVL patients have to move their heads from
side-to-side and forward and back to read the text. There are other
similar signals and patterns such as where the reader’s eyes are
looking on a monitor, their posture (such as how leaned back or
forward they are), and the size of their pupils.
1Artificial intelligence will help to improve reading opportunities for millions of peo-
ple
We can collect data on CVL patients’ reading behavior with the
use of an eye-tracker, and then use the data to train a model which
could predict when the user faces difficulty reading. The system
could then intervene by altering the presentation and style of the
text they are reading, for example by altering the font, size, con-
trast, brightness and other properties of the text.
The importance of improving the reading experience has mas-
sive practical and societal significance, and recent studies suggest
that personalizing readability by matching individuals to their opti-
mal font could improve their reading speed by 35% [20]. We believe
we can achieve similar results with a system designed specifically
for people who suffer from CVL. By designing interventions to im-
prove reading speed for people with central vision loss, we can
help reduce information overload and improve quality of life.
As a precursor to the thesis where we plan to develop an actual
solution, this report contains a deep dive into a collection of arti-
cles related to vision impairment, with a focus on central vision
loss, and its mitigation. The primary objective for us is to read
and summarize these articles to gain a deeper understanding of
the background knowledge and the current state of research on
this topic. In this process, we hope to identify key terms, the cur-
rent state of the art solutions as well gaps in the state of the art
where we can innovate, and interventions to improve outcomes
for individuals with vision impairment.
2
METHODOLOGY
Initially, we will conduct a literature review to understand the gen-
eral problem, why it is important, and what we can do about it. To
that end, we have devised the following research questions which
we will use to frame our literature review and define a scope.
2.1
Research questions
RQ1. What are some of the key terms and processes associated
with vision, reading and oculomotor function?
RQ2. What is central vision loss, what are the causes, and how
does it impair a reader’s ability to read?
RQ3. What properties are controllable in the typography of digi-
tal text, and how might these be used to make reading easier
for central vision loss patients?
RQ4. What is the current state-of-the-art on technologies and so-
lutions that central vision loss patients use?
RQ5. Which eye-tracking technologies are suitable for studying
signals’ effect on cognitive load in readers with impaired
vision?
RQ1 will give us a broader overview of the processes that hap-
pen in the eyes and brain which enable us to read — both people
with and without CVL. This is necessary to understand the broader
==PAGE:142==
(a) A scotoma taking the form of a dark spot [7]
(b) A scotoma taking the form of a blurred spot [11]
Figure 1: 2 examples of scotomas
domain that we plan to work in, which is filled with heavy medical
nomenclature and terms relating to the human anatomy. Establish-
ing a solid foundation in the key-terms is therefore an obvious first
step. If we develop an application that detects signals, for example
when a user is struggling to read, this will also help us to identify
what these signals might be — for example there may be differences
between normal readers and CVL readers.
With RQ2, our goal is to understand the underlying problem and
pain points that central vision loss patients currently face. In order
to develop an application that can address their needs, we need to
understand what their requirements are and we therefore need to
put ourselves in their shoes.
To be able to design a system which makes reading easier by
manipulating typography, we need to understand what the prop-
erties of typography are, how they can be changed and what the
effect of changing typography is, and we aim to address this by
answering RQ3.
With RQ4 we intend to investigate how CVL patients currently
cope with their condition and compare the different approaches
and their relative advantages and disadvantages, so we can identify
gaps where we can innovate and bring improvements with an all-
in-one solution.
There is a vast market of eye-trackers with differing features
and technologies. Although we already own the Tobii Eye Tracker
4C, we are interested in exploring what other options are available.
With the advancements in eye-tracking technology and the num-
ber of signals they can provide, it is crucial for us to understand the
processing and labelling employed by modern eye-trackers, and
we will encompass this with RQ5.
2.2
How literature was collected
Having established what we want to investigate, we would now
like to give an overview of how we collected papers and other lit-
erature.
To collect papers, we used Scopus 2, a database and search en-
gine for scientific papers. A large majority of the papers we col-
lected were found using the search terms “central AND vision AND
loss”, “cognitive AND load”, and “eye AND tracker AND reading”.
We selected papers by scanning their abstracts to see if they might
have some relevant information. This resulted in about 57 collected
papers. Some of the papers we selected also contained some refer-
ences which we considered useful, particularly the papers written
by Sofie Beier who did a significant amount of research in the field
of typography, which are also included in our count of papers. Fur-
thermore, we were given an assortment of about 48 papers by Pro-
fessor Bækgaard.
4 papers were discarded after further reading because we felt
they were not relevant to our study, and a large number of pa-
pers were not read due to time constraints, but are set aside for
the actual thesis, where they will come in handy for developing
applications or algorithms. For the purposes of simply identifying
background knowledge, which is the main focus of this report, we
selected 19 papers.
Having identified the papers we wanted to review, we employed
a bottom-up approach to generate our findings. We initially scanned
the paper for interesting points and then used them to build up to
some sort of conclusion we could use to answer our research ques-
tions. Findings from the paper were highlighted and categorized
under the following general categories, with some papers belong-
ing to multiple categories:
• Key terms and signals (12 papers)
• Motivation (6 papers)
• Existing research (10 papers)
• Eye-tracker (1 paper)
• Existing solutions (2 papers)
Our findings were collected in a note-taking application called
Notion. Under each category in our notes, we created a subsection
for the paper we found a finding in, followed by bullet points for
2Scopus
2
==PAGE:143==
each finding. When writing this report, we synthesized findings
across papers and combined them to come to our conclusions. This
ensured that we got a broad overview from many different sources.
We also scanned the internet using Google for a number of our
findings related to existing solutions and general knowledge about
central vision loss (3 sources).
3
EXISTING SOLUTIONS AND TECHNIQUES
In this section, we address RQ4 by investigating the current state of
the art techniques and solutions, both hardware and software, ana-
log and digital, which central vision loss patients use to improve
their reading performance.
3.1
Magnification
As a baseline, central vision loss patients can use magnification to
make the text on their paper or screen appear bigger. For reading
text on physical media such as newspapers and books, examples
include the simple handheld magnifying glass. Some of these in-
clude LED lights which illuminates the text being read, which can
be helpful. The advantages include the low price, ranging from $5
to $200 [13], as well as the portability, as they can easily fit into
a small bag, and they do not require any technical know-how to
operate. However, these are relatively simple devices and they do
not include much control over, for example, the contrast of the
text being shown. Depending on the kind of magnifier, it may also
mean that you can no longer use both hands as one of them has to
hold the magnifier. As such, these devices might be best suited for
smaller chunks of text such as reading the nutrition label on a box
of food as opposed to long text.
More sophisticated solutions include video-based magnifiers de-
signed for the visually impaired, which may be better suited for
reading longer forms of text. These allow for much more control
over properties of the text, such as changing the color, contrast
control, as well as multiple built in lenses to change the level of
zoom and autofocus [13]. Naturally, these magnifiers cost much
more, ranging from $500-$3,000, but according to a purchase guide
the “best value” is at $1,500 [13], which may be an inaccessible
price point for many people. Furthermore, these are typically much
larger devices meaning they will not be as portable.
In general, magnification of text has one major disadvantage,
which is that the field of view is reduced. Furthermore, they will
be somewhat clunky and clumsy to operate, as the material being
read has to be constantly adjusted to bring what is being read into
the field of view of the magnifier, and for patients who do not have
reduced motor control and/or older patients, this makes it subop-
timal. Patients will also have to move their eyes and heads more
than they would if reading at normal font sizes, making it poten-
tially less comfortable.
An alternative to optical magnifiers are software-based
solutions, like the accessibility features for zooming in built into
most modern operating systems such as macOS, iOS and Windows.
Another option is adjusting some font properties in the software
being used to read the text. Again, however, the main disadvantage
is that this limits the field of view, and furthermore the properties
that can be changed may be limited, depending on the software
being used.
Figure 2: Font Preference Test system created by Wallace et
al. [20]
3.2
Software-based solutions
One option is text-to-speech (TTS) software, which will read text
out loud allowing readers to listen to the text rather than to read
it. The advantage of this is that the task of reading is made much
more straightforward and they do not have to use any eccentric
strategies to be able to read the text. However, it affects the reading
experience in major ways. For example, it may not be as easy to
quickly jump back to re-read (or re-listen) to something you’ve just
read.
Other options for software may exist which allows you to change
the contrast and certain properties of the text. However, users may
not know what is best for them and what allows reading to be
the most comfortable experience for them, while also improving
reading performance. Wallace et al. have documented that by indi-
viduating the reading experience to the reader by making changes
such as finding the user’s optimal font, users can experience “large
gains in reading speed”, improve readability and reduce informa-
tion overload [20]. They created a system where users could run
through a test to find their “optimal font”, and one of the tests can
be seen in Figure 2. We think this is a great starting point with a
lot of room for improvement!
Susana Chung provides a high level overview of previous stud-
ies which investigate different presentation styles for text, such as
rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP), as well as other manipula-
tions done on the typography, all of which were not found to have
any meaningful benefit [8].
3
==PAGE:144==
3.3
Improving the reader’s strategy
In addition to making the text more readable through the various
methods listed before, users can also improve their own strategy.
One method to do this is using perceptual learning, which is es-
sentially a form of training or practice that at least one paper has
shown to be effective in improving CVL patient’s reading perfor-
mance [8]. While this may be a better long-term solution for pa-
tients suffering with CVL, not everyone may have access to this
form of training, and therefore a more accessible alternative would
be useful.
4
FINDINGS
In this section, we will address RQ1, RQ2 and RQ3. These questions
will cover the bulk of the needed background knowledge and by
the end of this section, we will demonstrate our knowledge of the
anatomy, medical terms and processes associated with reading and
central vision loss.
4.1
How do we read?
The pupil is a hole in the center of the iris where light rays enter
the eye, and this of course holds true for all vision-based activities,
including reading. The eye also has muscles which are responsible
for regulating the size of the pupil, i.e. how big the hole is, and
therefore how much light enters the hole [21].
The fovea is the central 2°of vision where vision is typically best
for those who can read normally. A parafovea describes the 5°of
vision on either side of a fixation, and parafoveal vision describes
the ability to read outside the current point of fixation, and the
peripheral is the region beyond that. Perceptual span describes
the region of effective vision. [16].
The process of reading is seen is a sequence of saccades be-
tween fixation points, and occasionally we also perform regres-
sions.
Saccades are rapid, jerky movements of the eye to shift focus
between fixation points, for example when reading text [12, 16].
The primary function is to put a new region of text into the foveal
region because reading from parafovea and peripheral is “near im-
possible”. We do not perceive any information during eye move-
ment, a term known as saccidic suppression [16]. A return sweep
is a type of saccade from the end of the current line to the be-
ginning of the next line. Reading span is the distance between
stopping points, and a larger reading span is associated with faster
reading [1].
Fixations are the state of an eye remaining still over a point
for a certain period of time. Fixation count is the number of fix-
ations around an area of interest. A longer fixation duration is
associated with deeper cognitive processing [21].
Regressions are form of a saccade where the eyes move in the
opposite direction of text, for example to re-read something. Short
regressions (for example within the word) may indicate problems
processing the currently fixated word, whereas longer regressions
(> 10 characters or to another line) suggest the user didn’t under-
stand the text. Readers are “generally accurate” at sending their
eyes back to the point they didn’t understand from [16]. Regres-
sion rate is the number of regressions per second [21].
These concepts are visualised in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Fixations as coloured dots, and saccades and regres-
sions as black and red arrows respectively. The colour of the
fixations represent time.
4.2
Readability and cognitive load
In the context of reading, readability concerns the aspects of the
design of the material being read which impact the flow of infor-
mation from the page/screen to the user, and a change in readabil-
ity affects the ease in which a user can extract information. Opti-
mal readability can be achieved by optimizing the fit between the
user and the content presentation to produce better reading out-
comes [1]
Reading speed is a function of moving the eyes across the con-
tent being read in saccades. It is generally calculated in “words per
minute”, although there are varying methods to define a “word”,
such as by counting characters, due to the varying length of words.
Beier contends that there is a “tendency to focus on [increasing]
reading speed”, but a higher speed may negatively impact compre-
hension/accuracy in acquiring information [1].
One factor that affects readability is the notion of cognitive
load, which can be defined as the amount of mental effort required
to accomplish a task, in this case for reading. Cognitive load can
be further considered as 3 different types of load, which are listed
below.
Intrinsic load is the complexity of the knowledge that is being ac-
quired, independent of how it is required. Sweller contends
that this is “fixed and unalterable” given a piece of informa-
tion processed by learners of the same level of expertise, and
can only be changed by changing the knowledge levels of
learners [19]. He further contends that some material is sim-
ply intrinsically difficult regardless of how it is taught [18].
Extraneous load refers to the cognitive effort required to process
information in a way that isn’t relevant to the learning task,
such as information displayed in a confusing manner.
Germane load is said to depend on intrinsic load. It deals with
“schema acquisition and automation”, which leads to deeper
understanding and long term memory of the material [18].
Along the same lines, blinking is a function that keeps the eye-
ball moist, and the number of blinks per second has been associated
with mental workload according to Zhan et al. [21].
We previously described the function of the pupil, the hole where
light enters the eye. The pupil size may give some hints on cogni-
tive load; a larger pupil size could indicate more cognitive effort.
4.3
Vision loss
Moving on to RQ2, we now intend to define some of the nomencla-
ture associated with central vision loss in particular, such as what
it is and what the causes are.
4
==PAGE:145==
As previously outlined, age-related macular degeneration is
the primary cause of central vision loss. AMD is a common eye
disease that negatively affects the macula, which is a central area
of the retina that is responsible for sharp, foveal vision needed for
reading etc. It is the leading cause of vision loss for elderly people
in developed countries.[5].
Patients suffering from AMD may develop a central scotoma,
which is a visual impairment that affects the central part of the
visual field. It results in a blind or dark spot in the fovea.
Central vision loss, or CVL for short, is an umbrella term for
visual impairment loss in the center of the vision. Consequently,
people with CVL have difficulty reading, using a computer and
driving.
The presence of a scotoma (including simulated scotomas) causes
patients to develop “eccentric” strategies which allow them to read
or perform other visual tasks [12].
Since people with a scotoma cannot read from the center of their
vision, they develop a preferred retinal locus, a location in their
peripheral vision which acts as a “pseudofovea” that takes over
tasks that require high-resolution vision, such as reading or recog-
nizing faces. The location will typically be close to the border of
the scotoma, but may change depending on conditions such as the
task or lighting conditions.
This is the most common compensatory oculomotor strategy
for CVL patients; patients will use a strategy called saccidic re-
referencing to direct the PRL rather than the fovea to land on
targets. There is no one set place where a PRL may develop, as
Maniglia et al. demonstrate, and the development of a PRL takes
time and evolves over time [9, 12].
4.4
Typography
Now addressing RQ3, we will give an overview of the relevant prop-
erties of typography, what we can control and how.
A typeface, not to be confused with font, is a collection of fonts
that define the style of text. The different styles are serif, sans-serif,
script and decorative typefaces.
Serifs are the lines at the end of letters in a font [15], for exam-
ple those seen in Times New Roman. Fonts without serifs are called
sans-serif fonts, for example Helvetica. Beier found that the pres-
ence of serifs causes lower reading speeds compared to the same
fonts without serifs, however the presence of serifs improves letter
recognition [1].
The optimal choice of typeface depends on the context they are
being used in, but for the purpose of longer forms of text and read-
ing, serif and sans-serif are used. Therefore, we will focus on these.
A font is then a particular instance of size, weight and style
of the letters of a typeface. Variable fonts were newly introduced
in 2016 as a digital font format that allows for multiple fonts in a
single file. This allows for the different properties of the font to
vary on a single or multiple axes [1].
The font size is usually declared in points or pixels and are the
actual size of the letters. However, perceptual size refers to the
perceived size of a font rather than the actual point size. Percep-
tual size is a function of the x-height of the chosen font [1]. For
example, as shown in Figure 6, the two fonts are both 100pt how-
ever Helvetica has a bigger x-height, and therefore perceptually, it
seems like a bigger font.
Letter weight defines the "boldness" of the text. They are typi-
cally numbered in 100 point increments, ranging from 100 to 900. A
high letter weight means more bold. They are also typically given
labels, such as “ultra-light” or “thin” (weight 100) to “black” (weight
900). Beier finds that “light” and “black” impair readability at all
font sizes [3]. Wallace also shows that light and ultra-light fonts
induce higher cognitive loads at all font sizes [20]. Therefore it
makes sense to use them for emphasis, but not longer forms of
reading.
Letter width, similar to letter weight, is also given numerical
values as well as labels such as “ultra-condensed” up until “ex-
tended”. In a study comparing the effect of font width on various
reading performance metrics, it was found that there was no ma-
jor effect of letter width on reading speed [14], nonetheless there is
an interesting analysis as shown in Figure 4. Another study found
that condensed fonts impair reading speed, however [1].
Inter-letter spacing is the space between the letters of a word.
It is recommended, for reading, that the space between letters has
the approximately the same optical value as the space within let-
ters [14]. Inter-word spacing is the space between words. In ty-
pography design, the inter-word spacing should be slightly less
than the width of the letter “o” [14].
Stroke contrast is the difference between stroke widths (i.e the
thickness of the letter) at different parts of the letter. High stroke
contrast, meaning large differences between stroke widths, is typ-
ically used to make UIs look more fashionable but are said to im-
pair reading and Beier contends that high stroke contrast should
be avoided where letter recognition is a priority [3], such as in
low-vision reading. Low and medium stroke contrast did not have
any meaningful impact on letter recognition, however [3]. Beier
found that typography scholars typically dislike fonts with “hair-
line strokes” [3]. One study found that words with low
stroke contrast were read at significantly smaller sizes when serifs
were used, as opposed to sans-serif [15].
Letter crowding is when the presence of neighboring letters
impairs
recognition
of
the
target
letter,
and
is
typically
found in smaller font sizes as well as the periphery [3]. According
to Beier, it is believed to be one of the biggest bottlenecks for letter
recognition and reading rate [3]. Beier also remarks that a new font
designed to decrease crowding facilitated peripheral crowded let-
ter recognition [3]. Similarly, Illusory conjunction is when fea-
tures of neighboring letters group together to form a non-existing
third letter. A high stroke contrast may cause this [3].
Text format depends on the context of the text being read. The
different formats include glanceable text such as the text you may
see on road signs or on a smartwatch, interlude text such as 280
character Tweets or other short form social media posts, and long
form text, such as textbook and novels. In this project where we
focus on education, we may focus on something between interlude
and long form text.
5
==PAGE:146==
Figure 4: Minakata and Beier show the effect of letter width
on various performance metrics associated with reading
Figure 5: Stylistic elements of font styles highlighted for the
sans serif font Helvetica (top) and the serif fonts Times Ro-
man (middle) and Courier (bottom).
Figure 6: Beier shows the perceptual sizes of different
fonts [1]
5
DISCUSSION
In section 4 we have seen definitions associated with vision in gen-
eral as well as typography. Furthermore, we have seen several ex-
isting solutions designed to help central vision loss patients read
in section 3. In this section, we will reflect on our findings which
will help us identify gaps in the state of the art, as well as potential
avenues we could exploit in developing our own solution to help
patients with CVL.
5.1
Cognitive load
Intrinsic and extraneous load were previously defined in section 4.
These loads are additive, and together they determine the total cog-
nitive load [18].
Intuitively, a high level of cognitive load that exceeds the work-
ing memory capacity compromises learning and information pro-
cessing as the reader’s efforts are wasted on understanding the for-
mat [18, 19]. Sweller also remarks that the instruction should be
designed so that working memory resources are allocated to ger-
mane load, i.e dealing with intrinsic load [18]. It would therefore
make sense to reduce the extraneous load, however Sweller cau-
tions not to reduce this load so much that the resources freed are
not used for productive learning [18]. Therefore, this is a delicate
balance that needs to be taken into consideration.
One way to reduce cognitive load is by varying the font weight.
Wallace et al. remark that light and ultra-light font weights induce
a higher cognitive load [20]. Other ways could include varying
the font family, for example serif or sans-serif. There are fonts de-
signed specifically to improve readability, which include fonts de-
signed specifically to be read on screens [3], and it is likely that
these could decrease the cognitive load. This can be tested experi-
mentally. We discuss other possible changes to the typography in
subsection 5.3.
5.2
Oculomotor behavior
There are a number of indicators and signals that we can take from
the readers’ oculomotor strategies to detect the reader struggling
to read. However, many of them can also be associated with a high
intrinsic load due to the difficulty of the material being read. For
experimental purposes, we may want to choose reading material
that is not so difficult to understand, as our experimental focus is
on improving the readability of the material.
While regressions can be an indicator that the reader has lost fo-
cus or is not giving the reading material the attention it needs due
to a high intrinsic load, it can also be an indicator of the reader sim-
ply not being able to read the material due to their central vision
loss. Therefore, a large number of regressions could be an indicator
to detect with an eye-tracker.
Another indicator could be the fixation duration. It was pre-
viously stated that a longer fixation duration is associated with
deeper cognitive processing (meaning trying to understand the ma-
terial, again associated with cognitive load), however we hypothe-
size that fixation duration and fixation count on a certain word or
phrase could also be a potential indicator of the reader struggling
to read.
5.3
Typography
There are many attributes of a font that can hinder or ease the read-
ing experience for both normal and hard of seeing people. Finding
the perfect balance of these attributes is impossible because each
person has different optimal typographic needs. However, there
are many studies that shows that typographic properties matter to
general reading accuracy and speed.
As letter recognition is a central part to reading, letter crowding
is said to be a “fundamental bottleneck” for reading performance
6
==PAGE:147==
and word recognition, and letter crowding is often found in the pe-
riphery vision [4] — an obvious point of improvement for our CVL
readers. We previously discussed the notion of crowding between
letters that are too close together which appear to morph and join
together or form non-existent letters. In one study Beier states it as
a well-described phenomenon that increased letter spacing helps
solve the problems of letter crowding, especially in the peripheral
vision [5]. One might assume that increasing letter spacing to ex-
tremes would continue to improve reading speed for CVL patients,
however Chung contends that it does not. On the contrary, how-
ever, Beier acknowledges that a font designed specifically to reduce
letter crowding facilitated peripheral crowded letter recognition —
and the greater the number of characters recognized in the periph-
ery, the faster the reading speed [4].
In the same paper, Beier also discusses the effect of stroke con-
trast on readability and contends that for light and bold fonts, read-
ability is impacted by a high stroke contrast, however for low and
medium contrast there was no significant difference [1, 4]. Wal-
lace also notes that light and ultra-light fonts increase cognitive
load [20]. The obvious conclusion is therefore to not test with bold
and light fonts with a high stroke contrast.
One thing to also consider is that showing a user a font that is
drastically different to fonts the user is accustomed to may hinder
their reading performance; as Beier finds that some typographers
think the user may be so used to a “bad” design that it takes them
time to get used to a better design [2]. The very same typographers
believe, however, that users need to overcome the “status quo” to
improve legibility. It would therefore make sense to give the user
a “warm-up” exercise to allow them to adjust to a new font; Beier
hypothesized that readers will become more efficient readers after
spending more time with the fonts after the initial period [2].
In particular, she found that it took users longer to adjust to nar-
rower fonts such as Helvetica and Times New Roman compared to
wider fonts, but “unusual letterforms” did not seem to slow down
the reading process. Users were more critical of unusual fonts, how-
ever.
With regards to fonts with serifs vs. sans-serif, Beier found that
users read slower with fonts with serifs at lower sizes [1]. Other fac-
tors that can be tweaked are x-height and average character height
and width, all of which affect the user’s preferences and together
can be used to increase reading speed by “35%” while maintaining
comprehension [20].
5.4
Performance measurements
A possible measure for cognitive load could be the variation in
pupil dilation; it is said that a pupil typically dilates when the mind
is stimulated. Another important factor could be the user’s posture,
i.e whether the user is leaning in to read the text, which could sug-
gest that the user is struggling to read the given text, but it could
also gauge how engaged the user is with the exercise of reading.
If using the eye-trackers, this information is available through the
extracted data; pupil size is given as one of the attributes, and the
𝑥and 𝑦positions of the eyes could indicate whether the user is
leaning in, for example when the eyes get further apart it is likely
they are leaning into the screen.
Although we can simply measure reading speed and use that as
a metric for whether a font is better for a participant, Beier et al.
note that readers will simply stop reading if they feel a font is un-
comfortable, even if it improves their reading speed [2]. Therefore,
when conducting experiments with participants we must also take
into account their preferences, and the best font for a reader must
take into account a delicate balance between reading performance
and their comfort.
6
EYE-TRACKERS
To address RQ5 we have researched different eye-trackers.
The world of eye trackers encompasses a wide range of devices
designed to capture and analyze eye movements. Among the var-
ious types available, including virtual reality (VR), glasses-based,
and screen-based eye trackers, we have chosen to focus on the lat-
ter. Given that our research focuses on individuals who predomi-
nantly read on screens, we have determined that screen-based eye
trackers are the most suitable for our specific objectives.
In this space, there exists a ton of different products with differ-
ent features, prices, and availability. First off we have the Parisian
company Gaze intelligence, previously SMI, recently acquired by
Apple. They have 3 products at different price points with different
refresh rates. All of their products seem good, especially LogicOne
with 250Hz would be a very suitable product. To buy these prod-
ucts require a quotation from the company themselves.
Second off, we have the SR-Research EyeLink 1000 Plus which is
a 2000Hz eye-tracker that can be integrated to many other medical
devices. SR-Research products are cited in over 11000 publications,
meaning it is a well used and tested product. Also, these products
are suitable for our application, but again a quotation is required
to buy these products.
The last eye-tracker we have looked at is the Tobii eye-trackers.
Tobii has a more diverse set of products for both personal and
research purposes. Their research suite includes 4 products with
different levels of portability, price and accuracy. Their top of the
line or mid-range options, Pro Spectrum and Pro Fusion respec-
tively, would be ideal candidates for our research with their 1200
and 250Hz refresh rate. Their other product line are focused more
on video gaming and immersion in this space. The eye-tracker that
our professor already has access to is an old generation of this prod-
uct line. The Tobii Eye Tracker 4C is meant for video gaming, but it
is nonetheless still a very solid choice for what we want to do. We
do not necessarily need the precision, accuracy and speed that the
professional research orientated eye-trackers have. This is the eye-
tracker that we are going to be using, simply because it is available
to us.
In the thesis following up on this paper, we will utilize eye-
trackers manufactured by Tobii, specifically the Tobii Eye Tracker
4C. To gain familiarity with the eye-tracker and explore its capabil-
ities, we conducted preliminary experiments to examine the type
of data it generates.
6.1
Data collection and understanding
We obtained a set of raw data from a fellow student who has done
practical studies on participants, sourced from the iMotions pro-
gram. This dataset consists of anonymized information collected
7
==PAGE:148==
from a female Control patient aged 22. The data encompasses var-
ious measurements pertaining to each eye, with clear descriptions
provided for each data type. The eye tracker utilized in the data col-
lection was the Smart Eye Aurora, sampling the data at a rate of
120Hz. For each eye, the eye tracker recorded the following types
of data:
• X and Y positions of the gaze in pixels
• Estimated quality of the gaze position measurement
• Pupil size in millimeters
• Estimated accuracy of the pupil size measurement
• Distance to the eye tracker in millimeters
• X and Y coordinates of the eyes within the capture box of
the eye tracker in millimeters
• Distance between the lower and upper eyelid in millimeters
• Estimated accuracy of the eyelid measurement
Additionally, the eye tracker provides supplementary data un-
related to the eyes directly, such as:
• Estimated distance between the gaze point (3D) and the gaze
origin (the precise meaning of this parameter is currently
unclear)
• Up/down, left/right, and tilt rotation of the head in degrees
Following the raw data, there is additional information gener-
ated by a device referred to as the "R Analysis GazeAnalysis I-
HMM filter," presumably an extension of the iMotions program.
This supplementary data provides detailed insights into fixations
and saccades.
Moreover, the dataset includes event data corresponding to the
presentation of slideshows to the respondents. These event data
points indicate the appearance of each "Part" (i.e., slideshow) to
the respondent. However, the specific visual content and structure
of these slideshows have yet to be determined.
The dataset also includes fixation and saccade data from multi-
ple participants, providing further insights into their reading be-
havior. The fixation data contains X and Y coordinates for each
fixation, facilitating easy visualization through plotting. The data
is organized based on anonymized participant identifiers and the
specific part they are reading. By plotting the data, we can exam-
ine the fixations of different participants for a particular part at a
time. In Figure 8, the plot illustrates the fixations overlaid on top
of text extracted from a 10th-grade reading examination.
To identify fixations and saccades from gaze coordinates, pro-
grams like iMotions make use of identification algorithms. The sim-
plest identification algorithm is VT, velocity threshold. This algo-
rithm labels fixations and saccades based on a threshold of the ve-
locity of the eye, for example every eye movement below 100deg/s
or 60deg/s is a fixation and the remainder is saccadic movement.
To visualise this we can graph the speed of the eye to time, seen
in the top of Figure 7. As can be seen in this graph, it is not very
precise to do this kind of velocity threshold for identification.
Another algorithm is dispersion threshold identification, where
the algorithm utilises the fact that fixation points tend to cluster
together. Here, fixations will be identified as groups of consecutive
points within a particular dispersion [17]. To see this we can look
at the coordinate data to time and notice the plateaus in the coor-
dinates, which are most likely fixations. It is difficult to visualise
this exactly without implementing the algorithm, which we do not
have time for in this project. In the bottom of Figure 7 the coordi-
nates of the eyes are plotted against time. It is clear to see that
there are plateaus in the gaze X coordinates, which correspond to
fixations. As well, it is clear to notice a regression as a fixation that
is closer to 0 than the previous one.
The drawback of these two threshold-based algorithms is that
they are simple. Imagine that we get a speed reading of 98deg/s,
and we are using a velocity threshold of 100deg/s, it would be la-
belled as a fixation, logically we can reason that it is most likely
going to be a saccade. The same applies to a dispersion thresh-
old, where a perfect dispersion threshold does not exist, and there
are high chances of mislabelling. The algorithm that the iMotions
extension we saw in the dataset uses a more advanced algorithm
called HMM which stands for hidden markov model. This algo-
rithm is a statistical tool that given certain probabilities find the
most likely label, based on the velocity of the eyes. It is a finite state
machine that uses two different probability distributions; transi-
tion and observation, for each state of fixation and saccade. The
distributions of saccade and fixations will be similar to that of the
VT algorithm, where saccades have distributions anchored more
towards the high velocities and fixations around the low velocities.
The key to HMM is then that for each datapoint we continue in
the state machine, for example at a fixation point, and only when
we substantially enter in to the saccade distribution, for example
at 95% do we change state in to a saccade and vice versa. This al-
gorithm will give more accurate results faster than VT especially,
but at the cost of more difficult implementation [17].
To visualise what a simple identification algorithm could look
like, we can visualise just the coordinate data against time. Shown
in
We can clearly see that there are plateaus in the graph, which is
where the reader are looking at the same spot, which we can label
as fixations
6.2
Tobii eye-tracker
As previously mentioned, the Tobii Eye Tracker 4C has been se-
lected for our research purposes. Our decision is primarily based
on its accessibility to us, but it is important to note that these eye-
trackers possess commendable features that align well with the
nature of our intended research. Through our practical experience,
we have found them to have good precision and responsiveness.
In the experimental setup, we utilized the Tobii Eye Tracker 4C
for data collection. To ensure accurate gaze tracking, we performed
calibration using the built-in calibration tool provided by Tobii. In
this calibration phase we were instructed to fixate on a series of
calibration points displayed on the screen while the eye tracker
captured their gaze data. This calibration process helped establish
a mapping between the eye tracker’s measurements and the corre-
sponding screen coordinates.
Following calibration, we simply looked around the screen for a
short period of time while our gaze data was recorded. It is impor-
tant to note that this data collection phase was primarily focused
on testing the functionality of the eye tracker and gathering pre-
liminary data. As such, only a small amount of time was allocated
for this process, and the data collected during this phase was not
intended for analysis.
8
==PAGE:149==
Figure 7: A visualisation of different parameters while reading a similar Danish 10th grade passage of text. Velocity is plotted
against time in the top graph. The green dots are anything above an arbitrary threshold of 60deg/s. The orange are the true
HMM-defined fixations, and the red are the mislabeled. X and Y coordinates is plotted against time in the bottom graph. For
the X coordinates the true HMM-defined fixations has been marked with blue, while the saccadic coordinates has been marked
with purple.
Figure 8: Fixations on a Danish 10th-grade reading test.
To extract raw data from the Tobii Eye Tracker 4C, we employed
a Python script that establishes a connection with the Tobii Pro
SDK using the Lab Stream Layer (LSL) interface. LSL is a compre-
hensive system designed for the cohesive collection of measure-
ment time series in research experiments. It encompasses network-
ing capabilities, time synchronization, real-time access, and, op-
tionally, centralized data collection, visualization, and disk record-
ing [10].
To utilize the Tobii eye-trackers, we employed their software
development kit (SDK) to identify and establish connections with
USB-connected trackers. Additionally, we applied a license file to
authenticate our usage. Following this setup, we were able to con-
figure the LSL stream. During the hardware testing phase, we em-
ployed a single computer connected to a single device. However,
it is worth noting that the LSL system enables the simultaneous
connection of multiple eye-trackers to one or more computers, fa-
cilitating data synchronization into a unified file. After collecting
some data from the Tobii Eye Tracker 4C, we saved it in a JSON
file.
9
==PAGE:150==
7
APPLICATIONS
In the research project that follows this initial investigation, our
objective is to design and develop an accessible application or in-
terface specifically tailored for individuals with central vision loss.
Building upon our research findings on typography and its influ-
ence on readability for this particular user group, our aim is to cre-
ate a personalized reading experience that caters to their unique
needs, by recognizing the individual nature of each person’s read-
ing experience. This experience is impacted by factors such as gen-
eral reading speed, and visual impairments. But also outside fac-
tors, as discussed earlier. Using the Tobii eye-trackers we will gather
real-time data on users’ reading patterns, eye movements, and gaze
behavior.
Using machine learning algorithms, we could develop a model
that could detect difficulty in reading text using signals detected
from the eye-tracker as previously outlined. Our application could
then either suggest changes, or intelligently adapt and adjust the
typography and visual elements of the application to cater to the
specific reading characteristics of each user. By taking into con-
sideration factors such as font size, weight, style, spacing, serifs,
and other typographic attributes, the model will dynamically cus-
tomize the font and text characteristics to reduce cognitive load
and increase readability. One thing that we would like to focus on
in this application is for the adjustments to be subtle to the user,
creating a natural, unobtrusive experience. The model should con-
tinuously adapt and incorporate the user’s real-time reading expe-
rience and signals, meaning it should allow it to dynamically adjust
and optimize.
To validate the effectiveness of the personalized adjustments,
we will conduct comprehensive user testing and evaluations. These
assessments will gauge the impact of the personalized adjustments
on users’ reading comprehension, speed, and overall satisfaction.
Actively seeking feedback from individuals with central vision loss
and collaborating with accessibility experts and organizations spe-
cializing in visual impairments will ensure that the design and
functionality of the application align with the specific requirements
of the target user group.
Furthermore, we acknowledge the significance of user empow-
erment and customization. The application will provide users with
options to fine-tune and customize the settings based on their pref-
erences and comfort levels. This customization feature will further
enhance the reading experience and enable users to adapt the ap-
plication to their individual needs.
By combining eye-tracking technology, machine learning algo-
rithms, user feedback, and collaboration with domain experts, our
research project seeks to develop an inclusive and accessible appli-
cation or interface that effectively supports individuals with cen-
tral vision loss in their reading experience. Ultimately, our endeavor
aims to create a platform that enables users to access and engage
with textual content comfortably, efficiently, and effectively.
8
CONCLUSION
Through this paper, we feel we have gathered enough information
to build a solid basis in the field we plan to do our thesis in. While
we researched the key terms, existing solutions and what data the
eye-tracker provides us, we also feel we built a solid motivation for
why this project is needed, as well as how it will be impactful, and
also that it is potentially feasible to undertake.
8.1
Onto the thesis
We now believe we have enough information to begin performing
the requirements analysis that would be needed to build a product
that end users could actually use.
Of course, algorithms and more specific features that could be
used to train a machine learning model will require additional re-
search which we plan to do during the thesis.
Furthermore, we need to devise a concrete plan for testing our
application through user studies and other user experience testing
methods. t
REFERENCES
[1] Sofie Beier, Sam Berlow, Esat Boucaud, Zoya Bylinskii, Tianyuan Cai, Jenae
Cohn, Kathy Crowley, Stephanie L. Day, Tilman Dingler, Jonathan Dobres, Jen-
nifer Healey, Rajiv Jain, Marjorie Jordan, Bernard Kerr, Qisheng Li, Dave B.
Miller, Susanne Nobles, Alexandra Papoutsaki, Jing Qian, Tina Rezvanian, Shel-
ley Rodrigo, Ben D. Sawyer, Shannon M. Sheppard, Bram Stein, Rick Treitman,
Jen Vanek, Shaun Wallace, and Benjamin Wolfe. 2021. Readability Research: An
Interdisciplinary Approach. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2107.09615
[2] Sofie Beier and Kevin Larson. 2013. How does typeface familiarity affect read-
ing performance and reader preference? Information Design Journal 20, 1 (Sept.
2013), 16–31. https://doi.org/10.1075/idj.20.1.02bei
[3] Sofie Beier and Chiron A.T. Oderkerk. 2021. High letter stroke contrast impairs
letter recognition of bold fonts. Applied Ergonomics 97 (Nov. 2021), 103499. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103499
[4] Sofie Beier and Chiron A.T. Oderkerk. 2021. High letter stroke contrast impairs
letter recognition of bold fonts. Applied Ergonomics 97 (Nov. 2021), 103499. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103499
[5] Sofie Beier, Chiron A.T. Oderkerk, Birte Bay, and Michael Larsen. 2021.
In-
creased letter spacing and greater letter width improve reading acuity in low
vision readers. Information Design Journal 26, 1 (April 2021), 73–88.
https:
//doi.org/10.1075/idj.19033.bei
[6] Rupert R A Bourne, Seth R Flaxman, Tasanee Braithwaite, Maria V Cicinelli,
Aditi Das, Jost B Jonas, Jill Keeffe, John H Kempen, Janet Leasher, Hans Limburg,
Kovin Naidoo, Konrad Pesudovs, Serge Resnikoff, Alex Silvester, Gretchen A
Stevens, Nina Tahhan, Tien Y Wong, Hugh R Taylor, Rupert Bourne, Peter Ack-
land, Aries Arditi, Yaniv Barkana, Banu Bozkurt, TASANEE BRAITHWAITE,
Alain Bron, Donald Budenz, Feng Cai, Robert Casson, Usha Chakravarthy, Jae-
wan Choi, Maria Vittoria Cicinelli, Nathan Congdon, Reza Dana, Rakhi Dandona,
Lalit Dandona, Aditi Das, Iva Dekaris, Monte Del Monte, Jenny Deva, Laura
Dreer, Leon Ellwein, Marcela Frazier, Kevin Frick, David Friedman, Joao Fur-
tado, Hua Gao, Gus Gazzard, Ronnie George, Stephen Gichuhi, Victor Gonza-
lez, Billy Hammond, Mary Elizabeth Hartnett, Minguang He, James Hejtman-
cik, Flavio Hirai, John Huang, April Ingram, Jonathan Javitt, Jost Jonas, Char-
lotte Joslin, Jill Keeffe, John Kempen, Moncef Khairallah, Rohit Khanna, Judy
Kim, George Lambrou, Van Charles Lansingh, Paolo Lanzetta, Janet Leasher, Jen-
nifer Lim, Hans LIMBURG, Kaweh Mansouri, Anu Mathew, Alan Morse, Beatriz
Munoz, David Musch, Kovin Naidoo, Vinay Nangia, MARIA PALAIOU, Mau-
rizio Battaglia Parodi, Fernando Yaacov Pena, Konrad Pesudovs, Tunde Peto,
Harry Quigley, Murugesan Raju, Pradeep Ramulu, Serge Resnikoff, Alan Robin,
Luca Rossetti, Jinan Saaddine, MYA SANDAR, Janet Serle, Tueng Shen, Rajesh
Shetty, Pamela Sieving, Juan Carlos Silva, Alex Silvester, Rita S Sitorus, Dwight
Stambolian, Gretchen Stevens, Hugh Taylor, Jaime Tejedor, James Tielsch, Mil-
tiadis Tsilimbaris, Jan van Meurs, Rohit Varma, Gianni Virgili, Jimmy Volmink,
Ya Xing Wang, Ning-Li Wang, Sheila West, Peter Wiedemann, Tien Wong,
Richard Wormald, and Yingfeng Zheng. 2017. Magnitude, temporal trends, and
projections of the global prevalence of blindness and distance and near vision
impairment: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet Global Health 5,
9 (Sept. 2017), e888–e897. https://doi.org/10.1016/s2214-109x(17)30293-0
[7] Singapore
National
Eye
Center.
2023.
Central
Vision
Loss
—
snec.com.sg.
https://www.snec.com.sg/patient-care/conditionstreatments/
common-eye-symptoms/central-vision-loss. [Accessed 25-Jun-2023].
[8] Susana T. L. Chung. 2011. Improving Reading Speed for People with Central
Vision Loss through Perceptual Learning. Investigative Opthalmology & Visual
Science 52, 2 (Feb. 2011), 1164. https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.10-6034
[9] Susana T. L. Chung. 2012. Dependence of Reading Speed on Letter Spacing in
Central Vision Loss. Optometry and Vision Science 89, 9 (Sept. 2012), 1288–1298.
https://doi.org/10.1097/opx.0b013e318264c9dd
10
==PAGE:151==
[10] Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience. 2023.
Lab Streaming Layer.
https://github.com/sccn/labstreaminglayer.
Accessed: February 13, 2023
(26f1c2c793f49983dcb70641a241c292624e05b0).
[11] Dr. Otto Lee. [n. d.]. Patient Information - Dr. Otto Lee — drottolee.com. http:
//drottolee.com/patient-information/. [Accessed 25-Jun-2023].
[12] Marcello Maniglia, Roshni Jogin, Kristina M. Visscher, and Aaron R. Seitz. 2020.
We don't all look the same; detailed examination of peripheral looking strategies
after simulated central vision loss. Journal of Vision 20, 13 (Dec. 2020), 5. https:
//doi.org/10.1167/jov.20.13.5
[13] with contributions Marilyn Haddrill and review by Mary Lou Jackson. 2019.
Guide to buying low vision magnifiers.
https://www.allaboutvision.com/
buysmart/magnifiers.htm
[14] Katsumi Minakata and Sofie Beier. 2021. The effect of font width on eye move-
ments during reading.
Applied Ergonomics 97 (Nov. 2021), 103523.
https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103523
[15] Katsumi Minakata, Christina Eckmann-Hansen, Michael Larsen, Toke Bek, and
Sofie Beier. 2023. The effect of serifs and stroke contrast on low vision reading.
Acta Psychologica 232 (Feb. 2023), 103810. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2022.
103810
[16] Keith Rayner. 1998. Eye movements in reading and information processing: 20
years of research. Psychological Bulletin 124, 3 (1998), 372–422. https://doi.org/
10.1037/0033-2909.124.3.372
[17] Dario D. Salvucci and Joseph H. Goldberg. 2000. Identifying Fixations and Sac-
cades in Eye-Tracking Protocols. In Proceedings of the 2000 Symposium on Eye
Tracking Research & Applications (Palm Beach Gardens, Florida, USA) (ETRA
’00). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 7178.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/355017.355028
[18] John Sweller. 2010. Cognitive Load Theory: Recent Theoretical Advances. In
Cognitive Load Theory. Cambridge University Press, 29–47.
https://doi.org/10.
1017/cbo9780511844744.004
[19] John Sweller. 2011. Cognitive Load Theory. In Psychology of Learning and Moti-
vation. Elsevier, 37–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-387691-1.00002-8
[20] Shaun Wallace, Zoya Bylinskii, Jonathan Dobres, Bernard Kerr, Sam Berlow,
Rick Treitman, Nirmal Kumawat, Kathleen Arpin, Dave B. Miller, Jeff Huang,
and Ben D. Sawyer. 2022. Towards Individuated Reading Experiences: Different
Fonts Increase Reading Speed for Different Individuals. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction 29, 4 (March 2022), 1–56. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3502222
[21] Zehui Zhan, Lei Zhang, Hu Mei, and Patrick Fong. 2016. Online Learners’ Read-
ing Ability Detection Based on Eye-Tracking Sensors. Sensors 16, 9 (Sept. 2016),
1457. https://doi.org/10.3390/s16091457
11
==PAGE:152==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Bygning 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
