==PAGE:1==
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
Case study of climate footprint and nutrient impacts
in Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
Case study of climate footprint and nutrient impacts in Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Laura Bøgebjerg Poulsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary biblio-
graphic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Drias, Videbæk Biogas
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental Engineering, Bygningstorvet, Building 114, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
rrrXbmbiBMX/imX/F
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In the light of the impending climate crisis, reductions of greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) are required
to offset the impacts of climate change. Denmark’s agricultural sector is characterized by high GHG emis-
sions and hard-to-abate emissions, and there is a political ambition of reducing emissions by 8 million t
CO2-eq in 2030. Pyrolysis technology has the potential to mitigate emissions from the agricultural sector.
By the thermal conversion of biomass into stable biochar and energy products, pyrolysis offers a pathway
to mitigate GHG emissions through avoided emissions from the reference use of the biomass, carbon
sequestration from biochar and substitution of fossil energy. Digestate from biogas production serves as
an abundant feedstock in areas with large agricultural sectors with biogas production. Ringkøbing-Skjern
Municipality falls into this category, and strives to reduce emissions from the agricultural sector through
integration of pyrolysis amongst other mitigation strategies.
The aim of this study is to investigate how the integration of pyrolysis in digestate management can pro-
vide GHG emission reductions in RKSK while considering impacts on the nutrient balance of nitrogen (N)
and phosphorus (P) to ensure nutrient recycling. The study employed a comparative life cycle assess-
ment within the consequential modelling framework to compare the impacts on global warming potential
and nutrient recovery of digestate management systems with and without pyrolysis in RKSK in 2025.
The findings indicate that integrating pyrolysis in digestate management leads to a lower climate footprint
compared to current practices in RKSK. Emission reductions are attributed to decreased storage emis-
sions, increased carbon sequestration in biochar, and substitution of natural gas. The recovery rates
of N and P were lowered in the pyrolysis system by 5.5 pct. and 3.0 pct., respectively, compared to
the reference digestate management system, but the high return of plant-available nutrients to the field
indicates that the fertilizer value might not be impaired. This conclusion is however highly dependent on
the separation technology of the system.
The introduction of pyrolysis has the potential to reduce the climate footprint by 400-950 kg CO2-eq/t DM
digestate, dependent on system parameters, such as separation technology and energy substitution, as
tested in sensitivity scenarios. Moreover, the study highlights that digestate fiber pyrolysis can effectively
contribute to RKSK’s climate targets. Based on the digestate potential of RKSK, the pyrolysis pathway
can contribute with emission reductions of approx. 30,000-75,000 t CO2-eq/yr based on the current di-
gestate production. This is equal to a contribution of 40-96 pct. of the 2030 target for emission reduction
from biochar and 20-48 pct. of the 2050 target. The high P content of biochar may constrain the appli-
cation rates of biochar produced from digestate fibers, necessitating the combination with biochar from
other feedstocks to achieve desired emission reductions.
This study serves as a preliminary screening of the impacts of integrating pyrolysis in digestate man-
agement in RKSK, and highlights the importance of context specific parameters such as separation
technology, digestate composition and energy substitution for the overall emission reduction potential.
Further scenario testing and data improvement are recommended to enhance the robustness of these
conclusions. Ultimately, this study offers valuable insights into the processes and parameters crucial for
achieving GHG emission reductions through pyrolysis integration in digestate management, with impli-
cations extending beyond RKSK to inform stakeholders and policymakers at both municipal and national
levels.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement and project design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project scope and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
4
2.1
Biochar definition and applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Pyrolysis: influencing factors on biochar production and properties . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Biomass feedstocks for pyrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Climate effects of digestate management with and without pyrolysis
. . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Nutrients in digestate management systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Digestate management in RKSK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods and data
14
3.1
Goal and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Life cycle inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results and discussion
32
4.1
Climate footprint of digestate management systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Impacts on nutrient balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Uncertainty of modelling a system in development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.5
Impacts at municipal level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6
Model representativeness of digestate management in RKSK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.7
Recommendations for RKSK and decision-makers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.8
Future perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Conclusion
54
Bibliography
55
A Appendices
61
A.1 Data quality assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Mass and substance tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 Mass and substance flow diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.4 Climate footprint results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.5 Perturbation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.6 Climate footprint results from sensitivity scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.7 Substance flows with decanter centrifuge separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
The increasing concentration of greenhouse gasses (GHGs) in the atmosphere from anthropogenic ac-
tivities is causing global climate change with widespread consequences across the world (IPCC, 2023).
The climate crisis calls for rapid reduction of GHG emissions (IPCC, 2023).
Denmark is committed to reducing the national GHG emissions through the Climate Law that was en-
acted in 2020 (Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, 2021). The agreement prescribes emission
reductions by 50-54 pct. in 2025, by 70 pct. in 2030 and to become climate neutral by 2050, all compared
to emission levels in 1990 (Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, 2021).
The Danish agricultural sector is responsible for approximately one fifth of Danish GHG emissions (Nielsen
et al., 2019). Through the Agreement on a green transition of the agricultural sector, the ambition is to
reduce emissions from the agricultural and forestry sector by 8 million t CO2-equivalents in 2030 (Ministry
of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, 2021). There is a binding goal of achieving 55-65 pct. GHG emission
reduction from the agriculture and forestry sector by 2030 compared to 1990 levels (Ministry of Food,
Agriculture and Fisheries, 2021).
Pyrolysis is among the technologies, that can contribute to achieving these climate targets (The National
Bioeconomy Panel, 2022). Negative emissions become essential to offset the residual emissions from
sectors where emission reductions are challenging (The National Bioeconomy Panel, 2022). Pyrolysis
can provide negative emissions, as the thermal transformation of biomass at elevated temperatures
converts a significant portion of the carbon (C) in biomass into stable C in biochar, which is the solid
product of pyrolysis (Lehmann et al., 2006), that can be applied to agricultural soils or used in various
other applications (Thomsen, 2022).
The recalcitrant nature of C in biochar results in reduced CO2-emissions to the atmosphere compared
to the untreated biomass (Han et al., 2020; Lehmann et al., 2006). Besides C sequestration, there may
be several other benefits of applying biochar to agricultural soils including fertilization from the nutrient
content in biochar and improved soil quality (Lehmann et al., 2006). Additionally, energy products are
produced from pyrolysis that can off-set the use of fossil fuels (Thomsen, 2022).
Pyrolysis is expected to have a technical reduction potential up to 2 million t CO2-equivalents (eq) in
2030 based on estimates by The Danish Council on Climate Change (The Danish Government, 2021),
and the companies developing the pyrolysis technology aim even higher. The development of pyrolysis
technology in Denmark is accelerating with companies such as Stiesdal SkyClean, AquaGreen and Dall
Energy developing and providing pyrolysis technology (Thomsen, 2022). While few pyrolysis plants exist
in Denmark today, several new plants will be put into operation in the coming years (Thomsen, 2023).
One of these is Stiesdal SkyClean’s plant in Vrå, that will produce biochar from biogas digestate fibers
from the adjacent biogas plant (Stiesdal, 2022).
Essentially, any biomass can undergo pyrolysis (Thomsen, 2022). However, it is essential to ensure the
maximum utilisation of the biomass resources in accordance with the cascading principle. Consequently,
residual biomasses should be used for pyrolysis (The National Bioeconomy Panel, 2022). Pyrolysis of
biogas digestate fiber, which is the solid fraction of the effluent from biogas production, can enhance the
energy yield from the biomass feedstocks used in biogas plants, reduce emissions from field application
and provide C sequestration from biochar production while solving challenges with increasing dry matter
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
1
==PAGE:7==
loading in Danish biogas plants (Elsgaard et al., 2022; The National Bioeconomy Panel, 2022; Toft and
Juul, 2022).
Agricultural and industrial activities disrupt the nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) nutrient cycles, surpass-
ing planetary boundaries for both elements and indicating unsustainable anthropogenic usage (Richard-
son et al., 2023). When coupling biogas plants and pyrolysis plants, it is important to consider nutrient
recycling and ensure the return of nutrients to the soil (The National Bioeconomy Panel, 2022). Loss of N
is highlighted as a downside of pyrolysis systems (Elsgaard et al., 2022; Thomsen, 2022). While biochar
can be source of nutrients to the soil, the relatively high P content of biochar may limit the application
rates due to Danish legislation limiting the P application (Elsgaard et al., 2022). Increased mobility of P
is often mentioned as a benefit of biomass pyrolysis as it enables distribution of P from areas of excess
to areas of scarcity (Elsgaard et al., 2022). The impacts on the K balance are considered less critical
(Grönman et al., 2016).
The Danish municipalities have an important role in achieving both the national and international climate
targets. Although municipalities are not required to plan for local emission reductions, they can become
central actors in facilitating, supporting and implementing climate mitigation actions locally (Frederiksen
and Damsø, 2023). Many Danish municipalities have large agricultural sectors, and especially in Jut-
land, these entail large quantities of farm animals and related hard-to-abate-emissions and problematic
nutrient flows. For this reason, many of the municipalities in Jutland include considerations of pyrolysis
deployment in their climate programs and plans. Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality (RKSK) is one of these
municipalities.
RKSK is engaged in climate mitigation with climate plans setting quantitative targets for the coming years
and towards 2050 (Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality, 2022a). RKSK has a large agricultural sector that is
responsible for 74 pct. of GHG emissions in the municipality corresponding to 805,791 t CO2-eq in 2021
(SparEnergi, 2023). Biochar is among the technologies appointed by the municipality to reduce emis-
sions from the agricultural sector. The target is to achieve emission reductions of 79,000 t CO2 annually
in 2030 and 158,500 t CO2 annually in 2050 relative to 1990 emission levels. This will correspond to ap-
plying biochar to 3,200 ha of land in 2030 and 6,300 ha in 2050 (Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality, 2022b).
The biochar targets set in the climate plan are based on simple calculations assuming that RKSK will
contribute to the national pyrolysis target of 2 mio. t CO2-reduction by their share of cultivated land.
Several biogas plants are placed within RKSK, and they handle just less than 1 Mt of agricultural biomass
per year of which the majority is liquid manure (The Danish Energy Agency, 2023c). The digestate
generated by these biogas plants constitutes a viable feedstock for biochar production.
This study aims at quantifying and assessing the potential GHG emission reductions that RKSK can
achieve from pyrolysis of biogas digestate fibers and subsequent field application of biochar in a life
cycle approach while considering impacts on nutrient balance and the limitations hereof. In this novel
approach combining both impacts on climate footprint and nutrient recovery, the study aims at qualifying
RKSK’s aims and expectations for pyrolysis to support decision making within the climate mitigation
strategy of RKSK.
1.1
Problem statement and project design
This study seeks to answer the problem statement:
How will integration of digestate fiber pyrolysis in Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality influence the munici-
pality’s climate footprint and nutrient balance?
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
2
==PAGE:8==
The study will investigate and answer the problem statement by addressing the following working-questions:
1. How does digestate pyrolysis systems function and how can they be expected to influence the
climate footprint and nutrient balances of digestate management?
2. How does the specific context of the Ringkøbing-Skjern case influence the performance and impact
of digestate management in systems with and without pyrolysis?
3. How much can pyrolysis-based digestate management systems impact Ringkøbing-Skjern Munic-
ipality’s climate footprint and nutrient balance in a 2025-scenario?
4. How robust are the produced results, and how can they be used to assess climate mitigation po-
tential from biochar application in RKSK and in a broader context?
The working questions are each addressed as follows:
Working question 1 is answered in Chapter 2 by conducting a literature study on biomass pyrolysis
systems with a particular focus on potential effects on climate impact and nutrient balances of digestate
management.
Working question 2 is answered in Section 2.6 by investigating the current and near-future situation
related to digestate management in Ringkøbing-Skjern municipality and by collecting and analyzing in-
formation about biomass potentials, biogas production, energy systems and agricultural practice in the
municipality.
Working question 3 is answered in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 by performing a life cycle assessment of
digestate management in Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality with and without pyrolysis technology. Impact
potentials are determined as the difference between the climate footprint and nutrient balance of current
digestate management without pyrolysis in the municipality and a near-future system with pyrolysis.
Working question 4 is answered in Sections 4.3-4.7 by i) conducting a sensitivity analysis, ii) inves-
tigating data quality and model limitations, iii) identifying important parameters for obtaining emission
reductions, iv) discussing the implications of the results for digestate pyrolysis in RKSK considering lim-
itations of the nutrient balance, and the relevance of the results for digestate pyrolysis at national scale.
1.2
Project scope and limitations
The project:
• is developed as a preliminary study of the current situation related specifically to digestate manage-
ment in RKSK and does not entail a full analysis of the impacts and issues related to deployment
of biomass pyrolysis in RKSK,
• considers near-future impacts on climate footprint and nutrient balance, and does not consider
long-term impacts related to development in biomass production and use,
• does not include soil-effects of biochar application,
• does not assess the potential impacts of combining biomass pyrolysis with other mitigation and
optimization strategies beyond supporting systems necessary for pyrolysis technology to function.
The scope is elaborated further in Section 3.1.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
This section presents relevant findings from a literature review encompassing pyrolysis technology,
biochar production, digestate management in agricultural systems with and without pyrolysis, and the
associated climate and nutrient impacts.
Firstly, biochar is briefly introduced. Pyrolysis technology and the implications of pyrolysis process pa-
rameters for biochar characteristics are addressed. The considerations for choice of biomass feedstock
for biochar production are then briefly examined. This leads to a review of the potential synergy between
biogas plants and pyrolysis plants utilizing biogas digestate as a feedstock for biochar production. The
review encompasses studies assessing the climate effects of this integration and reports on its implica-
tions for nutrient balance. Finally, the current digestate management in RKSK is presented.
2.1
Biochar definition and applications
Biochar is a C-rich material that can be produced from a range of thermochemical processes, including
pyrolysis (Prins and Dahmen, 2015). Biochar is not a uniformly defined material, but varies in physical
and chemical properties depending on factors such as biomass feedstock, pretreatment methods and
pyrolysis process parameters (Elsgaard et al., 2022). Examples of digestate fibers and the derived
biochar are shown in Figure 2.1. The International Biochar Initiative (IBI) defines biochar as ”a solid
material obtained from the thermochemical conversion of biomass in an oxygen-limited environment”
(IBI, 2015), while the European Biochar Certificate (EBC) defines biochar as ”a heterogeneous substance
rich in aromatic carbon and minerals produced from sustainable biomass under controlled conditions with
clean technology and used for any purpose that does not involve rapid mineralization of biochar to CO2”
(EBC, 2012). The conversion of biomass into more stable C during pyrolysis with a slow turnover in
the soil at rates on the centennial or millennial scale enables sequestration of atmospheric CO2 (Han
et al., 2020). Beyond its role in C sequestration in agriculture, biochar has diverse applications as a
remediation against environmental pollution, C sequestration in the built environment when embedded
in building materials and in animal husbandry as feed supplement (Schmidt et al., 2019; Thomsen, 2022).
However, applying biochar in agricultural soils secures a permanent sequestration and holds the potential
to enhance soil health (Elsgaard et al., 2022; Thomsen, 2022).
Figure 2.1: Images of dried digestate fibers (left) and the derived biochar (right). Copyright T. Thomsen
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
4
==PAGE:10==
2.2
Pyrolysis: influencing factors on biochar production and
properties
Pyrolysis can be conducted across a range of temperatures, retention times and oxygen levels, spanning
from limited to completely absent. At the elevated temperatures at which pyrolysis occurs (typically from
350 °C and higher), the biomass is carbonized and thermally split yielding solid biochar and a gas mixture
consisting of uncondensable gases (such as CO, CO2, CH4, H2) and condensable fractions (such as
water, oils and smaller hydrocarbons). The gas mixture can be further split by condensation into bio-oil
and pyrolysis gas. Pyrolysis is an energy consuming process, but the pyrolysis gas can be combusted
to fuel the process while still yielding net energy output. Biochar is often cooled in an inert atmosphere
or quenched with water to avoid combustion (Thomsen, 2022).
The pyrolysis conditions influence both the distributional yield of the pyrolysis products (char and gaseous
product) as well as the properties of the biochar that is produced (Thomsen, 2022). Different pyrolysis
process parameters impact the yield of products and their characteristics. The process temperature and
the retention time, i.e. the duration of the pyrolysis process, are parameters that are commonly identified
as having a significant impact on the properties of the produced biochar. The biochar characteristics are
also affected by the feedstock characteristics (Weber and Quicker, 2018). Biochar C stability is generally
higher in biochars derived from plant-based feedstocks, while manure-based biochars have a lower C
stability (Singh et al., 2012).
At increased temperatures the process yields a biochar with more stable C structures, but the biochar
yield is at the same time lowered with increasing temperature. Retention time impacts the degree of
conversion of the biomass feedstock. Fast pyrolysis results in incomplete conversion of the biomass
feedstock where the biochar will contain labile C fractions that are readily degradable in the soil (Bruun
et al., 2011). Furthermore, fast pyrolysis favors the yield of bio-oil (Weber and Quicker, 2018). Slow
pyrolysis favors a higher yield of biochar with a higher content of stable C (Bruun et al., 2012).
2.3
Biomass feedstocks for pyrolysis
Any type of organic material essentially has the potential to undergo pyrolysis (Thomsen, 2022), but the
choice of biomass feedstock influences the biochar yield and properties (Weber and Quicker, 2018). It
is relevant to consider factors that ensure a seamless pyrolysis process such as particle size, particle
robustness and morphology, while elements such as feedstock moisture and heating value influence the
yield of energy products and overall energy balance of the system (Thomsen, 2022). Generally, feed-
stocks with a high dry matter (DM) content are preferred for pyrolysis (Elsgaard et al., 2022). Moreover,
the chemical composition of the feedstock will impact the chemical composition of the resulting biochar,
including its nutrient content (Thomsen, 2022).
The National Bioeconomy Panel recommends the use of residual biomasses for pyrolysis to ensure
maximum resource utilization in accordance with the cascading principle (The National Bioeconomy
Panel, 2022). These biomasses include wastes, manure, deep bedding and sewage sludge along with
residual biomasses from food and feed crops, or residues of other biomasses with higher value purposes
such as chemical product applications (The National Bioeconomy Panel, 2022). The biomasses available
for biochar production in Denmark have been mapped in a project by NIRAS for the CIP Foundation
(NIRAS, 2023). The biomasses considered in the project are those categorized as residual, presently not
used for other purposes, such as combustion for energy production, and thereby avoiding any competing
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
5
==PAGE:11==
uses (NIRAS, 2023). These include straw that is not collected, sewage sludge and biogas digestate that
is directly applied to the field, bedding that is not anaerobically digested, but likely applied to the field,
and garden and park waste that is applied to fields or composted (NIRAS, 2023). Factors such as local
availability and affordability are also important when choosing biomass feedstock for pyrolysis (Elsgaard
et al., 2022).
2.3.1
Biogas digestate as feedstock
Biogas is produced from the anaerobic digestion of biomass, which is an anaerobic biological degradation
process that produces biogas, consisting of CO2 and CH4, as well as the effluent residue, digestate
(Tayibi et al., 2021). Digestate is typically returned to the farmer who exploits the nutrient content of the
digestate by using it as fertilizer on the field (Toft and Juul, 2022). Manure is typically the main feedstock
in agricultural biogas plants, often supplemented with co-digestion of higher gas potential feedstocks like
straw, energy crops, and deep bedding (Olesen et al., 2020). The digestate has a low DM content, but
it has been increasing over the years with the increasing use of straw and other fibrous feedstocks in
biogas plants. This presents a challenge to the farmers who now receive a digestate for spreading on
the field with a higher ammonia loss due to the increased DM content and lowered nitrogen utilization.
Separation of the digestate can be applied to concentrate DM in a fiber fraction while the liquid fraction
can be used as fertilizer with lowered emissions (Toft and Juul, 2022). An overview of the generation
of digestate and the subsequent optional separation is shown in Figure 2.2. The DM content of the
digestate fiber varies dependent on digestate and separation technology, but is often around 30 pct.
(Elsgaard et al., 2022).
Figure 2.2: Overview of digestate generation and the fiber and liquid fractions obtained after separation.
Separation also allows for separation of the N and P content of the digestate. According to Birkmose
et al. (2019) P concentrates in the fiber fraction, and in a higher degree than N, making separation a
way of adjusting the N/P ratio. The N/P ratio becomes lower in the fiber fraction and higher in the liquid
fraction. The fiber fraction can then be transported to areas with P deficit at a lower cost (Birkmose et al.,
2019).
It has historically been difficult to market the digestate fiber after separation (Toft and Juul, 2022). Py-
rolyzing the digestate fiber, which can be considered a valorization of the fiber that generates biochar
and energy products, has the potential to address the challenge of lacking outlets for digestate fiber (Toft
and Juul, 2022).
Separation with screw press and decanter centrifuge are the most relevant separation technologies in a
Danish context (Toft and Juul, 2022). The two separation technologies separate the components of di-
gestate with different efficiencies, resulting in different properties of the liquid and fiber fraction (Birkmose
et al., 2019). Separation is currently not common at Danish biogas plants (Toft and Juul, 2022).
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
6
==PAGE:12==
2.4
Climate effects of digestate management with and without
pyrolysis
The GHG mitigation potential of pyrolysis in agricultural systems is generally caused be three categories
of emission reductions: i) pyrolysis can lead to avoided emissions compared to the reference use of
the biomass feedstock, ii) biochar leads to increased negative emissions from C sequestration of more
stable C when applied to the soil, and iii) pyrolysis systems produce energy that can substitute fossil-
based energy (Elsgaard et al., 2022).
Elsgaard et al. (2022) studied the climate impact of digestate fiber pyrolysis, estimating effects per t DM of
digestate fiber with a DM content of 90 pct. The study found an overall mitigation potential from digestate
fiber pyrolysis of 863 kg CO2-eq/t DM. The largest emission reduction effect was attributed to excess
energy from pyrolysis mitigating 373 kg CO2-eq/t DM by substituting natural gas. Their findings revealed
that digestate fiber biochar sequestered 293 kg CO2-eq/t DM in the soil compared to untreated digestate
fiber, with biochar storing 425 kg CO2-eq/t DM after a 100 years, while untreated fibers stored 132 kg
CO2-eq/t DM. The study did not include separation of the digestate in the life cycle, as the study assumes
that separation also takes place in the reference scenario. The avoided emissions from pyrolysis of fibers
were 197 kg CO2-eq/t DM due to avoided CH4- and N2O-emissions for the handling of digestate fibers.
However, the study notes a lack of data on storage and field emissions from digestate fibers (Elsgaard
et al., 2022).
Thomsen et al. (2023) revised the results from Elsgaard et al. (2022) and found a higher emission reduc-
tions potential of 1850 kg CO2-eq/t DM in a 20 year perspective and 1550 kg CO2-eq/t DM in a 100 year
perspective. The potentials are reported with large uncertainty estimates of 200-3500 kg CO2-eq/t DM in
a 20 year perspective and 300-2500 kg CO2-eq/t DM in a 100 year perspective. Thomsen et al. (2023)
found that while the energy substitution contributes most to the emission reduction potential in both a 20
and 100 year perspective, the C sequestration effect is lower in a 20 year perspective and contributes
the least to the emission reduction potential in a 20 year perspective, as the digestate fiber also holds
a significant sequestration potential short-term. Conversely, the avoided emissions were substantially
larger in a 20 year perspective compared to a 100 year perspective, likely due to the higher impact of
CH4-emissions.
The large span of impact results, both between the two studies and within the study by Thomsen et al.
(2023), reflects the context-specific nature of emission reduction potential of digestate pyrolysis, consid-
ering factors such as energy substitution effects and the influence of modelling decisions on the quan-
tified climate effects. The main differences between the two studies lie in the modelled C sequestration
potential and value of energy substitution (Thomsen et al., 2023).
2.4.1
Avoided emissions from digestate management
The climate impact of biomass pyrolysis is highly dependent on the use of the biomass in the reference
use, i.e., how it would be managed if not treated in a pyrolysis plant (Elsgaard et al., 2022). When
digestate is separated into a liquid fraction and a fiber fraction, and the latter is pyrolyzed, there may
be avoided emissions from storage and field. GHG emissions from digestate management occur from
storage of the digestate in tanks before field application, as well as after field application (Holly et al.,
2017).
Holly et al. (2017) conducted an analysis of emissions from storage and land application of manure with
and without anaerobic digestion and separation with screw press. Overall, the separation of digestate led
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
7
==PAGE:13==
to higher cumulative GHG emissions compared to unseparated digestate due to greater N2O-emissions
from storage of separated solid digestate. This effect will however be lowered if the solids are applied to
land without storage, and possibly also if they are pyrolyzed without storage. GHG emissions from di-
gestate liquid were found to be lower than those of unseparated digestate due to lowered CH4-emissions
from storage. The emissions from digestate management depends on several factors, including storage
cover and field application method, e.g. with injection (Holly et al., 2017).
Pyrolysis is generally found to decrease emissions from field and storage in digestate management
(Elsgaard et al., 2022; Thomsen et al., 2023). The impact of biochar application on emissions from
the field have shown contradictory results, and there is a lack of studies in a Danish context (Elsgaard
et al., 2022). The impact on N2O-emissions from biochar application varies across published studies.
While some studies have found that biochar can decrease N2O-emissions from soil, others have found
no impact or an increase in N2O-emissions (Yoo and Kang, 2012; Zhu et al., 2014). A study found
no significant impact on N2O-emissions from application of biochar based on manure fibers (Zhu et al.,
2014). Meta-studies show no significant impact on CH4-emissions from biochar application (Woolf et al.,
2021).
2.4.2
Negative emissions from C sequestration
The transformation of C in biomass into more stable C compounds in biochar during pyrolysis facilitates
sequestration of C (Wang et al., 2016). The C sequestration that can be achieved from soil application of
biochar depends on the application rate of biochar, the amount of C present in biochar, and the amount
of this C that is mineralized over a given period of time (Woolf et al., 2021). The latter is dependent
on the stability of this C and soil conditions at the site of application (Woolf et al., 2021). In the case
where biochar is produced from biomass that would otherwise be applied to the field without pyrolysis
treatment, the C sequestration potential also depends on the difference in C sink effect between the
two (Elsgaard et al., 2022). The decay rate of biochar decreases over time and has been found to be
one to several orders of magnitude lower than decay rates of unpyrolyzed biomass (Azzi et al., 2024).
The rate of decomposition of C added from biomass soil amendment will initially be higher and then the
decomposition rate will stagnate. Depending on the C stability, the temporal aspect of the study will be
significant for the C sequestration potential (Petersen et al., 2013). Jensen et al. (2022) modelled the
degradation of manure-based digestate and biochar and estimated that approx. 35 pct. digestate C
remained in the soil after 20 years, while approx. 95 pct. of biochar C was sequestered. After 100 years,
approx. 85 pct. of biochar C would remain in the soil while only 10 pct. of C in digestate was sequestered
in 100 years perspective (Jensen et al., 2022).
Due to the very slow turnover of biochar C in the soil on a centennial or even millennial scale, the long-
term C sequestration potential of biochar is estimated using modelling with extrapolation of experimental
data (Wang et al., 2016). There is a correlation between the amount aromatic C condensation in biochar
and the C stability in the soil (Han et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2012). This correlation is used in the
parametrization of biochar C permanence where the H/Corg ratio is used as a proxy for the degree of
aromatic C condensation (Woolf et al., 2021). The correlation between increased C permanence with
increasing pyrolysis temperature is also used to estimate the C sequestration potential of biochars (Woolf
et al., 2021).
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
8
==PAGE:14==
2.4.3
Substitution of energy products
The energy production and consumption in pyrolysis systems has a large impact on the climate effect that
can be obtained from biomass pyrolysis (Elsgaard et al., 2022). Digestate pyrolysis systems can produce
excess high temperature heat, that can substitute heat from other sources. The emission reductions
potential of digestate pyrolysis will depend on the climate impact of the energy product that is displaced
(Elsgaard et al., 2022; Thomsen et al., 2023).
2.5
Nutrients in digestate management systems
Agricultural and industrial activities alter the nutrient cycles of N and P, and the planetary boundaries for
flows of both N and P are transgressed, indicating that the anthropogenic use of these nutrients is at a
level higher than what is sustainable for Earth’s environmental condition (Richardson et al., 2023).
The nutrient balance of agricultural systems is important to consider for multiple reasons (The National
Bioeconomy Panel, 2022). Firstly, nutrients are essential for plant growth and thereby crop production
(Andersen et al., 2016). On the other hand, excessive nutrient loading can cause environmental pollution
as N and P enters water bodies through leaching and runoff which can lead to eutrophication (Andersen
et al., 2016). The Danish aquatic environment is experiencing severe oxygen depletion as a result of eu-
trophication. While the west coast of Denmark is generally less affected by eutrophication, Ringkøbing
Fjord was severely affected by oxygen depletion in the summer of 2023 (Hansen and Rytter, 2023).
Efficient nutrient recycling in agricultural systems, exemplified by digestate management where agricul-
tural waste is treated and returned to the field, plays a crucial role in promoting sustainable resource
utilization. The nutrients in digestate can minimize reliance on conventional fertilizers, which often in-
cur high production impacts attributed to fossil-fuel dependency and substantial energy demands during
their manufacturing processes (Gilland, 2014; Poulsen et al., 2019). P is a scarce and non-renewable
resource, and the sustainable management of it is paramount to ensure that demands are met for global
agricultural production (Poulsen et al., 2019). Potassium (K) is the third important nutrient for crop culti-
vation. It is often perceived as less critical to consider K in terms of nutrient balance, as the K reserves
are more abundant than P reserves, and the production of K fertilizer is less energy intensive than for
conventional N fertilizers (Grönman et al., 2016).
2.5.1
Changes in nutrient balance from digestate pyrolysis
Digestate is currently applied as a soil amendment returning nutrients to the soil. It is important to con-
sider the changes in nutrient recycling that may occur from introducing digestate separation and pyrolysis
of the fiber fraction (Olesen et al., 2020; The National Bioeconomy Panel, 2022). Separation of diges-
tate is a necessary step before pyrolysis to increase the DM content. Therefore, changes in the nutrient
content resulting from separation are important for the nutrient balance. Additionally, pyrolysis of the
digestate fibers alters the nutrient composition as the fibers are converted to biochar and gas. While the
application of sufficient quantities of fertilizer is important, the plant availability of the nutrients is essential
for how well the soil amendments function as fertilizers, i.e. their fertilizer value (Tambone et al., 2017;
Thomsen, 2022).
Due to the increased use of deep bedding, straw and other feedstocks with high DM content, the fertilizer
value of digestate from Danish biogas plants has decreased over the years (Toft and Juul, 2022). Sep-
aration affects the nutrient concentration of the liquid and fiber fraction, and thereby the fertilizer value.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
9
==PAGE:15==
The separation technology has a large impact on the distribution of nutrients between the fiber and liquid
(Birkmose et al., 2019). Due to Danish regulation limiting the application of N and P, the N/P ratio of di-
gestate is important for the farmers’ ability to meet the fertilizer requirements of their crop production with
the nutrients in the digestate they receive from the biogas plant. Separation of digestate may provide an
opportunity to optimize the nutrient content according to the crops’ requirements and application limits
(Toft and Juul, 2022). A higher N/P ratio in the liquid fraction due to the repartitioning of N and P can
provide a better fertilizer reducing P accumulation (Tambone et al., 2017). Based on measurements of
plant available nutrients in separated digestate fractions, the digestate fiber may be used as an amend-
ment to enhance soil structure, while the digestate liquid can replace mineral N fertilizer (Tambone et al.,
2017).
The concentration of nutrients in biochar is generally correlated with the nutrient composition of the
biomass feedstock and the pyrolysis temperature (Elsgaard et al., 2022). The nutrients react differently
to the pyrolysis process. N is lost as gas during pyrolysis, resulting in a reduction of N concentration in
biochar with increasing pyrolysis temperature (Bruun et al., 2017). In contrast, P is transferred almost
completely to the biochar, and so the P content of biochar will reflect that of the feedstock (Bruun et al.,
2017; Christel et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2021).
2.5.1.1
Nitrogen in digestate management and pyrolysis systems
The value of manure and digestate as N fertilizer is associated with the ammonium (NH4+) content and
this is generally used as an indicator of plant available N in soil amendments. The non-ionized form,
ammonia (NH3), is also used to indicate the inorganic, plant-available N, and to indicate the potential for
N-loss as NH3 can volatilize. Organic N must undergo microbial decomposition to be broken down to
inorganic C species that are plant-available. The N content and the NH4+-N of digestate will depend on
the feedstock composition of the biogas plant. The NH4+-N concentration per kg N is high in feedstocks
such as cereal grains and pig manure, while it is lower in cattle manure. Anaerobic digestion increases
plant availability of nutrients by breaking down organic matter. In this process, organic N and P are
converted into inorganic nutrients (Möller and Müller, 2012).
Digestate has a lower fertilizer N value compared to mineral N fertilizer based on equal application of
total N (Möller and Müller, 2012). Studies of screw press separation of digestate show that NH4+-N is
mainly concentrated in the liquid fraction (Holly et al., 2017; Mazzini et al., 2020; Tambone et al., 2017).
Similarly, the majority of N in the liquid fraction obtained from decanter centrifuge separation is inorganic
NH3-N (Cathcart et al., 2021). Measurements of NH4+-N in Tambone et al. (2017) indicate a similar N
fertilizer value of digestate and digestate liquid. Mazzini et al. (2020) found that digestate and digestate
liquid had similar total N contents. Digestate liquid can lead to improved plant N uptake due to the higher
total share of NH4+-N, lower N immobilization after field application due to a lower organic C content in
the liquid, and faster soil infiltration due to lowered DM content (Möller and Müller, 2012).
Considering that a large share of N is lost as gas during the pyrolysis process and most of the N found in
biochar is in a very stable form associated with the stable C compounds, the plant availability of biochar
N is generally low and it constitutes a poor N fertilizer (Elsgaard et al., 2022).
2.5.1.2
Phosphorus in digestate management and pyrolysis systems
There is an excess of P in Danish soils, but its distribution is uneven. Eastern Denmark generally faces
P scarcity while western Denmark, with its dense animal husbandry, experiences a P surplus (Poulsen
et al., 2019). This uneven geographical distribution of the P resource could be solved partly by con-
centrating P in manure to a solid fraction that can be economically transported to areas with P scarcity,
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
10
==PAGE:16==
particularly in eastern Denmark (Poulsen et al., 2019). The low cost of conventional P fertilizers does
however challenge the competitiveness of this approach (Poulsen et al., 2019).
Digestate separation is viewed as an opportunity to concentrate P in the fiber fraction and solve regional
P challenges (Birkmose et al., 2019). However, the separation efficiency of P into the fiber fraction
depends on the separation technology (Birkmose et al., 2019). The majority of P will be transferred to
the liquid fraction using screw press separation, while separation with decanter centrifuge transfers the
majority of P to the fiber fraction (Birkmose et al., 2019; Drosg et al., 2015; Verbeke et al., 2021).
Studies of the impact of screw press separation on the P concentration show that P is mainly concentrated
in the liquid fraction, with comparable or higher concentrations of total P in the digestate liquid compared
to the unseparated digestate (Mazzini et al., 2020; Tambone et al., 2017). Furthermore, the studies
found that the concentration of plant available P was similar to or a higher than in unseparated digestate.
Though Mazzini et al. (2020) found that the concentration of plant available P was higher in the fiber
fraction, the overall higher P content of the digestate liquid provided a better source of plant available P.
During pyrolysis of biomass, nearly all P in the feedstock is retained, but the availability of P in the soil
from biochar amendment varies depending on pyrolysis conditions. P concentration generally increases
with increasing pyrolysis temperature, and longer residence time has also been found to increase P
content (Yang et al., 2021).
Pyrolysis has been found to change the P speciation of the feedstock (Yang et al., 2021). Bruun et
al. (2017) investigated how pyrolysis temperature impacted the P speciation and P availability in soil of
digestate fiber biochar in an incubation study. The digestate originated from a Danish biogas plant where
cattle and pig slurry were the main feedstocks. The immediate P availability was lowered in biochar
compared to the digestate fibers, but biochar produced at low temperature quickly had P availability
similar to that of digestate fiber during incubation. At very high pyrolysis temperatures (above 600 °C),
the biochar had low P availability in the longer term due to the formation of more stable P species (Bruun
et al., 2017).
Christel et al. (2015) conducted a soil incubation study on pig slurry fiber fractions treated with different
separation and thermal processing methods, such as screw press separation and pyrolysis at 400 °C and
600 °C. While the study is conducted on raw slurry, similar P content and availability as after anaerobic
digestion can be expected (Möller and Müller, 2012). The study by Christel et al. (2015) showed that
biochar produced at 400 °C from decanter centrifuge separated fibers exhibited long-term P availability
similar to unpyrolyzed fibers and conventional P fertilizer, suggesting that pyrolysis treatment does not
compromise its quality as a slow-releasing P fertilizer (Christel et al., 2015).
In conclusion, while biochar may have a lower P availability initially compared to non-pyrolyzed diges-
tate, biochar may have a more constant temporal pattern of P availability, or even increase over time,
making it a stable, slow-releasing P fertilizer (Bruun et al., 2017; Christel et al., 2015). By converting the
feedstock into biochar, it may become a long-term source of P and reduce P loss to the environment
through runoff and leaching (Yang et al., 2021). Although biochars produced at low temperature may
have high immediate P availability, there are tradeoffs with other desirable biochar characteristics, such
as C stability (Bruun et al., 2011; Bruun et al., 2017).
2.5.2
Regulation of nutrient application in Denmark
Danish legislation defines thresholds for the use of N and P on agricultural fields with the aim of reduc-
ing the environmental impact on Danish water systems (The Danish Agricultural Agency, 2022). The
regulatory framework defines utilization factors for N in different organic amendments, as the fertilizer
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
11
==PAGE:17==
quality of N in different substrates varies (Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, 2024). While the N
utilization factor of digestate depends on the feedstock used in biogas production (ranging from 50 to 85
pct.), the factors for separated digestate fractions and biochar are fixed values. The N utilization factors
for separated fiber and liquid fractions are 55 pct. and 85 pct., respectively, while biochar is assigned an
N utilization factor of 0 pct (Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, 2024). The lower the utilization
factor is, the more N can be applied to the soil within the N limits. A similar differentiation in P utiliza-
tion factor for different organic amendments does not exist (Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries,
2024). Consequently, the same amount of total P can be applied regardless of the type of amendment
that it is applied as. The total amount of P that can be applied is however constrained by so-called P
”ceilings” that vary, dependent on the type of organic amendment, between 30-35 kg P/ha (The Danish
Agricultural Agency, 2022).
2.6
Digestate management in RKSK
RKSK has a large biogas production with eight agricultural biogas plants located in the municipality and
two new biogas plants in construction. These plants collectively produced 1.2 PJ of upgraded biogas to
the gas grid in 2022 (The Danish Energy Agency, 2023b). In comparison, the national biogas production
in 2022 was approx. 30 PJ of which the majority is upgraded and injected to the gas grid (The Danish
Energy Agency, 2022). In addition to these biogas plants, that handle agricultural residues, there are a
few plants producing biogas from sewage sludge and landfill.
Collectively, the agricultural biogas plants treated approx. 900,000 tons agricultural residues annually in
2021-2022 (The Danish Energy Agency, 2023a). The biogas plants process a range of residues, with
the majority being manure, followed by industrial waste, energy crops, and other residues, as seen from
Figure 2.3. The manure processed in the municipality’s biogas plants predominantly stems from both
pigs and cattle, with an almost equal distribution between the two livestock types (ConTerra, 2023).
Figure 2.3: Feedstock composition for agricultural biogas plants in RKSK, 2021-2022. Data obtained from The
Danish Energy Agency (2023c).
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
12
==PAGE:18==
In RKSK, digestate is transported to the farm from the biogas plant by truck. At the farm, the digestate is
stored in tanks covered either with tent cover or scum layer in accordance with Danish legislation. The
digestate is applied to the field with band spread (Vestjysk Landboforening, 2024).
A survey amongst the agricultural biogas plants in the municipality reveals the configurations of the
plants, as shown in Table 2.1. Two of the biogas plants separate the digestate, with one of them being
in construction and expected to be in operation in the coming years. The purpose of separation is to
obtain a C/N ratio suitable for the application, to control DM content to adapt it to the crop needs, or to
concentrate P in the fiber (Nature Energy, 2024; RKB Bioenergi, 2023; Vestjysk Landboforening, 2024).
According to RKB Bioenergi, a DM content of 30 pct. in the fiber and 7-9 pct. in the liquid is expected
after screw press separation at the plant (RKB Bioenergi, 2023). RKB Bioenergi have incorporated the
possibility of coupling a pyrolysis plant to the biogas plant in the future (RKB Bioenergi, 2023).
Table 2.1: Information about the configuration of biogas plants in RKSK. The information is anonymized due to con-
fidentiality. Gathered through interviews with biogas plants in the municipality (Nature Energy, 2024; RKB Bioenergi,
2023; Vestjysk Biogas, 2024). Attempts were made to gather information from Fårborggård Biogas and Viftrup Bio-
gas, but without success. Another biogas plant is in the approval stage, but has not been included in the survey.
a)In construction.
Biogas plant
A
Biogas Plant
B
Biogas Plant
C
Biogas Plant
D
Biogas Plant
Ea)
DM content of digestate
6-7 pct.
6-7 pct.
6-7 pct.
7 pct.
9.8 pct.
Separation of digestate
None
None
Screw press and
decanter centrifuge
in series
None
Screw press
Upgrading of biogas
Amine
Amine
Water scrubber
Membrane
Amine
Energy source for upgrading unit
Heat from
gas boiler
Heat from
gas boiler
Heat from
gas boiler
Electricity from
the grid
Biomass
boiler
RKSK is actively engaged with pyrolysis companies regarding the possibilities for implementing pyrolysis
technology in the agricultural sector to achieve the goals set in the municipality’s climate plans (Westerby,
2023). The municipality is part of the SIMPLY project (Roskilde University, 2024) where they are working
with the pyrolysis company Stiesdal SkyClean to assess the potential for building pyrolysis plants in the
municipality (Westerby, 2023). Stiesdal SkyClean is currently developing their first large scale pyrolysis
plant in Vrå in Northern Denmark in connection to the biogas plant BB Bioenergi (Stiesdal, 2022). A
similar plant configuration can be relevant for digestate fiber pyrolysis in RKSK.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
13
==PAGE:19==
3
Methods and data
This section presents the methodology of the conducted assessment of climate footprint and nutrient bal-
ance impacts. It involves comparing the established reference system of current digestate management
with a pyrolysis system to analyze differences in processes, resource use, and emissions throughout
the life cycle. To do so, the study employs a life cycle assessment (LCA) drawing on the ISO frame-
work based on standards 14040 and 14044 and guided by Hauschild’s handbook on LCA (Hauschild
et al., 2018). A material flow analysis (MFA) of relevant substances in the system is performed with the
purpose of creating a solid basis with quantified flows and losses for the LCA. This chapter presents
methodological choices and assumptions for the conduction of the assessment of climate footprint and
nutrient balance in this study.
The workflow of the project has to a large extent followed the four stages of conducting an LCA; 1)
goal and scope definition, 2) life cycle inventory, 3) life cycle impact assessment and 4) life cycle inter-
pretation of climate footprint and nutrient balance impact (Hauschild et al., 2018). The workflow of the
study, illustrated in Figure 3.1, is characterized by iteration, involving the continuous refinement of the
goal and scope and ongoing adjustments to the inventory and impact assessment based on continuous
interpretation of intermediate results and learnings.
Figure 3.1: Overview of methodological workflow of the present study guided by the four stages of LCA.
The MFA quantifies flows of substances within both the reference and the pyrolysis systems from col-
lected data on the different processes of the life cycle. Mass flows and energy flows are established
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
14
==PAGE:20==
as the first step to ensure that quantified inputs and outputs are balanced throughout the processes of
digestate management. The material flows established in the MFA constitute a significant part of the
data inventory of the LCA. This flow of data and results is depicted in Figure 3.2. The mass balances
of the reference and pyrolysis systems are modelled using the software STAN. The advantage of using
STAN for MFA is that it ensures balanced inputs and outputs by indicating when these are not equal.
The impacts on climate footprint are quantified using the LCA software EASETECH.
Figure 3.2: Overview of data inputs and result flows between the MFA and LCA.
This chapter is concerned with the study’s methods and data with the intention to help the reader un-
derstand the construction of the modelled systems, as it is essential for understanding of the results and
their uncertainties presented in the later chapters. Firstly, the goal and scope of the study is presented
along with descriptions of the modelled system and data collection related to the system setup. The life
cycle inventory of the relevant processes are then presented along with the assumptions made to fill in
data gaps and limitations. Finally, the basis for the sensitivity analysis conducted is presented.
3.1
Goal and scope
The goal of this study is to investigate the effects on climate footprint and nutrient balance of integrating
digestate fiber pyrolysis in RKSK in 2025. The study will support decision making within the climate
mitigation strategy of RKSK regarding employment of pyrolysis of digestate fibers as a GHG mitigation
technology. The temporal setting of 2025 reflects a near-future implementation of the currently developed
pyrolysis technology. At the same time, it allows the assumption that the reference system for digestate
management in 2025 will be similar to the digestate management practice of today as presented in
Section 2.6.
The study is a comparative study looking into the change in climate footprint and nutrient balance from
introducing pyrolysis in digestate management. The study investigates the effects on climate footprint
and nutrient balance by establishing and analyzing the material flows in the current digestate manage-
ment system and in the potential digestate management system with pyrolysis of digestate fibers. To do
so, the study considers two impact indicators. The climate footprint is assessed using the global warm-
ing potential (GWP) measured in CO2-eq as an impact indicator to measure the comparative climate
footprint of the systems. The impact on nutrient balance is analyzed by employing the recovery rates of
N and P as indicators. The conclusions drawn from the results of the LCA are thus limited to the impact
on GHG emissions and share of nutrients returned to the field. The results cannot be used to conclude
on whether pyrolysis of digestate fibers has a lower environmental impact than the current digestate
management system. Rather, the results indicate the potential of achieving GHG emission reductions
by introducing pyrolysis in digestate management, and how the return of nutrients to the field is affected.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
15
==PAGE:21==
3.1.1
Establishment and description of studied systems
Two systems are compared and analyzed in this study. The current digestate management system in
RKSK is referred to as the reference system. In the potential future digestate management system, the
digestate is separated into a liquid and a fiber fraction of which the latter is pyrolyzed to produce biochar.
This system is referred to as the pyrolysis system.
A central aspect of constructing the reference system for digestate management has been to understand
how digestate is presently managed in the municipality. Information from various stakeholders has been
gathered for the study based on meetings and interviews. This information is not applied directly in the
model, but rather used to assess how the systems should be constructed to best represent how digestate
is and will be managed in RKSK.
All biogas plants in the municipality have been contacted in the research stage of this study. Informa-
tion regarding the configuration of the biogas plants (presented in Section 2.6) was collected from five
out of eight biogas plants in the municipality. Additionally, RKSK, Stiesdal and Vestjysk Landboforening
have provided information regarding current digestate management practices and potential integration
of pyrolysis (Butera, 2023; Vestjysk Landboforening, 2024; Westerby, 2023). Choices made in the con-
struction of the modelled systems are based hereon, for example regarding inclusion and selection of
separation technology and the energy that is consumed or substituted in the systems.
As the main goal is to assess the changes in climate footprint and nutrient balance, the processes that
are identical in the reference system and the pyrolysis system can be omitted from the assessment. In
both systems, the system boundaries are set from the handling of the digestate as it exits the biogas
plants until it is applied to the field either as untreated digestate in the case of the reference system, or
as biochar and digestate liquid in the pyrolysis system. The outputs of the systems are soil amendments,
heat energy, C sequestration, emissions and losses. Both systems are explained in detail below.
3.1.1.1
Reference system
In the reference system, which represents the current digestate management treatment in RKSK, the
digestate is transported by truck from the biogas plant to storage in tanks on the farm. It is subsequently
applied to the field with tractor. The system is shown in Figure 3.3.a.
3.1.1.2
Pyrolysis system
In the pyrolysis system, depicted in Figure 3.3.b, the pyrolysis plant is situated at the biogas plant. The
digestate is separated with a screw press into a liquid fraction, which is applied to the field without further
treatment, and a fiber fraction, which is pyrolyzed to produce biochar. The digestate liquid is transported
to farms where it is stored in tanks before field application, similar to the digestate management in the
reference system. The digestate fiber produced from screw press separation is pretreated before it
is pyrolyzed. This pretreatment includes steam drying to obtain a DM content suitable for pyrolysis
and pelletization to obtain uniform digestate fiber pellets. The evaporated fraction from steam drying is
assumed to be condensed and the condensate is mixed with the digestate liquid. The digestate fiber
pellets are pyrolyzed at 600 °C. The pyrolysis process yields biochar and pyrolysis gas. The biochar is
transported to farms for storage and subsequent field application, while the gas is combusted to produce
heat that is supplied to the pyrolysis process, the steam dryer and the biogas plant for its upgrading unit
where biogas is upgraded to biomethane for injection into the gas grid. Additionally, the excess heat from
the steam dryer is also supplied to the biogas plant for upgrading. All processes in the pretreatment and
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
16
==PAGE:22==
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure 3.3: Simple depictions of studied systems. Icons from flaticon.com.
pyrolysis steps are based on SkyClean’s Vrå-type configuration, which is a pyrolysis plant (a counter-
current fixed bed technology) combined with pressurized steam drying and pelletization.
3.1.2
Functional unit
The assessment of the two systems is based on the functional unit (FU):
Handling of 1 t DM digestate in RKSK in 2025
The chosen FU allows equal comparison of the reference system and the pyrolysis system, while it is
also used in other similar studies and thereby enables easy comparison between the results of this study
and other similar studies of biochar production and application.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
17
==PAGE:23==
3.1.3
Modelling framework for LCI
The life cycle inventory (LCI) comprises all flows of resources and emissions of the systems and forms the
basis for calculating the impacts of the systems (Hauschild et al., 2018). An important choice in the LCI
modelling framework is how to handle multifunctional processes (Hauschild et al., 2018). In the reference
system and pyrolysis system, soil amendments in the form of digestate, digestate liquid and biochar are
produced. The pyrolysis system also produces excess heat from combustion of the pyrolysis gas. The
multifunctionality of the systems is handled through system expansion where the system boundaries are
expanded by crediting the energy and fertilizer, that digestate and pyrolysis products will likely substitute,
as an avoided impact in the systems.
The LCI is performed within the consequential modelling framework. As opposed to attributional mod-
elling, where the impact of a system is allocated to a product, consequential modelling considers the
changes that a system will cause (Hauschild et al., 2018). Introducing pyrolysis in digestate manage-
ment in RKSK will cause changes in mass, energy and substance flows and the impacts should therefore
be quantified using consequential modelling. The pyrolysis system will cause changes in heat production,
fertilizer consumption and water consumption. The model accounts for these changes by considering the
energy sources, fertilizers and water that will be employed or displaced, termed the marginal products.
Thus, when an extra kWh of electricity is consumed in the pyrolysis system, the marginal electricity will
consist of the energy sources that are believed to be employed in case of increased electricity consump-
tion.
Biogenic CO2-emissions are not included in the climate footprint assessment, as they are assumed to be
part of the natural C cycle with zero impact on radiative forcing. This is further elaborated on in Section
3.1.7.
3.1.4
System boundaries and completeness requirements
To ensure that the systems modelled are aligned with the goal and intended application of the study,
the system boundaries must include the relevant processes to be able to assess the impact on climate
footprint and nutrient balance of the pyrolysis system compared to the reference system. The system
boundaries determine the processes from which the impacts are quantified (Hauschild et al., 2018).
A detailed overview of the systems including the indication of boundaries and substitution of products
are shown in Figure 3.4. These diagrams show the boundaries of the foreground and the background
systems. The foreground system includes all processes that are specific to this system, while the back-
ground system consists of the processes that are not affected by changes in the digestate management
system.
This study uses a qualitative approach to the exclusion of processes based on similar studies and the
argumentation for exclusion of processes will explained in the construction of the inventory in Section
3.2. Processes for production and maintenance of machinery and infrastructure in the pyrolysis system
are not included. This is in line with the practice of other similar studies, such as (Thomsen, 2022), but
the impact of including these life cycle stages should ideally be investigated. As previously mentioned,
processes that are identical between the reference and pyrolysis systems are also excluded.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
18
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.4: System boundaries of the reference system (R) and pyrolysis system (P).
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
19
==PAGE:25==
3.1.5
Data representativeness requirements
This section presents the requirements set for the data collection in terms of geographical, temporal and
technological representativeness. The quality of the collected data used in the model in relation to these
representativeness requirements is elaborated on in Section 3.2.1.
Geographical representativeness. The data must represent the digestate management system in
RKSK as presented earlier. For the pyrolysis system, which is not yet implemented in RKSK, the data
must align with the expected system as presented in Section 3.1.1.
Temporal representativeness. The data must reflect the temporal scope of the study, which is a 2025-
scenario to represent the current digestate management of RKSK in the reference system and the state
of the art pyrolysis technology for digestate fibers. The temporal scope is also reflected in the background
processes of the model, which to the furthest extend possible should represent this near-future temporal
scope.
Technological representativeness. The technological representativeness of the data must reflect the
technologies involved in the current digestate management system of RKSK and the expected pyrolysis
system. As the latter is not yet planned nor in function, the technological representativeness of the data
must align with the expected pyrolysis technology and processes involved in this system. The tech-
nological aspect of data representativeness is closely linked to the geographical and temporal aspects
(Hauschild et al., 2018). It is for example reflected in the energy systems in the background system, as
the energy mix depends on the location and the time, due to rapid development in energy mix. Further-
more, there should be internal technological compatibility between the processes modelled, meaning that
the output of one process should comply with the inputs of the subsequent process. The technologies
of the systems and their representativeness requirements include:
• Transportation by truck
• Tank storage with tent cover or scum layer according to Danish legislation
• Field application of soil amendments into the soil with agricultural machinery
• Screw press separation of digestate
• Pretreatment and pyrolysis of digestate fiber based on Stiesdal SkyClean pyrolysis (a counter-
current fixed bed technology) combined with pressurized steam drying and pelletization
3.1.6
Data quality requirements
Data quality is assessed based on the method by Weidema and Wesnæs (1996) with assessment of
data’s reliability, completeness and temporal, geographical and technological correlation with the sys-
tems to be modelled. Each aspect is given a rating from 1 to 5, and by taking the average of the score
of the five aspects the data quality score for each data source is obtained. A data quality score of 1
indicates a high data quality, while 5 indicates low data quality. Additionally, data reliability is assessed
qualitatively by comparing the data used in the model with other data sources and findings of similar
studies. The quality of the data collected and used in the model is evaluated in Section 3.2.1.
3.1.7
Preparing the basis for climate footprint impact assessment
The LCA in this study considers the impact on climate footprint of digestate management based on GWP
measured in CO2-eq, and the impact on nutrient balance quantified by the recovery rate of N and P.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
20
==PAGE:26==
The LCA is performed using the software EASETECH V3.5.0 and the 2022-12 official database. This
software is developed for LCA of environmental technologies (DTU Environmental Engineering, 2024).
The GWP of the systems is quantified by using the IPCC 2013 impact category that specifies the GWP
for GHGs. The climate footprint results are modelled using the long-term effects with carbon-climate
feedback (ccfb) loops to account for the feedback mechanisms between climate change and fluxes of
GHGs (Sonderegger and Stoikou, 2022). The impacts are modelled using both the GWP in a 20 year
perspective and 100 year perspective. Due to variation in lifetime and radiative forcing of different GHGs
in the atmosphere, the GWP of emissions will depend on the temporal scope. The GWP of the main
GHGs in IPCC 2013 are shown in Table 3.1.
Biogenic CO2-emissions are not included in this study in line with IPCC 2006 Guidelines for national
inventories, as they stem from C photosynthetically fixed by plants through uptake of CO2 from the
atmosphere and released back into the atmosphere (IPCC, 2013). Thereby, biogenic CO2-emissions
do not contribute to increased radiative forcing. Biogenic C emitted as CH4 will however have an in-
creased radiative forcing compared to CO2 (Sonderegger and Stoikou, 2022). This is implemented in
the EASETECH model using IPCC 2013 from which non-fossil CH4-emissions have an impact until oxi-
dized into CO2.
Table 3.1: Global warming potential of main greenhouse gasses in the model. Adapted from Table 8.7 in IPCC
(2013).
GWP20
GWP100
w. ccfb
w. ccfb
Fossil CO2
1
1
Biogenic CO2 (non-fossil)
0
0
Biogenic CH4 (non-fossil)
86
34
N2O
268
298
The nutrient recovery rates are considered as the amount of N and P in the digestate that is returned to
the field. The rate thus does not consider the quality of the nutrients nor the fate of the nutrients after
field application. The nutrient recovery rate is calculated as the mass of nutrient (N or P) returned to the
field out of the total input of the nutrient in digestate:
Recovery rate =
mfield
mdigestate
,
(3.1)
where mfield is the mass of N or P applied to the field, and mdigestate is the mass of N or P in the digestate
input to the system.
3.2
Life cycle inventory
In the following, the construction of the LCI is outlined along with assumptions made for the modelled
systems to overcome data limitations, uncertainties and gaps. The data collection and quality of the
collected data is presented and assessed. When building the LCI, calculations are necessary to ensure
unit consistency, consistency with the FU and to validate data. These are also presented in this sec-
tion. Finally, the basis for addressing the uncertainty of the model by employing sensitivity analysis is
presented.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
21
==PAGE:27==
3.2.1
Data collection and quality
Data is collected from multiple sources, and an overview of the types of data used to model the two
systems is given in Figure 3.5. The pyrolysis system is modelled using measured and modelled data for
the pretreatment and pyrolysis processes. The remaining processes in the pyrolysis system as well as
the whole reference system are modelled using data from scientific literature and LCI databases.
Figure 3.5: Overview of data sources for life cycle stages of the reference system and pyrolysis system.
The data quality has been assessed and scored. A full overview of collected data and their assessed
quality is found in Appendix A.1. Overall, the data applied in the study is of medium quality. The applica-
tion of data and assumptions is presented in the following sections, while the implications of data quality
are addressed in the sensitivity analysis and discussed in Section 4.4.
3.2.2
Mass balance assumptions
Assumptions are made due to data restrictions when information about the modelled systems is lacking.
These assumptions apply to both the overall model and to specific processes of the systems. The
assumptions that are made for the overall model and thus apply to both the reference system and the
pyrolysis systems are:
1. The material flows are modelled to ensure mass balance:
mass = DM + water
DM = VS + ash
2. Where data on flows or transfer of substances are missing the following assumptions for mass
balance are made:
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
22
==PAGE:28==
• mass balances for mass and DM as described above must be preserved,
• C follows DM. Mass loss of C from emissions is proportional to mass loss of DM,
• N follows DM. Mass loss of N from emissions is proportional to mass loss of DM, and
• energy follows C.
3.2.3
Digestate composition
Digestate as it leaves the biogas plants is the input to both the reference and pyrolysis systems. Data on
the composition of digestate in terms of concentration of substances (C, N, P, K, VS, ash and energy) has
not been obtained from the biogas plants in RKSK. Instead, the digestate composition is determined from
measurements of substrate concentration later in the life cycle of the pyrolysis system. It is assumed
that the digestate consists of 50/50 of cow manure and pig manure digestate, as these feedstocks make
up the majority of feedstock input to biogas plants in RKSK (The Danish Energy Agency, 2023a).
Specifically, the digestate composition is determined from the composition of digestate fibers, fiber pel-
lets and the derived biochar as measured by elemental analysis by Stiesdal SkyClean and DTU CHEC
(Ravenni, 2023; Stiesdal, 2023b). The composition of digestate as it leaves the biogas plant is deter-
mined by tracing back the change in composition through the relevant processes of pretreatment, drying
and separation based on the transfer functions of these presented later in this chapter. The energy con-
tent is assumed to be 18 MJ/kg DM based on measured energy content of digestate fibers and pellets
(Stiesdal, 2023b). Additionally, the DM and water content is modelled to fit the moisture contents given in
the thermodynamic modelling of the Vrå-type configuration (Butera, 2023). An NH4+-N fraction of 0.60 kg
NH4+-N/kg N is assumed in line with findings from Hamelin et al. (2010) and data from Stiesdal SkyClean
(Stiesdal, 2023b). The resulting digestate composition used in this model is shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Digestate composition applied in the model.
Water
DM
VS
Ash
Energy
C
N
NH4
+-N
P
K
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
[MJ/kg DM]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
[pct. N]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
90.6
9.4
89.0
11.0
18.0
42.0
6.40
0.60
1.14
8.40
This digestate composition is comparable with compositions found in the literature. Ranges of substance
compositions found in the literature and the Phyllis biomass database are shown in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Ranges of substance concentrations from digestate composition of other studies and the Phyllis database
(Hamelin et al., 2010; Phyllis2, 2011, 2019; Thomsen, 2021).
Ash
Energy
C
N
P
K
[pct. DM]
[MJ/kg DM]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
9.8-36
15.0-17.8
44.0-49.5
1.5-8.2
1.2-3.1
1.4-8.6
The digestate input in the model is scaled to the FU of 1 t DM digestate. The input to the model is thus:
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
23
==PAGE:29==
Table 3.4: Digestate substance input to the model per FU.
Total ww
Water
DM
VS
Ash
Energy
C
N
NH4
+-N
P
K
[t/t DM]
[t/t DM]
[t/t DM]
[t/t DM]
[t/t DM]
[MJ/t DM]
[t/t DM]
[t/t DM]
[t/t DM]
[t/t DM]
[t/t DM]
10.7
9.69
1
0.89
0.11
18,000
0.42
0.084
0.064
0.011
0.038
The digestate composition impact on the climate footprint results is assessed in the sensitivity analysis.
3.2.4
System modelling of processes
The following sections elaborate the calculations of and assumptions for the processes of both the ref-
erence and pyrolysis systems, as shown in Figure 3.4. All transfer functions are shown in Table 3.5, and
each block is discussed in the subsections with reference to the process names in Figure 3.4.
Table 3.5: Transfer functions applied in the model. ”-”: Not applied as there is no impact.
Reference system
Total ww
Water
DM
VS
Ash
Energy
C
N
NH4
+-N
P
K
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
References
Storage of digestate
Emissions from storage
4.92
5.00
3.20
3.59
0
6.2
6.2
9.0
15.0
0
0
Holly et al. (2017)
Digestate
95.1
95.0
96.8
96.4
100
93.8
93.8
91.0
85.0
100
100
Emissions from field
Emissions
-
-
-
-
-
-
2.1
0.29
-
-
-
Holly et al. (2017)
Field
-
-
-
-
-
-
97.9
99.7
-
-
-
IPCC (2019)
Pyrolysis system
Total ww
Water
DM
VS
Ash
Energy
C
N
NH4
+-N
P
K
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
Screw press separation
Digestate liquid
90.0
93.9
51.9
51.9
51.9
51.2
51.2
83.0
90.8
78.2
90.0
Drosg et al. (2015)
Digestate fiber
10.0
6.1
48.1
48.1
48.1
48.8
48.8
17.0
9.2
21.8
10.0
Steam drying
Digestate fiber
49.6
9.0
99.4
99.3
100
100
100
71.4
11.9
100
100
Butera (2023)
Vapor for condensation
50.4
91.0
0.6
0.7
0
0
0
28.6
88.1
0
0
Deviatkin et al. (2018)
Storage of digestate liquid
Emissions from storage
5.0
5.0
3.0
3.4
0
5.6
5.6
6.4
9.7
0
0
Holly et al. (2017)
Digestate liquid
95.0
95.0
97.0
96.6
100
94.4
94.4
93.6
90.3
100
100
Pelletization
Digestate fiber
99.0
99.0
99.0
99.0
99.0
99.0
99.0
99.0
99.0
99.0
99.0
Thomsen (2021)
Loss
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Pyrolysis
Biochar
40.0
28.5
41.3
34.1
100
57.8
57.8
33.3
12.1
87.2
100
Stiesdal (2023b)
Gas
60.0
71.5
58.7
65.9
0
42.2
42.2
66.7
87.9
12.8
0
Ravenni (2023)
Quenching
Biochar
-54.8
-771.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Butera (2023)
Emissions from field, liquid
Emissions
-
-
-
-
-
-
3.0
0.18
-
-
-
Holly et al. (2017)
Field
-
-
-
-
-
-
97.0
99.8
-
-
-
IPCC (2006)
Emissions from field, biochar
Emissions
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
IPCC (2006)
Field
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
99
-
-
-
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
24
==PAGE:30==
3.2.4.1
Transportation
It is assumed that the soil amendments (digestate, digestate liquid and biochar) are transported 25 km
from the biogas plant or pyrolysis plant (coupled to the biogas plant) to the farm for storage and field
application (Process R.1, P.2 and P.10 in Figure 3.4). The transportation is modelled with the econinvent
3.7.1 process transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5,RoW.
3.2.4.2
Emissions from storage
Emissions occur during storage of the digestate in the reference system (Process R.2 ) and digestate
liquid in the pyrolysis systems (Process P.3). It is assumed that there are no emissions during storage of
biochar (Thomsen, 2021). The fraction of C and N emitted as CH4-C and N2O-N are based on measured
data from storage of manure digestate and digestate liquid from Holly et al. (2017). Indirect emissions of
N2O are not included in the LCA. These indirect emissions occur from the conversion of NOX and NH3
into N2O through atmospheric reactions (Hamelin et al., 2010). The calculated emission fractions are
shown in Table 3.6. There is a discrepancy in the C emissions reported in Holly et al. (2017), but effects
on emission factors are small.
The share of DM emitted during storage is calculated following the assumptions for mass balance pre-
sented in Section 3.2.2. The share of water emitted during storage is assumed to be 5 pct. due to lack
of data on water evaporation from tank storage.
Table 3.6: Emissions from storage of digestate and digestate liquid given as fraction of emitted C and N. Based on
Holly et al. (2017).
CH4-C
N2O-N
[pct. of emitted C]
[pct. of emitted N]
Digestate
11.7
0.3
Digestate liquid
7.6
0.2
3.2.4.3
Emissions from field
The field application of soil amendments (Processes R.3, P.4 and P.12) leads to emissions from the
field. In the same manner as the emissions from storage, the fraction of C emitted as CH4-C after field
application of digestate and liquid digestate are based on Holly et al. (2017). The standard emission
factor of 0.01 kg N2O-N emission per kg N applied defined by IPCC is applied in this study (IPCC, 2006).
Biochar application is not assumed to cause emissions of CH4 and N2O (Elsgaard et al., 2022; Woolf
et al., 2021).
Due to the lowered N utilization factor of digestate, digestate liquid and biochar compared to conven-
tional fertilizer (presented in Section 2.5.2), and based on the assumption that the farmer will apply
the maximum allowed amount of N fertilizer, the application of these soil amendments will lead to in-
creased N2O-emissions compared to when only conventional fertilizers are applied. This increase in
N2O-emissions can be estimated as:
Increase in N2O emission factor =
1
N utilization factor
(3.2)
Only the increases in N2O-emission factors are applied in the model, as the maximization of N application
is the baseline assumption for the modelling of fertilizer application in the model. The emission fractions
are shown in Table 3.7.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
25
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.7: Emissions from digestate and digestate liquid after field application given as fraction of applied C and N.
a)77.5 pct. N utilization. b)85 pct. N utilization. c)0 pct. N utilization.
CH4-C
N2O-N
[pct. of applied C]
[pct. of applied N]
Digestate
0.02
0.29a)
Digestate liquid
0.04
0.18b)
Biochar
0
1.00c)
3.2.4.4
Screw press separation
Separation with screw press in the pyrolysis system (Process P.1) is modelled using data on typical
separation performance from Drosg et al. (2015). The separation efficiencies in the study are based
on a German study of nutrient recovery from manure digestate (KTBL, 2008).The separation of DM,
N and P correlates well with average values of screw press separation from a range of biogas plants
in Mazzini et al. (2020). The transfer of VS given in Drosg et al. (2015) does not correlate with the
composition of digestate in the model and is instead assumed to have the same transfer as DM. Ash and
water transfer functions are calculated according to the mass balance principles in Section 3.2.2. The
separation efficiencies of C and energy are based on the transfer of COD in Drosg et al. (2015).
The steam dryer receives heat from the combustion of pyrolysis gas in the burner and boiler, and delivers
heat at approx. 120 °C to the upgrading unit at the biogas plant (Butera, 2023). Resultingly, no energy
input or energy substitution is modelled from this process. The substitution of heat at the upgrading unit
at the biogas plant is modelled from the boiler process, which will be elaborated on later in the report.
3.2.4.5
Steam drying of digestate fibers
The steam drying of digestate fibers (Process P.5) is modelled based on the SkyClean Vrå-type configu-
ration (Butera, 2023). It is assumed that only water and N is lost during drying, along with the fraction of
DM corresponding to the N loss. After drying, the digestate fibers have a moisture content of 10 pct. The
transfer functions for the steam drying process are calculated to accommodate the water content. 28.6
pct. of N in digestate fibers is assumed to evaporate based on Deviatkin et al. (2018) who conducted a
study of N recovery from thermal drying of digestate produced from sewage sludge and biowaste. Under
optimal conditions, it can be expected that all soluble N will volatilize (Clausen et al., 2019; Deviatkin
et al., 2018). Assuming that all evaporated N is NH4+-N results in evaporation of 88.1 pct. of NH4+-N in
the digestate fibers.
If the NH4+-N is condensed and captured, it can be used as fertilizer (Clausen et al., 2019), which is
the chosen pathway for the condensate from drying in this model. The evaporated N is assumed to be
condensed and mixed into the liquid digestate fraction. There is a lack of knowledge about what happens
to the condensate in the real system, but to account for the condensate in the model, this pathway is
chosen. According to Deviatkin et al. (2018) not all evaporated N will be condensable, and so the impacts
of the condensate may be overestimated in the model.
3.2.4.6
Pelletization of digestate fibers
The digestate fibers are further pretreated after steam drying into pellets to obtain a uniform input to
the pyrolysis process (Process P.6). Through the pretreatment of the digestate fibers there may be
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
26
==PAGE:32==
losses of total mass. To account for this, an assumed overall loss of 1 pct. of all substance fractions is
assumed based on the assumption applied in Thomsen (2021). The end-of-life of the substances lost
from pretreatment are not considered in the model.
Electricity consumption of the pelletization process is based on the SkyClean Vrå-type configuration. The
power of the pellezation process is 20.4 MW and the system treats 4.79 t/h with a moisture content of 10
pct., resulting in an electricity consumption of 156.6 kWh/t ww (Butera, 2023). The modelling of marginal
electricity is presented in Section 3.2.4.14.
3.2.4.7
Pyrolysis
The transfer functions for the pyrolysis process (Process P.7) is calculated from experimental data. El-
emental analyses data of digestate fiber and the derived biochar after pyrolysis from Stiesdal SkyClean
and DTU CHEMEC are used to calculate transfer functions for digestate fiber into biochar and pyrolysis
gas during pyrolysis (Ravenni, 2023; Stiesdal, 2023b). Stiesdal (2023b) measured the composition of
digestate fiber and the derived biochar based on fibers from the BB Bioenergi biogas plant in Vrå where
the full scale SkyClean pyrolysis plant is being put into commission. The fibers are not pelletized before
being pyrolyzed at 600 °C in a laboratory oven. This dataset contains measurements of DM, N, NH4+-N,
P and K. Transfers of total ww, C and N are based on the data from Ravenni (2023). This dataset is of
pyrolysis of digestate fiber pellets in laboratory oven at 600 °C.
The transfer functions are calculated based on average values of multiple measurements in each dataset.
The transfer functions for ash and K are assumed to be zero as the calculated transfer functions based
on the datasets are so close to zero that the transfer functions become either negative or very large.
The substances not measured in the datasets are calculated according to the mass balance principles
in Section 3.2.2.
The pyrolysis process is fueled by heat supplied from the combustion of pyrolysis gas in the boiler (Butera,
2023). Any N that may be supplied to the process for purging to create an inert atmosphere during
pyrolysis is omitted from the model.
IPCC 2019 guidelines for national inventories include default emission factors for GHG emissions from
biochar production (IPCC, 2019). These emission factors are however based on the assumption that
most biochar is produced with traditional mound methods, and are not representative of modern pyrolysis
plants such as SkyClean’s Vrå configuration. The IPCC emission factors from production are not included
in this model.
3.2.4.8
Quenching of char
The char is quenched with water (Process P.9) to a water content of 40 pct. (Stiesdal, 2023a). This
requires an addition of 0.548 kg water per kg ww. The marginal water consumed in the pyrolysis system
is modelled using the ecoinvent 3.7.1 process tap water,tap water production, underground water without
treatment,Europe without Switzerland.
3.2.4.9
Boiler for pyrolysis gas combustion
The pyrolysis gas is combusted in a boiler (Process P.8), and the heat is supplied to the steam drying
process, pyrolysis process and the biogas plant’s upgrading unit (Butera, 2023). The boiler requires
0.0232 kWh/kg DM treated in the pyrolysis system, based on an electricity input of 0.1 MW with a capacity
of 4.31 t/h of digestate with 0 pct. moisture (Butera, 2023). The only GHG emission from combustion of
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
27
==PAGE:33==
pyrolysis gas is assumed to be biogenic CO2 with no impact on the climate footprint (Thomsen, 2021).
3.2.4.10
Heat substitution from combustion of pyrolysis gas
The heat produced from the combustion of pyrolysis gas is supplied to the amine scrubbers at the biogas
plant (Butera, 2023). It is assumed that the current heat energy is supplied from a gas boiler using the
biogas produced at the plant. As this biogas would otherwise substitute natural gas in the grid, the
marginal heat that will be displaced by the pyrolysis gas is assumed to be heat from combustion of
natural gas from the grid.
The amount of natural gas that is substituted is based on the transfer of energy from the pyrolysis gas
to the upgrading unit based on Butera (2023). The resulting transfer of energy is 34.5 MJ/MJ energy in
the digestate pellets corresponding to 2998 MJ per FU. Natural gas is assumed to have a lower heating
value of 37.4 MWh/m3 (Energinet, 2024). This corresponds to the substitution of 98 m3 natural gas per
FU.
The substitution of heat is modelled in EASETECH using the ecoinvent 3.7.1 process natural gas, high
pressure,market for natural gas, high pressure,DK and the EASETECH official 2022-12 database pro-
cess Combustion of natural gas, DK 2010 to account for both the production and distribution of natural
gas, and the combustion to produce heat.
The impact of heat substitution will be tested in sensitivity analysis.
3.2.4.11
Field application
It is assumed that the field application of digestate and digestate liquid (Processes R.3, P.4 and P.12)
consumes 0.0005 L diesel per kg ww digestate distributed based on Thomsen (2021). Biochar distribu-
tion is assumed to consume 0.00216 L diesel per kg ww biochar distributed (Thomsen, 2021). Diesel is
assumed to have an energy density of 42.7 MJ/L (The Danish Environmental Agency, 2024).
3.2.4.12
Fertilizer substitution
In both systems, nutrients are returned to the field as either digestate, digestate liquid or biochar. There
are however differences in both the share of nutrients that are returned to the field due to losses along
the life cycle processes, and differences in the fertilizer quality of the nutrients, as presented in Section
2.5. The N utilization factors for various soil amendments are defined in Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Fisheries (2024). It is assumed that farmers will maximize the amount of fertilizer that can be applied to
their fields. This entails that with application of soil amendments with N utilization factors <100 pct., the
farmer will apply additional conventional fertilizer to their economic optimum. The N utilization factor of
digestate depends on the feedstocks used in the biogas plant (Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries,
2024). In this study, a share of 50 pct. cattle manure and 50 pct. pig manure is assumed. There are
generalized N utilization factors for separated digestate, being 85 pct. for the liquid fraction and 55
pct. for the fiber fraction (The Danish Agricultural Agency, 2022). Based on these values, the fertilizer
substitution values applied in the model are given in Table 3.8.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
28
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.8: The fertilizer substitution factors for the N, P and K content of soil amendments in the model. N utilization
factors are based on Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries (2024). a)Based on an assumed composition of 50
pct. cattle manure and 50 pct. pig manure.
N substitution factor
P substitution factor
K substitution factor
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
Digestate
77.5 a)
100
100
Digestate liquid
85
100
100
Biochar
0
100
100
Fertilizer substitution is modelled using the processes for inorganic fertilizers in Denmark from ecoin-
vent 3.7.1: inorganic nitrogen fertiliser, as N,market for inorgenic nitrogen fertiliser, as N,DK, inorganic
phosphorus fertilizer, as P2O5,market for inorganic phosphorus fertiliser, as P2O5,DK and inorganic
potassium fertiliser, as K2O,market for inorganic potassium fertiliser, as K2O,DK.
3.2.4.13
C sequestration
The C sequestered in the soil from application of different organic soil amendments can be determined
through modelling where experimental data of the decomposition of amendments in soil forms the basis
for long-term decomposition rates applied in models (Thomsen et al., 2013). In this study the impacts
are considered in a 20 year and a 100 year perspective. The sequestered C is treated as avoided fossil
CO2-emissions to the atmosphere in the model, as the slowed release from the soil removes C from the
biogenic C cycle. The term Fperm is used for the fraction of C that is sequestered in the soil at the chosen
time scales of 20 and 100 years.
The C sequestration potential of digestate is based on mineralization curves made in the soil C dynamics
software C-TOOL by Jensen et al. (2022). C-TOOL is a software tool that estimates the C sequestered
over the years from field application of different soil amendments. The mineralization of digested cattle
faeces investigated by Thomsen et al. (2013) was implemented in C-TOOL by Hansen et al. (2020),
and based on these C-TOOL settings, Jensen et al. (2022) produced mineralization curves for digestate
C. Digestate liquid is assumed to have the same C sequestration potential as digestate, as they are
assumed to have similar C compositions. The resulting C sequestration values are applied in the model,
as shown in Table 3.9.
Multiple methods have been developed to estimate the C persistence of biochar in the soil over time.
The methods are mainly based on correlations between physico-chemical characteristics of the biochar
and the C stability, or between pyrolysis parameters and the C stability of the biochar. The H/Corg ratio
of the biochar is used as proxy for the degree of aromatic C structures (Woolf et al., 2021).
The C sequestration of biochar applied in this study is based on the method by Woolf et al. (2021).
The fractions of C sequestered after 20 and 100 years are found using the Fperm-values for manure
biochar produced at 550 °C and soil temperature of 10 °C in the Supporting Information of the study.
This approach was chosen, as it allows estimation of Fperm in both a 20 and 100 year perspective with
the same method. This biochar C stability may not be representative of the digestate fiber biochar of this
study, as the H/Corg of the former is 0.7 while the SkyClean digestate fiber biochar has an H/Corg of 0.3.
This indicates that the C sequestration potential in this study is based on a conservative estimate and
may be underestimated, as a low H/Corg ratio indicates a more stable biochar (Woolf et al., 2021). The
values applied in the model are shown in Table 3.9.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
29
==PAGE:35==
Table 3.9: The C sequestration after 20 and 100 years represented by the fraction sequestered in the soil, Fperm.
a)Based on Jensen et al. (2022). b)Based on Woolf et al. (2021).
Fperm after 20 years
Fperm after 100 years
[pct.]
[pct.]
Digestate a)
35
10
Digestate liquid a)
35
10
Biochar b)
97
87
3.2.4.14
Marginal electricity
The marginal electricity process in the model is based on the marginal electricity mix of Denmark esti-
mated with a consequential modelling approach by Muñoz and Weidema (2023). The marginal electricity
mix is based on considerations of what energy sources will be employed due to increases in electricity
demands and what energy sources are constrained. Based on the marginal mix by Muñoz and Weidema
(2023), the marginal electricity mix was implemented into EASETECH using ecoinvent 3.7.1 processes
by Thomsen (2021). Further details regarding the marginal electricity process can be found in the study
by Thomsen (2021). The impact of the electricity mix is tested in sensitivity analyses.
3.2.5
Basis for sensitivity and uncertainty analysis
Uncertainty in the modelled results arise from both uncertainty regarding the data input to the model
and choices taken when modelling the systems. The degree of uncertainty in a model is related to
the complexity of it. The simpler the model, the more inaccurately may it depict the actual system. A
higher complexity of a model may however cause higher uncertainty due to uncertainty of individual
parameters introduced to the model. The uncertainty of the modelled results describes how far the
modelled climate footprints can be from the actual digestate management system in RKSK and the
future, potential pyrolysis system (Hauschild et al., 2018).
The uncertainty of this study is analyzed by conducting sensitivity analyses to get an understanding
of how robust the conclusions of the LCA are and to identify the parameters of the model that have
the highest influence on the climate footprint. Sensitivity analysis is conducted in two ways. Firstly, a
perturbation analysis is conducted to assess the impact of all model parameters on the climate footprint.
The perturbation analysis is performed in EASETECH using the built-in function where each parameter
value is increased by 10 pct. one at a time. The sensitivity of the parameters tested in perturbation
analysis is measured as the sensitivity ratio (SR). The SR describes how sensitive the model results are
towards a change in a given parameter. If a small change in a parameter leads to large changes in the
climate footprint, the model is sensitive towards this parameter (Hauschild et al., 2018). The SR of a
parameter is in this study defined as the change in climate footprint, measured as GWP in kg CO2-eq,
of a system per relative change in the input parameter:
SR =
!∆GWP
GWP
"
/
!∆input parameter
input parameter
"
(3.3)
Secondly, discrete parameters and assumptions made in the model are tested by making alternative
sensitivity scenarios in which these parameters and assumptions are changed to other processes. The
parameters tested in sensitivity scenarios are chosen based on early iterations of the LCA. The six
sensitivity scenarios are presented below.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
30
==PAGE:36==
Alternative digestate composition. The impact of applying a different composition of the digestate
input is tested. A digestate as opposite in substrate composition as the one used in the baseline is
tested based on the ranges found in the literature shown in Table 3.3. The tested digestate composition
is shown in Table 3.10.
Table 3.10: Digestate composition applied in sensitivity analysis.
Water
DM
VS
Ash
Energy
C
N
NH4-N
P
K
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
[MJ/kg DM]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
[pct. N]
[pct. DM]
[pct. DM]
94.0
6.0
85.1
14.9
15.0
49.5
1.5
0.60
3.1
1.4
Decanter centrifuge separation. The impact of changing to decanter centrifuge separation in the pyrol-
ysis system is tested by applying separation efficiencies from Verbeke et al. (2021) shown in Table 3.11.
The electricity consumption of the decanter centrifuge is assumed to be 3.4 kWh/m3 (Verbeke et al.,
2021).
Table 3.11: Separation transfer functions for separation with decanter centrifuge tested in sensitivity scenario. Based
on Verbeke et al. (2021).
Total ww
Water
DM
VS
Ash
Energy
C
N
P
K
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
[pct.]
Digestate liquid
86.0
90.6
41.0
41.0
41.0
19.0
19.0
69.0
24.0
72.0
Digestate fiber
14.0
9.4
59.0
59.0
59.0
81.0
81.0
31.0
76.0
28.0
Biomass-based heat substitution. The future biogas plant in RKSK will have heat from a biomass
boiler supplying to the upgrading unit. The impact of substituting heat from a biomass boiler instead of
natural gas is tested. The scenario is modelled using the EASETECH 2022-12 database process Heat
from wood, DK 2010.
Renewable electricity. As an alternative to the marginal electricity mix used in the baseline model, the
impact of consuming electricity based solely on wind is tested. The EASETECH process Electricity from
wind, DK 2010 is used.
Non-renewable electricity. The impact of consuming electricity solely based on coal is tested. The
EASETECH process Electricity from coal, DK 2010 is used.
Alternative fertilizer substitution. The impact of using processes for fertilizer substitution from a dif-
ferent LCI database is tested. The fertilizer impacts from BioGrace II are applied, as given in Thomsen
(2021), with GWP impacts shown in Table 3.12.
Table 3.12: Alternative fertilizer substitution impacts with BioGrace II values. The values in the baseline model with
ecoinvent 3.7.1 processes are shown for comparison.
N fertilizer substitution
[kg CO2-eq/kg N]
P fertilizer substitution
[kg CO2-eq/kg P]
K fertilizer substitution
[kg CO2-eq/kg K]
BioGrace II
3.47
0.54
0.70
Ecoinvent 3.7.1, GWP20
5.57
3.24
4.10
Ecoinvent 3.7.1, GWP100
5.04
2.96
3.75
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
31
==PAGE:37==
4
Results and discussion
This section presents the results of the LCA to assess the impacts on climate footprint and nutrient
balance by introducing pyrolysis in digestate management. The results for the reference and pyrolysis
systems are compared in terms of climate footprint and nutrient recovery. The full results of climate
footprint and material flows are found in Appendix A.2, A.3 and A.4. The sensitivity and uncertainty
of the modelled systems is then addressed and discussed. The representativeness of the model for
digestate management in RKSK is discussed to assess the applicability of these results in the context
of pyrolysis planning in the municipality. Furthermore, the mitigation potential of digestate pyrolysis at a
municipal level is assessed based on the digestate potential of RKSK. This is compared to the climate
targets set for biochar in RKSK by considering possible P application limits. The implications of this study
for RKSK and central stakeholders is discussed.
4.1
Climate footprint of digestate management systems
The climate footprint of both the reference system and pyrolysis system are shown in Figure 4.1. As
can be seen from the graph, the climate footprint of both systems is negative in both a 20 year and
100 year perspective. In both systems, GHG emission reductions stem from fertilizer substitution and C
sequestration from soil amendments applied to the field. The pyrolysis system has additional negative
emissions from the substitution of heat supplied from the combustion of pyrolysis gas.
The GHG emissions of both systems mainly originate from the storage with only a minor portion of
the climate footprint attributed to emissions from the field, transportation, and field application. The
additional process steps in the pyrolysis system, including pelletization and screw press separation,
only result in minor GHG emissions compared to the overall climate footprint of the system. Storage
emissions are lower in the pyrolysis system due to the reduced CH4-emissions from storage of digestate
liquid compared to unseparated digestate, as can be seen from Table 4.1. Additionally, the absence of
emissions from biochar storage contributes to the overall reduction in storage-related emissions.
The GHG emission reductions from fertilizer substitution is approximately the same in both systems.
Although N, P and K is returned to the field in the form of different soil amendments (digestate, digestate
liquid and biochar) in the two systems, the fertilizer value is approximately the same. Slightly less N and
P is returned to the field in the pyrolysis system, but the higher N utilization factor of the digestate liquid
compared to digestate results in similar fertilizer substitution between the two systems. The impact on
nutrient balance is further elaborated on in Section 4.2.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
32
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.1: Climate footprint of the reference and pyrolysis systems in 20 and 100 years perspective. Pretreatment
and pyrolysis includes screw press separation, steam drying, pelletization, pyrolysis, boiler and quenching.
Table 4.1: Difference in climate footprint between the reference and pyrolysis system. Pretreatment and pyrolysis
includes screw press separation, steam drying, pelletization, pyrolysis, boiler and quenching.
Difference in climate footprint
20 years
[kg CO2-eq/t DM]
Difference in climate footprint
100 years
[kg CO2-eq/t DM]
Pretreatment and pyrolysis
16.5
15.2
Field application
2.80
2.56
Transport to storage
-0.94
-0.90
Field emissions
-20.2
-22.9
Storage emissions
-244
-86.1
Heat substitution
-235
-228
C sequestration
-172
-304
Fertilizer substitution
5.76
5.24
Emission reduction potential
-646
-619
When comparing the climate footprint of the reference system to the pyrolysis system, it is evident that
more C is sequestered in the pyrolysis system on a 100-year time scale. This is due to the fact that
the majority of C in digestate applied to the field is decomposed in the reference system, whereas a
substantial fraction of C in the applied biochar in the pyrolysis system remains in the soil long-term. The
main difference in the flow of C between the two systems is the splitting of C during pyrolysis into pyrolysis
gas and biochar, as seen in Appendix A.3. This diversion results in 20 pct. less C being returned to the
field in the pyrolysis system compared to the reference system, as seen in Table 4.2. Nonetheless, the
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
33
==PAGE:39==
C sequestration potential is higher in the pyrolysis system due to the higher persistence of biochar C
resulting in more sequestered C. Additionally, the C in the pyrolysis gas is not lost, but exploited for
energy production.
Table 4.2: C sequestered in the reference and pyrolysis system per kg C input.
C returned to
the field
[kg C/kg C input]
C sequestered
after 20 years
[kg C/kg C input]
C sequestered
after 100 years
[kg C/kg C input]
Reference system
0.938
0.328
0.094
Pyrolysis system
0.762
0.439
0.290
- digestate liquid
0.483
0.169
0.048
- biochar
0.279
0.270
0.242
The assessment of the climate footprint is evidently influenced by the chosen time scale, as Figure 4.1
shows. Both the impact of storage emissions and the obtained reduction from C sequestration is smaller
in a 100 year perspective. The reduced impact of storage emissions is mainly attributed to the lowered
GWP of CH4 in a 100 year perspective compared to a 20 year perspective. Meanwhile, the increased
share of decomposed C in the applied digestate and digestate liquid causes the reduced effect of C
sequestration. Although highly stable C in biochar is produced in the pyrolysis system, the majority of C
is applied to the field in the form of digestate liquid with a permanence similar to digestate in the reference
system. Thereby, approx. 1/3 of the C that is sequestered after 20 years remains in the soil after 100
years in the pyrolysis system, as seen in Table 4.2.
Based on the modelled results of the two systems, a reduction in climate footprint of 646 kg CO2-eq/t
DM digestate in 20 years and 619 kg CO2-eq/t DM digestate in 100 years can be obtained from the
implementation of pyrolysis in digestate management in RKSK. The difference in climate footprint is
shown in Table 4.1. Although the climate footprint of each system differs dependent on the temporal
perspective, the emission reduction from integration of pyrolysis is similar in both a 20 and 100 year
perspective.
The climate footprint results indicate that important factors for ensuring a GHG emission reduction from
implementing pyrolysis in digestate management are reduction of emissions from storage and field (with
largest effect short-term), C sequestration (with largest effect long-term), and substitution of natural gas.
Due to the high negative impact of fertilizer substitution, it is important to ensure the return of nutrients
to the field to substitute conventional fertilizer in the pyrolysis system.
Elsgaard et al. (2022) estimated a reduction of 863 kg CO2-eq/t DM digestate fiber found by in a 100 year
perspective. However, the FU of their study is 1 t DM digestate fiber, and so the handling of digestate
liquid is beyond the scope. Consequently, C sequestration and emissions in the reference system are
only based on the digestate fiber, with biochar being the only product added to the soil in the pyrolysis
system. The modelled system of this study treats 0.48 t DM digestate fiber per FU, and by scaling the
results to 1 t DM digestate fiber, the resulting emission reduction potential is approx. 1,300 kg CO2-
eq/t DM digestate fiber, and thus twice as much as found by Elsgaard et al. (2022). The emission
reduction from avoided emissions from storage and field are comparable with this study, with 197 kg
CO2-eq/t DM fiber compared to 216 kg CO2-eq/t DM fiber in the present study. This indicates that the
avoided emissions from separation of digestate correspond to the avoided emissions of fiber storage.
The reduced impact from energy substitution is also comparable with 475 kg CO2-eq/t DM fiber in the
present study compared to 373 kg CO2-eq/t DM fiber in Elsgaard et al. (2022). The C sequestration
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
34
==PAGE:40==
obtained in this study is higher due to both a higher C content in the fiber and a higher Fperm value
applied to biochar, as Elsgaard et al. (2022) applied an Fperm value of 63 pct. compared to the 87 pct. of
this study.
The emission reduction potential in a 100 year perspective in this study is comparable to the main results
reported by Thomsen et al. (2023) of 1,550 kg CO2-eq/t DM fiber treated in pyrolysis, while in a 20 year
perspective this study found a lower reduction potential of approx. 1,300 kg CO2-eq/t DM fiber compared
to 1,850 kg CO2-eq/t DM fiber in Thomsen et al. (2023). There is thus a bigger difference between the
emission reductions potential in a 20 year perspective and a 100 year perspective in the estimates by
Thomsen et al. (2023). The present study shows similar tendencies of high reduction potential from
avoided emissions from storage in a 20 year perspective and less so in a 100 year perspective, higher
C sequestration potential at 100 year perspective compared to 20 year perspective, but unlike what is
reported in Thomsen et al. (2023), the heat substitution effect is similar at both temporal perspectives in
this study.
4.2
Impacts on nutrient balance
The impact on nutrient flows is analyzed from the material flows of N and P established in the MFA. These
quantified flows serve as the basis for discussing the changes to the nutrient balance in RKSK resulting
from the implementation of pyrolysis of digestate fibers. The assessment considers the recycling of nu-
trients from digestate by assessing the recovery rates of N and P. The implications of digestate pyrolysis
for nutrient quality are qualitatively discussed in this section. An in depth assessment of the fate and
effects of N and P in the soil is beyond the scope of this project, but nonetheless an important aspect
when assessing the impact that pyrolysis in digestate management may have on nutrient recycling.
The recovery rates indicate how much of the N and P in digestate is returned to the field in soil amend-
ments. As can be seen from Table 4.3, the recovery rates are higher in the reference system than in
the pyrolysis system. Both systems experience greater loss of N throughout their life cycles compared
to P, with no loss of P in the reference system and minimal loss in the pyrolysis system. The impact of
digestate management on the nutrient balance of N and P is analyzed and discussed separately in the
following sections.
Table 4.3: Recovery rates of N and P in the reference and pyrolysis systems.
Recovery rate
nitrogen
Recovery rate
phosphorus
Reference system
0.91
1.00
Pyrolysis system
0.86
0.97
4.2.1
Nitrogen
Nearly all N in digestate is returned to the field in the reference system with the only loss of N being 9
pct. emissions from storage. The recovery rate of N in the pyrolysis system is slightly lower with 86 pct.
of N returned to the field. This is evident from the flows of N seen in Figure 4.2. Although the share of N
lost as emissions from storage is lower in the pyrolysis system, the loss from pretreatment and especially
pyrolysis results in a lower N recovery rate.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
35
==PAGE:41==
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure 4.2: Flows of N given in kg N/t DM digestate.
The majority of NH4+-N, which is readily accessible to plants, is separated into the liquid fraction from
screw press separation and ultimately applied to the field in the digestate liquid, as Figure 4.3. Con-
sequently, the N that is not applied to the field in the pyrolysis system, due to volatilization during the
pyrolysis of digestate fibers, is N of low fertilizer quality. Although the N recovery rate is lower in the
pyrolysis system, the recovery rate of NH4+-N is in fact higher than in the reference system, with 90 pct.
recovery in the pyrolysis system and 85 pct. recovery in the reference system. The higher recovery rate
in the pyrolysis system is however dependent on the assumption that N evaporated from steam drying
of the digestate fibers is mixed into the liquid fraction and applied to the field, as it contributes to the
recovery rate and fertilizer value of N returned to the field. Approx. 1/3 of N in the fibers is evaporated
during steam drying, and the potential of using this fraction as fertilizer should be investigated, as its fate
is unknown.
As explained in Section 2.5, separation may increase the fertilizer value of digestate liquid compared to
unseparated digestate. The digestate liquid modelled in this study does have a slightly higher NH4+-N to
N ratio than the unseparated digestate when applied to the field, but nearly the same amount of NH4+-
N per FU is applied to the field in the two systems. Thus, the results imply that the pyrolysis system
produces a more suitable N fertilizer with lowered N loss to emissions from storage and field.
The separation efficiency of N and NH4+-N is crucial for the N balance in the pyrolysis system. To ensure
the best utilization of the N resource in digestate, the inorganic, plant-available N should be separated
into the digestate liquid while the separation of other fractions of N into the digestate fiber may be less
detrimental for the nutrient balance due its low fertilizer value.
Under the assumption that farmers will maximize their allowed N application, more N is applied the lower
the N utilization factor of the soil amendment is. Despite the fact that biochar has an N utilization factor of
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
36
==PAGE:42==
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure 4.3: Flows of NH4
+-N given in kg NH4
+-N/t DM digestate.
0 pct., more ”accounted” N is applied in the pyrolysis system compared to the reference system, as the
vast majority of N is applied in digestate liquid which has a higher N utilization factor than unseparated
digestate. To compare the total N application in both systems, an application limit of 190 kg N/ha is
assumed. In the reference system, 45.1 kg ”accounted” N can then be applied to 0.237 ha within the
limits. As 44.7 kg ”accounted” N is applied to the field in the pyrolysis system, slightly more mineral N
is required to fertilize the same area as in the reference system. This amounts to 0.40 kg N/ha extra
mineral N. However, more total N is applied in the reference system due to the lower N utilization factor
of unseparated digestate. With an extra 2.6 kg N/ha applied, approx. 5 pct. more N is applied in the
reference system compared to the pyrolysis system. While the increased N2O-emissions from increased
N application is accounted for in the model, there may be other impacts from increased N loading beyond
the scope of this project.
Although biochar might not be a suitable N fertilizer on its own, it has the potential to increase N availability
in the soil by reducing N losses through other mechanisms such as lowered nitrate (NO3-) leaching, N2O-
emissions and NH3 volatilization (Elsgaard et al., 2022). These effects are beyond the scope of this study,
but important when considering the impacts on nutrient balance from digestate pyrolysis.
4.2.2
Phosphorus
All P in digestate is directed to the field in the reference system, as is seen in Figure 4.4. There are no
substantial P losses in the pyrolysis system with a recovery rate of 0.97, and so the vast majority of P
input in digestate is ultimately applied to the field in digestate liquid and biochar. The high P recovery
rate in both systems implies that the main differences in P balance between the reference system and
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
37
==PAGE:43==
pyrolysis system may lie in the fertilizer quality of the P.
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure 4.4: Flows of P given in kg P/t DM digestate.
According to experimental results by Mazzini et al. (2020) and Tambone et al. (2017), the fertilizer value
of the digestate liquid is comparable to that of the unseparated digestate. Although the modelled results
of this study do not assess the quality and plant availability of P, the trends in plant availability found in
the literature suggest that the separation of digestate does not significantly compromise the overall P
fertilizer value of the pyrolysis system compared to the reference system.
Only 20 pct. of P is applied in the form of biochar in the pyrolysis system, making digestate liquid the
main source of P. As presented in Section 2.5, the P availability of biochar is lower short-term compared
to that of unseparated digestate, but can function as a stable, slow-releasing fertilizer. P in biochar
can substitute conventional mineral P fertilizer 1:1 in terms of application as regulation considers the
P utilization factor of organic substrates to be 100 pct. The low immediate plant availability of P in
biochar might impair its quality as a P fertilizer. Fertilizer requirements for crop production are site specific
and while nutrient-depleted soils will require fertilizers to provide all necessary nutrients in a quality
and quantity required for crop production, fertile soils will require less and may also benefit from slow-
releasing fertilizers (Thomsen, 2022). Danish soils are generally rich in P and RKSK has a large excess
of P per hectare (Nehmdahl and Birkmose, 2020). A slow-releasing P fertilizer such as biochar might
be suitable in this context. The question is whether application of biochar in the long term can sustain
the P concentrations of the soil needed for crop cultivation. Otherwise, farmers may apply biochar in
combination with conventional fertilizer, which will further limit the amount of P that can be applied, and
thus the GHG emission reduction that can be obtained with biochar in RKSK.
Apart from the direct application of plant available P in biochar, biochar has been found to improve P
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
38
==PAGE:44==
availability in the soil through various other mechanisms, for example by inducing P mobilization of the P
already present in the soil, enhancing activity of P-solubilizing microbes, and reducing P leaching through
mechanisms such as adsorption (Yang et al., 2021). These soil enhancement effects are beyond the
scope of this study, but relevant in the discussion of the fertilizer value of biochar in an area with sandy
soils such as RKSK.
A motivation for introducing pyrolysis in the management of P-rich biomasses has been the possibility of
concentrating P in biochar to enable redistribution of P to geographical areas with P scarcity while solving
issues of excess P in other areas. However, the results of this study indicate that the majority of P will be
directed to the liquid fraction after screw press separation. Given the comparable P concentration in both
digestate and digestate liquid, it indicates that the pyrolysis system may not effectively address local P
loading concerns. Once again, this highlights the importance of selecting a separation technology that
aligns with the specific requirements for nutrient management.
4.2.3
Concluding remarks on impacts on nutrient balance
The nutrient recovery rate of N and P is slightly lower in the pyrolysis system compared to the reference
system. With the applied separation efficiencies of screw press separation, the digestate liquid is the
main source of nutrients in the pyrolysis system. The fertilizer value of digestate liquid is comparable to
digestate in this study, as the plant available N concentration is higher, while there are no indications of
a lower P fertilizer value. The separation of N and P into the liquid and fiber fractions has a high impact
on the overall nutrient balance, as the nutrient availability and loss of nutrients is different for the biochar
produced from the fiber fraction.
The assessment of recovery rates in this study evaluates the impact on the nutrient balance by consider-
ing the return of N and P to the field. However, the losses of nutrients from the soil and their environmental
impact should also be considered which could be done by expanding the scope. To get a holistic un-
derstanding of the implications of changes in nutrient flows and quality, other methods can be applied.
For instance, the contribution to eutrophication and acidification of the systems could be included in the
LCA. However, the fate and impact of nutrients in the soil from different organic amendments is context
specific (Elsgaard et al., 2022; Thomsen, 2022), and requires either measured data within this context
or application of additional modelling such as the agroecosystem model DAISY.
4.3
Sensitivity analysis
Sensitivity analysis is employed to tackle the inherent uncertainty in the model. The results of perturba-
tion analysis are first analyzed and discussed to gain enhanced understanding of the model’s sensitivity
to certain parameters. The tested sensitivity scenarios focus on assessing the influence of discrete pa-
rameters and modelling choices. The insights of the sensitivity analysis will form the basis of a discussion
of the overall uncertainty of the model, its representativeness of the actual digestate management system
in RKSK, and the conclusions that can be drawn from this study.
4.3.1
Perturbation analysis
The results of the perturbation analysis are shown in Figure 4.5. All parameters with SR’s between -0.2
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
39
==PAGE:45==
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure 4.5: Sensitivity ratios for input parameters tested with perturbation analysis. Each parameter value is in-
creased by 10 pct. one at a time. A cut-off is set for parameters with SR between -0.2 and 0.2. For SR results for
all input parameters from perturbation analysis, see Appendix A.5.
and 0.2 are not depicted in the figures due to their low influence, as increasing the parameter will lead to
less than 2 pct. change in GWP. The full results of the perturbation analysis are found in Appendix A.5.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
40
==PAGE:46==
A positive SR indicates that the GWP is lowered from an increase in parameter, while a parameter with
a negative SR results in increased GWP of the system. Overall, the sensitivity ratios (SR) are bigger
in the reference system compared to the pyrolysis system. In the reference system, the model is most
sensitive to the C sequestration potential assigned to digestate in a 20 year perspective, i.e. the Fperm,20,
while it is less sensitive to Fperm,100, likely due to the larger value of Fperm,20. The sensitivity of Fperm
values also indicates that the amount of C applied to the field influences the impact of the system, and
this is ultimately linked to the amount of C in the digestate input. Parameters determining the share of C
emissions from storage also have some of the largest SR’s, especially in a 20 year perspective where
the impact of CH4-emissions is larger than in a 100 year perspective.
The reference system is also sensitive to parameters regarding the K content of the digestate and the
ascribed K fertilizer substitution from the K content of the digestate. This is supported by the fact that the
K content of the digestate input also has a high SR. Parameters for N fertilizer substitution and N content
in digestate input are also influential, but less so for P fertilizer substitution and digestate content.
The pyrolysis system generally expresses lower sensitivity to individual parameters. Similar to the ref-
erence system, the model is most sensitive to parameters concerned with the content of C, K and N in
the digestate and derived impacts hereof, including fertilizer substitution and C sequestration based on
Fperm values. The digestate C content is the most sensitive parameter of the system, likely due to its
influence on C sequestration. K fertilizer substitution and K digestate content are also influential param-
eters, along with the Fperm values of biochar. The share of C in digestate fiber pellets directed to the
pyrolysis gas and the share of C directed to the liquid fraction during screw press separation are also
influential. Increasing these parameters results in the largest increase in the GWP of the system. This
emphasizes the importance of C flows for the overall climate footprint of the pyrolysis system.
By combining the knowledge about the model’s sensitivity to input parameters obtained from the pertur-
bation analysis with the data quality of these parameters, it becomes possible to identify the weaknesses
of the model. Efforts to improve the model’s robustness can then be focused on parameters for which
the model exhibits sensitivity and where the data quality is low. Figure 4.6 shows correlations between
SR of sensitive parameters and the data quality of these parameters as assessed in Appendix A.1.
Figure 4.6: Sensitivity ratio (SR) and data quality score (DQ) of influential parameters. The diagram shows all
parameters with SR under -0.2 and above 0.2 shown in Figure 4.5. The average of SR in 20 and 100 years for each
parameter .
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
41
==PAGE:47==
The C sequestration potentials, modelled using Fperm values, have both low data quality and a high SR,
while sensitive parameters such as digestate composition and fertilizer substitution are based on data
of medium quality. The digestate composition appears to be one of the most significant parameters for
the model, as contents of C, N and K are influential parameters in both systems and in both a 20 year
perspective and 100 year perspective. The impact of the digestate composition is tested in a sensitivity
scenario.
While fertilizer substitution factors are some of the most sensitive parameters, the data quality is high
as it is determined based on Danish legislation and modelled using ecoinvent data for the marginal
fertilizer substitution. The impact of fertilizer value will be tested in sensitivity scenarios by 1) changing
digestate composition to investigate how the impact from fertilizer substitution changes, and 2) changing
the background processes used to model the fertilizer substitution.
The most sensitive parameter of the perturbation analysis is the Fperm value of digestate, which is applied
in both the reference and pyrolysis system. It is difficult to assess the data quality of Fperm values since the
models used to estimate them are based on robust datasets (in the case of biochar). There is however
uncertainty linked to the extrapolation of data into long-term C sequestration in the soil. Furthermore,
many of the studies that the Fperm values are based on are incubation studies that do not consider all soil
dynamics. However, there is consensus about the long-term sequestration of biochar C in the literature
(Wang et al., 2016). The data quality is even lower for the Fperm values of digestate and digestate liquid
as they are extrapolated from data based on only one incubation study. The impact of alternative Fperm
values for soil amendments are not tested in sensitivity scenarios, as these are focused on discrete
parameters and model choices, but the uncertainty related to the climate footprint results is discussed in
Section 4.4.
The screw press separation efficiencies of C and energy have relatively low SR’s, but there is uncertainty
regarding what separation technologies will be implemented at biogas plants in RKSK if they are coupled
to a pyrolysis plant. Thus, a scenario with decanter centrifuge separation is also tested.
4.3.2
Sensitivity scenarios
Central discrete parameters and model choices have been tested in sensitivity scenarios. The results are
shown in Figure 4.7. All results with detailed impacts per process are shown in Appendix A.6. The rela-
tive changes in climate footprint from each scenario compared to the main, baseline results are shown in
Figure 4.8. The main objective of this study is to investigate the difference in impact from pyrolysis diges-
tate compared to digestate management without pyrolysis. The relative differences in climate footprint
between the reference system and the pyrolysis system in the different sensitivity scenarios are shown
in Figure 4.9. Most of the tested scenarios are concerned with parameters in the pyrolysis system, while
two scenarios are also relevant for the reference system.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
42
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.7: Climate footprint of sensitivity scenarios.
Figure 4.8: Relative change in climate footprint of sensitivity scenarios compared to baseline system.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
43
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.9: Emission reduction potential from digestate fiber pyrolysis of tested sensitivity scenarios. For scenarios
where the changed parameter or assumption is not applicable to the reference system, the relative difference to the
climate footprint of the baseline results of the reference system is calculated.
As can be seen from the Figure 4.9, none of the tested scenarios change the conclusion that the pyrolysis
system results in a lower climate footprint than the reference system. The lowered climate footprints
in a 20 year perspective compared to a 100 year perspective found in the baseline results for both the
reference and pyrolysis systems are also observed in all tested sensitivity scenarios. The relative climate
footprint of the pyrolysis system compared to the reference system is however only slightly more negative
in a 20 year perspective, as Figure 4.9 shows, and the difference dependent on time perspective is less
than 5 pct. for all scenarios.
The alternative digestate composition results in a less negative climate footprint compared to the baseline
model results. The alternative digestate is characterized by a substantially lower N and K content, which
results in a lowered negative impact from fertilizer substitution. N2O-emissions from the field are also
lowered with this digestate composition, but it does not outweigh the lowered fertilizer substitution effects.
Additionally, there is less heat substitution due to lowered energy content, but increased C sequestration
due to a higher C content. CH4-emissions from field and storage area increased. The lower DM content
also results in higher impact from transportation, as there is more total ww to be transported per t DM
digestate in the system. While the difference in climate footprint between the reference system and
pyrolysis system is unchanged from the change in digestate composition, as is evident from Figure 4.9,
other digestate compositions might yield other results due to the versatile influences of the substance
contents described here.
Separation with decanter centrifuge instead of screw press in the pyrolysis system results in a different
distribution of nutrients and energy between the digestate liquid and digestate fiber. This is evident from
the MFA results of the pyrolysis system with decanter centrifuge separation found in Appendix A.7. This
change results in a lower climate footprint compared to the baseline system. Less N and P is directed
to the liquid fraction and more to the fiber fraction. As a consequence, there is less N and P fertilizer
substitution due to losses of N and P throughout the pretreatment and pyrolysis processes. Additionally,
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
44
==PAGE:50==
N in biochar has an N utilization factor of zero, resulting in no N fertilizer substitution from biochar. The
higher separation efficiency of C into the fiber fraction results in a higher C sequestration effect, as more
C is turned into stable C in biochar. Based on the assumption that the energy content follows C in
separation, there will consequently also be more heat substituted from the increased energy content in
the fiber and thereby in the pyrolysis gas. The increased amount of heat substitution of C sequestration
results in a more negative climate footprint, that is approx. 300 kg CO2-eq/t DM lower than the baseline
results. It is important to stress, that the energy balance might not add up in the tested scenarios with
alternative digestate composition and decanter centrifuge.
If the excess heat produced from combustion of pyrolysis gas substitutes heat from a biomass boiler
instead of a gas boiler supplied with natural gas, the climate footprint is less negative, i.e. larger. As heat
produced from biomass has a lower climate impact than heat produced from natural gas, the substitution
will have a lower mitigation effect.
The scenario where the marginal electricity mix is changed to renewable electricity from wind shows only
a 1 pct. decrease in climate footprint. If the electricity is instead supplied purely from coal, the climate
footprint is 8 pct. higher. These results indicate that the climate footprint of the pyrolysis system will vary
with 9 pct. depending on the electricity mix used for separation, pelletization and the gas boiler.
The largest change in climate footprint is found in the scenario where fertilizer substitution is modelled
with GHG emission coefficients from BioGrace II instead of ecoinvent 3.7.1. As the GWP impacts of
fertilizers from BioGrace II are significantly lower than those of the ecoinvent processes, the fertilizer
substitution effect is significantly lower using the BioGrace II values. However, the difference in climate
footprint between the reference and pyrolysis systems is similar to that of the baseline and consequently,
the processes used to model the fertilizer substitution do not have an impact on the comparison between
the two systems.
The sensitivity scenarios reveal that the emission reduction potential from introducing pyrolysis is rather
within a range of 950 to 400 kg CO2-eq/t DM in both time perspectives, compared to the reduction
potentials of approx. 600 kg CO2-eq/t DM found in the baseline results. This is evident from the Figure
4.9. The span might be even larger due to ranges of parameters and scenarios not tested in this sensitivity
analysis. Central, sensitive parameters, such as Fperm have not been tested with sensitivity scenarios.
While central, sensitive parameters, such as Fperm have not been tested with sensitivity scenarios, the
ranges based on these however give a good indication of how central, discrete parameters influence the
model results.
4.4
Uncertainty of modelling a system in development
The modelled systems have been constructed with the aim of obtaining insights to changes in climate
footprint and nutrient balance from pyrolysis implementation in digestate management. An overarching
uncertainty in the modelling of the pyrolysis system revolves around the challenges posed by modelling
a system that does not yet exist. In this regard, the present study can be categorized as an ex-ante study
aiming to model pyrolysis technology that is not fully implemented at the time of the study, but modelled
in a near future where the technology is expected to be mature (Arvidsson et al., 2023).
The pyrolysis technology modelled is based on thermodynamic modelling, and not measured data of full
scale commission of the pyrolysis configuration. This brings inherent uncertainty regarding the modelling
of pyrolysis at full scale from these data. According to Stiesdal, the DM content of the digestate fiber
should ideally be 40-45 pct. after screw press separation. If the DM content is lower, it will affect the
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
45
==PAGE:51==
energy balance and consumption (Stiesdal, 2024). The emission reduction potential found in this study
is dependent on the energy balance of the plant, as it will ultimately affect the reduction in emissions from
heat substitution. Once in full commission, data measured over a longer period of time taking parameters
such as fluctuations in DM input and operating hours into account will strengthen the completeness and
lower the uncertainty of the modelled results. Furthermore, the pyrolysis model parameters can be
validated by comparing with values from literature.
An additional uncertainty of the pyrolysis system is the fate of the evaporated N from steam drying. It
has been assumed that it is recondensed into the digestate liquid and treated accordingly through the
life cycle. This introduces an uncertainty to the results. However, given that the evaporated N comprises
only 5 pct. of the total N input, its fate is unlikely to significantly influence the climate footprint or nutrient
balance, unless a considerably larger portion of N evaporates during drying than assumed in this study
and is not subsequently returned to the field.
Estimating the C sequestration potential of the systems also introduces uncertainty in the modelling. The
slow turnover of the soil amendments, and especially of biochar, necessitates modelling to determine the
long term C sequestration in the soil. This study may underestimate the biochar C stability, as it assumes
a higher H/Corg ratio of 0.7 than the actual ratio of 0.3. The estimated C sequestration that can be obtained
from biochar application is very dependent on the method used to estimate the Fperm-values, as is evident
from comparing the findings of Woolf et al. (2021) and Azzi et al. (2024). Based on the method by Woolf
et al. (2021), a soil temperature of 10 °C and an H/Corg of 0.3, the Fperm value becomes 92 pct. in a
100 year perspective. Thus, more C would be sequestered in a 100 year perspective based on this
value compared to the Fperm of 87 pct. applied in this model. Furthermore, the Fperm values applied for
digestate and digestate liquid could be improved with validation with more and better data.
Storage emissions are dependent on several factors including temperature, duration of storage and
whether the storage is covered (Olesen et al., 2020). These factors have not been included in the
modelling in this study, which poses an uncertainty in the interpretation of the results and their robustness.
While the results of the sensitivity scenarios support the conclusion that emission reductions can be ob-
tained from the implementation of pyrolysis in digestate management, not all central parameters have
been tested with scenario analysis, such as the values for Fperm and storage emissions. These param-
eters, that are both sensitive and uncertain, should be investigated by obtaining measured data specific
to the modelled systems or by testing sensitivity scenarios with other values from the literature. Addi-
tionally, the assumptions for mass balance calculations that have been applied to fill in data gaps, have
not been tested. As the assumptions concern the transfer of influential digestate substances such C, N
and energy, the mass balance assumptions may affect the modelled results with possible changes in C
sequestration, heat substitution and emissions.
An uncertainty analysis has not been performed in this study due to the lack of uncertainty data for model
parameters. Had an uncertainty analysis been performed by assuming a given standard deviation of
e.g. 10 pct. for all parameters, it could create a false certainty that the results would be within the found
intervals, as parameters might be higher, lower or have different distributions. An alternative could be
to conduct a Pedigree test where uncertainty is based on the data quality. Such an analysis was not
prioritized in this study.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
46
==PAGE:52==
4.5
Impacts at municipal level
Based on the total digestate potential in the municipality, the potential GHG emission reduction achiev-
able through implementing pyrolysis can be assessed by scaling up the climate footprint reduction. How-
ever, it is important to note that this estimation should not be viewed as a precise measure of the emission
reductions achievable through digestate fiber pyrolysis given the uncertainties and limitations outlined
in this study. Instead, the objective is to compare the climate mitigation potential of this study with the
targets outlined in the RKSK climate plan to qualify them.
4.5.1
Digestate potential of RKSK
The digestate potential is quantified based on the feedstock composition and quantities for biogas plants
in RKSK in 2021/2022 (The Danish Energy Agency, 2023a). The weighted average DM content of all
biomasses treated in the biogas plants is 14 pct. with an average VS content of 82 pct. based on the
values for DM and VS content of different feedstocks found in Olesen et al. (2020). This DM content is
rather high compared to DM contents reported in Olesen et al. (2020) of model plants. A simple assump-
tion is made that VS are transformed into biogas during anaerobic digestion at a rate corresponding to
obtaining 9.4 pct DM. This corresponds to 5 pct. loss of total ww in the biomass feedstocks during anaer-
obic digestion. This is similar to what is modelled for manure digestate in Thomsen (2021) where approx.
3 pct. total ww in manure is transformed into biogas during anaerobic digestion. Consequently, it is es-
timated that 855,000 t digestate are generated annually from the approx. 900,000 t biomass feedstock
treated at biogas plants in RKSK. This corresponds to 80,370 t DM digestate per year. For comparison,
this results in approx. 42,700 t dried fibers per year, and the Stiesdal SkyClean plant in Vrå is expected
to handle 40,000 t dried digestate fiber annually (Stiesdal, 2024).
4.5.2
Biochar application and P limitations: Implications for RKSK climate
targets
The emission reductions that can be obtained from integrating pyrolysis in digestate management is
51,900 t CO2-eq/yr in a 20 year perspective with results ranging from 33,100-75,000 t CO2-eq/yr consid-
ering the span of results from the sensitivity scenarios. In a 100 year perspective, the potential emission
reduction is 49,800 t CO2-eq/yr with a range of 31,400-76,100 t CO2-eq/yr from the sensitivity scenarios.
Compared to RKSK’s reduction targets from biochar, between 40-96 pct. of the 2030 target of 79,000 t
CO2-eq/yr reduction can be achieved, while 20-48 pct. of the 2050 target of 158,000 t CO2-eq/yr reduc-
tion can be achieved. These very simplified estimations indicate a large potential for emission reductions
from biochar produced from digestate fiber, although not enough to reach the biochar reduction targets
alone.
The concentration of P in biochar has often been raised as a limitation for biochar application to agri-
cultural soils (Elsgaard et al., 2022). The limit for P application according to Danish legislation varies
depending on the type of soil amendment and local restrictions, but is commonly 30 kg P/ha. The P ap-
plication limits for digestate and biochar depend on the input feedstock (The Danish Agricultural Agency,
2022). The P application limits for biochar in this study are shown in Table 4.4. With a P content of 11.0
kg P/t DM biochar in the modelled results of this study, 2.73 t DM biochar/ha/yr can be applied without
exceeding the P limits. Elsgaard et al. (2022) estimated that 0.5 t DM biochar derived from manure
digestate fiber could be applied at a P limit of 30 kg P/ha. Similar values were estimated by Thomsen
et al. (2023) with application limits of 0.4-0.8 t DM/ha/yr. The elevated application rate observed in the
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
47
==PAGE:53==
present study is attributed to the low P content of the digestate, in contrast to the findings reported in the
two referenced studies.
The biochar yield of the present study is 0.2 t DM/t DM digestate resulting in a total biochar potential of
15,753 t biochar/yr from digestate fiber in RKSK. This amount of biochar can be applied to 5760 ha/yr
without exceeding the limit of 30 kg P/ha.
Table 4.4: Application area needed to apply produced biochar without exceeding P application limits.
Production
[t DM/FU]
Total production
[t/yr]
P content
[kg P/t DM]
Application limit
[kg/ha]
Application area
[ha]
Biochar
0.20
15,753
11.0
2.73
5760
RKSK has set targets for biochar application on 3,200 ha in 2030 and 6,300 ha in 2050 (Ringkøbing-
Skjern Municipality, 2022a). These targets are based on an assumption that 4 pct. and 7 pct. of cultivated
area in the municipality will have biochar application in 2030 and 2050, respectively, and that a 25 t CO2-
eq/ha reduction is obtained from biochar application (PlanEnergi, 2022). The reduction potential per area
of biochar application is shown in Table 4.5.
Because of P limits constraining the rate of biochar application, the emission reduction achievable based
on the findings of this study is approx. 5.5-13 t CO2-eq/ha as seen in Table 4.5. This is substantially lower
than the 25 t CO2-eq/ha assumed in RKSK’s climate targets. Consequently, the emission reduction that
can be obtained from applying digestate fiber biochar to 3,200 ha and 6,300 ha will be 17,500-42,300
t CO2-eq and 34,400-83,300 t CO2-eq, respectively. Moreover, these estimates do not consider the
possibility that digestate liquid could be applied to the same soils as biochar, which would further decrease
the reduction potential per hectare. In order to achieve the emission reduction targets in RKSK, biochar
will have to be applied to a larger area, or the P content in the biochar should be decreased.
Table 4.5: Comparison of emission reduction potential from biochar in this study compared to reduction targets for
biochar in RKSK’s climate plan (PlanEnergi, 2022; Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality, 2022a)
Results from this study
Unit
20 year perspective
100 year perspective
Emission reduction potential
[t CO2-eq/yr]
33,100-75,000
31,400-76,100
Application area
[ha]
5,760
5,760
Reduction per area
[t CO2-eq/ha/yr]
5.7-13
5.5-13
RKSK reduction targets for biochar
Unit
2030
2050
Emission reduction target
[t CO2-eq/yr]
79,000
158,000
Application area
[ha]
3,200
6,300
Reduction per area
[t CO2-eq/ha/yr]
25
25
Multiple factors create uncertainty regarding the estimations of emissions reduction potential in this sec-
tion. Firstly, the inherent uncertainty of the modelled results due to data quality and modelling choices
comprises a possible error in the estimations. With the emission reductions varying between approx. 950
CO2-eq/t DM and 400 CO2-eq/t DM in the tested sensitivity scenarios, the span of potential reductions is
large. This span may be even larger if sensitive parameters such as the C stability of soil amendments
and storage emissions were also tested with scenarios.
As discussed in Section 4.3.2, the emission reduction obtained from implementing pyrolysis in digestate
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
48
==PAGE:54==
management depends on system specific parameters such digestate composition, separation efficiency
and heat substitution, while modelling choices such as impact of marginal fertilizer substitution also has
a large effect on the overall potential. As an example, decanter centrifuge separation leads to a higher
potential emissions reduction. However, the simultaneous increase in P content in biochar reduces the
application rate of biochar within the P limits substantially to 0.96 t DM/ha. While the sensitivity analysis
demonstrated increased emission reductions, the larger area required for biochar application lowers the
reduction potential per ha to approx. 3.8 t CO2-eq/ha.
Another source of uncertainty in estimating the reduction potential at the municipal level is the quantifica-
tion of digestate potential. The estimates rely on simple assumptions regarding the conversion of biogas
feedstocks into digestate, using data from only a single year, which may not accurately represent a sector
in rapid development. With biogas production expected to increase in RKSK with multiple new biogas
plants on the way, it can be anticipated that digestate potentials will increase and fluctuate towards 2030
and 2050.
4.6
Model representativeness of digestate management in RKSK
The model has been constructed to the best of abilities to enable assessment of the impacts on climate
footprint and nutrient balance of introducing digestate pyrolysis in RKSK. Modelling choices that gener-
alize digestate management and future pyrolysis configuration affect the representativeness of digestate
management in RKSK, and these implications will be discussed now.
4.6.1
Pyrolysis configuration
Firstly, the pyrolysis system is based on Stiesdal’s Vrå-type configuration pyrolysis plant, but other con-
figurations may be relevant in RKSK. Different configurations can impact the energy balance and the
energy products produced, and thereby also the mitigation potential of digestate pyrolysis. Furthermore,
as discussed in a previous section, pyrolysis of digestate fibers at industrial scale is an emerging technol-
ogy in Denmark, and measurements of full-scale pyrolysis were not available for this study. Changes in
the energy balance will affect the energy substituion potential from the pyrolysis process. If the biochar
yield is different at full-scale it may affect the impact of C sequestration and heat substitution. In the
modelled pyrolysis system, the mitigation potential of 1 kg C sequestered as biochar is higher than that
of 1 kg C supplied to pyrolysis gas with subsequent heat substitution (under the assumption that en-
ergy follows C in mass balance). Thus, the more C is directed into biochar during pyrolysis, the higher
mitigation potential can be achieved compared to the current digestate management.
The modelled results assume that heat from combustion of pyrolysis gas is supplied to the upgrading
unit of the biogas plant. However, this assumption is only valid for biogas plants that upgrade the biogas
to biomethane for injection to the gas grid. As the survey amongst biogas plants in RKSK shows, all
biogas plants have an upgrading unit. The upgrading technologies differ, and while most of them are
supplied by heat from a gas boiler, one biogas plant is supplied with electricity and the biogas plant
under construction is supplied with heat from a wood chip boiler. The heat substitution effect will thus be
different in these cases, and likely lower the emission reduction potential of the pyrolysis system. The
energy substitution effect is context specific and as this study has shown, it has a large impact on the
overall climate impact.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
49
==PAGE:55==
4.6.2
Digestate composition
This study has modelled digestate based on pig and cattle manure, as these are the primary feedstocks
in biogas production in RKSK. Any variations in digestate composition are likely to impact both the climate
footprint and nutrient balance, as demonstrated in the sensitivity analysis. Consequently, the emissions
reduction that can be achieved from implementing pyrolysis in digestate management may vary accord-
ingly. The main effects of variations in digestate composition are impacts from fertilizer substitution and
C sequestration connected to the content of C and nutrients in the digestate. Biogas feedstocks vary in
nutrient and DM content, and the fertilizer value of the digestate will thus vary accordingly (Möller and
Müller, 2012), with impacts on climate footprint and nutrient balance. The DM content will also affect the
results, as a lower DM content in the digestate will lead to higher GWP impacts from transportation and
pretreatment of the fiber to obtain a suitable DM content for pyrolysis.
4.6.3
Separation technologies
The separation modelled in the main results are based on screw press technology. However, as was
evident from the survey at the biogas plants in the municipality, one biogas plant separates with screw
press and decanter centrifuge in series, and the biogas plant in construction will separate with screw
press. This has two implications for the model representativeness for RKSK. Firstly, the separation
technology has been shown to have a large impact on the climate footprint and nutrient balance, and is
thus important for the mitigation potential of the pyrolysis technology. Secondly, the fact that some biogas
plants are separating digestate today without the purpose being obtaining fiber for pyrolysis, will impact
the mitigation potential, as the avoided emissions compared to the reference system will be different.
Additionally, the influence on the nutrient balance will be altered as the N utilization factor of digestate
fibers is 55 pct. compared to the 77.5 pct. applied in the system for digestate.
4.7
Recommendations for RKSK and decision-makers
This study serves as an initial screening of the effects of implementing pyrolysis technology in digestate
management in RKSK. The study has estimated the GHG emission reductions that can be obtained, but
the main contribution of this study is the identification of important parameters for ensuring both a high
mitigation potential of pyrolysis in digestate management and an advantageous impact on the nutrient
balance.
When planning pyrolysis capacity, it is important to consider the energy balance of the pretreatment
and pyrolysis steps, as the excess heat from combustion of pyrolysis gas has a high substitution effect.
The effect is dependent on the energy source that is displaced. At at least half of the biogas plants
in the municipality, the excess heat will substitute natural gas with high resulting emission reductions.
To properly quantify the GHG emission reduction at a municipal level, the impact of heat substitution
from the other biogas plants must be assessed. In this regard, other pyrolysis plant configurations can
produce other energy products with different applications and energy substitution effects. These may be
relevant to look into for RKSK.
The energy substitution from excess heat contributes significantly to the reduction potential from diges-
tate pyrolysis in this study. In the long term, the climate effect of heat substitution may change as the
energy system evolves, and this might be relevant to look into. The sensitivity analysis did however
show that an emission reduction will still be obtained when assuming substitution of low impact energy
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
50
==PAGE:56==
sources.
The high P content of digestate fiber biochar is a limitation for the area that the digestate fiber biochar can
be applied to, and thus a potential limitation for achieving emission reductions. To achieve the climate
targets, biochar produced from other feedstocks with a lower P content can be relevant and applied in
combination with digestate fiber biochar. A relevant feedstock can be straw, which has a lower P content
(Thomsen, 2022) and a emission reduction potential in the same range as digestate fibers (Elsgaard et
al., 2022; Thomsen et al., 2023). A higher content of straw and other crop residues is expected in biogas
plants in the future (Thomsen, 2021; Toft and Juul, 2022). Consequently, the P content in digestate will
likely be lowered and allow a higher application rate of biochar.
The separation of C and nutrients into the fiber and liquid fractions is an important process with large
impact on the emission reduction potential. C is best utilized in the fiber fraction for increased C seques-
tration, while N should be to the liquid fraction to ensure nutrient recovery and fertilizer substitution. The
preliminary results indicate a better climate footprint with decanter centrifuge separation, but the effects
should be properly assessed in terms of energy balance and nutrient balance.
The relevance of the findings of this study extends beyond RKSK, offering valuable insights for stakehold-
ers and decision-makers. The study sheds light on the key parameters and processes that are central to
achieving emission reductions through the integration of digestate pyrolysis. These insights are trans-
ferable to wider geographic contexts, providing decision-makers with valuable guidance for planning
digestate pyrolysis initiatives. As has been discussed in this study, the climate footprint is influenced
by factors such as digestate composition, separation technology, and the surrounding energy systems,
which determine the substitution effect. This study demonstrates the importance of acknowledging that
these parameters are context specific and will have a large impact on the emission reduction potential
of a specific case. Understanding how these parameters impact the climate footprint can support in-
formed planning of pyrolysis technology in Denmark. Moreover, the study introduces a novel dimension
as it combines the assessment of climate footprint impacts with considerations of how the integration of
pyrolysis affects the nutrient balance. This aspect is important when considering changes in digestate
management to ensure recycling of valuable nutrients for crop production and avoid increased consump-
tion of mineral fertilizers.
The geographic context is significant in terms of the proximity of pyrolysis plants to biogas plants, which is
a determining factor for the economic viability of utilizing digestate fibers. This is due to the transportation
costs associated with moving the digestate (Toft and Juul, 2022). The findings of this study are thus of
special interest for areas with biogas plants that can supply digestate with short transportation distances,
while economic considerations of transportation of digestate to the pyrolysis plant make the results less
relevant for areas without biogas production from agricultural biomasses.
4.8
Future perspectives
This section briefly explores opportunities for further research and future perspectives. Given the pre-
liminary nature of this study of digestate pyrolysis in RKSK, there are several areas of improvement and
exploration in terms of model choices, system boundaries and uncertainty. Furthermore, the findings of
this study suggest additional areas of research warranting further investigation.
The conducted sensitivity analysis has not investigated all uncertain and sensitive parameters, nor did it
test the impacts of the tested scenarios on the nutrient balance. Further work should investigate the C
sequestration potential in terms of the applied Fperm values, as well as storage emissions, by obtaining
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
51
==PAGE:57==
measured data specific to the modelled systems or by testing sensitivity scenarios with other values from
the literature. There are currently ongoing research projects working on expanding knowledge and data
within the field of agricultural biochar application. One of these is the STABIL project, that investigates
C sequestration and reduction of storage emissions from digestate pyrolysis in a Danish context. The
findings of the STABIL project can be used to improve and validate the findings of this study.
The separation of digestate is a central process in digestate management with pyrolysis integration.
However, a study with separation of digestate in the reference system should also be investigated, as it
is the case at two biogas plants in the municipality, and will impact the avoided emissions from storage
and field. If the fibers are stored before pretreatment and pyrolysis, this will also impact the climate
footprint.
There are a range of available separation technologies and configurations that can be used and com-
bined. Investigating the impacts of these on the climate footprint and nutrient balance can help informed
planning of separation of digestate that benefits the emission reduction potential and nutrient recovery.
Additionally, the ability to concentrate P in biochar to increase the mobility and redistribute the resource
depends on the separation efficiencies. If mobilizing P is a central objective of integrating digestate sepa-
ration and pyrolysis, the results of this study indicate that decanter centrifuge separation is more suitable
than screw press separation for this purpose.
This study has focused on the nutrient balance of N and P due to their environmental impacts, and in
terms of P also its application limitations and scarcity. The sensitivity analysis conducted in this study
indicated a high influence of K on the climate footprint, making it an interesting focus for further investi-
gations.
While the impacts on nutrient balance were considered in this study in terms of recovery rates with dis-
cussions of implications for the fertilizer quality, the environmental and agronomic impacts of integrating
pyrolysis should be included to properly assess its impacts. Further work can include loss of nutrients
after field application through runoff and leaching. In line with this, the effects of biochar application on
soil properties in terms of physiology, biology and chemistry are complex, but nonetheless highly rele-
vant to get a comprehensive understanding of the implications of biochar application to agricultural soils.
These aspects are important for informed and robust decision making that considers not only the climate
impact but also environmental impacts.
Infrastructure and maintenance has not been included in the LCA. The pyrolysis system will require
construction of new infrastructure including pyrolysis plants and possibly expansion of storage capacity
at the farm. These impacts are relevant to investigate to gain a broader understanding of the impacts of
integrating pyrolysis.
The C sequestration potentials modelled in this study are based on static calculations of the C sink in
the soil after 20 and 100 years. However, the mineralization of C in the soil and resulting release of CO2
to the atmosphere is dynamic. Incorporating dynamic effects is necessary to obtain C sequestration
potential estimates that align more closely with actual impacts (Petersen et al., 2013). Biogenic CO2-
emissions should then be considered as well as the pulses of CO2-emissions from biomass application
in the reference use and from pyrolysis of the biomass (Thomsen et al., 2023).
Although digestate fiber pyrolysis can contribute substantially to the climate targets set by RKSK for
biochar, additional feedstocks are necessary to achieve the targets based on the current digestate po-
tential. Additionally, the high P content of biochar derived from manure digestate fiber limits the applica-
tion rate, making it compelling to investigate the potential for obtaining emission reductions from other
feedstocks that are lower in P content, such as straw (Thomsen, 2021).
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
52
==PAGE:58==
The deployment of pyrolysis technology is dependent on an understanding of incentive structures for
biochar production and application. For successful deployment of pyrolysis, the incentives for farmers
and stakeholders to supply feedstock and apply biochar to their fields must be clear. The CIP Foundation
has assessed the necessary framework for successful implementation of biochar as a C sequestration
technology in the Danish agricultural sector. They conclude that through carbon credits it can become
economically viable to produce biochar from biogas digestate fibers, but a regulatory framework that
facilitates field application of biochar and placement of pyrolysis plant, as well as guidelines for the use
biochar in agriculture are needed to accelerate the integration of pyrolysis in the agricultural sector (CIP
Foundation, 2024).
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
53
==PAGE:59==
5
Conclusion
This study has sought to answer the problem statement: How will integration of digestate fiber pyrolysis in
Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality influence the municipality’s climate footprint and nutrient balance? This
was done by performing an LCA to determine changes in impact on GWP and nutrient recovery rates
between digestate management with and without pyrolysis technology.
The integration of pyrolysis in digestate management results in a lower climate footprint compared to
the current digestate management in RKSK based on the modelled results in this study. The emission
reductions are especially attributed to the reduction of storage emissions, increased C sequestration in
biochar and substitution of natural gas.
The introduction of pyrolysis in digestate management in RKSK has the potential to reduce climate foot-
print by 400-950 kg CO2-eq/t DM digestate input dependent on the digestate composition and technology
based on tested scenarios in this study. The conclusion may be different with more scenarios tested.
To further expand and validate the conclusions of this study, it is recommended that improved data are
obtained and a more thorough uncertainty analysis is conducted.
The study indicates that the fertilizer value of digestate is not impaired by the introduction of separation
and pyrolysis with high return of P and plant-available N. This will depend on the separation efficiency of
nutrients of the specific separation technology, as biochar constitutes a poor N fertilizer and has potential
to be a slow-releasing P fertilizer. How suitable biochar is as P fertilizer depends on several unknowns;
to what extent background P concentrations of the soils in RKSK can sustain crop P needs and how soil
enhancing effects from biochar application affect P availability and retention.
Digestate fiber pyrolysis has the potential to contribute substantially to the climate targets for biochar
in RKSK with an emission reduction potential of 30,000-75,000 t CO2-eq/yr corresponding to 40-96 pct.
contribution to the 2030 target and 20-48 pct. of the 2050 target. The application rate of biochar produced
from digestate fibers is however limited by its P content, causing a lower emission reduction potential per
hectare than in RKSK’s climate action plan. Biochar with lower P content produced from other feedstocks
can be applied in combination with digestate fiber biochar to achieve the GHG emission reduction strived
for in RKSK.
The model is based on generalizations of digestate management in RKSK, and alternative pyrolysis con-
figurations, energy systems, digestate compositions and separation technologies will impact the climate
footprint. Future work should focus on strengthening the robustness of the results through data improve-
ment and validation, and a more extensive sensitivity analysis including central parameters such as C
stability and storage emissions. The impacts on nutrient balance should be expanded to include envi-
ronmental impacts from losses to the environment and fertilizer value. By including considerations of
the effects of biochar application on soil properties, a more comprehensive understanding of impacts of
biochar application can be obtained.
The study provides novel insights into important processes and parameters for obtaining GHG emission
reduction from the integration of pyrolysis in digestate management that can aid not only RKSK, but also
other municipalities and central stakeholders in the planning and deployment of digestate fiber pyrolysis.
By expanding the study with further system setups, such as combinations of separation technologies,
pyrolysis configurations and substitution of different energy sources, the relevance of the results in a
broader context can be enhanced and function as a guideline for integrating pyrolysis in digestate man-
agement in Denmark.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
54
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
Andersen, H., Baatrup-Pedersen, A., Blicher-Mathiesen, G., Christensen, J., Heckrath, G., Nordemann
Jensen, P. (, Vinther, F., Rolighed, J., Rubæk, G., and Søndergaard, M. (2016). Redegørelse for ud-
vikling i landbrugets fosforforbrug, tab og påvirkning af vandmiljøet. Tech. rep. nr. 77. Aarhus Univer-
sity, DCE – Danish Centre for Environment and Energy, p. 86. URL: ?iiT,ff/+2kXmX/FfTm#fh_ddXT/7.
Arvidsson, R., Sandén, B. A., and Svanström, M. (2023). Prospective, Anticipatory and Ex-Ante - What’s
the Difference? Sorting Out Concepts for Time-Related LCA. Conference contribution. Environmental
Systems Analysis, Chalmers University of Technology.
Azzi, E. S., Li, H., Cederlund, H., Karltun, E., and Sundberg, C. (2024). “Modelling biochar long-term
carbon storage in soil with harmonized analysis of decomposition data”. In: Geoderma 441, p. 116761.
DOI: RyXRyRefDX;2Q/2`KXkykjXRRedeR.
Birkmose, T., Stougaard, K., Holst, T., Jensen, H. B., and Nielsen, B. S. (2019). Fosforregulering - er
biogasanlaeg en løsning eller en udfordring? Tech. rep. SEGES.
Bruun, E. W., Ambus, P., Egsgaard, H., and Hauggaard-Nielsen, H. (2012). “Effects of slow and fast
pyrolysis biochar on soil C and N turnover dynamics”. In: Soil Biology and Biochemistry 46, pp. 73–79.
DOI: RyXRyRefDXbQBH#BQXkyRRXRRXyRN.
Bruun, E. W., Hauggaard-Nielsen, H., Ibrahim, N., Egsgaard, H., Ambus, P., Jensen, P. A., and Dam-
Johansen, K. (2011). “Influence of fast pyrolysis temperature on biochar labile fraction and short-term
carbon loss in a loamy soil”. In: Biomass and Bioenergy 35.3, pp. 1182–1189. DOI: RyXRyRefDX#BQK#BQ2X
kyRyXRkXyy3.
Bruun, S., Harmer, S. L., Bekiaris, G., Christel, W., Zuin, L., Hu, Y., Jensen, L. S., and Lombi, E. (2017).
“The effect of different pyrolysis temperatures on the speciation and availability in soil of P in biochar
produced from the solid fraction of manure”. In: Chemosphere 169, pp. 377–386. DOI: RyXRyRefDX
+?2KQbT?2`2XkyReXRRXy83.
Butera, G. (2023). “WP1 SkyClean Scale-up”. gbu@stiesdal.com.
Cathcart, A., Smyth, B. M., Lyons, G., Murray, S. T., Rooney, D., and Johnston, C. R. (2021). “An eco-
nomic analysis of anaerobic digestate fuel pellet production: can digestate fuel pellets add value to
existing operations?” In: Cleaner Engineering and Technology 3, p. 100098. DOI: RyXRyRefDX+H2iXkykRX
RyyyN3.
Christel, W., Bruun, S., Magid, J., Kwapinski, W., and Jensen, L. S. (2015). “Pig slurry acidification,
separation technology and thermal conversion affect phosphorus availability in soil amended with the
derived solid fractions, chars or ashes”. In: Plant and Soil 401, pp. 93–107. DOI: RyXRyydfbRRRy9@yR8@
k8RN@y.
CIP Foundation (2024). Vejen til effektiv CO2-lagring med biokul. Tech. rep. URL: ?iiTb,ff+BT7QM/2MX/Ff
rT@+QMi2MifmTHQ/bfkyk9fyRfo2D2M@iBH@2772FiBp@*Pk@H;`BM;@K2/@#BQFmH@*AS@6QM/2M@DMm`@kyk9XT/7.
Clausen, L. R., Butera, G., and Jensen, S. H. (2019). “Integration of anaerobic digestion with thermal
gasification and pressurized solid oxide electrolysis cells for high efficiency bio-SNG production”. In:
Energy 188. DOI: RyXRyRefDX2M2`;vXkyRNXRReyR3.
ConTerra (2023). Biomasseopgørelse for Naturbiogas Ejstrup ApS. Report. Danish Ministry of the Envi-
ronment - Environmental Protection Agency.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
55
==PAGE:61==
Deviatkin, I., Havukainen, J., and Horttanainen, M. (2018). “Possibilities for enhanced nitrogen recovery
from digestate through thermal drying”. In: Journal of Material Cycles and Waste Management 20.2,
pp. 1016–1025. DOI: RyXRyydfbRyRej@yRd@yeej@3.
Drosg, B., Fuchs, W., Al Seadi, T., Madsen, M., and Linke, B. (2015). Nutrient Recovery by Biogas
Digestate Processing.
DTU Environmental Engineering (2024). EASETECH. URL: ?iiT,ffrrrX2b2i2+?X/Ff.
EBC (2012). European Biochar Certificate - Guidelines for a Sustainable Production of Biochar. Tech.
rep. Version 6.1. Accessed November 2023. Arbaz, Switzerland: European Biochar Foundation (EBC).
URL: ?iiTb,ff#BQ+?`@BMi2`MiBQMHXQ`;fbiM/`/@+2`iB7B+iBQM@i`BMBM;f#BQ+?`@biM/`/bf.
Elsgaard, L., Adamsen, A. P. S., Møller, H. B., Winding, A., Jørgensen, U., Mortensen, E. Ø., Arthur, E.,
Abalos, D., Andersen, M. N., Thers, H., and Sørensen, P. (2022). Knowledge synthesis on biochar in
Danish agriculture. Tech. rep. Aarhus University - DCA - Danish Centre for Food and Agriculture.
Energinet (2024). Gas composition and quality for transmission, yearly. Energinet. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrX
2M2`;B/ib2`pB+2X/FfibQ@;bf:b*QKTQbBiBQMu2`HvOK2i/i@BM7Q.
Frederiksen, E. E. and Damsø, T. (2023). Kommunale klimaindsatser. Tech. rep. Concito.
Gilland, B. (2014). “Is a Haber-Bosch World sustainable? Population, nutrition, cereals, nitrogen and
environment”. In: Journal of Social, Political, and Economic Studies 39, pp. 166–185.
Grönman, K., Ypyä, J., Virtanen, Y., Kurppa, S., Soukka, R., Seuri, P., Finér, A., and Linnanen, L. (2016).
“Nutrient footprint as a tool to evaluate the nutrient balance of a food chain”. In: Journal of Cleaner
Production 112, pp. 2429–2440. DOI: RyXRyRefDXD+H2T`QXkyR8XyNXRkN. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+B2M+2/B`2+iX
+QKfb+B2M+2f`iB+H2fTBBfayN8Ne8keR8yRjeN9.
Hamelin, L., Wesnæs, M., Wenzel, H., and Petersen, B. M. (2010). Life Cycle Assessment of Biogas
from Separated slurry. Report Environmental Project No. 1329. Danish Ministry of the Environment -
Environmental Protection Agency.
Han, L., Sun, K., Yang, Y., Xia, X., Li, F., Yang, Z., and Xing, B. (2020). “Biochar’s stability and effect
on the content, composition and turnover of soil organic carbon”. In: Geoderma 364.September 2019,
p. 114184. DOI: RyXRyRefDX;2Q/2`KXkykyXRR9R39. URL: RyXRyRefDX;2Q/2`KXkykyXRR9R39.
Hansen, J. H., Hamelin, L., Taghizadeh-Toosi, A., Olesen, J. E., and Wenzel, H. (2020). “Agricultural
residues bioenergy potential that sustain soil carbon depends on energy conversion pathways”. In:
GCB Bioenergy 12.11, pp. 1002–1013. DOI: RyXRRRRf;+##XRkdjj.
Hansen, J. W. and Rytter, D. (2023). Iltsvind i danske farvande 24. august - 21. september 2023. Tech.
rep. Rådgivningsnotat nr. 2023/44. Aarhus University, DCE – Danish Centre for Environment and En-
ergy, p. 23.
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K., and Olsen, S. I. (2018). Life Cycle Assessment. Theory and Prac-
tice. Springer Nature.
Højgaard Maskinfabrik (n.d.). Beretning af massebalance for anlæg til separering af gylle. Version 1.0.
September 2009.
Holly, M. A., Larson, R. A., Powell, J. M., Ruark, M. D., and Aguirre-Villegas, H. (2017). “Greenhouse
gas and ammonia emissions from digested and separated dairy manure during storage and after land
application”. In: Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 239, pp. 410–419. DOI: RyXRyRefDX;22X
kyRdXykXyyd.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
56
==PAGE:62==
IBI (2015). Standardized Product Definition and Product Testing Guidelines for Biochar That Is Used in
Soil. Product Definition and Specification Standards IBI-STD-2.1. International Biochar Initiative. URL:
?iiTb,ff#BQ+?`@BMi2`MiBQMHXQ`;fbiM/`/@+2`iB7B+iBQM@i`BMBM;f#BQ+?`@biM/`/bf.
IPCC (2006). 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Volume 4, Agriculture,
Forestry and Other Land Use. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Chap. 11.
– (2013). “Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis”. In: Working Group I Contribution to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Chap. 8. URL: ?iiTb,
ffrrrXBT++X+?fbBi2fbb2ibfmTHQ/bfkyR3fykfq:R_8nHHn7BMHXT/7.
– (2019). 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.
Chapter 4: Fugitive Emissions, Volume 2. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXBT++@ M;;BTXB;2bXQ`XDTfTm#HB+fkyRN`7f
T/7fknoQHmK2kfRN_nokn9n*?y9n6m;BiBp2n1KBbbBQMbXT/7.
– (2023). Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Tech. rep. Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC, pp. 35–115.
Jensen, J. L., Thers, H., and Elsgaard, L. (2022). Afklaring om videns- og ressourcebehov ved at integrere
biokul i C-TOOL modellen til brug for emissionsopgørelser. Rådgivningsnotat fra DCA - Danish Centre
for Food and Agriculture.
Lehmann, J., Gaunt, J., and Rondon, M. (2006). “Bio-char sequestration in terrestrial ecosystems - A
review”. In: 11.2, pp. 403–427. DOI: RyXRyydfbRRykd@yy8@Nyye@8.
Mazzini, S., Borgonovo, G., Scaglioni, L., Bedussi, F., D’Imporzano, G., Tambone, F., and Adani, F.
(2020). “Phosphorus speciation during anaerobic digestion and subsequent solid/liquid separation”.
In: Science of The Total Environment 734, p. 139284. DOI: RyXRyRefDXb+BiQi2MpXkykyXRjNk39.
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries (2021). Aftale om grøn omstilling af dansk landbrug. Tech.
rep. Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries.
– (2024). BEK nr 1060 af 26/07/2023: Bekendtgørelse om jordbrugets anvendelse af gødning i planpe-
rioden 2023/2024. Retsinformation. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrX`2ibBM7Q`KiBQMX/Ff2HBfHifkykjfRyey.
Möller, K. and Müller, T. (2012). “Effects of anaerobic digestion on digestate nutrient availability and crop
growth: A review”. In: Engineering in Life Sciences 12, pp. 242–257. DOI: RyXRyykf2Hb+XkyRRyyy38.
Muñoz, I. and Weidema, B. (2023). Example – Marginal Electricity in Denmark. Version: 2023-09-20.
URL: rrrX+QMb2[m2MiBH@H+XQ`;.
Nature Energy (2024). “Dialogue with Nature Energy regarding their biogas plants in Ringkøbing-Skjern
Municipality”.
Nehmdahl, H. and Birkmose, T. (2020). Udvikling af GIS-kort over estimeret fosfortal i landbrugsjord.
Report. ConTerra and SEGES.
Nielsen, O.-K., Plejdrup, M. S., Winther, M., Nielsen, M., Gyldenkærne, S., Hjorth Mikkelsen, M., Albrek-
tsen, R., Thomsen, M., Hjelgaard, K., Fauser, P., Bruun, H. G., Kvist Johannsen, V., Nord-Larsen, T.,
Vesterdal, L., Callesen, I., Hjorth Caspersen, O., Scott-Bentsen, N., Rasmussen, E., Bødtker Petersen,
S., Maliina Olsen, T., and Gunnleivsdóttir Hansen, M. (2019). Denmark’s National Inventory Report
2019. Emission Inventories 1990-2017 - Submitted under the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol. Tech. rep. Scientific Report No. 318. Aarhus University,
DCE – Danish Centre for Environment and Energy, p. 886. URL: ?iiT,ff/+2kXmX/FfTm#fa_jR3XT/7.
NIRAS (2023). Kortlægning af biomasser til biokul og CO2-potentialer. Report 4th version. Niras for CIP
Foundation.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
57
==PAGE:63==
Olesen, J. E., Møller, H. B., Petersen, S. O., Sørensen, P., Nyord, T., and Sommer, S. G. (2020).
Bæredygtig biogas - klima og miljø-effekter af biogasproduktion. Report DCA rapport nr. 175. Aarhus
University, DCA - Danish Centre for Food and Agriculture, p. 88. URL: ?iiTb,ff/+Tm#XmX/Ff/D7T/7f
.*`TTQ`iRd8XT/7.
Petersen, B. M., Knudsen, M. T., Hermansen, J. E., and Halberg, N. (2013). “An approach to include soil
carbon changes in life cycle assessments”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 52, pp. 217–224. DOI:
RyXRyRefDXD+H2T`QXkyRjXyjXyyd.
Phyllis2 (2011). pig manure digestate, dried (#2903). URL: ?iiTb,ffT?vHHBbXMHf"`Qrb2faiM/`/f1*L@
S?vHHBbO/B;2bii2.
– (2019). Digestate (#3593). URL: ?iiTb,ffT?vHHBbXMHf"`Qrb2faiM/`/f1*L@S?vHHBbO/B;2bii2.
PlanEnergi (2022). “Bilag 9 - Omregning af den nationale landsbrugsaftale til RKSK-forhold”. Calculations
performed by PlanEnergi for Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality’s Climate Action Plan.
Poulsen, H. D., Møller, H. B., Klinglmair, M., and Thomsen, M. (2019). Fosfor i dansk landbrug - ressource
og miljøudfordring. Tech. rep. Aarhus University, DCE – Danish Centre for Environment and Energy,
p. 44.
Prins, W. and Dahmen, N. (2015). “Processes for thermochemical conversion of biomass”. In.
Ravenni, G. (2023). Experimental data from elemental analysis of digestate fiber pellets and digestate
fiber pellets biochar from pyrolysis in laboratory oven at DTU Risø, performed by DTU CHEMEC in
2023. Obtained from Giulia Ravenni 19-12-2023.
Richardson, K., Steffen, W., Lucht, W., Jørgen, B., Cornell, S. E., Donges, J. F., Drüke, M., Fetzer, I., Bala,
G., Bloh, W. von, Feulner, G., Fiedler, S., Gerten, D., Gleeson, T., Hofmann, M., Huiskamp, W., Kumull,
M., Mohan, C., Nogués-Bravol, D., Petri, S., Porkka, M., Rahmstorf, S., Schaphoff, Sibyll, Thonicke,
K., Tobian, A., Virkki, V., Wang-Erlandsson, L., Weber, L., and Rockström, J. (2023). “Earth beyond six
of nine planetary boundaries”. In: Science Advances 9.37, eadh2458. DOI: RyXRRkefb+B/pX/?k983.
Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality (2022a). CLIMATE ACTION PLANNING FRAMEWORK Ringkøbing-Skjern
Kommune. Tech. rep. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrX`FbFX/FfQK@FQKKmM2Mf#v`/@kykk@kyk8f/;bQ`/2M@Q;@
`272`i\;2M/A.4jNykO8y/8+R7e@+/2N@9+dN@#3j@N99eR78+yNe.
– (2022b). Klimapolitik 2023-2026. Tech. rep. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrX`FbFX/FfQK@FQKKmM2Mf#v`/@kykk@
kyk8f/;bQ`/2M@Q;@`272`i\;2M/A.4jNykO8y/8+R7e@+/2N@9+dN@#3j@N99eR78+yNe.
RKB Bioenergi (2023). “Dialogue with manager of RKB Bioenergi, Kim Gohr Nielsen, regarding the con-
figuration of the future biogas plant in Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality”.
Roskilde University (2024). Supporting implementation and scale-up of biomass pyrolysis. URL: ?iiTb,
ff7Q`bFMBM;X`m+X/Ff2MfT`QD2+ibfbmTTQ`iBM;@BKTH2K2MiiBQM@M/@b+H2@mT@Q7@#BQKbb@Tv`QHvbBb.
Schmidt, H.-P., Hagemann, N., Draper, K., and Kammann, C. (2019). “The use of biochar in animal
feeding”. In: PeerJ, pp. 1–55. DOI: RyXddRdfT22`DXdjdj.
Singh, B. P., Cowie, A. L., and Smernik, R. J. (2012). “Biochar Carbon Stability in a Clayey Soil As
a Function of Feedstock and Pyrolysis Temperature”. In: Environmental Science & Technology 46,
pp. 11770–11778. DOI: RyXRykRf2bjyk898#.
Sonderegger, T. and Stoikou, N. (2022). Implementation of life cycle impact assessment methods in
the ecoinvent database v3.9 and v3.9.1 (v1.1 - 2023.01.23). Tech. rep. Zürich, Switzerland: ecoinvent
Association. URL: ?iiTb,ff2+QBMp2MiXQ`;frT@+QMi2MifmTHQ/bfkykjfyRfG*AnBKTH2K2MiiBQMnjXN@M/@
jXNXRXT/7.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
58
==PAGE:64==
SparEnergi (2023). Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality. URL: ?iiTb,ffbT`2M2`;BX/FfQ772MiHB;f2M2`;B@Q;@+Qk@
`2;MbF#2if`BM;FQ2#BM;@bFD2`M.
Stiesdal (2022). Pressemeddelelse: Byggestart i Vrå på Danmarks største SkyClean-anlæg. SkyClean
Scale-Up. URL: ?iiTb,ffbFv+H2M@b+H2@mTX/Ff.
– (2023a). “Biogas digetate based biochar, version 1.3”. Product datasheet supplied by Stiesdal Sky-
Clean.
– (2023b). Experimental data from elemental analysis of digestate fiber and digestate fiber biochar from
pyrolysis in laboratory oven at DTU Risø, performed in 2023. Obtained from Stiesdal SkyClean 18-12-
2023.
– (2024). Personal communication with Henrik Nørskov Petersen at Stiesdal SkyClean.
Tambone, F., Orzi, V., D’Imporzano, G., and Adani, F. (2017). “Solid and liquid fractionation of digestate:
Mass balance, chemical characterization, and agronomic and environmental value”. In: Bioresource
Technology 243, pp. 1251–1256. DOI: RyXRyRefDX#BQ`i2+?XkyRdXydXRjy.
Tayibi, S., Monlau, F., Bargaz, A., Jimenez, R., and Barakat, A. (2021). “Synergy of anaerobic digestion
and pyrolysis processes for sustainable waste management: A critical review and future perspectives”.
In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 152. DOI: RyXRyRefDX`b2`XkykRXRRReyj.
The Danish Agricultural Agency (2022). Vejledning om gødsknings- og harmoniregler. Planperioden 1.
august 2022 til 31. juli 2023. The Danish Agricultural Agency.
The Danish Energy Agency (2022). Klimastatus og –fremskrivning 2022 (KF22): Biogasproduktion. Tech.
rep. Forudsætningsnotat nr. 7C. The Danish Energy Agency. URL: ?iiTb,ff2MbX/Ffb2`pB+2f7`2KbF`BpMBM;2`@
MHvb2`@KQ/2HH2`fFHBKbiimb@Q;@7`2KbF`BpMBM;@kykj.
– (2023a). Accumulated feedstock input and its composition for all biogas plants in Ringkøbing-Skjern
Municipality for the period 2021/2022. Unpublished data obtained from The Danish Energy Agency.
– (2023b). “Biogas statistics for biogas production in Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality 2021-2022”. Un-
published data obtained from The Danish Energy Agency.
– (2023c). “Biomass statistics for biogas production in Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality 2021-2022”. Un-
published data from biomass reportings for Danish biogas plants obtained from The Danish Energy
Agency.
The Danish Environmental Agency (2024). Bilag A.1 Datagrundlag lastbil. OMIT - Vejledning til miljø-
opgørelse/dokumentation af international godstransport. The Danish Environmental Agency. URL:
?iiTb,ffrrrkXKbiX/Ffm/;BpfTm#HBFiBQM2`fkyykf3d@dNdk@jee@df?iKHf#BH;yRX?iK.
The Danish Government (2021). Regeringsoplæg til grøn omstilling af landbruget.
The National Bioeconomy Panel (2022). Anbefalinger Bioressourcer til grøn omstilling Det Nationale
Bioøkonomipanel. Tech. rep.
Thomsen, I. K., Olesen, J. E., Møller, H. B., Sørensen, P., and Christensen, B. T. (2013). “Carbon dy-
namics and retention in soil after anaerobic digestion of dairy cattle feed and faeces”. In: Soil Biology
and Biochemistry 58, pp. 82–87. DOI: RyXRyRefDXbQBH#BQXkyRkXRRXyye.
Thomsen, T. P. (2021). Climate Footprint Analysis of Straw Pyrolysis & Straw Biogas: Assessment of the
Danish climate crisis mitigation potential of two new straw management options. Tech. rep. Roskilde
University.
– (2022). Introduction to Production and Use of Biochar 2022: working towards a more circular and
bio-based Danish economy. Tech. rep. Roskilde University.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
59
==PAGE:65==
Thomsen, T. P. (2023). “Pyrolyse status anno 2023”. Conference presentation at SkyClean Scale-up
conference, Vejle.
Thomsen, T. P., Karlsson, M. B., and Kamp, A. (2023). Styrket grundlag for vurdering af klimaeffekter
ved pyrolyse af 3 forskellige typer af biomasse - et arbejds- og baggrundsnotat.
Toft, L. V. and Juul, T. A. (2022). Brug af halm i biogasanlæg. Tech. rep. Seges.
Verbeke, M., Van Dijk, K., and Brienza, C. (2021). Report with scenario’s and schemes of proven NRR
techniques. Tech. rep. SYSTEMIC - Circular solutions for biowaste. URL: ?iiTb,ffbvbi2KB+T`QD2+iX2mf
#mbBM2bb@.
Vestjysk Biogas (2024). “Dialogue with Vestjysk Biogas regarding their biogas plant in Ringkøbing-Skjern
Municipality”.
Vestjysk Landboforening (2024). “Description of digestate management in RKSK from dialogue with Niels
Gylsen Buch”.
Wang, J., Xiong, Z., and Kuzyakov, Y. (2016). “Biochar stability in soil: meta-analysis of decomposition
and priming effects”. In: GCB Bioenergy 8.3, pp. 512–523. DOI: RyXRRRRf;+##XRkkee.
Weber, K. and Quicker, P. (2018). “Properties of biochar”. In: Fuel 217, pp. 240–261. DOI: RyXRyRefDX7m2HX
kyRdXRkXy89.
Weidema, B. P. and Wesnæs, M. S. (1996). “Data quality management for life cycle inventories—
an example of using data quality indicators”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 4.3, pp. 167–174.
DOI: RyXRyRefayN8N@ e8keUNeVyyy9j@ R. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXb+B2M+2/B`2+iX+QKfb+B2M+2f`iB+H2fTBBf
ayN8Ne8keNeyyy9jR.
Westerby, H. (2023). “Dialogue with Henrik Westerby from Ringkøbing-Skjern Municipality regarding
pyrolysis plans in the municipality and biomass potential”.
Woolf, D., Lehmann, J., Ogle, S., Kishimoto-Mo, A. W., McConkey, B., and Baldock, J. (2021). “Green-
house Gas Inventory Model for Biochar Additions to Soil”. In: Environmental Science & Technology
55.21, pp. 14795–14805. DOI: RyXRykRf+bX2biXR+yk9k8.
Yang, L., Wu, Y., Wang, Y., An, W., Jin, J., Sun, K., and Wang, X. (2021). “Effects of biochar addition on
the abundance, speciation, availability and leaching loss of soil phosphorus”. In: Science of the Total
Environment 758, p. 143657. DOI: RyXRyRefDXb+BiQi2MpXkykyXR9je8d.
Yoo, G. and Kang, H. (2012). “Effects of Biochar Addition on Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Microbial
Responses in a Short-Term Laboratory Experiment”. In: Journal of Environmental Quality 41, pp. 1193–
1202. DOI: RyXkRj9fD2[kyRRXyR8d.
Zhu, K., Christel, W., Bruun, S., and Jensen, L. S. (2014). “The different effects of applying fresh, com-
posted or charred manure on soil N2O emissions”. In: Soil Biology and Biochemistry 74, pp. 61–69.
DOI: RyXRyRefDXbQBH#BQXkyR9XykXyky.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
60
==PAGE:66==
A
Appendices
A.1
Data quality assessment
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
61
==PAGE:67==
Table A.1: Data quality scores for processes and parameters
Process or
parameter
Reliability
Completeness
Temporal correlation
Geographical correlation
Further technological correlation
Data quality
score
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Digestate
composition
3
Calculated based
on mass balance
from elemental
analysis data, and
verified by com-
parison with values
from the literature.
4
Incomplete data
from a smaller num-
ber of data points.
1
The elemental anal-
ysis data are from
2023.
4
The elemental anal-
ysis data are based
on similar produc-
tion conditions, but
as the feedstock
composition of the
digestates analyzed
is largely unknown,
the correlation may
be low.
2
The digestate com-
position is calculated
from elemental analy-
sis and transfer func-
tions based on various
sources. The quality
thus depends on both
the representativeness
of elemental analysis
data and data on sep-
aration, pretreatment
and pyrolysis.
2.8
Transportation
2
Based on ecoinvent
data deemed to be
of high quality, but
with assumption
of transportation
distance and truck
type.
1
Based on ecoinvent
data deemed to be
of high quality.
5
Process based on
2007 data.
3
Process is for
Rest-of-World, but
assumed to be sim-
ilar to conditions in
RKSK.
1
2.4
Emissions
from storage
(Holly et al.,
2017)
2
Data are cross-
checked with other
sources, but as-
sumptions are
made regarding
correlation with
digestate in study
and storage condi-
tions.
4
Based on one study
with measurements
over one season.
3
Data from 2017.
3
Data from study
conducted in USA,
but with similar con-
ditions.
2
Data on manure di-
gestate storage and
field application. Un-
clear whether storage
conditions comply with
expected storage in
study.
2.8
Emissions
from field
(Holly et al.,
2017)
2
Data are cross-
checked with other
sources, but as-
sumptions are
made regarding
correlation with
digestate in study
and storage condi-
tions.
4
Based on one study
with measurements
over one season.
3
Data from 2017.
3
Data from study
conducted in USA,
but with similar con-
ditions
2
Data on manure di-
gestate storage and
field application. Un-
clear whether storage
conditions comply with
expected storage in
study.
2.8
Diesel con-
sumption
for field ap-
plication
(Thomsen,
2021)
4
Based on data used
in similar study.
5
Representativeness
is unknown.
5
Age of data is un-
known.
3
Used in study with
Danish scope and
assumed to be
similar to field appli-
cation technology in
RKSK.
4
Used in study with
Danish scope and
assumed to be similar
to field application
technology in RKSK.
4.2
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
62
==PAGE:68==
Table A.1 (continued): Data quality scores for processes and parameters
Process or
parameter
Reliability
Completeness
Temporal correlation
Geographical correlation
Further technological correlation
Data quality
score
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Fertilizer
utilization
factors (Min-
istry of Food,
Agriculture
and Fish-
eries, 2024)
1
Based on current
Danish legislation.
1
Factors defined i
legislation.
1
Legislation from
2023/2024.
1
National legislation
applicable to RKSK.
1
Factors are applicable
to the soil amend-
ments of the study.
Modelled as 50/50
cattle and pig manure.
1
Fertilizer sub-
stitution
1
Based on ecoinvent
data deemed to be
of high quality.
1
Based on ecoinvent
processes using
”market for” to
account for all up-
stream processes.
2
Processes are
based on data from
2020.
2
Average data for
Denmark.
2
Generic LCI process
assumed to be repre-
sentative of fertilizer
consumed in RKSK.
1.6
Screw press
separation
(Drosg et al.,
2015)
2
Verified data based
on cross-check with
other sources.
4
Screw press data
from a single study.
The article in which
the data are pub-
lished is not acces-
sible.
5
Data from 2007.
3
From study of di-
gestate separation
in Germany.
2
Data based on screw
press separation of
manure digestate.
3.2
Screw press
electricity
demand
(Højgaard
Maskinfabrik,
n.d.)
1
Based on power
and capacity of
Højgaards screw
press. Cross-
checked with an-
other source.
2
Based on one rep-
resentative site,
and based on aver-
age capacity.
4
Data from 2009.
2
Data from Danish
company.
2
Assumed to represent
future screw press
separation technology
in RKSK.
2.2
Marginal
electricity
(Muñoz and
Weidema,
2023)
2
Modelled marginal
electricity mix
based on assump-
tion of future energy
sources.
1
LCI database of
high quality.
1
Data from 2023.
2
National average.
5
Large uncertainty
regarding marginal
electricity mix.
2.2
Pyrolysis
plant con-
figuration
(Butera,
2023)
3
Based on thermo-
dynamic model not
fully verified by full
scale measure-
ments.
1
Representative for
the Vrå-type pyroly-
sis plant.
1
Data from 2023.
2
Standard configura-
tion of the Vrå-type
plant that will likely
be similar in RKSK.
1
Standard configuration
of the Vrå-type plant
that will likely be simi-
lar in RKSK.
1.6
Pyrolysis pro-
cess transfer
functions
(Ravenni,
2023; Sties-
dal, 2023b)
2
Based on lab mea-
surements from two
different datasets of
two types of diges-
tate with different
pretreatments
(pelletized and
un-pelletized). Ex-
pert estimates say
that pretreatment
differences do not
impact results.
2
1
Data from 2023.
1
Data are not ex-
pected to differ
based on geo-
graphical setting.
4
Laboratory scale
pyrolysis of two di-
gestates of which one
correlates well with the
study and the other is
unknown. Pyrolysis
temperature is rep-
resentative of the full
scale plant.
2
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
63
==PAGE:69==
Table A.1 (continued): Data quality scores for processes and parameters
Process or
parameter
Reliability
Completeness
Temporal correlation
Geographical correlation
Further technological correlation
Data quality
score
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
N evapora-
tion during
thermal dry-
ing (Deviatkin
et al., 2018)
2
Non-verified data
based on measure-
ments.
2
Representative
data from experi-
mental measure-
ments of thermal
drying of digestate.
2
Data from 2018.
3
3
Thermal drying of
digestate. Unknown
correlation between
digestate composition
and drying technology.
2.4
Biochar char-
acterisation
(Stiesdal,
2023a)
1
Measurements on
biochar conducted
by Stiesdal Sky-
Clean.
5
Unknown sample
size.
1
Data from 2023.
3
Data from digestate
collected from BB
Bioenergi at Vrå.
2
Biochar produced
from digestate fiber at
laboratory scale with
process parameters
similar to the Vrå-type
plant.
2.4
Digestate
density
1
3
Based on a single
study of manure
digestate density.
2
Data from 2019.
3
Study of dairy ma-
nure digestate in
Wisconsin, USA.
Assumed to have
similar production
conditions as in
RKSK.
3
Based on digested
manure at biogas
plant in USA.
2.4
LHV of nat-
ural gas
(Energinet,
2024)
1
1
1
Data from 2023.
2
National average.
1
Data on Danish gas
grid mix.
1.2
Natural gas
production
1
Based on ecoinvent
data deemed to be
of high quality.
1
Based on ecoinvent
processes using
”market for” to
account for all up-
stream processes.
5
Unknown.
2
Average data for
Denmark.
1
Generic LCI process
for natural gas produc-
tion in Denmark.
2
Natural gas
combustion
1
Based on
EASETECH
database deemed
to be of high qual-
ity.
1
Based on average
of power plants in
Denmark.
4
Data from 2010.
2
Average data for
Denmark.
1
Generic LCI process
for natural gas com-
bustion in Denmark
based on data from
enterprises, processes
and materials under
study.
1.8
Water for
quenching
1
Based on ecoinvent
data deemed to be
of high quality.
1
Based on ecoinvent
processes using
”production”. Pro-
cess documentation
deemed to include
relevant upstream
processes.
5
Data from 2000.
2
Average data for
Europe.
2
Generic LCI process
for tap water produc-
tion without further
treatment.
2.2
Fperm diges-
tate (Jensen
et al., 2022)
4
Modelled based
on extrapolation of
experimental mea-
surements.
3
Based on one
study of digestate
decomposition in
incubation study.
4
Study from 2013.
3
Danish study, but
based on soil incu-
bation.
5
Estimated from ex-
trapolation of exper-
imental data. Based
on manure digestate
incubated in soil short-
term.
3.8
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
64
==PAGE:70==
Table A.1 (continued): Data quality scores for processes and parameters
Process or
parameter
Reliability
Completeness
Temporal correlation
Geographical correlation
Further technological correlation
Data quality
score
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Score
Note
Fperm di-
gestate liquid
(Jensen et
al., 2022)
4
Assumed to be
similar to digestate
based on knowl-
edge on difference
in C composition.
5
Not known how well
the C permanence
of digestate liquid
resembles that of
digestate. Assumed
to have similar C
composition as di-
gestate.
4
Study from 2013.
3
Danish study, but
based on soil incu-
bation.
5
Based on modelled
results for digestate.
4.2
Fperm
biochar
(Woolf et al.,
2021)
4
Modelled based
on extrapolation of
experimental mea-
surements.
3
Based on mod-
elled correlations
by Woolf for a
large number of
data points, but
short-term mea-
surements.
1
Model from 2021.
5
Model is built on
large sample of
measurements from
different geographi-
cal locations.
5
Based on manure
biochar at 550 °C with
H/Corg=0.7.
3.6
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
65
==PAGE:71==
A.2
Mass and substance tables
Table A.2: Mass and substance flows in the reference system and pyrolysis system based on the MFA. Flow names
refer to the processes in the system diagram in Figure 3.4.
Reference system
Flow
Flow name
Total ww
[t/FU]
Water
[t/FU]
DM
[t/FU]
VS
[t/FU]
Ash
[t/FU]
Energy
[MJ/FU]
C
[t/FU]
K
[t/FU]
N
[t/FU]
N
[t/FU]
NH4-N
[t/FU]
R0-1
To transport
1.07
9.69
1.00
8.90
1.10
1.80 · 104
4.20
8.40
6.40
1.14
3.84
R1-2
To storage
1.07
9.69
1.00
8.90
1.10
1.80 · 104
4.20
8.40
6.40
1.14
3.84
R2-0
Emissions from storage
5.00 · 10-1
4.80 · 10-1
3.20 · 10-2
3.20 · 10-2
0
1.10 · 103
2.60 · 10-2
0
5.80 · 10-3
0
5.80 · 10-3
R2-3
To field application
1.02
9.21
9.68 · 10-1
8.58 · 10-1
1.10
1.69 · 104
3.94
8.40
5.82
1.14
3.26
Pyrolysis system
Flow
Flow name
Total ww
[t/FU]
Water
[t/FU]
DM
[t/FU]
VS
[t/FU]
Ash
[t/FU]
Energy
[MJ/FU]
C
[t/FU]
K
[t/FU]
N
[t/FU]
N
[t/FU]
NH4-N
[t/FU]
P0-1
To separation
1.07
9.69
1.00
8.90
1.10
1.80 · 104
4.20
8.40
6.40
1.14
3.84
P1-2
To transport of
digestate liquid
9.63
9.10
5.19 · 10-1
4.62 · 10-1
5.71 · 10-2
9.22 · 103
2.15
7.56
5.31
8.91 · 10-3
3.49 · 10-2
P2-3
To storage of
digestate liquid
1.02
9.64
5.22 · 10-1
4.65 · 10-1
5.71 · 10-2
9.22 · 103
2.15
7.56
5.62
8.91 · 10-3
3.80 · 10-2
P3-0
Emissions from storage,
digestate liquid
5.08 · 10-1
4.82 · 10-1
1.57 · 10-2
1.57 · 10-2
0
5.21 · 102
1.21 · 10-2
0
3.61 · 10-3
0
3.60 · 10-3
P3-4
To field application,
digestate liquid
9.66
9.15
5.06 · 10-1
4.49 · 10-1
5.71 · 10-2
8.70 · 103
2.03
7.56
5.26
8.91 · 10-3
3.44 · 10-2
P1-5
To steam drying of
digestate fiber
1.07
5.88 · 10-1
4.81 · 10-1
4.28 · 10-1
5.29 · 10-2
8.78 · 103
2.05
8.40 · 10-3
1.09 · 10-2
2.49 · 10-3
3.53 · 10-3
P5-2
To transport of
digestate liquid
5.39 · 10-1
5.35 · 10-1
3.11 · 10-3
3.11 · 10-3
0
0
0
0
3.11 · 10-3
0
3.11 · 10-3
P5-6
To pelletization of
digestate fiber
5.31 · 10-1
5.31 · 10-2
4.78 · 10-1
4.25 · 10-1
5.29 · 10-2
8.78 · 103
2.05
8.40 · 10-3
7.77 · 10-3
2.49 · 10-3
4.21 · 10-4
P6-0
Loss from pelletization
5.31 · 10-3
5.31 · 10-4
4.78 · 10-3
4.25 · 10-3
5.29 · 10-4
8.78 · 101
2.05 · 10-3
8.40 · 10-5
7.77 · 10-5
2.49 · 10-5
4.21 · 10-6
P6-7
To pyrolysis of
fiber pellets
5.26 · 10-1
5.26 · 10-2
4.73 · 10-1
4.21 · 10-1
5.24 · 10-2
8.69 · 103
2.03
8.32 · 10-3
7.69 · 10-3
2.47 · 10-3
4.17 · 10-4
P7-8
To boiler
3.16 · 10-1
3.76 · 10-2
2.78 · 10-1
2.77 · 10-1
0
3.67 · 103
8.58 · 10-2
0
5.13 · 10-3
3.16 · 10-4
3.66 · 10-4
P7-9
To quenching
2.11 · 10-1
1.50 · 10-2
1.96 · 10-1
1.44 · 10-1
5.24 · 10-2
5.02 · 103
1.17
8.32 · 10-3
2.56 · 10-3
2.15 · 10-3
5.06 · 10-5
P9-10
To transport of biochar
3.27 · 10-1
1.31 · 10-1
1.96 · 10-1
1.44 · 10-1
5.24 · 10-2
5.02 · 103
1.17 · 10-1
8.32 · 10-3
2.56 · 10-3
2.15 · 10-3
5.06 · 10-5
P10-11
To storage of biochar
3.27 · 10-1
1.31 · 10-1
1.96 · 10-1
1.44 · 10-1
5.24 · 10-2
5.02 · 103
1.17 · 10-1
8.32 · 10-3
2.56 · 10-3
2.15 · 10-3
5.06 · 10-5
P11-12
To field application,
biochar
3.27 · 10-1
1.31 · 10-1
1.96 · 10-1
1.44 · 10-1
5.24 · 10-2
5.02 · 103
1.17 · 10-1
8.32 · 10-3
2.56 · 10-3
2.15 · 10-3
5.06 · 10-5
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
66
==PAGE:72==
A.3
Mass and substance flow diagrams
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure A.1: Flows of C given in kg C/t DM digestate.
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure A.2: Flows of total ww given in t total ww/t DM digestate.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
67
==PAGE:73==
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure A.3: Flows of DM given in kg DM/t DM digestate.
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure A.4: Flows of energy given in MJ/t DM digestate.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
68
==PAGE:74==
(a) Reference system.
(b) Pyrolysis system.
Figure A.5: Flows of K given in kg K/t DM digestate.
A.4
Climate footprint results
Table A.3: Climate footprint of different processes in reference system measured as GWP.
Process
20 years
[kg CO2-eq/FU]
100 years
[kg CO2-eq/FU]
Sum
-762
-561
Transport to storage
48.7
46.5
Emissions from storage
350
125
Field application of digestate
31.8
29.1
N2O emissions from field
72.4
80.5
CH4 emissions from field
8.46
2.87
C sequestration
-505
-144
Fertilizer substitution
-768
-700
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
69
==PAGE:75==
Table A.4: Climate footprint of different processes in the pyrolysis system measured as GWP.
Process
20 years
[kg CO2-eq/FU]
100 years
[kg CO2-eq/FU]
Sum
-1408
-1180
Transport to storage, digestate liquid
43.8
41.8
Transport to storage, condensated N
2.46
2.35
Emissions from storage, digestate liquid
106
38.3
Emissions from storage, condensated N
0.171
0.191
Field application of digestate liquid
28.5
26.1
Field application of condensated N
1.60
1.47
N2O emissions from field, digestate liquid
38.4
42.7
N2O emissions from field, evaporated N
2.25
2.50
CH4 emissions from field, liquid digestate
9.08
3.08
C sequestration, liquid digestate
-260
-74.4
Fertilizer substitution, digestate liquid
-688
-627
Fertilizer substitution, evaporated N
-13.8
-12.5
Screw press separation
0.884
0.811
Steam dryer
0
0
Pelletization
13.8
12.7
Pyrolysis
0
0
Quenching
0.012
0.011
Boiler
1.84
1.69
Heat substitution from pyrolysis gas
-235
-228
Transport to storage, biochar
1.49
1.42
Field application of biochar
4.40
4.03
N2O emissions from field, biochar
11.0
12.2
C sequestration, biochar
-417
-374
Fertilizer substitution, biochar
-60.3
-55.2
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
70
==PAGE:76==
A.5
Perturbation analysis
Table A.5: Sensitivity ratio (SR) results from perturbation analysis of reference system. TF = transfer function.
Name
Description
SR - 20 years
[-]
SR - 100 years
[-]
Dig_total_ww
Digestate total wet weight
0
0
Dig_water
Digestate water
-9.56 · 10-2
-1.22 · 10-1
Dig_DM
Digestate dry matter
0
0
Dig_VS
Digestate VS
-8.83 · 10-3
-1.13 · 10-2
Dig_ash
Digestate ash
-1.11 · 10-3
-1.41 · 10-3
Dig_energy
Digestate energy
0
0
Dig_C
Digestate C
2.03 · 10-1
4.50 · 10-2
Dig_K
Digestate K
5.42 · 10-1
6.74 · 10-1
Dig_N
Digestate N
2.25 · 10-1
2.48 · 10-1
Dig_P
Digestate P
1.36 · 10-1
1.68 · 10-1
Transport
Transport distance
-6.39 · 10-2
-8.29 · 10-2
stor_dig_C
C TF emissions from storage
-4.93 · 10-1
-2.24 · 10-1
stor_dig_N
N TF emissions from storage
-3.31 · 10-2
-4.08 · 10-2
stor_dig_water
Water TF emissions from storage
1.98 · 10-3
2.47 · 10-3
stor_dig_DM
DM TF emissions from storage
0
0
stor_dig_VS
VS TF emissions from storage
1.31 · 10-4
1.63 · 10-4
stor_dig_ww
Total ww TF emissions from storage
0
0
stor_dig_energy
Energy TF emissions from storage
0
0
stor_dig_N2O
N2O emission fraction from storage
-9.76 · 10-3
-1.47 · 10-2
stor_dig_NH3
NH3 emission fraction from storage
0
0
stor_dig_CO2
CO2 emission fraction from storage
0
0
stor_dig_CH4
CH4 emission fraction from storage
-4.49 · 10-1
-2.08 · 10-1
F_perm_20_dig
C stability digestate
6.63 · 10-1
0
F_perm_100_dig
C stability digestate
0
2.58 · 10-1
field_dig_CH4
CH4 fraction from field
-1.11 · 10-2
-5.13 · 10-3
N2O_field
N2O emission fraction from field
0
0
P_fert_sub
P fertilizer substitution
1.36 · 10-1
1.68 · 10-1
K_fert_sub
K fertilizer substitution
5.42 · 10-1
6.74 · 10-1
N_fert_sub
N fertilizer substitution
3.30 · 10-1
4.06 · 10-1
diesel_field_digestate
Diesel consumption for field application, liquid
-4.17 · 10-2
-5.18 · 10-2
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
71
==PAGE:77==
Table A.6: Sensitivity ratio (SR) results from perturbation analysis of pyrolysis system.
Name
Description
SR - 20 years
[-]
SR - 100 years
[-]
Dig_total_ww
Digestate total wet weight
0
0
Dig_water
Digestate water
-5.33 · 10-2
-5.97 · 10-2
Dig_DM
Digestate dry matter
0
0
Dig_VS
Digestate VS
-1.46 · 10-2
-1.60 · 10-2
Dig_ash
Digestate ash
-2.33 · 10-3
-2.57 · 10-3
Dig_energy
Digestate energy
1.67 · 10-1
1.93 · 10-1
Dig_C
Digestate C
4.01 · 10-1
3.48 · 10-1
Dig_K
Digestate K
2.93 · 10-1
3.20 · 10-1
Dig_N
Digestate N
1.38 · 10-1
1.40 · 10-1
Dig_P
Digestate P
7.12 · 10-2
7.76 · 10-2
sep_water
Water separation to liquid fraction
1.54 · 10-2
1.68 · 10-2
sep_DM
DM separation to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_VS
VS separation to liquid fraction
1.05 · 10-2
1.14 · 10-2
sep_ash
Ash separation to liquid fraction
1.87 · 10-3
2.05 · 10-3
sep_ww
Total ww to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_energy
Energy to liquid fraction
-1.75 · 10-1
-2.03 · 10-1
sep_C
C to liquid fraction
-2.06 · 10-1
-3.02 · 10-1
sep_K
K to liquid fraction
2.64 · 10-3
2.88 · 10-3
sep_N
N to liquid fraction
1.36 · 10-1
1.52 · 10-1
sep_P
P to liquid fraction
7.85 · 10-3
8.55 · 10-3
sep_electricity
Electricity for screw press
-6.28 · 10-4
-6.88 · 10-4
transport_dist
Transport distance
-3.39 · 10-2
-3.86 · 10-2
stor_liquid_C
C to emissions from storage, liquid
-8.40 · 10-2
-3.34 · 10-2
stor_liquid_N
N to emissions from storage, liquid
-1.17 · 10-2
-1.27 · 10-2
stor_liquid_water
Water to emissions from storage, liquid
1.01 · 10-3
1.10 · 10-3
stor_liquid_DM
DM to emissions from storage, liquid
0
0
stor_liquid_VS
VS to emissions from storage, liquid
3.45 · 10-5
3.77 · 10-5
stor_liquid_ww
Total ww to emissions from storage, liquid
0
0
stor_liquid_energy
Energy to emissions from storage, liquid
0
0
stor_liquid_N2O
N2O fraction from storage, liquid
-2.08 · 10-3
-2.76 · 10-3
stor_liquid_CO2
CO2 fraction from storage, liquid
0
0
stor_liquid_CH4
CH4 fraction from storage, liquid
-7.34 · 10-2
-2.97 · 10-2
F_perm_20_liquid
C stability liquid digestate
1.85 · 10-1
0
F_perm_100_liquid
C stability liquid digestate
0
6.31 · 10-2
field_liquid_CH4
CH4 fraction from field, liquid
-6.45 · 10-3
-2.61 · 10-3
N2O_field_liquid
N2O emission fraction from field
-2.88 · 10-2
-3.83 · 10-2
P_fert_sub
P fertilizer substitution
7.12 · 10-2
7.76 · 10-2
K_fert_sub
K fertilizer substitution
2.93 · 10-1
3.20 · 10-1
N_fert_sub_liquid
N fertilizer substitution
1.77 · 10-1
1.91 · 10-1
dryer_water
Water transfer to evaporated fraction
1.01 · 10-2
1.10 · 10-2
dryer_DM
DM transfer to evaporated fraction
0
0
dryer_VS
VS transfer to evaporated fraction
6.36 · 10-5
6.94 · 10-5
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
72
==PAGE:78==
Table A.6 (continued): Sensitivity ratio (SR) results from perturbation analysis of pyrolysis system.
Name
Description
SR - 20 years
[-]
SR - 100 years
[-]
dryer_ww
Total ww transfer to evaporated fraction
0
0
dryer_energy
Energy transfer to evaporated fraction
-4.84 · 10-4
-5.62 · 10-4
dryer_N
N transfer to evaporated fraction
1.12 · 10-2
1.24 · 10-2
stor_condensate_N
N to emissions from storage, condensate
-6.84 · 10-4
-7.42 · 10-4
stor_condensate_water
Water to emissions from storage, condensate
5.96 · 10-5
6.51 · 10-5
stor_condensate_DM
DM to emissions from storage, condensate
0
0
stor_condensate_VS
VS to emissions from storage, condensate
1.85 · 10-7
2.02 · 10-7
stor_condensate_ww
Total ww to emissions from storage, condensate
0
0
stor_condensate_energy
Energy to emissions from storage, condensate
0
0
stor_condensate_N2O
N2O fraction from storage, condensate
-1.22 · 10-4
-1.61 · 10-4
stor_condensate_CO2
CO2 fraction from storage, condensate
0
0
stor_condensate_CH4
CH4 fraction from storage, condensate
0
0
diesel_field_liquid
Diesel consumption for field application, liquid
-2.14 · 10-2
-2.34 · 10-2
F_perm_20_liquid
C stability liquid digestate
1.85 · 10-1
0
F_perm_100_liquid
C stability liquid digestate
0
6.31 · 10-2
field_liquid_CH4
CH4 fraction from field, liquid
-6.45 · 10-3
-2.61 · 10-3
N2O_field
N2O emission fraction from field
0
0
P_fert_sub
P fertilizer substitution
7.12 · 10-2
7.76 · 10-2
K_fert_sub
K fertilizer substitution
2.93 · 10-1
3.20 · 10-1
N_fert_sub_liquid
N fertilizer substitution,
1.77 · 10-1
1.91 · 10-1
pellet_loss
Loss from pelletization
-4.97 · 10-3
-5.46 · 10-3
pellet_electricity
Electricity for pelletization
-9.81 · 10-3
-1.07 · 10-2
pyr_water
Water to pyrolysis gas
7.51 · 10-4
8.29 · 10-4
pyr_DM
DM to pyrolysis gas
0
0
pyr_VS
VS to pyrolysis gas
4.21 · 10-3
4.66 · 10-3
pyr_ash
Ash to pyrolysis gas
0
0
pyr_ww
Total ww to pyrolysis gas
0
0
pyr_energy
Energy to pyrolysis gas
1.67 · 10-1
1.93 · 10-1
pyr_C
C to pyrolysis gas
-2.16 · 10-1
-2.32 · 10-1
pyr_K
K to pyrolysis gas
0
0
pyr_N
N to pyrolysis gas
1.56 · 10-2
2.07 · 10-2
pyr_P
P to pyrolysis gas
-2.03 · 10-3
-2.21 · 10-3
boiler_electricity
Electricity for boiler
-1.30 · 10-3
-1.43 · 10-3
heat_combustion_MJ
Heat substitution, combustion of natural gas
1.51 · 10-1
1.79 · 10-1
heat_naturalgas_m3
Heat substitution, natural gas substitution
1.57 · 10-2
1.42 · 10-2
quenching_water
Water consumption for quenching
-1.48 · 10-3
-1.64 · 10-3
quenching_water_prod
Water production
-8.50 · 10-6
-9.36 · 10-6
diesel_field_biochar
Diesel consumption for field application, biochar
-3.13 · 10-3
-3.42 · 10-3
F_perm_20_biochar
C stability biochar
2.96 · 10-1
0
F_perm_100_biochar
C stability biochar
0
3.17 · 10-1
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
73
==PAGE:79==
Table A.6 (continued): Sensitivity ratio (SR) results from perturbation analysis of pyrolysis system.
Name
Description
SR - 20 years
[-]
SR - 100 years
[-]
P_fert_sub
P fertilizer substitution
7.12 · 10-2
7.76 · 10-2
K_fert_sub
K fertilizer substitution
2.93 · 10-1
3.20 · 10-1
N_fert_sub_biochar
N fertilizer substitution, biochar
0
0
sep_dec_water
Water separation to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_DM
DM separation to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_VS
VS separation to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_ash
Ash separation to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_ww
Total ww to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_energy
Energy to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_C
C to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_K
K to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_N
N to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_P
P to liquid fraction
0
0
sep_dec_electricity
Electricity for screw press
0
0
A.6
Climate footprint results from sensitivity scenarios
Table A.7: Results of sensitivity scenarios - reference system. Scenarios names are denoted by the following
abbreviations; alternative digestate composition (ADC), decanter centrifuge (DC), biomass-based heat substitution
(BHS), renewable electricity (RE), non-renewable electricity (NRE), alternative fertilizer substitution (AFS). All nu-
meric values have the unit kg CO2-eq/FU.
Reference system - 20 years
Name
Baseline
ADC
DC
BHS
RE
NRE
AFS
Sum
-762
-457
-239
Transport to storage
48.7
75.9
48.7
Emissions from storage
350
405
350
Field application of digestate
31.8
49.5
31.8
N2O emissions from field
72.4
17.0
72.4
CH4 emissions from field
8.46
9.97
8.46
C sequestration
-505
-596
-505
Fertilizer substitution
-768
-419
-244
Reference system - 100 years
Name
Baseline
ADC
DC
BHS
RE
NRE
AFS
Sum
-561
-273
-105
Transport to storage
46.5
72.5
46.5
Emissions from storage
125
139
125
Field application of digestate
29.1
45.3
29.1
N2O emissions from field
80.5
18.9
80.5
CH4 emissions from field
2.87
3.39
2.87
C sequestration
-144
-170
-144
Fertilizer substitution
-700
-382
-244
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
74
==PAGE:80==
Table A.8: Results of sensitivity scenarios - pyrolysis system. Scenarios names are denoted by the following abbre-
viations; alternative digestate composition (ADC), decanter centrifuge (DC), biomass-based heat substitution (BHS),
renewable electricity (RE), non-renewable electricity (NRE), alternative fertilizer substitution (AFS). All numeric val-
ues have the unit kg CO2-eq/FU.
Pyrolysis system - 20 years
Name
Baseline
ADC
DC
BHS
RE
NRE
AFS
Sum
-1400
-1110
-1690
-1170
-1420
-1290
-889
Transport to storage, digestate liquid
43.8
69.3
41.8
43.8
43.8
43.8
43.8
Transport to storage, condensated N
2.46
3.97
3.79
2.46
2.46
2.46
2.46
Emissions from storage, digestate liquid
106
122
40.8
106
106
106
106
Emissions from storage, condensated N
0.171
0.04
0.312
0.171
0.171
0.171
0.171
Field application of digestate liquid
28.5
45.2
27.3
28.5
28.5
28.5
28.5
Field application of condensated N
1.60
2.59
2.47
1.60
1.60
1.60
1.60
N2O emissions from field, digestate liquid
38.4
8.99
31.9
38.4
38.4
38.4
38.4
N2O emissions from field, evaporated N
2.25
0.527
4.10
2.25
2.25
2.25
2.25
CH4 emissions from field, liquid digestate
9.08
10.7
3.37
9.08
9.08
9.08
9.08
C sequestration, liquid digestate
-260
-307
-96.6
-260
-260
-260
-260
Fertilizer substitution, digestate liquid
-688
-345
-518
-688
-688
-688
-224
Fertilizer substitution, evaporated N
-13.8
-3.23
-25.1
-13.8
-13.8
-13.8
-8.59
Screw press separation
0.884
1.38
6.01
0.884
0.0872
7.08
0.884
Steam dryer
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Pelletization
13.8
14.7
17.4
13.8
0.347
111
13.8
Pyrolysis
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Quenching
0.012
0.0132
0.015
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
Boiler
1.84
1.76
2.25
1.84
0.181
14.7
1.84
Heat substitution from pyrolysis gas
-235
-195
-389
-0.304
-235
-235
-235
Transport to storage, biochar
1.49
1.64
1.86
1.49
1.49
1.49
1.49
Field application of biochar
4.40
4.86
5.50
4.40
4.40
4.40
4.40
N2O emissions from field, biochar
10.98
2.57
20.0
10.98
10.98
10.98
10.98
C sequestration, biochar
-417
-492
-692
-417
-417
-417
-417
Fertilizer substitution, biochar
-60.3
-61.7
-182
-60.3
-60.3
-60.3
-10.2
Pyrolysis system - 100 years
Name
Baseline
ADC
DC
BHS
RE
NRE
AFS
Sum
-1180
-897
-1500
-952
-1190
-1080
-728
Transport to storage, digestate liquid
41.8
66.2
40.0
41.8
41.8
41.8
41.8
Transport to storage, condensated N
2.35
3.79
3.62
2.35
2.35
2.35
2.35
Emissions from storage, digestate liquid
38.3
42.1
15.7
38.3
38.3
38.3
38.3
Emissions from storage, condensated N
0.191
0.0447
0.347
0.191
0.191
0.191
0.191
Field application of digestate liquid
26.1
41.4
25.0
26.1
26.1
26.1
26.1
Field application of condensated N
1.47
2.37
2.26
1.47
1.47
1.47
1.47
N2O emissions from field, digestate liquid
42.7
10.0
35.5
42.7
42.7
42.7
42.7
N2O emissions from field, evaporated N
2.50
0.586
4.56
2.50
2.50
2.50
2.50
CH4 emissions from field, liquid digestate
3.08
3.64
1.14
3.08
3.08
3.08
3.08
C sequestration, liquid digestate
-74.4
-87.7
-27.6
-74.4
-74.4
-74.4
-74.4
Fertilizer substitution, digestate liquid
-627
-315
-472
-627
-627
-627
-224
Fertilizer substitution, evaporated N
-12.5
-2.93
-22.8
-12.5
-12.5
-12.5
-8.59
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
75
==PAGE:81==
Table A.8 (continued): Results of sensitivity scenarios - pyrolysis system.
Pyrolysis system - 100 years
Name
Baseline
ADC
DC
BHS
RE
NRE
AFS
Screw press separation
0.812
1.27
5.52
0.812
0.0754
5.85
0.812
Steam dryer
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Pelletization
12.7
13.5
15.9
12.7
1.18
91.3
12.7
Pyrolysis
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Quenching
0.011
0.0122
0.0138
0.011
0.011
0.011
0.011
Boiler
1.69
1.61
2.07
1.69
0.157
12.1
1.69
Heat substitution from pyrolysis gas
-228
-190
-379
-0.212
-228
-228
-228
Transport to storage, biochar
1.42
1.57
1.77
1.42
1.42
1.42
1.42
Field application of biochar
4.03
4.45
5.04
4.03
4.03
4.03
4.03
N2O emissions from field, biochar
12.2
2.86
22.3
12.2
12.2
12.2
12.2
C sequestration, biochar
-374
-441
-621
-374
-374
-374
-374
Fertilizer substitution, biochar
-55.2
-56.3
-167
-55.2
-55.2
-55.2
-10.2
A.7
Substance flows with decanter centrifuge separation
Figure A.6: Total ww flows in pyrolysis system with decanter centrifuge.
Figure A.7: Total DM flows in pyrolysis system with decanter centrifuge.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
76
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.8: Energy flows in pyrolysis system with decanter centrifuge
Figure A.9: C flows in pyrolysis system with decanter centrifuge.
Figure A.10: K flows in pyrolysis system with decanter centrifuge.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
77
==PAGE:83==
Figure A.11: N flows in pyrolysis system with decanter centrifuge.
Figure A.12: P flows in pyrolysis system with decanter centrifuge.
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
78
==PAGE:84==
Integration of pyrolysis in digestate management
79
==PAGE:85==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 114
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
rrrXbmbiBMX/imX/F
