==PAGE:1==
Application of optimization algorithms for the development
of multi-step chromatographic processes for synthetic
peptide purification
By:
Amalie Elsborg Andersen (s174928)
Department of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Supervised by:
J¨org Kittelmann, Principal Scientist at Novo Nordisk A/S
John Woodley, Professor at Technical University of Denmark
Submitted: December 28th 2023
==PAGE:2==
This page was intentionally left blank
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis is conducted as the final assessment of the Ms.c. in Chemical and
Biochemical engineering at Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work has been
performed in collaboration between Novo Nordisk A/S and DTU. The project was done
in the period from 1st of August 2023 to 31st of December 2023 and is awarded 30
ECTS.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my gratitude to everyone who contributed and supported me
during this project. Thank you to my company supervisor J¨org Kittelmann for all the
great discussions and valuable inputs. I really appreciate being able to drop by your
office with questions or concerns. You have been of great help for the progress of this
project, and your positive attitude has been very encouraging.
I would also like to
present a thank you to my DTU supervisor John Woodley for the inputs and feedback
on the project.
Another thank you goes to the employees in CMC API Downstream Development at
Novo Nordisk A/S. Thank you for contributing to my project with many interesting and
educational discussions. Your humour and the good work environment made every day
fun. I highly appreciate the warm welcome, you all gave me.
Last but not least, I would like to express my sincere gratitude for having an encouraging
and supporting family and boyfriend. Thank you for always motivating me.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The purification of synthetic peptides usually contains two orthogonal reversed-phase chro-
matography steps. These steps are typically being optimized one at a time, thereby not
taking interactions into account, which can reduce the overall yield. Within the last few
years, the application of Bayesian optimization for process optimization has increased.
This thesis therefore examines the application of Bayesian optimization for the develop-
ment of a multi-step chromatographic process for purification of the synthetic peptide
product X.
Initially, the Bayesian optimization algorithm was evaluated in-silico for four different sce-
narios to study the complexity, optimal tuning parameter and required initial conditions.
The different decision variables considered were gradient parameters and the pooling cri-
terion. This showed, how the complexity increased with number of decision variables.
The complexity was also influenced by how the decision variables impacted the objective
function and the boundaries applied. The tuning parameter, κ, balances exploration and
exploitation in the Bayesian optimization. Three different κ values(1, 4 and default value
of 2.576) were tested as tuning parameter. This suggested to use the default κ value as
tuning parameter when applying Bayesian optimization for new projects with an unknown
surface of the optimization problem. Lastly the optimization process in-silico indicated,
that more than two initial conditions should be applied in order to reduce the required
iterations to a magnitude being reasonable to perform in the laboratory.
The multi-step chromatographic setup in the laboratory was successfully automated. The
automation allowed to run two chromatographic purification steps based on pre-set pa-
rameters without human interaction. This automated setup was used in the Bayesian
optimization applied to develop a multi-step chromatographic process for purification of
product X. The purification process was optimized by having a single pooling criterion for
each chromatography step as decision variables. Two local optima was found by applying
Bayesian optimization for the development of the multi-step chromatographic process. The
optimal solution had a strict pooling criterion (0.92) for the first chromatography step and
a more loose pooling criterion (0.77) for the second chromatography step. The Bayesian
optimization showed to be advantageous compared to the original process, where each
column was optimized individually. For the same purity, higher yields were obtained with
this multi-column optimization compared to the expected yield in the original process.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
Mathematical symbols
Symbol
Unit
Description
c
mM
Concentration of adsorbate in mobile phase
q
mM
Concentration of adsorbate in stationary phase
K
-
Equilibrium constant (Steric mass-action isotherm)
−→x
-
Current measured absorbance signal vector
−→y
-
Target absorbance signal vector
wi
-
Weight factor for wavelength i
s
-
Scaling factor
Min UV1 signal
mAU
Minimum absorbance required at wavelength 1
Ytarget
%
Overall yield of target peptide
P
%
Purity of final pool
Preq
%
Purity requirement for final pool
m
g
Mass
ni
mole
Moles of peptide i
nP
-
Number of peptides loaded onto the column
gradstart,i
%
% of elution solvent at gradient start for chromatography step i
gradend,i
%
% of elution solvent at gradient end for chromatography step i
coefstart,i
-
Purity coefficient for pooling start criterion for chromatography step i
coefend,i
-
Purity coefficient for pooling end criterion for chromatography step i
Greek letters
Symbol
Unit
Description
Λ
mM
Stationary phase capacity
σ
-
Shielding factor
ν
-
Characteristic charge
iv
==PAGE:7==
v
θ
◦/radians
Angle between two vectors
µ(x)
-
Mean of probabilistic surrogate model
σ(x)
-
Standard deviation of probabilistic surrogate model
κ
-
Parameter for emphasizing exploration vs exploitation in UCB
Subscripts
U
Upper bound
L
Lower bound
con
Constraint
Abbreviations
API
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient
CPP
Critical Process Parameter
CQA
Critical Quality Attribute
PAT
Process Analytical Technology
SPPS
Solid Phase Peptide Synthesis
LPPS
Liquid Phase Peptide Synthesis
Fmoc
9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl
Boc
Tert-butoxy carbonyl
TFA
Trifluoroacetic acid
RPC
Reversed-Phase Chromatography
NPC
Normal-Phase Chromatography
HIC
Hydrophobic Interaction Chromatography
AC
Affinity Chromatography
IEX
Ion-Exchange Chromatography
SEC
Size Exclusion Chromatography
PI
Probability of Improvement
EI
Expected Improvement
UCB
Upper Confidence Bound
GP
Gaussian Process
UPLC
Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Medicine development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Synthetic peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Purification of synthetic peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Fundamentals of chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Application of chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Reversed-phase chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.3
Isotherms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
UV/Vis absorption of proteins and peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
The 3-wavelength tool and purity coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5.1
Bayesian optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Materials and Methods
17
3.1
Evaluation of optimization process in-silico
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Mechanistic model for RPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.2
Objective function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.3
Bayesian optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Automation of experimental multi-step chromatographic process
. . . . .
23
3.3
Application of Bayesian optimization for development of a multi-step chro-
matographic process for purification of the synthetic peptide product X
.
25
3.3.1
Laboratory setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.2
Objective function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.3
Bayesian optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results and Discussion
30
4.1
Evaluation of optimization process in-silico
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.1
Scenario A: One RPC column, two decision variables . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.2
Scenario B: Two RPC columns, six decision variables
. . . . . . .
32
vi
==PAGE:9==
4.1.3
Scenario C: Two RPC columns, four decision variables . . . . . . .
33
4.1.4
Scenario D: Two RPC columns, two decision variables . . . . . . .
34
4.1.5
Discussion of the optimization process in-silico
. . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Discussion of the automated multi-step chromatographic process
. . . . .
40
4.3
Application of Bayesian optimization for the development of a multi-step
chromatographic process for purification of the synthetic peptide product X 43
4.3.1
Discussion of the application of Bayesian optimization for devel-
opment of a multi-step chromatographic process for purification of
product X . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Technical issues
51
6
Conclusion
55
7
Future work
57
References
59
A Experimental data for multi-step chromatographic process
63
B Parameters for the purity coefficient calculation
64
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Type 2 diabetes and obesity are common diseases worldwide. In 2017, approximately
462 million people suffered from type 2 diabetes corresponding to 6.28% of the world’s
population [20]. The International Diabetes Federation predicts 643 million people will
be living with diabetes in 2030 of which 90% is type 2 diabetes [37]. This increase in
type 2 diabetes patients is related to the increase in people living with obesity. The
World Obesity Federation predicts, that one billion people will be living with obesity in
2030 [40]. The fact, that obesity is the fifth leading factor for early death and diabetes
being the eight leading cause of mortality, clearly states the need of anti-diabetic medi-
cation for treatment of type 2 diabetes and anti-obesity medication for long term weight
management [27, 28].
Type 2 diabetes and obesity have successfully been treated with peptide drugs [43].
The increasingly large patient population requires high production volumes of the active
pharmaceutical ingredient (API), and a fast development cycle of new peptide APIs to
address unmet patient needs.
The synthetic peptide production is much faster than
producing recombinant peptides, where the peptide is expressed in either a bacteria or
yeast. Synthetic peptides are therefore typically used in the early phases of medicine
development (Preclinical and Phase 1) where only a small amount of the API is required
for testing the potential of the peptide API. A recombinant process is typically being
developed for the later stages (Phase 2 and Phase 3) and large scale manufacturing, due
to recombinant peptides being cheaper to produce in large scale compared to synthetic
peptides. However, the synthetic peptides can be designed with chemical modifications,
which are currently not possible in recombinant peptides without adding chemical steps
and additional purification steps.
To make novel peptides available to patients, the
synthetic peptide production therefore needs to be scalable with focus on cost. The
yield in the synthetic peptide purification has a very big impact on cost as high value
product is potentially lost.
Preparative chromatography is a key method for purifying synthetic peptides [15]. The
1
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
synthetic peptide purification usually contains two orthogonal reversed-phase chromatog-
raphy (RPC) steps. The application of RPC is preferred, due to its good selectivity for
closely related molecules, which are the main impurities in synthetic peptide production.
The recent developments in real time analytical technologies have reduced the need for
time consuming analysis during the purification and have thereby reduced the produc-
tion cycle time. Furthermore, the application of process analytical technologies (PAT)
with in-line measurements of critical process parameters (CPP) affecting the critical
quality attributes (CQA) enhances the consistency of the peptide API [38]. An example
of a minimal PAT approach for chromatographic purification is the 3-wavelength tool,
in which a purity coefficient applied as pooling criterion is determined based on the
absorbance at three different wavelengths.
The chromatographic purification process provides a multi-dimensional design space
to be explored for an optimal outcome with regards to product yield, purity and re-
source consumption. The complexity increases considering multiple consecutive chro-
matographic steps. Typically one chromatography step is being optimized at a time,
thereby not taking interactions into account, which leads to reduced yields. Therefore
new optimization strategies like multi-column optimization with Bayesian optimization
are required to reach global optima in order to make the synthetic peptide APIs available
to as many patients as possible.
1.1
Aim of thesis
The multi-step chromatographic purification of synthetic peptides must be optimal in
order to make the synthetic peptide production scalable with focus on cost. This project
explores the application of Bayesian optimization for development of a multi-step chro-
matographic process for synthetic peptide purification with respect to optimal yield and
purity. The Bayesian optimization of the multi-step chromatographic process for syn-
thetic peptide purification is first evaluated in-silico with respect to tuning parameters,
initial conditions and complexity. The knowledge from the in-silico optimization is used
to apply the Bayesian optimization for the development of a multi-step chromatographic
process for purification of the synthetic peptide product X. In order to apply a PAT ap-
proach in the chromatographic purification, the 3-wavelength tool and purity coefficient
are incorporated in the mechanistic modelling of the reversed-phase chromatography and
subsequently in the laboratory setup.
Secondly, the possibility of automating the experimental setup with two consecutive
chromatography columns is explored.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
This chapter gives a short introduction to the drug life cycle and synthetic peptides.
The fundamentals and application methods of chromatography are presented with a
more in detail explanation of reversed-phase chromatography used for purification of
synthetic peptides. The steric-mass action isotherm used for mechanistic modelling of
RPC is introduced. Lastly the theory behind the 3-wavelength tool and purity coefficient
used for real time analysis of the eluate is presented as well as a short introduction to
optimization algorithms.
2.1
Medicine development
The process from discovering a potential molecule with therapeutic effect till marketing
of the new product contains many steps as illustrated in Fig 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the drug life cycle.
The discovered potential API candidate is tested in animals in the preclinical phase.
The purpose of the preclinical phase is to evaluate the effects, dosage and toxicity in
animals before testing in humans. In Phase 1 of the clinical trials, the safety and dosage
of the potential new medicine is tested in healthy humans. This involves between 20-100
healthy volunteers. Phase 2 and 3 use patients with the disease to test the efficacy, side
effects and long term adverse reactions. The required number of participants in Phase
2 is 100-300, while Phase 3 requires several hundred to a few thousand patients. If the
3
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
4
API successfully makes it through the clinical trials, an authorization to manufacture
the product in large scale can be obtained [39].
Speed is an important parameter for preclinical trials and Phase 1 in order to test
the potential of the API fast. Synthetic peptides are often used for the early phases,
since the synthetic peptide production is much faster than the recombinant peptide
production. The production method, that will be used for large scale manufacturing
must be developed during the late phases in the clinical trials in order to be approved
by the authorities. Typically the large scale production of peptide API is done with
a recombinant process, if a larger market demand is expected. The large amounts of
peptide API required in large scale manufacturing makes the cost of a synthetic peptide
process high compared to a recombinant process. However, the synthetic peptides have
the advantage, that chemical modifications can be done, which are currently not available
with a purely recombinant process without adding chemical steps [43]. Novel peptide API
can therefore be produced using peptide synthesis. In order to address the unmet patient
needs, the synthetic peptides should also be considered for the late stages in clinical trials
and in large scale production. Due to the higher production cost of synthetic peptides,
it requires an optimized purification process of the synthetic peptides to reduce the
potential loss of highly valuable product.
2.2
Synthetic peptides
Synthetic peptides are produced through either solid phase peptide synthesis (SPPS) or
liquid phase peptide synthesis (LPPS). SPPS is a quick method for synthesis of peptides
and the most frequently used method [43]. The synthetic peptide production at Novo
Nordisk A/S is done through SPPS as well. The SPPS method will therefore be the one
of focus for this work.
SPPS was developed back in 1963 by Bruce Merrifield and is nowadays a well established
process being crucial for modern peptide production within the pharmaceutical industry
[43, 18]. Advantages by synthetic peptide production compared to recombinant peptides
is the possibility to perform backbone modifications, incorporate D-amino acids, and
easily include side chains [43, 18].
The SPPS method facilitates the peptide production by combining amino acid coupling
and deprotection in a single reactor.
When using SPPS, the peptide is synthesized
from the C-terminal to the N-terminal, which is opposite to biologically synthesized
peptides.
The C-terminal of the initial amino acid is covalently linked to an insol-
uble polymeric support, also known as resin. The N-terminal is protected with either
9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc) or tert-butoxy carbonyl (boc). Typically Fmoc pro-
tection is used due to the boc-deprotection process being associated with irritating odor
and toxicity [43]. The Fmoc-deprotection is done using piperidine. Once the N-terminal
is deprotected, it is reacted with the carbonyl group of the next N-terminal protected
amino acid in the sequence. To ensure complete coupling, an excess of amino acids are
==PAGE:14==
5
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
used and the remaining is washed out after the coupling step. The process is repeated
until the desired peptide sequence is obtained as shown in Figure 2.2.
After synthesis of the peptide follows a process of deprotection and cleavage of the
peptide from the resin. The cleavage is done by suspending the peptide and resin in a
cleavage cocktail containing trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).
Figure 2.2: Illustration of SPPS [4]
The impurity profile from SPPS is completely different than in recombinant production
and more product related. The impurity profile from recombinant peptides include bio-
logical compounds such as enzymes, DNA and RNA fragments and other host proteins.
The impurities from SPPS are mainly derived from incomplete or side reactions during
the synthesis or by incorrect cleaving. Examples are:
• Deletion: An incomplete coupling occurred due to incomplete removal of the pro-
tecting group, which results in a missing amino acid in the peptide chain
• Truncation: One or more amino acids are missing at either the C- or N-terminal
due to precipitation of resin beads during synthesis
• Dimers: Self-association of hydrophobic amino acid residues in peptides to form
aggregates
• Amino acid insertion: An extra amino acid is inserted in the peptide sequence due
to excess of the Fmoc-protected amino acid and improper washing.
• Deamination: Formation of a free carboxylic acid due to hydrolysis of the side-
chain amide linkage of an amino acid residue
• By-products generated by incomplete deprotection: The incomplete deprotection
results in protection groups being covalently attached to the peptide
The purification process of synthetic peptides must be able to separate impurity peptides
closely related to the target peptide.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
6
2.2.1
Purification of synthetic peptides
A key method for purifying the synthetic peptides is by reversed-phase chromatography.
Figure 2.3 shows a typical purification process of synthetic peptides. The purpose of
the two RPC steps is to remove process and API related impurities in a bind-and-elute
mode. The two RPC steps are done orthogonally, where the selectivity in the separation
is altered by changing solvent or pH conditions [25, 17]. The impurities will thereby elute
differently in the two steps compared to the target peptide. Different unit operations
can be used for the polishing and formulation depending on the peptides and product
requirements.
Figure 2.3: Example of typical purification process for synthetic peptides. The purpose is listed
at the top of each box with the possible technology options listed below.
For this project, the two orthogonal RPC steps will be considered for the development of
an optimal multi-step chromatographic process for synthetic peptide purification using
optimization algorithms. In this report the first RPC step will be referred to as Z1 and
the second RPC step as Z2.
2.3
Fundamentals of chromatography
Chromatography is a separation technique used to separate homogeneous mixtures based
on variation in compounds’ distribution equilibrium between a stationary phase and a
mobile phase [15]. The mobile phase can be either gaseous or liquid. The purification
of pharmaceuticals uses a liquid mobile phase [30, 16]. Chromatographic modes with a
liquid mobile phase will therefore be the main focus.
The stationary phase, also known as the adsorbent, consists of porous particles with
a base matrix made of silica, polymer(e.g.
polystyrene) or gel(e.g.
agarose).
The
diameter of the particles are typically in the range of a few micrometers to 100 mi-
crometers [16]. For most of the common types of chromatographic mode, the surface of
the porous particles is covered with covalently bonded ligands except for Size Exclusion
==PAGE:16==
7
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Chromatography (SEC). The purpose of the ligands is to mediate the interaction with
the compounds being separated - also called the adsorbate [30]. The most common types
of chromatographic mode along with its type of ligand-adsorbate interaction are listed
in Table 2.1.
For the chromatographic modes with ligand-adsorbate interaction, the strength of the
interaction defines the distribution equilibrium.
The stronger the interaction is, the
longer the compounds remain in the column. The compounds with strongest ligand-
adsorbate interaction will have the highest retention time [16].
Table 2.1: Common chromatographic modes with the ligand-adsorbate interaction and elution
method.
Chromatographic mode
Interaction
Elution
Reference
Size Exclusion (SEC)
None
None
[34]
Ion-exchange (IEX)
Electrostatic
Increase salt
concentration
[35]
Affinity (AC)
Functional pair
Varying
[32]
Hydrophobic Interaction
(HIC)
Hydrophobic(weak)
Decreasing salt
concentration
[33]
Reversed-phase (RPC)
Hydrophobic(strong)
Non-polar organic
solvent
[33]
Normal-phase (NPC)
Polar
Polar organic
solvent
[44]
In order to elute the bound compounds from the column, the ligand-adsorbate interac-
tion must be decreased. The way of decreasing the ligand-adsorbate interaction depends
on the chromatographic mode as seen in Table 2.1. For RPC, the elution is done by
decreasing the polarity of the eluent.
The elution of compounds from the column can be done in three different ways. The
simplest mode of chromatographic development is by isocratic elution, in which a con-
stant eluent composition is kept through the operation. For gradient elution, a linear
gradient going from weak eluent solution to strong eluent solution is applied. Lastly,
the elution can be done step-wise, where the elution buffer concentration is increased in
steps [16]. Typically the gradient elution is used, since the elution peaks broaden with
increasing retention time for isocratic elution due to axial dispersion, film mass diffu-
sion and pore diffusion. In gradient elution, the ligand-adsorption interaction gradually
decreases, which results in the elution peaks being sharper [30, 45]. Another benefit
by gradient elution is the increased productivity due to gradient elution being faster
than isocratic elution [45]. The step-elution can be used, if the compounds bound vary
significantly in ligand-adsorbate interaction.
The eluted compounds can be collected in different bottles by fractionating the eluted
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
8
mobile phase. Depending on the fractionation volume, the different impurities and target
product will be separated and can be analysed independently. If only the target product
is of interest, pooling is started when the target product is being eluted while the rest
containing impurities is send to waste. The initialization of the pooling is typically based
on a detector signal such as absorbance at a specific wavelength.
2.3.1
Application of chromatography
The application of chromatography can be divided in two categories: Analytical and
Preparative. The main goal of analytical chromatography is to gather information and
thereby identify and quantify a sample. The sample load is small in analytical chro-
matography in order to ensure proper peak separation. Gaussian distributed peaks with
a high resolution are preferred in order to analyse the composition of the sample [13].
Preparative chromatography is used to purify the target adsorbate from the other im-
purities in the sample. A much larger sample is loaded in preparative chromatography
compared to analytical chromatography, since productivity is a very important factor.
It is desirable to have minimal loss of the target adsorbate in order to maximize re-
covery. The preparative chromatography mode should therefore not damage the target
adsorbate [13].
2.3.2
Reversed-phase chromatography
Reversed-phase chromatography is the main process operation in purification of synthetic
peptides.
The name reversed-phase comes from its opposite nature to normal-phase
chromatography (NPC), which was the first available chromatographic system. In RPC,
the polarities of adsorbent and mobile phase are inverted compared to NPC. This means,
that the adsorbent is hydrophobic and a polar mobile phase is used in RPC. The mobile
phase in RPC is primarily aqueous with an ion-pairing agent such as TFA to enhance
hydrophobic interactions[33].
The adsorbates in RPC elute in order of increasing hydrophobicity, with the most hy-
drophobic adsorbate eluting last. This is similar to HIC, which also uses the hydrophobic
ligand-adsorbate interaction to separate a homogeneous mixture. However, the surface
of the adsorbent in RPC is more hydrophobic than in HIC due to a higher ligand den-
sity. This causes a stronger hydrophobic interaction strength in RPC, and a non-polar
organic solvent must be used for elution. Important is, that the non-polar organic sol-
vent is miscible with water and UV transparent in order to enable detection of the
eluting molecules. Acetonitrile is commonly used due to less safety risks compared to
methanol and an absorbance cut-off at 190 nm [33]. Ethanol is rarely used due to its
higher viscosity than acetonitrile [24]. The high viscosity causes a poorer separation but
also reduced productivity due to operation at slower flow rates in order to avoid high
pressures. Furthermore, ethanol is not as inert as acetonitrile and therefore proposes a
risk of side products, if used as organic solvent for elution [42].
==PAGE:18==
9
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The net charge of proteins and peptides varies with pH, causing their net hydrophobicity
to also vary with pH [33]. The purification process of synthetic peptides therefore often
contains two orthogonal RPC steps. One with a pH above the isoelectric point (pI) of
the target peptide and one with a pH below the pI of the target peptide. This is done
to promote conditions for separation of closely related impurities to the target peptide
in at least one chromatographic dimension.
2.3.3
Isotherms
The adsorption equilibrium in chromatography is described by an isotherm, which cor-
relates the concentration of adsorbate in the stationary phase (q) and in the mobile
phase (c). The most commonly used type of isotherm in preparative chromatography
is the Langmuir isotherm developed by Irving Langmuir in 1918 [30, 22].
However,
several other isotherms exist with just a few examples being the Freundlich or Steric-
Mass Action(SMA) isotherm. The Freundlich isotherm is an empirical equation in which
a heterogeneous surface, multilayer adsorption of adsorbate molecules and interaction
between adsorbed molecules is considered [29, 26].
The SMA differs from the other isotherms in the sense, that it takes steric hinderance of
counterions into account. The number of binding sites at the stationary phase occupied
by each adsorbate is normally determined by the characteristic charge ν of the adsorbate
molecule. Due to the shape of the molecule, it covers significantly more binding sites
as illustrated in Fig. 2.4. These sterically hindered sites are not available for other
adsorbates in the mobile phase [11].
Figure 2.4: Illustration of steric hinderance effects on protein adsorption [31].
The SMA isotherm includes the steric hinderance, by including the steric shielding factor
σ. Eq. (2.1) presents the equation for the multicomponent SMA isotherm with n different
proteins and one salt. The subscript 1 refers to the salt.
qi =
Λ · αi1 · ci
Pn+1
j=1 αj1(σj + νj)cj
(2.1)
Λ represents the binding capacity of the stationary phase. ν is the characteristic charge
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
10
and σ is the steric shielding factor. α is given by Eq. (2.2).
αi1 = qi/ci
¯q1/c1
= K1i
 ¯q1
c1
vi−1
(2.2)
where q and c are the concentration of adsorbate in the stationary and mobile phase
respectively. The ¯q1 is the bound salt counterions available for exchange with protein
binding. K1i is the equilibrium constant. The subscript 1 refers to the salt for which
K11=1, σ1=0 and ν1=1.
The SMA isotherm was developed for ion-exchange chromatography. However, Arkell
et al.[6] showed, that the SMA isotherm can also be used to describe RPC with the
presumption of hydrophobic interactions modulated by organic solvent rather than elec-
trostatic interactions modulated by a salt. The SMA isotherm has therefore been used
to describe the adsorption equilibrium in the mechanistic model used in the optimization
in-silico to model RPC processes for synthetic peptides.
2.4
UV/Vis absorption of proteins and peptides
Proteins and peptides absorb at different wavelengths in the UV spectra depending on
their structure. Mainly the aromatic structure of tryptophan, tyrosine and phenylalanine
contribute to the mid-UV absorption with two absorption peaks each as illustrated in
Fig.
2.5.
The high wavelength peak for tryptophan, tyrosine and phenylalanine is
around 280 nm, 275 nm and 257 nm respectively. The low wavelength peak for all three
of the aromatic structures is around 215-230 nm [19]. Cysteine and peptide bonds also
absorb in the mid-UV spectra. Cysteine mainly absorbs below 260 nm with a rather low
absorbance. The absorbance from the peptide bonds increases strongly towards lower
wavelengths around 190-210 nm [19].
Figure 2.5: UV absorption spectra of amino acids and peptide bonds [19].
Measurement of the absorbance at a certain wavelength can be used to detect the pro-
teins/peptides and determine its concentration. Detection of proteins/peptides is usually
==PAGE:20==
11
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
not performed at wavelengths as low as 190 nm due to this wavelength typically giving
apparatus issues of absorption measurements [19]. The most common wavelength for
detection and quantification in preparative chromatography is 280 nm as influence from
additives and buffer components is avoided.
In preparative chromatography, the start of the pool collection is typically determined
by a UV signal at 280 nm. The UV signal is dependent on the peptide concentration
and does therefore not reflect the peptide API purity. Variations in batch, column load,
column quality, material composition and impurity profile will therefore compromise the
quality of the target product. An increase in the column load, increases the concentra-
tion, which causes the UV signal to be observed earlier as seen in Fig. 2.6. An earlier
start of the pool collection leads to a reduced purity due to more impurities being col-
lected. Similarly, a decrease in column load, decreases the concentration and UV signal,
resulting in a later start of the pool collection. This reduces the yield.
Having a fixed pooling criterion despite so many process variations leading to different
purity does not reflect process knowledge. A PAT approach such as the 3-wavelength tool
with the in-line purity coefficient calculation should be used for pooling criterion. The
use of the 3-wavelength tool for qualitative pooling decisions will ensure no compromise
on quality due to batch, column load or impurity profile variation.
Figure 2.6: Preparative chromatogram from Novo Nordisk A/S with absorbance vs. column
volume (CV) for a load variation of +/- 10%. Green chromatogram is for base case column load,
blue chromatogram furthest to the left is for 10% increase in column load and blue chromatogram
furthest to the right is for 10% decrease in column load.
2.4.1
The 3-wavelength tool and purity coefficient
The 3-wavelength tool is a Novo Nordisk A/S in-house development. It measures the
absorbance at three different wavelengths, typically being 280 nm, 254 nm and a low
wavelength between 220-240 nm. Lower wavelengths are not used due to the absorbance
of the peptide bonds causing the apparatus to reach maximum absorbance value. Fur-
thermore, the wavelengths used should be higher than the wavelengths for detection of
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
12
the organic solvent used for elution in order to ensure baseline stability in the chro-
matogram.
The 3-wavelength tool enables in-line calculations of the purity coefficient. The purity
coefficient is a factor used to determine when to start pooling of the eluate in order to
ensure a high purity of the target product. It takes a value between 0 and 1, where
1 means it is pure target product. The purity coefficient is based on the ratio of the
absorbance signal at 3 different wavelengths, which is compared to pre-set target values
for the absorbance at the three wavelengths [2]. The target values of the absorbance
at the three specific wavelengths are determined experimentally prior to performing the
purification by RPC.
Each of the three wavelengths used represent a dimension in a three-dimensional space.
The ratio of the absorbance at the different wavelengths can therefore be expressed
as a vector in that space. The length of the vector represents the concentration. The
current measured absorbance signal vector, denoted −→x , is defined by (x1, x2, x3) where xi
represents the measured absorbance at wavelength i. Similarly the pre-set target signal
vector, denoted −→y , is defined by (y1, y2, y3), where yi represents the target absorbance
at wavelength i. The similarity of the current measured absorbance signal and the target
absorbance signal can be expressed as the angle θ between the two vectors.
The difference between the target protein and impurities might be easier to detect at
one of the applied wavelengths compared to the other wavelengths. Weight can therefore
be added to the wavelengths by multiplying the absorbance signal with a weight factor
w (w1, w2, w3) element-wise. The weighted vectors for current and target absorbance
signal are denoted −→x w and −→x w respectively.
The weighted vectors are normalized as shown in Eq. (2.3), where the weighted vectors
are divided with the magnitude of the vector. The direction of the vector is unchanged
by normalization.
ˆx =
−→x w
||xw||
and
ˆy =
−→y w
||yw||
(2.3)
where
||xw|| =
q
x2
w1 + x2
w2 + x2
w3
and
||yw|| =
q
y2
w1 + y2
w2 + y2
w3
With the normalized vectors for current signal ˆx and target signal ˆy, the scalar product
of the vectors is determined to give the angle between the normalized vectors:
cos(θ) = (ˆx · ˆy)
(2.4)
The angle θ is determined by taking the inverse cosinus known as arccos. Since the
inverse of the cosinus function is not available in the program Unicorn used for controlling
the ¨Akta/chromatography columns, the arccos function is substituted by the Doerfler
estimation [14]. However slight modifications to the Doerfler estimation given in Eq.
(2.5) has been made in order to improve the estimation of small angles.
==PAGE:22==
13
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
θ =
p
7 · (1000 −1000 · cos(θ)) −1
2
(2.5)
The applied estimation of arccos in the purity coefficient calculation is presented in Eq.
(2.6). This gives better estimation for small angles, which is most important in the
calculation of the purity coefficient.
θ =
p
6.57 · (1000 −1000 · cos(θ))
(2.6)
The expression for cos(θ) from Eq. (2.4) is inserted to give:
θ =
p
6.57 · (1000 −1000 · (ˆx · ˆy))
(2.7)
An angle of 0◦will give a purity coefficient of 1. The signals from different compounds in
the homogeneous mixture loaded onto the column can be rather similar. A scaling factor
s, which is compound specific, can therefore be implemented to increase the difference
between impurities and target product. The angle θ is converted from ◦to radians before
using the scaling factor.
coef = 1 −
θ
π/s
(2.8)
In case a negative purity coefficient (coef) is determined, the value is set equal to zero.
The ratio of the pre-set target absorbances at the three wavelengths could occur at low
intensity signals due to uncertainty and background noise in the absorbance signal. As
it is not desired to have false positive correlation, which starts the pooling too early, a
minimum absorbance for the first wavelength is defined (Min UV1 signal). For any ratios
with an absorbance at the first wavelength below the threshold, the purity coefficient is
penalized as seen in Eq. (2.9).
coef =
(
coef
if x1 ≥Min UV1 signal
coef ·
q
x1
Min UV1 signal
if x1 < Min UV1 signal
(2.9)
The determined purity coefficient in Eq. (2.9) is used to determine when pooling of the
target product in RPC should occur.
2.5
Optimization
The aim of optimization is to minimize/maximize an objective function by varying a set
of decision variables. A mathematical representation of an objective function is presented
in Eq. (2.10).
max
fobj(x)
w.r.t
x = (x1, x2, x3, ....., xN) ∈RN
s.t.
xL ≤x ≤xU
fcon(x) ≤0
(2.10)
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
14
The objective function (fobj) is to be maximized with respect to (w.r.t) the decision
variables x. The decision variables can be subject to (s.t) upper and lower bounds as
well as the constraint function fcon. In case, the optimization problem was regarding
minimization, the objective function fobj would be multiplied with -1.
Several different optimization algorithms exist, which can be used for the optimization
of an objective function. Some examples of commonly used optimization algorithms are
gradient descent, genetic algorithms and Bayesian optimization.
Gradient descent optimization algorithms are used to find a local minimum/maximum
of the objective function. It is a requirement, that the objective function is both convex
and differentiable. The gradient descent is easy to implement and commonly used in
machine learning and deep learning [36]. The disadvantages by using gradient descent for
optimization is, that it can get stuck in a local minimum/maximum rather than finding
the global optimum. Furthermore, the convergence of the gradient descent algorithms are
highly sensitive to the initial points and can in some cases have a very slow convergence
[36].
Genetic algorithms are an iterative optimization technique, that simulates natural se-
lection to find the optimal solution [12]. It is good at exploring a wide solution space
and can find a global optimum. Furthermore, it can handle optimization problems with
non-continuous variables.
The genetic algorithms have application in financial mod-
elling, combinational optimization, machine learning, optimization problems and image
and signal processing. The major disadvantage of the genetic algorithms is the compu-
tational cost.
The Bayesian optimization falls in the class of sequential model-based optimization al-
gorithms. These types of algorithms use previous observations of fitted models to de-
termine the next point to investigate. With Bayesian optimization, there is no need of
knowing the derivatives or convexity properties of the objective function, The Bayesian
optimization finds the global optimum [5]. Major advantages of Bayesian optimization
is its sample efficiency and ability to handle noisy data. The Bayesian optimization can
efficiently optimize objective functions with a limited number of iterations compared
to other optimization algorithms. Furthermore, Bayesian optimization has few tuning
parameters in the setup of the algorithm. The disadvantage of Bayesian optimization is,
that the computational time increases much for high-dimensional optimization problems.
The Bayesian optimization algorithms have found application in a wide range of fields
such as engineering, finance, machine learning and hyper-parameter tuning for model
selection [5].
Due to its ability to find global extrema without having to know the
convexity of the objective function, having few parameters to tune and its ability to
optimize expensive cost-functions with limited number of iterations as well as handling
noisy data, the Bayesian optimization will be used for this project.
==PAGE:24==
15
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
2.5.1
Bayesian optimization
Bayesian optimization is a powerful and adaptable strategy for finding a global optimum
of an objective function, which is expensive to evaluate. The two key components of the
Bayesian optimization algorithms are [5]:
1. The surrogate model approximating the true objective function
2. The acquisition function determining the next set of decision variables to evaluate
The process of Bayesian optimization is to create a surrogate model of the objective
function based on initial points. The surrogate model offers an estimate of the uncer-
tainty, which is used in the acquisition function to determine the next set of decision
variables to be examined. Once the objective function has been evaluated at the newly
suggested set of decision variables, the surrogate model is updated based on the new
information from the last iteration. As illustrated in Fig. 2.7, the process of suggesting
new decision variables, evaluation the objective function and updating the surrogate
model is repeated until terminating the optimization.
Figure 2.7: Schematic representation of the Bayesian optimization process [5].
Surrogate model
Different surrogate models such as the Gaussian Process (GP), Random Forest or neural
networks exist [12, 5]. The GP dates back to the late 1970s and is the most widely
adopted surrogate model [5]. The GP will therefore be the choice of surrogate model
for this work. With GP, the values of the objective function correspond to realizations
of multivariate GP that for each set of decision variables x return a mean (µ(x)) and
a variance (σ2) of the probabilistic surrogate model. One can intuitively think of a GP
as analogous to a function, but instead of returning a scalar f(x) for an arbitrary x, the
GP returns the mean and variance of a normal distribution over the possible values of
f(x) at x [10].
Acquisition function
The role of the acquisition function is to guide the search for the optimum. Based on
the mean (µ(x)) and variance (σ2) from the GP, the acquisition function determines
the next point for evaluation by maximizing the acquisition function. The selection of
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
16
the next point is based on a trade-off between exploration and exploitation. With high
emphasize on exploration, the next sample is from regions with high uncertainty in order
to gain information of unexplored areas. Exploitation refers to sampling in regions near
the current known optimum and thereby concentrate on areas that are likely to contain
the global optimum [5, 10].
The most widely used acquisition functions are the Probability of Improvement (PI),
the Expected Improvement (EI) and the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) [5, 10]. The
PI was the first acquisition function proposed in literature by Kushner in 1964 [21].
It calculates the probability, that a candidate point will lead to an improvement over
the current best solution.
The drawback by PI is, that it is highly biased towards
exploitation, such that points with a high probability of being infinitesimally greater
than the current best value are selected rather than points offering larger gains but
less certainty [10]. Opposite PI, the EI acquisition function encourages exploration by
examining the expected improvement over the current best-solution when finding the
next point to evaluate. Lastly the UCB balances the exploitation and exploration by
implementing the hyper-parameter of the optimizer, κ, as shown in Eq. (2.11).
UCB(X) = µ(x) + κ · σ(x)
(2.11)
The κ has a default value of 2.576. Increasing the κ value prioritizes exploration in the
search for the next point to try as the standard deviation from GP is weighted. For a
smaller κ value, focus is on the mean value and exploitation is prioritized. No matter
which acquisition function is used, the balance between exploration and exploitation is
crucial for finding the optimum while minimizing the number of iterations performed.
Example of Bayesian Optimization
Figure 2.8 illustrates how the GP is adjusted after each iteration and how the next point
for evaluation is chosen based on maximizing the acquisition function.
(a) The GP and acquisition function after 5
observations. The maximum of the acquisi-
tion function shows which point to evaluate
next.
(b) The GP and the acquisition function
change after another evaluation. The evalu-
ation point was selected based on maximum
of the acquisition function in Fig. 2.8a.
Figure 2.8: Illustration of the Bayesian Optimization [5]. The GP is shown in blue and the
acquisition function in red.
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3
Materials and Methods
This chapter describes the method used for evaluation of the optimization process in-
silico. The parameters for the mechanistic model for RPC, the objective function and
setup of the Bayesian optimization are presented. The chapter also describes the method
for automating the multi-step chromatographic setup in the laboratory.
Lastly the
method for applying Bayesian optimization in the development of a multi-step chro-
matographic process for purification of the synthetic peptide product X is presented.
Due to confidentiality reasons, details about the specific sample used in the laboratory
and solvents are omitted.
3.1
Evaluation of optimization process in-silico
The optimization of chromatographic purification in-silico was done to obtain knowl-
edge about complexity of the optimization problem, optimal tuning parameter for the
Bayesian optimization and required initial conditions. The in-silico optimization process
was done in Python 3.11.4 according to the process shown in Fig. 3.1. The Bayesian
optimization suggested values for the decision variables such as gradient start, gradient
end and purity coefficient for pooling criteria. These suggested values were applied in
Figure 3.1: Illustration of in-silico chromatography optimization.
17
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
18
the mechanistic modelling of the RPC column, where a yield and purity of the target
peptide was determined. The value of the objective function was calculated based on
the yield and purity of the target peptide in the final pool. The value of the objective
function was returned to the Bayesian optimization algorithm, which suggested new
values for the decision variables in the next iteration.
Initially one RPC column was considered in the mechanistic model, before extending
it to include two orthogonal RPC columns.
A total of four different scenarios were
studied in the in-silico chromatography optimization to examine how the complexity of
the optimization problem varied with number of decision variables:
Scenario A: One RPC column with two decision variables, which were the gradient
start and gradient end. The purity coefficient used for starting and ending the pooling
was set to 0.90.
Scenario B: Two orthogonal RPC columns with six decision variables in the optimiza-
tion. The decision variables were the gradient start and gradient end for both chro-
matography steps and a single pooling criterion for each step. The value of the purity
coefficient used for pooling start and pooling end were the same, thus resulting in only
one pooling criterion to optimize for in each chromatography step.
Scenario C: Two orthogonal RPC columns with four decision variables. A conservative
elution gradient going from 0-100% elution solvent was implemented on both columns.
The purity coefficient for starting the pooling and ending the pooling on a column did
not have to be the same. Thereby each column had two pooling criteria to optimize for.
Scenario D: Two orthogonal RPC columns with two decision variables. A conservative
gradient going from 0-100% elution solvent was used as done in scenario C as well. The
purity coefficient for starting and ending the pooling in each step were the same, thus
only one pooling criterion for each chromatography step to optimize for.
Figure 3.2 illustrates the decision variables applied in the four scenarios on a chro-
matogram:
==PAGE:28==
19
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.2: Illustration of chromatogram for the elution of the three theoretical peptides con-
sidered in-silico. The UV absorbance signal at three different wavelengths are used to determine
the purity coefficient plotted in solid black. For scenario A and B the gradient was varied as
illustrated by the red arrows. The red crosses show the purity coefficient applied as criteria for
starting and ending the pooling. These were varied in scenario B, C and D. For scenario B and
D, coefstart and coefend had the same value thus giving only one pooling criterion to optimize
for each chromatography step.
3.1.1
Mechanistic model for RPC
The RPC columns were modelled by a previously implemented mechanistic model in
Fortran/Python at Novo Nordisk A/S. The Python modelling was further developed to
include the 3-wavelength tool and purity coefficient calculation from section 2.4.1. Based
on the output from the model, the yield and purity were calculated. The yield was given
by the ratio between mass of collected target peptide in the pool (mtarget,pool) and total
mass of target peptide loaded (mtarget,load). For the scenarios with two columns, the
yield for the second column was the overall yield given by the ratio between mass of
collected target peptide in the final pool and total mass of target peptide loaded onto
the first column. Eq. (3.1) shows the yield calculation.
Ytarget = mtarget,pool
mtarget,load
(3.1)
The purity of the collected pool was determined based on moles of target peptide and
moles of impurities as shown in Eq. (3.2).
P =
ntarget,pool
PnP
i=1(ni,pool)
(3.2)
where ntarget,pool was the moles of target peptide in the pool and ni,pool was the moles
of peptide i when nP different peptides including target peptide and impurities were
loaded onto the column.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
20
For the RPC modelling workflow, three peptides were considered. Theoretical values
were assigned to the three peptides to create a case for optimization, where a pre-
impurity(peptide 1) and post-impurity(peptide 3) would overlap with the target peptide
as illustrated in Fig. 3.3a. Table 3.1 shows the theoretical values applied for the three
peptides in the first RPC step. When assigning extinction coefficients for a peptide at
the different wavelengths, it was taken into account, that the extinction coefficients at
the three wavelengths should be different.
Table 3.1: Theoretical values used for the modelling of peptides in the first RPC step.
Peptide 1
Peptide 2 (target)
Peptide 3
Molar mass [g/mol]
5775
5775
5775
Distribution coefficient
(Pore availability)
1
1
1
Equilibrium constant
0.40
0.45
0.54
Steric shielding factor
2.2
2.2
2.2
Effective charge
2.85
3.10
3.20
Extinction coefficient
wavelength 1 [M
−1cm
−1]
1.10
1.40
1.70
Extinction coefficient
wavelength 2 [M
−1cm
−1]
1.20
1.60
1.50
Extinction coefficient
wavelength 3 [M
−1cm
−1]
1.22
1.90
2.40
The load onto the first RPC step was set to 0.19 CV and the concentrations of peptide
1, peptide 2 and peptide 3 were 8.32 g/L, 38.30 g/L and 14.56 g/L respectively. For
the column properties, an interstitial porosity of 0.34, a particle porosity of 0.25 and a
column capacity of 500 mM were used. The number of equilibrium stages were set to
120.
A second RPC step was included for scenario B, C and D with multi-column optimiza-
tion. The pH conditions in the second column were different in order to get a different
elution of the peptides. The change in pH in the second column was reflected in the
change of the equilibrium constant and effective charge of the peptides. Table 3.2 shows
the theoretical values applied for peptides in the second RPC step.
Table 3.2: Theoretical values used for the modelling of peptides in the second RPC step. This
table only shows the values in the second step, which are different from the theoretical values
for peptides in the first step shown in Table 3.1.
Peptide 1
Peptide 2 (target)
Peptide 3
Equilibrium constant
0.44
0.43
0.39
Effective charge
3.15
3.20
2.90
==PAGE:30==
21
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The values for the second RPC step were chosen to give a challenging optimization
case, with peptide 3 eluting as pre-impurity but overlapping with the target peptide and
peptide 1 eluting at the same time as the target peptide. This ensured both columns
were required for the purification, since most of peptide 1 must be removed in the first
column to meet the purity requirement. The remaining of peptide 3 must be removed
in the second column. The chromatograms in Fig. 3.3 illustrates the elution order of
the three peptides in the two chromatography steps modelled.
(a) First chromatography column
(b) Second chromatography column
Figure 3.3: Chromatogram showing how the three peptides elute from the first column (Fig.
a) and from the second column (Fig. b). Only the elution part of the chromatograph is shown.
For the illustration was used a gradient of 0-100% elution solvent over 30 CV.
The column properties for the second RPC step were the same as for the first RPC
step. The load volume and concentration of peptides loaded onto the second RPC step
depended on the collected pool from the first RPC step.
The gradient elution in the mechanistic model was for both RPC steps specified to be
over 30 CV. This was done to ensure the optimization did not become limited in the
steepness of the gradient in scenario A and B.
For the purity coefficient calculation was defined a scale factor of 10 and a minimum
absorbance of wavelength 1 to be 0.1 mAU. The three wavelengths all had a weight of 1
in the purity coefficient calculation.
3.1.2
Objective function
The objective function for the optimization in all four scenarios was to maximize the
overall yield of the target peptide in the chromatographic purification. When maximiz-
ing the yield, the purity was considered by applying the purity coefficient as pooling
criteria. However, as the purity coefficient depended on the similarity of the target pep-
tide and impurity peptides as explained in section 2.4.1, a penalty was implemented in
the objective function in Eq. (3.3) in case the purity in the final pool did not meet the
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
22
purity requirement.
max
Obj. func =





mtarget,pool
mtarget,load
if P ≥Preq
mtarget,pool
mtarget,load −(Preq −P)
if P < Preq
(3.3)
where Preq was a defined purity requirement for the final pool and P was the actual
purity in the final pool given by Eq. (3.2). The purity requirement was for all four
scenarios set to 90 %.
The boundaries applied on the decision variables in the optimization were as following,
where i referred to the chromatography step.
0 ≤gradstart,i < 100
0 < gradend,i ≤100
0.01 ≤coefstart,i ≤1
0.01 ≤coefend,i ≤1
gradstart,i and gradend,i referred to the gradient start and end applied for chromatogra-
phy step i, while coefstart and coefend referred to the purity coefficient used as starting
and ending criterion for the pooling in chromatography step i. Not all decision variables
and boundaries stated above where relevant in each scenario. Only the boundaries for
the used decision variables in the specific scenario were implemented in the optimization.
The constraint gradstart,i < gradend,i was included in the formulation of the objective
function for scenario A and B.
3.1.3
Bayesian optimization
The python package BayesianOptimization[1] was used with the Gaussian Process as
surrogate model. UCB was chosen as acquisition function in order to examine the effect
of exploration versus exploitation by varying the κ value. The default κ value of 2.576
was used as well as κ being 1 favouring more exploitation and κ being 4 favouring more
exploration.
The optimization in each of the four scenarios was repeated 100 times with 280 iterations
in each repetition. This was done for each of the three different κ values. The random
state in the Bayesian optimization was undefined, thus meaning different random states
were used in each repetition. Two initial conditions were used in the Bayesian opti-
mization. Scenario A was done first by using two random initial conditions and then
afterwards repeated with two defined initial conditions.
All other scenarios had two
defined initial conditions according to Table 3.3.
==PAGE:32==
23
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Table 3.3: The two initial conditions in the Bayesian optimization for each scenario.
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Scenario D
Initial
condition 1
gradstart,1: 0 %
gradend,1: 100%
gradstart,1: 0 %
gradend,1: 100 %
coef1: 0.70
gradstart,2: 0 %
gradend,2: 100 %
coef2: 0.95
coefstart,1: 0.70
coefend,1: 0.70
coefstart,2: 0.95
coefend,2: 0.95
coef1: 0.70
coef2: 0.95
Initial
condition 2
gradstart,1: 20 %
gradend,1: 80 %
gradstart,1: 20 %
gradend,1: 80 %
coef1: 0.50
gradstart,2: 20 %
gradend,2: 80 %
coef2: 0.80
coefstart,1: 0.50
coefend,1: 0.50
coefstart,2: 0.80
coefend,2: 0.80
coef1: 0.50
coef2: 0.80
When the Bayesian optimization suggested the next set of values for the decision vari-
ables, duplicates of previously used combinations were not allowed.
The reversed-phase chromatographic principle assumes an increasing organic solvent
content during the gradient for elution. Therefore all cases with a decreasing organic
solvent content during elution were disregarded. This was done by implementing the
constraint on the gradient for scenario A and B by setting the objective function to be
zero if gradend,i < gradstart,i.
3.2
Automation of experimental multi-step chromatographic
process
The experimental multi-step chromatographic process was automated such that the col-
lected pool during elution from Z1 automatically was loaded onto the column with
conditions for the Z2 step. The illustration in Fig. 3.4 shows the experimental setup
with an ¨Akta Explorer 100 from Cytiva. The ¨Akta was equipped with an A and B pump
(P-900), mixer (M-925), UV-monitor (UV-900, 2 mm optical path length), conductivity
and pH monitor (pH/C-900) all from Cytiva. In order to have enough B-inlets, besides
the existing B1 and B2 inlets, an extra valve was added on the B1 inlet. Furthermore,
an air sensor was included on the A14 tube to control the Z2 application. Both the extra
B valve and air sensor were from Cytiva. The ¨Akta instrument was controlled through
the software Unicorn 7.8.
An arduino micro computer was connected to transfer data between Python 3.11.4 and
the ¨Akta. The purity coefficient calculation in Python was updated every second with
the measured UV absorbance at three selected wavelengths in order to determine the
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
24
current purity coefficient. The signal from the calculated purity coefficient with a value
between 0 and 1 was scaled to give a power output to the ¨Akta with a value between 2
mV and 1480 mV.
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the experimental multi-step chromatographic setup. Z1 and Z2 refer
to the chromatography step. ZX means the solvent can be used for all steps. S1, S2 and S4 refer
to equilibration solvent, elution solvent and regeneration solvent respectively.
The same chromatography column was used in both the Z1 and Z2 step, but the con-
ditions in the column were changed according to the chromatography step being per-
formed. Each of the two chromatography steps Z1 and Z2 contained the following phases:
Equilibration, load, wash, elution and regeneration. The solvents applied were denoted
according to the step they were used for and its purpose. S1 referred to the equilibration
solvent, S2 referred to the elution solvent and S4 referred to the regeneration solvent.
The application for Z1 was loaded through the A2 inlet onto the column. The gradient
elution on Z1 was done using Z1-S1 from A11 and Z1-S2 from B1 valve 1. During elution,
watch functions were activated in Unicorn to observe when the voltage signal reached
a certain value for either starting or stopping the pooling of the eluate. The pool from
Z1 was collected through the F3 outlet in a centrifuge tube. If the purity coefficient
==PAGE:34==
25
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
defined as pooling criterion for Z1 was not achieved during the gradient elution, the
¨Akta would receive a high voltage signal of 2200 mV. The Unicorn method had a watch
function for this high voltage signal with the action of ending the entire method rather
than proceeding to the Z2 load phase.
If a pool was collected from Z1, the method would continue and load the collected pool
onto the column after it had been equilibrated with Z2 conditions. During load, an in-
line dilution of the Z1 pool was done with Z2-S1 from the B2 inlet to reduce the organic
solvent content in the application and ensure binding to the column. A constant ratio of
45% Z2-S1 was added to the application in-line using the B pump. The air sensor on the
A14 tube was implemented to know when to stop the load phase for Z2, since it could
not be defined to last for a certain number of CVs due to unknown volume eluted from
Z1. In order to not trigger the air sensor before the load phase for Z2, it was necessary
to prime the tubing and have a small volume of Z2-S1 in the centrifuge tube for the Z1
pool at the start of the experiment.
For elution of the peptides in the Z2 step, a gradient with Z2-S1 from A13 and Z2-S2
from B1 valve 2 was used. The purity coefficient was again used as pooling criterion in
order to know when to collect the eluate through the F4 tube rather than sending it
to waste. Since the target wavelengths, weighting of the wavelengths, scale factor and
minimum absorbance at wavelength 1 for the purity coefficient calculation were different
for the Z1 and Z2 step, the Python script had to know when to use which values. This
was done by lowering the flow rate slightly during load, wash and elution for Z2 compared
to Z1. By sending the current flow rate to Python, a decision for the right parameters
for the purity coefficient could be taken automatically in the Python script.
3.3
Application of Bayesian optimization for development
of a multi-step chromatographic process for purifica-
tion of the synthetic peptide product X
The evaluating of the optimization process in-silico for the four different scenarios
provided knowledge about the complexity, optimal tuning parameter(κ value) for the
Bayesian optimization and number of initial conditions. This knowledge was used to ap-
ply Bayesian optimization for the development of a multi-step chromatographic process
for purification of the synthetic peptide product X. The pooling criterion to apply for
each of the two chromatographic steps were optimized based on the Z2 pool composition
by applying the Bayesian optimization algorithm according to the process shown in Fig.
3.5.
The Bayesian optimization algorithm suggested a single purity coefficient for each of the
two chromatography steps to be used as pooling criterion. The Z1 and Z2 steps were
performed in the laboratory with the suggested purity coefficients as pooling criteria.
The collected pool from Z2 was analysed in order to determine the overall yield and
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
26
purity. Based on the yield and purity, the value of the objective function was determined
and returned to the Bayesian optimization algorithm, which suggested a new pooling
criterion for each of the two chromatography steps to try in the laboratory.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of how Bayesian optimization was applied for determining the optimal
pooling criteria for a multi-column purification process of the synthetic peptide product X.
3.3.1
Laboratory setup
Materials
Crude peptide powder containing product X and several different impurities was provided
by Novo Nordisk A/S. For the preparative chromatography was prepared five different
solvents in total for the Z1 and Z2 step. The solvents for the Z1 step were buffered at
neutral pH. A low organic solvent(Z1-S1) was used for equilibration and a high organic
solvent(Z1-S2) for elution. For the Z2 step were used solvents buffered at acidic pH.
For Z2-S1 was used a low organic solvent, while Z2-S2 was a high organic solvent. The
regeneration solvent ZX-S4 was the same for both the Z1 and Z2 step. It had a high
organic content and neutral pH conditions.
Sample preparation
The sample for the preparative chromatography was prepared by dissolving 18g of crude
peptide powder per liter of Z1-S1. The pH had to be adjusted continuously in order
to solubilize all the crude peptide. Once fully dissolved, the sample was filtered with
a ’Stericup Quick Release Durapore 0.45 µm’ filter from Milipore.
The purity and
concentration of product X in the sample were determined by analytical chromatography.
Analytical chromatography
An Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) from Waters with a C18 RP-
HPLC column in size 2.1x150mm was used for the analytical chromatography.
The
absorbance was measured at a wavelength of 215 nm. In order to determine the concen-
tration of product X in the sample, a reference sample with known concentration was
run on the UPLC as well. The analytical chromatograms from the UPLC were analysed
==PAGE:36==
27
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
using the program Empower. For the analytical chromatography, a low organic solvent
(A) and a high organic solvent (B) both with acidic pH conditions were used.
Determination of parameters in the purity coefficient calculation
The target wavelengths, weighting of the wavelengths, scale factor and minimum ab-
sorbance at wavelength 1 had to be determined for each chromatography step in order
to apply the purity coefficient as pooling criteria. The target wavelengths for each step
were determined by performing a preparative chromatography run with sample loaded
to 5g product X per liter resin on the C18 RP-HPLC column with size 10x250 mm.
The sample was eluted from the column with a gradient from 45%-100% S2 solvent over
12 CV with a flow of 6 CV/h. The eluate was fractionated into volumes of 1.5 mL.
All the fractions collected during elution of product X were analysed with analytical
chromatography. The purity of each fraction was determined in order to find the most
pure fraction of product X. From the chromatogram in Unicorn, the absorbance at the
three different wavelengths were read for the most pure fraction. The three wavelengths
applied for the preparative run was 290 nm, 254 nm and 240 nm. A wavelength of 280
nm could not be applied due to UV detector saturation at this wavelength.
The weights applied on each wavelength, the scale factor and the minimum absorbance at
290 nm were determined by modelling the obtained chromatogram from the preparative
run in Python. Several different combinations of parameters were tested in the modelling
in order to best differentiate between product X and peptide impurities.
This process was done first for the column with Z1 conditions and afterwards repeated
with Z2 conditions on the column.
Performing the laboratory experiments for the initial conditions and itera-
tions in the Bayesian optimization
The automated setup described in section 3.4 was used in the laboratory to test the
multi-step chromatographic purification process with the suggested pooling criterion for
Z1 and Z2 from the Bayesian optimization.
A C18 RP-HPLC column with size 10x250 mm was used for both the Z1 and Z2 step.
The sample application was loaded to 12 g product X per liter resin in the Z1 step. For
the load, wash and elution on Z1 was used a flow rate of 6.1 CV/h, while it was lowered
to 5.8 CV/h for the load, wash and elution on Z2. During equilibration and regeneration
on Z1 and Z2, a flow rate of 15 CV/h was used. The centrifuge tube for the Z1 pool
contained 5 mL of Z2-S1 at the beginning of every experiment in order to not trigger
the air sensor before the load in the Z2 step.
The collected pool from Z2 was mixed well and 1.5 mL of the pool was transferred to a
vial for the analytical chromatography. The concentration and purity of product X in
the Z2 pool was determined by analytical chromatography.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
28
A gradient going from 45%-100% Zx-S2 solvent over 12 CV was always used for elution in
the Z1 and Z2 step in every experiment(iteration in the Bayesian optimization). However,
the purity coefficient applied as pooling criterion for each of the two chromatography
steps changed in every iteration based on what the Bayesian optimization algorithm
suggested. The watch functions in the Unicorn method were therefore updated after
each experiment with the new suggested purity coefficients for pooling criteria.
3.3.2
Objective function
The objective function applied for the development of a multi-step chromatographic pro-
cess for purification of product X focused on maximizing the yield, while still considering
the purity. Since many more impurities were present and overlapping with the target
peptide, when considering the sample with product X compared to the in-silico scenar-
ios with two impurities, the objective function presented in Eq. (3.3) was modified into
Eq. (3.4). If the purity requirement was satisfied, the yield would be the value of the
objective function. However, if the purity of the collected pool from Z2 was below the
purity requirement, the yield was punished with the squared difference between purity
requirement and actual purity. The reason for squaring the difference was to avoid the
Bayesian optimization finding the optimal solution having a purity several percentage
point below the purity requirement just to obtain a higher yield.
max
Obj. func =





mtarget,pool
mtarget,load
if P ≥Preq
mtarget,pool
mtarget,load −(Preq −P)2
if P < Preq
(3.4)
Preq was a defined purity requirement for the Z2 pool and P was the actual purity in the
collected pool from Z2. For this project with product X was used a purity requirement
of 90%. No constraints were specified in the objective function, but the boundaries for
the decision variables were as following:
0.5 ≤coef1 ≤1
0.5 ≤coef2 ≤1
Process knowledge obtained during experiments for determination of the parameters in
the purity coefficient calculation was applied when deciding on the boundaries of the
purity coefficients used as pooling criteria.
3.3.3
Bayesian optimization
The Bayesian optimization part was performed in Python 3.11.4. using the BayesianOp-
timization[1] package also applied for the optimization process in-silico. The surrogate
model (Gaussian Process) and acquisition function (UCB) applied were the same as
for the optimization process in-silico described in section 3.1.3. The κ value in the ac-
quisition function was set to the default value of 2.576 based on the results from the
evaluation of the optimization process in-silico discussed in section 4.1.5.
==PAGE:38==
29
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The Bayesian optimization algorithm was given three initial conditions with the pooling
criterion for each chromatography step as shown in Table 3.4. The value of the objective
function for each of these three sets of initial conditions was determined by applying the
procedure in the laboratory described in section 3.3.1.
Table 3.4: The three initial conditions applied in the Bayesian optimization for the development
of a multi-step chromatographic process for purification of product X. Each chromatography step
had one purity coefficient as pooling criterion.
Pooling criterion Z1
Pooling criterion Z2
Initial condition 1
0.85
0.85
Initial condition 2
0.75
0.88
Initial condition 3
0.92
0.77
To ensure the same random state was used in the Bayesian optimization every time a
new set of decision variables were suggested, an arbitrary value was specified for the
random state in the Bayesian optimization. As new decision variables were suggested,
the duplication of previous combinations were per default set to ’False’.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
This section presents the results obtained during the thesis.
First the optimization
process in-silico is evaluated and discussed with respect to complexity, tuning parameter
and initial conditions. This is followed by a discussion of the automation of the multi-
step chromatographic setup in the laboratory. Lastly the results for the development of
a multi-step chromatographic process for purification of the synthetic peptide product
X using Bayesian optimization are presented and discussed.
4.1
Evaluation of optimization process in-silico
The optimization process in-silico of the four different scenarios was evaluated with
respect to κ tuning parameter, initial conditions and complexity reflected by the required
iterations in order to obtain a good solution.
A good solution was defined as being
within 99% of the maximum value of the objective function. The maximum value of the
objective function in each of the four scenarios was determined as the maximum value
obtained within the hundred repetitions across all three tested κ values. For comparison
the iterations required for reaching 95% of the maximum value of the objective function
was also considered.
The median, the fifth quantile and the minimum of the objective function based on the
hundred repetitions of the optimization problem was determined.
4.1.1
Scenario A: One RPC column, two decision variables
Scenario A considered one chromatography column and had the gradient start and gra-
dient end as the two decision variables in the optimization problem. The optimization
process in-silico of scenario A was initially performed with two random initial conditions.
Figure 4.1 shows, how the optimization with the default κ value and with a κ value of
4 generally approached the optimum similarly. The optimization with a κ value of 4
only appeared to be faster than with a default κ value when considering the minimum
30
==PAGE:40==
31
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
value of the hundred repetitions. The κ value of 1, favouring exploitation, required the
highest number of iterations to find a good solution.
Some of the random states in the Bayesian optimization resulted in being within 99% of
the maximum value of the objective function fast whereas other required more iterations.
This was reflected by the median reaching a good solution in 10 iterations whereas it
took 33 and 156 iterations for the fifth quantile and the minimum value respectively to
be within 99% of the maximum value of the objective function for a κ value of 4 in the
optimization.
Figure 4.1: Results for optimization process in-silico of scenario A with two random initial
conditions and including all iterations.
Applying two random initial conditions in the optimization caused at least one of the
two initial conditions to be zero in over 50 of the 100 repetitions for all the κ values. The
optimization thereby started far from its optimum value. An objective function value
of zero was due to the gradient violating the constraint with gradstart,i < gradend,i.
Since the implementation of the constraint in the Bayesian optimization was done by
assigning a low objective function value of zero, if the constraint was violated, the
Bayesian optimization would still suggest decision variables to try, which violated the
constraint. Due to a negative gradient not being feasible, all iterations violating the
constraint were therefore removed in all other optimization processes in-silico.
Scenario A was repeated without considering iterations violating the constraint and
with two defined initial conditions according to Table 3.3. Figure 4.2 shows, how the
optimization with the κ value of 4 approached optimum fastest. The required number
of iterations to be certain of being within 99% of the maximum value of the objective
function was reduced to 27 iterations. For this case with the three peptides, the two
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
32
initial conditions resulted in already being within 95% of the maximum value of the
objective function at the start of the optimization. The flat part of the graph for the
first few iterations were due to the suggested decision variables giving a lower value of
the objective function than the value obtained for the initial conditions.
Figure 4.2: Results for optimization process in-silico of scenario A with two defined initial
conditions and removing iterations violating the constraint gradstart,i < gradend,i.
The optimization process in-silico of scenario A with two defined initial conditions
showed, how the optimization of a single chromatography column with only two gra-
dient parameters as decision variables was not very complex. The required number of
iterations for finding a good solution was low considering the experimental work neces-
sary to execute this optimization.
4.1.2
Scenario B: Two RPC columns, six decision variables
The complexity of the optimization problem was increased by including two orthogonal
chromatography columns and increasing the number of decision variables to six. The
decision variables included the gradient start and gradient end for both chromatography
steps as well as a single pooling criterion for each chromatography step.
The optimization process in-silico of scenario B had the two initial conditions defined in
Table 3.3 and removed iterations with decision variables violating the gradient constraint.
==PAGE:42==
33
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
According to Fig. 4.3, the complexity increased drastically by having two orthogonal
columns with six decision variables. The optimization with the κ value of 1 approached
optimum fastest by requiring 133 iterations to have the fifth quantile within 99% of
the maximum value of the objective function. In comparison, the optimization with
the default κ value required 134 iterations to have the fifth quantile within 99% of the
maximum value of the objective function. However, the minimum value reached a good
solution much faster when using the default κ value compared to the κ value of 1.
Figure 4.3: Results for optimization process in-silico of scenario B with two defined initial
conditions and removing iterations violating the constraint gradstart,i < gradend,i.
The optimization problem with two columns and six decision variables increased dras-
tically in complexity compared to scenario A. The optimization of scenario B required
more iterations than would be feasible to perform in the laboratory for development of
a purification process. The complexity of the multi-step chromatography optimization
was therefore reduced by decreasing the number of decision variables to four in scenario
C.
4.1.3
Scenario C: Two RPC columns, four decision variables
The decrease in decision variables between scenario B and C reduced the complexity of
the optimization problem. Scenario C applied a conservative gradient and only had four
decision variables to optimize for, which were two pooling criteria for each chromatogra-
phy step. The purity coefficient used for defining the pooling start and pooling end did
not have to be the same, thus giving two pooling criteria in each chromatography step.
The optimization with the κ value of 4 approached optimum fastest overall as seen in
Fig. 4.4. When considering the median and the minimum value, the optimization with
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
34
a κ value of 4 reached within 99% of the maximum value of the objective function in
fewest iterations. However for the fifth quantile, the optimization with a κ value of 4
approached a good solution fastest, but it did not reach within 99% of the maximum
value of the objective function fastest due to a flat rate of improvement between iteration
56 and 83. In the meantime, the optimization with the default κ value found a good
solution in 78 iterations despite starting with a much slower approach towards optimum.
For the optimization with κ being 4, 166 iterations were needed to be certain of finding
a good solution despite which random state was used. Considering the fifth quantile
instead, and thereby allowing a small uncertainty in whether the 99% of the maximum
value of the objective function was obtained, resulted in the required iterations being
reduced to 86.
Figure 4.4: Results for optimization process in-silico of scenario C with two defined initial
conditions.
4.1.4
Scenario D: Two RPC columns, two decision variables
The complexity of the optimization problem with two orthogonal columns was decreased
even further by only having two decision variables, which were a single pooling crite-
rion for each chromatography step. Figure 4.5 shows, that the optimal solution was
approached fastest with a κ value of 1. The optimization with the default κ approached
the optimum only slightly slower than for the κ value of 1, while a κ value of 4 required
a much higher number of iterations. For the optimization with κ being 1, 61 iterations
were required to be certain of finding a good solution. Decreasing the certainty in be-
ing within 99% of the maximum value of the objective function led to a decrease in
==PAGE:44==
35
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the required number of iterations. For the fifth quantile and the median to be within
99% of the maximum value of the objective function, 37 and 15 iterations were required
respectively.
Even though the same initial conditions as in scenario C were used, the maximum value
of the objective function within the 280 iterations in scenario D was found to be 98.2.
This was lower than the maximum value of the objective function in scenario C being
99.9.
Figure 4.5: Results for optimization process in-silico of scenario D with two defined initial
conditions.
Figure 4.6 shows, how the pooling criteria for the first and second RPC step were varied
in each iteration in the Bayesian optimization. Fig. 4.6a shows the elution chromatogram
for the first initial condition with a purity coefficient of 0.70 and 0.95 applied as pooling
criterion for the first and second RPC step respectively. The two red dotted lines show,
where the pooling started and ended. With this combination of pooling criteria was
achieved a purity of 85.6% and a yield of 78.29% thus resulting in a value of 73.89 for
the objective function. Fig. 4.6b shows the elution chromatogram for the first and second
RPC step for an iteration late in the optimization. This iteration resulted in a purity
of 96.38% and thereby the value of the objective function being equal to the yield of
97.87%. As seen by comparing Fig. 4.6a and Fig. 4.6b an increase in Z1 pooling criterion
from 0.70 to 0.73 significantly lowered the amount of collected peptide 1 impurity in the
first RPC step. This resulted in the purity coefficient applied for pooling criterion in the
second RPC step could be reduced to 0.67 in order to increase yield but still satisfy the
purity constraint.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
36
(a) Elution chromatogram for the first(Z1) and second(Z2) RPC step with the pooling criteria applied
in the first initial condition. The pooling criteria applied was 0.70 and 0.95 for Z1 and Z2 respectively.
(b) Elution chromatogram for the first(Z1) and second(Z2) RPC step with the pooling criteria applied
in one of the late iterations in the optimization. The pooling criteria applied was 0.73 and 0.67 for Z1
and Z2 respectively.
Figure 4.6: Visualization of how the pooling criteria applied for the two RPC steps varied in
the iterations in order to maximize the value of the objective function.
4.1.5
Discussion of the optimization process in-silico
The objectives of the optimization process in-silico was to evaluate it with respect to
the best tuning parameter for the optimization (κ value), applied initial conditions and
complexity in terms of required number of iterations for finding a good solution. The
knowledge from the optimization process in-silico of the four scenarios can be applied
for the development of multi-step chromatographic processes for synthetic peptide pu-
rification in the laboratory. As more peptides and different ones are considered in the
laboratory compared to the in-silico optimization with theoretical peptides, the obtained
yield in the different scenarios will be different. The very high yields obtained in these
four scenarios are not expected in the laboratory where more impurities are present
compared to the two impurities considered in-silico.
Evaluating the optimization process in-silico with respect to the best κ value showed,
how the optimal tuning parameter differed in the four scenarios. The optimal tuning
parameter for scenario A with two defined initial conditions was the κ value of 4. Sce-
==PAGE:46==
37
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
nario B had the default κ value of 2.576 as best tuning parameter, while scenario C
and D had a κ value of 4 and 1 as best tuning parameter respectively. However for
scenario C and D, the optimization with the default κ value showed to be almost as
good. This change in best tuning parameter between the four scenarios suggests, that
the optimal tuning parameter depends on the initial conditions and how the surface of
the optimization problem looks. If the surface of the optimization problem has several
different local optima and the optimization starts in a local optimum being different
from the global optimum, it would make sense to favour exploration. However, if the
initial conditions are close to the global optimum of the optimization problem, favour-
ing exploitation gives a faster approach of the optimum. When it comes to applying
the Bayesian optimization with the UCB as acquisition function for the development
of multi-step chromatographic purification for a new project/peptide, the optimal yield
and the surface of the optimization problem is unknown. It can therefore be difficult
to predict which κ value would give the fastest optimization of the purification process
with respect to optimal yield and purity. The default κ value showed to be best in sce-
nario B. In the other scenarios the optimization with the default κ value was almost as
good as with the optimal tuning parameter in those scenarios. It is therefore suggested
to use the default κ value in the UCB acquisition function for new projects in order
to both favour exploitation and exploration. In this project was only tested the UCB
acquisition function. However, another study compared different acquisition functions
for Bayesian optimization, where the UCB showed to be desirable for the early stages of
process optimization [9].
The complexity of the optimization problem increased, as the number of decision vari-
ables and chromatography steps increased. Figure 4.7 summarizes the required number
of iterations in order to have the fifth quantile within 99% of the maximum value of the
objective function for the four scenarios.
Figure 4.7: Barplot of the iterations required in the four scenarios in order to have the fifth
quantile within 99% of the maximum value of the objective function. The number in parenthesis
refers to the number of decision variables in the specific scenario. The result included for scenario
A is for the case with two defined initial conditions.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
38
Figure 4.7 shows, how the complexity of the multi-column optimization problem(scenario
B-D) increases as the number of decision variables increase. It is also shown in Fig. 4.7,
that the required number of iterations for scenario A and D, which both have two decision
variables, are different. This shows, that the complexity of the optimization problem
not only depends on the number of decision variables, but also on how big impact the
decision variables have on the objective function. Scenario A had the gradient start and
gradient end as decision variables, while scenario D had the pooling criterion for each
chromatography step as decision variables.
Changing the gradient slightly will most
likely not impact the value of the objective function much. However, a small change in
the applied purity coefficient as pooling criterion can cause a large change in the value of
the objective function due to the yield and purity changing significantly. Furthermore,
the complexity of the optimization problem is also impacted by the defined boundaries
of the decision variables.
Providing narrow boundaries gives an easier optimization
problem. For scenario A, the negative gradients were not included in the optimization,
whereas scenario D considered the entire range of purity coefficient for pooling criterion
even though a pooling criterion with a purity coefficient of 0.01 would not be optimal.
This also explains, why the increase in decision variables from four in scenario C to six
in scenario B did not give an exponential increase in complexity as expected. Scenario
C had four pooling criteria as decision variables, whereas scenario B had the gradient
start and gradient end for each chromatography step as well as a pooling criterion for
each step. Since the comparison of scenario A and D showed how optimization with the
gradient is less complex than with pooling criteria, the complexity in scenario B increases
less than if it would have considered more pooling criteria as decision variables.
Scenario B with two columns and six decision variables showed to be too complex for
finding a good solution within a reasonable number of iterations with respect to how
many experiments are feasible to perform in the laboratory. If a purification process with
two orthogonal columns is to be developed using optimization algorithms, it can be done
by defining the gradient, and thereby reducing the number of decision variables to four or
two by only varying the pooling criteria. The number of iterations required for scenario
C and D is still very high compared to how many laboratory experiments are desirable
to perform. It could therefore be considered to include extra initial conditions to give
the optimization more knowledge at the beginning.
Increasing the number of initial
conditions is expected to decrease the required iterations for finding a good solution,
since the Bayesian optimization has a better understanding of the optimization problem
and its surface.
The optimization process of scenario C and D showed, how two different maximum
values of the objective function were found within the 280 iterations despite having
the same initial conditions. The difference between the two scenarios was in the pooling
criterion. For scenario C was allowed a different pooling criterion for starting and ending
the pooling in the two steps, whereas for scenario D was only specified one pooling
criterion for each chromatography step. This shows, that having a start and end pooling
criterion to optimize for, rather than letting the start and end of the pooling being
==PAGE:48==
39
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
defined by one purity coefficient results in a higher maximum value of the objective
function being obtained. This is due to pre-impurities and post-impurities overlapping
differently with the target peptide. The disadvantage by having two pooling criteria
for each chromatography step to optimize for is the much higher number of iterations
required to find the optimum.
Limitations:
For the optimization process in-silico only a hundred repetitions were performed for
each scenario. The large difference in required iterations in order to have the median
and the fifth quantile of the hundred repetitions within 99% of the maximum value of
the objective function showed, how the random state impacts the optimization. Some
uncertainty therefore lies in the determined number of iterations required for the different
scenarios due to only performing a hundred repetitions.
The optimization process in-silico did not consider any noise. When applying the op-
timization algorithm on a laboratory setup, a higher number of iterations might be re-
quired due to the noise. However, a study using Bayesian optimization with the Gaussian
Process as surrogate model like in this project, showed how the Bayesian optimization is
suitable when working with measurements with uncertainty. The Bayesian optimization
performed very well on noisy data [23].
The objective function used for the optimization aims to maximize the yield while con-
sidering the purity of the target peptide. The yield was penalized, if a purity lower than
the purity requirement was obtained. Despite the penalty on yield for a lower purity, it
could still be possible that the maximum value of the objective function is obtained for
a case with lower purity than the purity requirement. By squaring the purity offset in
the Z2 pool, the objective function will be penalized even more for conditions giving a
Z2 purity lower than the purity requirement.
Edge cases:
Some ’edge cases’ were observed as the Bayesian optimization for the four different
scenarios were set up. For a case with a much lower concentration of impurities (peptide
1 and peptide 3) compared to the target peptide, the Bayesian optimization found the
maximum value of the objective function in scenario A by pushing the peptides off the
column right as elution started. The solution was thereby barely purified. This was
due to the target peptide and peptide 1 being very similar in extinction coefficients and
thereby resulting in a purity coefficient higher than 0.9 used as pooling criterion. Due
to the low concentration of impurities considered, the purity requirement of the target
peptide was still satisfied when the peptides were pushed right off the column by using a
gradient with a high percentage of elution solvent at the start. This could be overcome
by either increasing the concentration of the impurities or by increasing the scale factor
to 65 in order to better differ between the peptides. However increasing the scale factor
too much could lead to a too easy optimization problem since all impurities would then
have a purity coefficient around zero.
A similar ’edge case’ for the optimization of multi-column chromatography was observed,
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
40
when low concentrations of impurities were applied. The first column removed most of
peptide 3, but the second column did not do any further purification. Due to the low
amounts of peptide 1 and the very similar signals from peptide 1 and the target peptide,
all the peptides were pushed off the second column right as the gradient started. This
still resulted in meeting the purity requirement. For this edge case, it was not sufficient to
increase the scale factor in order to create a multi-column optimization problem where
both columns were needed in the purification. Since it was desirable to have a case
where both columns were used in order to study the complexity, a criterion for the yield
calculation had to be implemented for this case with low impurity concentration. The
yield calculation would not consider anything eluting until 2 CVs after the load finished.
The scale factor could be reduced to 10, since the yield criterion ensured none of the
chromatography steps pushed everything off at the beginning of the gradient.
4.2
Discussion of the automated multi-step chromatographic
process
The multi-step chromatographic process in the laboratory was automated as described
in section 3.4 such that the collected pool from Z1 was automatically loaded onto the
column equilibrated with Z2 conditions. The automation of the setup reduced the re-
quired human interaction. This allowed for performing the multi-step chromatographic
experiment overnight due to the elimination of the manual interaction for defining the
load parameter of the Z2 step.
The air sensor in the automated setup was necessary in order to control the Z2 application
to ensure the complete Z1 pool was applied on the column while avoiding application
of air. However, a small loss of the Z1 pool was inevitable when using the air sensor to
control the Z2 application. As soon as air was detected in the air sensor, the Unicorn
method switched from Z2 application through the A14 inlet to washing with Z2-S1 from
the A13 inlet to avoid getting air into the system. The tube between the air sensor and
the A1-valve still contained Z1 pool, which was not loaded onto the column. The length
of this tube was minimized in order to reduce the loss of Z1 pool during the load for the
Z2 step. The percentage loss of Z1 pool was also reduced by using a larger column. To
ensure the flask with the Z1 pool was fully emptied, a centrifuge tube was applied due
to the centrifuge tube having a tip at the bottom. The A14 tube was placed with its
inlet at the very end of the tip.
The collected Z1 pool was in-line diluted with a ratio of 45% Z2-S1 before being loaded
onto the column for the Z2 step. The dilution reduced the organic solvent concentration
and pH in order to ensure product X would bind to the column. The centrifuge tube
collecting the Z1 pool had 5 mL of Z2-S1 at the beginning of the experiment in order to
not trigger the air sensor before the Z2 load phase. The volume of Z2-S1 in the centrifuge
tube was always 5 mL despite the volume of the Z1 pool varying with different pooling
criteria. This led to small variations in the dilution factor of the Z1 pool. However, a
==PAGE:50==
41
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
slight change in dilution factor did not impact the yield and purity, since it was ensured,
that the Z1 pool was diluted enough to bind product X to the column. A higher dilution
factor would only increase the volume and thereby time required for the Z2 application.
The sample application in the Z1 step was always loaded to 12 g product X per liter
resin. The column load in the second step varied due to variation in the amount of
product X collected in the Z1 pool with the different pooling criteria. If all of product X
was collected during elution from Z1, the column load for Z2 would also be 12 g product
X per liter resin. As the amount of collected product X in the Z1 step decreased, the
column load for the Z2 step would also decrease. A benefit by lower column load was
increased separation, while the drawback was not full utilization of the column capacity.
For the synthetic peptide production, the upstream steps are very expensive due to
the high volumes of amino acids required to construct the peptide [43]. A high yield
in the purification process is therefore crucial and more important than fully utilizing
the column capacity. It was therefore acceptable to have the column load for the Z2
step in the multi-column chromatographic process vary as the purification process was
optimized with respect to yield and purity.
The power output from the arduino micro computer to the ¨Akta was observed by watch-
functions in the Unicorn method in order to determine when to start and end the pooling
of the eluate in the Z1 and Z2 step. Due to limitations on the arduino micro computer,
fluctuations in the power output of approximately 18 mV were observed. If these fluctu-
ations in the power output occurred right around the value applied as pooling criterion,
it would lead to constantly starting and stopping the pooling of the eluate. This con-
stant change between eluate going to waste or being pooled during the elution of the
target peptide would cause uncertainty in the yield and purity of the Z2 pool for that
specific combination of Z1 and Z2 pooling criteria. To avoid these fluctuations in the
power output, it would be necessary to look into improving the arduino micro computer
in order to have a more stable signal. Another possibility would be to incorporate the
purity coefficient calculation in the Unicorn method, which has been done for the pilot
facilities at Novo Nordisk A/S. This eliminates the need of the arduino micro computer
or any other external signal. The incorporation of the purity coefficient calculation in
the Unicorn method has not shown fluctuations in the purity coefficient when applied
in the pilot facilities.
This automation of the multi-step chromatographic process does not provide the possi-
bility of closed-loop optimization, which in other studies has been applied for optimal
gradient determination in analytical chromatography [7]. The Z2 pool must be analysed
by analytical chromatography in order to determine the pooling criteria for Z1 and Z2
to be applied in the next experiment. Since it requires human interaction to transfer the
Z2 pool into a vial and placing the vial in the sample manager on the UPLC, it is not
a closed-loop optimization. This means, it is not yet possible to just press start on the
¨Akta and have several experiments performed in a row without human interaction.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
42
4.3
Application of Bayesian optimization for the develop-
ment of a multi-step chromatographic process for pu-
rification of the synthetic peptide product X
Bayesian optimization was applied for designing a multi-step chromatographic process
for purification of the synthetic peptide product X. Based on the evaluation of the
optimization process in-silico of the different scenarios, it was chosen to optimize the
purification of product X by only having a single pooling criterion for each chromatog-
raphy step as decision variables. A gradient from 45-100% S2 solvent over 12 CV was
defined for both chromatography steps.
Three initial conditions were applied in the
Bayesian optimization in order to give the algorithm more knowledge and reduce the
required number of iterations in the laboratory. The applied tuning parameter for the
UCB acquisition function in Bayesian optimization was the default κ, which was chosen
based on the evaluation of the optimization process in-silico in section 4.1.5.
The multi-step chromatographic process for purification of the synthetic peptide product
X was optimized to maximize the overall yield with a given purity requirement of 90% in
the Z2 pool. Table A.1 in Appendix A shows the Z1 and Z2 pooling criteria applied for
each iteration as well as yield and purity of product X in the Z2 pool. Figure 4.8 shows
the maximum value of the objective function with number of iterations. Only twelve
iterations were performed beside the three initial conditions due to technical issues(see
chapter 5) with the equipment in the beginning.
Figure 4.8: Plot of the maximum value of the objective function (Eq. 3.4) after each iteration.
The value of the objective function for each of the three initial conditions is shown with a black
dot.
Figure 4.8 shows, how the optimization had a flat rate of improvement for the twelve
iterations performed and thereby did not find a set of decision variables giving a higher
value of the objective function than obtained by the third initial condition. This obser-
==PAGE:52==
43
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
vation is not surprising when comparing to the optimization process in-silico of scenario
D with two pooling criteria as decision variables. Fig. 4.5 shows, that the fifth quantile
and the minimum value of the objective function had a flat rate of improvement for 21
and 28 iterations respectively. Adding an extra initial condition should give the Bayesian
optimization algorithm more knowledge such that it finds better decision variables faster.
The length of the flat rate of improvement might have been reduced with three initial
conditions in the laboratory compared to two initial conditions in the in-silico optimiza-
tion. However, it was not enough to perform twelve iterations in order to obtain a higher
value of the objective function.
The purity and overall yield of product X after the Z2 step is shown in Fig. 4.9 for all
initial conditions and iterations with the points coloured according to the value of the
objective function. The darker red a point is, the higher is the value of the objective
function.
Fig.
4.9 shows, how none of the initial conditions or iterations with the
suggested Z1 and Z2 pooling criteria achieved a purity of 90% in the Z2 pool. The
third initial condition, which resulted in the highest value of the objective function, had
a purity of 87.20% and a yield of 91.74%. The Bayesian optimization suggested two
sets of Z1 and Z2 pooling criteria, which gave a higher purity of 87.68% and 88.50%.
However, as the purity increased the yield decreased, which led to a lower value of the
objective function than for the third initial condition.
Figure 4.9: Obtained yield and purity of product X in the Z2 pool for the different initial
conditions and iterations performed. The darker red the points are, the higher is the value of
the objective function.
The iterations with a slightly higher yield than for the third initial condition did not
obtain a higher value of the objective function due to the purity decreasing. A decrease
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
44
in purity led to a larger offset compared to the purity requirement. Since the offset was
squared in the objective function, a slight decrease in purity would lower the objective
function by a lot as seen by the brighter red colors for decreasing purity.
The two points in Fig. 4.9 with a yield of 45.44% and 56.74% were for iterations with a
Z2 pooling criterion right where the fluctuations in the power output from the arduino
micro computer occurred. As discussed in section 4.2 this caused some uncertainty in
the actual yield and purity for that specific set of Z1 and Z2 pooling criterion applied.
The pooling criterion applied for the Z1 and Z2 step were varied in each iteration accord-
ing to what the acquisition function found best to try next. The different combinations
of Z1 and Z2 pooling criterion are plotted in Fig. 4.10 with the points coloured according
to the value of the objective function. Dark green points correspond to a high value of
the objective function. The points have increasing brightness of the green as the value
of the objective function decreases and turns into bright red for a further decrease in the
value of objective function. The lowest values of the objective function are shown with
dark red points.
Figure 4.10: Plot of the value of the objective function in relation to the Z1 and Z2 pooling
criterion applied. The value of the objective function is shown with a high value being dark
green and a low value being dark red. The two areas with high values of the objective function
are marked with blue dotted lines. The three initial conditions are indicated by their respective
number.
It appears from Fig. 4.10, that the three highest values of the objective function occurred
for a strict Z1 pooling criterion with a purity coefficient above 0.90 and a more loose
==PAGE:54==
45
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Z2 pooling criterion. By having a strict Z1 pooling criterion, the post-impurities, which
showed similar absorption signal as product X in the second step, were not collected
in the Z1 pool. The two medium green points with Z2 being approximately 0.90 and
Z1 being 0.65 and 0.75 respectively showed, how a second local optimum existed in the
surface of the optimization problem. Furthermore, the dark red points represent the two
iterations where no product X was collected in the Z2 pool. These iterations resulted in
a very low value of the objective function being -8100. The surface of the optimization
problem therefore experienced some steep drops, referred to as functional cliffs, occurring
close to the two local optima.
The functional cliff occurring for a pooling criterion around 0.99 for Z1 and 0.81 for Z2
had a slightly higher Z1 and Z2 pooling criterion than the nearby local optimum. As
the functional cliff occurred, the Bayesian optimization algorithm suggested the next
point for evaluation, which had a slightly lower Z1 and Z2 pooling criterion than the
nearby local optimum. The same was observed for the other functional cliff occurring at
0.62 for Z1 pooling criterion and 1.0 for Z2 pooling criterion. Since none of these points
around the local optimum resulted in higher values of the objective function, the next
suggested point for the thirteenth iteration was chosen to explore new areas with a Z1
pooling criterion of 0.92 and Z2 pooling criterion of 0.56. The Bayesian optimization
thereby performs as expected with the default κ value applied by balancing exploration
and exploitation.
4.3.1
Discussion of the application of Bayesian optimization for devel-
opment of a multi-step chromatographic process for purification
of product X
The optimal solution found within the twelve iterations, was the third initial condition.
The Z2 pool from the third initial condition had a purity of 87.20% and did thereby not
achieve the target purity of 90%. This suggests, that more iterations are required to
examine if an optimum with a purity of 90% can be obtained. The experiment in the
laboratory for each iteration took approximately twelve hours followed by approximately
two hours of analytical chromatography and integration of the results from the analytical
chromatography. The long time required for each iteration allowed for only performing
one iteration every day. To have more iterations done in a shorter time, it could be
considered to have the Bayesian optimization algorithm suggest two sets of decision
variables at a time rather than just one as done here. Thereby two experiments can
be done simultaneously. However, the second set of decision variables is suggested with
less knowledge in the Bayesian optimization compared to suggesting one set of decision
variables at a time and registering the outcome of this to improve the knowledge of the
Bayesian optimization. Thereby a few more iterations might be required compared to
when only suggesting one decision variable at a time, but on the other hand twice as
many experiments are performed in the same amount of time.
A reason for the flat rate of improvement observed in Fig.
4.8 could be due to the
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
46
third initial condition already giving a very high value of the objective function. With
the chosen objective function, it was difficult to find combinations of Z1 and Z2 giving
a higher value, since a higher purity resulted in a lower yield than for the third initial
condition and thereby a lower value of the objective function. Another reason for the flat
rate of improvement could be due to the boundaries applied for the decision variables.
Having a broad range can make the optimization slower due to more areas to search in.
The boundary range for the decision variables could be narrowed down at the beginning
of the optimization for the purity coefficient applied as pooling criteria. If an optimum
on the boundary range is found, the range for the decision variables should then be
expanded during the Bayesian optimization.
This Bayesian optimization only applied three initial conditions. It could be argued
to include more initial conditions in order to faster guide the algorithm to areas with
improvement in the value of the objective function. Other studies on gradient optimiza-
tion for liquid chromatography have typically used between four to six initial conditions
[7, 8]. The three applied initial conditions in the Bayesian optimization was chosen such
that one initial condition had similar Z1 and Z2 pooling criterion, while another had
more strict Z1 than Z2 pooling criterion, and the last had a more strict Z2 than Z1
pooling criterion. All the three applied initial conditions had pooling criteria somewhere
in the middle of the applied range in the optimization. Treier et al. demonstrated how
a broader distribution of initial conditions within the applied boundaries led to a higher
number of optima found and thereby assured identification of optima on the broader
of the parameter space [41]. The study by Treier et al. was done using the genetic
algorithm, but it is believed that the Bayesian optimization would also benefit from a
broader distribution of the initial conditions. To give the Bayesian optimization broader
knowledge of the applied range for the Z1 and Z2 pooling criterion, it could be considered
to choose five initial points being spread as shown in Fig. 4.11. Other options for
Figure 4.11: Alternative starting point suggestions when applying the Bayesian optimization
for development of a multi-step chromatographic process for synthetic peptide purification.
==PAGE:56==
47
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
choosing the initial conditions could be to use random sampling, Latin hypercube sam-
pling or a Sobol sampling approach.
These sampling methods have been applied to
determine initial conditions for the Bayesian optimization in other successful optimiza-
tions of the gradient in chromatography [7, 8, 41].
A purity of 90% required for the Z2 pool might be achieved as more iterations are
performed in the optimization. However, it could also be the case, that with the defined
gradient in each chromatography step, the applied column load for Z1 and the determined
target wavelengths for the purity coefficient calculation, that it is not possible to achieve
90% purity. The benefit of defining a gradient for each chromatography step and thereby
only varying the pooling criteria in the optimization is the reduced complexity compared
to scenario B with six decision variables. The drawback is, that the chosen gradient might
not be the most optimal gradient to use and thereby limit the possible maximum yield
and purity, which can be achieved.
The target wavelengths in the purity coefficient calculation were determined as described
in section 3.3.1 by loading the crude peptide to 5g product X per liter resin. When
determining how much should be loaded, it is a trade-off between improved separation
at low load versus increased impact by background noise in the UV measurement at low
load. Fig. 4.12a shows the analytical chromatogram for the crude peptide used. The
tall peak around 26 minutes is product X. The other peaks are different impurities being
present, which are desirable to separate from product X for the determination of the
target wavelengths.
(a) Analytical chromatogram for the crude pep-
tide.
(b) Analytical chromatogram for the Z2 pool in
iteration 6.
Figure 4.12:
Analytical chromatograms for the crude peptide(Fig.
a) and the Z2 pool in
iteration 6(Fig. b). The first peaks around 1-2 minutes are due to the injection of the sample.
The last wide peak at approximately 55 minutes is caused by a change in gradient settings. The
peak for product X is observed at approximately 26 minutes.
When the crude peptide was eluted from the column with Z1 and Z2 conditions respec-
tively to determine the target wavelengths, the purest fraction obtained had a purity
of 89.71% for the Z1 step and 89.89% for the Z2 step. The target wavelengths applied
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
48
(Table B.1 in Appendix B) for determining the purity coefficient throughout the elution
phase, was thereby not determined for completely pure product X. This could be the
reason why an impurity being very similar to product X was present in the Z2 pool for
all experiments. Fig. 4.12b shows the analytical chromatogram for iteration 6, where the
Z2 pool had the highest achieved purity of 88.50 %. A few small peaks for impurities
are observed, but the most noticeable is the pre-impurity at 25.5 minutes being very
similar to product X and thereby eluting almost at the same time. This impurity was
present in the fraction used to determine the target wavelengths, which causes the purity
coefficient calculation during elution in the preparative run to have a higher value, when
this impurity is also present in the eluate compared to when pure product X is eluting.
This limits how pure product X can be achieved when basing the pooling criteria on the
purity coefficient.
To improve the target wavelengths applied for the purity coefficient calculation in Z1
and Z2, the target wavelengths should be re-determined once a more pure Z2 pool such
as in iteration 6 has been obtained. By using this much more pure sample compared to
the crude peptide in the method for target wavelength determination, the fractions are
expected to be more pure. The target wavelengths can thereby be determined based on a
fraction with a higher purity of product X, which will improve the ability to differentiate
between product X and impurities when pooling based on the purity coefficient. Once
new target wavelengths have been determined, the previous performed initial conditions
and iterations should be re-evaluated with respect to what purity coefficient was used
as Z1 and Z2 pooling criterion.
Due to the high cost upstream for synthetic peptide production, it was chosen to prior-
itize the maximization of the yield in the objective function. The yield was penalized
with the squared value of the purity offset in case the Z2 pool had a purity lower than
the required 90%. Fig. 4.9 showed, how a purity of 88.5% had a lower value of the
objective function than for a purity of 87.20% due to the yield being reduced. This
suggests that with the applied objective function, the optimum will not be for a 90%
pure Z2 pool but rather for a slightly less pure Z2 pool with higher yield of product X.
It should therefore be examined, if other objective functions are better for maximizing
the yield in the synthetic peptide purification while having the Z2 pool meet the target
purity. Suggestions could be to include the presence of single impurities in the objective
function.
The application of Bayesian optimization for the design of a multi-step chromatographic
process has advantages compared to the current strategy for purification development by
optimizing one step at a time. Interactions between the two chromatographic steps are
taken into account, when applying the Bayesian optimization for development of multi-
step chromatographic processes. This shows to give higher yield for the same purity,
than expected with the original process where each column was optimized individually
[3].
==PAGE:58==
49
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Uncertainty in the experiments
Different sources of uncertainty were present, when performing the development of the
multi-step chromatographic process for purification of product X by applying Bayesian
optimization. Below are listed uncertainties in the laboratory, which impact the experi-
ment performed in each iteration.
• Pump accuracy: Limited pump accuracy might lead to steeper or more shallow
gradients than expected.
• Solvent composition: Inconsistency in the solvent composition can lead to gradient
fluctuations.
• UV measurements: The purity coefficient calculation is based on the absorbance
measured at three different wavelength. Uncertainty in the UV measurements will
impact the purity coefficient determined and thereby the pooling of the eluate.
• Concentration determination of the crude peptide: Uncertainty in the concentra-
tion determination impacts the column load in the Z1 step as well as the calculated
yield in the Z2 pool.
• Integration in Empower to determine the purity and concentration of product
X in the Z2 pool: The uncertainty in the integration impacts the purity and
yield determined for the Z2 pool and thereby the value of the objective function.
Uncertainty in the value of the objective function will impact which point is chosen
as the next to evaluate in the Bayesian optimization.
• The power output from the arduino micro computer: Limitations in the power
output impacted when the pooling started and ended and thereby the purity of
product X in the Z2 pool as well as the overall yield.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Technical issues
The method created in Unicorn for the automated setup of the two chromatography steps
was tested on a sample containing product X. Periodic fluctuations in the conductivity
and the UV measurements at all three wavelengths were observed during the elution
from both Z1 and Z2. As Fig. 5.1 shows, the periodic fluctuations occurred when the
gradient was between approximately 55% to 80% S2 solvent. Furthermore the in-line
dilution of the collected pool from Z1 gave fluctuations in the conductivity.
Figure 5.1: Chromatogram showing all phases during the test of the method for the automated
setup. The orange graph shows the conductivity while the green graph shows the percentage of
S2 solvent. The absorbance at the three wavelengths 290 nm, 254 nm and 240 nm are shown in
blue, purple and red respectively.
The root-cause of the fluctuations were examined. The following factors were evaluated:
50
==PAGE:60==
51
CHAPTER 5. TECHNICAL ISSUES
• Improper solvent preparation: The fluctuations were not observed when using only
S1 solvent (equilibration solvent) or S2 solvent (elution solvent). It was therefore
concluded, that improper mixing of the solvents during preparation could not be
the reason for the fluctuations in the conductivity.
• Air in UV-sensor: If air-bobbles were stuck in the UV sensor it would lead to
fluctuations in the measurements. However it would be expected, that air-bobbles
in the UV-sensor would lead to fluctuations reaching minimum absorbance. Nev-
ertheless, a high flow of 25 mL/min was sent through the UV-sensor to remove
any potential air-bobbles. The fluctuations still occurred after this, and air in the
UV-sensor was not the issue.
• Air in column: A slow downflow and afterwards an upflow was done on the column
to remove any potential air in the column. Since the fluctuations still occurred after
this, it was concluded, that it was not a column issue.
• Material sticking in the pumps: A pump-wash of pump A and B was done to
remove any potential material sticking to either of the pumps. If material was
partially blocking one of the pumps, the flow rate would decrease. A decrease in
flow rate for only one of the solvents being mixed during a gradient would cause
fluctuations in the conductivity.
After the pump-wash and a flush with hot water, different scenarios with a gradient
were tested. For all scenarios, a flow of 2 mL/min was used, since this was the
flow used during elution in the method for the automated setup. The first two
gradients shown in Fig. 5.2 were done over 8 minutes and bypassing the column.
The following three gradients were also done over 8 minutes but passing through the
column with no sample loaded. Neither of these gradients resulted in fluctuations
in the conductivity. A sample containing product X and impurities was loaded
onto the column, and a gradient elution going from 45%-100% S2 over 1 hour was
done. Fluctuations in conductivity and UV measurements were observed. This led
to the thought, that it was a material specific issue.
Figure 5.2: Chromatogram from the troubleshoot run. No fluctuations in conductivity(purple
graph) were observed during the first five gradients where no sample was applied. Fluctuations
were seen in the conductivity during the last gradient eluting sample from the column.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5. TECHNICAL ISSUES
52
The material used for this project was thought to cause the A-pump to be partially
blocked after the sample for Z1 was loaded through the A2 inlet.
It was therefore
decided to try loading the sample differently to avoid it passing through the A-pump.
Initially, it was considered to load the sample through the sample valve. However, this
valve had a membrane pump and could not provide the required pressure. Therefore
was chosen to use a super-loop to inject the sample for Z1 through the injection point.
When using the super-loop to load through, a chromatogram for Z1 looking just like in
Fig. 5.1 with fluctuations during the elution was obtained. It was thereby concluded,
that the fluctuations during elution was not due to the sample material partially blocking
the A-pump. A different material, called product Y, which was known to not give any
issues with fluctuations in the conductivity during elution was tested on the specific ¨Akta
equipment used for this project. As Fig. 5.3 shows, fluctuations in the conductivity and
UV measurement occurred during elution when product Y had been loaded onto the
column.
Figure 5.3: Chromatogram for elution of product Y. The fluctuations in the conductivity(orange
graph) and absorbance(blue, purple and red graph) were still observed.
The fluctuations occurring during elution of both product X and product Y led to the
conclusion, that it was not a sample specific issue, but an equipment issue. Even though
different gradients had already been tested as shown in Fig. 5.2, the thought of the
pumps being the issue was not fully disproved. The gradients tested when no sample
was loaded were only over 8 minutes, which could have been too short time to see an
issue with either of the pumps. In the method for the automated setup was applied a
gradient going from 45% to 100% S2 solvent over 12 CVs with a flow of 6 CV/h. These
gradient conditions were therefore tested on a column with no material loaded, which
==PAGE:62==
53
CHAPTER 5. TECHNICAL ISSUES
gave the chromatogram shown in Fig. 5.4.
Figure 5.4: Chromatogram showing elution going from 45-100% S2 in 12 CVs with a flow of 6
CV/h (approx 2 ml/min). No sample was loaded onto the column before doing the gradient.
When no material was loaded onto the column and the gradient was done over 12 CVs
(2 hours) rather than over 8 minutes, the fluctuations in the conductivity was observed.
Studying how the frequency in the fluctuations increased towards higher percentage of
S2 while the amplitude of the fluctuations decreased led to the conclusion, that it must
be the B-pump causing the fluctuations. If it was the A-pump, the fluctuations were
expected to have high frequency at the beginning of the gradient and lower frequency
towards 50% S2 solvent. As it was easier to change the entire pump-module in the ¨Akta,
this was done rather than just changing the B-pump. After the entire pump module was
changed, no fluctuations in the conductivity or UV measurements were observed.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The purification process of synthetic peptides usually contains two orthogonal reversed-
phase chromatography steps. These steps are typically being optimized one at a time
thereby not taking interactions into account.
To make synthetic peptide production
scalable by reducing cost, this project investigated a new optimization strategy with
multi-column optimization by applying the Bayesian optimization algorithm to maximize
process yield at a given product purity. For the Bayesian optimization algorithm, the
Gaussian process was used as surrogate model and UCB as the acquisition function.
The optimization process in-silico of four different scenarios was evaluated to obtain
knowledge about the optimal tuning parameter for the acquisition function, complexity
and required initial conditions. This suggested, the default κ value to be an appropriate
tuning parameter for new projects with unknown surface of the optimization problem.
The complexity of the optimization problem increased with the number of decision vari-
ables. The complexity also depended on the specific decision variables being considered
and their boundaries defined. It showed to be easier to optimize for two gradient param-
eters rather than two pooling criteria. The multi-column optimization with six decision
variables being four gradient parameters and two pooling criteria was very complex and
required 134 iterations to obtain a good solution. Decreasing the multi-column opti-
mization problem to only have two pooling criteria as decision variables decreased the
required iterations to 37. To further reduce the required iterations, the number of initial
conditions had to be increased compared to the two applied in the optimization in-silico.
Based on the complexity of the different scenarios studied in-silico, it was chosen to
optimize the multi-step chromatographic process for purification of product X by having
a single pooling criterion for each step as decision variables. The gradient for elution was
based on process knowledge defined to be 45-100% elution solvent over 12 CV in both
chromatographic steps. The default κ value was used in the acquisition function, and the
number of initial conditions was increased to three. The laboratory setup applied in the
optimization was automated, such that the Z1 pool was automatically loaded onto the
54
==PAGE:64==
55
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION
column equilibrated with Z2 conditions by using an air sensor to control the loading. This
reduced the required human interaction and allowed for performing the multi-column
experiment overnight. A limitation was, that fluctuations up to 18 mV occurred for the
power output. This caused uncertainty in the yield and purity determined, when the
pooling criterion for Z1 or Z2 had a purity coefficient value right where the fluctuations
occurred.
The Bayesian optimization algorithm applied for development of the multi-step chro-
matographic process for purification of product X found two local optima as the design
space was explored by balancing exploration and exploitation. The optimal solution was
given by the third initial condition with a strict Z1 pooling criterion(0.92) and a more
loose Z2 pooling criterion(0.77). A flat rate of improvement was observed for the twelve
iterations, since no decision variables resulted in a higher value of the objective function
than obtained by the third initial condition. Applying Bayesian optimization for the
development of multi-step chromatographic processes indicates advantages compared
to the original process, where each chromatography step was optimized individually.
For the same purity, higher yields were obtained using multi-column optimization with
Bayesian optimization compared to the expected yield for the original process.
The optimal solution had a purity of 87.20% in the Z2 pool, which is slightly lower than
the target being 90% pure product X. This is not due to how the Bayesian optimization
explored the design space, since a significantly better optimal solution is not expected
as more iterations are performed. The maximum purity being possible to achieve was
impacted by the limitations in the target wavelength determination. Furthermore the
applied column load and gradient might not provide the possibility of purifying the crude
peptide to 90% pure product X in the Z2 pool.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
Future work
The knowledge obtained during the work performed for this thesis has opened up for
several points to consider for future development of multi-step chromatographic pro-
cesses by applying Bayesian optimization. Below are listed proposed future work for the
optimization process in-silico and for the development of an optimal multi-step chro-
matographic process in the laboratory.
Optimization process in-silico:
• Noise should be added to the UV measurements to study the impact of noisy data
on the required iterations in the Bayesian optimization.
• The complexity of other relevant objectives functions should be evaluated. The
solvent consumption could be taken into account to have a more sustainable per-
spective on the purification process.
• The complexity of multi-column optimization with six decision variables (Scenario
B) should be re-evaluated with more initial conditions having a broader distribution
within the applied ranges for the decision variables. The boundaries for the Z1
and Z2 pooling criterion should be limited to not include low values such as 0.01.
• Acquisition functions such as the Expected Improvement or the Probability of Im-
provement should be evaluated and compared to the UCB in terms of required
iterations to find an optimal solution for multi-column optimization problems.
Development of a multi-step chromatographic process for synthetic peptide
purification by applying Bayesian optimization:
To further enhance the application of Bayesian optimization for development of multi-
step chromatographic processes for synthetic peptide purification, the following should
be examined:
56
==PAGE:66==
57
CHAPTER 7. FUTURE WORK
• Increasing the number of initial points and use a broad distribution for the initial
points to examine how it impacts the required iterations for optimization.
• Perform the Bayesian optimization by having two sets of decision variables sug-
gested at a time to reduce the time required for experiments.
• Re-determine the target wavelengths applied in the purity coefficient calculation
for a more pure sample. Afterwards the applied Z1 and Z2 pooling criterion in
previous iterations should be updated.
• The purity coefficient calculation should be incorporated in the Unicorn method in
order to avoid fluctuations in the power output from the arduino micro computer.
The fluctuations cause uncertainty in the yield and purity, which propagate in the
value of the objective function used in the Bayesian optimization.
• Other objective functions should be evaluated e.g including single impurity levels
in the objective function.
• The possibility of closed-loop optimization for preparative chromatography should
be examined.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] Bayesian-optimization
1.4.3
(released
April
25th
2023).
https://pypi.org/project/bayesian-optimization/#history.
Accessed
August
17, 2023.
[2] Novo Nordisk A/S internal document - Design Doc MW.
[3] Novo Nordisk A/S internal document - Master formula.
[4] Novo Nordisk A/S internal document - Synthetic peptide production.
[5] Archetti, F., and Candelieri, A. Bayesian Optimization and Data Science.
Springer, 2019. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-24494-1.
[6] Arkell, K., Breil, M. P., Frederiksen, S. S., and Nilsson, B. Mechanis-
tic modeling of reversed-phase chromatography of insulins with potassium chloride
and ethanol as mobile-phase modulators. ACS omega 2, 1 (2017), 136–146. DOI:
10.1021/acsomega.6b00248.
[7] Boelrijk, J., Ensing, B., Forr´e, P., and Pirok, B. W. Closed-loop automatic
gradient design for liquid chromatography using bayesian optimization. Analytica
Chimica Acta 1242 (2023), 340789. DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2022-rbq49.
[8] Boelrijk, J., Pirok, B., Ensing, B., and Forr´e, P. Bayesian optimization
of comprehensive two-dimensional liquid chromatography separations. Journal of
Chromatography A 1659 (2021), 462628. DOI: 10.1016/j.chroma.2021.462628.
[9] Braconi, E., and Godineau, E. Bayesian optimization as a sustainable strategy
for early-stage process development? a case study of cu-catalyzed c–n coupling of
sterically hindered pyrazines. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 11, 28
(2023), 10545–10554. DOI: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.3c02455.
[10] Brochu, E., Cora, V. M., and de Freitas, N. A tutorial on bayesian opti-
mization of expensive cost functions, with application to active user modeling and
hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv (2010).
58
==PAGE:68==
59
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] Brooks, C. A., and Cramer, S. M. Steric mass-action ion exchange: Displace-
ment profiles and induced salt gradients. AIChE Journal 38, 12 (1992), 1969–1978.
DOI: 10.1002/aic.690381212.
[12] Chehouri, A., Younes, R., Ilinca, A., and Perron, J. Review of performance
optimization techniques applied to wind turbines. Applied Energy 142 (2015), 361–
388. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.12.043.
[13] Ditz, R. Chapter 1: Introduction in Preparative Chromatography. John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd (2005), pp. 1–8.
[14] Doerfler, R. W. Dead reckoning: calculating without instruments. Taylor Trade
Publishing, 1993.
[15] Ersson, B., Ryden, L., and Janson, J.-C. Chapter 1: Introduction to Pro-
tein Purification in Protein Purification: Principles, High Resolution Methods, and
Applications. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd (1998), pp. 4–22.
[16] Ersson, B., Ryden, L., and Janson, J.-C. Chapter 2: Introduction to Chro-
matography in Protein Purification: Principles, High Resolution Methods, and Ap-
plications. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd (1998), pp. 23–50.
[17] Gilar, M., Olivova, P., Daly, A. E., and Gebler, J. C. Two-dimensional
separation of peptides using RP-RP-HPLC system with different pH in first and
second separation dimensions. Journal of separation science 28, 14 (2005), 1694–
1703. DOI: 10.1002/jssc.200500116.
[18] Hackenberger, C. P., Dawson, P. E., Chen, Y.-X., and Hojo, H. Modern
peptide and protein chemistry: Reaching new heights.
The Journal of Organic
Chemistry 85, 3 (2020), 1328–1330. DOI: 10.1021/acs.joc.0c00104.
[19] Hansen, S. K., Jamali, B., and Hubbuch, J. Selective high throughput protein
quantification based on UV absorption spectra. Biotechnology and bioengineering
110, 2 (2013), 448–460. DOI: 10.1002/bit.24712.
[20] Khan, M. A. B., Hashim, M. J., King, J. K., Govender, R. D., Mustafa,
H., and Al Kaabi, J. Epidemiology of type 2 diabetes–global burden of disease
and forecasted trends. Journal of epidemiology and global health 10, 1 (2020), 107.
DOI: 10.2991/JEGH.K.191028.001.
[21] Kushner, H. J. A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary
multipeak curve in the presence of noise (1964).
Journal of Basic Engineering
(1964). DOI: 10.1115/1.3653121.
[22] Langmuir, I. The adsorption of gases on plane surfaces of glass, mica and plat-
inum. Journal of the American Chemical society 40, 9 (1918), 1361–1403. DOI:
10.1021/ja02242a004.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
60
[23] Maier, M., Rupenyan, A., Akbari, M., Zwicker, R., and Wegener,
K.
Turning:
Autonomous
process set-up through
bayesian
optimization
and gaussian process models.
Procedia CIRP 88
(2020), 306–311.
DOI:
10.1016/j.procir.2020.05.053.
[24] Nikam, P. S., Shirsat, L. N., and Hasan, M. Density and viscosity studies
of binary mixtures of acetonitrile with methanol, ethanol, propan-1-ol, propan-2-
ol, butan-1-ol, 2-methylpropan-1-ol, and 2-methylpropan-2-ol at (298.15, 303.15,
308.15, and 313.15) K.
Journal of Chemical & Engineering Data 43, 5 (1998),
732–737. DOI: 10.1021/je980028e.
[25] Pellett, J., Lukulay, P., Mao, Y., Bowen, W., Reed, R., Ma, M.,
Munger, R., Dolan, J., Wrisley, L., Medwid, K., et al. Orthogonal sep-
arations for reversed-phase liquid chromatography. Journal of Chromatography A
1101, 1-2 (2006), 122–135. DOI: 10.1016/j.chroma.2005.09.080.
[26] Piccin, J. S., Dooto, G. L., and Pinto, L. Adsorption isotherms and ther-
modynamical data of FD&C RED N◦40 binding by chitosan. Brazilian Journal of
Chemical Engineering 28, 2 (2011), 295–304. DOI: 10.1021/je200388s.
[27] Ritchie,
H.,
and
Roser,
M.
Obesity.
Our World in Data
(2017).
https://ourworldindata.org/obesity. Accessed August 22, 2023.
[28] Ritchie, H., Spooner, F., and Roser, M. Causes of death. Our World in Data
(2018). https://ourworldindata.org/causes-of-death. Accessed August 22, 2023.
[29] Saleh, T. A. Isotherm models of adsorption processes on adsorbents and nanoad-
sorbents. Surface Science of Adsorbents and Nanoadsorbents 34 (2022), 99–126.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-849876-7.00009-9.
[30] Schulte, M., and Epping, A. Chapter 2: Fundamentals and General Terminol-
ogy in Preparative Chromatography. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd (2005), pp. 9–49.
[31] Cytiva.
Adsorption
isotherm
models
for
chromatography.
https://www.cytivalifesciences.com/en/us/solutions/bioprocessing/knowledge-
center. Accessed August 18, 2023.
[32] GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB.
Affinity Chromatography: Vol.2: Tagged
Proteins. 2000, pp. 9–13.
[33] GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB.
Hydrophobic Interaction and Reversed-
Phase Chromatography: Principles and Methods. 2000, pp. 7–23 & 89–128.
[34] GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB. Size Eclusion Chromatography: Principles
and Methods. 2000, pp. 15–35.
[35] GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB. Ion Exchange Chromatography: Principles
and Methods. 2004, pp. 11–26.
==PAGE:70==
61
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36] IBM. What is gradient descent?
https://www.ibm.com/topics/gradient-descent..
Accessed October 4, 2023.
[37] International Diabetes Federation.
About diabetes - facts & figures.
https://idf.org/about-diabetes/facts-figures/.. Accessed August 18, 2023.
[38] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Guidance for industry
- A Framework for Innovative Pharmaceutical Development, Manufacturing and
Quality Assurance (2004).
[39] U.S. Food & Drug Administration.
The
drug
development
process.
https://www.fda.gov/patients/learn-about-drug-and-device-approvals/drug-
development-process.. Accessed September 21, 2023.
[40] World Obesity Atlas 2022.
One billion people blobally eastimated to be
living with obesity by 2030.
https://www.worldobesity.org/resources/resource-
library/world-obesity-atlas-2022. Accessed August 18, 2023.
[41] Treier, K., Lester, P., and Hubbuch, J. Application of genetic algorithms and
response surface analysis for the optimization of batch chromatographic systems.
Biochemical engineering journal 63 (2012), 66–75. DOI: 10.1016/j.bej.2012.02.003.
[42] Tuma, D. J., Hoffman, T., and Sorrell, M. F. The chemistry of acetaldehyde-
protein adducts.
Alcohol and alcoholism (Oxford, Oxfordshire). Supplement 1
(1991), 271–276.
[43] Wang, L., Wang, N., Zhang, W., Cheng, X., Yan, Z., Shao, G., Wang,
X., Wang, R., and Fu, C.
Therapeutic peptides: Current applications and
future directions. Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy 7, 1 (2022), 48. DOI:
10.1038/s41392-022-00904-4.
[44] Wewers, W., Dingenen, J., Schulte, M., and Kinkel, J. Chapter 4: Se-
lection of Chromatographic Systems in Preparative Chromatography. John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd (2005), pp. 107–172.
[45] Yamamoto, S., Nakanishi, K., and Matsuno, R.
Chapter 2: Theoretical
Aspects in Ion-exchange chromatography of proteins. CRC press, 1988.
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Experimental data for multi-step
chromatographic process
Table A.1: The purity coefficient applied as pooling criterion for Z1(coef1) and Z2(coef2) for the three
initial conditions and each of the iterations in the Bayesian optimization. The overall yield and purity
were determined based on the Z2 pool in order to determine the value of the objective function(Eq.
(3.4)), when a purity requirement of 90% was applied.
Iteration
coef1
coef2
Yield [%]
Purity [%]
Obj. function
Initial
condition
0.85
0.85
92.36
80.99
11.18
Initial
condition
0.75
0.88
91.18
83.53
49.32
Initial
condition
0.92
0.77
91.74
87.20
83.90
1
0.75152
0.82503
95.12
79.55
-14.09
2
0.76070
0.83149
94.61
79.72
-11.07
3
0.95273
0.74115
86.85
87.68
81.47
4
0.98599
0.81062
0.0
0.0
-8100.0
5
0.88547
0.70061
94.00
71.56
-246.03
6
0.97597
0.64865
77.55
88.50
75.30
7
0.82644
0.76571
92.83
68.95
-350.27
8
0.82171
0.95921
45.44
83.49
3.06
9
0.72057
0.98708
56.74
83.66
16.55
10
0.64976
0.90936
87.79
82.99
38.65
11
0.61770
1.00
0.0
0.0
-8100.0
12
0.64054
0.82496
95.54
75.97
-101.3
62
==PAGE:72==
Appendix B
Parameters for the purity
coefficient calculation
Table B.1: Applied values for the parameters in the purity coefficient calculation for each of
the two chromatography steps.
Value
Weight
Wavelength 290 nm (Z1)
1370.1
1
Wavelength 254 nm (Z1)
806.6
2
Wavelength 240 nm (Z1)
1230.6
1
Scale factor (Z1)
8
-
Min UV at 290 nm (Z1)
50
-
Wavelength 290 nm (Z2)
1267.4
1
Wavelength 254 nm (Z2)
753.3
1
Wavelength 240 nm (Z2)
1151.5
1
Scale factor (Z2)
15
-
Min UV at 290 nm (Z2)
200
-
63
