==PAGE:1==
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool
steel manufactured by Spray Forming and
Laser Powder Bed Fusion
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
==PAGE:2==
Preface
————–
This project started with a scope way bigger than what was possible. It was envisioned that everything
that was done in this project should be repeated for 3D printing and 3D printing parameters should be
found. This is reflected in the title. Sadly the scope had to be reduced to be anywhere near realistic.
This project has reinvigorated the passion for materials science. This has happened by hitting many
barriers that had to be broken through by learning new techniques and interesting experiences. A lot
has been learned and had to be relearned during this project. All making for a better experience.
A thank you to all my supervisors for their guidance and their rapid acceptance of the project, Marcel
Somers, Morten Stendahl, Thomas Dahmen and Venkata Karthik who’s mixing in the project was
entirely unnecessary due to the scope change. None the less thank you. A great thank you to Matteo
Villa who helped me a great deal with understanding the heat treatment process and have been
always as available as any of my supervisors.
A great thank you to all of the laboratory technicians Flemming Grumsen, Niklas Brinckman, Steffen
Munk and Xiaosong Zhang who are always patient and helpful even when a question more than
necessary is asked.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As the world population continues to grow so does the living standard and the demand for high end
products. In order to keep up with this increase in demand, new innovative ways to produce goods
must be made. For this purpose Asgaard Metals is producing a closed loop recycling system to
produce an alloy with less waste and less energy consumption.
In this thesis a spray formed H13 alloy produced by Asgaard Metals characterised to compare with the
competitor product Orvar Supreme by Uddeholm. Here the main strengthening mechanic is found to
be from M23C6, M7C3, MC, M6C carbide formation and its the wear resistance high but slightly lower
than Orvar supreme. This pattern repeats when it comes to how easy it is to get a clean polished
finish which is important for the look of a plastic product produced in a steel mould. The corrosion
potential is comparable to its competitor and the correct way to heat treat the spray formed sample is
discovered.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Production and composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
4
2.1
Equipment and setups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Hardness indentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Heat treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Wear testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Surface profile analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Polishability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Corrosion testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Light Optical Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.9
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.10 SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Results and Discussion
14
3.1
Heat treatment and Hardness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Corrosion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Polishability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Wear testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.7
LOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Conclusion
38
Bibliography
39
Appendix A Composistion
42
Appendix B CCT Diagrams and written description
43
Appendix C CCT curve from vacuum furnace
45
Appendix D OCP and corrosion potential
45
Appendix E
XRD ORS
49
Appendix F
Tribometry
50
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
As the world population grows and the demands of the less fortunate increases to accommodate
the rising living standards of the many, the need for cleaner and more efficient ways of production
increases [1][2]. And this reality is reflected on the governmental level. More and more governments
increase focus on the sustainability of all of industry. This is perhaps best seen in the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG) set by the united nations [3]. While many SDGs are humanitarian in
nature some are directly related to industry, and are therefore mostly relevant to the engineering craft.
These goals would be 9, 12 and 13 that ask to foster innovation, ensure sustainable consumption and
production patterns and to take act against climate change [3].
It is for these known reasons that companies already seek the new and innovative ways to be ahead
of the curve. Or more specifically to be ahead of the regulation from governmental institutions. This
is not only desirable to not be taken aback but it is also good for public relations, as it is yet another
selling point to be future proof and green.
These are some of the reasons that there is a high interest in spray formed H13 steel for tool man­
ufacturing by Asgaard Metals. As H13 is already used for injection molds, casting dies, or forging
dies due to its good wear resistance and hardenability [4], the market is set and a new and improved
way of production is always desirable. Therefore Asgaard Metals have therefore chosen to make
their own their spray formed H13 tool steel, where they provide a great opportunity to increase the
recycling of different dies and molds and the energy efficiency during production. This is done with
their closed loop recycling plan where they provide the tool steel to the customer and the customer
can then later return the product to Asgaard metals who can now recycle it. This closed loop recycling
plan is important as it provides Asgaard Metals with a complete understanding and composition of the
steel and is necessary for the future of production [5]. As this makes recycling much more efficient as
a standard process can be used to reuse the steel and grant is new life with close to 100% recycling.
This will then resemble the well known recycling of cans that we all have grown accustomed to. An
illustration of the closed loop that Asgaard Metals would have can be seen in figure 1
Figure 1: Illustration the closed loop lifecycle of H13 steel for Asgaard Metals. Illustration courtesy of
Moritz [6].
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
1
==PAGE:6==
The importance of the super high recycling rate is first fully understood when looking at and comparing
it to conventional recycling. Here a target metal is selected and scrap is chosen based on its contents
of this metal. Then it is taken through a long and hard cleaning process with the singular goal of
recovering the target material, which creates a lot of waste both in form of slag but also some just
cant be used and will enter landfills. An example of this i conventional recycling of the widely used
metal Nickel. Here only about 52% of the initial product being recovered for reuse and the rest entering
landfill or lost in the refining process [7]. This is not very sustainable and is the most common way of
current metals recycling.
All the recycling and sustainability is great but if the end product is not able to replace the prior product
then it is all for naught. This is how this thesis came about. It is desired for Asgaard Metals to be
able to make their product as good as the conventional competitors to replace them. And therefore
characterization and comparison was chosen to be done with their competitor Uddeholm who pro­
duces Orvar Supreme for injection moulds for LEGO. LEGO has high standards for their product as
small defects in the moulds will leave imprints in the plastic product that can be seen with the naked
eye. This thesis aims to show the strength and weaknesses of the H13 tool steel compared to Orvar
Supreme.
1.1
Production and composition
In order to examine the characteristics of an alloy its composition and production method and the
desired end result must first be know. At the beginning of this project it was specified that the hardness
of the delivered tool block should be 50 HRC as this is what the toolmakers ask for. This hardness is
then converted to Vickers, as it is what was used during the project, and is equivalent to 505 HV [8][9].
The theoretical composition of both Orvar supreme, conventional H13 steel and Billet 18 (B18) can be
seen in table 1. It is assumed that the composition of B18 is very similar to that of Billet 19 (B19) that
is examined throughout this thesis. And it can be seen that they are all very similar in composition.
Chemical composition of powders
Element
C
Si
Mn
Cr
Mo
V
Al
O
N
Fe
B18 (B19) [wt%]
0.38
1.1
0.43
5.4
1.5
0.89
<0.02
<0.035
0.07
bal
Orvar Supreme [wt%]
0.39
1.0
0.4
5.2
1.4
0.9
­
­
­
bal
H13 Theoretical [wt%]
0.4
1.00
0.40
5.25
1.35
1.00
­
­
­
bal
Table 1: The table shows the chemical composition of the different alloys examined. It is assumed
that the composition of B18 is about equal to B19. The complete overview of the compositions can
be seen in appendix A [6][10][11].
The method for production that Asgaard Metals use for their production is spray forming also known
as spray deposition. This method can be described as a billet build by continuous 3D printing. It,
in the case of Asgaard Metals, involves a rotating platform that serves as build plate on which a thin
layer of molten alloy is sprayed onto. This layer continuously cools and solidifies making a tall billet as
seen in figure 2. The process is done in an inert atmosphere to prevent oxidation during the process.
In the case of Asgaard Metals this is a Nitrogen atmosphere. This Nitrogen also becomes a part of
the alloy during the processing as it mixes with the alloy during the forming process.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
2
==PAGE:7==
Figure 2: Example of a billet created by Asgaard metals by spray forming[12].
This inert gas that is used for the atmosphere is also used in the nozzle as to propel the molten alloy
in the direction of the build plate. The nozzle is called an atomizer and in the case of Asgaard Metals
they utilise a setup of 2 free fall atomizer at the same time that move during the forming to help control
the process. Depending on the droplet size from the atomizer they accelerate towards the build plate
and reach speeds of up to 100 m/s generating additional energy on impact and partially or completely
remelting the surface of the billet. This creates the even molten layer that solidifies to form the plate.
This process creates a refined globular microstructure with a high chemical homogeneousity and low
segregation compared to conventional casting methods. With finely disperse Carbides, Nitrides or
sulfides, depending on alloy, across the billet [13]. While a lot more can be say about the spray
forming production method it would not be necessary for the understanding of the rest of this thesis.
After the billet has been built it is left to slowly cool. This billet then has some porosities and is sent
out of house for hot forging into a beam and afterwards soft annealing. This completes the process
and results in densification for pore removal and a finer dispersion of the carbides.
The production of Orvar supreme by Uddeholm utilises Electro Slag Remelting (ESR). This is done
by first mixing scrap metal with the requirred alloying element to reach the desire composition. This
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
3
==PAGE:8==
is done in a electric arc furnace. Then as the alloy is molten it is cleaned of undesired element such
as Oxygen or Sulpur by slag removal and vacuum degassing. When the alloy has reached its desire
composition the uphill solidification begins further refining the product. An illustration of this can be
seen in figure 3. This results in an ingot without macrosegragation and a high degree of cleanliness.
The ingot produces is then at a later stage taken for hot working [10].
Figure 3: Illustration of the Electro Slag Remelting (ESR) process. Illustration courtesy of Moritz [6].
2
Methodology
For this project 2 chunks of H13 steel was received from Asgaard Metals billet 19 (B19). One is a
plate from the as sprayed billet and the other from the hot forged and then soft annealed beam. It
is from these chunks that all samples have been taken and used for this project. These chunks are
taken near the center of the billet and the beam and should therefore not have any defects related to
the ends from production. The hot forged beam is also assumed homogeneous with its grain structure
after the soft annealing process. The hot forging will generally show as an elongation of the grains in
the forging direction. To further avoid dealing with this the cuts have been made as to have the same
direction.
The prior student (Moritz) working with this project had shown that they were rather homogeneous
across. It was concluded that the hot forged beams had some issues with banding and some grain
size variance [6].
2.1
Equipment and setups
2.1.1
Preparation of samples
Cutting of the larger chunks received from Asgaard metals was done by the workshop. From here
smaller and more manageable samples could be cut. This was done with a Struers Accutom­50. The
cuts were in general made with a single cutting angle. But after heat treatment the the samples were
cut with a rotation mode enabled to avoid residual stresses sitting clamping down on the disc.
The biggest issue with cutting was the to get the samples to be plane parallel, when only a single cut
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
4
==PAGE:9==
had to be made, due to the manual fastening. This could have an impact some of the testing.
Below in table 2 the cutting parameters can be found. After each cut the samples were washed in a
sonic ethanol bath.
Feed Speed
Force
Water
Rotational speed
0.050 mm/s
Medium
On
4000Rpm
Table 2: The cutting parameters used for the Accutom­50
The samples were cut as to have the build direction of the billet and hot forged beam always be the
face observed. And to for good measure the edges of the billet and beam have not been included
for testing. How the cuts were made on the beam can be seen in figure 4 and from the sprayed billet
in figure 5. Each sample cut was then named to to keep track of its origin. As the Orvar supreme
had no initially know forging direction it was just ensured that the samples were kept with the same
orientation.
Figure 4: Illustration of where the cuts were performed by the workshop on the beam.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
5
==PAGE:10==
Figure 5: Illustration of where the cuts were performed by the workshop on the beam.
Embedding was done when needed with the use of Struers ProntoPress­20. Here the ”general
use” setting for the lab was applied. It used a pressure of 20 kN and a temperature of 180◦C for a
duration of 6 minutes. On some occasions the pressure was observed to spike to 35 kN. This was
not observed to not have a major impact on the embedding result but should be noted. The substrate
used were a combination of the general use Levofast and Multifast plastics. And immediately after
each embedding its name was etched into its back.
Grinding and Polishing of all samples was done with a Struers Rotopol­22 when embedded and by
hand when not. The samples were ground with 320, 500, 1000 and 4000 SiC papers. The machine
setting were 5N, 150 Rpm for 5 min on each step with water on the plate. And afterwards the samples
polished on a MOL plate with 3µm diamonds and then a NAP plate with 1µm diamonds, both using
ethanol based lubricant and the same machine settings. After polishing the sample would be sonically
washed in ethanol and observed. If the fisnish was not satisfactory it would receive another polishing
step accordingly.
Etching was done to reveal the micro structure. Here 3 etching agents were used. Nital, Kalling and
Murakami. The main and most common etching agent used is Nital which is used to make the grain
boundaries visible for study. More specifically 5% Nital in ethanol was used and applied with a cotton
swab and light swabbing.
Kallings agent was used as a last resort to try and bring forth the grain boundaries of the heat treated
sample. As Nital gave less desirable results. This agent is usually used for more corrosion resistant
materials such as stainless steels and as such resulted in over etching a bit. It is composed of 2%
HCl in ethanol.
Murakami is a alkaline etch that is binds to carbides on the sample surface and hereby makes them
visible. Murakami is composed of 10g of NaOH and 10g KFe­cyanide in 100 ml of DI water. This
is then brought to 55◦C on a hot plate and kept at stable at that temperature while the embedded
sample is lowered into the alkaline mixture. It is kept there for 3min and 30s and carefully washed
with ethanol afterwards. If mishandled during the wash the product that sticks to the surface can be
damaged. Due to its alkaline nature it will damage the embedding material.
An overview of the different etchings used on the samples can be seen in table 3. Here it should be
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
6
==PAGE:11==
noted that the use of extra Nital and Kallings was due to what was observed in the LOM. The initial
plan was to just use Nital for 15s like the other samples.
Sample material
Eching agent
Time
B19 As sprayed
Nital
15s
B19 Hot forged
Nital
15s
B19 Heat treated
Nital
Kallings
15s+15s+15s
+10s
Orvar Supreme
Nital
15s
All materials
Murakami
3.5 min
Table 3: The different echings given to the samples.
2.2
Hardness indentation
To measure the hardness of the samples a Struers DuraScan with Vickers geometry was used. The
Vickers geometry requires a distance of a least 2.5 diagonals from edges and other indents, as well
as depth of the test sample of at least 1/7 the diameter, as described in ISO 6507­1:2018 [14]. The
load was set to 5kg. The reason behind this choice is comparability as it is what was previously used
in the thesis before [6]. A higher load could have been desirable as it would have provided a better
average over more grains. With that in mind it is still a good choice.
An initial test indent was made on one of the soft samples. The indent was 220µm on the diagonal.
And from there the pattern as seen in figure 6 was decided upon. This pattern has a distance of
at least 0.7mm from center to center on the softer materials. The 12 points give a good reference
with and enough data point for relatively good uncertainty. The pattern was always placed a good
distance away from the edge after heat treatment for extra caution of edge defects. During heat
treatment testing only 4 indents in a similar but smaller pattern were used to get a rough estimate of
the hardness.
Figure 6: Illustration how the indents were placed on the samples.
Normally the the indentation should be done on a fully polished surface. But due to the time reasons
the test indentations for during the heat treatment was done on a hand polished 1000 grit finish. A
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
7
==PAGE:12==
concern that this would be cause for inconsistency in the results. This was therefore tested and
showed that the 1000 grit finish had little to no effect on the final measurement, as seen in figure 7
and 8.
Figure 7: An indent with the 1000 grit finish on a
heat treated sample.
Figure 8: An indent with the full polish finish on
a the same sample as in figure 7.
2.3
Heat treatment
The heat treatment was done in a Nabertherm muffle furnace and later on in a custom adapted
Nabertherm tube furnace. The custom adapted furnace was made a vacuum furnace. It was used as
a way to lower the cooling rate as the geometry of the samples proved it hard to lower the cooling rate
in between furnace cooling and the air cooling used. For consistency it was ensured that it was the
same furnace and the same center placement inside the furnace, when not changing furnace. The
Furnaces can be seen in figure 9 and 10.
Figure 9: The muffle furnace used for heat treat
treatment.
Figure 10: The custom adapted vacuum tube fur­
nace used for heat treatment.
The first heat treatment was based on recommendations made by H13 steel companies Interlloy [15]
and Hudson Tool Steel [11]. From their CCT curves and written recommendations a austenizing tem­
perature of 982◦C was chosen. From here varying tempering procedures were made to try and
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
8
==PAGE:13==
control the hardness, which was measured after each heat treatment to see if the desired hardness
had been reached. Most of these samples were air cooled. A few quenched and finally one heat
treatment was made in the custom vacuum tube furnace.
2.4
Wear testing
To test the wear resistance the CSM Tribometer was used. It is a pin on disk tribometer used for
friction and wear studies. It functions by rotating the sample with the pin with a ball on top, with a
predetermined load, hereby creating a circular wear pattern and recording the friction coefficient. It is
important that the sample is planar parallel for the best results as any slope will create a difference in
the force applied to the area and is undesired.
The testing for the samples was done with a new 6mm alumina (Al2O3) ball at the tip. The settings
were a 3 mm radius 60 RPM as a speed setting with a load of 10 N for 10,000 laps. To ensure a
comparable surface texture all of the samples were hand polished to 1000 grit. These parameters
were chosen based on the size of the sample and their hardness to make an imprint that could be
measured afterwards. The radius was set to 3 mm as to make sure the edge and the deformation of
the wear mark would not affect the result. An example of this setup can be seen in figure 11 and 12
Figure 11: The CSM tribometer setup after sam­
ple testing has finished.
Figure 12: An example of the wear track after a
tribometer testing.
To find the volume of the wear track the formula for the area of a spherical cap [16] can be used
multiplied with the circumference of a circle.
V = 2 · π · rb · h · 2 · π · rt
(1)
Where V is the volume, rb is the radius of the alumina ball, h is the depth of the wear track and rt is
the radius of the wear track. This way the wear can be calculated in volume loss. Which can then be
used in the wear coefficient calculation that has been used earlier for another project with Asgaard
Metals [17].
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
9
==PAGE:14==
K = HV · V
P · L
(2)
Where K is the wear coefficient, HV is the hardness in vickers, V is the volume loss in mm3, P is the
applied load during testing and L is the distance travelled in mm.
2.5
Surface profile analysis
After wear testing the sample was taken to the Alicona Infinite Focus. This is a light optical coordinate
measuring machine and was used to examine the surface of the samples. This way the wear track
on a sample could be extracted. The 50x objective lens of the machine was used as to grant a lower
uncertainty. This was then put into the metrology program Mountains[18] to extract the depth of the
wear track.
To ensure that the wear track was not randomly deeper in the part of the wear track measured 2
opposite parts of the wear track was acquired and analysed, as seen in figure 13. In the software
Mountains many different ways of measuring the depth are possible. Here before anything leveling
of the sample was done to ensure the plane used as a zero was actually the surface with no tilt.
Then the different techniques attempted were histogram, volume of hole, slices, ”wear or deposit”
and use of multiple line profiles. In the end, due to different disadvantages, the best suitable method
was decided to be 5 different line profiles per acquisition, then then taking the average of these, then
average over both the areas observed to calculate the average depth of the wear track of the sample.
Figure 13: Illustration where in the wear track depth was acquired on the sample.
2.6
Polishability
To compare how easy the materials are to polish a sample of Orvar Supreme and the heat treated
sample from Asgaard Metals were each cut to equal size and hot embedded. The dimensions of the
surface analysed were 96mm x 197mm and 95mm x 195m respectively. These samples were then
purposely under polished on the Rotopol for comparison of the leftover polishing tracks. The samples
were polished at the same time on the same plate to remove uncertainty in regards to different pol­
ishing parameters. The steps were as seen in table 4 with the rotational speed of 150 RPM and force
of 5 N. For the sandpaper water was used and for the diamonds the ethanol was used. The samples
were sonically washed in ethanol in between each polishing step.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
10
==PAGE:15==
Grit
Time
320
3 min
500
6 min
1000
2 min
4000
2 min
3µm Diamonds
2 min
1µm Diamonds
2 min
Table 4: The polishing grit and times for polishability testing.
The embedded samples were then analysed on the coordinate measuring machine Olympus LEXT
[19]. It was first attempted to analyse on the Alicona with little success due to reflections. The LEXT
gets around this issue by using a laser for its measurements instead.
When measuring the samples the middle was first found. This was simple due to a slight pencil shape
from the Rotopol. Then the area profile was acquired in sections of 258µm x 258µm and auto stitched
together in the LEXT software with a 30% overlap for a total area acquired of 1163µm x 1163µm.
This acquisition was then analysed in the Mountains software. The parameters were chosen from
ISO standard ISO 25178­2:2021 [20]. From this standard an array of parameters were chosen with
the help of a technician that might describe how good the polishing was, without this investigation
becoming a thesis in itself. The chosen parameters and their description can be seen in table 5. A
form removal was performed before any parameter measuring. The parameter Smq was not able to
give any results and was therefore not used.
Parameter
Description
Spkx
Maximum peak height
Svkx
Maximum peak depth
Sak1
Area of the hills
Sak2
Area of the dales
Smq
Dale root mean square deviation
Table 5: The parameters chosen from table F.1 ISO 25178­2:2021 [20].
2.7
Corrosion testing
The corrosion test were done using 0.1 wt% NaCl water on a 1cm2 area. This was done using a glass
cylinder with a sealing ring and some masking tape with a 1cm2 hole in it made by Gamry instruments.
Around the sample plates were stacked and taped together to ensure a tight hold with an even surface
transition to the sample to prevent leaks, as seen in figure 14. This was all then clamped down, as
seen in figure 15, and electrical contact was ensure with a multimeter. The sample itself had copper
tape attached to it for good electrical contact. In the top of the salt water with a calomel reference
electrode and a work cathode was placed. These electrical contacts were all connected to a GillAC
by ACM instruments that was used to record the Own Current Potential (OCP) and the corrosion
potential. An initial electrode had something wrong with the pores at the end and was then changed
and the tests were redone. During the rest of the testing the reference electrode was kept the same
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
11
==PAGE:16==
and not used by others to minimize uncertainty.
Figure 14: Corrosion sample setup without the
glass cylinder.
Figure 15: Corrosion setup clamped down dur­
ing a corrosion test.
This entire setup can be reduced to a simple electrochemical cell. Here the Tafel approximation is
then applied to find the overpotential Ecorr and the corrosion current Icorr. The formula from Faraday’s
first law can then be used for analysis of the corrosion rate [16][21].
d
t =
I · M
z · F · ρ · A
(3)
Where d
t is corrosion rate per s, I is the corrosion current, M is molar weight, z is the number of
electrons, ρ is density and A is the area. The time can be multiplied up to eg. mm/year for a better
understanding. And a simple overview of the OCP and overpotential can tell which is less corrosion
resistant [21].
2.8
Light Optical Microscopy
To study the microstructure the Zeiss AXIO LOM was used. This includes different methods such as
bright field, dark field, DIC, filters and polarized light. And in addition to this the Keyence G VHX­6000
was used to get an overview of corrosion products.
2.9
XRD
For the X­Ray Diffraction the D8 Discover by Bruker was used with a copper source. Here first a
quick pass was made with to asses the 2θ range needed to get a all the peaks. Afterwards the actual
passes were made to get the desired results. Afterwards it was analysed in EVA and their peaks were
compared to the PDFs of the database hereby determining the most likely phases.
As the some of the phases were not entirely clear due to the large interference of the Fe matrix another
method was applied. This is a home brew technique by the XRD Technician to extract the precipitates
from the matrix of a Fe based metal. It uses 5% HCl in ethanol with electrodes to dissolve the matrix
of the sample and as such leave the precipitates to be collected on the bottom on a glass plate. And
illustration of the setup and the actual can be seen in figure 16 and 17. The grid is made of Tantalum
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
12
==PAGE:17==
and connected to negative on the power source. It is important that the tweezers holding the sample
are conductive and not submerged in the acid as it would the also start to dissolve. The tweezers is
connected to the positive side on the power source. The power is set to be 25V and 1A but should
be lowered if the liquid becomes warm to prevent it from evaporating. Every hour from here on the
approximately 500 ml of acid should be exchanged for fresh acid to keep the reaction speed high.
This exchange is to be done very carefully with a long pipette to not wash off the precipitates that
have settled on the sample glass plate. When a satisfactory amount of precipitates have gathered
on the glass plate the sample can be removed as well as the acid. The now empty glass container
is carefully filled with ethanol to ”rinse” the precipitates for acid. Afterwards the ethanol is carefully
removed and the glass plate is left to dry for the night. The glass plate with precipitates stuck to it can
now be put in the XRD for analysis without the noise of the matrix.
Figure 16: Illustration of the precipitate extrac­
tion setup with the sample half submerged in
acid.
Figure 17: The setup for the precipitation extrac­
tion.
After all the XRD results are analysed the samples are then analysed in an Scanning Electron Micro­
scope (SEM) with Energy Dispersive x­ray Spectroscopy (EDS) for verification.
2.10
SEM
To better understand the microstructure and phases of the samples a Supra 35 SEM by Zeiss was
used with a Gemini 1 optical column EDS module. For better conductivity the samples were carbon
coated with the Quorum Q150R.
The EDS maps were made by selecting an area of interest and then a completing low magnification
EDS map to be scrapped and straight afterwards a high magnification EDS map was made for use.
This way drift was reduced.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
13
==PAGE:18==
3
Results and Discussion
In this chapter a lot of results are presented. Du to the nature of the project these results will be
discussed as it goes
3.1
Heat treatment and Hardness
As it was the goal of is to compare the Billet 19 (B19) to Orvar Supreme (ORS) it is important that they
are on equal footing. This meant that the hardness of the received materials had to be measured and
then a heat treatment that would make the samples the desired hardness, of 505 HV, for tool makers
could be attempted. The hardness of the samples was measured according to the description in
section 2.2 and the results can be seen in table 6.
Sample
HV5 average
B19­AR
192
B19­HF
188
ORS
509
Table 6: The hardness measured by 12 point average HV5.
With little to no experience doing heat treatments the first thing to do is consult other sources from the
competition. Here the CCT curve of a H13 tool steel producer [15], the written description by another
H13 producer [11] and Uddeholms CCT [10]. These CCT curves and the written description can be
seen in appendix B. The goal of how to achieve the hardness was to try and imitate industry. Although
the samples used in these heat treatments are a lot smaller (4cm x 2cm x 2cm) and therefore would
have a much higher cooling rate than in the industrial setting. This small geometry did however also
mean that the issue of thermal stress during cooling was not really an issue. As such the the first
suggestion and the actual first try can be seen in table 7 and 8.
Target temperature [◦C]
time
speed
650
2hr5min
300c/hr
hold
30min
0
850
40min
300c/hr
hold
30min
0
982
26min
300c/hr
hold
30min
0
Quench in air
Table 7: The first idea plan for the heat treatment.
Target temperature [◦C]
time /speed
982
300c/Hhr
982
Hold 1 hr
Quench in air
Table 8: The actual first heat treatment.
The reason that the initial plan was scrapped was due to the prior mention geometry. With larger
chunks of steel there needs to be holding time near the phase transition temperatures as to prevent
damage to the product. But in this case it would only increase furnace time and risk decarburization.
However what was kept was the low austenizing temperature. This temperature should provide the
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
14
==PAGE:19==
maximum toughness and lower hardness [11]. The placement in the furnace can be seen on figure
18. Here disregard the 2 extra samples on the right and left as they were as sprayed and ORS placed
in there in case of extra time to do more work, there was not extra time for this.
Figure 18: Picture of the placement of the samples at 982◦C austenizing temperature with a hold for
1 hr.
At this point the block was cut into smaller pieces to test its hardness. The sample was a bit too
hard at 570 HV5. So it was decided to try and temper it at 250◦C holding for 2 hours hoping that
it would lower its hardness. The new hardness was measured to be 545 HV5. And from this point
the tempering manual from Hudson steel [11] was tried. This lead to a new sample from the heat
treatment described in table 8 put in the furnace for tempering at 520◦C with a 2 hour hold. This
resulted instead in secondary hardening and a hardness of 592 HV5. This is not uncommon for H13
steel and has been shown to happen for multiple different sources and can be used to control the
hardness if done correctly [22][23][24]. The decision to continue was however made. From here on
out a lot of tries to soften the steel but none yielded the desired result. The hardness measure can
be seen in the boxplot in figure 19. Here it is cumulative tempering at the temperature given by the
label and also a 2 hour holding. After the may tries it was decided that this was too much and that this
would ruin the alloy with grain growth and precipitation growth and would therefore not be comparable
to what would actually be sold even if the hardness was correct.
As such a new approach was taken with inspiration from Villa and Somers [25]. This involved lowering
the austenizing temperature and then quenching it even further to try and follow the graph seen in
figure 20. Here it can be seen that to hit approximately 500 HV5 the amount of C dissolved in the
austenite phase should be about 0.25­0.3 wt%.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
15
==PAGE:20==
Figure 19: Boxplot of a single sample first austenized at 982◦C and then repeatedly tempered each
name being the holding temperature with a 2 hr hold.
To determine at what temperature this amount of C would be present in the austenite phase a ther­
mocalc simulation was made as seen in figure 21. This was cross checked with the thermocalc
simulations made by Moritz to ensure that it would be within the austenitic phase equilibrium [6] as
seen in figure 22.
Figure 20: Graph from Villa and Somers [25] showing the potential gain in hardness from quenching
dependant on the carbon content dissolved in the austenite.
With this assumption of dissolved C in the austenite phase the heat treatment seen in table 9 was
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
16
==PAGE:21==
applied to one of the smaller samples that had already been heat treated as seen in table 8. This
gave a hardness of 197 or unchanged from the initial hardness of the hot forged sample. As such the
sample was then given the same heat treatment but now quenched in water, as seen in table 10. The
hardness of this sample was 178 HV5.
Figure 21:
Quick thermocalc simula­
tion for the C dissolved in the Austenite
phase.
Figure 22: Thermocalc simulation for the phase equilib­
rium of the h13 steel [6].
Target temperature [C]
time /speed
942
300c/Hhr
942
Hold 1 hr
Quench in air
Table 9: The first heat treatment plan to try to quench
into to uttilize the dissolved C in the austenitic phase.
Target temperature [◦C]
time /speed
942
300c/Hhr
942
Hold 1 hr
Quench in water
Table 10: The second heat treatment plan
to try to quench into to utilize the dissolved
C in the austenitic phase.
From here on the decision was made to go for a controlled cooling of a fresh sample in a custom made
vacuum furnace. With the aim of hitting the 500 HV5 on the first try without secondary hardening. It
should be noted that this sample had already been cut in half for other testing purposes originally
intended, as seen in figure 24. The sample was tempered afterwards at 250◦C for 1 hr to relieve any
residual stress. This gave an average of 491 HV5 but with a considerable spread compared to ORS,
as seen in the boxplot of figure 23. This was still chosen as the sample to go forwards with testing.
If more time was spent on heat treatment to perfection it should have been tempered until it hit the
perfect hardness maybe reducing the spread.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
17
==PAGE:22==
Target temperature [◦C]
time /speed
982
300c/Hhr
982
Hold 1 hr
Controlled cooling
Table 11: The heat treatment plan used in the vacuum furnace.
Figure 23: Boxplot of the hardness for Orvar Supreme
(ORS) and the spray formed controlled cooling sample
from the vacuum furnace.
Figure 24: The samples as they are
placed in the vacuum furnace.
A great advantage of the vacuum furnace is that it keeps track of how the sample cools allowing for
a CCT curve to be made as seen in figure 25. The CCT curve does however only have a data point
every minute which means that the start of cooling is a bit off. To compensate for this the first point
has been extrapolated assuming the mean cooling rate from the next point. The actual CCT curve
generated can be found in appendix C. When compared to the CCT curves of ORS and Interlloy as
seen in appendix B the hardness matches pretty nicely due to the lowered austenizing temperature.
From here on the new final sample will be called 982CC for ease as it is its sample naming. A total
of 15 different heat treatments were done.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
18
==PAGE:23==
Figure 25: Compensated CCT curve from the final heat treatment in the vacuum furnace.
3.2
Corrosion
For the purpose of not just drowning the reader in graphs from the OCP and the corrosion potential the
single most average measurement per sample has been selected and is shown in figure 26 and 28, all
the other measurement graphs can be found in appendix D. When viewing the graphs it is important
to remember that this was measured using the a Calomel reference electrode and therefore all the
graphs are 0.244 V lower than if meassure with the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).
Figure 26: The average OCP run of each of the 4 samples.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 27: The average corrosion potential run of each of the 4 samples.
From figure 26 it can be seen that there definitely is a difference between the having heat treated the
steel and not. Heat treating the steel increases the OCP and it could be said that ORS and 982CC
are largely the same or at least that testing variation could be the cause of most of the difference seen
on the graph. It can also be said that the hot forging does nothing to grant corrosion resistance to the
steel when soft annealing it afterwards.
The corrosion potential as seen in figure 28 tells much the same story as the OCP. Here also the ORS
is slightly more corrosion resistant than 982CC. And again the as sprayed and hot forged samples
are right on top of each other. None of the samples form a protective passive anodic layer that is
commonly seen on stainless steel [21]. But rather just continue off with free corrosion occurring.
This is to be expected as the Pitting Resistance Equivalent Number (PREN), that is often used for
predicting corrosion resistance of stainless steel, can be easily predicted to be rather low as all the
samples are somewhat low in Cr and Mo, and have no Ni in them. Of which Ni is what adds most
corrosion protection from the PREN number [26].
To get some numbers on this all the icorr values from the Tafel extrapolations have been gathered
and converted to a corrosion rate in mm/year. How the Tafel extrapolation was done can be seen in
figure ?? which is the same as figure 28 but with the linear extrapolations put onto it. It is where these
new lines intersect that the Icorr is measured. This is the put into the formula from section 2.7 with all
the values added [27] and a factor so that it is converted to years. It is assumed that it is the Fe that
corrodes.
d
t =
3268 · Icorr · 55.84g/mol
2e · 96485C/e · 7.87g/cm3 · 1cm2
(4)
The results can be seen in table 12.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
20
==PAGE:25==
Figure 28: The average corrosion potential run of each of the 4 sample with Tafel extrapolation.
Sample
Icorr
mm/year
Average corrosion rate
b19AR
0.008
0.000961
b19AR
0.007
0.000841
0.000841
b19AR
0.006
0.000721
b19HF
0.007
0.000841
b19HF
0.006
0.000721
0.000761
b19HF
0.006
0.000721
ORS
0.002
0.00024
ORS
0.0018
0.000216
0.000176
ORS
0.0006
7.21E­05
982CC
0.003
0.00036
982CC
0.002
0.00024
0.000272
982CC
0.0018
0.000216
Table 12: The calculated corrosion rates from the Tafel extrapolation.
It is clear from here that the corrosion resistance of the 982CC sample from Asgaard Metals is not
higher. But it is also not much lower, which in it self is a good thing. As one would be inclined to call
their corrosion resistance similar.
3.3
XRD
As the XRD was analysed and compared with the local database it was clear that a lot of carbides
were in the H13 steel from Asgaard metals. This makes sense and was expected as shown in the
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
21
==PAGE:26==
thermocalc done by Moritz seen in figure 22. The precipitation extraction method proved extremely
useful as somewhat doubtful phases became very obvious. It is worth of note that in most of the XRD
graphs the ferrite phase is not shown as a match to avoid unnecessary clutter for the reader. It is
however very much present in all the samples as the matrix. An overview of what phases were found
and their PDFs can be seen in table 13.
pdf
06­0696
71­0552
36­1482
35­0768
47­1191
73­0476
Sample
Ferrite
Cr23C6
Cr7C3
VN
Fe3Mo3C
VC
B19­AR3
Y
y
Y
Y
Y
Maybe
B19­HF1
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Maybe
ORS
Y
N
N
Y
N
Maybe
B19­HF1 precipitate extraction
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Maybe
ORS precipitate extraction
N
N
N
Maybe
Y
Y
B19­982CC precipitate extraction
N
y
Y
Y
Y
Maybe
Table 13: The phases found during XRD
It is worth noting that while it might say ”Cr23C6” in table 13 it should be considered a M23C6 carbide
until confirmed otherwise, as it could be any metal carbide with that structure.
As it can be seen in figure 29 most of the phases could be determined to be present with fairly high
certainty. However phases such as the VN are hard to say for certain as it is covered by the noise of
the matrix. This is where the precipitate extraction method described in chapter 2.9 removes all the
doubt as can be seen in figure 30.
With this method in mind the exact same was done with the heat treated 982CC sample and ORS, as
seen in figure 31 and 32. It gives good results and clearly shows what phases can be determined to
be present and which cannot. However as seen in figure 32 a new unknown phase showed up. This
unknown phase could not be found in the local database. Searching in literature has also not yielded
any results. The spacing and width of the peaks suggest that it could be a nano sized hexagonal
phase. The first thought was that it could be an aluminium oxide leftover from the ESR process. Many
attempts to discover what what it could be have been made. A strategic brute force comparison of
all known elements in ORS has been made without a conclusion as to what it could be. As of writing
this unknown phase has not been determined. This is also with searching for discoveries of nano
size particles in Orvar Supreme in general and trying to find them. As well as the use of the Materials
project website, by Berkeley Lab, that allows for a generated XRD powder diffraction of different crystal
structures [28]. As such this has to be deemed either contamination or an unfinished. But to be able
to conclude either the phase has to be discovered. For anyone willing to give it a try the scaled up
version with only the precipitation extraction can be found in appendix E.
As for the ORS and its VC it could be VN as they very simmilar peaks. However VC fits just a bit
better than VN for ORS but it could be a mix. There is however a high likelihood of VN being present
in the spray formed samples due to the Nitrogen atmosphere during production. All the carbides
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
22
==PAGE:27==
suggested by thermocalc and discovered here in the XRD match with the carbides that are formed
during secondary hardening [29]. And they prove to be the greatest contributor to strengthening[30].
Figure 29: The XRD results for B19 Hot forged(blue curve) and B19 As sprayed (black curve) with
the corresponding phases present. Except ferrite. Peaks are scaled up for the reader.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 30: The XRD results for B19 Hot forged(blue curve) and B19 Hot forged precipitation extrac­
tion(black curve) with the corresponding phases present. Except ferrite. Peaks are scaled up for the
reader.
Figure 31: The XRD results for 982CC(blue curve) and 982CC precipitation extraction(black curve)
with the corresponding phases present. Peaks are scaled up for the reader.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
24
==PAGE:29==
Figure 32: The XRD results for ORS(blue curve) and ORS precipitation extraction(black curve) with
the corresponding phases present. Peaks are scaled up for the reader.
3.4
SEM
In order to help determine the phases from the XRD the samples were taken to the SEM for EDS
mapping. It is important to remember that the EDS is not able to detect lighter elements such as N
and C due to how it functions [31], especially not when it is carbon coated for conductivity. In figure
33 the EDS map can be seen. From this mapping it can be concluded that the black areas are V rich
and are likely VN. The dark grey areas are Cr rich with some Mn in it. The Mn is also evenly spread
out outside the Cr rich areas. And the white areas are Mo rich with some Si in it. The Si is also evenly
spread out outside the Mo rich areas. As such it can be concluded that the likely inclusions in the
hot forged sample a mix of CrMnC, MoSiC, VN and VC. This was the same for both the 982CC and
the as sprayed sample. However in the case of the as sprayed sample the different inclusions were
much less evenly spread out.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
25
==PAGE:30==
Figure 33: The EDS map of B19 Hot forged. Top left corner is a micrograph of the area observed.
Drift has is observed as the mapping is smeared.
Figure 34: The EDS map of B19 as sprayed. Top left corner is a micrograph of the area observed.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
26
==PAGE:31==
Figure 35: The EDS map of ORS. Top left corner is a micrograph of the area observed.
As for ORS as seen in figure 36 there was a generally very boring surface to observe as the alloying
elements are very evenly spread out. An Aluminium oxide leftover from the ESR process was also
found. The even spread of alloying elements can also be seen in figure 37. This does match very
well with the XRD results of having only VC present.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
27
==PAGE:32==
Figure 36: The EDS map of ORS. Top left corner is a micrograph of the area observed.
Figure 37: A micrograph of ORS with a poor carbon coating.
As stated earlier the EDS maps in conjunction with the XRD show the that there is CrMnC, MoSiC, VN
and VC present. In all the H13 samples from Asgaard Metals and this is supported by the thermocalc
from Moritz [6] and Ji Li et al.[32] who found the carbide formation during tempering to be the main
strengthening mechanic. And Ji Dengping et al. found a lot of the same results however they found
the Mn to be bound as MnS instead of being bound to Cr[33]. Another study found that the main
strengthening mechanic to be from V2C and the way they transform into VC nano particles that lock
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
28
==PAGE:33==
up the the bainitic ferrite laths [22]. Exactly which carbides these are is still hard to determine.
3.5
Polishability
The test polishing for polishability was done as described in chapter 2.6. And the subsequent testing
on the LEXT was completed. As no standard nor real polishability testing was found to be established
as to how much work needs to be done to achieve the same finish. Therefore the results can only
really be used as comparative results. However there is some research on this in ceramics with the
focus on tooth prosthetics [34]. And also one by Sedlaček et al. on the the wear effect on injection
moulding [35]. With that in mind the form removed surface extracted from the software Mountains
is shown in figure 38 and 19. And the resulting parameter extracted can be seen in table 14. Here
it can be seen that 982CC has performed worse in all aspects of the the polishing test compared to
ORS. It has large peak, deeper dales, and a general larger area of both dales and hills. This matches
what coul be seen with the naked eye as ORS seemed to have just a few less scratches compared
to 982CC. It is however not a large difference and woul likely be accepted on this basis as just a bit
more difficult to polish. The real issue might be the inclusions and porosity that has been observed in
LOM and will be discussed later in section 3.7.
Figure 38: The polished surface of 982CC after
the form removal.
Figure 39: The polished surface of ORS after the
form removal.
Parameter
982CC
ORS
Unit
Description
Sak1
2787
1896
µm3/mm2
Area of the hills
Sak2
2713
1383
µm3/mm2
Area of the dales
Spkx
2.206
2.102
µm
Maximum peak height
Svkx
4.054
1.063
µm
Maximum peak depth
Table 14: The polishability parameters and their values for ORS and 982CC.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
29
==PAGE:34==
3.6
Wear testing
The wear testing with the tribometer had its issues as some of the samples were not completely planar
parallel from the manual setup during cutting. This meant that there was a slight cyclic tendency as
the sample rotated in the specimen holder. This however did not seem to have a major impact on the
final result. It can however be seen in the resulting friction coefficient graph as the many data points
makes the spread bigger. But when the median for the friction coefficient is taken then it is not really
an issue. An example of the friction graph from the tribometer can be seen in figure 40, and the rest
can be found in appendix F.
Figure 40: Graph depicting the friction coefficient change as a function of time during the tribometer
testing of ORS.
An example of how the depth measurements of the wear tracks were made can be seen in figure 41
and 42. The results of all the calculations can be seen in 15.
The most surprising about these results are how non agreeing they are. The friction coefficient is
surprisingly high for the harder samples compared to the low. Normally the opposite effect would be
expected where as the hardness increases the friction coefficient goes down [36]. And the wear rate
K goes down really fast from the 982CC sample to the ORS sample but stays largely the same for the
for the softer as sprayed sample. The only parameter that behaves as expected when compared to
the size of the wear track is the volume loss. The volume loss is the parameter that seems the most
fitting to compare the wear rate of future products with and are also used in by others [35]. It should
however be noted that the prior report on wear made for Asgaard Metals used a oscillating setup and
not a continuously rotating one as in this project.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
30
==PAGE:35==
Figure 41: The wear track topography analysed in the Alicona CMM with profiles dragged acros the
track in the Mountains software.
Figure 42: Example of a depth measurement of for the profile of the wear track.
Sample
Depth of wear track [µm]
Average depth [µm]
Median friction coefficient
Volume loss [mm3]
Wear rate [K]
Hot forged
49.61
Hot forged
34.07
41.84
0.68
29.73199
0.002965
As sprayed
35.73
As sprayed
37.34
36.535
0.67
25.96219
0.002644
982CC
12.74
982CC
15.23
13.985
0.77
9.937902
0.002589
ORS
9.744
ORS
8.487
9.1155
0.76
6.477579
0.001749
Table 15: The calculated and measured values for the wear testing.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
31
==PAGE:36==
3.7
LOM
While the LOM has been used throughout the project it has been somewhat unconventionally used
rather late due to heat treatment taking a long time. This did however not mean that the micro graphs
from the LOM are not important. In figure 43 the as sprayed micro structure can be seen after a
nital etching. The grains are large and ferritic and have formed subgrains. It is however clear that
what appears to be the original grain boundaries hold more of the different inclusions than the grain
boundaries of the subgrains. In figure 44 a lamellar like structure and precipitated in the the ferrite
grain. This is as expected of a large and slow cooling object like the as sprayed billet.
Figure 43:
As sprayed micrograph after nital
etching.
Figure 44:
As sprayed micrograph after nital
etching.
It is interesting to see that the murakami etching which sticks to carbides show largely the same as
the nital etching when done on the as sprayed sample, as seen in figure 45. A difference however is
that it looks as there are more large carbides within the grains compared to what can be seen when
etching with nital. A very fine lamellar structure can be seen on figure 46 suggesting that this is indeed
a carbide that forms the lamellar.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
32
==PAGE:37==
Figure 45:
As sprayed micrograph after mu­
rakami etching.
Figure 46:
As sprayed micrograph after mu­
rakami etching.
When observing the hot forged structure as seen in figure 47 it is clear that that the carbides have
been redistributed almost homogeneously throughout the alloy. A few larger precipitates can still be
seen around but not all gathered up like in figure 43. And while the grain size is reduced significantly
it is not completely homogeneous. This can be seen extra clearly in the dark field micrograph in figure
48. Here there is a lot of smaller grains that surround a few larger grains. This is likely due to grain
growth during the soft annealing process.
Figure 47: Hot forged micrograph after nital etch­
ing.
Figure 48: Hot forged micrograph after nital etch­
ing using dark field.
In figure 49 it can be seen how there is a clear tendency for carbides to surround certain locations.
This is most likely due to a larger carbide or inclusion having been redissolved during the hot forging
and soft annealing process. This can also be seen around the smaller but still large inclusion in figure
50. Here it can also be seen how the carbides have some very fine precipitates in most of the small
grains.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
33
==PAGE:38==
Figure 49:
Hot forged micrograph after mu­
rakami etching.
Figure 50:
Hot forged micrograph after mu­
rakami etching.
In both figure 51 and 52 the first thing you see is the inclusions. These are the aluminium oxide
remains from the ESR process as mentioned earlier in the SEM section. While not abundant they are
present in the matrix. The rest of the sample is really homogeneous. This looks a lot like the tempered
martensite structure that MChugh et al. achieved during their investigation of the influence of cooling
rate on H13 steels [37]. And much like them if the etching of this project were to be repeated, then
the sample would be brought into the SEM to better observe the microstructure.
Figure 51: ORS micrograph after nital etching.
Figure 52: ORS micrograph after nital etching.
While the nital etching did not not show any clear grains, murakami surprisingly reveals an old grain
boundary of a large grain where the carbides have gathered. This can be seen in figure 53 and
even more clearly in the dark field version in figure 54. Other than the faint outline the carbides are
very evenly distributed. It is here important to remember that murakami is an adhesive etching which
means that it cannot be concluded that the carbides extend out from the dark field image.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
34
==PAGE:39==
Figure 53:
ORS micrograph after murakami
etching.
Figure 54:
ORS micrograph after murakami
etching with dark field.
As for the 982CC sample no real grain boundary showed up as initially expected. Therefore this
should have been moved to the SEM for further study as the grain size is so small now [22][37]. The
needle like imprints in figure 55 looks to be a bainitic structure with retained austenite [22][37].
Figure 55: 982CC micrograph after 15s nital etching.
It is interesting that even after austenizing the 982CC sample the dispersion of carbides looks to be
no finer than when hot forged as seen in figure 56 compared to figure 49. This could either be due to
the carbides redissolving and forming a solid solution hardening or it could be because they now are
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
35
==PAGE:40==
so small that the murakami does not stick.
Figure 56: 982CC micrograph after murakami etching.
While the kalling etching was a short 10 s it is way too potent for H13 steel. This has resulted in an
over etching that really brings forth the Cr rich carbides as they are more corrosion resistand than the
matrix as well as the inclusions, as seen in figures 58 and 57 respectively. It also brings forth a more
needle like structure which would be martensite [37].
Figure 57: 982CC micrograph after kalling etch­
ing.
Figure 58: 982CC micrograph after kalling etch­
ing.
The inclusions in both figure 57 and 59 look like inclusion type B2 which suggests that they are either
Al2O3 or MgO. These inclusions are likely also the reason why 982CC performs worse in polishability
as they can come loose during polishing and create scratches and leaving pores.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
36
==PAGE:41==
Figure 59: 982CC micrograph after kalling etching.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
37
==PAGE:42==
4
Conclusion
In conclusion to this project, billet 19 by Asgaard Metals is not quite as good as the competitor product
Orvar Supreme from Uddeholm. However it is very close to being able to replace it. This conclusion
is based on one main thing.
If the customer requires the perfect polishing finish the last loose inclusions and porosities need to be
removed. This in itself should make it very comparable to Orvar Supreme.
The difference in corrosion resistance between the two competitors is negligible and the lack of cor­
rosion resistant alloying elements other than Cr means that this is unlikely to change.
The wear resistance is found to be slightly lower that Orvar supreme.
The strengthening mechanics of the two products are vastly different. While Orvar Supreme seems
to rely more on finely distributed VC and solid solution strengthening. The spray formed steel from
Asgaard Metals relies mainly on a combination of M23C6, M7C3, MC, M6C carbides for strengthening.
Asgaard Metals main selling point if trying to compete with Orvar Supreme would still be the closed
loop recycling. And a product almost as good.
Some future work would be that more work needs to be done with the heat treatment. And a decision
on how much the the secondary hardening should be utilised should be made.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
38
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Kaja Jurczynska and Bernice Kuang. “Population Growth”. eng. In: International Encyclopedia
of Public Health (2016), pp. 533–540. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-803678-5.00339-8.
[2]
Sandipan Das, Ankur Rawat, and Sitesh Kumar Singh. “Impacts of temperature, precipitation
and population growth on energy demands of Delhi”. eng. In: International Journal of Design
and Nature and Ecodynamics 15.4 (2020), pp. 539–544. ISSN: 17557445, 17557437. DOI:
10.18280/ijdne.150411.
[3]
United Nations. Sustainabel Development Goals. 2024. URL: https://sdgs.un.org/goals.
[4]
J. C. Outeiro. “Residual stresses in machining”. eng. In: Mechanics of Materials in Modern
Manufacturing Methods and Processing Techniques (2020), pp. 297–360. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
0-12-818232-1.00011-4.
[5]
Christian Hagelüken and Daniel Goldmann. “Recycling and circular economy—towards a closed
loop for metals in emerging clean technologies”. eng. In: Mineral Economics 35.3­4 (2022),
pp. 539–562. ISSN: 21912211, 21912203. DOI: 10.1007/s13563-022-00319-1.
[6]
Moritz Zwicker. Characterization of sprayformed and additively manufactured tool steels in a
circular economy. DTU internal thesis log. 2023.
[7]
Barbara K. Reck and T. E. Graedel. “Challenges in metal recycling”. eng. In: Science 337.6095
(2012), pp. 690–695. ISSN: 10959203, 00368075. DOI: 10.1126/science.1217501.
[8]
David G. Rethwisch William D. Callister. Callister’s materials science and engineering. River
street, Hoboken: Wiley, 2020. ISBN: 978­1­119­45391­8.
[9]
Steelexpress Limited. Steel Hardness Conversion. 2024. URL: https://www.steelexpress.co.uk/
steel-hardness-conversion.html.
[10]
Uddeholm. Uddeholm Orvar Supreme. 2021. URL: https://www.uddeholm.com/app/uploads/
sites/44/2018/08/Tech-Uddeholm-Orvar-Supreme-EN-1.pdf.
[11]
Hudson Tool steel. H13 Tool Steel. 2023. URL: https://hudsontoolsteel.com/technical-data/
steelH3.
[12]
Asgaard Metals. Asgaard Metals. 2024. URL: https://asgaardmetals.com/.
[13]
K. Bauckhage, A. Schulz, and V. Uhlenwinkel. “Characteristic features and specific qualifica­
tions of the sprayforming process to be generalized”. ger. In: Materialwissenschaft Und Werk­
stofftechnik 34.1 (2003). Translation software used., pp. 6–12. ISSN: 15214052, 09335137.
DOI: 10.1002/mawe.200390019.
[14]
ISO. Metallic materials – Vickers hardness test – Part 4: Tables of hardness values (ISO 6507­
4:2018). eng. 2018.
[15]
Interlloy. h13 tool steel. 2023. URL: https://www.interlloy.com.au/our-products/tool-steel/h13-
tool-steel-x40crmov5-1/.
[16]
Thomas F. Fuller and John Naim Harb. Electrochemical engineering. eng. Wiley, 2018, xv, 417
Seiten (unknown). ISBN: 111900425x, 1119446589, 1119446597, 1523115653, 9781119004257,
9781119446583, 9781119446590, 9781523115655, 111900425X.
[17]
Nuclear Power. What is Wear Coefficient. 2024. URL: https://material-properties.org/what-is-
wear-coefficient-definition/.
[18]
Digialsurf. Mountains. Metrology software used in conjuction with the Alicona and LEXT. 2024.
[19]
Olympus. LEXT. Metrology coordinate measuring machine LEXT. 2024.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
39
==PAGE:44==
[20]
ISO. Geometrical product specifications (GPS) – Surface texture: Areal – Part 2: Terms, defini­
tions and surface texture parameters. eng. 2021.
[21]
Einar Bardal. Corrosion and protection. eng. Springer, 2004, XI, 315 S (unknown). ISBN: 1280145536,
1447139321, 1852337583, 1852338458, 9781280145537, 9781447139324, 9781852337582,
9781852338459.
[22]
Xiaowen Sun et al. “Microstructure and mechanical properties of Si­rich H13 steel processed
via austempering and tempering”. eng. In: Materials Science and Engineering: a 834 (2022),
p. 142616. ISSN: 18734936, 09215093. DOI: 10.1016/j.msea.2022.142616.
[23]
E. Nelson, A. Kohli, and D. R. Poirier. “Hardness of H13 Tool Steel After Non­isothermal Tem­
pering”. eng. In: Journal of Materials Engineering and Performance 27.6 (2018), pp. 2766–2771.
ISSN: 15441024, 10599495. DOI: 10.1007/s11665-018-3369-8.
[24]
S. W. Xia et al. “Influence of nickel on secondary hardening of a modified AISI H13 hot work
die steel”. eng. In: Materialwissenschaft Und Werkstofftechnik 50.2 (2019), pp. 197–203. ISSN:
15214052, 09335137. DOI: 10.1002/mawe.201700205.
[25]
M. Villa and M. A. J. Somers. “On the Role of Isothermal Martensite Formation during Cryogenic
Treatment of Steels”. eng. In: H T M 75.5 (2020), pp. 263–286. ISSN: 21941831, 18672493.
DOI: 10.3139/105.110420.
[26]
Stephen D. Cramer, ASM International, and Handbook Committee ASM International. ASM
handbook / prepared under the direction of the ASM International Handbook Committee ; Vol.
13B: Corrosion : materials. eng. ASM International, 2005, XVII, 703 S (unknown). ISBN: 0871707071,
1615031979, 1615834303, 9780871707079, 9781615031979, 9781615834303, 1627081836,
9781627081832.
[27]
National library of medicine. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Iron. 2024. URL: https:
//pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Iron.
[28]
Berkeley Lab. Materialsproject. 2024. URL: https://next-gen.materialsproject.org/materials.
[29]
David A. Porter, Kenneth E. Easterling, and Mohamed Y. Sherif. Phase Transformations in
Metals and Alloys, Fourth Edition. eng. CRC Press, 2021, pp. 1–556. ISBN: 0367430347,
0367820773, 1000467791, 1000467821, 1003011802, 9780367430344, 9780367820770, 9781000467796
9781000467826, 9781003011804. DOI: 10.1201/9781003011804.
[30]
Yaojun Lin et al. “Microstructure and hardness of spray­formed chromium­containing steel tool­
ing”. eng. In: Scripta Materialia 55.7 (2006), pp. 581–584. ISSN: 13596462, 18728456. DOI:
10.1016/j.scriptamat.2006.06.020.
[31]
Yang Leng. Materials characterization: Introduction to microscopic and spectroscopic methods:
Second edition. eng. wiley, 2013, pp. 1–376. ISBN: 1299775802, 3527334637, 3527670777,
3527670793, 3527670807, 9781299775800, 9783527334636, 9783527670772, 9783527670796,
9783527670802, 0470822988, 0470822996, 0470823003, 3527670785, 9780470822982, 9780470822999
9780470823002, 9783527670789. DOI: 10.1002/9783527670772.
[32]
Ji Li et al. “Study on Carbide in Forged and Annealed H13 Hot Work Die Steel”. eng. In: High
Temperature Materials and Processes 34.6 (2015), pp. 593–598. ISSN: 21910324, 03346455.
DOI: 10.1515/htmp-2014-0073.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
40
==PAGE:45==
[33]
Dengping Ji et al. “Precipitation Behavior of Primary Carbide in H13 Bloom Die Steel”. eng.
In: Physics of Metals and Metallography (2023), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 15556190, 0031918x. DOI:
10.1134/S0031918X23600902.
[34]
Anastasiia Grymak et al. “Comparison of hardness and polishability of various occlusal splint
materials”. eng. In: Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 115 (2021),
p. 104270. ISSN: 18780180, 17516161. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2020.104270.
[35]
Marko Sedlaček et al. “Influence of Boron and Nitrogen on the Machinability, Polishability and
Wear of Martensitic Stainless Steels”. eng. In: Metals 13.10 (2023), p. 1759. ISSN: 20754701.
DOI: 10.3390/met13101759.
[36]
N. M. Mikhin and K. S. Lyapin. “Hardness dependence of the coefficient of friction”. eng. In:
Soviet Physics Journal 13.3 (1970), pp. 317–321. ISSN: 15739228, 10648887, 00385697. DOI:
10.1007/BF00818317.
[37]
K. M. McHugh et al. “Influence of cooling rate on phase formation in spray­formed H13 tool
steel”. eng. In: Materials Science and Engineering: a 477.1­2 (2008), pp. 50–57. ISSN: 18734936,
09215093. DOI: 10.1016/j.msea.2007.05.121.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
41
==PAGE:46==
A
Composistion
Figure 60: The composition extracted by Moritz for his thesis [6].
Figure 61: The composition given for Orvar Supreme [10].
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
42
==PAGE:47==
Figure 62: The composition of general H13 tool steel [11].
B
CCT Diagrams and written description
Figure 63: The CCT diagram for Orvar Supreme [10].
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 64: The CCT diagram for H13 steel by Interlloy [15].
Figure 65: The written description for the heat treatment of H13 by Hudson steel [11].
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
44
==PAGE:49==
C
CCT curve from vacuum furnace
Figure 66: CCT curve from the final heat treatment in the vacuum furnace.
D
OCP and corrosion potential
Figure 67: The corrosion potentials measured for 982CC.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
45
==PAGE:50==
Figure 68: The corrosion potentials measured for the as sprayed material.
Figure 69: The corrosion potentials measured for the hot forged material.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
46
==PAGE:51==
Figure 70: The corrosion potentials measured for ORS.
Figure 71: The OCP measured for 982CC.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
47
==PAGE:52==
Figure 72: The OCP measured for the as sprayed material.
Figure 73: The OCP measured for the hot forged material.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
48
==PAGE:53==
Figure 74: The OCP measured for ORS.
E
XRD ORS
Figure 75: The OCP measuredThe XRD results for ORS precipitation extraction with the correspond­
ing phases.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
49
==PAGE:54==
F
Tribometry
Figure 76: Graph depicting the friction coefficient change as a function of time during the tribometer
testing of B19 as sprayed.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
50
==PAGE:55==
Figure 77: Graph depicting the friction coefficient change as a function of time during the tribometer
testing of B19 hot forged.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
51
==PAGE:56==
Figure 78: Graph depicting the friction coefficient change as a function of time during the tribometer
testing of 982CC.
Wear and Corrosion Performance of H13 tool steel manufactured by Spray Forming and Laser Powder Bed Fusion
52
