==PAGE:1==
Robust
Real-Time
Non-Cooperative
Target
Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
E.Y.E.B.A.L.L - Efficient Yaw pitch roll Estimation By
using A Lone Lens
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applica­
tions
E.Y.E.B.A.L.L ­ Efficient Yaw pitch roll Estimation By using A Lone Lens
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Mikkel Rosenfeldt Anderson & Jonas Højen Nielsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
The input image (green) overlayed with output pose from 3D model (pur­
ple)
Published by:
DTU, Department of Space Research and Technology, Elektrovej 327,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.space.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at Department of Space Research and
Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the de­
gree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mathematics, statistics
and space engineering.
Mikkel Rosenfeldt Anderson ­ s184230
Signature
Date
Jonas Højen Nielsen ­ s174022
Signature
Date
ii
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
4. feb 2024
4. feb 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents the development and evaluation of Efficient Yaw, pitch and roll Es­
timation By using A Lone Lens (EYEBALL), a real­time, non­cooperative target tracking
algorithm designed for space applications using a single, greyscale monocular camera.
Addressing the growing challenge of space debris and the need for sustainable practices,
the algorithm aims to estimate the full 6DoF pose of non­cooperative objects in space
without requiring prior information or communication.
While further studies are necessary for definitive implementation decisions, EYEBALL
presents promising results through its efficient non­cooperative target tracking approach.
The algorithm exhibits notable performance characteristics. With an average execution
time of 0.85 seconds per image, it meets the required frame rate of 1 Hz. However,
further optimisation has the potential to reduce this time to approximately 0.30 seconds,
improving computational efficiency. Notably, vertex accuracy exceeds target values in the
X and Y directions, demonstrating the algorithm’s ability to precisely localise key points
on the target object. Furthermore, the algorithm successfully predicts rotations applied to
the dynamic test model, with step sizes closely aligning with desired values and standard
deviations remaining within acceptable limits. Additionally, the pitch estimate falls well
within the targeted margin of error of ±4 degrees, highlighting the algorithm’s capability
for accurate orientation estimation.
By addressing the crucial challenge of non­cooperative target tracking in space applica­
tions, EYEBALL not only contributes to a cleaner and more sustainable future for space
exploration but also opens doors for exciting possibilities in scientific discovery and tech­
nological innovation.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Mikkel Rosenfeldt Anderson, Master of Science in Engineering (Human­Centered Arti­
ficial Intelligence), DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Jonas Højen Nielsen, Master of Science in Engineering (Earth and Space Physics En­
gineering), DTU
Creator of this thesis.
We would like to express our deepest gratitude to our supervisor, David Arge Klevang,
for his invaluable guidance and support throughout this journey. His expertise and belief
in us were instrumental in shaping this thesis. David’s insightful feedback and thought­
provoking discussions pushed us beyond our initial expectations, allowing us to achieve
great results. His passion for space was truly contagious, and it fuelled our own dedication
to this project.
A special thank you also goes to Freja for her delicious baked goods we enjoyed during
this process.
iv
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Mission Objective & Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
System Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Components and Frameworks
5
2.1
Scene Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The Target Spacecraft, CSC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
The Chaser Spacecraft, OSC & the CHU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Reference Frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Coordinate Transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Algorithm Overview
13
3.1
Rough Pose Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Fine Pose Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Rough pose estimation
17
4.1
Template Based Pose Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Shape Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Filter 1: Global Shape Descriptors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
Filter 2: Roll Angle Parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Fine Pose Estimation
41
5.1
Vertex Localisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Pose Refinement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Results and Analysis
49
6.1
Validation of the Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Verification of the Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7
Conclusion
69
7.1
Directions for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Bibliography
73
Glossary
77
Acronyms
78
A Result data
81
A.1 Ground truth scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.2 Guesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A.3 Estimated scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.4 Rotated scores for Top right solar panel 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
1Only Top right solar panel was selected to limit the amount of pages needed to show all data according
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
v
==PAGE:8==
B Performance data
93
to Section 2.4.2 residuals can be calculated with the rotation and translation from Appendix A.3
vi
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The vast expanse of space might seem infinite, but humanity’s footprint within it is quickly
accumulating. The last decade has witnessed an unprecedented surge in space activity,
with hundreds of new satellites launched each year. While this ”democratisation of space”
revolutionises communication, navigation, and scientific exploration, it leaves behind a
growing legacy: space debris.
Thousands of defunct satellites and spent rocket bodies now litter Earth’s orbit, remnants
of past missions. Each piece, hurtling at kilometres per second, poses a significant risk
of collision. A single wayward bolt could trigger a domino effect, cascading into a catas­
trophic chain reaction that could render key orbits unusable for generations. This is not
science fiction; it is a pressing reality demanding immediate action.
The challenge extends beyond mere debris removal. Sustainability must become the
cornerstone of our future space endeavours. How can we extend the lifespan of existing
satellites, minimising the need for replacements and the resulting debris? Can we develop
innovative solutions for refuelling satellites in­orbit, extending their operational life and
reducing launch requirements? And what about the tantalising prospect of assembling
complex structures in space, pushing the boundaries of human exploration and scientific
discovery?
This report delves into the heart of these challenges, exploring innovative solutions for
sustainable space exploration. One crucial aspect is pose estimation, which determines
the position and orientation of an object in space. This is critical for various tasks like:
Capturing and manipulating debris: Accurately knowing the pose of a defunct satellite
allows for safe capture, repair, or controlled deorbiting. Refuelling satellites: Precise
pose estimation ensures the refuelling nozzle aligns perfectly with the target satellite’s fuel
port, preventing spills or damage. Assembling structures in space: Precise knowledge
of the pose of each component is crucial for accurate assembly and alignment in the
microgravity environment.
However, pose estimation becomes significantly more challenging when dealing with non­
cooperative targets, such as defunct satellites without communication capabilities. Tradi­
tional methods rely on cooperation from the target, but this isn’t feasible for ”lost in space”
debris. This report presents a novel non­cooperative 6DoF pose estimation algorithm,
meaning it can determine the full 3D pose (position and orientation) of a target object
without any prior information or communication. The algorithm utilises only a single cam­
era and a 3D model of the target. This breakthrough opens doors for:
• Autonomous debris mitigation: Capturing and deorbiting debris without requiring
cooperation from the target itself.
• Extending satellite lifespans: By enabling non­cooperative pose estimation, our
method opens doors for advancements in on­orbit refuelling and repair of satellites,
extending their operational life and reducing the need for new launches.
• Enabling complex space missions: With precise pose estimation capabilities, com­
plex structures like space stations or telescopes can be assembled in orbit, facilitat­
ing groundbreaking scientific research and exploration endeavours.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
1
==PAGE:10==
In conclusion, this research not only addresses a critical challenge in sustainable space
exploration but also opens doors for exciting possibilities in the future. By enabling ac­
curate and efficient non­cooperative pose estimation, our solution paves the way for a
cleaner, more sustainable, and more ambitious future in space.
1.1
Mission Objective & Requirements
This research aims to develop a robust and reliable real­time non­cooperative tracking
algorithm capable of estimating the 6DoF pose (position and orientation) of a target object
in space using only a monocular greyscale camera as input. Additionally, the algorithm
should generate a model of the target’s kinematics to predict future pose changes even
when the visual lock is temporarily lost.
Mission objective:
The work in this report aims to produce an algorithm taking the input
of a monocular greyscale camera and return a reliable estimation of 6DoF and model the
behaviour of the observed target. The algorithm shall function in real­time and be able to
accurately predict the pose.
From this, the two main requirements have been derived:
Mission performance validation requirement:
The thesis shall validate the perfor­
mance and theoretical capability of a 6DoF pose estimation algorithm on a known target.
Mission performance verification requirement:
The thesis shall validate the perfor­
mance of a 6DoF pose estimation algorithm on a real­world target with challenging lighting
conditions.
1.2
System Requirements
Several of the requirements are inferred from current rendezvous and docking proce­
dures, e.g. for docking with the International Space Station. Other requirements are set
by the authors of this paper and are rooted in the limitations of the instruments. These
have been formalised to the following requirements:
1.2.1
Translational and Rotational Accuracy
Rendezvous and Docking (RDV)
Most of the requirements outlined in this section are based on the Rendezvous and Dock­
ing problem and are therefore designed with the assumption that the spacecraft is within
the docking range of 5 meters between the Target and Chaser.
Translational precision requirement:
The translational distance shall be determined
with a precision of ±1 % relative to the distance.
Pitch/Yaw misalignment requirement:
The vector sum of the pitch/yaw angle of the
target relative to the chaser shall be determined within ±4.0° (“International Docking Sys­
tem Standard (IDSS) Interface Definition Document (IDD) Revision F” 2022).
Roll misalignment requirement:
The roll angle of the target relative to the chaser shall
be determined within ±4.0° (“International Docking System Standard (IDSS) Interface
Definition Document (IDD) Revision F” 2022).
2
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:11==
Proximity Operations
Docking accuracy requirements are typically governed by the docking mechanism specific
to each mission. Rendezvous and Docking operations are typically performed within 5 m.
Proximity Operations, on the other hand, has less strict requirements.
Translational precision for proximity operations requirement:
The relative position
distance shall be determined within 2.5 m at a range of 15 m (Upadhyay, Progri, and Lo­
mas, 1999).
1.2.2
Temporal Performance:
Real­time pose estimation requirement:
To achieve a useable real­time pose esti­
mate, the algorithm shall produce a pose estimate at a rate above ±1 Hz.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:13==
2
Components and Frameworks
2.1
Scene Analysis
Before proceeding with solutions and different approaches for solving the 6DoF non­
cooperative pose estimation problem, it is important to understand which conditions affect
the scene. Anything from lighting, materials and surroundings affect what the camera will
see. A scene analysis will be detailed for the specific case of the Proba­3 spacecraft’s
and also considered as a general problem beyond the specifics of any one mission.
To begin with, the environment is in space. This has a few implications, like a lack of
atmosphere for passive illumination from light interacting with particles. The implication
is that anything not illuminated by the Sun will be in complete darkness and completely
indistinguishable from the background.
Spacecraft are typically made up of a combination of different materials, like Multi Layer
Insulation (MLI), aluminium and solar panels. Spacecraft. Typically, the reflectivity of the
materials used are designed with temperature regulation in mind and would be in the
higher end. Often, spacecraft are characterised with a high emittance. The choice of
materials for any given mission therefore affect what the camera will see.
Proba­3 is a pair of satellites flying in formation. The mission is a technology demonstrator
with a primary scientific mission of measuring the Sun’s corona by having one satellite,
the Occulter Spacecraft (OSC) occlude the Sun, while another satellite, the Coronagraph
Spacecraft (CSC) makes measurements of the Sun’s corona through refractive optics.
Proba­3 will be in a Highly elliptical orbit (HEO) ESA ­ Proba­3 Mission (n.d.). When Proba­
3 is close to the perigee, the two satellites can rely on GPS for attitude determination.
When the two spacecraft get further to the apogee, the formation flight begins and a 6DoF
pose lock has to be achieved. During formation flight, the angle between the surface
normal of the CSC and the Sun is designed to be no more than 10◦. Cooperative target
tracking is utilised to track the fine 6DoF movements of the CSC between each frame of
the images taken with a modified star tracker camera on the OSC. The body of the CSC
is designed to be within the shadow, or umbra, of the OSC, whereas the solar panel is
outside the shadow, or in the penumbra. One side of the CSC will therefore always be in
shade during data acquisition and active target tracking.
The Proba­3 mission is constrained by the specifics of the mission. The precision and
accuracy in estimating the pose with a cooperative target tracking system is reliant on the
tight requirements of general heading with respect to the Sun.
2.1.1
Lost in Space
When a more wide use­case is considered, conditions and limitations will be entirely dif­
ferent. Consider the case of the ”lost in space” scenario, which occurs when the target
spacecraft loses time, position, velocity information and communication with Earth or other
spacecraft (Andrew Russell Dahir and Smead, 2013).
You will effectively have no idea how the target is oriented and will have to pick up on
this with no a priori data. As the target can be viewed from any possible orientation, one
must consider not just the changing morphology of the spacecraft, but also the changing
lighting conditions. Because the attitude of the target is unknown before tracking, the
target spacecraft can appear in many different ways. Knowing the position, and hence
the incident angle of the Sun is therefore integral to achieving a lock.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1.2
Assumptions
A few assumptions have been made in this thesis. It is assumed that the OSC and CSC
are already in proximity to each other. As Proba­3 is meant to fly in a HEO orbit, and
maintain an angle to the Sun, there is a possibility that the Earth might appear in the
image (Pedersen, 2015). An assumption is therefore made, that the appearance of Earth
is not occurring and should not be accounted for.
2.2
The Target Spacecraft, CSC
The target spacecraft consists of two parts; a rigid body containing scientific instruments
and a solar panel which is slightly angled with respect to. the body. The spacecraft body
measures 985 mm × 1440 mm × 1238 mm and with the solar panel, the spacecraft
measures approximately 3.3 meters across at its widest and 2 meters at its tallest (Peñin
et al., 2020). The dimensions can be seen on Figure 2.1b. The CSC is designed to
be facing towards the Sun continuously. Many different instruments therefore feature
prominently on the front face (­X), like four mono­propellant thrusters for performing orbital
maintenance manoeuvres, which sit at different angles to each other close to the corners
of the front. The OSC is designed to occult the Sun during operation. The body of the
CSC is therefore partially occluded during operation. The solar panel is designed to sit
outside the penumbra positioned slightly angled with a rigid support structure. On the +Y
side, a slight protrusion occurs. On the ± Z sides, a mechanical interface for the Occulter
Spacecraft (OSC) can be seen. (Tiraplegui et al., 2019). The ­X face is constantly in the
shade. An optical bench housing three star trackers perpendicular to each other. This is
not visible on the 3D mesh. The 3D mesh used in this report may not accurately represent
the final version of the spacecraft.
(a) A showcase of the Satellite Body
Coordinate Frame (SBC) with respect
to the 3D mesh of the CSC. The 3D
mesh is centred in the CoM defined
from the geometry. The dashed lines
are the negative directions.
(b) The 3D mesh of the Coronagraph Spacecraft seen
from ±X, Y & Z. The dimensions are 1:1.
Figure 2.1: Showcase of the coordinate system (SBC) and dimensions of the CSC 3D
mesh.
2.2.1
The Scale Model
A scale model of the CSC has been made to perform test on. The model is a 1:10 scale
and approximates the shape of the 3D mesh. Slight differences may therefore appear.
6
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:15==
The most obvious difference between the 3D mesh and the scale model is the materi­
als and how they react to the virtual and real­life environments, respectively. The scale
model is made to resemble the real CSC, which contains both textureless and reflective
materials, like MLI or solar panels. These materials will challenge the camera under harsh
illumination conditions. The 3D mesh exists in a well­lit environment without any reflective
surfaces.
(a) The 1:10 scale model of the Corona­
graph Spacecraft taken with a phone cam­
era. The background appears very clearly
as well as the rotation stand from which the
scale model rotates around.
(b) The scale model of the Coronagraph
Spacecraft as seen from the Camera Head
Unit. Any face, which is not in line of sight of
the light/”Sun” or occluded, appears similar
to the background.
2.3
The Chaser Spacecraft, OSC & the CHU
The OSC is not of much relevance in this thesis, but is considered analogue to the CHU
regarding non­cooperative target tracking, as this spacecraft is the one housing the cam­
era. The CHU is the camera used in the tests performed in this thesis. The camera is of
a similar build to the one, which will be operated on Proba­3 in space. The camera used
for tests is not calibrated, so the standard parameters for the camera are used, as seen
in Table 2.1. The camera is equipped with a spectral bandpass filter, which blocks out
light below Near Infrared (NIR), like visible light. The image is therefore in greyscale, with
pixel intensities varying from 0 −255 (black/white).
On the OSC, two different cameras with 20 mm and 100 mm focal lengths are used for
different operational modes. In this report, the short­range, wider angle optics with a
20 mm focal length have been used.
Other camera parameters, like the aperture or the shutter speed, are not listed. The
camera is specially designed to take pictures in the harsh lighting conditions of space with
a pitch­black background and a well­lit object. It is therefore expected that the intensity of
the background will stay constant from image to image.
2.3.1
Light Source & Conditions
As described by Pedersen (2015), the light source used in the test setup is a Metal­Halide
lamp of the type Dedolight 400D, which closely resembles the spectral composition of
Sunlight within the bandpass of the sensor.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
7
==PAGE:16==
Parameters
Description
value
unit
f
Focal length
20
mm
ps,x
Pixel size
8.6
µm
ps,y
Pixel size
8.3
µm
κ
Radial distortion coefficient
2.3 · 10−8
CCD resolution
752 x 580
Pixels
x0
Principal point on CCD
376
Pixel
y0
Principal point on CCD
290
Pixel
Table 2.1: Specifications of the Camera used in the test setup.
Figure 2.3: The composition of the spectral irradiance of the Metal­Halide lamp (Dedolight
400D) and the Sun plotted together. Credit: A. Massaro, DTU Space.
2.4
Reference Frames
In this report, several coordinate reference frames will be utilized, so it is important to
distinguish between them for the sake of clarity and cohesion. The reference frames
in question are the Camera Coordinate Frame (CC) from which images will be taken,
the Satellite Body Coordinate Frame (SBC), which is centred in the CoM of the target
satellite (in this case the Coronagraph Spacecraft (CSC)). The images of the CSC will
described either as distorted or undistorted pixel coordinates, the difference can be seen
in Figure 6.9a.
The Earth­Centered Inertial Coordinate Frame (ECI) is used to describe the location of
the target and chaser with respect to other celestial objects, like the Earth and the Sun.
Our research relies on transforming between different coordinate systems, specifically
from camera coordinates to distorted pixel coordinates, which are crucial for accurately
matching 3D points on the CSC to corresponding pixels in images of the CSC. Lens dis­
tortion is an optical phenomenon that causes light rays to deviate from their ideal paths,
resulting in distorted images. In our case we are dealing with radial distortion, causing the
image to appear bulging outward. An overview of the coordinate systems can be seen in
table 2.2
8
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the pose estimation problem. 2D points in the image have a
direct correspondence to 3D points. Credit: Comellini et al. (2021)
Reference frame
Denotation
Unit
Type
Origin
World/Camera
QC
m
3D coordinate
CHU pinhole
CSC
QT
m
3D coordinate
CoM of CSC
CCD coordinate
qccd
m
2D coordinate
Principal point of CCD
Distorted pixel
qd
pixel
2D coordinate
Principal point of image
Undistorted pixel
qu
pixel
2D coordinate
Principal point of image
Table 2.2: Overview of the different reference frames used
2.4.1
Camera Coordinate Frame (CC)
A CHU was used to take images of the CSC, with the CC centred in the camera’s pinhole
of the CHU. The CC axes are defined as follows:
• X­axis: The axis is pointing to the right.
• Y­axis: The axis is pointing downwards.
• Z­axis: The axis is pointing inwards. In this implementation towards the CSC.
In the actual deployment scenario, the CHU would be mounted aboard the OSC aimed
towards the CSC. The experimental setup, depicted in Figure 6.9a, would be equivalent
to the two spacecraft being 22.1 meters from each other, as specified in Table 6.2.
2.4.2
Converting camera coordinates to distorted pixel coordinates
The camera coordinates are in 3D, and when comparing the points to 2D­point, we need
to convert them. The coordinates for an arbitrary 3D point in camera coordinates are:
!
XC
YC
YC
"
(2.1)
The pinhole camera model describes the projection of a three­dimensional point (Q) onto a
two­dimensional image plane (q). This projection is governed by a geometric relationship,
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.5: A representation of the different coordinate frames are illustrated together.
The CC pointing along the boresight of the camera, SBC and ECI are depicted together.
as seen in Figure 2.4. The equation is from Klevang et al. (2023):
qx
f = Qx
Qz
, qy
f = Qy
Qz
(2.2)
Where f is our camera’s focal length. We can rewrite the eq. (2.2) and add the convention
from table 2.2 in order to project camera coordinates to CCD coordinates:
xccd =
XC
(d + ZC) · f
(2.3)
yccd =
YC
(d + ZC) · f
(2.4)
where xccd and yccd are CCD coordinates, d is the distance from camera to the object, f
is our camera’s focal length. Now we need to project the points to the undistorted image
plane, to get the pixel values.
xu = xccd
ps,x
(2.5)
yu = yccd
ps,y
(2.6)
We divide the point in CCD coordinates with the pixel size ps for each direction, to get the
undistorted pixel coordinate.
To get the undistorted coordinates to become distorted, we use the formula (Klevang et
al., 2023):
qu = qd · (1 + κrd)
(2.7)
rd = q2
x,d + q2
y,d
(2.8)
Rewriting the formula gives us:
10
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: Picture showing the relationship between undistorted and distorted pixels in
an image. Credit: (Gribbon, Johnston, and Bailey, 2003).
xd =
xu
(1 + κru)
(2.9)
yd =
yu
(1 + κru)
(2.10)
ru = x2
u + y2
u
(2.11)
Where κ is the radial distortion coefficient, ru is the squared distance from origin of the
image. It is important to note that the pixel coordinates are centred around the principal
point of the image, which is given in table 2.1.
2.4.3
Satellite Body Coordinate Frame (SBC)
The target satellite is a rigid body, from which a coordinate frame can be defined. The
SBC has its origin in the Center of Mass of the spacecraft, as illustrated in Figure 2.5. The
Center of Mass is not a ”true” midpoint. It is derived from the surface area of the 3D mesh
in Blender’s environment.
The SBC axes are defined as follows, as seen on Figure 6.9a:
• X­axis: Aligning with the front and backside of the CSCPointing towards the light
source in the extension of the rotation stand.
• Y­axis: Pointing from CoM towards the solar panel, perpendicular to the rotation
stand.
• Z­axis: Pointing upwards to the roof.
”The satellite is a rigid body in which a Satellite Body Frame (SBC) can be defined. The
SBC has its origin in the Center of Mass (CoM) of the satellite. The different faces of the
satellite are each perpendicular to either the X, Y and Z axis. All the faces can be named
after the respective axis and direction perpendicular to it; denoted X±, Y ± and Z±.”
2.4.4
Earth-Centered Inertial Coordinate Frame (ECI)
The ECI is an inertial reference frame centred in the Earth’s CoM and fixed in space
Herman (1994). The ECI is relevant to the contents of this report in terms of relating the
attitude of the CSC with celestial objects, like the Sun. When the incident angle of the
Sun’s light is mentioned in this report, it is implied that it is with respect to the ECI.
The ECI axes are defined as follows:
• X­axis: Points in the direction of the vernal equinox, which is the point at which the
Earth’s equatorial plane and the ecliptic plane intersect.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
11
==PAGE:20==
• Y­axis: Perpendicular to the X­axis and in the plane of Earth’s ecliptic plane.
• Z­axis: Completing the right­hand coordinate system.
2.5
Coordinate Transformation
We construct a rotation matrix to get the 3D points rotated around (0,0,0). We construct
the rotation matrix using three rotation matrices for each rotation.
• For rotation around the x­axis, we use φ to denote, the roll.
• For rotation around the y­axis, we use θ to denote, the pitch.
• For rotation around the z­axis, we use ψ to denote, the yaw.
Rroll(φ) =


1
0
0
0
cos (φ)
−sin (φ)
0
sin (φ)
cos (φ)


(2.12)
Rpitch(θ) =


cos (θ)
0
sin (θ)
0
1
0
−sin (θ)
0
cos (θ)


(2.13)
Ryaw(ψ) =


cos (ψ)
−sin (ψ)
0
sin (ψ)
cos (ψ)
0
0
0
1


(2.14)
The three rotation matrices are multiplied together, first rotating around x then y and lastly
z.
R = Ryaw(ψ) · Rpitch(θ) · Rroll(φ)
(2.15)
To translate a 3D point by a specified displacement in each coordinate direction, we can
use a translation matrix T:
T =


∆x
∆y
∆z


(2.16)
where ∆x, ∆y, and ∆z represent the translation in the x, y, and z directions, respectively.
To apply both rotation and translation simultaneously, we can combine the rotation matrix
R and translation matrix T using matrix multiplication:
prt = R · p + T
(2.17)
where p are the 3D points, and prt are the corresponding rotated and translated points.
12
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:21==
3
Algorithm Overview
To give an idea of how all the theories behind estimating a 6DoF pose work in unison, we
will first show a general overview and later a deep dive into every implementation aspect
of the algorithm. As stated in Section 1.1 the goal is to estimate a 6DoF pose, from an
image of the CSC and a 3D model of the CSC.
Figure 3.1: An overview of the algorithm
The algorithm works with input/output depicted in ovals and processes depicted as squares,
as seen in Figure 3.1. Each arrow points where the input goes after being calculated. The
different meanings of the letters are described as follows:
• I ­ Image of the CSC
• C ­ Contour of the CSC
• V ­ Vertices on the CSC
• R ­ Rough pose estimation step
• F ­ Fine pose estimation step
• M ­ Model contours with known rota­
tion
• P ­ Points in 3D on the CSC
• E ­ Estimated 6DoF pose of the CSC
3.1
Rough Pose Estimation
First the contour of the CSC is found. Next the 200 contours of a 3D model CSC with
different poses are found and saved. The first process (R) is to get a rough 6DoF pose
of the CSC, this process matches the contour of the image with the 200 other contours of
the 3D model. This initial guess is then used to further refine the 6DoF pose. The part of
the algorithm marked inside the red rectangle in Figure 3.1, is only running when the fine
pose estimation needs a new guess, e.g. losing a lock on the target. The area marked in
the blue rectangle is precomputed and contains the pose database with different contours
and matching poses. The process for finding the contour can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
13
==PAGE:22==
1 Input image
2 Median filter
3 Object detection
4 Segmentation
5 Rough contour
6 Simplified contour
Figure 3.2: Finding contours of the CSC in the image
In Figure 3.2, the CSC is depicted with various image preprocessing steps. The first step is
to input the image of the CSC, this image is then having a median filter applied to remove
noise from the image while being edge­preserving (The image illustrates the amplified
14
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:23==
difference between the raw and filtered image). In image 3 the red crosses correspond to
values above the threshold value (found with the triangle method on a subset of the Sobel
gradient data). The binary image (4) is the result of the global threshold being applied.
The rough contour (5) can be found with the new segmented image, and after this further
simplifies the contour (6).
3.2
Fine Pose Estimation
The contour from the image is converted to vertices, and selected 3D points from the 3D
model of the CSC are found which can be seen in Figure 5.1 with corresponding values
in Table 5.1. The next process (F) is to match these 3D points with the found vertices
using a minimisation algorithm. The initial guess of the 6DoF pose is the input for the
minimisation algorithm. The output is a fine 6DoF pose of the CSC, and the 10 previous
6DoF poses are used to guess the next 6DoF pose.
1 Found vertices
2 Initial guess
3 Minimisation
4 Best estimate
Figure 3.3: Minimising the 3D points to the found 2D points.
The aim for the minimisation algorithm is to rotate, translate and project to 2D pixel co­
ordinates, match and minimise the distance between them and the found vertices in the
image. As seen in image 1 in Figure 3.3 the found vertices are in yellow, kept vertices in
red with their weights. In image 2­4 the red points are the found vertices and the yellow
points are the rotated and translated 3D points projected onto the image.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:25==
4
Rough pose estimation
Initially, nothing is known of the target spacecraft. It is considered ”lost in space” and
the first step towards achieving a 6DoF pose estimate is to get a lock. The process of
acquiring a lock has in this report been attempted with a template­based approach. From
200 unique vantage points, 200 × 4 unique images are formed. Each has a unique set of
parameters, which is precomputed and saved in a database. The parameters are a Hu
Moment vector, a parametric curve and a corresponding orientation.
When an image is taken with the camera, the picture is processed, and parameters are
computed and run through two filters: a comparison of Hu Moment vectors and a cross­
correlation of parametric curves. This process reduces the solution space from hundreds
to tens to one. Ultimately, every singular estimate is a calculated guess. It is therefore
important to consider the temporal dimension too and base a lock of consecutive guesses
in agreement.
4.1
Template Based Pose Estimation
The first step to achieve a pose is to compare the image taken of the Coronagraph Space­
craft with a 3D model with known dimensions. However, the computational load of storing
a complex 3D Cad model and rotating it on the fly is too vast to function in flight. A sim­
plified approach is therefore taken where many pictures are taken from N different view­
points. This process is cheaper computationally, but it is also important to consider the
trade­off between the amount of vantage points and the precision of the resulting rough
pose match. The pictures also have to be taken with an approximately even spacing to
achieve the best coverage, and close enough that the found pose can be used as an ini­
tial guess for further pose­refinement. A similar approach has been used by (Pedersen,
2015; Konishi et al., 2016; Cao, Sheikh, and Banerjee, 2016; Payet and Todorovic, 2011)
with 200, 500, 600, 240 unique template images, respectively.
4.1.1
Even Spacing On A Sphere
To achieve the greatest packing efficiency and even spacing between points on a sphere,
a Fibonacci Sphere is employed. Spiral lattices using the golden angle as a turn angle
between consecutive points avoid periodicities and near­periodicities in the spiral arrange­
ment, due to the irrationality of the golden ratio González (2009) and Swinbank and Purser
(2006). No points are placed on the poles. The golden angle can be approximated by:
φ = 3 −
√
5 · π ≈137.5078
(4.1)
In Figure 4.1, the packing density of the Fibonacci Sphere vs. e.g. a Latitude­Longitude
Lattice is illustrated.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.1: The three top plots show a latitude–longitude lattice with 15 × 14 + 2 = 212
points from a top­down, angled 45 degrees and side­on view. Below, three similar plots
with a 200­point Fibonacci sphere are shown. The plot was recreated from González
(2009).
Figure 4.2: Illustration of how the trajectory of the ”actual” pose is simplified by discrete
poses. The grid used in this illustration is a latitude­longitude, whereas a Fibonacci lattice
is used on the actual data.
4.1.2
Handling Harsh Lighting Conditions & Occlusions
The problem of dealing with occlusions and the effects on the appearance of the shape
is addressed with a simple set of assumptions based on the 3D model described in Sec­
tion 2.2. The assumptions are as follows:
1. The spacecraft faces are oriented strictly along the axes of the SBC.
18
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:27==
2. If a face is not illuminated, the camera cannot see it.
3. The target spacecraft does not cast shadows upon itself.
The unit normal vectors of the surfaces on the CAD model are directly related to an RGB
value and are coloured accordingly. The following is a representation of how different
orientations would appear as colours. As defined in Section 2.4.3:
• ± X­axis will be pure red RGB = (1, 0, 0)
• ± Y­axis will be pure green RGB = (0, 1, 0)
• ± Z­axis will be pure blue RGB = (0, 0, 1)
• A 45◦PoV in Yaw and Pitch will correspond to RGB ≈(0.58, 0.58, 0.58)
4.1.3
Faces
Because the target is in space, the incident angle of the Sun’s light directly affects which
faces are illuminated. Knowledge of the orientation of the Target can therefore be im­
proved by extracting and comparing not just a contour of the entire target, but only the
contours of the sides illuminated by the Sun at a given moment in time. For simplicity, we
assume that the faces of the spacecraft are oriented solely along the axes of the Satellite
Body Coordinate Frame. Each face will be labelled according to the orientation and face
normal with the X­axis being North/South, Y­axis East/West and Z­axis Up/Down. This is
illustrated in Figure 4.4. It is also assumed that the faces are only visible where the point
of view of the camera and the Sun overlap. If the Sun with respect to the SBC is in line of
sight of the +X, +Y and +Z faces (SOUTH, WEST and UP), and the camera is in line of
sight of the +X, +Y and ­Z faces (SOUTH, WEST and DOWN), the camera can only see
the +X and +Y faces (SOUTH and WEST). This corresponds to the red and green colour
channels.
Figure 4.3: An RGB­coloured version of the 3D mesh of the Coronagraph Spacecraft
. The different combinations of colour channels are shown.
According to the assumptions, each face is therefore either illuminated or not illuminated,
which means that the visual contour of the CSC can have 7 different configurations, as
seen in Figure 4.3. Either one side, two sides, or all sides are illuminated. To decrease
the number of different contours, the edge cases where only face side is illuminated are
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
19
==PAGE:28==
removed: {!
@
R, !
@
G, !
!
@
@
B, RG, RB, GB & RGB}. With 200 unique vantage points, the amount
of different contours therefore increases fourfold to 800.
4.1.4
Vertices
Figure 4.4: An RGB coloured version of the
3D mesh of the Coronagraph Spacecraft
Similarly, any vertex can be defined from
the same set of assumptions.
Any ver­
tex defined in the 3D mesh will be given
a set of labels of the adjoining faces. Take
the illustration in Figure 4.4 as an exam­
ple. In the figure, a corner is highlighted,
which sits at the intersection of three faces:
UP, EAST and SOUTH. These form the
set from which the point is visible.
Any
combination involving at least one of these
should render the vertex visible. So, if the
viewer is viewing from head­on WEST, the
highlighted vertex is invisible.
If the ob­
server moves up, so the NORTH face now
is visible, the highlighted vertex should ap­
pear in the bottom right corner of the im­
age. A set of vertices can be selected from the 3D mesh, either through manual or auto­
matic processes, so identifiable vertices are viewable from any possible orientation.
4.1.5
Template Database Summary
For this project, N = 200 points were chosen, similarly to Pedersen (2015). First, an extra
assumption is made, which increases the amount of chosen vantage points fourfold. It is
therefore crucial to keep the amount of points to a minimum. Second, 200 points give a
mean angle between points of ≈12◦. Assuming that the right rough pose is achieved, this
means the pose refinement process has to be robust with guesses within ±6◦. This has
shown to be the case, hence validating that 200 points are sufficient for the rough pose
estimate.
4.2
Shape Extraction
To compute the image parameters used for the template­based pose estimation, different
image processing methods have to be employed. In this work, the intended output of
the segmentation process is a well­defined contour. Many different approaches for pre­
processing and segmentation have been tested in the course of this project. The gist of
the problem is to consistently, and computationally inexpensively, achieve a separation
between the object and the background and retrieve shape information from the object.
To the human eye, this process is trivial, but to encode the logic to achieve this is anything
but. This shape information can then be used for both direct comparisons between shapes
and later steps in the pose estimation algorithm.
Ultimately, the algorithm has to run in real­time, so any algorithmic design choice has
direct implications for the feasibility of the algorithm and the real­time requirement Sec­
tion 1.2.2. Algorithms such as the Canny edge detector have therefore been rejected
based on computational complexity.
The best methods to use depend on the application and the error sources associated
with the image, and can therefore be both an asset and a drawback depending on the
application. The results are therefore best informed by rigorous testing.
20
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:29==
4.2.1
Image Processing
The initial raw image is a discretisation and 2D representation of a real­world scenario. In
this case, a spacecraft. Different operations are performed on the image to enhance or
extract different features. The task of image processing can in broad terms be separated
into separate layers; low­level, mid­level and high­level operations.
• The low­level operations deal with primitive operations such as noise reduction, im­
age sharpening, enhancement and such. The input is an image, and the output is
an image.
• The mid­level operations deal with the segmentation and classification of individual
objects. The input is an image, but the output can be different attributes of the image,
like the edges of contours, the latter, which is of crucial importance to the algorithm
designed in this report.
• Finally, the high­level operations attempt to make sense of the recognized objects
and extract meaningful information. This could be functions associated with vision,
like pose estimation.
Raw Image & Sources of Error
The output of the image­capturing process is a raw image. The raw images contain a
wealth of information, but often suffer from various imperfections and artefacts, which de­
grade the image. Pre­processing is a vital step in enhancing meaningful information and
mitigating the effects of noise. Some different sources of image noise could be random
fluctuations in pixel intensities, called Gaussian noise. Another source could be salt and
pepper noise, in which white and black pixels are scattered throughout the image. Effects
relating to the optics of the camera, like blurring from a loss of sharpness, can also occur.
Two optical artefacts, which are especially prevalent in the test images taken, are ghosting
and blooming, which is highlighted in Figure 4.5. Ghosting occurs when light reflects in­
ternally in the camera system and creates duplicate ”ghost” images, which are especially
prevalent around bright light sources in the image, like highly reflective surfaces reflect­
ing directly into the camera sensor. Blooming is an effect cause caused by the CCD, in
which intense light sources oversaturate the sensor and light spills over into neighbouring
sensors, creating a halo effect. This introduces a light gradient in the image, which can
challenge further processing.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.5: An illustration of different factors, which degrade the image and contour.
Also mentioned are obscured parts and weak Signal­to­noise Ratio (SNR). The obscured
parts are not the fault of the imaging process, but the lighting conditions. It is mentioned
because of the challenges it introduces to the pose estimation, by creating complex con­
tours. Different lighting conditions can create variations in the apparent contours. Differ­
ent parts of the spacecraft have different reflective properties. The main body of the CSC
with variations in the surface texture is easy to identify. The solar panel has often proved
to be more difficult. The showcased image in Figure 4.5 suffers from poor lighting. In this
case, the weak edge signal can most likely be attributed to the setup, where the light cone
has not properly covered the entire model. Generally, it is still a problem that the edges
around the solar panel tend to fade into the background. The edge around the solar panel,
where the back panel is not covered by reflective solar panels, is thin. 25 mm on the CSC
and 2.5 mm on the scale model. If not properly illuminated, parts of the contour are lost.
4.2.2
Image Pre-processing
To mitigate the degradation of the edge signals, pre­processing is employed. Common
techniques employed, which have been examined with this project, are:
The Gaussian filter
is a linear and local filter, which smooths the image, without regard
for edges or details (Shreyamsha Kumar, 2013). The Gaussian filter functions, in essence,
as a low­pass filter.
The median filter
is a non­linear method to remove noise from images. The median
filter is suitable for removing salt and pepper noise and has good edge­preserving prop­
erties. The median filter works by replacing each pixel with the median value of its neigh­
22
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:31==
bourhood. It is commonly asserted that median filters have better edge­preserving abili­
ties than linear filters. In general, this statement is false. By modifying the median filter to
run two multiscale passes, the median filter has been shown to improve on linear filtering
(Arias­Castro and Donoho, 2009). Median filters offer several advantages over other sim­
ilar filters. The biggest strength is the low complexity. The median filter is computationally
efficient and easy to implement. The median filter also retains sharp transitions between
different image regions and is less sensitive to extreme values, like the intensities intro­
duced in salt­and­pepper noise. The median filter can also be seen as an adaptive filter,
which adjusts to local variations in pixel intensities. This feature is especially important
for edge preservation without blurring the image.
The bilateral filter
introduced by Tomasi and Manduchi (1998), is a local but non­linear
filter, which considers both intensity similarities and geometric closeness to neighbouring
pixels. The bilateral filter smooths the image, but retains edges. A direct implementation
of the bilateral filter requires O(σ2
s) operations per pixel, with σs being the effective width
of the spatial kernel. The authors of (Chaudhury, 2013) have shown that an accelerated
version of the bilateral filter is possible for real­time implementation for small σr (effective
width of the range/geometric closeness kernel), where the per­pixel operations can be
reduced to O(1).
The linear Wiener filter
has also been researched. It is a deconvolution and noise­
reducing filter, which attempts to recreate the signal, as it is supposed to appear, like
correcting an image with motion blur. The Wiener filter requires specific knowledge of the
statistics of the signals and noise. In comparison to e.g. median filters, the computational
efficiency is lower without providing better results.
Convolution
Image convolution is similar in concept to mathematical convolution, but is not achieved
through traditional matrix multiplication (Yildirim and Kacar, 2019). Image convolution
is a process of analysing the data in the local neighbourhood around a given element.
A pre­defined kernel, e.g. a 3 × 3 Gaussian kernel, functions like a mask around the
given element. The kernel is employed to weigh the local data through an operation on
the neighbourhood, like a mean of the products between the kernel and the local neigh­
bourhood of the element. In Figure 4.6, the process of convolving the input image is
showcased.
Figure 4.6: The output image is the input image convolved with a kernel (Input image =
Output Image * Kernel): em = a · j + b · k + c · l + d · m + e · n + f · o + g · p + h · r + i · s. The
red figure is the input, the purple is the kernel and the green is the input image. Credit:
(Yildirim and Kacar, 2019).
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
23
==PAGE:32==
4.2.3
Image Segmentation
Image segmentation can be seen as a process of arranging the image into different ele­
ments, based on segments of dissimilarity or similar features.
Figure 4.7: Classification of Image Segmentation. Reproduced from Dubey and Vijay
(2018)
Image segmentation techniques, as a whole, can be viewed from two different lenses:
discontinuity and similarity. Discontinuity­based image segmentation focuses on identi­
fying and enhancing regions in an image where abrupt changes or discontinuities occur.
Edges can be found at the discontinuities, by employing methods for detecting and en­
hancing these features. The edge­based discontinuity methods can be further split into
gradient­based methods, like Sobel, Robert and Prewitt, and Gaussian­based methods,
like the Canny edge detector or the Laplacian of the Gaussian.
The other branch of image segmentation deals with identifying and enhancing different
regions in the images based on the similarity between pixel values or textures.
This could be clustering­based approaches, where pixel values are treated as data points
in a feature space which are separated into clusters via different clustering algorithms.
The pixels in one cluster will in some sense relate more to its group than to others (Dubey
and Vijay, 2018).
A common similarity measure is thresholding. The two main categories of image thresh­
olding are global thresholding methods and locally adaptive thresholding methods. Global
thresholding is a cost­effective technique, which separates an image into an object and
the background based on a single pixel­intensity value between 0 −255. It is the simplest
method for segmenting an image, but is susceptible to noise since a clear distinction be­
tween the object and the background rarely exists. Locally adaptive methods attempt to
take into consideration differing lighting and produce much more clean results but at a
cost of computation time.
Region­based segmentation focuses on grouping pixels based on their spatial proximity
and similarity in intensity or other image properties (Lalaoui and Mohamadi, 2013).
4.2.4
Chosen Segmentation Techniques
As the main concern of the algorithm is computation speed, a gradient approach in con­
junction with global thresholding is chosen. Several segmentation techniques can rela­
tively quickly be ruled out. Gaussian­based second­order derivatives provide good re­
sults, but with added computational complexity. Similarly, for threshold methods, locally
24
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:33==
optimised methods trade results for complexity. Several different threshold methods have
been tested in the course of this work, and the incremental improvement different meth­
ods provide is not enough to justify their inclusion. Region­ and clustering­based meth­
ods have only been considered in limited scopes. In tests, the methods didn’t produce
favourable results and the complexity of the algorithms employed far outweighed the ben­
efits.
The conclusions drawn in this section may have to be reassessed at a future point, in
favour of smarter solutions, but at the time of writing this report, the segmentation choices
provide solid results.
Below is an elaboration and description of the gradient­based Sobel filter and the chosen
threshold method.
Sobel
The Sobel filter was chosen over more sophisticated filters, like the Canny edge
detector, due to its simplicity. The Sobel filter is most commonly separated into an x­ and
y­components. The Sobel operator is a combination of a 1D Gaussian filter vector mul­
tiplication with a first­order derivative. For discrete non­continuous functions, the deriva­
tive can be considered analogous to a finite approximation central difference scheme like
such:
f(x, y) = f(x + h, y) −f(x −h, y)
2h
=⇒−1
0
1
f(x, y) = f(x, y + h) −f(x, y −h)
2h
=⇒
−1
0
1
The two Sobel operators therefore become:
Sobel X :
1
2
1
∗
−1
0
1 =⇒


−1
0
+1
−2
0
+2
−1
0
+1


Sobel Y :
−1
0
1
∗
1
2
1 =⇒


−1
−2
−1
0
0
0
+1
+2
+1


When the Sobel operators are convolved with the image, the gradients in the x­ and y­
direction are estimated (Gradients: Gx and Gy). By considering both gradients, one can
achieve a gradient magnitude and direction field:
G =
'
Gx2 + Gy2
Θ = atan
(Gy
Gx
)
Ideas such as utilising a combination of four separate Sobel kernels varying in the ori­
entation of 90◦, 45◦, 0◦and −45◦or combining with a non­maximum value suppression
step, like the Canny edge detector have also been discussed (Canny, 1986; Weng et al.,
2021). Ultimately, the added robustness can not justify the added computational time.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
25
==PAGE:34==
Global Thresholding & the Triangle Method
The main concern for this algorithm is
computation speed, so a global approach is the most feasible.
To solve the problem of deciding a threshold value, the automated thresholding method
known as the triangle method is utilised. The triangle method was developed by Zack,
W. E. Rogers, and Latt (1977) and takes a histogram of the pixel intensities, draws a
straight line from the highest peak to the last bin of the histogram and makes a right
triangle by normalising these distances. The selected threshold value is then the one
with the furthest distance from the line.
The triangle method works especially well in images with one dominant background peak,
unlike Otsu’s method, which is ideal for a bimodal distribution of intensities. The best
thresholding value for the triangle method exists at the base of the peak. The triangle
method is preferential to subjectively picking a threshold.
In­flight, the pictures should all be taken with the same camera settings and under similar
conditions, so the case could also be made, that a manual threshold value based on
testing could be selected as a trade­off for quicker computation. The choice between
one approach and another would have to be studied more thoroughly to make a definitive
decision.
4.2.5
Contour Acquisition Algorithm
For contour acquisition in 2­dimensional images, typically, the concept of connectedness
is used. The two most common methods are 4­ and 8­connectivity in a Von Neumann or
Moore neighbourhood, respectively (Algohary et al., 2011). 8­connectivity will be the focus
of this paper, as that is the choice of employed connectedness. The neighbouring pixels
padding the pixel is called the Moore neighbourhood, which is a 3x3 square tessellation,
with each square being labelled with a cardinal direction, or the corresponding number
with east being 0 and rotating counter­clockwise 8 steps. Any pixel that touches an edge
or a corner becomes a part of the chain and forms either a horizontal, vertical, or diagonal
line. The process of finding the digital pattern is as follows:
1. Starting from a point on the edge, check the adjacent pixel (east/0).
2. If the pixel has a value of 0, continue counter­clockwise until 1 is encountered.
3. When a 1 is encountered, start the process again, but start 2 steps back in a clock­
wise direction.
4. When the digital pattern overlaps with itself, the contour is closed.
In the case multiple contours are located in the image, the contours, which are of an
arbitrary size compared to the longest contour, are kept. This could be any contour, which
is at least 10 % of the length of the original contour.
Custom Contour Acquisition Algorithm
Attempts have also been made to make a custom contour­finding algorithm using a com­
bination of 1D 1st and 2nd order derivatives in three consecutive Bresenham circle of dif­
ferent radii. The product can be seen in Figure 4.8. The approach showed promise as
an alternative to convolutional algorithms, but ultimately was abandoned in favour of the
simplicity of the Sobel filter.
4.2.6
Chosen Algorithm and Design Choices
Many different combinations of filters, kernel sizes and combinations have been tested
out in the course of this project. A lot of time has been allotted to find the most robust and
consistent method for finding the separation of the object and the background. Besides
26
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:35==
(a) Initial starting point.
(b) The gradients in the starting point.
(c) The resulting contour.
Figure 4.8: Attempt at a gradient­based custom contour finding algorithm.
the discussed approach, many different approaches have been attempted. Weighing
results and computational complexity, the best and simplest approach is to pre­process
the image by convolving with a median filter. Then use a Sobel filter for segmentation, to
enhance the edges. The magnitude of the Sobel filter is then used to threshold the image.
The result is a binary image consisting of 1’s belonging to the object and 0’s belonging
to the background. In Figure 4.9, the binary image resulting from different combinations
can be seen. As an example, increasing the size of the median filter kernel did not show
a significant improvement with the added computational costs and even worsened the
results slightly by occasionally severing the solar panel from the body.
Figure 4.9: Different attempted combinations of Sobel filters, median filter kernels of dif­
ferent sizes and thresholding methods and the order of operations
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
27
==PAGE:36==
4.2.7
Line Simplification and Perceptual Grouping
Once the contour has been found, the next step becomes extracting the most useful
features, such as lines and vertices. However, the contour is riddled with noise and what
to the human eye appears to be one continuous straight line, can to a computer appear
like a mess of smaller lines with many different orientations. The discipline of grouping
lines together, much like the human brain would, is called perceptual grouping and sets
up a few conditions to evaluate whether two separate lines belong to the same line.
4.2.8
Initial Reduction
At this point, the contour consists of possibly thousands of pixel­length line segments
resulting from the 8­connectivity approach.
To reduce the load on computation, a pre­processing step is employed. Currently, any line
can have eight different orientations; 0◦to 360◦in 45◦degree steps. To simplify these
orientations, you can exploit the symmetry of rotation. 0◦and 180◦are in the same plane,
45◦and 225◦, 90 and 270◦and finally 135◦and 315◦. No opposite will follow each other.
The entire chain of the contour is run through and whenever a consecutive chain of similar
angles occurs, only the starting point and endpoint are kept. In tests, this has reduced
the number of lines in the vicinity of 40­50 %. This significantly reduces the computational
load of later line simplification steps.
4.2.9
Line Simplification
Many different methods for line simplification have been researched and tested. Most
notably, the Reumann­Witkam (RW), the Lang and the Ramer­Douglas­Peucker (RDP)
algorithms. All three algorithms operate with a tolerance of perpendicular distance from
point to edge, ϵ. The RW and the Lang algorithms are local processing routines, whereas
the RDP is a global processing routine. Other algorithms which have been either briefly
studied or not studied in this report are: The Opheim algorithm, the Visvalingam­Whyatt
algorithm, the Zhao algorithm and the Zhao­Saalfeld algorithm Zhao and Saalfeld (2008).
The three algorithms work in similar ways and achieve comparable results but with slight
differences. The Reumann­Witkam algorithm works by defining a line between the first
vertex and the next. For each successive vertex, the distance between the line and the
vertex is calculated. The tolerance defines a window above and below the line. A new line
is formed between the first vertex and the last vertex within the window. The last index is
now considered the key, and the process repeats.
The Lang Algorithm defines a ’look ahead’ search region, e.g. five vertices ahead, in
which a line is drawn between. Similarly to Reumann­Witkam, a point­to­edge distance
tolerance is used. If any perpendicular distance is larger than the tolerance, the process
will repeat, but now with a line one vertex shorter.
The Ramer­Douglas­Peucker (RDP) algorithm takes a recursive divide­and­conquer ap­
proach. The algorithm starts by defining a line between the first vertex and the one furthest
away. The point that lies farthest away is selected, and a new search begins from both
the first vertex to the new farthest vertex and the old farthest vertex to the new farthest
index. As long as the perpendicular point­to­line distance is larger than the tolerance, the
search repeats. When the perpendicular distance is lower, the first and last vertex are
kept and make up a simplified line.
4.2.10
Perceptual Organization
Perceptual organisation is also an algorithm, which has been experimented with in this
project. The concept in relation to computer vision was suggested by Lowe (1987). Per­
28
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:37==
ceptual organisation has previously been implemented with non­cooperative target track­
ing by Pedersen (2015) and ’amico, Benn, and Jørgensen (2013). In this report, it was
attempted both instead of and in conjunction with RDP. On its own, the reduction was
not nearly as significant as for the RDP algorithm, and problems with computation speed
arose when they were used together. This may have been due to implementation itself.
The results were not telling enough to justify using perceptual organisation over simple
line simplification algorithms.
4.2.11
Choice of Line Simplification Algorithm
A study by Ekdemir (2011) evaluated the RDP, the Lang, the RW, nth point and Triangular
method on four different parameters: performance (speed), shape distortion (positional
error sum), visual difference (total areal sum) and the rendering speed (reduction rate).
The study evaluated varying datasets between 100 and 1,000,000 data points. The RDP
has a recursive implementation. In this study, it was converted into a non­recursive ver­
sion. Ultimately, none of the methods can be considered best in general. Instead, each
method has different advantages in different aspects.
The study found that pre­processing the data with Gaussian smoothing significantly im­
proved the performance of the simplification routines.
Of the different methods, the Ramer­Douglas­Peucker is considered the most mathe­
matically superior routine and yields the best results in terms of dissimilarity measures
and reduction rates, but with the caveat of the lowest processing speed.
Both Lang
and Reumann­Witkam perform approximately equally in terms of the different evaluation
benchmarks. Of the two, the RW better preserved the global characteristics of the poly­
line. Cumulatively, the RDP, RW and the triangular methods were shown to perform the
same in this study, but with different strengths. The downside of the three are the speed,
shape distortion and reduction rate, respectively. In this report, the biggest emphasis has
been on reducing the contour while simultaneously preserving the shape. For this, the
Ramer­Douglas­Peucker by far shows the best results in comparison to the other studied
methods. From the processing of the 73 test images in the dynamic test, the dataset
had an average size of 657 points after the initial reduction of the contour. At this scale,
there is still a significant difference in computation speed by comparison, but the speed
is insignificant in the grand scheme. From tests on the 73 test images, the implemented
RDP Matlab code took on average 8.6 milliseconds per image.
In terms of improving the computational speed of the RDP, two things stand out. The
classic implementation of Ramer­Douglas­Peucker is both recursive and has a complexity
of O(n2). As proposed in Ekdemir (2011), the algorithm could be altered to a non­iterative
version. Another factor slowing down computation is, that in every iteration, the distances
between the key and every point until the endpoint are computed. Another idea could
be to implement a convex hull algorithm into the process. Where instead of computing
the distance between all points, one could simply separate the contour into segments
between every point on the convex hull.
By using Ramer­Douglas­Peucker (RDP), the lines making up the contour are reduced
by around 90 % after the first processing step, or around 94 % compared to the original
contour. This is a monumental decrease and significantly improves the significance of the
resulting lines. This is demonstrated in Section 4.2.11.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) Initial 8­Connectivity Con­
tour
(b) First Line Simplification
step
(c) Ramer­Douglas­Peucker
Line Simplification with ϵ = 3
4.2.12
Contour Acquisition Summary
To acquire a contour, the image is pre­processed with a median filter. The image is then
convolved with two Sobel filters and a magnitude is calculated. From the magnitude,
a threshold value is calculated from a subset of the data via the triangle method. This
thresholding value is then used with a global threshold approach to separate the object
from the background. The object is now a binary image with 0’s being the background
and 1’s being the object.
Once an object has been localised, 8­connectivity is used to separate the contour from
the object. In the case of broken contours, the largest contours are kept. The contour
lines are processed in two steps. First, the size of the contour elements is reduced by
employing a reduction filter, which only keeps start and endpoints, where many consec­
utive lines form a straight line. This reduces lines by approximately 40­50 %. The lines
are then reduced by an additional 90 % by employing the Ramer­Douglas­Peucker line
simplification algorithm. Although faster algorithms exist, the RDP algorithm achieves the
best results in terms of retaining the original. The losses in computational complexity are
negligible at the size of the data sets operated on in this report. Solutions have been
suggested to improve the performance of the RDP. The end product is a contour, which
heavily decreases the lines making up the initial contour by around 94 %, while retaining
the most important data; the overall shape of the object.
4.3
Filter 1: Global Shape Descriptors
The first step in achieving a rough pose­lock is to compare the shape of the spacecraft in
the captured image with a database of different shapes via a global shape descriptor.
Global shape descriptors, which can be compared from image to image, play an instru­
mental part in the process of estimating a rough 6DoF pose for a non­cooperative target
in space. They provide a computationally low complex way of achieving a lock with no a
priori data. Several different invariants exist, including Hu Moments, Fourier Descriptors
and Zernike Moments (Teague, 1980). A study of the robustness of different invariants for
capturing the target’s silhouette with a single binary image taken with a monocular camera
has found that Zernike moment invariants provide higher accuracy and robustness in off­
nominal conditions (Comellini et al., 2021). It has, however, not been studied under harsh
illumination conditions in space, nor with a target with textureless and reflective materials.
Though Hu Moments are known to form an incomplete set, meaning that some shapes
or transformations can’t be uniquely described based on Hu’s Moments, the approach
cannot be excluded outright. Hu Moments offer robustness to certain transformations but
struggle with complex shapes and conditions where e.g. occlusions occur. Using different
30
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:39==
descriptors in conjunction can help offer a more comprehensive and accurate character­
isation of the shapes. There are also improvements to be made for Hu’s invariant mo­
ments, which significantly improve the performance without additional computational cost
(Rhouma and Hussain, 2015). Though, several invariants have been developed since
the development of Hu’s invariant moments in 1962. Hu moments is still one of the most
easily implementable methods with lots of documentation and readily available code.
4.3.1
Hu Moments
Hu Moments is a set of mathematical descriptors used to characterise the shape of an ob­
ject from a binary image (Hu, 1962). Hu Moments are based on normalised spatial image
moments up to the third order, which are invariant to the translation, rotation, and scaling
of the image. The moments only retain their invariance when the function is continuous.
In practice the contour of the image is discrete, so scaling, rotation and translation, will
each have different effects on the outcome (Huang and Leng, 2010).
The steps for calculating the Hu Moments involve the following steps:
1. Convert the image:
Convert the image into a binary image or apply a threshold to
segment the object you want to analyse.
2. Calculate Moments:
Compute the binary image’s central moments up to the third
order. The central moments are calculated using the following formula:
*
µpq = +
x
+
y(x −¯x)p(y −¯y)qI(x, y)
,
where (¯x) and (¯y) are the centroid coordinates of the image and (I(x, y)) is the pixel
intensity at coordinates ((x, y)).
3. Normalize the Moments:
Normalize the central moments to make them invariant to
translation, scale, and rotation. Normalisation is performed using a set of equations to
generate scale, rotation, and translation­invariant Hu Moments.
1. Scale Invariant Moments (First­Order Moments):
η00 = µ00
η10 = µ10
µ00
η01 = µ01
µ00
The normalised Hu Moments from the second order and up are all in the form:
ηjk = µjk/µγ
00
γ = (j + k)/2 + 1
j + k = 2, 3, ...
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
31
==PAGE:40==
2. Rotation Invariant Moments (Second­Order Moments):
η20 = µ20
µ2
00
η11 = µ11
µ2
00
η02 = µ02
µ2
00
3. Scale and Rotation Invariant Moments (Third­Order Moments):
η30 = µ30
µ2.5
00
η21 = µ21
µ2.5
00
η12 = µ12
µ2.5
00
η03 = µ03
µ2.5
00
4. Calculate Hu Moments:
Calculate seven Hu Moments (η) using the normalised
central moments. These moments are computed from the normalised central moments
(µpq) and can be obtained as follows:
η1 =µ20 + µ02
η2 =(µ20 −µ02)2 + 4µ2
11
η3 =(µ30 −3µ12)2 + (3µ21 −µ03)2
η4 =(µ30 + µ12)2 + (µ21 + µ03)2
η5 =(µ30 −3µ12)(µ30 + µ12)[(µ30 + µ12)2−
3(µ21 + µ03)2] + (3µ21 −µ03)(µ21 + µ03)[3(µ30 + µ12)2 −(µ21 + µ03)2]
η6 =(µ20 −µ02)[(µ30 + µ12)2 −(µ21 + µ03)2] + 4µ11(µ30 + µ12)(µ21 + µ03)
η7 =(3µ21 −µ03)(µ30 + µ12)[(µ30 + µ12)2 −3(µ21 + µ03)2]
−(µ30 −3µ12)(µ21 + µ03)[3(µ30 + µ12)2 −(µ21 + µ03)2]
The output of the Hu Moments calculation is the Hu moment vector that contains the
values (η1, η2, . . . , η7), which form the set of numerical descriptors that represent the shape
of the object. These moments can be used in computer vision applications for shape
matching, recognition, and classification.
4.3.2
The Haversine Distance & the Antipode
The haversine distance is the shortest distance from two points on a sphere. The 200
different orientations have been mapped out on the sphere and for each index of point,
its antipode has been found. The antipode is the point farthest from another on a sphere.
Given two points on a sphere, P1 and P2, they can be defined via three parameters: the
radius r, the latitude ϕ, and the latitude λ. The haversine formula, described in Arman
Prasetya et al. (2019), is as follows:
32
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:41==
hav(θ) = sin2
(θ
2
)
= 1 −cos(θ)
2
(haversine function)
(4.2)
hav(θ) = hav (ϕ2 −ϕ1) + cos (ϕ1) cos (ϕ2) hav (λ2 −λ1) (haversine formula)
(4.3)
Where
·
ϕ1, ϕ2 are the latitude of P1 and P2, respectively,
·
λ1, λ2 are the longitude of P1 and P2, respectively.
The haversine distance, d, can then be found from the following equation, where h is the
haversine function:
d = r archav(h) = 2r arcsin(
√
h)
(4.4)
4.3.3
Evaluating uniqueness in Hu Moments
As discussed in Section 4.1.1, 200 images are generated with approximately evenly
spaced orientations around the sphere. From these different orientations, 200 unique
shadows are generated, and the Hu Moment vector is precalculated and stored in a data­
bank with the corresponding orientations. Every time an image is taken of the CSC, the
contour is found, the Hu Moment vector is calculated and compared against the 200 Hu
Moment vectors stored. The general idea is that as long as the target closely resembles
the corresponding model, the contour should also. When comparing Hu Moments, the
contour should most closely resemble one taken from approximately the same vantage
point.
4.3.4
Mirror Symmetry
The contour viewed from one point and the opposite, its antipode, is roughly equivalent but
mirrored. Two similar but mirrored shapes should differ only in the sign of the seventh Hu
Moment. In the case of the 200 images, 148 opposite orientations were correctly identified
as each other’s mirror. In Figure 4.12, images 1­200 (placement shown in Figure 4.11) are
shown as individual lines, where a yellow line indicates that the contours from one point
and its antipode are correctly identified from the seventh Hu moment. There appears to
be a clustering around certain viewpoints. There appears to be a higher concentration of
false negatives around the middle point on Figure 4.12. This would correspond to viewing
perpendicular to the X­axis with respect to the SBC. The seventh Hu Moment is therefore
a good indicator, but not a consistent measure.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.11: Pictures is the CAD model of the CSC along with all the 200 evenly separated
points on the Fibonacci Sphere. Picture #1 is the first point in the sequence and #200 the
last. Pictured are viewpoints #1, #100 and #200.
Figure 4.12: A coloured illustration of the Hu Moment mirror indicator. From left to right,
the figure consists of 200 lines coloured either yellow or black. Yellow indicates a correct
separation of two opposite, and hence mirrored, contours
4.3.5
Uniqueness Hypothesis
As an attempt to evaluate the Hu Moments match as a robust method for matching, a
hypothesis is formed:
Contours closely related to each other pose­wise should appear similar, so we postulate,
that the Hu Moment distance, or matching score, is lowest and most similar to the contours
of neighbouring viewpoints and opposite viewpoints (mirrored contours).
In Figure 4.13, an example of a model picture/contour is given. In the leftmost plot, an
image of a unique viewpoint can be seen. In the middle plot, the resulting matching scores
can be seen as a haversine distance from the selected viewpoint. Matching scores under
0.2 are highlighted in red to show the distribution. A 2nd order polynomial is fitted to the
data to show a general tendency. In the rightmost plot, a sphere can be seen. Here,
the matching scores corresponding with the positions on the sphere are mapped with
high/bad matching values in red and low/good matching values in blue and interpolated
to cover the sphere.
34
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.13: Match Image
For the given viewpoint, it can be observed that the tendency is for the matching values
to be highest at a distance of π/2, but from the rightmost plot in Figure 4.13, it is apparent
that this is only true for the polar regions. There exists a band along the equator, where
matching values are roughly equivalent. In Figure 4.14, the process carried out in the
middle plot from Figure 4.13 is repeated for images 1 −200. Similarly, the 2nd order data
fit is calculated. In the plot, darker values correspond to low/good match scores and bright
values correspond to high/bad. It is clear that in the band roughly between images 60−140,
the contour matches tend to match best with neighbouring contours or opposite/mirrored
contours, thereby validating the hypothesis. Images 1 −59 and 141 −200 seem to vary
in tendency. This could indicate a difficulty in uniquely identifying contours in this interval.
Now, this is a vast simplification of a rather complex relationship, so the results aren’t fully
indicative.
Figure 4.14: Hu Moments Match values for images 1−200. On the X­axis is the haversine
distance from each point. This way, all different pictures can be analysed for overall trends
all at once. The right plot is derived by fitting a 2nd order polynomial to the match data of
the left plot as a function of the haversine distance.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
35
==PAGE:44==
4.3.6
Evaluation of Filter 1
Hu Moments provides a good and stable way to quickly match the contour of the imaged
CSC and the databank of 800 unique contours. The seventh value in the Hu Moment
vector is indicative of mirroring, but is more stable in certain bands of orientations than
others. Similarly, when matching the Hu Moment vector of one contour with all the others,
patterns emerge that show increased stability in certain bands of orientations. Hu Moment
matching alone does not provide a robust enough result, so further filtering of solutions is
required.
4.4
Filter 2: Roll Angle Parameter
After the initial Hu moments match, the result is a list of the best matches. However, the
Hu Moments are invariant to rotation and therefore do not indicate as to which roll angle
it is viewed from.
The roll angle is calculated via circular cross­correlation. The utility of the result is two­
fold. First, it allows the algorithm to find a suitable guess for part of the actual 6DoF pose
with the pitch­ and yaw angle coming from the rough matching with Hu Moments.
Second, it functions as another filter of the best Hu Moments match. As discussed in
section Section 4.3.1, Hu Moments is prone to false positives. The lower Hu Moments
score, the better. The solutions with an arbitrarily low score (e.g. < 0.2) are passed on
to the next filter. From the current image and the best guesses from the Hu Moments
matches, the Center of Mass (CoM) and the contour are used to parametrise the curves.
The parametric curves of the image and best matches are then cross­correlated. A high
cross­correlation score indicates a good match and the best rotation. The parametric
curves are normalised to remove bias from differently scaled contours. From the selected
best Hu Moments matches, the one with the highest cross­correlation score is selected
as the ”true” match. The process of parametrising the contours are as follows:
1. Calculate the Center of Mass from the 0th and 1st order image moments, which have
been calculated in connection with the Hu Moments.
2. From the CoM calculate the Euclidean distance and angle to each point in the con­
tour.
3. Sort them from 0◦to 360 ◦to form the parametric curve.
4. Subsample the parametric curve to discrete steps of 1◦in the interval 0◦­359◦via
linear interpolation.
5. Remap the curve to between 0 and 1 by subtracting the lowest value and dividing
by the highest value.
Once the two contours have been parametrised, the next step is to perform circular cross­
correlation to find the optimal roll angle.
1. Overlay the two parametric curves.
2. Calculate the product between the curves and save the result.
3. Shift the second of the parametric curves once and recalculate the product
4. Repeat this process until the second parametric curve has shifted 360 times
5. Find the location of the highest index. This is the roll angle.
36
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:45==
As an example, a test image and a roughly corresponding model image have been se­
lected, as seen in Figure 4.15a. The contours and CoMare found from both images dis­
played. The two parametric curves are displayed on the left plot in Figure 4.15b with the
resulting cross­correlation plot and optimal roll angle on the right plot. On Figure 4.16, the
model image is rotated −74◦. Through visual inspection, it is clear that the two closely
resemble each other.
(a) A test image and roughly corresponding model images (with the blue
channel removed) are shown side­by­side with their respective contours
and CoM displayed.
(b) The plot on the left displays the two parametric curves on top of each other. The plot on the
right shows the corresponding cross­correlation curve.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.16: Similar to Figure 4.15a. The model image is rotated according to the optimal
roll angle from the cross­correlation.
4.4.1
Translation estimation
Having established a rough rotation estimate, we proceed to estimate the x, y, and z co­
ordinates of the CSC’s CoM. These coordinates indicate the CSC’s approximate position
relative to the camera. Initially obtained the CoM coordinates in pixel coordinates. These
camera coordinates serve as an initial estimate, which is subsequently refined through
further processing steps. To translate, we need to estimate the depth of the image. In
our templates we already know how far away the contour is from the camera, we can
therefore use this information to create a scaling factor, to estimate z.
ˆ
ZC =
d
Acsc
Amodel
(4.5)
Where Acsc is the contour area of the CSC and Amodel contour area of the matched model,
d is the distance from camera to CSC in Blender and ˆ
ZC is our estimated values for CoM
in camera coordinates.
To convert undistorted pixel coordinates to camera coordinates, we employed the follow­
ing formula, by rewriting eq. (2.3) and eq. (2.5):
ˆ
XC = xups,x ˆ
ZC
f
(4.6)
ˆ
YC = yups,y ˆ
ZC
f
(4.7)
•
ˆ
XC and ˆ
YC are our estimated values for CoM in camera coordinates.
• xu and yu are values for the CoM in this case, but can be an arbitrary point in the
image.
• ps,x and ps,y are the pixel size in x and y of the CCD.
• f is the focal length.
Constants can be found in Table 2.1.
38
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:47==
4.4.2
Summary of Filter 2
The result of applying the second filter, has resulted in a single 6 Degrees of Freedom
guess, which can be passed on to the next step of the algorithm.
If the guess is consistent with previous guesses, the guess can be considered good
enough to pass on to the fine pose estimation algorithm. The criterion for which the con­
sistency is defined is not fully defined. Given that the different images are, on average,
12◦apart, any solution, which differs at least twice that, should be discarded.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:49==
5
Fine Pose Estimation
To go from the rough pose to the fine, an algorithm is used to minimize the distance
between known 3D points on the 3D models and points located in the image. The most
obvious and the most recognisable points are vertices.
5.1
Vertex Localisation
Vertices appear at the corners or intersections of lines. Following the line simplification
described in Section 4.2.12, the result is a series of lines, approximately representing the
shape and geometry of the original contour. The best vertices will be made from the best
lines. To evaluate the quality of the lines, two processes are employed.
5.1.1
1. Line Significance
The first process considers the length of the lines and the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
of the simplified lines with respect to the original contour (this value is calculated during
the line simplification step). The length and the RMSE are collected in a single parameter
called the significance parameter.
The RMSE is an evaluation of the lines’ predictive performance, i.e. if the simplified line is
a good representation. The RMSE carries the same units as the parameters. The RMSE
can also be considered the standard deviation of the residuals.
Longer lines indicate a clear representation of the geometric features of the spacecraft,
and large prediction errors penalise the RMSE. The lower the value, the higher the accu­
racy of the fit. Therefore, the significance parameter is defined as:
significance =
d
RMSE
(5.1)
From the two points making up the line, the distance, d, is the Euclidean between. The
Root Mean Square Error is defined as:
RMSE =
-
.
.
/ 1
N
n
0
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(5.2)
where: yi is the actual value ˆyi is the predicted value N is the number of observations
The standard approach to measuring the actual values is to measure the distances from
the predicted values as a y­value. However, as both the x­ and y­positions are susceptible
to errors, the perpendicular distance from the line is measured, instead. This also ensures
stability across all orientations of the line.
5.1.2
2. Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
The other parameter, for evaluating the lines, is the OLS. Any simplification will in na­
ture increase deviation from the truth, and distort the shape of features for the cost of
computation time.
Using the resulting simplified contour to locate the vertices therefore perpetuates errors
picked up from the simplification process.
Where the RMSE gives information on how the established simplified line fits to the data in
the interval between the two end­points, the OLS looks at all the data from one end­point
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
41
==PAGE:50==
to another and fits a line between. This line might be more representative of the tendency
of the whole line and might be closer to the actual vertex than the appeared.
The equations used to define the OLS can be written in a simple form by defining the sum
of squares (Kenney and Keeping, 1962).
ssxx =
n
0
i=1
(xi −¯x)2
(5.3)
ssyy =
n
0
i=1
(yi −¯y)2
(5.4)
ssxy =
n
0
i=1
(xi −¯x) (yi −¯y) ,
(5.5)
The variances and covariances, standardised for sample size, can be written as:
σ2
x = ssxx
n
(5.6)
σ2
y = ssyy
n
(5.7)
cov(x, y) = ssxy
n ,
(5.8)
The regression coefficient b of the line can be found as the covariance between the two
parameters, x and y, divided by the significance of the x­values squared.
b = cov(x, y)
σ2x
= ssxy
ssxx
(5.9)
The slope is then given from the equation of the line:
a = ¯y −b · ¯x
(5.10)
The correlation coefficient, or the coefficient of determination, r2 quantifies the quality of
the fit, where 1 indicates a perfect fit, values close to 1 provide a good explanation of
the variability in the data, and values closer to 0 indicate a larger spread. The correlation
coefficient is given as the squared covariance between the two parameters divided by the
product of the variances of the two parameters.
r2 =
ss2
xy
ssxx ssyy
(5.11)
5.1.3
When to use the line fit
The goodness of a fit can vary quite a lot from application to application. An arbitrary
cut­off is set on the correlation coefficient to decide whether to use the original line, or
the OLS line fit. The selected cut­off is 0.7 in the current implementation of the algorithm.
Anything above this threshold can be considered better than the vertex formed by the
contour lines themselves.
42
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:51==
5.1.4
Intersection Points
Only the most significant lines are of interest. A set of the N most significant lines are
therefore selected to find the vertices, which best represent the shape. In this implemen­
tation, 20 lines are used. An example could be the side of the solar panel, which is most
often picked up as a long straight uninterrupted line and forms the basis of good vertex
estimates.
To begin with, when looking for intersection points, one line is considered at a time. Any
other lines where one of the endpoints lies within the length of the baseline from either of
the endpoints are checked for intersections. The two best intersection points from either
side of the line are kept.
with only lines where one of the end­points Any two of the remaining non­parallel lines
can intersect, so a set of rules is applied to filter out vertices. The first three rules are
following (Pedersen, 2015).
• If the distance from the closest end­points of the two lines is further away from the
intersection point than any of the respective line lengths, the point is discarded.
• The angle between two lines must be in the interval angle ∈[20◦, 160◦].
• The intersection point cannot exist outside the ROI of the target.
• To deal with intersection points from broken contours, a convex hull is formed around
the shape. If two vertices exist within a predefined distance to one of the points of the
convex hull, proximity will have priority over significance. The distance is a design
parameter (set to 30 pixels in the algorithm).
5.1.5
Discussion of the Approach
In this report, the OLS has been used instead of methods, like the Total Least Squares
(TLS) or the Orthogonal Distance Regression (ORD). Only the vertical offsets between
points and the fitted line are therefore considered, as opposed to the perpendicular offset,
like what is used in calculating the significance. The OLS offers simpler computation, but
might come at the cost of the quality of the line fit. The ORD has been shown to perform
significantly better for a straight line than the OLS (Paul T. Boggs et al., 1988; Paul T
Boggs and J. E. Rogers, 1989). Alas, a more thorough analysis needs to be performed
to show how different regression methods affect the overall performance and to better
understand the trade­off between precision versus computation time.
5.2
Pose Refinement
With a rough estimate for the 6DoF pose, we can now further refine this estimate, to
find the correct 6DoF pose. Multiple 3D points are located on the 3D model of the CSC,
making it possible to project to 2D and match them with points in the image of the CSC.
The selected points are the most visible corners of the CSC, since corners are easier to
locate and typically visible from more than one side of the model, These points can be
seen in Figure 5.1 and Table 5.1.
In Section 5.1 a set of 2D vertices and corresponding weights were found from the images.
By transforming the 3D points into the image plane, we can fit the 3D points to the 2D
points using a minimisation algorithm. First, a description of the chosen minimisation
algorithm will be done, then further details of performance.
The minimisation algorithm takes four inputs: the initial guess from the contour matching,
the 3D points on the model, the found 2D points and weights for the 2D points. The initial
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
43
==PAGE:52==
x
y
z
Top right solar panel
­0.080
­2.303
1.197
Top left solar panel
­0.157
­0.843
1.197
Bottom right solar panel
­0.080
­2.303
­0.783
Bottom left solar panel
­0.157
­0.843
­0.783
Bottom left satellite
­0.243
1.030
­0.653
Table 5.1: This table shows the 3D­coordinates of the model. The coordinates are in
meters in SBC as described in Section 2.4.3, and description of placement are as seen
from Figure 5.1
Figure 5.1: 3D model of the CSC with 3D points in light green dots
guess consists of 6 guess values (roll, pitch, yaw, x, y and z of the CSC). From the first
guess, a set of bounds on the guesses is made. It is reasonable to assume that any
consecutive guesses should lie in the vicinity of each other. In space, the trajectory and
angular velocity should not change unless acted upon. The correct 6 values are therefore
assumed to be within these bounds.
The bounds are created using the initial guess plus and minus a standard deviation times
a trial multiplier. When we have 10 good guesses, the standard deviation changes with
these guesses. A simple moving average is used, to estimate where the next guess will
be.
Gn+1 = GSMA5 + Gn
(5.12)
Where G is a vector consisting of all the guesses, n is the image number, GSMA5 is the
simple moving average vector for the last 5 guesses.
Bn+1 = Gn+1 ± 2σSMA5 · t
(5.13)
Where B is a vector consisting of all the lower and upper bounds, σSMA5 is the standard
deviation of the simple moving average vector for the last 10 guesses. t is the trial multi­
plier which increases if a guess is a bad guess, indicated by the loss function. An example
of how the calculated values would look can be seen in table 5.2.
The bounds and guesses can now be added to the minimisation algorithm, which will
44
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:53==
attempt to match the 3D points with the 2D points each iteration using the guessed value,
and steadily approach a local minimum using the L­BFGS­B algorithm:
5.2.1
Matching the points
by using the nearest neighbour method. We start by finding all the projected 2D points for
each image 2D point. Now we calculate the distances between the matches, and also find
duplicate matches. All duplicate matches will be removed, except the one match where
the distance is the lowest. We calculate the distances again, and creating an upper bound
equal to
µ + 1.7 · σ
(5.14)
Every point match that has a greater distance than the upper bound, will not be consid­
ered. If there are under 3 point matches left, we return a very high loss, since the fit would
not produce a valid result. With the point matches left, we can calculate a Weighted Mean
Square Error (WMSE) and return this as our loss.
WMSE =
+ ||p −prt||2
2 · w
+ w
(5.15)
5.2.2
Minimising the distance
The points distances are minimised using the L­BFGS­B algorithm. The perfect scenario
would be an exact analytical solution. This would significantly reduce computation time
and ensure a correct pose solution. The problem, however, does not have an analytical
solution, due to multiple factors making the problem intractable.
• The 3D model and scale model might not perfectly match.
• The 2D vertex localisation has a small, but non­zero error and bias
• The positioning of both the 3D and 2D points might not be accurate, meaning that
the points might never overlap correctly
• Matching points are non­deterministic, we might obtain multiple solutions for match­
ing the points
To overcome this we turn to numerical solution to get approximate solutions. The factors
explained should be considered, since they still apply to the numerical solution. The goal
for minimisation is to approximate the minimum value of a function, in other words, find the
global minimum. The most simple minimisation algorithm works by ”walking” the function
using the gradient. The new parameters θn+1 are calculated using the update rule, given
the current parameters θn (“Quasi­Newton Methods” 2006):
θn+1 = θn −α · ∇f(θn)
(5.16)
Where α is the learning rate, controlling the step size. A step size too big might overshoot
the minimum, and too small might never converge to the minimum. The f is the function,
and ∇f is the function’s gradient. The algorithm continues until it converges, which is typ­
ically when the new parameters are close to the previous parameters. This convergence
differs in different algorithms.
Newton’s method
To overcome having to control the step size, Newton’s method can
be used, which utilises the Hessian matrix to control the step size. The Hessian matrix is a
square matrix with rows and columns equal to the amount of parameters; in this case, six.
The Hessian matrix describes the local curvature using second­order partial derivatives.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
45
==PAGE:54==
The Hessian matrix is used to assess the curvature of the function, to determine whether
the gradient descent algorithm is converging quickly or slowly. The curvature can be
thought of, as a measure of how fast a curve is changing direction at a given point (Polyak,
2007).
θn+1 = θn −H(θn)−1∇f(θn)
(5.17)
Where H is the Hessian matrix. It comes with its own problems, typically the Hessian
matrix might not be available since it is computationally expensive to calculate. The con­
cept of positive definiteness is important. A Hessian matrix, which is not positive defi­
nite, indicates that the function does not have a single global minimum. Instead, we use
a Quasi­Newton method to approximate the Hessian, and make sure it is always posi­
tive definite. The Hessian matrix of our non­quadratic function could be computed using
numerical methods, but be computationally expensive (J. E. Dennis and Moré, 2006)
(“Quasi­Newton Methods” 2006).
L­BFGS­B algorithm
The L­BFGS­B1 algorithm extends the BFGS algorithm, which is
a type of Quasi­Newton method as described in Byrd et al. (2006) and “Quasi­Newton
Methods” (2006).
The BFGS algorithm works in five steps until converging, the algorithm starts by estimating
the inverse Hessian matrix, which will use less computing and produce more precise
estimates. The Hessian matrix needs to follow some constraints which makes it positive­
definite i.e. having a global minimum, each iteration. The constraints are incorporated by
following Wolfe conditions, which keeps the Hessian matrix positive­definite as described
in Wolfe P (2006).
The BFGS algorithm starts by finding a direction
pk = −Hk∇f(xk)
(5.18)
Where pk is the direction vector in the step k, Hk is the approximated inverse Hessian
matrix. ∇f is the function’s gradient, and xk are the values we are minimising.
Next, make a line search while satisfying the Wolfe conditions Wolfe P (2006):
f(xk + αpk) ≤f(xk) + c1α∇fT
k pk
(5.19)
Where c ∈(0, 1).
or using Armijo line search from Armijo (1966):
αk = arg minf(xk + αpk)
(5.20)
Where αk is our step size in the step k. We can multiply the direction vector (pk) with the
newly found step size, to get new values for x:
sk = αkpk
(5.21)
xk+1 = xk + sk
(5.22)
Where sk are the step. With the next values (xk+1), we can calculate a delta gradient, to
update the inverse Hessian matrix.
yk = ∇f(xk+1) −∇f(xk)
(5.23)
1Limited­memory Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno Bound constrained algorithm
46
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:55==
Where yk is the delta gradient. The next Hessian is calculated like this:
Hk+1 = Hk + (sT
k yk + yT
k Hkyk)(sksT
k )
(sT
k yk)2
−HkyksT
k + skyT
k Hk
sT
k yk
(5.24)
The Hessian is positive­definite and since αk satisfies the Wolfe conditions, then the new
Hessian must also be positive­definite.
The steps are repeated until xk converges. The algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 BFGS algorithm
Require: x0 starting values, ϵ > 0 convergence tolerance and H0 Inverse hessian
k ←0
while ||∇fk|| > ϵ do
pk = −Hk∇f(xk)
▷Compute direction
sk = αkpk
▷Compute step
xk+1 = xk + sk
▷Update values
yk = ∇f(xk+1) −∇f(xk)
▷Update delta gradient
Compute new hessian Hk+1 from eq. (5.24)
k ←k + 1
end while
The L­BFGS­B algorithm follows the same steps as the BFGS algorithm, although now
with two optimisations (Al­Baali, 1999):
1. Instead of doing 1D optimisation using Armijo line search, we can now constrain the
individual pose parameters. We might know that the CSC would not suddenly roll
90 deg.
2. The BFGS algorithm uses a full Hessian matrix, where the L­BFGS­B algorithm uses
a limited­memory Hessian approximation
The L­BFGS­B algorithm is widely recognized as a more efficient and robust optimisation
technique than the Nelder–Mead (NM) algorithm. Here are some of the key advantages
of L­BFGS­B (Varelas and Dahito, 2019):
• Efficiency: L­BFGS­B employs derivative information to guide its search for an
optimal solution. This utilisation of gradient information significantly enhances the
algorithm’s efficiency, particularly for issues involving smooth and well­behaved ob­
jective functions.
• Robustness: L­BFGS­B exhibits reduced sensitivity to the choice of initial starting
point and variable scaling compared to NM. This increased robustness renders it
suitable for a broader spectrum of optimisation problems.
• Convergence: L­BFGS­B generally converges to an optimal solution more rapidly
than NM. This is attributed to its ability to take larger steps in the direction of the
steepest descent, enabling it to overcome local optima more effectively.
In summary, L­BFGS­B is a suitable choice for optimisation problems characterised by
smoothness, well­behaved objective functions, and well­defined global optima. In con­
trast, NM is more appropriate for problems involving noise, multiple local optima, or un­
defined global optima.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
47
==PAGE:56==
Optimising the L­BFGS­B algorithm
Due to the gradual changes in the relative ve­
locity and pose of the CSC to the OSC in HEO, we leveraged this dynamic behaviour
to predict the CSC’s subsequent pose based on the preceding 10 observations. Ad­
ditionally, we employed uncertainty measures to adaptively shrink or expand the pose
search space, ensuring that the search area is focused when the uncertainty is low (indi­
cating high confidence in the current pose estimate) and expanded when the uncertainty
is high (suggesting a need for more exploration). The initial guess for the subsequent
pose was obtained from the first stage of the algorithm, where a rough pose match was
established. For the first 10 images, no predictions were made; instead, we assumed
that the subsequent pose remained the same as the current pose, incorporating fixed
deviations to accommodate potential errors. Following the 10th image, we employed a
simple moving average (SMA) on the discrete differences between consecutive poses,
effectively capturing the overall trend in pose changes. Simultaneously, we calculated
the standard deviation (SD) of the SMA, which served as the uncertainty measure for
the subsequent pose estimate. This uncertainty determined the upper and lower bounds
for the next guess, ensuring that the search space was appropriately constrained. The
detailed process is described in Section 5.2.
φ
θ
ψ
x
y
z
SMA
­12.092
­4.957
1.964
­0.008
­0.009
­0.294
STD
3.924
3.339
4.045
0.011
0.018
0.095
Previous guess
­30.832
­111.464
91.725
0.229
0.153
­0.612
New guess
­36.878
­113.943
92.708
0.225
0.148
­0.759
Lower bounds
­40.802
­117.282
88.663
0.214
0.130
­0.853
Upper bounds
­32.955
­110.604
96.753
0.237
0.167
­0.664
Guess with lowest loss
­33.721
­113.301
89.760
0.222
0.138
­0.727
Table 5.2: Example values for calculations of bounds and new guess
48
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:57==
6
Results and Analysis
This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of the pose estimation algorithm, com­
paring its performance under two distinct setups: a simulated best­case setup, using
images generated in Blender, and a real­world setup, using images taken from a scaled
model of the CSC spacecraft. The goal is to assess the algorithm’s robustness and accu­
racy in both controlled and dynamic environments, also evaluating the requirement criteria
given in Table 6.1.
Area
Criteria
Goal
Performance
Processing time
1Hz
Synthetic data
Lateral (radial) placement
±1% relative to the target
Angular (roll) misalignment
±4°
Angular (pitch,yaw) misalignment
±4°
Real world experiment
Translational (z) precision
±1% relative to the target
Radial (x,y) precision
±1% relative to the target
Delta rotation step size CSC
5°±1°
Table 6.1: Evaluation criteria’s of the algorithm
The results of the different tests are presented in detail, providing a comprehensive as­
sessment of the algorithm’s performance in both real­world and simulated environments.
We discuss the algorithm’s strengths and limitations, highlighting its ability to handle chal­
lenging lighting conditions and dynamic movements.
Finally, we compare the performance of the algorithm under the two setups, concluding
that the simulated setup offers several advantages for reproducibility and controlled ex­
perimentation. However, the real­world setup provides a more realistic assessment of the
algorithm’s ability to handle real­world conditions.
6.1
Validation of the Algorithm
To evaluate the accuracy and reproducibility of the algorithm, a set of test images was
created using a 3D model of the CSC in Blender, using the rotation axis as described in
Section 6.2.4. The camera parameters (as stated in Table 2.1) and location in Blender
were adjusted to match a real­world scenario. However, with the pixel sizes being equal
length of 8.6µm (due to limitations in Blender). This would enable us to have a real truth,
instead of an estimated truth. It would also help us validate the pose aspect of the al­
gorithm, since the images would not include any artefacts or other image distortions that
would interfere with other aspects of the algorithm.
6.1.1
Performance
As stated by Pedersen (2015), the onboard microchip of the CSC possesses restricted
computational capacity. This is a common feature among spacecraft, as they operate
with limited energy and resources, further constraining onboard computing power. The
performance in this report evaluation was conducted on a 2.6 GHz 6­Core Intel Core i7
Central Processing Unit (CPU). Although the algorithm was not optimized for multicore,
some internal functions would utilize all 6 cores to perform better. The total time in this
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
49
==PAGE:58==
section has been upscaled to total CPU time, indicating a value that could be expected
on a single core CPU. The results will be categorized into segments corresponding to the
algorithm depicted in Figure 3.1. The test was conducted on a dataset of 73 images to
obtain an average performance across all images. The data can be seen in Appendix B.
Rough pose estimation
The rough pose estimation used 0.55 seconds per image, which is high, but with some
simple optimizations it is possible to decrease quite a bit as described in this section. Due
to prioritisation these optimizations were not implemented, but were planned. The time
used for performance is the total time spent in the function, excluding time made in calls
to sub­functions.
As seen in Figure 6.1 the top 1, 3 and 4 functions all has something to do with calculating
the roll of the CSC as described in Section 4.4.
Figure 6.1: Total running time of top 10 functions in rough pose estimation
The function custom_uniform_interpolation is calculating the parametric curve of the
contour. This function is called every time a match is found and runs on the image contour
and the matched model contour, for each match. Leading to a running time of, O(N)
where N is the number of matches.
Instead, all parametric curves could be precalculated for all model contours, e.g. before
launching the CSC. The CPU should only calculate once per image. Leading to a running
time of O(1) this would decrease the average calls to this function from 50.63 to 1, making
the function 50.63 times quicker. Inherently decreasing the average time per image with
0.12 seconds.
We can still do better. The function roll is used when calculating the sum of overlapping
two parametric curves, then rolling one parametric curve and calculating again 360 times.
We are also doing it for the reversed parametric curve, to check for mirroring. This result
is used to find the best roll value for the CSC, but we only need an estimate for the roll,
therefore we could either decrease the number of times we are shifting, or find another
way to estimate the roll. As mentioned in Section 4.3.1 and Section 4.4 there is a way
to estimate the roll and mirroring using image moments and Hu Moments, respectively,
which could be sufficient for the rough pose estimate. This would remove the need for
50
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:59==
roll and calculate_roll, hypothetically decreasing the average time per image with
0.24 seconds.
The hypothetical time per image could be decreased to 0.19 seconds, a lot better than
0.55 seconds.
Finding vertices
The finding vertices step used on average 0.04 seconds per image. Which is a very low
time to find vertices in an image.
Figure 6.2: Total running time of top 10 functions in finding vertices
When comparing Figure 6.2 with Figure 6.1 it is evident that the readAscImage is much
quicker than {imread}:internal, suggesting that changing the way we read the images
can also be accelerated quite a bit.
Fine pose estimation
The fine pose estimation used to an average of 0.26 seconds per image. In this step of the
algorithm, a lot of aspects has already been optimised which is apparent when looking at
the Figure 6.3.
The fine pose estimation is a numerical iterative process. Therefore, giving this step better
guesses and tighter bounds for the minimisation variables, could decrease the overall
iterations needed. The closer the guess is to the minimised value, the fewer iterations are
required according to Byrd et al. (2006).
Running on a microprocessor
The current implementation of the rough pose estimation algorithm exhibits inefficiencies
that can be effectively addressed by employing a combination of optimisation strategies.
Precalculating parametric curves, adopting a more efficient roll estimation method, and
modifying the image acquisition process can significantly reduce the algorithm’s computa­
tional burden. Furthermore, the fine pose estimation phase can be enhanced by providing
improved initial guesses and tighter bounds for the minimisation variables.
To further optimise the algorithm for execution on a microchip, a transition to a better­
performing programming language such as C is recommended. This migration would
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.3: Total running time of top 10 functions in fine pose estimation
grant greater control over memory management and instruction­level optimisation, po­
tentially yielding substantial performance gains. Additionally, the algorithm’s structure
should be redesigned to minimise data transfers between the CPU and memory.
By implementing these comprehensive optimisation strategies, the algorithm can be trans­
formed into a highly efficient and microchip­compatible solution. This advancement would
enable real­time object detection and tracking capabilities on the spacecraft.
6.1.2
Vertex precision
We evaluate how good the algorithm is at finding vertices in the images by rotating the
3D points (section 2.5) on the CSC and then projecting to the image plane (section 2.4.2).
We can then compare the true projection with the estimated projection by calculating the
residuals using Equation (6.1). We would also like to know if the line fit described in
section 5.1 performed better than without the line fit.
(a) Residuals for x in pixel values
(b) Residuals for y in pixel values
Figure 6.4: Residuals for pixel values without line fit
Figure 6.4 visually depicts the estimated pixel values compared to the ground truth for
52
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:61==
the synthetic data without line fitting. While the estimates are not perfectly aligned with
the correct values, as evidenced by the non­zero residuals, it is important to consider the
accompanying standard deviation. Notably, the standard deviation associated with these
residuals may be ”a little high” indicating a spread in the estimation errors. Given this
observation, it is reasonable to explore potential improvements.
In contrast, Figure 6.5 showcases a significant improvement in estimation accuracy with
a different approach using life fit. In both the x and y directions, the estimated pixel values
exhibit a high degree of agreement with the ground truth. The residuals lie predominantly
within an approximately 1­pixel band for the x direction and a 2­pixel band for the y direc­
tion, reflecting a substantial gain in accuracy.
(a) Residuals for x in pixel values
(b) Residuals for y in pixel values
Figure 6.5: Residuals for pixel values with line fit
While the x­axis pixel estimation exhibits high accuracy, further investigation is warranted
for the y­axis results. Despite the overall good performance within a 2­pixel band, a con­
sistent tendency towards overestimation with a bias of approximately 1 pixel is observed.
This observation suggests the presence of a systematic bias within the algorithm, po­
tentially related to its vertex detection capabilities. However, it is crucial to consider the
inherent challenges of depth estimation from 2D images alone. The difficulty of accurately
reconstructing depth information from a single view can contribute to biases in algorithms
attempting to localise specific features like vertices. While the observed 1­pixel overes­
timation may seem minor, its potential source lies in the inherent limitations of 2D­to­3D
depth estimation algorithms.
Depth Uncertainty
The theoretical best­case is achieved From the fine pose estimate using synthetic data.
The distinction between background and object is as good as possible, given the dimen­
sions of the image and inherent resolution. It has been established, that fitting a line to the
contour lines when finding the vertices, versus just using the contour lines, is significantly
better. Without the line fit, the estimated points are on average biased µ = −0.22 pixels
away with one standard deviation of σ = 1.75 in the X­direction, and µ = 0.54, σ = 1.26
in the Y­direction, from the true position.
This is significantly reduced by fitting a line to the data, to now be, X : µ = 0.11, σ = 0.6
and Y : µ = 0.78, σ = 0.98.
This uncertainty in X and Y gives rise to an uncertainty in the depth estimation. As­
suming that the standard deviation in X and Y corresponds to the vertex precision, the
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
53
==PAGE:62==
Z­uncertainty can be calculated. This is done using the pinhole camera model, where
a small uncertainty in the vertex placement in the image plane corresponds to a large
uncertainty in the world coordinates. Assuming that the X­ and Y­coordinates appear
in the same place in the image, draw a line here and find at which z­value the vertex,
converted from pixels to world coordinates, would cross this line. In Figure 6.6, the 1D
case is shown, where the Z­uncertainty is plotted as a function of a small change in the
y­pixel­coordinates.
Figure 6.6: The pinhole camera model with a 1D depth uncertainty plotted over.
According to Section 1.2.1, the lateral positioning between the target and chaser should
be at most ±1 % of the target distance. Assuming a distance of 22 m, this is ±22 cm.
In Figure 6.7, the uncertainty, as a function of the X­ and Y­coordinates with and without
using line fitting to find the vertices, can be seen. Without fitting a line, the result of
the corresponding image area percentages under ±1, ±1.5 and ±2.5 %, respectively,
corresponds to an effective area in the image of 19.72 %, 43.84 % and 64.63 %. With the
line fit, these ratios increase to 51.69 % below ±1 %, 67.29 % below ±1.5 % and 80.19 %
below ±2.5 %.
It is very clear, that the results and accuracy are vastly improved by utilising a line fit. The
Z­uncertainty in the image plane is not fully indicative of the result of the minimisation al­
gorithm. Even though a vertex appears in an area with an inherent uncertainty of ±2.5 %,
the errors might be compensated by the fitting of more vertices. It is, however, a good
indication to some of the limitations of the algorithm.
6.1.3
Angular precision
Having established the true rotation values, we now embark on a comparative analysis
with the estimations generated by our algorithm. This investigation utilises the calculated
residuals depicted in Figure 6.8. Amongst the three rotational axes, the pitch residuals
exhibit the most favourable statistical properties, characterised by a mean closest to zero
and the lowest standard deviation. This observation implies that the algorithm demon­
strates superior accuracy in estimating pitch angles compared to roll and yaw.
While the mean value of −0.09 degrees suggests a systematic tendency for the algorithm
54
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:63==
(a) Uncertainty in Z given the vertex uncer­
tainty with wo/ line fitting.
(b) Uncertainty in Z given the vertex uncer­
tainty w/ line fitting.
Figure 6.7: Uncertainty of the vertex depth location when the vertices have been located
with and without line fitting.
to underestimate pitch, the low standard deviation of 1.11 degrees signifies a minimal
spread in this underestimation, indicating low uncertainty in the predictions. This implies
that the algorithm consistently underestimates pitch by a small amount. Examination of
the residual plots reveals intriguing characteristics within the roll and yaw residuals. No­
tably, both axes exhibit skewness in opposite directions, potentially suggesting a system­
atic pattern of underestimation and overestimation, possibly intended for mutual compen­
sation. This hypothesis is bolstered by the observation of identical means (albeit with
opposite signs) and highly similar standard deviations in both residuals. Furthermore, a
potential link exists between this phenomenon and the previously observed overestima­
tion in the y direction when identifying vertices. This overestimation might influence how
the algorithm subsequently integrates vertices into the 3D point fitting process, potentially
inducing systematic errors in specific axes like roll and yaw.
6.1.4
Algorithm Validation Summary
The current implementation of the algorithm exhibits an average execution time of 0.85
seconds per image, which is the sum of the individual execution times of the rough es­
timate (0.55 seconds), finding vertices (0.04 seconds) and fine estimate (0.26 seconds).
This runtime is below the frequency criterion of 1Hz. However, it is noteworthy that only
the rough estimate executes during the lock acquisition phase, suggesting a potential for
performance optimisation. If optimised, the average execution time could be reduced to
approximately 0.30 seconds. While theoretical analysis suggests that achieving sub­ 1Hz
execution on a microprocessor is feasible, further investigation and practical implemen­
tation are necessary for conclusive validation.
Under the best­case conditions, the algorithm could locate vertices with an accuracy of
X : ± = 0.6 pixels and Y : ± = 0.98 pixels. The uncertainty in the vertex accuracy
directly affects the minimization algorithm by introducing errors in the depth estimate of
the located vertices. By using Ordinary Least Squares to locate the vertices, the accuracy
was decreased from ±1.75 to ±0.6 pixels in the X­direction, and ±1.26 to ±0.98 in the
Y­direction. The position of the vertices compared with the true position exhibits a slight
bias, with the average offset being 0.11 and 0.78 pixels in X and Y.
Using the synthetic data the algorithm could estimate roll within −2.98°to +4.94°, the pitch
within −1.20°to +1.02°, and yaw within −4.92°to +2.76°. This implies that only the pitch
estimation is within the goal of ±4°, although the roll and yaw estimates are very close to
the goal.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) Residuals for roll
(b) Residuals for pitch
(c) Residuals for yaw
(d) Residuals for the vector product of pitch
and yaw
Figure 6.8: Residuals for rotation
6.2
Verification of the Algorithm
The test setup was designed to closely simulate a real­world scenario. A 3D model was
employed, specifically crafted to closely resemble the actual configuration. The camera
utilized in the test setup was a Camera Head Unit (CHU) with specifications as detailed
in Table 2.1. A top­down view of the test setup can be observed in Figure 6.9a. The
positions of the elements, the angles, the camera FoV and the model size are drawn to
the true scale in relation to each other.
As seen in Figure 6.9a, the setup had a 1:10 scale model of the CSC. The height of the
light source, CSC and CHU had a roughly even height. Enough to consider them equal.
Distance
CHU ­ CSC
221.0 cm
Light source ­ CSC
210.0 cm
Light source ­ CHU
81.5 cm
CSC ­ rotation stand
30.5 cm
Light source ­ rotation stand
240.5 cm
Table 6.2: Distances in the test setup, all measurements are from centre of the object,
measured from above
While the test setup aimed to replicate the conditions of outer space, it was unable to
56
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:65==
(a) Illustration of the setup (seen from above). The CC is denoted as C, and
the SBC is denoted as T.
(b) Image of the setup seen from behind the CHU.
fully capture the complex and dynamic environment. Consequently, it was not possible to
obtain an entirely accurate representation. Nonetheless, efforts were made to minimize
the discrepancies. The spotlight was positioned in such a manner that the 3D model cast
a shadow on the rotation arm, reducing the shadow’s visibility to the CHU. Additionally, the
setup was positioned far enough away from the walls to diminish the amount of light from
the light source striking the background. The light source placement was further refined
to minimize light reflections from the model into the CHU, thereby reducing flaring and
ghosting effects in the images. In all test setups, the images used were uncompressed.
The light source was also the only light source in the room that was turned on during the
tests.
6.2.1
Static tests
A series of five static tests were conducted, employing five consecutive images for each
test, all captured from the CSC scale model. Neither the model nor the test setup under­
went any alterations during the acquisition of the five consecutive images. The primary
objective of these static tests was to verify the algorithm’s determinism and robustness to
image noise and other factors that might influence image quality.
To achieve this goal, the test sequence was designed to maintain a consistent illumination
and background environment for each image in the sequence. Additionally, the CHU’s
parameters were kept constant to avoid introducing any potential bias. By employing
these measures, we aimed to isolate the algorithm’s performance and assess its ability
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
57
==PAGE:66==
to consistently extract the same 6DoF from every image, regardless of minor variations
in the image quality.
In Figure 6.10, five images from one of the static test setups are shown. It can be observed
that slight variations occur from image to image. Notably, the shape retention is very
significant. However, slight, presumably random, variations from image to image change
how some of the lines are simplified. This in turn affects the significance factor of the lines
and thus, which lines are selected to find vertices and the resulting weights of the found
vertices. Though slight variation appears, the three most significant vertices on the three
most distinct corners of the solar panel, remain with a consistent collective significance of
approximately 80­85 % of the total significance. In this test, there would therefore not be
any significant change to the pose refinement step, as the rest of the remaining vertices
fluctuate randomly and without much significance. The static test also highlights that the
otherwise linear features around the body of the satellite are not picked up often enough.
This is either due to different optical effects introducing noise into the contour or the level
of smoothing employed.
(a) Vertices located on pic­
ture 1.
(b) Vertices located on pic­
ture 2.
(c) Vertices located on picture
3.
(d) Vertices located on pic­
ture 4.
(e) Vertices located on pic­
ture 5.
Figure 6.10: The test results of setup 1 in the static tests.
6.2.2
Dynamic tests
While static tests provide valuable insights into the algorithm’s performance under con­
trolled conditions, they fail to capture the complexities of real­world scenarios. To truly
assess the robustness and accuracy of 3D model pose estimation algorithms, it is crucial
to conduct dynamic tests. These tests involve rotating the model to simulate its movement
in a dynamic environment, such as outer space.
Dynamic tests assess the algorithm’s ability to accurately track the model’s pose as it
58
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:67==
rotates. This is essential since it is a requirement to continuously monitor the CSC in
motion. By evaluating the algorithm’s performance under these conditions, we can assess
its robustness in the real world.
Dynamic tests also have some challenges, such as maintaining consistent illumination
during rotation, as the model’s orientation relative to the light source changes. This can
introduce variations in image brightness, individual components disappearing or fading
and contrast changes, all affecting the algorithm’s performance.
The dynamic test was conducted by rotating the scale model around the rotation stand,
as depicted in Figure 6.9a. Starting from the axial angle of −360◦, 73 images were taken
of the CSC with 5°intervals to reach the final angle of 0◦.
6.2.3
Algorithm Results
Figure 6.11: Estimates from the rough pose estimates, the score represent the matching
value of the image contour and the model contour, lower is better. Some points in the plot
are higher correlated, indicating that these estimates might have found a correct estimate
of the CSC.
The output from the algorithm is shown in rough estimates in fig. 6.11 and fine estimates
in Figure 6.12, where also the guess and min/max values are depicted with the output
of the algorithm. The data has been repeated to check if the algorithm is consistent and
repeatable, since we have the same rotation on the first and last image, the last image
has been omitted to keep the axial delta rotation to be 5°.
As evident for Figure 6.12 in the first point, in all plots, the initial guess exhibits the highest
uncertainty. The uncertainty ”spikes” observed in the plots arise from instances where the
algorithm requires more iterations to converge on a satisfactory match. This phenomenon
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
59
==PAGE:68==
(a) Roll guess
(b) Pitch guess
(c) Yaw guess
Figure 6.12: Guesses for rotation using SMA
is attributed to the ”trial multiplier,” which dynamically adjusts the number of trials based
on the complexity of the pose estimation task. Visually, the predictions appear to be
remarkably accurate in anticipating subsequent poses, especially when the best estimates
exhibit a stable trend. Additionally, as seen in Figure 6.13, through visual inspection,
there is a large agreement between the estimated poses and the images taken. Even
though a perfect ground truth comparison was not achieved, the pictures tell a story and
consistently reach a pose approximately similar to what is observed.
6.2.4
Dynamic Test Verification
All the results from the 6DoF pose estimation algorithm are attempting to coincide points
from the 3D model of the CSC with what the camera observes. For any estimate that
is produced, a ground truth exists. The scale model sits on a rotation stand, which is
angled with respect to the observer. The 1:10 scaled drawing of the setup can be seen in
Figure 6.9a. From knowing this ground truth, the estimated orientations can be validated.
Though attempts were made during the initial data collection, a true ”ground truth” was
never established, so this has to have been found after data collection and partly uses test
results to iteratively estimate both the rotation axis, rotation point and step size. There are
also some factors, which make an accurate depiction impossible. Some of the different
sources of error are listed and discussed below.
Deviation Between the 3D Mesh and Scale Model
Between the 3D model and the scale model, there is a slight discrepancy. The scale
model is made to as closely as possible resemble 3D mesh, with added materials to make
it appear as the real spacecraft would. Small differences might appear between one and
60
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.13: 3D model images overlaid over the scale model images. The 3D model
images are transformed according to the estimated 6DoF pose from the algorithm.
another. For example, the material used for the solar panel had woven carbon fibre, which
is both visible in the picture and reflects light unevenly. Though a similar material might
be in use for the real spacecraft, the weave is not scaled down to 1:10. The result is a
degradation of the signal from the edges of the solar panel. The solar panels themselves
were also placed unevenly around the edges. Measurements from the real CSC reveal
that the distances from solar panel to edge should be 25 mm and hence 2.5 mm on the
scale model. This distance is measured between 1.5 and 2 mm on the scale model. In
tests, this was mitigated by adding 2.5 mm wide reflective tape to the edges. This is but
one example where the scale model differs.
Initial Pose Error & Guess
In the dynamic test from which the pose estimations are derived, the gimbal, which was
responsible for rotation around the scale model’s z­axis, or yaw angle, was not tightened
properly. The yaw­gimbal was therefore freely rotating and had to be locked in an unknown
position to solve this. Presumably around 10 −20 degrees.
To arrive at a good guess for the initial pose, which is subsequently used to validate the
test data, the result from the pose refinement algorithm is manually adjusted. The result
is not perfect. As discussed, a perfect alignment may not exist. This is the pose which is
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
61
==PAGE:70==
assumed to be the ”ground truth” pose and is subsequently used to produce the synthetic
data from which the estimated data is validated. Any deviation should show up as a
systematic error.
(a) Picture 1 cropped to 580×
580.
(b) Picture 1 and 3D mesh es­
timate superimposed
(c) The estimated position
and orientation of the 3D
mesh from comparison with
the image.
Figure 6.14: The figure shows the initial guess of the ”ground truth” pose. The guess is
the result of an orientation produced from the algorithm but with slight manual changes.
Axis of Rotation
Another point of deviation from the experiment to the data processing is the fact that
the point of rotation as well as the rotational axis of the setup is unknown before data
processing. Attempts have been made to estimate the ground truth of the setup. From the
result of the fine pose estimate, the axis of rotation has been estimated. In Figure 6.15,
the resulting position of the top right point of the solar panel can be seen plotted from
pictures 2­73 (the first is omitted because it is from the initial guess).
Given a set of n points, A = (x, y, z)T ∈R3, the following algorithm can find the circle in
3D space, which best fits the data.
First, the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) is used to find the plane which best fits
the set of mean­centred points. The data is decomposed into the U, S and V matrices,
where the columns of U and V are orthonormal. A relates to the SVD by A = V S−1U T ,
where the columns of U are the eigenvectors, which span the data space and the columns
of V are the eigenvectors (or the basis), which span the model space (“Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD)” n.d.; Fitting a Circle to Cluster of 3D Points | MeshLogic n.d.).
The mean­centred points are then projected onto the 2D fitting plane using the newly
found basis. The method of least­squares is used to find a circle in the 2D points and
extract the centre and radius, which minimises the sum of squares of the fitted circle.
Lastly, the circle is transformed back into 3D coordinates with a corresponding centre,
radius and normal vector.
As seen in Figure 6.15, the movement of the top right point of the solar panel shows a
clear trend of a circular motion. The 3D mesh is plotted in the frame with the estimated
pose, centre and rotation axis. The TRSP point of the 3D mesh is plotted in green.
From the TRSP data, the fitted plane indicates a normal vector of the rotation axis of
[X, Y, Z] = [−0.0228, 0.3338, −0.9424]CC. This result is malleable and changes slightly
depending on which and how many different of the estimated 3D points are used. The
result should therefore be accepted as an approximate estimate.
62
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.15: The image illustrates the 3D mesh positioned on the estimated rotational
axis and point. The points in the picture correspond to the resulting position of the top
right (TRSP) point on the solar panel during the full rotation in the dynamic test. A circle
has been fitted to the data via SVD. From this fit, the normal vector of the plane is the
estimated rotation axis.
Verifying Rotation Step-size
73 images were taken, rotating the scale model 5◦per picture around the central axis of the
rotation stand. Images 1 and 73, correspond to a rotation of −360◦and 0◦, respectively.
In other words: the same starting and endpoint. It was, however, observed from visual
inspection, that the apparent pose of images 1 and 73 were not in perfect alignment.
It can be concluded from this that either the 5◦steps were slightly off, or some sort of
slip occurred during data collection. This result was consistent across multiple separate
tests. The result is, therefore, that the rotation steps are uneven throughout the data
collection, though close enough to be approximated to 5.0◦. We must keep this in mind
when evaluating the data. A slight twist change in the yaw angle also occurred.
The data shown in Figure 6.16 are produced by rotating the estimated TRSP points to
align with the rotation axis in Section 6.2.4. An angle is then calculated for each point,
corresponding to the supposed roll angle. By subtracting the difference in angle for each
successive point, one should ideally arrive at the known step size of 5◦. The calculated
step size had a mean of 4.9872◦and a standard deviation of 0.7365◦. Most of the data lies
very close to the expected 5◦, with a few outliers. The dashed red line in the middle of
Figure 6.16, indicates where the test data has been appended to itself (excluding image
73). The highest difference appears where the data set has been repeated.
Evaluation of point bias
In order to evaluate the roll, pitch and yaw, we projected all
3D points from Table 5.1 using the ground true rotation minus estimated rotation to get
the residuals. This is done using this equation (Chatterjee, 2011):
r = QT −ˆ
QT
(6.1)
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.16: Calculating the axial rotation of the estimated data by rotating the data from
the CC to align with the estimated axis of rotation, and finding the difference in angle
between consecutive data points.
Where r are the residual for a given true point QT minus an estimated point ˆ
QT . This is
done for all 3D points and images. The residuals are the difference between the orange
and blue points in Figure 6.17.
In Figure 6.18 the estimated and synthetic 3D points of the top right and bottom right solar
panel and the bottom left satellite have been projected together with the 3D mesh. The
figure illustrates that the synthetic data in relation to the estimated data shows a consistent
offset, which appears to be due to a rotation around the Z­axis of the SBC.
The projected residuals are illustrated in Figure 6.19. In general are all points very close
to the true value in the x component, indicated by low variance and mean around zero.
Upon closer inspection, it is evident that one point (Bottom left satellite) exhibits a higher
concentration around the mean of zero and a lower variance compared to the remaining
points, especially in the y and z component. This suggests that this point is generally
closer to the ground truth than the others, implying a degree of bias. An examination
of the (bottom right solar panel) in z component, reveals a high variance, lacking a dis­
cernible mean, suggesting that the estimates are approaching randomness. Statistically,
a distribution approaching a uniform distribution implies that random guesses within the
minimum and maximum values could yield equally accurate results (Rathie, 2011).
Since we cannot directly extract the actual values, we are forced to compare the points
to a ground truth that may itself be biased towards a single point.
In general, for the x component, the maximum and minimum residual values are approxi­
mately 0.1 meters apart. Considering that the average distance between the CSC and the
CHU is 22 meters, this represents a variance of approximately ±0.5% in the extreme val­
ues. For the y components we observe residual values are approximately +0.2 and −0.1
variance of approximately +0.9% and −0.5% in the extreme values. For the z component
we observe residual values are approximately +0.2 and −0.5 variance of approximately
+0.9% and −2.3% in the extreme values. The reason for the deviation of the variance,
might be found when analysing the rotation point.
64
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.17: Projected 3D points using estimated rotation and ground truth rotation
Deviation of Rotation Point
Under ideal circumstances, the estimated rotation point
should be stationary. We know that the rotation point of the scale model during data col­
lection is stationary, so it is logical to assume the same for the estimated values. However,
it is observed that the rotation point varies in time. Part of the explanation can be found
in the fact that there is a deviation in the rotation point used between the 3D mesh and
the scale model. The 3D mesh has its origin in the CoM with respect to the surface area.
This is not guaranteed to line up with the actual point of rotation.
To attempt to solve this and achieve an estimate of the prediction error, an offset was
added to the 3D points to simulate the rotation point moving. This procedure was done
via brute force and solved by finding the rotation point with corresponded to the lowest
standard deviation in the residual between the estimated TRSP (Top Right Solar Panel)
point and the one from the reproduced synthetic data. The rotation point was found to
be offset by [X, Y, Z] = [0.2799, −0.1329, −0.1785]SBC m. On the scale model, this would
correspond to a shift of [2.799, −1.329, −1.785] cm. In Figure 6.20. It should be noted that
the result cannot stand alone as a definitive, conclusive solution. In fact, by attempting
to fit more than just the TRSP point, the estimated rotation point shifts significantly. It
does, however, illustrate that there is a significant difference, and how a small difference
of centimetres and millimetres can perpetuate errors in the data.
6.2.5
Algorithm Verification Summary
In the absence of precise knowledge regarding the true location of points, the ground truth
data was employed for analysis. As illustrated in Figure 6.19 and discussed earlier, the
x­direction exhibited the highest level of precision. Deviations in this direction amounted
to merely 0.5%, with a mean close to zero. This implies an uncertainty of approximately
±0.25%, significantly lower than the targeted value of ±1%. The y­direction deviations
ranged from +0.9% to −0.5%, still close to the desired goal. However, deviations in the
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
65
==PAGE:74==
(a) Side view.
(b) The top view.
Figure 6.18: The estimated data (in red) vs the synthetic data (in blue) shown together
with the 3D mesh.
z­direction exceeded the target, reaching +0.9% and −2.3%. As previously mentioned,
estimating the z­axis is inherently more challenging, especially in instances of potential
observation bias. Figure 6.16 visually confirms the rotation step sizes to be approximately
4.99°, closely aligning with the intended 5°. The standard deviation of ±0.74°falls within
the acceptable variation limit of ±1°.
66
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:75==
(a) Residuals for rotated point x component
(b) Residuals for rotated point y component
(c) Residuals for rotated point z component
Figure 6.19: Residuals for rotating and projecting 3D points
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
67
==PAGE:76==
(a) Alignment of the TRSP point of the syn­
thetic (before rotation point shift) and esti­
mated data and the residuals.
(b) Close­up of residuals in X, Y and Z. The
black line represents the mean and the red
lines are one standard deviation ± from the
mean.
(c) Alignment of the TRSP point of the syn­
thetic (after rotation point shift) and esti­
mated data and the residuals.
(d) Close­up of residuals in X, Y and Z. The
black line represents the mean and the red
lines are one standard deviation ± from the
mean.
Figure 6.20: The figure shows how the TRSP (Top right solar panel) point as estimated
from the fine pose refinement moves in relation to the TRSP point of a synthetically pro­
duced dataset. The standard deviation from the residual of the X, Y and Z movements
are minimised to find the ”true” rotation point. In (a) and (c), X, Y and Z are coloured
red/green, blue/purple and cyan/yellow for the synthetic/estimated data, respectively.
68
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:77==
7
Conclusion
This thesis presented the development and evaluation of an algorithm capable of real­time
non­cooperative target tracking called Efficient Yaw, pitch and roll Estimation By using A
Lone Lens (EYEBALL). The algorithm has been designed and tested for ESA’s Proba­
3 mission, so only with a greyscale monocular camera and a 3D model of the target
available. This algorithm was designed as a general solution to the non­cooperative target
tracking problem.
The 3D model used in this thesis was altered to be coloured according to the face normal,
with the X­axis being red, the Y­axis being green and the Z­axis being blue. This was
done to be able to easily alter the contour of the target as a function of the Sun’s incident
angle, as only illuminated faces are visible to the optical system. From the 3D model of the
target, 200 images were produced from orientations evenly spaced around the sphere.
Each contour was then altered to appear in four different variations: Red & Green, Red
& Blue, Red & Green, and Red, Green & Blue. This produced 800 unique images. From
each image, a contour was found and a Hu moment vector was computed along with a
parametrisation of the contour.
Similarly, images are acquired from a camera. The images are pre­processed by a 3 × 3
median filter and a gradient is computed with a Sobel kernel. From the gradient magni­
tude, a global threshold value is computed via the triangle method on a subset of the data.
By applying this threshold value to the image, a binary image is acquired, from which a
Hu Moment vector and parametric curve is computed.
The first step to acquiring a lock is to compare the computed Hu Moment vector from the
image with the 800 stored values in the database. From this, a subset of likely candidates
is produced. The second step to acquiring a lock is to compare the parametric curves of
the remaining candidates with that of the image via a process of cross­correlation. The
result is a single, most likely result, which can be presented as an initial guess if several
consecutive rough pose estimates are in approximate agreement. From the binarised
version of the captured image, the lines are simplified with a combination of a simple re­
duction step, keeping only the start and end point of consecutively similarly angled lines.
The next step is to use the Ramer­Douglas­Peucker algorithm, reducing lines, which de­
viate no more than 2 pixels from the line. From the simplified contour, a set of vertices
can be computed by considering the length of the lines, the RMSE and fitting a line to
the data. A set of 3D coordinates of the most notable corners from the 3D model is also
produced.
The initial 6DoF pose estimate is passed on to the quasi­Newtonian L­BFGS­B minimi­
sation algorithm, which aims to search for a pose, which minimises the distance between
the observed vertices and the rotated 3D coordinates from the 3D model. The points are
first matched with a simple nearest neighbour approach. The minimisation algorithm is
bounded by estimates based on the previous ten guesses in a simple moving average.
This way, the algorithm is robust to small picture­to­picture deviations as well as avoids
irregular estimating of sudden movements. If the minimisation algorithm doesn’t con­
verge, the bounds are increased, allowing the algorithm to search in an increased search
area. If the algorithm reaches convergence, a successful 6DoF pose estimate has been
produced.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
69
==PAGE:78==
The algorithm was validated on a set of synthetic images generated in the digital environ­
ment Blender. The images were generated with the same image resolution as the camera
used on Proba­3’s CSC, but without the added effects of image distortion or the non­
quadratic shape of the pixels in the CCD. They should therefore reach the theoretically­
best outcome from the pose estimation algorithm. From this data, the algorithm exhibits
an average execution time of 0.85 seconds per image below the frequency criterion of
1Hz. If the algorithm was further optimised as discussed, the average execution time
could be reduced to approximately 0.30 seconds. Under the best­case conditions, the
algorithm could locate vertices with an accuracy of X : ± = 0.6 pixels and Y : ± = 0.98
pixels, which was optimized using line fit. The x and y­directions both exhibited devia­
tions lower than the targeted value of ±1%, whereas the z­direction exceeded the target,
reaching +0.9% and −2.3% in relation to the targeted value of ±1%. Using the synthetic
data, the algorithm could estimate roll within −2.98°to +4.94°, the pitch within −1.20°to
+1.02°, and yaw within −4.92°to +2.76°. This means that only the pitch estimations are
within the goal of ±4°(Section 1.2.1). The explanation could partly be owed to the way the
rotations are being interpreted and a combination of vertex accuracy and the algorithm’s
interpretation of the data.
The rotation step size in the rotation axis was calculated to be approximately 4.99°, closely
aligning with the intended 5°goal. The standard deviation of ±0.74°falls within the accept­
able variation limit of ±1°precision (Section 1.2.1).
Moreover, this thesis acknowledges the growing importance of sustainable practices in
space exploration and emphasises the need for algorithms that minimise resource con­
sumption and mitigate potential environmental impacts. Overall, the algorithm shows
promise for real­time target tracking in space applications, but further studies are needed
to make definitive decisions on certain aspects.
7.1
Directions for Future Research
While the proposed method demonstrates promising results, several steps for future re­
search remain:
• Improvements to contour, lines and vertices: Several improvements can be
made for each step in the image processing pipeline. Many different improvements
have been touched on in the discussion. An example could be to incorporate per­
ceptual organisation to connect lines, which have been broken up by other features.
• Refine 3D Model and Ground Truth: Discrepancies between the 3D model and the
real object require further investigation. Additionally, explore more accurate meth­
ods for ground truth estimation, potentially via additional sensors or measurements.
• Address Uneven Rotations and Point Bias: Investigate and compensate for ob­
served unevenness in rotational steps during data collection. Explore re­calibration
or statistical techniques to account for inconsistencies. Analyse the source of point
estimation bias, particularly for specific points, considering factors like lighting, cam­
era angle, and algorithmic limitations.
• Dynamic Environment Challenges: Further explore pose estimation robustness
in dynamic scenarios involving lighting variations, motion blur, and occlusions.
• Lower­Level Programming Languages: Evaluate the potential benefits of using a
lower­level language like C for performance improvements, particularly on microchip
platforms.
70
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:79==
Figure 7.1: Different types of LiDAR scanners. Reproduced from Qiu H (n.d.)
• Self­Calibration: Develop self­calibration mechanisms to automatically adjust pa­
rameters based on real­world data, e.g. the sun’s position, potentially improving
accuracy.
• Kinematic Model: Another result, which is desired from the algorithm, is a model
of velocity information, such as the rotational speed of the target as well as the
velocity between the target and chaser. A better understanding of the kinematics of
the target could improve the guesses as well.
7.1.1
Extending the Capabilities to Unknown Target
While this thesis leveraged knowledge of the target satellite’s appearance to a certain ex­
tent, it acknowledged the limitations of this approach. In scenarios where the target’s char­
acteristics are unknown, acquiring information prior to pose estimation becomes crucial. A
potential solution lies in developing a hybrid system that incorporates LiDAR technology.
During a rendezvous manoeuvre, this system could generate a real­time 3D model of the
target, enabling pose estimation regardless of prior knowledge. Such an implementation
would significantly expand the algorithm’s capabilities, allowing it to effectively track arbi­
trary targets in space, including space debris. This significantly expands the algorithm’s
capabilities:
• Superior detail: The visual system excels at capturing intricate features but strug­
gles with depth estimation.
• Depth perception: The LiDAR system complements the visual system by providing
crucial depth information, which directly translates to accurate distance estimation of
the target. Additionally, LiDAR data can significantly aid in estimating pitch and yaw
rotations, traditionally considered the most challenging aspects of pose estimation
due to inherent limitations of single­camera vision.
Therefore, the hybrid system’s combined strengths overcome individual limitations, allow­
ing effective tracking of diverse targets, including space debris, under various conditions.
According to Qiu (n.d.), there are many different LiDARs that each have their advantages
and disadvantages. One key factor to keep in mind is that the LiDAR should be able to
reconstruct a 3D model and operate on the same ranges as the camera.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
71
==PAGE:80==
72
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
’amico, D, S ; Benn, and M ; Jørgensen (2013). “Pose Estimation of an Uncooperative
Spacecraft from Actual Space Imagery”. In:
Algohary, Ahmad O. et al. (Mar. 2011). “A novel segmentation method to identify left ven­
tricular infarction in short­axis composite strain­encoded magnetic resonance images”.
In: Medical Imaging 2011: Image Processing 7962, 79622E. ISSN: 16057422. DOI:
10.1117/12.877098.
Andrew Russell Dahir, by and HJ Smead (2013). “Lost in Space: Autonomous Deep Space
Navigation”. In:
Arias­Castro, Ery and David L. Donoho (June 2009). “Does median filtering truly preserve
edges better than linear filtering?” In: Annals of Statistics 37.3, pp. 1172–1206. ISSN:
00905364. DOI: 10.1214/08-AOS604. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/math/0612422%20http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1214/08-AOS604.
Arman Prasetya, Dwi et al. (2019). “Journal of Critical Reviews Resolving the Shortest
Path Problem using the Haversine Algorithm”. In: DOI: 10.22159/jcr.07.01.11. URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Armijo, Larry (Jan. 1966). “Minimization of functions having Lipschitz continuous first par­
tial derivatives.” In: Pacific Journal of Mathematics 16.1, pp. 1–3. ISSN: 0030­8730.
DOI: pjm / 1102995080. URL: https : / / projecteuclid . org / journals / pacific - journal - of -
mathematics/volume-16/issue-1/Minimization-of-functions-having-Lipschitz-continuous-
first- partial- derivatives/pjm/1102995080.full%20https://projecteuclid.org/journals/
pacific-journal-of-mathematics/volume-16/issue-1/Minimization-of-functions-having-
Lipschitz-continuous-first-partial-derivatives/pjm/1102995080.short.
Al­Baali, Mehiddin (1999). “Improved Hessian approximations for the limited memory
BFGS method *”. In: Numerical Algorithms 22, pp. 99–112.
Boggs, Paul T and Janet E Rogers (1989). “Orthogonal Distance Regression Orthogonal
Distance Regression *”. In:
Boggs, Paul T. et al. (May 1988). “A computational examination of orthogonal distance
regression”. In: Journal of Econometrics 38.1­2, pp. 169–201. ISSN: 0304­4076. DOI:
10.1016/0304-4076(88)90032-2.
Byrd, Richard H. et al. (July 2006). “A Limited Memory Algorithm for Bound Constrained
Optimization”. In: https://doi.org/10.1137/0916069 16.5, pp. 1190–1208. ISSN: 1064­
8275. DOI: 10.1137/0916069. URL: https://epubs.siam.org/doi/10.1137/0916069.
Canny, John (1986). “A Computational Approach to Edge Detection”. In: IEEE Trans­
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence PAMI­8.6, pp. 679–698. ISSN:
01628828. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.1986.4767851.
Cao, Zhe, Yaser Sheikh, and Natasha Kholgade Banerjee (June 2016). “Real­time scal­
able 6DOF pose estimation for textureless objects”. In: Proceedings ­ IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation 2016­June, pp. 2441–2448. ISSN: 10504729.
DOI: 10.1109/ICRA.2016.7487396.
Chatterjee, Samprit (2011). “Residuals”. In: International Encyclopedia of Statistical Sci­
ence, pp. 1227–1229. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-04898-2{\_}491. URL: https://link.
springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-3-642-04898-2_491.
Chaudhury, Kunal N. (2013). “Acceleration of the shiftable O(1) algorithm for bilateral filter­
ing and nonlocal means”. In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 22.4, pp. 1291–
1300. ISSN: 10577149. DOI: 10.1109/TIP.2012.2222903.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
73
==PAGE:82==
Comellini, Anthea et al. (Dec. 2021). “Global Descriptors for Visual Pose Estimation of
a Noncooperative Target in Space Rendezvous”. In: IEEE Transactions on Aerospace
and Electronic Systems 57.6, pp. 4197–4212. ISSN: 15579603. DOI: 10.1109/TAES.
2021.3086888.
Dubey, Sandeep Kumar and Sandeep Vijay (2018). “A Review of Image Segmentation
using Clustering Methods”. In: International Journal of Applied Engineering Research
13.5, pp. 2484–2489. URL: http://www.ripublication.com.
Ekdemir, Şadan (2011). “Efficient Implementation of Polyline Simplification for Large Datasets
and Usability Evaluation Institutionen för informationsteknologi Department of Informa­
tion Technology”. In: URL: http://www.teknat.uu.se/student.
ESA ­ Proba­3 Mission (n.d.). URL: https: //www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Space_
Engineering_Technology/Proba_Missions/Proba-3_Mission3#.
Fitting a Circle to Cluster of 3D Points | MeshLogic (n.d.). URL: https://meshlogic.github.
io/posts/jupyter/curve-fitting/fitting-a-circle-to-cluster-of-3d-points/.
González, Álvaro (2009). “Measurement of areas on a sphere using Fibonacci and latitude­
longitude lattices´Alvaro lattices´ lattices´Alvaro González”. In: URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s11004-009-9257-x.
Gribbon, K T, Christopher Troy Johnston, and Donald G Bailey (2003). A real­time FPGA
implementation of a barrel distortion correction algorithm with bilinear interpolation.
URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228546868_A_real- time_FPGA_
implementation_of_a_barrel_distortion_correction_algorithm_with_bilinear_interpolation.
Herman, L K (1994). “The History, Definition and Pecularities Of the Earth Centered Inertial
(ECI) Coordinate Frame and the Scales That Measure Time”. In:
Hu, Ming­Kuei (1962). “Visual Pattern Recognition by Moment Invariants”. In:
Huang, Huang and Jinsong Leng (2010). “Analysis of Hu’s Moment Invariants on Image
Scaling and Rotation”. In: pp. 476–480. DOI: 10.1109/ICCET.2010.5485542. URL: https:
//ro.ecu.edu.au/ecuworks/6350.
“International Docking System Standard (IDSS) Interface Definition Document (IDD) Re­
vision F” (2022). In:
J. E. Dennis, Jr. and Jorge J. Moré (July 2006). “Quasi­Newton Methods, Motivation and
Theory”. In: https://doi.org/10.1137/1019005 19.1, pp. 46–89. ISSN: 0036­1445. DOI:
10.1137/1019005. URL: https://epubs.siam.org/doi/10.1137/1019005.
Klevang, D. A. et al. (Feb. 2023). “Pre­flight Geometric and Optical Calibration of the Plan­
etary Instrument for X­ray Lithochemistry (PIXL)”. In: Space Science Reviews 219.1.
ISSN: 15729672. DOI: 10.1007/S11214-023-00955-1.
Konishi, Yoshinori et al. (2016). “Fast 6D pose estimation from a monocular image using
hierarchical pose trees”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 9905 LNCS,
pp. 398–413. ISSN: 16113349. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0{\_}24/TABLES/2.
URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0_24.
Lalaoui, Lahouaoui and Tayeb Mohamadi (2013). “A comparative study of Image Region­
Based Segmentation Algorithms”. In: International Journal of Advanced Computer Sci­
ence and Applications 4.6. ISSN: 2158107X. DOI: 10.14569/IJACSA.2013.040627.
Lowe, David G. (Mar. 1987). “Three­dimensional object recognition from single two­dimensional
images”. In: Artificial Intelligence 31.3, pp. 355–395. ISSN: 0004­3702. DOI: 10.1016/
0004-3702(87)90070-1.
Payet, Nadia and Sinisa Todorovic (2011). “From contours to 3D object detection and
pose estimation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 983–990. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.2011.6126342.
74
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:83==
Pedersen, David Arge Klevang (2015). High Accuracy Tracking of Space­Borne Non­
Cooperative Targets. Vol. 04. Technical University of Denmark, p. 2023. ISBN: 978­
87­91694­29­5. URL: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/high-accuracy-tracking-of-
space-borne-non-cooperative-targets.
Peñin, Luis F. et al. (2020). “Proba­3: ESA’s small satellites precise formation flying mis­
sion to study the Sun’s inner corona as never before”. In:
Polyak, B. T. (Sept. 2007). “Newton’s method and its use in optimization”. In: European
Journal of Operational Research 181.3, pp. 1086–1096. ISSN: 0377­2217. DOI: 10.
1016/J.EJOR.2005.06.076.
Qiu, Huaqing (n.d.). “Energy­efficient Integrated Optical Phased Array on Silicon­on­Insulator
Platform”. In: (). URL: www.fotonik.dtu.dk.
Qiu H (n.d.). Energy­efficient Integrated Optical Phased Array on Silicon­on­Insulator Plat­
form. URL: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/6404f4d8e7bdde3c48f5a377.
“Quasi­Newton Methods” (2006). In: Springer Series in Operations Research and Finan­
cial Engineering, pp. 135–163. ISSN: 21971773. DOI: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 387 - 40065 -
5{\_}6/COVER. URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-0-387-40065-5_6.
Rathie, Pushpa Narayan (2011). “Normal Distribution, Univariate”. In: International En­
cyclopedia of Statistical Science, pp. 1012–1013. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 642- 04898-
2{\_}425. URL: https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-3-642-04898-
2_425.
Rhouma, Mohamed and Mohammad Minhal Hussain (2015). “Improving the Performance
of Hu Moments for Shape Recognition”. In: January 2014.
Shreyamsha Kumar, B. K. (Sept. 2013). “Image denoising based on gaussian/bilateral
filter and its method noise thresholding”. In: Signal, Image and Video Processing 7.6,
pp. 1159–1172. ISSN: 18631711. DOI: 10.1007/S11760-012-0372-7/METRICS. URL:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11760-012-0372-7.
“Singular Value Decomposition (SVD)” (n.d.). In: ().
Swinbank, Richard and R. James Purser (July 2006). “Fibonacci grids: A novel approach
to global modelling”. In: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 132.619,
pp. 1769–1793. ISSN: 00359009. DOI: 10.1256/QJ.05.227.
Teague, Michael Reed (Aug. 1980). “Image analysis via the general theory of moments”.
In: JOSA, Vol. 70, Issue 8, pp. 920­930 70.8, pp. 920–930. ISSN: 00303941. DOI:
10.1364/JOSA.70.000920. URL: https://opg.optica.org/viewmedia.cfm?uri=josa-
70-8-920&seq=0&html=true%20https://opg.optica.org/abstract.cfm?uri=josa-70-8-
920%20https://opg.optica.org/josa/abstract.cfm?uri=josa-70-8-920.
Tiraplegui, Sergio et al. (2019). “Proba­3: Challenges and Needs for Sub­Millimetre Au­
tonomous Formation Flying”. In: 8th European Conference for Aeronautics and Aerospace
Sciences (EUCASS) July, p. 2019.
Tomasi, C. and R. Manduchi (1998). “Bilateral filtering for gray and color images”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 839–846.
DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.1998.710815.
Upadhyay, Triveni, Ilir Progri, and Jim Lomas (1999). “PRECISION RELATIVE NAVIGA­
TION FOR AUTOMATED RENDEZVOUS AND DOCKING”. In:
Varelas, Konstantinos and Marie Ange Dahito (July 2019). “Benchmarking multivariate
solvers of scipy on the noiseless testbed”. In: GECCO 2019 Companion ­ Proceedings
of the 2019 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pp. 1946–
1954. DOI: 10.1145/3319619.3326891.
Weng, Bingjun et al. (Oct. 2021). “Newly designed identifying method for ice thickness on
high­voltage transmission lines via machine vision”. In: High Voltage 6.5, pp. 904–922.
ISSN: 23977264. DOI: 10.1049/HVE2.12086.
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
75
==PAGE:84==
Wolfe P (July 2006). “Convergence Conditions for Ascent Methods”. In: https://doi.org/10.1137/1011036
11.2, pp. 226–235. ISSN: 00361445. DOI: 10.1137/1011036. URL: https://epubs.siam.
org/doi/10.1137/1011036.
Yildirim, Melih and Firat Kacar (2019). “Adapting Laplacian based filtering in digital image
processing to a retina­inspired analog image processing circuit”. In: Analog Integrated
Circuits and Signal Processing 100.3, pp. 537–545. ISSN: 15731979. DOI: 10.1007/
s10470-019-01481-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10470-019-01481-3.
Zack, G. W., W. E. Rogers, and S. A. Latt (1977). “Automatic measurement of sister
chromatid exchange frequency”. In: The journal of histochemistry and cytochemistry :
official journal of the Histochemistry Society 25.7, pp. 741–753. ISSN: 0022­1554. DOI:
10.1177/25.7.70454. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/70454/.
Zhao, Zhiyuan and Alan Saalfeld (2008). “LINEAR­TIME SLEEVE­FITTING POLYLINE
SIMPLIFICATION ALGORITHMS”. In:
76
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:85==
Glossary
Blender Blender is a 3D computer graphics software tool set used for creating 3D­printed
models, renders of 3D­models and other computer graphics. 38, 49
Hu Moments Global descriptors, which can be compared from image to image. 30, 33,
34, 36, 50
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
77
==PAGE:86==
Acronyms
6DoF 6 Degrees of Freedom. iii, 1, 2, 5, 13, 15, 17, 30, 36, 39, 43, 58, 60, 61, 69
CC Camera Coordinate Frame. 8–10, 57, 64
CCD Charge­Coupled Device. 8–10, 21, 38, 70
CHU Camera Head Unit. v, 7, 9, 56, 57, 64
CoM Center of Mass. 6, 8, 9, 11, 36–38, 65
CPU Central Processing Unit. 49, 50, 52
CSC Coronagraph Spacecraft. v, 5–9, 11, 13–15, 17, 19, 20, 22, 33, 34, 36, 38, 43, 44,
47–50, 52, 56, 57, 59–61, 64, 70
ECI Earth­Centered Inertial Coordinate Frame. 8, 10, 11
EYEBALL Efficient Yaw, pitch and roll Estimation By using A Lone Lens. iii, 69
FoV Field of View. 56
HEO Highly elliptical orbit. 5, 6, 48
ISS International Space Station. 2
L­BFGS­B Limited­memory Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno Bound constrained al­
gorithm. 45–48
MLI Multi Layer Insulation. 5
NIR Near Infrared. 7
NM Nelder–Mead. 47
OLS Ordinary Least Squares. 41–43, 55
ORD Orthogonal Distance Regression. 43
OSC Occulter Spacecraft. v, 5–7, 9, 48
PoV Point of View. 19
RDP Ramer­Douglas­Peucker. 28–30, 69
RDV Rendezvous and Docking. 2, 3
RMSE Root Mean Square Error. 41, 69
ROI Region of Interest. 43
78
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:87==
RW Reumann­Witkam. 28, 29
SBC Satellite Body Coordinate Frame. 6, 8, 10, 11, 18, 19, 33, 44, 57, 64
SD standard deviation. 48
SMA simple moving average. 48, 60
SNR Signal­to­noise Ratio. 22
SVD Singular Value Decomposition. 62, 63
TLS Total Least Squares. 43
WMSE Weighted Mean Square Error. 45
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
79
==PAGE:88==
80
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:89==
A
Result data
A.1
Ground truth scores
Table A.1: True scores
roll
pitch
yaw
img_number
163.329
­72.431
­82.099
1
158.013
­72.313
­81.765
2
152.735
­72.186
­81.471
3
147.497
­72.051
­81.218
4
142.299
­71.909
­81.007
5
137.142
­71.763
­80.840
6
132.028
­71.612
­80.717
7
126.955
­71.458
­80.637
8
121.923
­71.303
­80.601
9
116.931
­71.147
­80.608
10
111.979
­70.992
­80.655
11
107.065
­70.839
­80.743
12
102.187
­70.689
­80.870
13
97.344
­70.543
­81.034
14
92.533
­70.403
­81.233
15
87.754
­70.268
­81.464
16
83.003
­70.140
­81.727
17
78.279
­70.020
­82.017
18
73.579
­69.908
­82.335
19
68.902
­69.806
­82.675
20
64.244
­69.714
­83.038
21
59.604
­69.632
­83.419
22
54.979
­69.561
­83.816
23
50.367
­69.501
­84.228
24
45.765
­69.453
­84.651
25
41.172
­69.418
­85.082
26
36.584
­69.394
­85.519
27
31.999
­69.383
­85.961
28
27.415
­69.384
­86.403
29
22.830
­69.398
­86.843
30
18.241
­69.424
­87.280
31
13.646
­69.462
­87.710
32
9.042
­69.513
­88.130
33
4.428
­69.575
­88.539
34
­0.200
­69.648
­88.933
35
­4.844
­69.732
­89.311
36
­9.505
­69.826
­89.669
37
­14.187
­69.931
­90.005
38
­18.892
­70.044
­90.317
39
Continued on next page
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
81
==PAGE:90==
Table A.1: True scores
roll
pitch
yaw
img_number
­23.621
­70.166
­90.602
40
­28.378
­70.295
­90.858
41
­33.163
­70.431
­91.083
42
­37.980
­70.573
­91.275
43
­42.831
­70.720
­91.431
44
­47.716
­70.871
­91.550
45
­52.638
­71.024
­91.630
46
­57.598
­71.179
­91.669
47
­62.598
­71.335
­91.667
48
­67.638
­71.490
­91.622
49
­72.720
­71.643
­91.533
50
­77.843
­71.793
­91.401
51
­83.008
­71.939
­91.225
52
­88.214
­72.079
­91.006
53
­93.461
­72.213
­90.744
54
­98.747
­72.338
­90.441
55
­104.070
­72.455
­90.100
56
­109.429
­72.561
­89.721
57
­114.820
­72.656
­89.309
58
­120.240
­72.739
­88.866
59
­125.685
­72.810
­88.397
60
­131.152
­72.867
­87.906
61
­136.636
­72.909
­87.397
62
­142.132
­72.938
­86.876
63
­147.635
­72.951
­86.347
64
­153.141
­72.949
­85.816
65
­158.643
­72.933
­85.288
66
­164.137
­72.902
­84.769
67
­169.618
­72.856
­84.263
68
­175.080
­72.796
­83.776
69
179.479
­72.723
­83.312
70
174.064
­72.638
­82.875
71
168.680
­72.540
­82.470
72
82
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:91==
A.2
Guesses
Table A.2: Guesses
img_number
roll
pitch
yaw
x
y
z
roll_min
roll_max
pitch_min
pitch_max
yaw_min
yaw_max
x_min
x_max
y_min
y_max
z_min
z_max
1
161.323
­63.822
­74.941
0.221
0.028
­0.353
153.323
169.323
­67.822
­59.822
­78.941
­70.941
0.121
0.321
­0.072
0.128
­0.453
­0.253
2
161.323
­63.822
­74.941
0.221
0.028
­0.353
129.323
193.323
­79.822
­47.822
­90.941
­58.941
­0.179
0.621
­0.372
0.428
­0.753
0.047
3
160.792
­64.481
­85.073
0.217
0.096
­0.477
152.792
168.792
­68.481
­60.481
­89.073
­81.073
0.117
0.317
­0.004
0.196
­0.577
­0.377
4
156.693
­64.454
­86.004
0.227
0.099
­0.474
148.693
164.693
­68.454
­60.454
­90.004
­82.004
0.127
0.327
­0.001
0.199
­0.574
­0.374
5
153.627
­63.944
­88.061
0.230
0.106
­0.529
145.627
161.627
­67.944
­59.944
­92.061
­84.061
0.130
0.330
0.006
0.206
­0.629
­0.429
6
150.311
­64.621
­89.584
0.225
0.105
­0.629
142.311
158.311
­68.621
­60.621
­93.584
­85.584
0.125
0.325
0.005
0.205
­0.729
­0.529
7
142.766
­62.840
­87.112
0.250
0.085
­0.559
134.766
150.766
­66.840
­58.840
­91.112
­83.112
0.150
0.350
­0.015
0.185
­0.659
­0.459
8
140.851
­60.885
­89.798
0.232
0.061
­0.659
132.851
148.851
­64.885
­56.885
­93.798
­85.798
0.132
0.332
­0.039
0.161
­0.759
­0.559
9
138.178
­62.478
­92.486
0.245
0.094
­0.701
130.178
146.178
­66.478
­58.478
­96.486
­88.486
0.145
0.345
­0.006
0.194
­0.801
­0.601
10
134.906
­61.293
­94.151
0.243
0.076
­0.731
126.906
142.906
­65.293
­57.293
­98.151
­90.151
0.143
0.343
­0.024
0.176
­0.831
­0.631
11
128.702
­63.070
­97.871
0.256
0.102
­0.747
121.076
136.329
­66.987
­59.153
­102.929
­92.813
0.183
0.330
0.059
0.146
­0.910
­0.583
12
122.657
­62.283
­97.472
0.287
0.085
­0.600
119.618
125.697
­64.722
­59.844
­100.439
­94.505
0.261
0.313
0.044
0.125
­0.737
­0.462
13
118.494
­63.652
­98.253
0.299
0.097
­0.539
115.451
121.536
­66.258
­61.047
­101.227
­95.278
0.273
0.325
0.056
0.138
­0.683
­0.396
14
114.708
­63.149
­99.659
0.308
0.086
­0.530
111.710
117.706
­65.754
­60.544
­102.583
­96.735
0.282
0.334
0.045
0.127
­0.670
­0.391
15
111.085
­63.259
­100.709
0.315
0.079
­0.504
96.918
125.252
­75.316
­51.202
­112.453
­88.965
0.195
0.434
­0.115
0.273
­1.081
0.074
16
106.017
­65.979
­101.088
0.334
0.114
­0.503
102.240
109.794
­68.687
­63.272
­102.728
­99.447
0.298
0.370
0.049
0.180
­0.669
­0.337
17
102.129
­66.570
­102.360
0.345
0.118
­0.489
98.560
105.697
­68.757
­64.383
­103.729
­100.992
0.314
0.376
0.056
0.181
­0.638
­0.341
18
96.439
­64.815
­101.937
0.363
0.061
­0.389
92.868
100.010
­67.187
­62.443
­103.123
­100.751
0.332
0.394
­0.007
0.128
­0.537
­0.241
19
90.957
­65.020
­101.699
0.374
0.062
­0.390
87.390
94.524
­67.180
­62.860
­102.911
­100.487
0.344
0.404
­0.005
0.129
­0.534
­0.247
20
85.595
­65.062
­101.241
0.379
0.053
­0.415
82.030
89.161
­67.084
­63.041
­102.418
­100.065
0.349
0.409
­0.011
0.116
­0.563
­0.268
21
79.722
­64.390
­100.491
0.387
0.027
­0.464
76.077
83.367
­66.465
­62.314
­101.883
­99.099
0.357
0.417
­0.037
0.091
­0.603
­0.324
22
73.550
­64.422
­99.329
0.400
0.032
­0.496
69.842
77.259
­66.363
­62.480
­100.936
­97.721
0.370
0.430
­0.031
0.095
­0.634
­0.358
23
68.268
­64.441
­99.593
0.417
0.012
­0.623
64.651
71.885
­66.343
­62.539
­100.954
­98.232
0.387
0.447
­0.052
0.075
­0.779
­0.467
24
64.672
­63.009
­101.168
0.402
­0.014
­0.586
62.128
67.216
­64.180
­61.837
­102.766
­99.570
0.373
0.431
­0.075
0.046
­0.711
­0.461
25
60.618
­64.015
­102.010
0.414
­0.015
­0.691
58.914
62.321
­65.394
­62.636
­103.631
­100.389
0.396
0.433
­0.050
0.020
­0.811
­0.570
26
54.011
­64.742
­100.309
0.425
­0.008
­0.749
52.343
55.680
­66.194
­63.291
­101.979
­98.640
0.406
0.444
­0.044
0.028
­0.871
­0.627
27
50.687
­64.161
­102.037
0.417
­0.032
­0.758
48.729
52.646
­65.371
­62.952
­103.992
­100.082
0.397
0.437
­0.059
­0.004
­0.854
­0.661
28
45.860
­64.726
­102.756
0.423
­0.049
­0.755
43.910
47.810
­65.986
­63.467
­104.735
­100.777
0.403
0.442
­0.077
­0.022
­0.853
­0.658
29
43.106
­63.793
­104.659
0.407
­0.063
­0.822
40.820
45.392
­65.145
­62.441
­106.817
­102.500
0.384
0.430
­0.089
­0.036
­0.920
­0.724
30
40.873
­64.154
­107.567
0.394
­0.074
­0.785
38.376
43.370
­65.467
­62.840
­109.967
­105.168
0.370
0.419
­0.100
­0.049
­0.892
­0.677
31
38.363
­65.460
­109.806
0.376
­0.069
­0.697
35.999
40.727
­66.975
­63.944
­111.961
­107.651
0.351
0.401
­0.094
­0.043
­0.824
­0.570
32
35.358
­63.903
­112.063
0.375
­0.101
­0.848
33.093
37.623
­65.696
­62.110
­114.240
­109.886
0.353
0.397
­0.129
­0.073
­0.987
­0.709
33
31.763
­63.774
­113.380
0.376
­0.108
­0.894
21.067
42.460
­71.933
­55.615
­122.279
­104.481
0.280
0.471
­0.231
0.015
­1.508
­0.281
34
29.553
­67.831
­116.652
0.326
­0.109
­0.418
26.876
32.230
­71.840
­63.821
­118.934
­114.370
0.281
0.370
­0.140
­0.078
­0.813
­0.023
35
24.601
­66.658
­116.353
0.336
­0.120
­0.698
22.410
26.792
­70.745
­62.571
­118.108
­114.597
0.291
0.381
­0.148
­0.091
­1.130
­0.266
36
19.350
­63.444
­116.317
0.320
­0.126
­0.735
16.933
21.767
­67.972
­58.916
­118.303
­114.331
0.275
0.365
­0.153
­0.099
­1.167
­0.302
37
15.724
­63.722
­117.512
0.305
­0.123
­0.693
13.464
17.983
­68.239
­59.204
­119.433
­115.590
0.262
0.349
­0.151
­0.096
­1.126
­0.259
38
10.578
­68.722
­116.984
0.308
­0.118
­0.730
8.189
12.966
­74.003
­63.441
­119.201
­114.766
0.263
0.352
­0.147
­0.090
­1.163
­0.298
39
8.928
­68.211
­120.577
0.289
­0.137
­0.739
6.313
11.543
­73.523
­62.898
­123.093
­118.062
0.244
0.333
­0.166
­0.108
­1.171
­0.307
40
6.283
­67.896
­122.902
0.278
­0.143
­0.778
3.641
8.926
­73.188
­62.605
­125.463
­120.341
0.234
0.323
­0.171
­0.116
­1.206
­0.349
41
0.085
­70.304
­121.400
0.271
­0.139
­0.773
­2.897
3.067
­75.557
­65.052
­124.362
­118.439
0.227
0.315
­0.162
­0.116
­1.191
­0.355
42
­6.327
­70.761
­120.006
0.262
­0.138
­0.796
­9.017
­3.637
­75.735
­65.787
­123.154
­116.859
0.223
0.301
­0.157
­0.119
­1.199
­0.393
43
­10.214
­70.671
­120.816
0.257
­0.139
­0.880
­12.918
­7.511
­74.500
­66.841
­123.755
­117.876
0.241
0.274
­0.152
­0.126
­1.038
­0.722
44
­14.017
­71.772
­122.163
0.234
­0.142
­0.804
­16.675
­11.359
­75.497
­68.047
­125.038
­119.289
0.223
0.246
­0.155
­0.130
­0.862
­0.746
45
­19.119
­72.237
­121.564
0.237
­0.132
­0.833
­21.780
­16.457
­75.079
­69.396
­124.528
­118.600
0.224
0.251
­0.146
­0.118
­0.890
­0.775
46
­23.519
­73.146
­122.335
0.216
­0.143
­0.853
­26.161
­20.878
­75.959
­70.333
­125.283
­119.387
0.201
0.231
­0.158
­0.128
­0.900
­0.807
47
­24.832
­73.409
­125.866
0.207
­0.142
­0.815
­27.876
­21.788
­74.770
­72.048
­129.109
­122.622
0.194
0.220
­0.156
­0.127
­0.866
­0.763
48
­28.225
­74.039
­127.106
0.202
­0.134
­0.766
­30.922
­25.527
­75.224
­72.853
­129.878
­124.333
0.190
0.215
­0.144
­0.123
­0.826
­0.705
49
­34.995
­75.378
­125.125
0.195
­0.123
­0.698
­37.828
­32.161
­76.465
­74.291
­128.025
­122.225
0.183
0.208
­0.135
­0.112
­0.767
­0.630
50
­42.475
­77.220
­122.795
0.171
­0.118
­0.613
­45.732
­39.217
­78.223
­76.217
­126.004
­119.587
0.157
0.186
­0.130
­0.107
­0.693
­0.534
Continued on next page
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
83
==PAGE:92==
Table A.2: Guesses
img_number
roll
pitch
yaw
x
y
z
roll_min
roll_max
pitch_min
pitch_max
yaw_min
yaw_max
x_min
x_max
y_min
y_max
z_min
z_max
51
­46.979
­78.034
­123.185
0.160
­0.117
­0.591
­59.505
­34.454
­81.764
­74.304
­135.486
­110.885
0.103
0.217
­0.164
­0.070
­0.869
­0.313
52
­65.334
­78.899
­109.844
0.151
­0.084
­0.418
­73.688
­56.979
­79.796
­78.001
­118.113
­101.575
0.136
0.165
­0.105
­0.064
­0.519
­0.318
53
­65.758
­80.577
­114.049
0.156
­0.075
­0.265
­74.668
­56.849
­81.590
­79.564
­122.806
­105.292
0.140
0.172
­0.095
­0.056
­0.384
­0.146
54
­80.740
­82.726
­103.559
0.163
­0.059
­0.132
­91.070
­70.410
­83.739
­81.713
­113.892
­93.225
0.146
0.181
­0.080
­0.039
­0.241
­0.023
55
­89.647
­82.768
­99.559
0.168
­0.046
0.020
­99.902
­79.391
­83.960
­81.577
­109.777
­89.342
0.151
0.184
­0.062
­0.029
­0.079
0.118
56
­108.674
­84.817
­85.396
0.171
­0.045
0.085
­119.946
­97.402
­86.085
­83.549
­96.623
­74.169
0.154
0.188
­0.061
­0.028
­0.007
0.177
57
­123.710
­84.675
­75.113
0.176
­0.036
0.145
­134.631
­112.789
­86.126
­83.224
­86.038
­64.188
0.158
0.194
­0.052
­0.020
0.056
0.234
58
­146.154
­84.182
­57.457
0.179
­0.035
0.159
­158.635
­133.674
­85.892
­82.471
­69.963
­44.952
0.161
0.197
­0.052
­0.018
0.060
0.257
59
­157.053
­83.139
­51.330
0.198
­0.017
0.297
­169.208
­144.899
­85.017
­81.261
­63.460
­39.200
0.183
0.213
­0.035
­0.000
0.194
0.399
60
­169.848
­81.710
­43.366
0.205
­0.013
0.317
­180.873
­158.824
­83.923
­79.496
­54.335
­32.397
0.193
0.217
­0.030
0.004
0.216
0.418
61
­172.794
­79.657
­45.353
0.209
­0.009
0.300
­184.512
­161.076
­82.243
­77.072
­57.100
­33.605
0.201
0.217
­0.019
0.002
0.193
0.406
62
­177.275
­76.786
­45.833
0.215
­0.004
0.250
­187.781
­166.768
­79.603
­73.968
­56.470
­35.197
0.207
0.223
­0.014
0.007
0.136
0.364
63
­184.208
­73.906
­43.970
0.216
­0.008
0.174
­194.859
­173.557
­76.509
­71.304
­54.735
­33.204
0.208
0.224
­0.019
0.003
0.049
0.299
64
­185.878
­72.137
­47.257
0.214
­0.007
0.062
­197.795
­173.961
­74.700
­69.574
­59.296
­35.217
0.205
0.223
­0.018
0.003
­0.064
0.188
65
­184.223
­70.541
­53.950
0.208
­0.004
­0.071
­196.524
­171.922
­72.108
­68.975
­66.408
­41.492
0.198
0.219
­0.014
0.006
­0.213
0.072
66
­184.087
­69.394
­59.291
0.200
0.008
­0.153
­196.466
­171.707
­70.722
­68.066
­71.846
­46.736
0.187
0.212
­0.002
0.019
­0.292
­0.014
67
­189.618
­67.886
­58.791
0.197
0.009
­0.294
­197.314
­181.922
­68.973
­66.800
­66.631
­50.951
0.184
0.210
­0.002
0.020
­0.444
­0.144
68
­186.010
­66.545
­67.537
0.190
0.021
­0.361
­194.150
­177.871
­67.507
­65.584
­75.806
­59.269
0.181
0.198
0.011
0.030
­0.453
­0.270
69
­184.852
­65.604
­73.769
0.179
0.036
­0.475
­191.060
­178.645
­66.618
­64.590
­80.051
­67.487
0.170
0.188
0.025
0.046
­0.552
­0.398
70
­187.805
­64.409
­75.733
0.174
0.039
­0.554
­193.922
­181.689
­65.430
­63.388
­81.919
­69.548
0.165
0.182
0.028
0.050
­0.614
­0.495
71
­193.049
­63.197
­75.402
0.179
0.032
­0.596
­199.307
­186.791
­63.987
­62.407
­81.736
­69.067
0.171
0.188
0.020
0.045
­0.652
­0.540
72
­195.695
­62.009
­77.509
0.176
0.036
­0.671
­219.525
­171.866
­64.161
­59.858
­104.994
­50.024
0.138
0.215
­0.022
0.095
­0.932
­0.411
73
­200.597
­62.578
­78.063
0.215
0.032
­0.462
­206.636
­194.558
­63.251
­61.905
­85.465
­70.661
0.194
0.236
0.017
0.047
­0.605
­0.319
74
­203.846
­61.473
­80.207
0.218
0.039
­0.490
­229.370
­178.322
­64.640
­58.307
­109.235
­51.178
0.122
0.315
­0.031
0.108
­1.132
0.152
75
­201.658
­63.778
­87.717
0.219
0.106
­0.515
­210.211
­193.105
­66.228
­61.328
­95.914
­79.520
0.192
0.246
0.074
0.139
­0.694
­0.336
76
­207.443
­63.284
­86.840
0.223
0.096
­0.582
­215.748
­199.137
­65.686
­60.883
­94.791
­78.889
0.196
0.250
0.062
0.130
­0.752
­0.411
77
­210.279
­62.745
­89.086
0.227
0.105
­0.612
­217.951
­202.607
­65.100
­60.390
­96.367
­81.805
0.201
0.254
0.071
0.139
­0.783
­0.442
78
­214.651
­62.907
­89.756
0.240
0.104
­0.596
­222.102
­207.201
­65.266
­60.548
­96.811
­82.701
0.215
0.265
0.069
0.138
­0.760
­0.433
79
­220.796
­62.498
­88.641
0.258
0.091
­0.568
­228.418
­213.174
­64.787
­60.210
­95.889
­81.393
0.233
0.283
0.055
0.127
­0.729
­0.407
80
­222.533
­60.525
­91.511
0.239
0.066
­0.677
­230.117
­214.949
­62.949
­58.102
­98.671
­84.350
0.210
0.268
0.026
0.106
­0.847
­0.506
81
­224.805
­61.340
­94.764
0.248
0.085
­0.715
­231.975
­217.634
­63.849
­58.831
­100.580
­88.947
0.218
0.277
0.045
0.124
­0.886
­0.544
82
­228.094
­61.029
­96.221
0.247
0.081
­0.767
­235.163
­221.025
­63.538
­58.520
­101.347
­91.095
0.221
0.272
0.041
0.121
­0.902
­0.631
83
­231.480
­62.838
­97.912
0.266
0.111
­0.739
­238.023
­224.938
­65.318
­60.358
­103.016
­92.808
0.241
0.291
0.069
0.153
­0.854
­0.624
84
­236.851
­62.122
­97.941
0.283
0.086
­0.641
­239.490
­234.212
­63.877
­60.368
­100.586
­95.296
0.263
0.303
0.054
0.117
­0.743
­0.539
85
­241.219
­63.690
­98.548
0.299
0.099
­0.537
­243.473
­238.966
­65.681
­61.700
­100.761
­96.336
0.279
0.320
0.067
0.130
­0.649
­0.426
86
­245.173
­63.222
­99.795
0.309
0.087
­0.524
­247.237
­243.109
­65.197
­61.248
­101.807
­97.783
0.289
0.329
0.056
0.119
­0.633
­0.415
87
­248.697
­63.430
­100.966
0.315
0.083
­0.506
­258.406
­238.988
­72.768
­54.091
­109.678
­92.254
0.220
0.410
­0.067
0.232
­1.021
0.009
88
­252.375
­63.555
­102.668
0.319
0.078
­0.510
­254.765
­249.985
­66.162
­60.947
­104.497
­100.839
0.293
0.344
0.037
0.119
­0.658
­0.361
89
­256.206
­66.728
­103.980
0.338
0.125
­0.525
­258.370
­254.043
­69.377
­64.080
­105.665
­102.295
0.318
0.357
0.081
0.170
­0.656
­0.395
90
­262.013
­65.888
­103.417
0.358
0.081
­0.406
­264.322
­259.704
­68.651
­63.126
­105.204
­101.630
0.338
0.378
0.029
0.133
­0.542
­0.270
91
­268.267
­65.017
­102.461
0.371
0.063
­0.393
­270.758
­265.776
­67.857
­62.178
­104.451
­100.470
0.351
0.390
0.010
0.116
­0.523
­0.263
92
­272.460
­65.716
­103.238
0.375
0.067
­0.443
­274.922
­269.998
­68.471
­62.961
­105.145
­101.331
0.356
0.393
0.018
0.116
­0.581
­0.304
93
­278.916
­64.323
­101.850
0.380
0.024
­0.437
­281.640
­276.192
­67.232
­61.413
­104.097
­99.604
0.361
0.399
­0.030
0.078
­0.571
­0.303
94
­285.897
­64.418
­99.882
0.397
0.031
­0.484
­288.936
­282.858
­67.212
­61.623
­102.538
­97.226
0.378
0.416
­0.022
0.084
­0.613
­0.356
95
­291.678
­64.442
­99.647
0.417
0.012
­0.621
­294.653
­288.703
­67.210
­61.673
­102.186
­97.108
0.397
0.437
­0.042
0.065
­0.773
­0.470
96
­295.978
­62.857
­100.583
0.409
­0.017
­0.628
­298.008
­293.948
­65.398
­60.317
­103.158
­98.007
0.391
0.427
­0.070
0.036
­0.753
­0.503
97
­299.431
­64.497
­101.943
0.415
­0.008
­0.677
­301.658
­297.205
­66.963
­62.031
­104.105
­99.781
0.399
0.431
­0.059
0.042
­0.792
­0.561
98
­306.462
­64.702
­99.850
0.427
­0.009
­0.752
­308.657
­304.266
­66.426
­62.979
­102.050
­97.650
0.411
0.443
­0.047
0.029
­0.872
­0.632
99
­309.406
­63.970
­101.975
0.418
­0.035
­0.766
­311.993
­306.818
­65.700
­62.241
­104.560
­99.390
0.401
0.436
­0.070
0.000
­0.850
­0.682
100
­312.020
­64.878
­104.519
0.405
­0.046
­0.710
­314.867
­309.172
­66.616
­63.139
­107.409
­101.629
0.385
0.426
­0.081
­0.011
­0.807
­0.613
101
­313.736
­63.631
­107.820
0.391
­0.071
­0.738
­317.095
­310.377
­65.396
­61.866
­111.192
­104.448
0.368
0.414
­0.104
­0.037
­0.835
­0.641
102
­316.567
­64.147
­110.162
0.382
­0.080
­0.713
­319.798
­313.335
­65.744
­62.550
­113.410
­106.914
0.358
0.405
­0.108
­0.052
­0.812
­0.614
103
­320.876
­65.875
­110.583
0.370
­0.068
­0.628
­323.605
­318.146
­67.757
­63.993
­113.329
­107.837
0.348
0.391
­0.097
­0.038
­0.744
­0.511
Continued on next page
84
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:93==
Table A.2: Guesses
img_number
roll
pitch
yaw
x
y
z
roll_min
roll_max
pitch_min
pitch_max
yaw_min
yaw_max
x_min
x_max
y_min
y_max
z_min
z_max
104
­323.719
­64.310
­112.974
0.367
­0.099
­0.759
­326.237
­321.201
­66.436
­62.184
­115.653
­110.295
0.351
0.384
­0.131
­0.067
­0.879
­0.639
105
­327.109
­64.210
­114.462
0.366
­0.106
­0.789
­338.913
­315.306
­73.858
­54.561
­125.240
­103.684
0.291
0.441
­0.245
0.033
­1.349
­0.230
106
­330.458
­67.807
­116.643
0.326
­0.109
­0.419
­333.736
­327.180
­71.934
­63.680
­119.338
­113.948
0.291
0.360
­0.145
­0.074
­0.741
­0.097
107
­335.368
­66.660
­116.382
0.336
­0.120
­0.698
­338.082
­332.655
­70.869
­62.452
­118.420
­114.345
0.302
0.370
­0.154
­0.085
­1.063
­0.332
108
­340.656
­63.453
­116.309
0.319
­0.126
­0.734
­343.549
­337.762
­68.088
­58.819
­118.539
­114.078
0.285
0.354
­0.159
­0.093
­1.100
­0.368
109
­344.496
­63.707
­117.328
0.307
­0.124
­0.697
­347.348
­341.644
­68.316
­59.097
­119.489
­115.166
0.273
0.342
­0.157
­0.091
­1.062
­0.332
110
­349.773
­68.817
­116.639
0.309
­0.117
­0.730
­352.412
­347.135
­74.182
­63.451
­118.621
­114.657
0.274
0.344
­0.150
­0.085
­1.095
­0.364
111
­351.968
­68.246
­119.659
0.292
­0.134
­0.750
­354.790
­349.146
­73.647
­62.845
­121.925
­117.393
0.256
0.327
­0.167
­0.101
­1.115
­0.385
112
­353.799
­67.855
­122.818
0.279
­0.143
­0.785
­356.807
­350.791
­73.200
­62.509
­125.260
­120.377
0.244
0.314
­0.174
­0.113
­1.145
­0.424
113
­359.968
­70.261
­121.349
0.272
­0.139
­0.782
­363.229
­356.708
­75.578
­64.943
­124.141
­118.557
0.237
0.307
­0.166
­0.112
­1.133
­0.430
114
­366.458
­70.752
­119.899
0.263
­0.139
­0.808
­369.236
­363.680
­75.729
­65.776
­122.826
­116.972
0.232
0.295
­0.160
­0.118
­1.149
­0.467
115
­370.215
­70.673
­120.816
0.257
­0.139
­0.880
­372.891
­367.538
­74.544
­66.801
­123.704
­117.928
0.241
0.273
­0.152
­0.127
­1.037
­0.722
116
­374.017
­71.772
­122.163
0.234
­0.142
­0.804
­376.647
­371.386
­75.540
­68.004
­124.985
­119.342
0.223
0.246
­0.154
­0.130
­0.860
­0.748
117
­379.137
­72.293
­121.561
0.236
­0.132
­0.828
­381.773
­376.500
­75.185
­69.401
­124.474
­118.648
0.224
0.249
­0.145
­0.118
­0.883
­0.773
118
­383.563
­73.204
­122.357
0.214
­0.144
­0.850
­386.179
­380.946
­76.068
­70.341
­125.254
­119.460
0.199
0.229
­0.159
­0.129
­0.894
­0.806
119
­384.861
­73.404
­125.837
0.207
­0.142
­0.815
­387.887
­381.834
­74.777
­72.032
­129.019
­122.655
0.194
0.220
­0.156
­0.127
­0.865
­0.766
120
­388.144
­74.013
­127.185
0.202
­0.134
­0.768
­391.006
­385.283
­75.197
­72.829
­130.104
­124.266
0.189
0.215
­0.146
­0.122
­0.826
­0.710
121
­394.975
­75.332
­125.140
0.195
­0.124
­0.704
­397.823
­392.127
­76.406
­74.259
­128.029
­122.250
0.182
0.208
­0.136
­0.112
­0.770
­0.638
122
­402.473
­77.155
­122.800
0.171
­0.119
­0.623
­405.754
­399.192
­78.136
­76.174
­126.007
­119.593
0.156
0.187
­0.131
­0.107
­0.699
­0.547
123
­406.977
­77.961
­123.191
0.160
­0.118
­0.601
­419.576
­394.379
­81.604
­74.319
­135.459
­110.922
0.101
0.219
­0.166
­0.069
­0.867
­0.336
124
­425.291
­78.900
­109.886
0.151
­0.084
­0.418
­433.631
­416.951
­79.776
­78.023
­118.133
­101.639
0.136
0.165
­0.105
­0.063
­0.522
­0.314
125
­437.115
­80.725
­102.873
0.147
­0.081
­0.349
­445.878
­428.352
­81.761
­79.688
­111.532
­94.213
0.133
0.161
­0.101
­0.061
­0.454
­0.244
126
­453.328
­82.911
­91.248
0.151
­0.062
­0.180
­463.421
­443.235
­83.971
­81.851
­101.378
­81.118
0.136
0.167
­0.084
­0.041
­0.291
­0.069
127
­453.957
­82.916
­95.405
0.160
­0.046
0.004
­464.760
­443.153
­84.163
­81.670
­106.187
­84.623
0.145
0.176
­0.064
­0.028
­0.107
0.115
128
­471.522
­84.679
­82.583
0.169
­0.045
0.077
­482.648
­460.396
­85.932
­83.426
­93.735
­71.431
0.151
0.187
­0.063
­0.027
­0.027
0.182
129
­483.715
­84.540
­75.120
0.175
­0.036
0.136
­494.080
­473.350
­85.971
­83.110
­85.560
­64.679
0.157
0.194
­0.054
­0.019
0.034
0.238
130
­505.590
­84.059
­58.033
0.178
­0.035
0.149
­517.414
­493.767
­85.746
­82.372
­69.944
­46.122
0.159
0.197
­0.054
­0.017
0.039
0.260
131
­517.512
­83.035
­50.869
0.198
­0.018
0.296
­528.967
­506.058
­84.886
­81.183
­62.361
­39.377
0.182
0.215
­0.036
0.001
0.182
0.410
132
­531.634
­81.631
­41.569
0.207
­0.013
0.325
­541.854
­521.413
­83.813
­79.448
­51.798
­31.341
0.192
0.221
­0.031
0.005
0.215
0.436
133
­532.919
­79.604
­45.229
0.209
­0.009
0.297
­544.444
­521.393
­82.144
­77.064
­56.857
­33.601
0.198
0.220
­0.021
0.003
0.180
0.413
134
­535.472
­76.762
­47.631
0.214
­0.003
0.244
­548.043
­522.900
­79.479
­74.045
­60.336
­34.925
0.205
0.222
­0.015
0.009
0.106
0.382
135
­542.011
­73.748
­46.166
0.214
­0.009
0.145
­554.260
­529.763
­76.245
­71.250
­58.529
­33.803
0.204
0.223
­0.020
0.003
­0.002
0.292
136
­544.362
­71.852
­48.789
0.209
­0.009
0.007
­556.248
­532.476
­74.318
­69.386
­60.832
­36.747
0.198
0.219
­0.019
0.002
­0.137
0.151
137
­542.443
­70.394
­55.785
0.201
­0.003
­0.127
­554.900
­529.987
­72.002
­68.786
­68.410
­43.160
0.188
0.213
­0.013
0.008
­0.282
0.029
138
­542.186
­69.219
­61.264
0.189
0.010
­0.232
­555.125
­529.247
­70.592
­67.846
­74.396
­48.133
0.175
0.204
­0.001
0.021
­0.386
­0.079
139
­547.583
­67.710
­60.949
0.187
0.013
­0.356
­556.400
­538.767
­68.844
­66.576
­69.923
­51.974
0.173
0.202
0.002
0.024
­0.513
­0.198
140
­542.556
­66.595
­71.110
0.175
0.030
­0.455
­551.727
­533.385
­67.639
­65.551
­80.408
­61.812
0.165
0.186
0.019
0.041
­0.547
­0.362
141
­542.811
­65.847
­75.958
0.172
0.046
­0.510
­549.105
­536.517
­66.983
­64.712
­82.304
­69.612
0.163
0.180
0.034
0.059
­0.577
­0.443
142
­547.722
­64.434
­75.823
0.174
0.040
­0.554
­554.179
­541.265
­65.562
­63.307
­82.366
­69.280
0.165
0.182
0.025
0.054
­0.610
­0.498
143
­553.404
­63.023
­75.003
0.180
0.029
­0.600
­560.096
­546.711
­63.965
­62.082
­81.802
­68.205
0.170
0.189
0.011
0.046
­0.655
­0.546
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
85
==PAGE:94==
A.3
Estimated scores
Table A.3: Estimated scores
img_number
iterations
loss
roll
pitch
yaw
x
y
z
1
728
1123.213
153.323
­59.822
­77.152
0.321
0.128
­0.253
2
490
0.000
160.792
­64.481
­85.073
0.217
0.096
­0.477
3
651
0.000
156.693
­64.454
­86.004
0.227
0.099
­0.474
4
1246
0.000
153.627
­63.944
­88.061
0.230
0.106
­0.529
5
1015
1.891
150.311
­64.621
­89.584
0.225
0.105
­0.629
6
490
0.234
142.766
­62.840
­87.112
0.250
0.085
­0.559
7
427
0.056
140.851
­60.885
­89.798
0.232
0.061
­0.659
8
413
0.182
138.178
­62.478
­92.486
0.245
0.094
­0.701
9
399
0.000
134.906
­61.293
­94.151
0.243
0.076
­0.731
10
420
1.304
131.164
­62.745
­95.799
0.263
0.105
­0.697
11
518
0.000
126.471
­62.503
­96.232
0.280
0.086
­0.587
12
469
0.000
122.314
­63.733
­97.028
0.292
0.097
­0.533
13
518
0.000
118.600
­63.229
­98.499
0.300
0.088
­0.530
14
924
311.178
117.706
­65.612
­99.029
0.282
0.045
­0.391
15
455
0.000
109.692
­65.665
­99.690
0.326
0.111
­0.509
16
378
0.914
106.001
­66.002
­101.104
0.334
0.113
­0.506
17
595
0.668
100.613
­64.581
­100.992
0.351
0.064
­0.420
18
434
0.150
95.352
­64.647
­100.944
0.361
0.063
­0.424
19
476
0.096
90.152
­64.831
­100.697
0.367
0.058
­0.443
20
497
0.013
84.397
­64.201
­100.065
0.376
0.033
­0.476
21
420
0.074
78.426
­64.353
­99.099
0.389
0.038
­0.500
22
294
0.000
73.301
­64.320
­99.484
0.406
0.019
­0.614
23
413
0.216
69.976
­63.269
­100.954
0.390
­0.008
­0.566
24
420
0.007
65.525
­64.180
­101.778
0.406
­0.002
­0.672
25
476
0.002
59.210
­64.868
­100.389
0.416
0.004
­0.725
26
504
0.049
55.680
­64.203
­101.932
0.410
­0.022
­0.724
27
630
0.584
50.809
­64.718
­102.575
0.416
­0.038
­0.722
28
434
0.676
47.810
­63.897
­104.263
0.403
­0.051
­0.784
29
371
0.260
45.225
­64.158
­106.817
0.393
­0.064
­0.754
30
308
0.233
42.369
­65.349
­108.735
0.377
­0.058
­0.677
31
350
0.336
39.152
­63.944
­110.805
0.378
­0.089
­0.824
32
728
322.917
37.623
­62.110
­112.805
0.397
­0.073
­0.987
33
392
0.000
33.150
­67.466
­115.164
0.334
­0.098
­0.443
34
441
0.011
28.062
­66.479
­114.756
0.344
­0.107
­0.701
35
469
0.000
22.983
­63.520
­114.879
0.329
­0.116
­0.734
36
539
0.000
19.232
­63.822
­116.018
0.316
­0.115
­0.696
37
483
0.043
14.301
­68.239
­115.712
0.317
­0.112
­0.736
38
392
0.015
12.558
­67.805
­119.201
0.299
­0.129
­0.741
39
448
0.000
9.892
­67.641
­121.485
0.288
­0.135
­0.768
40
497
0.010
3.992
­69.668
­120.341
0.282
­0.134
­0.778
41
469
0.000
­1.932
­69.896
­119.286
0.275
­0.132
­0.815
42
434
0.000
­5.878
­70.350
­120.251
0.265
­0.135
­0.836
43
462
0.000
­9.809
­71.243
­121.423
0.245
­0.139
­0.794
44
483
0.004
­14.908
­71.366
­120.896
0.246
­0.130
­0.823
45
672
1.229
­19.244
­72.213
­121.703
0.226
­0.140
­0.837
46
434
0.196
­20.919
­72.892
­124.850
0.218
­0.139
­0.807
47
378
0.191
­24.146
­73.415
­126.315
0.212
­0.133
­0.763
48
427
0.254
­30.506
­74.604
­124.761
0.204
­0.124
­0.705
49
343
0.948
­37.828
­76.465
­122.550
0.183
­0.120
­0.630
50
28
1000000.000
­42.475
­77.220
­122.795
0.171
­0.118
­0.613
Continued on next page
86
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:95==
Table A.3: Fine scores
img_number
iterations
loss
roll
pitch
yaw
x
y
z
51
490
0.970
­59.388
­78.044
­110.885
0.162
­0.089
­0.460
52
679
0.142
­60.163
­79.643
­114.787
0.165
­0.082
­0.318
53
399
1.812
­74.157
­81.590
­105.292
0.172
­0.066
­0.201
54
483
0.063
­82.606
­81.713
­101.774
0.174
­0.055
­0.066
55
539
0.004
­99.898
­83.625
­89.342
0.175
­0.054
­0.004
56
476
0.023
­113.754
­83.549
­80.233
0.180
­0.046
0.054
57
567
0.052
­134.590
­83.224
­64.188
0.181
­0.044
0.072
58
420
0.413
­145.131
­82.471
­58.452
0.197
­0.028
0.204
59
427
0.636
­157.111
­81.261
­51.309
0.202
­0.023
0.224
60
476
0.393
­161.453
­79.496
­51.906
0.205
­0.017
0.224
61
378
0.486
­165.563
­77.072
­52.729
0.210
­0.011
0.193
62
546
0.374
­173.203
­74.675
­50.102
0.212
­0.014
0.136
63
553
0.208
­175.551
­73.095
­52.708
0.210
­0.012
0.049
64
448
0.415
­175.790
­71.849
­57.489
0.205
­0.009
­0.064
65
399
0.750
­177.053
­70.810
­61.385
0.198
0.003
­0.132
66
497
2.591
175.885
­69.420
­59.331
0.195
0.004
­0.258
67
392
0.565
178.078
­68.138
­66.629
0.190
0.016
­0.305
68
434
0.064
177.922
­67.170
­71.523
0.181
0.030
­0.405
69
392
0.000
174.830
­65.918
­73.351
0.177
0.033
­0.476
70
371
0.403
169.700
­64.584
­73.134
0.182
0.028
­0.517
71
700
2831.010
162.982
­63.987
­69.067
0.188
0.020
­0.540
72
511
0.031
161.908
­63.630
­75.527
0.214
0.028
­0.411
73
868
1602.015
154.967
­61.905
­76.783
0.236
0.047
­0.319
74
637
0.000
160.802
­64.481
­85.084
0.217
0.096
­0.477
75
441
0.409
154.890
­63.898
­84.089
0.221
0.087
­0.549
76
518
0.264
152.557
­63.285
­86.840
0.223
0.096
­0.582
77
490
0.000
148.606
­63.333
­87.933
0.234
0.096
­0.577
78
476
0.234
142.767
­62.840
­87.112
0.250
0.085
­0.559
79
462
0.065
140.690
­60.931
­89.673
0.233
0.062
­0.661
80
434
0.000
137.974
­61.605
­92.194
0.242
0.078
­0.698
81
434
0.000
134.906
­61.289
­94.152
0.243
0.076
­0.731
82
476
1.304
131.164
­62.745
­95.799
0.263
0.105
­0.697
83
434
0.035
126.914
­62.358
­96.655
0.276
0.087
­0.624
84
420
0.001
122.392
­63.711
­97.103
0.291
0.097
­0.539
85
336
0.000
118.600
­63.229
­98.499
0.300
0.088
­0.530
86
532
319.803
116.891
­65.197
­98.474
0.289
0.056
­0.415
87
693
0.510
111.139
­63.483
­101.113
0.312
0.079
­0.515
88
777
0.027
107.483
­66.149
­102.549
0.327
0.119
­0.539
89
434
1.066
101.986
­65.460
­102.295
0.346
0.081
­0.435
90
441
0.163
96.051
­64.644
­101.630
0.358
0.064
­0.427
91
630
0.000
91.902
­65.418
­102.494
0.363
0.071
­0.468
92
420
0.076
85.667
­64.126
­101.331
0.370
0.030
­0.456
93
413
0.112
78.932
­64.347
­99.604
0.387
0.037
­0.490
94
483
0.000
73.350
­64.320
­99.532
0.405
0.019
­0.612
95
462
0.347
69.309
­63.091
­100.372
0.397
­0.010
­0.607
96
455
0.000
65.626
­64.396
­101.860
0.405
0.000
­0.660
97
490
0.000
58.933
­64.847
­100.120
0.417
0.004
­0.730
98
392
0.050
55.734
­64.119
­102.007
0.411
­0.023
­0.733
99
938
0.504
52.787
­64.854
­104.230
0.401
­0.035
­0.682
100
455
0.146
50.828
­63.810
­107.287
0.388
­0.057
­0.711
101
679
0.024
47.657
­64.145
­109.279
0.381
­0.069
­0.687
Continued on next page
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
87
==PAGE:96==
Table A.3: Fine scores
img_number
iterations
loss
roll
pitch
yaw
x
y
z
102
392
0.108
43.105
­65.722
­109.485
0.372
­0.057
­0.614
103
448
0.469
39.988
­64.311
­111.630
0.371
­0.087
­0.744
104
896
336.675
38.799
­62.184
­113.768
0.384
­0.067
­0.879
105
385
0.000
33.150
­67.466
­115.164
0.334
­0.098
­0.443
106
469
0.011
28.062
­66.479
­114.756
0.344
­0.107
­0.701
107
602
0.000
22.983
­63.520
­114.879
0.329
­0.116
­0.734
108
483
0.000
19.232
­63.822
­116.018
0.316
­0.115
­0.696
109
343
0.035
14.287
­68.316
­115.704
0.317
­0.111
­0.728
110
434
0.044
11.994
­67.836
­118.621
0.301
­0.128
­0.743
111
455
0.000
9.892
­67.641
­121.485
0.288
­0.135
­0.768
112
476
0.011
4.027
­69.666
­120.377
0.282
­0.134
­0.778
113
441
0.000
­1.932
­69.895
­119.286
0.275
­0.132
­0.815
114
392
0.000
­5.878
­70.352
­120.251
0.265
­0.135
­0.836
115
504
0.000
­9.809
­71.243
­121.423
0.245
­0.139
­0.794
116
399
0.008
­14.925
­71.416
­120.893
0.246
­0.130
­0.819
117
770
0.480
­19.283
­72.266
­121.723
0.224
­0.141
­0.835
118
392
0.195
­20.946
­72.896
­124.824
0.218
­0.139
­0.806
119
490
0.199
­24.131
­73.395
­126.329
0.212
­0.133
­0.766
120
371
0.274
­30.488
­74.563
­124.774
0.205
­0.125
­0.710
121
322
0.977
­37.823
­76.406
­122.558
0.182
­0.120
­0.638
122
28
1000000.000
­42.473
­77.155
­122.800
0.171
­0.119
­0.623
123
609
0.971
­59.350
­78.045
­110.922
0.162
­0.089
­0.460
124
378
0.903
­70.384
­79.776
­104.728
0.157
­0.087
­0.393
125
343
1.966
­85.488
­81.761
­94.213
0.161
­0.069
­0.244
126
448
0.174
­86.489
­81.851
­98.037
0.167
­0.056
­0.080
127
700
0.000
­102.465
­83.500
­86.807
0.174
­0.054
­0.011
128
455
0.018
­113.757
­83.426
­80.240
0.179
­0.046
0.046
129
539
0.047
­134.080
­83.110
­64.707
0.181
­0.044
0.064
130
231
0.382
­145.543
­82.372
­58.038
0.197
­0.028
0.202
131
448
0.606
­158.717
­81.183
­49.693
0.203
­0.024
0.230
132
392
0.380
­161.562
­79.448
­51.798
0.204
­0.017
0.221
133
378
0.459
­164.963
­77.064
­53.340
0.208
­0.011
0.180
134
441
0.296
­172.359
­74.549
­50.971
0.208
­0.015
0.106
135
518
0.114
­174.575
­72.852
­53.714
0.204
­0.013
­0.002
136
581
0.256
­174.445
­71.705
­58.887
0.198
­0.008
­0.115
137
448
0.465
­175.343
­70.639
­63.162
0.188
0.004
­0.204
138
581
2.012
177.767
­69.250
­61.325
0.187
0.007
­0.314
139
294
0.148
­178.855
­68.173
­69.803
0.177
0.024
­0.389
140
378
0.000
179.598
­67.381
­73.331
0.175
0.039
­0.436
141
406
0.000
174.894
­65.936
­73.421
0.177
0.034
­0.477
142
371
0.369
169.440
­64.427
­72.837
0.182
0.025
­0.522
143
700
2770.692
162.237
­63.965
­68.205
0.189
0.011
­0.546
88
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:97==
A.4
Rotated scores for Top right solar panel 1
Table A.4: Rotated points
img_number
x_point_fine
y_point_fine
z_point_fine
x_point_true
y_point_true
z_point_true
residual_x
residual_y
residual_z
1
1.878
­1.395
­1.127
2.079
­1.426
­0.622
­0.201
0.031
­0.505
2
1.918
­1.510
­0.886
1.936
­1.594
­0.675
­0.018
0.084
­0.210
3
1.762
­1.661
­0.939
1.778
­1.748
­0.724
­0.016
0.088
­0.215
4
1.594
­1.794
­0.992
1.607
­1.890
­0.769
­0.013
0.095
­0.224
5
1.422
­1.925
­1.007
1.423
­2.016
­0.807
­0.001
0.091
­0.199
6
1.212
­1.993
­1.142
1.229
­2.128
­0.841
­0.017
0.135
­0.301
7
1.038
­2.039
­1.229
1.025
­2.222
­0.868
0.013
0.184
­0.361
8
0.826
­2.154
­1.193
0.813
­2.300
­0.890
0.012
0.146
­0.303
9
0.622
­2.184
­1.260
0.596
­2.360
­0.905
0.026
0.176
­0.354
10
0.389
­2.256
­1.226
0.373
­2.402
­0.914
0.016
0.146
­0.312
11
0.162
­2.268
­1.255
0.148
­2.425
­0.917
0.013
0.157
­0.337
12
­0.061
­2.294
­1.216
­0.078
­2.430
­0.914
0.017
0.136
­0.303
13
­0.286
­2.264
­1.240
­0.304
­2.416
­0.904
0.018
0.152
­0.337
14
­0.355
­2.304
­1.145
­0.528
­2.383
­0.887
0.173
0.079
­0.257
15
­0.734
­2.218
­1.133
­0.747
­2.332
­0.865
0.013
0.113
­0.268
16
­0.947
­2.149
­1.108
­0.961
­2.263
­0.837
0.014
0.114
­0.271
17
­1.159
­2.026
­1.139
­1.167
­2.177
­0.802
0.008
0.151
­0.336
18
­1.365
­1.915
­1.102
­1.365
­2.073
­0.763
­0.000
0.159
­0.339
19
­1.551
­1.797
­1.053
­1.552
­1.954
­0.718
0.001
0.157
­0.335
20
­1.730
­1.647
­1.019
­1.728
­1.820
­0.668
­0.003
0.173
­0.351
21
­1.896
­1.502
­0.945
­1.890
­1.672
­0.614
­0.006
0.170
­0.331
22
­2.054
­1.323
­0.879
­2.038
­1.511
­0.556
­0.016
0.187
­0.323
23
­2.169
­1.139
­0.861
­2.170
­1.338
­0.494
0.001
0.198
­0.367
24
­2.287
­0.959
­0.769
­2.286
­1.154
­0.429
­0.001
0.195
­0.340
25
­2.388
­0.785
­0.653
­2.385
­0.962
­0.361
­0.003
0.177
­0.291
Continued on next page
1Only Top right solar panel was selected to limit the amount of pages needed to show all data according to Section 2.4.2 residuals can be calculated with the rotation and
translation from Appendix A.3
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
89
==PAGE:98==
Table A.4: Rotated points
img_number
x_point_fine
y_point_fine
z_point_fine
x_point_true
y_point_true
z_point_true
residual_x
residual_y
residual_z
26
­2.459
­0.574
­0.606
­2.465
­0.762
­0.291
0.006
0.188
­0.315
27
­2.521
­0.356
­0.512
­2.527
­0.556
­0.220
0.006
0.200
­0.292
28
­2.550
­0.152
­0.469
­2.569
­0.346
­0.147
0.020
0.194
­0.322
29
­2.562
0.066
­0.417
­2.592
­0.133
­0.074
0.030
0.199
­0.343
30
­2.560
0.262
­0.351
­2.596
0.081
­0.001
0.036
0.181
­0.350
31
­2.531
0.494
­0.303
­2.579
0.295
0.071
0.048
0.199
­0.374
32
­2.498
0.651
­0.285
­2.543
0.507
0.142
0.045
0.144
­0.427
33
­2.426
0.911
­0.173
­2.487
0.715
0.212
0.062
0.195
­0.385
34
­2.354
1.093
­0.084
­2.413
0.918
0.279
0.059
0.175
­0.364
35
­2.256
1.285
0.019
­2.320
1.114
0.344
0.064
0.171
­0.325
36
­2.147
1.458
0.092
­2.210
1.302
0.405
0.063
0.156
­0.313
37
­2.026
1.618
0.145
­2.083
1.480
0.463
0.056
0.137
­0.318
38
­1.873
1.789
0.178
­1.940
1.648
0.517
0.066
0.142
­0.339
39
­1.716
1.936
0.224
­1.782
1.802
0.566
0.066
0.134
­0.342
40
­1.551
2.063
0.284
­1.611
1.944
0.610
0.059
0.119
­0.326
41
­1.374
2.174
0.363
­1.427
2.070
0.649
0.053
0.103
­0.286
42
­1.183
2.276
0.404
­1.233
2.182
0.682
0.049
0.094
­0.278
43
­0.974
2.369
0.430
­1.029
2.276
0.710
0.055
0.092
­0.280
44
­0.782
2.429
0.483
­0.817
2.354
0.731
0.035
0.075
­0.248
45
­0.556
2.487
0.501
­0.599
2.414
0.747
0.043
0.073
­0.246
46
­0.342
2.526
0.494
­0.377
2.456
0.756
0.035
0.071
­0.261
47
­0.131
2.544
0.504
­0.152
2.479
0.759
0.021
0.065
­0.255
48
0.090
2.545
0.507
0.075
2.484
0.755
0.016
0.062
­0.248
49
0.329
2.532
0.474
0.300
2.470
0.745
0.028
0.062
­0.271
50
0.549
2.496
0.461
0.524
2.437
0.729
0.025
0.059
­0.267
51
0.776
2.435
0.459
0.743
2.386
0.706
0.033
0.049
­0.248
52
0.978
2.374
0.388
0.957
2.317
0.678
0.020
0.058
­0.290
53
1.170
2.300
0.293
1.164
2.231
0.644
0.007
0.069
­0.351
54
1.366
2.192
0.272
1.361
2.127
0.604
0.005
0.064
­0.332
55
1.551
2.077
0.150
1.549
2.008
0.559
0.003
0.069
­0.410
Continued on next page
90
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:99==
Table A.4: Rotated points
img_number
x_point_fine
y_point_fine
z_point_fine
x_point_true
y_point_true
z_point_true
residual_x
residual_y
residual_z
56
1.718
1.945
0.103
1.724
1.874
0.510
­0.006
0.070
­0.406
57
1.873
1.799
0.015
1.886
1.726
0.455
­0.014
0.073
­0.440
58
2.014
1.639
­0.035
2.034
1.565
0.397
­0.020
0.074
­0.433
59
2.140
1.468
­0.110
2.167
1.392
0.335
­0.027
0.076
­0.446
60
2.253
1.283
­0.152
2.283
1.208
0.270
­0.030
0.074
­0.422
61
2.347
1.092
­0.209
2.381
1.016
0.202
­0.035
0.076
­0.411
62
2.416
0.897
­0.319
2.462
0.816
0.133
­0.045
0.080
­0.452
63
2.475
0.694
­0.372
2.523
0.610
0.061
­0.049
0.083
­0.433
64
2.521
0.482
­0.395
2.566
0.400
­0.011
­0.045
0.082
­0.384
65
2.548
0.262
­0.429
2.589
0.187
­0.084
­0.041
0.074
­0.345
66
2.537
0.058
­0.553
2.592
­0.027
­0.157
­0.055
0.085
­0.395
67
2.533
­0.160
­0.548
2.575
­0.241
­0.230
­0.042
0.081
­0.319
68
2.506
­0.373
­0.570
2.539
­0.453
­0.301
­0.033
0.080
­0.269
69
2.451
­0.566
­0.644
2.484
­0.661
­0.371
­0.033
0.095
­0.273
70
2.370
­0.745
­0.754
2.409
­0.864
­0.438
­0.039
0.119
­0.316
71
2.301
­0.832
­0.869
2.317
­1.060
­0.503
­0.015
0.229
­0.367
72
2.166
­1.119
­0.895
2.206
­1.248
­0.564
­0.040
0.130
­0.331
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
91
==PAGE:100==
92
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:101==
B
Performance data
Calls to the function
Total running time (s)
file:function
2661120/1330560
13.206
numeric.py:roll
3878
10.672
{imread}:internal
3696
8.671
contour_service.py:custom_uniform_interpolation
1848
4.536
contour_service.py:calculate_roll
4938
4.063
{built­in method builtins.sorted}:internal
58400
3.754
{matchShapes}:internal
1
1.771
{built­in method _pickle.load}:internal
1332896
1.424
numeric.py:normalize_axis_tuple
1332504
0.765
{method ’reshape’ of ’numpy.ndarray’ objects}:internal
665280
0.729
function_base.py:flip
Table B.1: Rough pose match for top 10 functions by Total running time for all 73 images
Calls to the function
Total running time (s)
file:function
36316
3.695
match_three_d.py:loss
131999
2.730
{function KDTree.query at 0x12fa6cf70}:internal
715849
2.129
{method ’reduce’ of ’numpy.ufunc’ objects}:internal
36378
0.714
_methods.py:_var
36316
0.658
_kdtree.py:__init__
108913
0.530
linalg.py:norm
36316
0.515
arraysetops.py:_unique1d
328452
0.455
{built­in method numpy.array}:internal
251549
0.423
fromnumeric.py:_wrapreduction
263998
0.412
fromnumeric.py:_wrapit
Table B.2: Fine pose match for top 10 functions by Total running time for all 73 images
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
93
==PAGE:102==
Calls to the function
Total running time (s)
file:function
36316
3.695
loss
131999
2.730
internal
715849
2.129
internal
36378
0.714
_var
36316
0.658
__init__
108913
0.530
norm
36316
0.515
_unique1d
328452
0.455
internal
251549
0.423
_wrapreduction
263998
0.412
_wrapit
Table B.3: Vertices finding for top 10 functions by Total running time for all 73 images
94
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
==PAGE:103==
Robust Real­Time Non­Cooperative Target Tracking Algorithm for Space Applications
95
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej 327
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.space.dtu.dk/english
