==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D
Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
Master Thesis
4th February, 2024
Sarah Fusco, s213444
Supervisor: Claus Sternberg
Co-supervisor: Asha Maria Rudjord Levann
Co-supervisor: Giorgio Scordo
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my thanks to Søren Molin and Helle Krogh Johansenby for giving me the
opportunity to work on such a fascinating topic. I am also thankful to Claus Sternberg who has
been my supervisor throughout this journey and for making this project possible on behalf of
DTU. My gratitude extends to my co‐supervisor Asha Maria Rudjord Levann who guided me in
the cell‐biology lab and introduced me to the experimental analysis conducted in this thesis.
I am thankful for having had the possibility to be introduced to the 3D bioprinting technology
by my co‐supervisor Giorgio Scordo and the availability of the 3D printer provided by Jenny
Emnéus and group. I appreciate the support and guidance of Alexander Frederick Melanson,
who helped me out in the lab during my supervisor’s maternity leave. I am grateful for the
Infection Microbiology Group at DTU Biosustain. Their guidance, expertise, and insights have
played an important role in deepening my understanding of the intricacies of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa infection in Cystic fibrosis patients. Furthermore, I would like to give a special thanks
to my family who has always stood by my side since day one. Their never‐ending support was a
source of motivation and strength.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
==PAGE:3==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
1
Abstract
Intra‐ and interspecies diversities characterize the mixed bacterial populations usually observed
in Cystic Fibrosis (CF) sputum samples. Intra‐clonal diversity of specific Pseudomonas aerugi‐
nosa (P. aeruginosa) strains in CF lungs, as identified by mutations across the genome, is driven
by interactions with other microbes in local micro‐niches. As an example of intra‐clonal inter‐
actions, co‐existence of quorum sensing (QS) positive and negative variants in the P. aerugi‐
nosa population may arise from the generation of variants that benefit from signal molecules
produced/excreted by non‐mutated bacteria. Whilst for interspecies interaction, the Type VI
secretion system of P. aeruginosa exhibits an antagonist effect against Staphylococcus aureus,
proposed as an explanation of P. aeruginosa’s late dominance in late stages of CF lung infec‐
tions. However, conclusive evidence supporting these suggestions is lacking. We have de‐
veloped a CF lung infection model using Air‐Liquid‐Interphase (ALI) epithelial cultures, which
mimics human CF lung epithelial cells. Furthermore, I apply 3D bioprinting, to precisely print
bacteria onto ALI cultures to study microbial interactions and analyze the ecological impacts of
altering spatial configurations. This innovative approach allows future investigations of com‐
plementation, competition, antibiotic tolerance, QS molecules, and Type VI secretion toxins
at predefined micron‐scale distances. We have optimized 3D bacterial bioprinting of relevant
fluorescently stained bacterial populations on ALI cultures. Current results include printing of
uniform and reproducible bioink droplets, successful biocompatibility with PAO1, a reference
strain of P. aeruginosa and BCi‐NS1.1 lung cells. Finally, printing of two different PAO1 strains
at micro‐scale distances was achieved. Employing our lung infection model and 3D bioprinting
technology, we aim to profile microbe‐microbe interactions impacting on the infection process
to direct our understandings towards more effective and personalized infection control.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
==PAGE:4==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Contents
1
Abstract
2
Introduction
1
3
Pseudomonas aeruginosa: Characteristics, and Pathogenesis
2
3.1
Characteristics, Pathogenicity and Secretion Systems of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
2
3.2
Cystic Fibrosis and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
Pseudomonas aeruginosa patho‐adaptive behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and microbial dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.5
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and ALI model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Bacterial 3D bioprinting
10
4.1
Applications of 3D Printing in microbiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
Bioink formulation for bacterial printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Bioink printing parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Materials and methods
14
5.1
Bioink preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Bacterial preparation and biocompatibility test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Seeding of lung epithelium cells onto ALI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.4
ALI biocompatibility and infection test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.5
Printing optimisation and 3D bioprinter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.6
Statistical analysis of acquired data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Results
19
6.1
Bacterial biocompatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.2
ALI biocompatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6.3
Bioink parameters and optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.4
3D bacterial printing onto ALI cultures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7
Discussion and conclusion
26
Bibliography
28
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
==PAGE:5==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
2
Introduction
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder with mutations in Cystic Fibrosis Trans‐membrane Con‐
ductance Regulator (CFTR) gene, leading to severe pulmonary infections, with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) being a highly prevalent bacterium in people with cystic fibrosis
(pwCF). This bacterium rapidly adapts to the CF lung environment and persists despite host
immune responses. P. aeruginosa forms bacterial niches in the lungs resulting in development
of mutant strains; such as persistant strains to antibiotic treatments. The adaptation to the
lung environment and persistent phenotype is primarily attributed to the accumulation of ge‐
netic mutations, pathoadaptive mutations, that modify the expression profiles and phenotype
of P. aeruginosa [1], [2]. Notably, the coexistence of Quorum Sensing (QS) mutants (positive
and negative variants) highlights intra‐clonal diversity and dynamics [3]. Additionally, P. aerugi‐
nosa interaction with other CF microorganisms, including Aspergillus fumigatus (A. fumigatus),
Candida albicans C.albicans), and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), result in symbiotic and
antagonistic relations [4]. Nevertheless, such microbial interactions might differ if studied at
a finer scale (micron‐scale) when compared to higher spatial distance as demonstrated by [4]
with Escherichia coli (E. coli) strains.
The breakthrough of innovative technologies has opened new possibilities for exploring and un‐
derstanding microbial dynamics and infectious diseases. Recently, 3D bioprinting has emerged
as a new technology for bacterial bioprinting. Among, the various 3D printed bacteria there are:
E. coli, S. aureus, Methicillin‐resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and P. aeruginosa. The
application of 3D bacterial bioprinting has been employed in various scenarios, such as assess‐
ing drug efficacy against 3D printed bacterial biofilms on plastic surfaces [5], exploring interac‐
tions of 3D printed bacteria at a micron‐scale on agar plates [4], and 3D bacterial bioprinting of
biofilms on human bronchial cells [6].
The aim of this thesis is to develop a technique to study microbial interaction onto human lung
epithelial cells by using 3D bioprinting and lung epithelial Air‐Liquid Interface (ALI) cultures. 3D
bioprinting will be used to simulate the interactions of P. aeruginosa with different microbial
species in CF lungs at a predetermined micron‐scale distance. On the other hand, lung epithelial
ALI cultures will be used to closely mimic infections by P. aeruginosa in human lungs. Bioinks
biocompatibility assays will be performed for both bacterial and lung epithelial cells. This is
conducted to asses the bioink impact on infection performance compared to standard infec‐
tion approach. Additionally, 3D bioprinting optimisations will be conducted for reproducibility
purposes. In the long run, we aim in employing our CF lung infection model and 3D bioprint‐
ing technology to be able to better understand how the dynamics between bacterial species
within CF lungs is, and how does their interactions lead to the pathology of P. aeruginosa that
we observe within pwCF.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
1
==PAGE:6==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
3
Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
Characteristics, and Pathogenesis
3.1
Characteristics, Pathogenicity and Secretion Systems of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
P. aeruginosa belongs to the Pseudomonas genus in the Proteobacteria phylum, it is a non‐spore
forming, Gram‐negative bacterium normally found in soil. It is a facultative anaerobic bacterium
that shows reduced metabolic activity in low oxygen conditions. P. aeruginosa optimal growth
occurs at 37°C, yet it thrives at temperature range of 4°C to 42°C [7]. P. aeruginosa’s motility is
facilitated by a single polar flagellum and its genome spans from 5.5 to 7 megabase pairs con‐
tributing to its flexible adaptability to diverse environments. Its rapid mutational adaptation
can lead to antibiotic resistance, with carbapenem‐resistant P. aeruginosa strains designed as
critical pathogens by the World Health Organization [8], [9]. Infections with P. aeruginosa in in‐
dividuals with compromised immune function such as in CF and obstructive pulmonary diseases
(COPD), shows challenges for treatment and often results in severe infections. Two commonly
used laboratory strains are PAO1 (chronic wound isolate) and PAO14 (highly virulent strain)[7],
[10]. Figure 3.1, shows P. aeruginosa with single polar flagellum.
Figure 3.1: P. aeruginosa bacteria with single polar flagellum [11].
The pathogenicity of P. aeruginosa relies on its adaptation to environmental stresses, viru‐
lent traits (i.e motility, toxin production), and resistance mechanisms (i.e biofilm formation,
multi drug resistance (MDR)). An important regulatory system providing strict regulation of P.
aeruginosa’s virulence is QS. QS enables the production of auto‐inducers (AIs) diffusible signal
molecules that can trigger the expression of diverse virulence genes while coordinating bacte‐
rial responses within the community [12]. QS plays an important role at all stages of P. aerug‐
inosa’s pathogenesis, from host colonization to invasion, infection, immune evasion, and drug
resistance [13].
P. aeruginosa secretes QS molecules as N‐3‐oxododecanoyl‐L‐homoserine lactone (3OC12HSL),
by the LasI enzyme. The signal diffuses in and out the cells and binds to LasR which is a LuxR
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
2
==PAGE:7==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
family transcription factor. When the concentration of 3OC12‐HSL reaches a sufficient level,
LasR triggers the transcription of numerous target genes as transcription factor, rhlR. Both
lasR and rhlR encompass several genes that are responsible for encoding virulence factors.
Other QS molecules are found to be N‐butanoyl‐L‐homoserine lactone (C4HSL) and 2‐heptyl‐3‐
hydroxy4(1H)‐quinolone (PQS), produced by the rhlI, and pqsABCDH gene cluster, respectively.
These signals bind to their regulators RhlR and PqsR to activate downstream virulence factors
such as pyocyanin, elastase, rhamnolipids, and pyoverdine. PQS is produced in the lungs of
pwCF infected with P. aeruginosa, it induces apoptosis [14], [15].
It was observed transcription of virulence factors by QS system to stimulate Interleukin‐6 (IL‐6)
and Interleukin‐8 (IL‐8) production in lung epithelial cells leading to disruption of epithelial tight
and adherence junctions, and finally apoptosis in airway epithelial cells[15]. Figure (3.2, shows
the inter‐cellular signalling regulation mechanism.
Figure 3.2: QS cascade initiates by activation of lasR (regulated by Vfr and GacA) and lasI (positive auto‐regulation
and negative regulators RsaL and QscR). LasR‐3OC12HSL, influences rhlR, rhlI, and pqsH, with the latter encoding
a putative mono‐oxygenase for PQS synthesis. At the pqsR promoter, a competitive regulatory event arise, where
LasR‐3OC12HSL and RhlR‐C4HSL induce and repress pqsR, respectively. When PqsR interacts with PQS it forms a
complex regulating the pqsA promoter which allows for increase in PQS production.
Among P. aeruginosa’s virulence traits there are different secretion systems which play cru‐
cial roles in the bacterium survival, virulence, and ability to cause infections. A well‐known
secretion system in P. aeruginosa is the Type III secretion system (T3SS) which permits the bac‐
terium to inject effector proteins, ExoS, ExoT, ExoU, and ExoY, straight into the host cell. ExoS
and ExoT disrupt signaling by ADP‐ribosylation, ExoY affects actin via elevated cyclic adenosine
mono‐phosphate (cAMP), and ExoU leads to tissue destruction through lipase activity. T3SS is
triggered by host cell contact, calcium limitation, cAMP levels, and spermidine [16]. In addition
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
3
==PAGE:8==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
to the T3SS, P. aeruginosa possesses other secretion systems, such as the Type II secretion sys‐
tem (T2SS) and Type VI secretion system (T6SS). The T2SS takes part in the secretion of various
exo‐enzymes, toxins, and other virulence factors into the extracellular environment. It excretes
Exotoxin A inducing host cell death by inhibiting protein synthesis, elastases (LasA) which de‐
grade lung connective tissue elastin, while phospholipases and lipases interfere with normal
immune functions by targeting surfactants in the pulmonary system [17]. On the other hand,
T6SS is implicated in inter‐species competition and can contribute to P. aeruginosa’s ability to
establish dominance in certain ecological niches. P. aeruginosa utilizes T6SS to inject effectors,
Tse1‐6 proteins, into both host cells and competing bacteria. Tse1/3 hydrolyzes peptidoglycan,
Tse4‐6 act as antibacterials, and Tse2 inhibits growth in prokaryotes and eukaryotes [18]. In
Figure 3.3, we can observe the three described secretion systems.
Figure 3.3: P. aeruginosa bacterium with the described secretion systems Type II, III, VI. T2SS (bacterial lysis) release
of toxins: exotoxin A, Las A (elastane), Las B (elastane B), phospholipase and protease. T3SS (host interaction) in‐
volves the injection of effector proteins ExoS, ExoT, ExoU and ExoY. T6SS (host interaction and bacterial competition)
injection in host cell of Tse 1‐6 proteins.
3.2
Cystic Fibrosis and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
P. aeruginosa is one of the most common bacterial species involved in CF respiratory tract in‐
fection. CF is an autosomal recessive disease, where mutations in CFTR are observed [1]. The
CFTR gene is involved in the regulation of chloride and water transport across cell membranes.
As well, it takes part in the regulation of sodium, potassium, calcium‐activated chloride, and
sodium bicarbonate channels. Mutations at the CFTR gene lead to disruption in ion channeling,
while sodium transport is increased via the Epithelial Sodium Channel (ENaC). This results in
formation of dehydrated airway surface liquid leading to mucus accumulation [19]. In Figure
3.4, we can observe a standard lung (A) vs a CF lung (B)
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
4
==PAGE:9==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Figure 3.4: Standard lung (A) vs a CF lung (B). Active CFTR gene is present in with ion channeling and stable sodium
production (A). Mucus accumulation and bacterial thriving is observed in CF lung (B) [20].
The lungs employ a multi‐faceted defenses against pathogens like P. aeruginosa. Physical de‐
fenses, including tight junctions and cilia‐covered mucus layers, work alongside chemical factors
such as low iron levels, neutral pH, and antimicrobial substances. Additionally, pre‐existing mi‐
crobiota in mucosal tissues contribute to host defense by engaging in nutrient competition with
occurring pathogens[21].
Nevertheless the dehydration of airway surface liquid leads to mucus accumulation, limiting cilia
to be able to effectively prompt it out of the lungs. Consequently, the mucus accumulation leads
to low pH, impeding antimicrobial and immune response mechanisms and facilitating infection
by P. aeruginosa. At low pH the improper folding of mucin carbohydrate side chains results in the
impairment of mucins’ ability to bind foreign particles and prevention of mucociliary clearance.
Moreover, the low pH contributes to altered mucins O‐glycosylation and sulfation, promoting
bacterial adherence and colonization. Furthermore, an amino acid‐rich environment is created
in CF lungs due to host enzyme proteolysis favoring the dominance of P. aeruginosa, which uses
amino acids as a preferred carbon source [21].
The triggers of tissue damage, bronchiectasis, and loss of lung function, resulting in respiratory
failure and a shortened life expectancy among pwCF can be connected to P. aeruginosa infection
which has shown to adapt to the CF lung environment by slowing growth, forming biofilm, and
antibiotic‐tolerant persister populations, contributing to chronic infection [7].
3.3
Pseudomonas aeruginosa patho-adaptive behaviour
As mentioned earlier, P. aeruginosa exhibits adaptive evolution in CF airways that could be ob‐
served by diverse CF isolates. It has been found, that once P. aeruginosa adapts in CF lungs it
gives rise to mucoid colonies which result in the the overproduction of alginate an exopolysac‐
charides, found in bacterial biofilm. Furthermore, other P. aeruginosa adaptations include the
loss of motility. Moreover, use of antimicrobial therapy has been demonstrated to lead to
pathoadaptive mutations resulting in the over‐expression of efflux pumps, changes in antibi‐
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
5
==PAGE:10==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
otic targets, higher production of β‐lactamases, and decrease in outer membrane permeability.
During infections, P. aeruginosa produce pyoverdine to obtain iron; however, once in CF lungs it
adapts to use haemoglobin instead by mutations at the Phu system. Furthermore, up to 60% of
the P. aeruginosa population in CF airways consists of hyper‐mutators, resulting in rapid adap‐
tation and acquisition of beneficial traits, such as enhanced antibiotic resistance and virulence.
As described in Section 3.1, T3SS plays a dominant role in early stage of P. aeruginosa’s infec‐
tion. Nevertheless, once P. aeruginosa adapts to CF lungs it has the the tendency to become
defective in key virulence factors such as T3SS secretion and QS [21], [2]. Figure 3.5, shows the
change observed in P. aeruginosa after adaptation in CF lungs.
Figure 3.5: Adaption of P. aeruginosa in CF lungs. Inspired by [21] and created with Biorender.
3.4
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and microbial dynamics
As previously described, P. aeruginosa exhibits adaptive evolution in CF airways which might
lead to rewired microbial interactions (inter‐species interactions) and intra‐clonal variation [1],
[22].
Adaptation in P. aeruginosa is often associated with a reduction in social behaviors, supported
by frequent occurrence of LasR mutations during in vitro evolution. Consequently, emergence
of LasR‐mutant, indicate a loss of intra‐species cooperative behaviors, thus resulting in social
cheaters. However, some samples from pwCF show that P. aeruginosa LasR mutants main‐
tain active QS through LasR‐independent induction of the Rhl system. This is often linked to
compensatory mutations in the MexT gene. The MexT gene has been shown to affect the ex‐
pression of 40 genes including the efflux pump MexEF‐OprN and has role as a global regulon
intersecting the las‐pqs‐rhl QS signalling. This highlights a rewiring of QS networks, promoting
Rhl‐mediated social behavior within the bacterial population during chronic infections in CF lung
[3], [23]. Furthermore, the complexity of CF mucus, rich in various components (mucins, DNA,
amino acids, glucose, lactate, and ions), varies among patients and lung regions, emphasizing
CF lungs heterogeneity. As a result, intra‐clonal diversity might be driven by hypermutability
and geographical isolation in the lungs.[1], [22].
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
6
==PAGE:11==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Additionally, CF airways host a diverse microbial community, exceeding 1,000 species, with bac‐
teria dominating at over 99% including common pathogens such as; P. aeruginosa, Haemophilus
influenzae (H. influenzae), S. aureus, C. albicans, Burkholderia cepacian (B. cepacian), and Achro‐
mobacter spp. Traditional mechanisms including competition, antagonism, and symbiosis, as
well as iron sequestration through siderophores and T6SS, influence these interactions [24].
The evolution of P. aeruginosa demonstrates an evolving interaction with other co‐colonizing
microorganisms in the CF environment. P. aeruginosa typically displays
anti‐staphylococcal behavior, as P. aeruginosa has been observed to utilize S. aureus as an iron
source during iron depletion. Nevertheless, CF‐adapted strains exhibit variability in this behav‐
ior, transitioning from a competitive to a co‐existing dynamic with S. aureus. This is due to some
CF‐adapted strains having a reduced LasA protease (Type2SS) activity, affecting their ability to
lyse S. aureus cells. This was mostly observed in late isolates of P. aeruginosa showing reduced
antagonist behaviour towards S. aureus, and thus leading to high genotypic and phenotypic
heterogeneity.
Moreover, the aggressive behaviour of P. aeruginosa extends to other microorganism such as C.
albicans and B. cepacian, where it was suggested that these microorganisms can take advantage
of the interaction within mixed‐species biofilms, enhancing antimicrobial resistance and viru‐
lence. As an example, production of phenazine by P. aeruginosa and C. albicans’s production
of ethanol increase during their interaction. While, it has been observed that P. aeruginosa’s
alginate can protect B. cepacian from the host immune system [25].
It is important to mention that spatial distancing in microbial interactions can play a part as
demonstrated in study [4]. In their research they observed that providing a micron‐scale (fine
scale) distance to different E.coli strains producing diverse toxins shows interesting results com‐
pared to more coarse scale distancing of the studied toxin producing E.coli strains. Therefore,
showing that some E.coli strains had a co‐existing relation with other E.coli toxin producing
strains at coarse‐scale. However, a different result was observed when a fine scale was imple‐
mented. At the fine scale antagonism relation was observed by one E.coli strain to the other
[4].
Hence, P. aeruginosa persistence and pathoadaptive capabilities in the CF environment are in‐
fluenced by interactions with pathogens, commensal anaerobes, and the typical lung micro‐
biota, along with the stress within the lung environment. It is important to fully understand the
specific mechanisms and the extent to which these interactions occur. Examining the spatial
arrangement of P. aeruginosa interactions with prevalent CF lung microbes as S. aureus and
P. aeruginosa QS variants can provide additional understanding of these mechanisms. This in‐
volves exploring microbial interactions at varying spatial separations to understand the impor‐
tance of spatial impact on microbial interaction by conducting such studies under conditions
that mimic infections on human lungs.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
7
==PAGE:12==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
3.5
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and ALI model
To study host‐pathogen interaction in infection microbiology, various models are employed, in‐
cluding organoids [26], microfluidic devices [27], and transwell systems [28]. In the context of
this thesis, the transwell systems, particularly the ALI mono‐culture and co‐culture approach,
are chosen. ALI culture is a method for differentiating airway epithelial cells under controlled
conditions, creating a more physiologically relevant environment. In ALI models, a porous mem‐
brane inserts separates two compartments: the upper apical side exposed to air and the lower
basolateral side in contact with a nutrient medium. This system is designed to closely replicate
the physiological conditions of the epithelial barrier in human lungs. Initially, cells are seeded
onto the membrane and expansion media is added to the basolateral and apical compartment,
while cells are allowed to expand to ensure proper contact with neighboring cells. After a few
days media is removed from the apical compartment, and changed to the media that induces
differentiation leading to the development of a pseudo‐stratified epithelial cell layer [29], [30]
The cell types in our ALI model include basal cells, multi‐ciliated cells and secretory cells (club
cells and goblet cells) which are some of the primary cell that we can observe in the human lungs
[31]. In Figure 3.6 we can observe the lung epithelium with the cells used in our ALI model.
Figure 3.6: Some of the primary cells in human lungs present in our ALI model. Created with Biorender.
The ALI method has been used for toxicity screening [31], drug transport [32], and infection
analysis [33]. ALI models serve as a crucial tool to examine the interaction between lung ep‐
ithelial cells and P. aeruginosa.
ALI conditions are monitored through parameters such as transepithelial electric resistance
(TEER) offering insights into tight junction formation, cell monolayer integrity and infection
severity. TEER analysis is performed by assessing the electrical current across the epithelial
membrane, influenced by the tight junctions between cells which in turn acts as barriers against
ion and solute passages. Higher resistance is an indication of intact junctions, while a decrease
in TEER indicates disruption of the epithelial barrier suggesting that P. aeruginosa might have
compromised cell layer integrity by tight junction damage [34], [35].
Analysis as Immunofluorescence (IF) Staining, Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) Cytotoxicity Assays,
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
8
==PAGE:13==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
IL‐8 analysis, live/dead assays can also be conducted. IF Staining is employed to visualize specific
proteins or cellular structures through fluorescently labeled antibodies to interpret the extent
of infection, bacterial localization, and potential damage to the lung epithelium [36]. LDH Cy‐
totoxicity Assays focus on the release of LDH, an enzyme released into the extracellular space
when cells undergo damage or lysis. These assays measure LDH levels in the culture medium,
providing an indication of cellular damage or death caused by the infection. Increased LDH
levels suggest cell damage attributed to P. aeruginosa [37]. On the other hand, IL‐8 serves as
an important marker of the immune response within the respiratory system. By measuring IL‐8
levels, we gain insights into the inflammatory reactions triggered by the P. aeruginosa infection.
Elevated IL‐8 levels indicate the start of an immune response, this provides an understanding
of the host’s reaction when an infection in ALI culture is performed [38]. Another test normally
conducted is the live‐dead assay which can evaluate the viability of cultivated lung epithelial
cells. In Figure 3.7 we can observe the mentioned infection analysis performed after infection
of ALI cultures.
Figure 3.7: Infection analysis performed to evaluate extent of infection damage onto ALI cultures. Figure created
with Biorender.
In summary, the combination of TEER, IF staining, LDH cytotoxicity assays, IL‐8 analysis and
live/dead assay can collectively provide a better understanding of the immune response, in‐
fection dynamics, and cellular damage associated with P. aeruginosa infection of ALI cultures.
Additionally, through quantification of P. aeruginosa colony forming unit (CFU) insights into the
complex interplay between the pathogen and the host cells during infection can be further con‐
sidered [29], [35].
Since a majority of P. aeruginosa infections occur in mucosal tissues, our primary focus lies in
replicating these specific infection site, with a particular emphasis on the lungs. When modeling
lung infections, cells used are typically obtained from human cell lines or primary cells sourced
from healthy individuals or lung patients. Primary cells present an advantage in their ability
to maintain characteristics resembling in vivo conditions. Nevertheless, they are difficult to
maintain and have limited passage capabilities. The cell line utilized in this study is the BCi‐
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
9
==PAGE:14==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
NS1.1 (Basal cell immortalized nonsmoker), which originates from a non‐smoking individual and
is engineered to prevent senescence. Basal cells have the capacity to differentiate into diverse
cell types and the BCi‐NS1.1 differentiates into a fully differentiated epithelium [29], [35].
4
Bacterial 3D bioprinting
4.1
Applications of 3D Printing in microbiology
3D bacterial bioprinting has shown significant progress in printing of diverse bacterial species
and in its recent application in various aspects of infection studies.
Firstly, bacterial bioprinting has been employed in the assessment of antimicrobial drugs’ ef‐
ficacy onto 3D bioprinted bacterial biofilm printed on plastic surfaces. The bioink formulated
in this study comprised planktonic bacteria; E. coli, S. aureus, MRSA, and P. aeruginosa with
partially cross‐linked alginate. Their 3D bacteria biofilm construct showed easy observation of
anti‐microbial biofilm penetration and greater resistance to antimicrobial treatment compared
to test performed on 2D cultures. The article was performed with the scope that 3D biofilm
printing could mimic real‐life biofilm formation in clinical infections [5].
In a separate study, 3D bioprinting was utilised to print and arrange different E. coli bacteria
strains at predefined micron‐scale (fine‐scale) distance. This was executed to study bacterial re‐
lease of toxins at a finer scale than previously studied. When fine scale positioning was applied
a shift in competition from one dominating strain to another was noticed. Furthermore, trans‐
lation of result obtained at different spatial separation (from coarse to fine scale) was limited
due to different observed outcomes. Conditions where co‐existence was noted at coarse scale
did not correspond to fine‐scale conditions where mutual destruction was examined. Thus, this
research leads to further study on understanding the effect of spatial distancing in terms of
bacterial interactions and infection outcomes [4].
A farther study, conducted 3D bioprinting of bacterial biofilms of (E.coli MG1655) onto mono‐
layers of human bronchial epithelial cells (Calu‐3) grown on transwell inserts. In their study a
biocompatibility assay was performed, demonstrating their formulated bioink (gelatin‐alginate)
to be biocompatible to Calu‐3 cells and E. coli. The bioink was further optimised to be printed in
different shapes and sizes while still maintaining the required biofilm properties. The study was
carried‐out to test the printed stability of the biofilm’s structure and its antibiotic susceptibility.
As a result, they developed an innovative methodology to bioprint biofilms on human epithelial
cell layers for establishing more robust human‐based in vitro models to test antimicrobial [6]. In
Figure 4.1 we can observe the three studies which used 3D bacterial bioprinting: (A) 3D biofilm
printing onto plastic surfaces, (B) 3D printing of bacterial at fine‐scale distancing on agar plate,
(C) 3D biofilm printing onto ALI culture. In the same Figure, on the right, we can observe this
set‐up for this thesis 3D biorprinting application.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
10
==PAGE:15==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Figure 4.1: The three studies which used 3D bacterial bioprinting are shown. (A) 3D biofilm printing onto plastic
surfaces, (B) 3D printing of bacterial at fine‐scale distancing on agar plate, (C) 3D biofilm printing onto ALI culture.
On the right, our 3D bacterial printing set‐up is shown. Bacterial strains are printed at fine‐scale onto ALI culture.
Created with Biorender.
In summary, 3D bioprinting presents a promising experimental design to answer questions re‐
lated to possible effect of spatial positioning onto bacterial interaction while mimicking real‐life
situations in CF lungs. Advantages granted by 3D bioprinting as shown by literature analysis
above include the precise spatial arrangement, varied assortment of cells, and possibility to
closely mimicking infection in pwCF. Consequently, the aim of this study is to develop an ap‐
proach using 3D bioptinting to study the intricate interactions between pathogens, as P. aerug‐
inosa and lung microbiome in pwCF.
As describe in article [6], prior to infection modeling, it is crucial to test for bioink formulations
biocomaptibility with cells involved in the experimentation along with optimisation of parame‐
ters for bioink printing.
4.2
Bioink formulation for bacterial printing
A requisite of 3D bioprinting is bioink formulation which needs to meet critical attributes, viscos‐
ity (formulation), uniform printability and biocompatibility with both bacterial and human cells
[39]. Additionally, bioink needs to be printed at moderate pressure and temperature similar to
the survival conditions of P. aeruginosa (4°C to 42°C) [10].
A bioink is composed primarily of a hydrogel and a cross‐linking solution. Hydrogels, such
as agarose, sodium alginate, and gelatin, are popular options for bacterial bioinks. They are
found to be biocompatibility, minimal toxicity, affordability, and user‐friendly nature for bac‐
terial printing. It is important to underline that polymer concentration and molecular weight
distribution influence the mechanical characteristics of hydrogel. A high hydrogel concentra‐
tions might require higher printing temperatures and pressures to avoid any printing blockages
[40].
Among the mentioned hydrogels, sodium alginate can form gels through self‐assembly or in‐
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
11
==PAGE:16==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
teraction with cations (calcium chloride) the cross‐linkg solution. It is a widely used option as a
bioink formulation; however, it does not retain specific shapes and does not promote cellular
adhesion due to its gradual degradation over time. More recently, a variant of agarose known
as ultra‐low gelling temperature (ULGT) agarose has been used for 3D printing of bacterial cells.
In contrast to standard agarose (melting point of 90°C), ULGT agarose exhibits a significantly
lower melting point (25°C to 30°C). Thus, allowing it to be suitable for scenarios requiring gen‐
tle gelation conditions or the encapsulation of thermally sensitive substances. ULGT agarose
was employed for bioprinting E. coli cells at 37°C with a G35 (150 µm) needle. [4].
The 3D‐printed bacterial bioink must ultimately interact with lung epithelial cells. Thus, opting
for a bioink composition that is compatible with lung epithelium cells is critical. In article [5],
h sodium alginate and calcium chloride were used for the 3D printing of bacterial biofilm onto
plastic for antimicrobial drug efficacy test. Even though they do not print on ALI cultures this
combination can be considered as the two solutions have not shown to be troublesome onto
epithelial cells [6], [5]. On the other hand, in article [6],bioink composed of sodium alginate,
calcium chloride, and gelatin was used to print bacterial cells onto bronchial epithelial cells in ALI
culture [6]. This strategy can be potentially applied due to its resemblance to the methodology
used in this project. Nonetheless, upon consideration, it was determined to explore the testing
of a bioink with varying percentages of sodium alginate, ranging from 1% to 4% (in article [5]
sodium alginate 4% solution is used), along with the inclusion of 0.4% calcium chloride. This
choice was driven by uncertainties associated with the use of gelatin, pig‐derived as in the case
of article [6], and its potential implications on the inflammatory response within the ALI culture
employed in this project.
An high bioink concentration might result in blockages during the printing process, whereas
an insufficient concentration could lead to inadequate material gelling. Therefore, it is key to
understand what percentage of sodium alginate in the bioink formulation can provide the best
conditions for 3D bacterial printing onto ALI culture.
4.3
Bioink printing parameters
An further essential aspect of 3D bacterial bioprinting involves ensuring the reproducibility of
printing outcomes. In article [5], a custom‐designed three‐axis (X–Y–Z) 3D cell printer was
adopted. This printer consisted of a single nozzle and performed extrusion‐based bioprinting
of various bioinks‐laden with bacterial strains onto plastic substrates. In their bioink formu‐
lation (consisting of 4% sodium alginate and 0.4% calcium chloride), they applied a G25 nee‐
dle (515μm) for the printing process. However, the specific pressure(s) used during printing
was/were not defined in their publication [5].
Alternatively, the research conducted in article [4], has shown to use a bioink formulated with
ULTG agarose. This bioink has been used for printing various strains of bacteria to examine
spatial segregation at a micron‐scale on an agar plate. The printing process was facilitated by
a custom‐built 3D droplet printer. The printing pressure was generated using a custom‐built
transducer operating at 130V. This transducer transmitted controlled pressure impulses into a
chamber containing Milli‐Q (MQ) water. The chamber was connected to a glass nozzle with a
tip diameter of G35 (150μm). To prevent any mixing between the MQ water in the chamber
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
12
==PAGE:17==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
and the printing solution, an oil plug was used for separating the two solutions [4]. In Figure
4.2, the 3D bioprinting set‐up used in article [4] can be observed.
Figure 4.2: 3D droplet printer with custom‐built transducer operating at 130V transmitting pressure impulses into
MQ water chamber connected to a glass nozzle G35 (150μm). To prevent any mixing an oil plug was used for sepa‐
rating the two solutions. Image from my previous special course created with Biorender.
In article [6], researchers have been using the Discovery model from RegenHu 3D bioprinter. E.
coli cells were suspended in a bioink consisting of gelatin and sodium alginate grown to biofilm
state by using a G25 needle (515μm),fixed to cartridges connected to an air pressure source.
They applied pressures ranged from 50kPa to 250kPa, to facilitate the printing of biofilms onto
bronchial epithelium cell ALI cultures [6].
As it can be observed by the information above, the articles mentioned, that closely reflect the
objectives of this project, involve various printers, pressures, nozzle dimensions, compositions,
and concentrations of bioinks, alongside the different bacterial cells used. Among the men‐
tioned works,[6], is the only one to focus on printing bacteria onto bronchial epithelium cells
ALI culture. Consequently, after conducting a thorough literature review, the optimal approach,
as discussed in Section 4.2, was determined to involve a bioink formulation containing sodium
alginate (ranging from 1% to 4%) and calcium chloride (at 0.4%). The printability of this formu‐
lation was tested using a Cellink droplet printer, with pressure settings ranging from 50kPa to
200kPa, and nozzle size G27 (410μm) with a set printing temperature of 37°C.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
13
==PAGE:18==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
5
Materials and methods
The following bacterial strains were used throughout the thesis: PAO1 mkOk, PAO1 GFP, and
PAO1 ΔpscC GFP. They were kept at ‐80°C, plated on Lysogeny Broth (LB) plates and stored at
4°C for up to 15 days, for overnight culture (O/N) a single culture was inoculated into LB broth
for each bacterial strain and kept at 37°C and 250rpm. For ALI culture BCi‐NS1.1 cells were
used and kept at ‐80°C, then suspended in media at 37°C for about three days before seeding
or passaging.
In Figure 5.1, we can observe the experimental set‐up, divided into two main steps. The first
being the set‐up of the basis of the 3D bioprinting: bioink formulation, printing parameters
optimisation and bioink biocompatibility. The second step involves the printing of single and
double bacterial strains on ALI cultures at micron‐scale distance.
Figure 5.1: The experimental set‐up, divide into two main steps. The first step includes; 3D bioprinting bioink formu‐
lation, printing parameters optimisation and bioink biocompatibility. The second step involves the printing of single
and double bacterial strains on ALI cultures at micron‐scale distance. Created done with Biorender
5.1
Bioink preparation
To initiate the process of bacterial 3D bioprinting, the initial step involved the preparation of
bioink solution. As indicated in Section 4.2, the optimal approach is to use a bioink solution
composed of sodium alginate and calcium chloride. Hence, various concentrations of the bioink
solutions were made to examine the impact of sodium alginate proportion to calcium chloride
onto the viability of bacterial and lung epithelium cells. In parallel, the different bioinks were
tested for droplet uniformity, reproducibility and size.
A range of sodium alginateconcentrations, spanningfrom1% to4%dilutedin Gibco™D‐Phosphate
Buffer Saline pH 7.4 (D‐PBS), and 0.4% calcium chloride concentration MQ water, were prepared
and autoclaved. Every new experiment was executed using fresh bioink solutions autoclaved on
the same day. To make the bioinks solutions (1%‐4% sodium alginate and 0.4% calcium chloride)
were mixed in a 1:1 ratio before usage to avoid immediate jellification. The tested bioinks were
as follow: bioink 1% (1% sodium alginate and 0.4% calcium chloride), bioink 2% (2% sodium
alginate and 0.4% calcium chloride), bioink 3% (3% sodium alginate and 0.4% calcium chloride)
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
14
==PAGE:19==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
and bioink 4% (4% sodium alginate and 0.4% calcium chloride). In Figure 5.2 formulation and
preparation of bioinks is shown.
Figure 5.2: Bioink formulation and preparation can be seen in the figure. Sodium alginate at different percentage
(1% to 4%) was mixed in a 1:1 ratio with calcium chloride 0.4%. The figure shows two options one where the bioink
is prepared for biocompatibility test (D‐PBS added) while the second option is bioink prepared with bacteria for
infection purpose. The figure was obtain for my previous special course report and created with Biorender.
5.2
Bacterial preparation and biocompatibility test
The bacterial biocompatibility assessment consisted in the preparation of O/N of PAO1 GFP and
PAO1 ΔPscC GFP in separate 5mL LB tubes. Concurrently, LB agar plates coated with the different
bioinks prepared in Section 5.1 were made. For adequate coverage, 500 µL of the mixed bioink
solution was pipetted onto each corresponding LB plate and left to dry for 20 minutes.
The next day, the diluted OD600 (1:10) of the bacterial strains was measured, and each strain
was diluted to OD600 of 0.05 in LB, and incubated for 3 hours to reach the exponential bacterial
growth phase. Following this, the OD600 was measured, and the cells were centrifuged and
diluted with D‐PBS to an OD600 of 1, based on previous established conversion of OD600 to CFU
to obtain 107cells/mL. Subsequently, a sequence of dilutions was performed. On each of the
bioink‐coated plates, triplicates of PAO1 GFP and PAO1 ΔpscC GFP were pipetted in 10x dilutions
Negative controls were also conducted by incubating LB plates and LB plates coated with each
type of bioink percentage with no bacteria. On the subsequent day, CFU were enumerated to
evaluate the biocompatibility of the bioink on PAO1 GFP and PAO1 ∆pscC GFP.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
15
==PAGE:20==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Figure 5.3: Bacterial biocompatibility assay showing three LB plates: LB plate with bioink % (negative control), LB
plate with bacterial strain (positive control), LB plate with bacterial strain and bioink %. Figure obtained from my
previous special course report and was created with Biorender.
5.3
Seeding of lung epithelium cells onto ALI
The first step of ALI biocompatibility test, required coating of transwells, 24‐well plate 0.4μm
incorporated transwell from Corning Costar, with 70 μL of 1x collagen solution. Coated tran‐
swells were stored at 4°C and prior to use any excess solution was aspirated, and transwells
were rinsed with D‐PBS and exposed to UV‐light for 15 minutes to ensure sterilization.
Thereafter, BCi‐NS1.1 cells cultured in T‐75 flasks to approximately 80% confluency were used.
After washing the BCI cells with 6mL of D‐PBS, 3mL of Gibco™TrypLE Select Enzyme (1X) was
added and cells were incubated for 5‐minutes. Subsequently, 12mL of Gibco™Roswell Park
Memorial Institute 1640 Medium GlutaMAX (RPMI) was added to neutralise the trypsin, and
the contents were transferred to a clean falcon tube for centrifugation at 300 x g for 5 minutes.
A viability assessment (NucleoCounter NC‐200TM) was performed and the RMPI was aspirated
and cells were resuspended in 1mL of PneumacultTM‐ ExPlus Medium (Explus) and the appro‐
priate number of cells from the latter suspension was used to seed a new T‐75.
For transwell seeding, 1.5 x 105 cells in 200μL Explus media were seeded into the apical cham‐
ber of each transwell, and 400μL of ExPlus media was added to the basolateral chamber. The
well plate was incubated in a humidified chamber at 37°C, 5% CO2. After three days, the ALI
cultures were lifted by aspiration of medium from the apical chambers, followed by microscopic
confirmation of confluency. Subsequently, the apical side was rinsed with 200μL of D‐PBS. Me‐
dia in the basolateral chamber was then removed, and 400μL of Technologies PneumaCult™
ALI medium (ALI) was added exclusively to the basolateral chamber. The ALI cultures were then
incubated for around 28 days. To maintain cell health, medium changes were conducted ap‐
proximately every other day. All mammalian cells were incubated in a humidified chamber, at
37°C, 5% CO2.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
16
==PAGE:21==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
5.4
ALI biocompatibility and infection test
After 28 days, the ALI cultures were fully differentiated and ready for bioink biocompatibility
and infection test using the bioink solutions prepared in Section 5.1 and with the bacteria pre‐
pared in Section 5.2 (infection test). The ALI cultures were transferred to the microbiology lab,
the basolateral ALI media was changed, and TEER measured with D‐PBS (Infection time = 0hr).
Thereafter, 10 μL of each bioink (with no bacteria for biocompatibility and with bacteria for in‐
fection) was pipetted onto the apical part of the corresponding transwells. Negative controls
were made by adding 10 μL of D‐PBS, the ALI cultures were incubated O/N. For the first biocom‐
patibility test, the volume of printed droplet was not known thus we used both 10 μL and 50
μL for bioink 4%. In Figure 5.4, we can observe the ALI culture transwell, the standard infection
method with the pipette and the new method with the printer.
Figure 5.4: The figure shows the standard ALI culture with the apical and basolateral side as well the method pre‐
viously used with the pipette (old method) and the method used in this thesis for biocompatibility and infections
(new method). Created with Biorender.
The next day after the addition of 200μL D‐PBS to the apical compartment TEER was measured
(infection time= 14hr) and collection of samples for the different assays conducted were pre‐
pared. LDH was measured using The Invitrogen™CyQUANT™LDH Cytotoxicity Assay Kit (Cat.
No. C20301). IL‐8 was measured using R&D Systems Human IL‐8/CXCL8 Cat.No DY208 assay
kit. For conducting the LIVE/DEAD staining, a Thermofisher LIVE/DEAD staining kit (488/570)
containing ultraviolet dye and DAPI for dead cell count.
For IF staining, the cells were fixed with 4% Paraformaldehyde (PFA) in D‐PBS and kept at 4°C
for 20 min. Then rinsed three times in D‐PBS (both apical and basolateral compartments) and
stored at 4°C until staining. Antibodies were used to label specific proteins of interest, three
primary antibodies (ZO‐1, F‐actin, and Muc5Ac) and a nuclear stain (DAPI) was used.
5.5
Printing optimisation and 3D bioprinter
To evaluate the bioink parameters and their optimization, bioink compositions outlined in Sec‐
tion 5.1 were systematically tested under pressure range 50KPa to 200KPa, using a G27 needle
size. The selection of these parameter values was based on literature discussed in Section 4.3.
Furthermore, the printing temperature was maintained at 37°C, aligning with the preferred
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
17
==PAGE:22==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
growth conditions for P. aeruginosa. A Cellink BioX 3D droplet printer was used were the pre‐
pared bioinks for infections test were each at a time loaded into syringes mounted onto the
bioprinter. Subsequently, the bioprinter was set to undergo a calibration process aimed at en‐
suring precision and accuracy in the deposition of bioinks. This calibration involves adjusting key
parameters such as extrusion pressure, speed, and nozzle distance to achieve the desired print‐
ing outcome. Employing an air pressure approach, the bioprinter deposits the bioink droplet
according to the predefined position. The bioprinter was kept in an Laminar Air Flow (LAF) bench
for the entirety of the experiments and further aseptic conditions were achieved through UV
sterilization using the printer’s program. Additionally, all equipment such as syringes, nozzles
and spatulas were all kept sterile by autoclaving. For measuring of droplet size, a standard mi‐
croscope was used in parallel with ImageJ
5.6
Statistical analysis of acquired data
All statistical analysis for data acquired throughout thesis experimentation was performed with
Graphpad. For different tests, ordinary one‐way ANVOVA and two‐way ANOVA was performed
when required. The bars in each data graph represent standard deviation and p‐values are as
follow; *p<0.1, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, and ****p<0.0001.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
18
==PAGE:23==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
6
Results
6.1
Bacterial biocompatibility
This section investigates the outcomes of the biocompatibility of different bioink formulation
outlined in Section 5.1 onto strains PAO1 and PAO1 ΔpscC. As illustrated in Figure 6.1, there
is no significant distinction when PAO1(blue) and PAO1 ΔpscC (red) are grown on the different
bioinks (1% to 4%) compared to their growth on traditional LB plates. The experiment was
repeated three times, each time with three technical triplicates (N=3, n=3). Furthermore, for
both bacterial strains a similar variation of CFU/mL for each bioink percentage and LB data is
observed.
Figure 6.1: Comparison of bacterial biocompatibility between standard plating (LB) and various tested bioinks (1%
to 4%). No significant difference (ns) is observed in the growth (CFU/mL) of PAO1 (blue) and PAO1 ΔpscC (red) on the
tested bioinks (1% to 4%) and LB. Statistical analysis was conducted using two‐way ANOVA, bars represent standard
deviation.
6.2
ALI biocompatibility
The evaluation of the biocompatibility of ALI cultures to tested bioinks serves to understand
how the bioinks might affect cell barrier integrity, cellular damage, immune response and cell
viability. Therefore, the coming results present an understanding of the bioink’s behavior on
lung epithelium ALI cultures.
The biocompatibility test was conducted in duplicates (n=2), Figure 6.2 (left) illustrates the com‐
parison of TEER fold change (FC) at different hours post‐infection (hpi) for all tested bioinks and
control (D‐PBS). No statistically significant difference in TEER was observed. Additionally, Figure
6.2 (middle) presents LDH assessments measuring cytotoxicity levels, revealing no statistically
significant distinctions in LDH release of bioinks compared to the control (D‐PBS). Data variation
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
19
==PAGE:24==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
occurs for bioink 4% (B) where 50μL were added compared to bioink 4% (A) where 10 μL was
added (as for the other bioinks percentages). An IL‐8 analysis by ELISA was also conducted, as a
readout for inflammation, (Figure 6.2, right) shows no statistically significant differences among
various bioinks compared to the control (D‐PBS).
Figure 6.2: TEER measurement LDH cytotoxicity assessment and IL‐8 analysis were carried out on ALI cultures to
evaluate biocompatibility with tested bioinks (1% to 4%). These tests were performed in comparison to a control
(D‐PBS). No significance (ns) can be observed between bioinks and D‐PBS for all graphs. Statistical analysis was
conducted using ordinary one‐way ANOVA, bars represent standard deviation.
Furthermore, an assessment of cell death was performed, Figure 6.3, only the count of dead
cells was reported. The graph demonstrates a noteworthy variance in cell deaths between ALI
cultures at specific bioinks when compared to the control ALI treated with D‐PBS. Notably, the
figure shows statistical significance when utilizing a larger volume of bioink (Bioink 4%B, 50µL),
or employing bioink 1% or 2%, compared to the control.
Figure 6.3: Assessment of cell death was carried out on ALI cultures to evaluate biocompatibility with tested
bioinks (1% to 4%). The comparisons were made against a control (D‐PBS). Significant difference can be observed
for bioink 1%, bioink 2%, bioink 4% B. Statistical analysis was performed using ordinary one‐way ANOVA, *p<0.1,
****p<0.0001, bars represent standard deviation.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
20
==PAGE:25==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
IF staining, illustrated in Figure 6.4, was conducted to evaluate the expression of lung epithelial
markers after bioink test. DAPI (blue) was used to stain DNA molecules within the cell nucleus,
ZO‐1 (magenta) targeted tight junctions in cell membranes, F‐actin (green) targeted cytoskele‐
tal actin filaments, and Muc5Ac (red) was used to target mucin glycoproteins. The IF staining
patterns for all bioinks and controls show the over‐expression of F‐actin for bioink 1% and the
under‐expression of F‐actin proteins for bioinks 2% and bioink 4% B (50µL). In summary, both
bioink 3% and bioink 4% A (10µL) present the most similar expression of all proteins when con‐
fronted to the control (D‐PBS).
Figure 6.4: Experiment conducted on ALI cultures to evaluate biocompatibility with tested bioinks (1% to 4%) as
compared to a control (PBS). DAPI (blue) and antibodies ZO‐1 (magenta), F‐actin (green) and Muc5Ac (red).
An additional biocompatibility test was carried out specifically to evaluate the biocompatibility
of bioink 3% and bioink 4% with ALI cultures, comparing them to D‐PBS. This additional test
aimed to generate more data (seven technical replicates, n=7) for the most promising bioink
formulations: bioink 3% and bioink 4%. This decision was based on the previous results, where
bioink 3% and 4% demonstrated the most promising characteristics for subsequent stages in‐
volving 3D bioprinting of bacterial cells onto ALI cultures.
In Figure 6.5 the biocompatibility data for bioink 3% and 4% are collected into one graph for each
test. In Figure 6.5(left), TEER measurements was conducted. There is no significant difference
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
21
==PAGE:26==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
in TEER measurements between the control (D‐PBS) and the bioinks (bioink 3% and 4%). An
LDH cytotoxicity test was performed in Figure 6.5, revealing no significant difference among the
bioinks and the control. Figure 6.5(right) illustrates no significant difference in IL‐8 release for
D‐PBS, bioink 3%, and bioink 4%.
Figure 6.5: The test performed on ALI cultures to evaluate the biocompatibility of tested bioinks (3% and 4%) reveals
no significant (ns) difference among bioink 3%, bioink 4%, and D‐PBS for all graphs. Statistical analysis performed
using ordinary one‐way ANOVA, *p<0.1, ****p<0.0001, bars represent standard deviation.
6.3
Bioink parameters and optimisation
Concurrently with the biocompatibility assessment on ALI cultures and bacterial strains (PAO1
and PAO1 ΔpscC), the tested bioink formulations underwent optimization for 3D bioprinting.
The optimization concentrated on two parameters outlined in Section 4.3: the bioink formu‐
lation (mixture percentage) and printing pressure. These parameters were tested to conclude
the optimal conditions for 3D bacterial bioprinting. The bioinks tests were executed with five
biological replicates and six technical replicates (N=5, n=6). Figures 6.6 displays the average of
each technical replicate across the five biological replicates.
At first, the effect of pressure variation (from 50kPa to 200kPa) on droplet size and variability
was examined for each bioink (1% to 4%), while applying a G27 needle for each bioink. Fig‐
ure 6.6 (above) demonstrates that by increasing pressure we have an increase in droplet size,
particularly evident in bioink 1%, bioink 2%, and bioink 3%, emphasizing the importance of pre‐
cise pressure selection. It’s noteworthy that for bioink 3%, significant differences in droplet size
are observed when altering pressure, except between 50kPa and 100kPa where no significant
difference is noticed. In Figure 6.6 (below), drop size for each pressure is evaluated among dif‐
ferent bioinks. When using different bioinks at 50kPa we see no significant difference across
bioinks in terms of droplet size. At all pressure bioink 3% and 4% drop size show no significant
difference between them and show low drop size across all pressure when compared to bioink
1% and 2%
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
22
==PAGE:27==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Figure 6.6: Bioinks 1% to 4% were evaluated at pressure range 50kPa to 200kPa using a G27 nozzle to test the effect
pressure effect on droplet variability and size across each bioink formulation. Significant difference in droplet size
can be seen for bioinks 1%, 2% and 3% except for bioink 4% when using different pressure. Among the bioinks with
smallest drop size and low drop variability are bioink 3% and 4%. Bioink 3% has been observed to provide easy
usage without nozzle blockage when printing. Bioink 3% shows the lowest drop size at both 50kPa and 100kPa with
no significant difference between the two. Statistical analysis using ordinary one‐way ANOVA, *p<0.1, **p<0.01,
***p<0.001, and ****p<0.0001, bars represent standard deviation.
Following the optimization of bioink printing, it was determined that using bioink 3% at a print‐
ing pressure of 100kPa with a G27 nozzle yielded small and reproducible droplets with low vari‐
ability. Consequently, the next phase of the thesis involves 3D bioprinting single and double
strains at predefined micron‐scale distances onto ALI cultures to replicate P. aeruginosa infec‐
tion in lung epithelial cells. To achieve this, the printing of PAO1 mkOk and PAO1 GFP was con‐
ducted to assess how closely the drops could be printed onto a Corning Transwell with no BCi‐
NS1.1 cells. A spatial distance of 500µm was achieved in between PAO1 mkOk and PAO1 GFP,
as indicated by the droplet halos in Figure 6.7.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
23
==PAGE:28==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Figure 6.7: PAO1 mkOK and PAO1 GFP 500µm separation onto corning transwell with no BCi‐NS1.1 cells. Brightfield
image with 200µm scale
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
24
==PAGE:29==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
6.4
3D bacterial printing onto ALI cultures
Throughout most of the master’s thesis period, contamination in the cell lab was a recurring
issue. This provoked most ALI culture set‐up to not be used for infection with the 3D printed
bacteria and, thus the ALI set‐ups had to be discarded. Additionally, constraints related to the
availability of the 3D droplet printer and technical limitations made it impractical to infect cells
with singular and double bacteria while maintaining a predefined spatial separation, thus pre‐
venting the collection of results from such assessments. As a result, a conclusive experimental
assay was chosen, involving the introduction of bioink with bacteria onto the ALI cultures by
pipetting. This approach was then compared to standard bacterial infections in PBS to evaluate
if the bioink had an effect on the bacteria to infect ALI cell cultures.
As a result, it can be observe in Figure 6.8 that several tests were performed including TEER
measurement (left), LDH cytotoxicity (middle) and IL‐8 analysis (right). Figure 6.8, indicates
that the levels of TEER measurement, LDH cytotoxicity, and IL‐8 release do not significantly dif‐
fer whether the bacteria was in PBS or in bioink (bioink 3%) prior to infection. The test was
conducted one time with three technical replicates (n=3) for all tested bacterial infection. On
the other hand, due to unavailability of ALI cultures, both control (PBS and bioink 3%) were run
in just one technical sample (n=1). In Figure 6.8, data of both controls was acquired from previ‐
ous experiment (biocompatibility of bioinks onto ALI cultures). Figure 6.8, shows no significant
difference between bacterial infection in bioink and bacterial infection in D‐PBS.
Figure 6.8: Test performed on ALI cultures to assess difference in infection of PAO1 in bioink 3% and PAO1 in PBS by
TEER measurement, LDH, IL‐8. No significance (ns) can be observed between infection with bioink (bioink 3%) and
standard infection (PBS) Statistical analysis using ordinary one‐way ANOVA, bars represent standard deviation
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
25
==PAGE:30==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
7
Discussion and conclusion
The focus of this thesis centered on developing a protocol for 3D bioprinting P. aeruginosa
droplets onto ALI cultures. The aim was not only to establish a protocol for a single strain print‐
ing but also to create a method for printing multiple bacterial 3D droplets at a predetermined
micron‐scale distance onto ALI cultures, so to understand the impact of spatial distance in micro‐
bial interactions. This approach aims to expand our understanding of P. aeruginosa infections
in CF lungs, delving into interactions with other microbes such as S. aureus and mutant forms
of P. aeruginosa, including QS mutants.
The experimentation part of this thesis, started with bacterial and ALI biocompatibility tests. It
was observed that bioinks at varying concentrations exhibit comparable bacterial biocompati‐
bility to the standard LB plating. Additionally, biocompatibility evaluation of ALI cultures cells
with tested bioinks revealed no significant differences in TEER measurements, LDH cytotoxicity,
and IL‐8 release between all the tested bioinks and control (D‐PBS). Regarding distinct protein
expression patterns, IF staining, bioink 3% and bioink 4% (A) showed the most similar profile to
the control (PBS). Furthermore, a dead cell count assessment indicated significant differences in
cell deaths, particularly with higher bioink volumes as those used in bioink 4% (B). Nevertheless,
the last test was done in technical duplicates therefore more data is needed to be acquired.
Concurrently, the bioinks underwent optimization for 3D bioprinting focusing on formulation
and printing pressure. Significant effects of pressure variation on droplet size were observed
especially in bioink 1%, bioink 2%, and bioink 3%, with bioink 3% showing no significant differ‐
ence between 50kPa and 100kPa. Moreover, as shown in Figure 6.6 bioink 3% and 4% provide
the smallest droplet diameter and minimal variation. Subsequently, 2‐way ANOVA revealed no
significant difference in drop size and printing pressure between bioink 3% and 4%, compared
to bioink 1% and 2%. Optimizing bioink printing concluded that bioink 3% at 100kPa with a G27
nozzle provided reproducibility, small droplet size, and low variability. A rheological study can
be later implemented to study the viscosity background of the tested bioinks compared to D‐
PBS. This can be performed to capture a full picture of what type of bioinks were used in this
thesis
This thesis accomplished spatial separation of 3D printed bacteria droplets, as shown in Figure
6.7. Nevertheless, more tests need to performed to confirm possible 500µm distance achieved
between the two droplets.
As mentioned earlier, throughout the duration of this thesis, persistent contamination chal‐
lenges in the cell lab and technical limitations limited the use of the 3D bioprinting setup for
conducting infections with printed bacterial droplets onto ALI cultures. Technical constraints
included the unreliable positioning of droplets in the x and y dimensions across experiments,
requiring re‐calibration measurements and introducing variability in the spatial separation of
bacterial 3D droplets. Additionally, achieving the correct z positioning of the needle relative
to the membrane (with cells) showed to be challenging. If the needle was slightly above the
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
26
==PAGE:31==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
membrane, droplets wouldn’t fall, and if too close, membrane poking took place. To ensure
consistent and accurate positioning of bacterial 3D droplets, non‐manual calibration of the 3D
printer is essential. This could be achieved through machine coding or exploring the possibility
of 3D bioprinting bacterial droplets with an alternative 3D printer.
As a result, of these technical difficulties and printer availability the only ALI setup not contami‐
nated was used for an alternative assay involving pipetting bacterial bioink droplets onto ALI cul‐
tures. This method, was compared to standard D‐PBS infections, aimed to examine the impact
of bioink on P. aeruginosa infection. Figure 6.8 presents TEER measurement, LDH cytotoxicity,
and IL‐8 analysis, revealing no significant differences between bacterial infections in PBS and
bioink (bioink 3%). The test was conducted only once due to time constraint and contamination
problems explained above; therefore, it must be repeated. Additionally, attempts to determine
CFU counts (apical, basolateral, and internal) were challenging due to inappropriate dilutions of
acquired samples after infection. The latter could have provided a better understanding of the
impact of bioink on P. aeruginosa penetrability for infection onto ALI cultures.
Overall, aside the contamination problem and 3D bioprinter availability, this thesis has shown
at first a comprehensive literature on the state of the art of 3D bacterial bioprinting. Secondly,
I used the literature to formulate a protocol for 3D bacterial droplets printing at predetermined
micron scale distance onto ALI cultures. Thirdly, I conducted infection and biocompatibility
tests where the bioinks formulation showed biocompatibility with both bacterial strains and
ALI cultures. 3D bioprinting of uniform and reproducible bioink droplets were achieved at low‐
est possible droplet size for a final bioink formulation of bioink 3% (sodium alginate 3% and
calcium chloride 0.4%) at 100kPa and G27 needle. Finally, printing of two different PAO1 strains
at micro‐scale distances was achieved. The precision of 3D bacterial printing, to study microbial
interactions and analyze the ecological impacts of altering spatial configuration, still needs to
be optimized. This is due to technical limitations of the used 3D printer in term of x‐y‐z position‐
ing variability and printing obstruction. Finally,it was observed that infections conducted with
bioink instead of PBS show no difference to standard infections.
Overall, this innovative approach allows future investigations on studies regarding bacterial
complementation, competition, antibiotic tolerance, QS molecules, and Type VI secretion toxins
at predefined micron‐scale distances. Furthermore, the P.aeruginosa mutants found in pwCF
sputum samples and S. aerues interactions with standard P.aeruginosa could be studied by us‐
ing 3D bioprinting. The latter could be used to examine interaction and spatial distancing effect
on P. aeruginosa’s pathoadaptive characteristics in pwCF. As a result, employing our CF lung
infection model and 3D bioprinting technology, we aim to profile microbe‐microbe interactions
impacting on the infection process to direct our understandings towards more effective and
personalized infection control.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
27
==PAGE:32==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
Bibliography
[1]
Ruggero La Rosa, Helle Krogh Johansen, and Søren Molin. “Adapting to the airways: Metabolic requirements
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa during the infection of cystic fibrosis patients”. In: Metabolites 9 (10 Oct. 2019).
ISSN: 22181989. DOI: 10.3390/metabo9100234.
[2]
Craig Winstanley, Siobhan O’brien, and Michael A Brockhurst. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa Evolutionary Adap‐
tation and Diversification in Cystic Fibrosis Chronic Lung Infections”. In: Trends Microbiology 5 (May 2016).
DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2016.01.008.
[3]
Laura Camus, François Vandenesch, and Karen Moreau. “From genotype to phenotype: adaptations of Pseu‐
domonas aeruginosa to the cystic fibrosis environment”. In: Microbial Genomics 7 (2021), p. 513. DOI: 10.
1099/mgen.0.000513.
[4]
Ravinash Krishna Kumar et al. “Droplet printing reveals the importance of micron‐scale structure for bacterial
ecology”. In: Nature Communications 12 (1 Dec. 2021). ISSN: 20411723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467‐021‐20996‐w.
[5]
“3D bioprinting of mature bacterial biofilms for antimicrobial resistance drug testing”. In: Biofabrication 11
(4 Sept. 2019). ISSN: 17585090. DOI: 10.1088/1758‐5090/ab37a0.
[6]
Samy Aliyazdi et al. “3D bioprinting of E. coli MG1655 biofilms on human lung epithelial cells for building
complex in vitro infection models”. In: Biofabrication 15 (3 July 2023), p. 035019. ISSN: 1758‐5082. DOI: 10.
1088/1758‐5090/acd95e.
[7]
Elio Rossi et al. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa adaptation and evolution in patients with cystic fibrosis”. In: Na‐
ture Reviews Microbiology 19 (5 May 2021), pp. 331–342. ISSN: 17401534. DOI: 10.1038/s41579‐020‐00477‐
5.
[8]
Shugang Qin et al. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa: pathogenesis, virulence factors, antibiotic resistance, inter‐
action with host, technology advances and emerging therapeutics”. In: Signal Transduction and Targeted
Therapy 7 (1 Dec. 2022). ISSN: 20593635. DOI: 10.1038/s41392‐022‐01056‐1.
[9]
M. Fata Moradali, Shirin Ghods, and Bernd H.A. Rehm. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa lifestyle: A paradigm for
adaptation, survival, and persistence”. In: Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 7 (FEB Feb. 2017).
ISSN: 22352988. DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00039.
[10]
Stephen P Diggle and Marvin Whiteley. “Microbe Profile: Pseudomonas aeruginosa: opportunistic pathogen
and lab rat”. In: Microbiology 166 (2020), pp. 30–33. DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000860.
[11]
National Center for Emerging, Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion (DHQP) Centers for Disease Control
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID), and Prevention. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa in Healthcare Settings”.
In: (Nov. 2019).
[12]
Tom Defoirdt et al. “Relationship Between Quorum Sensing and Secretion Systems”. In: Frontiers in microbi‐
ology (June 2019). DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01100.
[13]
Jatin Chadha, Kusum Harjai, and Sanjay Chhibber. “Revisiting the virulence hallmarks of Pseudomonas aerug‐
inosa: a chronicle through the perspective of quorum sensing”. In: Environmental Microbiology 24 (6 June
2022), pp. 2630–2656. ISSN: 14622920. DOI: 10.1111/1462‐2920.15784.
[14]
Dana S. Wade et al. “Regulation of Pseudomonas quinolone signal synthesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa”. In:
Journal of bacteriology 187 (13 July 2005), pp. 4372–4380. ISSN: 0021‐9193. DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.13.4372‐
4380.2005.
[15]
Aubin Souche et al. How Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa Hijack the Host Immune Re‐
sponse in the Context of Cystic Fibrosis. Apr. 2023. DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076609.
[16]
SophieBlevesetal. “Proteinsecretionsystemsin Pseudomonas aeruginosa: A wealth of pathogenic weapons”.
In: International Journal of Medical Microbiology 300 (8 Dec. 2010), pp. 534–543. ISSN: 1438‐4221. DOI:
10.1016/J.IJMM.2010.08.005.
[17]
Teiji Sawa et al. “Association between Pseudomonas aeruginosa type III secretion, antibiotic resistance, and
clinical outcome: a review Sawa et al. Association between Pseudomonas aeruginosa type III secretion, an‐
tibiotic resistance, and clinical outcome: a review”. In: Critical Care 18 (2014), p. 668. DOI: 10.1186/s13054‐
014‐0668‐9.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
28
==PAGE:33==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
[18]
John C. Whitney et al. “Genetically distinct pathways guide effector export through the type VI secretion
system”. In: Molecular Microbiology 92 (3 May 2014), pp. 529–542. ISSN: 13652958. DOI: 10.1111/MMI.
12571/SUPPINFO.
[19]
Anjali Y. Bhagirath et al. “Cystic fibrosis lung environment and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection”. In: BMC
Pulmonary Medicine 16 (1 Dec. 2016). ISSN: 14712466. DOI: 10.1186/S12890‐ 016‐ 0339‐ 5. URL: /pmc/
articles/PMC5139081/%20/pmc/articles/PMC5139081/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC5139081/.
[20]
David N. Sheppard and Anthony P. Davis. “Pore‐forming small molecules offer a promising way to tackle
cystic fibrosis”. In: Nature 2021 567:7748 567 (7748 Mar. 2019), pp. 315–317. ISSN: 14764687. DOI: 10.1038/
d41586‐019‐00781‐y.
[21]
Irene Jurado‐Martín, Maite Sainz‐Mejías, and Siobhán McClean. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa: An Audacious
Pathogen with an Adaptable Arsenal of Virulence Factors”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences
2021, Vol. 22, Page 3128 22 (6 Mar. 2021), p. 3128. ISSN: 1422‐0067. DOI: 10.3390/IJMS22063128.
[22]
Peter Jorth et al. “Regional Isolation Drives Bacterial Diversification within Cystic Fibrosis Lungs Article Re‐
gional Isolation Drives Bacterial Diversification within Cystic Fibrosis Lungs”. In: Cell Host Microbe 18 (2015),
pp. 307–319. DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2015.07.006.
[23]
Maxim Kostylev et al. “Evolution of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa quorum‐sensing hierarchy”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 116 (14 Apr. 2019), pp. 7027–7032. ISSN:
10916490. DOI: 10.1073/PNAS.1819796116/‐/DCSUPPLEMENTAL.
[24]
Angela Sandri et al. “Adaptive interactions of achromobacter spp. With pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fi‐
brosis chronic lung co‐infection”.In: Pathogens 10 (8 Aug. 2021). ISSN: 20760817. DOI:10.3390/pathogens10080978.
[25]
Laura Camus et al. “How Bacterial Adaptation to Cystic Fibrosis Environment Shapes Interactions Between
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 12 (Mar. 2021). ISSN:
1664302X. DOI: 10.3389/FMICB.2021.617784.
[26]
“Evaluating Bacterial Pathogenesis Using a Model of Human Airway Organoids Infected with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa Biofilms”. In: Microbiology Spectrum 10 (6 Dec. 2022). ISSN: 21650497. DOI: 10.1128/SPECTRUM.
02408‐22/SUPPL_FILE/SPECTRUM.02408‐22‐S0001.PDF. URL: https://journals.asm.org/doi/10.1128/
spectrum.02408‐22.
[27]
Buket Baddal and Pasquale Marrazzo. “Refining Host‐Pathogen Interactions: Organ‐on‐Chip Side of the Coin”.
In: Pathogens 10 (2 Feb. 2021), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 20760817. DOI: 10.3390/PATHOGENS10020203.
[28]
P. Chandorkar et al. “Fast‐track development of an in vitro 3D lung/immune cell model to study Aspergillus
infections”. In: Scientific Reports 2017 7:1 7 (1 Sept. 2017), pp. 1–13. ISSN: 2045‐2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598‐
017‐11271‐4.
[29]
Signe Lolle Filipa Simões Antonella Colque Mar Margalef‐Català Charlotte de Rudder Mads Laursen Manuel R
Amieva Søren Molin Helle Krogh Johansen. “Poster: Using airway organoids and Air Liquid Interface cultures
to profile the spatial and temporal dynamics of P aeruginosa infections”. In: ().
[30]
Giovanni Sette et al. “Theratyping cystic fibrosis in vitro in ALI culture and organoid models generated from
patient‐derived nasal epithelial conditionally reprogrammed stem cells Shareable abstract (@ERSpublica‐
tions)”. In: EUROPEAN RESPIRATORY JOURNAL (2021). DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00908‐ 2021. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00908‐2021.
[31]
Soraia Silva et al. “Air‐liquid interface (ALI) impact on different respiratory cell cultures”. In: European Journal
of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 184 (Mar. 2023), pp. 62–82. ISSN: 0939‐6411. DOI: 10.1016/J.EJPB.
2023.01.013.
[32]
Rhianna E. Lee et al. “Air‐Liquid interface cultures to model drug delivery through the mucociliary epithelial
barrier”. In: Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 198 (July 2023), p. 114866. ISSN: 0169‐409X. DOI: 10.1016/J.
ADDR.2023.114866.
[33]
Bjarke H. Pedersen et al. “Metabolic specialization drives reduced pathogenicity in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
CF clinical isolates”. In: bioRxiv (Dec. 2023), p. 2023.04.17.537125. DOI: 10.1101/2023.04.17.537125.
[34]
Balaji Srinivasan et al. “TEER measurement techniques for in vitro barrier model systems”. In: Journal of
laboratory automation 20 (2 Apr. 2015), p. 107. ISSN: 22110690. DOI: 10.1177/2211068214561025.
[35]
Jian Li et al. “Pseudomonas aeruginosa Exoprotein‐Induced Barrier Disruption Correlates With Elastase Ac‐
tivity and Marks Chronic Rhinosinusitis Severity”. In: Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 9 (Feb.
2019). ISSN: 22352988. DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00038.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
29
==PAGE:34==
Technical University of Denmark
3D Printing for Studying Bacterial Interactions in Infection Modeling
[36]
Seongjin Park et al. “An Improved Method for Bacterial Immunofluorescence Staining to Eliminate Antibody
Exclusion from the Fixed Nucleoid”. In: Biochemistry (2019), pp. 4457–4465. ISSN: 15204995. DOI: 10.1021/
ACS.BIOCHEM.9B00724/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/BI9B00724_0006.JPEG.
[37]
D Scott Merrell et al. “Bacterial Interference With Lactate Dehydrogenase Assay Leads to an Underestimation
of Cytotoxicity”. In: Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 1 (2020), p. 494.
DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00494.
[38]
“Lung defense through IL‐8 carries a cost of chronic lung remodeling and impaired function”. In: American
Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology 59 (5 Nov. 2018), pp. 557–571. ISSN: 15354989. DOI: 10.
1165/RCMB.2018‐0007OC/SUPPL_FILE/DISCLOSURES.PDF.
[39]
Concepción Valencia‐Barragán et al. “Recent Advances in 3D Bioprinting: A Review of Cellulose‐Based Bio‐
materials Ink”. In: Polymers 2022, Vol. 14, Page 2260 14 (11 May 2022), p. 2260. ISSN: 2073‐4360. DOI: 10.
3390/POLYM14112260.
[40]
Jinhua Li et al. “3D printing of hydrogels: Rational design strategies and emerging biomedical applications”.
In: Materials Science and Engineering R: Reports 140 (Apr. 2020). ISSN: 0927796X. DOI: 10.1016/j.mser.2020.
100543.
Advancements in CF Lung Infection Modeling: 3D Bioprinting and Ecological Consequences
30
