==PAGE:1==
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored
by in­situ hybridization
Christina Kolokousi
Master Thesis, February 2024
DTU Fødevareinstituttet
Department of Gut, Microbes and Health
==PAGE:2==
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
Master Thesis, February 2024
February, 2024
By:
Christina Kolokousi
Supervised by:
Egon Bech Hansen
Claus Heiner Bang­Berthelsen
Joanna Ivy Fugaban
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the custom­
ary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the department of Gut, Microbes and
Health, department of Food Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of microbiology.
Christina Kolokousi ­ s213234
Signature
Date
ii
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Rapid and efficient bacterial detection holds significant importance in the food indrus­
try, especially in the content of food spoilage and for the assessment of dynamics within
mixed bacterial communities during fermentation processes. This study focused on the
evaluation of lactic acid bacteria (LAB), pivotal as probiotics and primary starter cultures
in dairy product fermentation. The final goal was to observe the growth kinetics of sub­
species L.lactis, L.cremoris and Leuconostoc strains in a mixed community experiment.
The main methods utilized in this analysis were flow cytometry (FCM) and fluorescence
in situ­hybridization (FISH). FCM serves as a sensitive technique that can create a cy­
tometric fingerprint or microbial community dynamics and FISH is a DNA assay that can
target specific groups in the ribosomal RNA of defined phylogenetic groups. Traditional
plate counting was used for the validation of the flow cytometric gating and spectrophoto­
metric analysis provided details about the relevant growth levels in relation to the sample
turbidity. Despite encountering challenges in defining the probe specificity, successful
hybridization with high specificity level exceeding 90% was achieved once, in contrast
by at least six failed repetitions with low specificity levels. Consequently, monitoring the
growth of strains within a mixed community was unattainable and a separate growth eval­
uation was performed for each strain. Overall, plate counts and flow­FISH exhibited a
strong correlation, revealing that L.cremoris enters an early exponential phase at 6h in­
cubation, L.lactis at 8h, while Leuoconostoc strains exhibit a delayed exponential phase
at 17h. Imperative future exploration lies withing the minimization of autofluorescent and
non­specific signals, which presents a multi­parametric optimization challenge, demand­
ing expertise at both cell molecular dynamics and in the analysis of the flow cytometry.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Aim of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Principles of Flow Cytometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Gating the correct population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Community Profiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
FISH Principle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Ribososmal RNA as DNA barcode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.7
Probe selection and design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.8
Flow­FISH General workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.9
Limitations of Traditional Flow­FISH Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2
Materials and Methods
14
2.1
Flow Cytometry (Viability Testing) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2
Flow­In Situ Hybridization (Flow­FISH) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3
Detailed Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Stringency Conditions/Staining Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.5
Growth Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
Results and Discussion
22
3.1
Viability Testing (Live/Dead Visualization)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2
Probe Specificity Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3
Troubleshooting­ Technique Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.4
Plate Count vs FCM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.5
Growth Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.6
Future Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4
Conclusion
35
Bibliography
36
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are the main bacteria used worldwide as starter cultures for
the production of fermented dairy products. Starter culture strains are selected for their
flavor formation characteristics and fermentation capacities [1] and are inoculated into the
food substrate to produce lactic acid within a specific time period. Additional key factors
include the resilience of cells during processing and the preservation of different strains
in a mixed starter culture [2][3]. LAB also play a vital role as probiotics, which are food
ingredients with health benefits. Research and development of probiotics involve key is­
sues, such as growth and survival during processing, shelf life, resistance to bile salts and
acids and survival in the gut [4][5]. Thus, rapid and reliable detection, quantification and
viability assessment are essential for the research and selection of fermentation starter
bacteria and probiotics [6] . Additionally, monitoring and enumerating the interaction dy­
namics are essential to be able to characterize the fermentation process and evaluate the
synergistic/antagonistic effect between the strains [7].
A typical tool for bacteria viability assessment, due to its high selectivity and sensitivity, is
the plate count method [6]. However, the method has several disadvantages, including
being labor­intensive and time consuming, as it requires an incubation period of one or
more days to to yield definite results [5]. Plate counts only indicate viable and cultivable
microbes, neglecting information about bacteria that may be metabolically active but do
not form colonies [8]. Active but nonculturable starter cells might contribute to fermen­
tation as well. Research has shown that when starter cultures are subjected to various
forms of sublethal stress, bacteria can be injured and fail to grow on a medium suitable
for unstressed cells, but thrive in a suitable environment [9]. Subsequently, cell injury and
dormancy may lead to low viable counts [5].
Several techniques, utilizing fluorescence emittance, have been widely applied in the
medical and diagnostic field and are named Flow Cytometry (FCM) and in­situ hybridiza­
tion (ISH). FCM is a powerful technique that is highly sensitive, rapid and can help for the
specific and non­specific detection, enumeration, and monitoring of microorganisms [6].
FCM can create a cytometric fingerprint of the microbial community dynamics [10] and
helps to distinguish between viable, metabolically active and dead cells, which is of great
importance in food development and food spoilage. The technique allows the detection
of a particular cell type of interest, but also detects other subpopulations based on their
structural and physiological parameters [11]. The application of flow cytometry (FCM) in
microbiology offers several notable advantages such as (i) rapid assay times and data
generation (3­4 min/sample), (ii) the analysis of high cell number per sample (10.000 and
more), (iii) use of small sample volumes (200­300 μl), (iv) availability of multiple stains and
fluorochromes, (v) less­labor and space requirements compared to conventional plating
[10].
Nevertheless, FCM is mostly useful for quantitative analyses, but it is unspecific and can­
not differentiate between different subspecies, since the size and morphological charac­
teristics are similar. A powerful tool used for targeting specific groups of microorganisms
is fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), where labelled DNA probes are used to target
the ribosomal RNA of defined taxonomic of phylogenetic groups [12]. Coupling flow cy­
tometry and in­situ hybridization, can meet all the required criteria, such as reproducibility,
effectiveness, and sensitivity [6].
2
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Aim of the report
The aim of this project was to investigate the use of fluorescently labelled oligonucleotides
for the analysis of bacterial growth of microbial communities found mostly in probiotic prod­
ucts, such as lactic acid bacteria (LAB) strains [6]. The project provides detailed informa­
tion on currently developed flow cytometric and flow­FISH protocols, for the non­specific
and specific detection, monitoring and characterization of LAB microbial communities.
The method relied on targeting the 16S location in the ribosomal RNA, by using already
designed oligonucleotide DNA probes from the study of [13]. The ribosomal RNA was
used as a first target due to the high copy number (7.000­70.000/cell) [14], which makes
a probe­conferred cell fluorescence quantification easier. Specific quantification can help
the researcher to discriminate between target and non­target populations and correlate
the growth characteristics with traditional plate counting or other methods such as PCR,
plate counts or, fluorescence microscopy [13]. The final objective of the study, was to
investigate a mixed microbial community of LAB and evaluate the synergistic/antagonis­
tic growth of Lactococcus lactis, Lactococcus Cremoris and Leuconostoc strains [15] by
using probes with high affinity, validated in the previous part of the project.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
3
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Principles of Flow Cytometry
The fundamental principle of flow cytometry involves suspending the bacterial cells in
a flowing liquid stream. The stream is then analyzed by a laser, and the resulting light
scatter properties translated as forward scatter, side scatter or fluorescent emitted signal
arising from stained cells at various wavelengths [16].
The flow cytometer contains three systems: fluidics, optics and electronics. The fluidics
system consists of a sheath fluid that under hydrodynamic pressure, encloses the cells
into a single­file stream. The laminar flow of the sheath fluid allows the cells to be analyzed
individually as they pass through the laser beam [17]. To differentiate the cells regarding
their morphology, forward scatter (FSC) provides information on the particle size and at
90 degrees side scatter (SSC) indicates the cell granularity or complexity [11].
Figure 1.1: Diagram showing an overview of the flow cytometer. Sheath fluid focuses the
cell suspension, leading cells to be analysed individually as they pass through the laser
beam. Forward (FSC) and side (SSC) is detected, with fluorescence emitted from stained
cells (made in Biorender [18])
.
The optical system consists of various light sources and a series of lenses to focus the
light beam [11]. Fluorescence detectors measure the fluorescence signal intensity emitted
from positively stained cells and particles with relevant fluorochromes. Photomultiplying
tubes (PMTs) are channeling the light signals under a set of mirrors and filters and convert
them to a proportional number of electronic pulses, which represent the recorded events
[1]. PMT’s are very sensitive to debris, dust or other fluorochromes emitting at similar
wavelengths, therefore it is important to set the appropriate thresholds, to differentiate the
signals accurately. The electronic system converts these light signals into data, which are
interpreted by software as scattered plots [17][19]. The flow cytometer used in this study
4
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:9==
is MACSQuant VYB (Milltenyi, Germany), which is equipped with a 15­mW argon laser
emmiting light at 488 nm. The sheath fluid used is Osmosol. The instrument is equipped
with forward­angle light scatter (<15o), side­angle light scatter (>15o), and three fluores­
cence detectors FL1­Violet (405 nm), FL2­Blue (488 nm) and FL3­Yellow (561 nm). Each
detector has sub­channels that filter fluorescence on specific wavelengths and indicative
dyes are provided for each channel to facilitate effective detection [19].
Figure 1.2: Principle of a flow cytometer (FCM). Forward­scattered light (FSC), side­
scattered light (SSC), photomultiplier tubes (PMT, fluorescence detectors), detectors at
specific wavelength (violet, blue, yellow) [6] (made in Biorender [18])
.
1.3
Gating the correct population
When the fluorochromes absorb light from the laser, their electrons enter a maximum en­
ergy state, which is called excitation. Subsequently, the electrons go back to a resting
state, where the excess energy is released as fluorescent emitted signal [20]. It is impor­
tant to excite the fluorochromes at their excitation maxima to increase the intensity of the
emission. Each type of fluorochrome or stain, has its own characteristic excitation and
emission spectrum, which is vital parameter for acquiring optimal detection [17].
Table 1.1: Excitation and emission maxima of stains used in this study.
Fluorochrome
Excitation
Emission
Reference
FITC
494
520
[21]
PI
535
618
[22]
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
5
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.3: (a) Jablonski term scheme [23], (b) Spectrum of FITC: difference between ex­
citation maximum and emission maximum, is called Stokes shift [24], (made in Biorender
[18])
.
When working with specific fluorochromes, there is a high chance of having a spectral
overlap on the emission spectra between different fluorochromes. This results in detect­
ing the fluorochrome in other channels, that have similar spectral boundaries, known as
spillover [17]. When a spectrum is spilled on another channel, that means that the over­
lapping signal is not detected in either channel. In order to adjust the gating there must
be a compensation control, which basically calculates the percentage lost during spillover
and sums it up in the final quantification. To perform a compensation control relative train­
ing is required to adjust the correct percentages [19], therefore compensation control was
not performed in this assay .
Figure 1.4: Spectral Overlap of different fluorochromes emitting signal in similar wave­
length. Compensation control is required to ensure correct quantification [25] (made in
Biorender [18]).
6
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:11==
1.4
Community Profiling
Every cell that passess through the laser, will be detected and counted as a distinct event.
Each type of detected light (FSC,SSC, each different fluorescence emitted wavelength)
will have its own unique channel. The data for each event is plotted and can be visually
represented through different ways. The most common data graphs used in flow cytom­
etry include histograms and density dot­plots [26]. Histogram plots measure only one
parameter, which is typically the event count at a given fluorescence. Ideally, a distinct
peak will be produced, and this can be interpreted as the positive dataset. When the
analysis is performed on a mixed population of cells, this results in multiple peaks on the
histogram and a negative control is required to compare the positive result and the shift
in intensity between negative and positive samples. Dot plots compare 2 or 3 parameters
simultaneously on a scatter plot where every event is represented as a single point (dot).
The parameters may constist of a any combination between scatter and fluorescence
signals [17].
Figure 1.5: Illustration of data display (a) histogram plot: lots of events at low fluorescence
intensity, (b) histogram plot: lots of events at high fluorescence intensity (c) dot­plot com­
munity profiling FSC­SSC (d) histogram plot: mixed cell population [17].
The events can be visualized either at low or at high fluorescence intensity depending
on the channel settings, the fluorochrome intensity and the stability of the fluorochrome
[26]. However, when the analysis is performed on a mixed population of cells and there
are multiple peaks on the histogram, the flow experiment should be repeated with an
appropriate negative control which helps to identify the positive dataset and evaluate the
non­specific signals [17].
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
7
==PAGE:12==
1.5
FISH Principle
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) serves as a powerful technique for visualizing
target ribosomal RNA (rRNA) transcripts within cultured cells [6]. The method operates
based on the nucleic acid thermodynamic principles, where two complementary nucleic
acid strands can bind under energetically suitable conditions, creating a DNA:RNA hybrid
[27] as can be seen in figure 1.6. When fluorescently labelled oligonucleotide probes, bind
to specific DNA or RNA target positions, characteristic microorganisms can be identified.
This has led to the development of in situ­hybridization, a method employing DNA or
RNA probes that bind to DNA or RNA targets within a biological sample [28]. When the
probes are highlighted with fluorophores, the detection occurs with flow cytometry and
the method is known as FISH. FISH protocols include labelling of specific positions in the
chromosomal gene, which are characteristic for individual microorganisms and can be
used either for disease diagnosis or microorganism identification [29].
Figure 1.6: Schematic representation of hybridization of the oligonucleotide probe and
16S ribosomal RNA. The oligonucleotide probe needs to be labelled with a fluorophore to
allow visualization [29].
1.6
Ribososmal RNA as DNA barcode
For a gene to be used as a DNA barcode, it must be universally present, otherwise it
may exclude certain organisms. All members of bacteria are confirmed to have a 16S
gene, which provides phylogenetic information, as it is about 1500bp long, which falls
within moderate range [30]. A single L.lactis cell has between 104­105 ribosomes [31]
and consequently, as many copies of 16S or 23S­like rRNAs. Thus, the rRNA serves
as an amplified target for hybridization probes, due to their distinctive organization and
the presence of both highly conserved and variable regions. The subtle differences in the
16S rRNA sequences of lactic acid bacteria are sufficient for differentiating closely related
subspecies [32]. Due to the high copy number per cell, individual cells can be identified by
using singly radiolabeled oligonucleotides [33]. This is also the reason for reliable detec­
tion of individual microbial cells through the use of a combination involving less sensitive
fluorescently monolabeled oligonucleotides targeted at rRNA, and standard epifluores­
cence microscopy [34]. Furthermore, based on the extensive 16S rRNA sequence data
base (The Ribosomal Database Project,RDP) [35] [36] holding almost all known species
of bacteria, probes can be designed for organisms which have not yet been brought into
culture [34]. By searching the 16S sequence in these databases, anyone can identify
newly isolated strains [30].
8
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:13==
1.7
Probe selection and design
The design of rRNA­targeted, species­specific probes should consider several aspects.
The effectiveness of any probe should be visualized as an alignment between the se­
quence and the database [37]. As soon as target and non­target are defined, an 18 (± 3)
nucleotide region is located where all the non­target show mismatches and in the case
of the species­specific probe, the target sequence are identical [34]. In this study, the
probes were chosen based on previous experiments of [13], considering the evaluated
specificity and selectivity of the probes on the selected LAB strains created in­situ.
The probe EUB338 is a well characterized target sequence, that is present in all living
bacteria and functions as a positive control [7]. It helps to verify the efficiency of the
procedure, the success of the hybridization and ensure that the conditions are suitable.
The probe NON338 is a sequence non­complementary to any present bacteria and is
serving as an identification tool for non­specific binding or background signals that may
emerge during the assay. It is therefore used to set the appropriate thresholds [38].
Figure 1.7: Schematic illustration of the 16S ribosomal RNA sequence alignment of
L.lactis at position 62­79 showing target region of probe LAC62 probe and position 344­
361 for probe EUB338. Alignments were visualized in CLC workbench software [39].
The three­dimensional order of the ribosome can strongly affect the target accessibility
[31]. The high order structure including interactions between rRNA molecules and interac­
tions between rRNAs and ribosomal proteins create a complex secondary structure with
loops and helices. These interactions can potentially create regions that are more acces­
sible to the oligonucleotide probe than others [12], which hold significant value for probe
design [40]. This problem was adressed, by adding helper oligonucleotides which bind
close to the target site of the DNA probe and act as competition for the target DNA [31].
Helper oligos reduce the chances of the probes binding non­specifically to repetitive ele­
ments, and thereby minimizing background signals [38][40]. Combinations ranging from
adding one to four unlabelled helper oligonucleotides have been widely used, resulting in
up to 25­fold signal amplification [31]. In figure 1.8 the probe H1044 is depicted as binding
directly next to the primary probe LEUC1026. Meanwhile, in figure 1.9, the structure of
16S RNA structure is illustrated to define the further complexity of the secondary structure
in connection with the binding sites.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
9
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.8: Schematic illustration of the 16S ribosomal RNA sequence alignment of Leu­
conostoc at position (1299­1316) showing target region of LEUC1062 probe and position
(1317­1334) of helper H1044. Alignments were visualized in CLC workbench software
[39].
Figure 1.9: Schematic illustration of Leuconostoc’s 16S ribosomal secondary RNA struc­
ture. Sequence alignment is the same as figure 1.8. Alignments were visualized in CLC
workbench software [39].
10
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:15==
1.8
Flow­FISH General workflow
Steps
In general, flow­FISH consists of four preparation steps: (i) sample preparation, (ii) fixa­
tion and permeabilization, (iii) probe hybridization with the target sequence, (iv) washing
of excess and unbound probes, and (v) observation of cells with flow cytometry [41][34][6].
The steps mentioned above, are illustrated in figure 3.12. The fixation and permeabiliza­
tion step of samples has several purposes. Firstly, it enables the cells to maintain their
integrity to withstand further processing, while permeabilization enables the fluorescent
probes to penetrate the cell membrane [42]. The most common fixative agent for Gram­
positive cells is 50% ethanol, however there is not a standard fixation and permeabilization
protocol available yet, since cell composition differs for every microorganism [33]. Ethanol
serves as a fixative solution which dehydrates the cells by replacing the free water in the
tissue and destabilizing the hydrogen bonds [43]. Specific modifications are required so
that the probes can penetrate the membrane, without causing overfixation and cell loss
lysis [31] [44]. Following the fixation and permeabilization, oligonucleotide probes need
to bind specifically to their target sequence in the hybridization step. Usually, tempera­
tures between 37 ◦C and 50 ◦C for several hours in a dark, humid chamber are the ideal
conditions for hybridization [6]. Successful hybridization is described by exclusive binding
of the oligonucleotide probe to the target sequence. Thus, the accessibility of the target
site as well as the melting point of the probes, can determine the optimal hybridization
and washing temperatures [45]. Lastly, before performing the flow cytometric analysis, a
washing step needs to be performed to remove unbound and excessive probes, minimize
false­positive detection and remove any present formamide in the samples [41].
The challenge of specific binding
To ensure specific binding, highly stringent conditions are necessary which can be af­
fected by various factors such as time and temperature of hybridization, PH, concentration
of salts and denaturants, probe concentration [6]. The specificity of the oligonucleotide
probe defines the accuracy and specificity of the method, therefore the stringency of the
hybridization buffer and wash solution has to be adjusted to allow proper annealing of
the probes to the target site [46]. These parameters need to be optimized for each spe­
cific application, in order to avoid the formation of non­specific hybrids that might result
in false­positive signals [29]. One agent that is important for accurate probe specificity is
the concentration of salts in the buffer. When the concentration of NaCl is increased, the
stability of the mismatched heteroduplexes in increased, while lowering of the concentra­
tion, promotes the denaturation of mismatched heteroduplexes and is a useful quality in
the washing stringency [15][38]. Lower salt concentration in combination with high wash
temperature, lead to more stringent washing. More accurate specificity is achieved when
the hybridization is performed at high stringency and washing at similar or low stringency
[44]. Another agent that is commonly used in the hybridization buffer to enhance the
specificity is formamide. Formamide is widely used since it decreases the free energy
of binding in the nucleic acid strands, thus allowing hybridization at lower temperatures
[42]. Formamide increases the tissue structural preservation, and usually constitutes 10
to 50% of the final hybridization buffer, however the final concentration has to be deter­
mined for each individual probe [29]. Considering the high toxicity and carcinogenicity
of formamide, important precautions need to be taken into consideration to avoid inhala­
tion and direct contact, something that can be considered an important limitation in the
application of FISH techniques [47] [29].
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
11
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.10: General workflow of in­situ hybridization coupled with flow cytometry. Initially
a sample is collected and the microbial community is separated. Then the sample is fix­
ated with ethanol and permeabilized, so the probe can enter the nuclear membrane. The
sample is hybridized with specific probe for 15h at 46oC, and washed to avoid non­specific
hybridization. Detection can be accomplished with flow cytometry (made in Biorender
[18])
.
12
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:17==
1.9
Limitations of Traditional Flow­FISH Protocols
While FCM­based assays for bacterial cells in foods are greatly advantageous, they are
still hold aback by a range of minor and major technical and regulatory obstacles [16].
Significant key factors should be considered for routine food safety monitoring, such as
specificity, sensitivity, test speed and economic viability [6].
1. FISH is a microscopic technique that is still poorly standardized [31], therefore is not
yet suitable for routine analysis and there is the need for trained personnel for result
interpretation and microscopic evaluation [10].
2. Bacterial cells are usually one thousandth the size of mammalian cells, which places
them near the detection limit of the instrument. At this size, distinguishing viable cells
from similarly­sized debris can pose a significant challenge [48][49].
3. The food matrix itself poses a significant challenge since autofluorescent particles
found in specific tissues can produce strong background and autofluorescence sig­
nals and may require specialized removal procedures prior to FCM. Also, the tech­
nique is greatly sensitive meaning that it gets really affected by the storage and
freshness of cells and chemical reagents, while improper storage of cells can lead
to natural apoptosis, compromising the specificity of the method [6].
4. In terms of detection limits, the optimal performance of most cytometers is achieved
when the analyzed samples contain an adequate amount of cells ranging from 105 to
106 cells [46]. This implies the necessity for using concentrated samples containing
target cells or impellent preliminary enrichment steps to increase the low levels of
target cells to detectable levels [16]. Sorting larger cell quantities might increase
the likelihood of isolating the cells of interest, but also increases the risk of sorting
non­target cells [12].
5. Flow cytometers, are instruments with high cost, lack of portability, and the need for
dedicated bench space in the laboratory due to the large size [50][51].
6. Most importantly, the method requires the use of toxic chemicals and mutagenic
fluorochromes, capable of causing birth defects on embryos via inhalation. Conse­
quently, the handling of formamide in the research laboratories demands precau­
tionary safety measures that go beyond standard personal protective equipment.
This includes the use of fume hood for the hybridization and part of the washing
steps and dedicated hazardous waste disposal routes [24]. The washing and flow
cytometric analysis however, are steps that cannot be performed inside the fume
hood, therefore special precaution needs to be taken during the washing steps by
centrifuge, which provide adequate removal of formamide during flow cytometry.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
13
==PAGE:18==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Flow Cytometry (Viability Testing)
2.1.1
Experiment purpose
Live/dead staining allows the rapid and direct quantification of cell death for any given
process [52]. The method enables the detection of cell states, categorizing as live cells
those able to grow on an agar plate, and dead or injured cells, as those unable to grow
on agar plates [51]. Therefore, it is standard practice in flow cytometry to characterize
the sample, by determining the relative amounts of live and dead cells. This result is
routinely achieved by application of viability dyes, such as SYTO9 for identifying live cells,
or Propidium Iodide for marking cells with compromised membranes [46]. Some cells, as
the mCherry strain used in this experiment, exhibit fluorescence without any staining,
therefore the live cells can be visualized without SYTO9 treatment.
2.1.2
Materials
1. Bacterial strain: L.lactis mCherry MS22413
2. Suspension buffer: 1xPBS solution (Phosphate Buffered Saline)
3. Stain: Propidium Iodine (PI)
2.1.3
Sample Preparation
Live and dead mCherry cultures were prepared based on the instructions given on the
BacLight Kit [53]. To initiate a sample preparation, a fresh culture is incubated overnight
by diluting 1 ml of the grown culture in 9 ml of M17/0.5% glucose. Subsequently, 2 ml of
the samples get centrifuged at 4500 rpm x g for 5 min to eliminate unwanted particles.
The supernatant is then discarded, the cell pellet is washed with PBS and is recentrifuged.
The sample is vortexed for 1 min and OD600 is measured. Then, the samples are diluted
10­fold with 1xPBS until reaching an OD600 of 0.1, corresponding to approximately 106
cells/ml of sample. The prepared samples are divided into categories of live, dead, and
live/dead cells mixtures. Dead cells undergo a 30­minute heat treatment, in thermal bath
(Eppendorf thermo mixer C). The viability of the bacterial cultures is assessed by staining
of the samples with propidium iodide (PI), which penetrates broken cell membranes, indi­
cating cell death [51]. 1 μl of PI is added per 1 ml sample, and the samples are incubated
for 15 min at 37oC.
2.1.4
Flow Cytometry
Stained samples were analysed using the MACSQuantVYB flow cytometer (Miltenyi biotec,
Germany). The needle and PMT’s get are calibrated using the MACSQuant calibration
beads [54]. 500 μl of sample are added in the 5­chill rack and the following channel set­
tings are configured in logarithmic amplification (hlog).
14
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:19==
Table 2.1: Gating setting for mCherry viability assessment. All settings are in hlog (loga­
rithmic amplification).
Detector Setting (hlog)
Trigger (hlog)
Strain
FSC
SSC
B1
B2
V1/V2
Y1­Y4
SSC
mCherry
500
438
500
400
400
400
1.50
2.2
Flow­In Situ Hybridization (Flow­FISH)
2.2.1
Experiment purpose
This experiment aimed to first establish the specificity of the probes within individual
strains and subsequently conduct tests on mixed LAB populations.
2.2.2
Chemical Reagents
1. Wash Buffer: 20 mM Tris­HCl, (pH 7.2), 0.01% SDS, 40 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA
stored at 5◦C [55]
2. Hybridization Buffer: 0.9M NaCl, 0.01% SDS, 20 mM Tris­HCl (pH 7.2), 30% for­
mamide] stored at 25◦C [55]
3. Fixation Buffer:1:1 mixture of 96% Ethanol:PBS] stored at −20◦C [34]
4. Suspension Buffer: 1xPBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline)
2.2.3
Buffer Preparation
Stock solutions were prepared by diluting the powder solvent into distilled water (Tris,
SDS, NaCl, EDTA), and mixing it with magnetic stirrer until dissolved. The required solid
mass was calculated according to the equation:
The equation relating mass (g), moles (n), molecular weight (Mw), concentration (C), and
volume (V ) is given by:
mass (g) = n(mol) · Mw(mol/g) = C(mol/L) · V (L) · Mw(mol/g)
Then the solutions were mixed after calculating the required dilution. The equation for the
dilution of a solution is given by:
C1(M) · V1(L) = C2(M) · V2(L)
where C1 is the initial stock concentration, V1 the added volume from the stock, V2 the
final mixture volume and C2 the final required concentration of the solvent. The solution
Tris­HCl, was created by diluting Tris and adding gradual drops of HCl (1M), until PH was
fixated at 7.2. The following configuration was used 2.1, to ensure homogenous mixing
during the PH shift.
The rest of the volume was filled up with distilled water. If the solution was not trans­
parent, it was filtered with sterile filter under vacuum. The solutions were stored in the
fridge for a month and new solutions were prepared for the last experiments. However,
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
15
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.1: Buffer Preparation configuration for PH standardization in wash and hybridiza­
tion Buffer, (made in Biorender[18]).
due to limited space in the fridge, the stocks were stored at room temperature. Special
precautions were followed during the addition of HCl and formamide, due to high acidity
and carcinogenicity. The fixation buffer was prepared by adding equal volume of 96%
ethanol and 1X Phosphate Buffered Saline and was stored on the freezer (­20°C).
2.2.4
Organisms and Growth Conditions
Sources and strains are listed in Table 2.2 . The strains were stored in 20% glycerol/80%
media at −20°C. Before each experiment, cells were pre­cultivated for 18 h in M17/0.5%
w/v glucose medium (1:500) until they reach late logarithmic phase.
Table 2.2: Strain Number Information
Strain
L. lactis
L. cremoris
Leuconostoc
Strain Number
MS22389
MS22355
L8 mesenteroides
2.2.5
Oligonucleotide Probes
The oligonucleotide probes used for this study can be seen in table 2.3. The specificity
of the probes was based on the study of (Friedrich,2006) [13]. The probes were com­
mercially synthesized and purified by TAG Copenhagen [56], labelled with fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC) at the 5’ end. The probes were dissolved in RNA free distilled wa­
ter and stored at ­ 20°C. The initial concentration was 100 uM and the final experimental
concentration was 50 ng/ul according to the dilution equation 2.2.3. Details about the
probe binding sites and sequencing can be found in table 2.3.
16
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:21==
Table 2.3: Details in relation to the oligonucleotide probes used in the present study [13].
Oligonucleotide
Target (Position)
Sequence (5’ →3’)
EUB338
Bacterial 16S rRNA (338­355)
GCT GCC TCC CGT AGG AGT
CREM62
L.lactis subsp. Cremoris 16S rRNA
(62­80)
CCA ATC TTC ATC GCT CAA
H44
L.lactis subsp. Cremoris 16 rRNA
(44­61)
CTT GCA TGT ATT AGG CAC
H81
L.lactis subsp. Cremoris 16 rRNA
(81­99)
TTC AAA TYG GTG CAA GCA
LAC62
L.lactis subsp.
Lactis 16S rRNA
(62­80)
CCA ACC TTC AGC GCT CAA
LEUC1026
Leuconostoc spp 16S rRNA (1026­
1043)
CAC TTT GTC TCC GAA GAG
H1009
Leuconostoc spp 16S rRNA (1009­
1025)
AAC ACT TCT ATC TCT AAA
H1044
Leuconostoc spp 16S rRNA (1044­
1061)
CGA CCA TGC ACC ACC TGT
NON338
Negative control
ACT CCT ACG GGA GGC AGC
2.3
Detailed Method
2.3.1
Sample Preparation
Cells in late exponential phase (OD600 nm of 1.8­2.1) were diluted at a final OD600=0.05 in
PBS, since the protocol should be initiated with at least 1 × 106 cells [46] to obtain at least
200,000 events analyzed by flow cytometry. Cells were then harvested by centrifugation
(5 min x 4500rpm), washed in 500ul of 1xPBS and re­centrifuged.
2.3.2
Plate Counts
18h samples were serially diluted in a 1XPBS solution, and 10ul portions of the appropriate
dilution (resulting in 100 to 300 colonies) were spread homogenously in the M17/0.5%
glucose agar plates, using the spreading inoculation loop. The plates were incubated
anaerobically at 30oC (L.lactis/L.cremoris) and 37oC (Leuconostoc) for 48h, to obtain total
anaerobic mesophilic colony counts.
2.3.3
Cell fixation and permeabilization
Then the cells were fixed with 200 μl of 1:1 mixture of 96% ethanol/PBS. The samples
were stored at (­20)oC for 15 min until hybridization. The alcohol solution is stored in ice,
since the reduced temperature reduces the risk of over­permeabilization and subsequent
leakage of target molecules [29].
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.2: Sample preparation, fixation and hybridization protocol for flow­FISH analysis
according to [13] (made in Biorender [18]).
2.3.4
Hybridization
After fixation, samples are typically permeabilized to facilitate the effective penetration of
hybridization reagents [29]. Ethanol­fixed cell aliquots (20 μl) were centrifuged at 4500 x g
for 5 minutes, washed with 500 μl PBS, and then re­centrifuged. The resulting pellets were
resuspended in 100 μl of hybridization buffer, and 1 μl of each probe (stock concentration
50 nm μl­1) was added. Subsequently, the samples were incubated at 46°C for 15 hours
in an Eppendorf Water bath [13]. Critical during this step is the protection of the probe
vials from direct light exposure, since prolonged hybridization at 37 °C (>16 h) can lead
to fluorochrome tandem dye degradation with associated signal loss [46].
2.3.5
Post­hybridization Treatment/Wash
The purpose of the post­hybridization washes is to separate nonspecific hybrids and re­
move unbound probe molecules from the tissue to minimize background signal [29]).
Great importance was given to this step to remove any remaining formamide in the sam­
ples [12]. After hybridization, cells were pelleted at 4500 × g for 5min and samples were
18
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:23==
first resuspended in 500 µl of wash buffer and incubated at 48 °C for 15 min. Then,
they were washed with 500 ul of PBS, pelleted at 4500xg for 5 min and finally cells were
resuspended in 500 µl of ice­cold 1x PBS and kept on ice until further analyses.
Figure 2.3: Post hybridization wash and FCM protocol for Flow­FISH analysis according
to [29],[13], [12] (made in Biorender [18]).
2.3.6
Flow Cytometry and Data Analysis
Forward light scatter (FSC), side light scatter (SSC) and FITC B1/SSC fluorescence at
550 nm were measured simultaneously on cells with a MACSQuant VYB flow cytome­
ter (Miltenyi biotec, Germany) argon laser light at 488 nm. The data were recorded on
hlog­scale and visualized on histograms by the software MACSQuant 2.013. The flow
cytometer was calibrated with MACSQuant Calibration Beads, following the instructions
found in [54]. FCM samples were adjusted to an event rate of approximately 800 events
per s, at low flow rate with a sample uptake volume of 100ul. Data acquisition required 4
min/sample. The following gating settings were used as can be seen in table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Gating setting for flow­FISH experiment detecting cells stained with fluorescein
(FITC). All settings are in hlog (logarithmic amplification).
Detector Setting (hlog)
Trigger (hlog)
FSC
SSC
B1
B2
V1/V2
Y1­Y4
SSC
500
438
550
400
400
400
1.5
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
19
==PAGE:24==
2.4
Stringency Conditions/Staining Controls
When designing a flow­FISH experiment on a mixed bacterial community, different con­
trols have to be taken into account, to ensure that the correct population is being monitored
and to exclude any autofluorescent or non­specific signals.
First, the efficiency of the hybridization was evaluated by performing separate experiments
with positive probe EUB338 and negative probe NON338 [13]. During this evaluation,
gradient formamide concentration in the hybridization buffer (10,20,30,40%) were tested
on L.lactis in relation to two hybridization times (5h, 15h) to validate the optimal stringency
conditions. Upon observing a clear differentiation between the two reference probes, the
analysis advanced to specificity testing across all strains. This decision was influenced by
the fact that the reference paper [13] employed uniform stringency conditions (10%) for
all strains. The following controls shown in table 2.5 were used for the probe specificity
evaluation, which is based on the flow cytometric design suggested in [17] found below.
Table 2.5: Staining controls for evaluation of relevant specificity levels and hybridization
efficiency.
Bacterial
Strain
Unstained
Control
Negative
Control
Positive
Control
Specific
Control
Non­
Target
Control 1
Non­
Target
Control 2
L. Lactis
No probe
NON338
EUB338
LAC62
LEUC102
CREM62
L.Cremoris
No probe
NON338
EUB338
CREM62+
H44+ H81
LAC62
LEUC1062
Leuconos­
toc
No probe
NON338
EUB338
LEUC1062+
H1044+
H1009
CREM62
LAC62
1. Unstained Control: Unstained cells, incubated in parallel with the stained sam­
ples, fully processed. Used as an additional negative control, to control background
signals derived from autofluorescence and set the negative gates appropriately [17].
2. Negative Control: Cells incubated with the negative fluorochrome control NON338.
Is used to determine nonspecific binding of the primary fluorochrome and ideally, the
fluorescence intensity should be similar as the unstained control[17].
3. Positive Control: Cells known to express your target of interest incubated with
EUB338. Used to avoid false negatives, evaluate the efficiency of the hybridization
and define if the conditions are stringent enough [17].
4. Specific Control: Cells incubated with the specific probe binding only to the target
sequence. Used to quantify the target population and should have lower count than
the positive control while the count compared to the negative controls should be
higher higher [17].
5.
Non­Target Control: Cells incubated with the unspecific probe, e.g., LEUC for
Lactis strains. Used as a third type of negative control, to determine signals derived
from autofluorescence and non­specific binding. [17].
20
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:25==
2.5
Growth Experiment
2.5.1
Experiment Purpose
This experiment aimed to observe the growth of each distinct strain over a 26­hour incu­
bation period and to evaluate their growth characteristics using spectrophotometry and
flow cytometry for comparison.
2.5.2
Method
The strains were brought to late exponential phase for 18h and then new samples (100ul
in 4900 ul M17/0.5% glucose) were incubated for a time period of 26 hours. Subsamples
of 1 ml were taken with a time interval of 2h and each sample was frozen until further
sample preparation. after completing the collection of samples, they were thawed for
3h at 5°C, OD600 was measured for each sample and the protocol followed in part 3.12
was performed. During the hybridization step, the specific probe described in table 2.5
was used for each individual strain and the non­specific NON338 was tested for negative
control. In order to obtain a dataset of at least two replicates for every measurement, four
different batches of strains were incubated as can be seen in figure 2.4 There is gap of
measurements between 10h and 14h of incubation due to researcher’s relaxation hours.
Figure 2.4: Ghant chart visualising the sample collection conducted during a 26­hour
strain incubation, ensuring the acquisition of a minimum of two replicates from each
dataset. The dim colours between 22 pm and 8 am represent absence of sample col­
lection.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
21
==PAGE:26==
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Viability Testing (Live/Dead Visualization)
The following dot plots were recorded FSC/SSC, histogram channel Y2 (dsRed/txRed­A),
histogram channel B2 (PI/LSS­mKate/PerCP­ASSC­PI), channel B2/channel Y2. FSC/SSC
depicts the total population detected, channel Y2 detects the live cells, channel B2 detects
the injured/dead cells and correlation between B2/Y2 provides details about the position
of live/dead cells.
Figure 3.1: Gating strategy for Live/Dead L.lactis mCherry analysis. Bacterial Population
stained with PI for dead cells visualization, while live cell visualization was without staining
due to natural emitted autofluorescence. The number of events collected in each popu­
lation is shown in a count vs PI histogram, to understand the shift in fluorescence when
stained, and in a dot­plot dsRed vs PI to visualize the 50:50 mixture (analysis designed
in MACSQuantify 2.13.0., Miltenyi biotec, Germany).
As can be observed, the stained cells with PI have a higher intensity signal ranging from
e1 to e2 and their distribution is broader, in comparison with the live cells which range from
22
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:27==
Table 3.1: Population statistics. Number of total events collected in each gate for live and
dead L. lactis mCherry cells counted in the sample individually and as a 50:50 mix.
Live
Dead
Individual Count
3.45 × 106/ml
4.5 × 106/ml
Mixture 50:50
1.7 × 106/ml
2.07 × 106/ml
0 to e1 in the PI scaling channel and have a more compact configuration. The signals at
0 fluorescence intensity can be classified as debris or noise. The quantification of the
live/dead cells is represented on the table below. Notably, in the the 50:50 mixed sample,
dead cells demonstrate slightly higher quantification, which can be linked to the elevated
counts observed in the individual sample.
3.2
Probe Specificity Testing
To define the required stringency, L.lactis strain samples were tested with 4 gradient con­
centrations of formamide in the hybridization buffer, starting from 10% reaching up to
40%. The probes that were used in this analysis, were the positive EUB338, validating
the efficiency of the hybridization and the negative NON338, which identifies non­specific
signals.
3.2.1
Evaluating the effect of formamide/ Hybridization Time
Figure 3.2: Dependence of hybridization time (h) and formamide gradient on the event
quantification. Subsamples of L.lactis cells hybridized with gradient formamide concen­
tration from (10% to 40%) for two hybridization times, one at 5h and one at 15h.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
23
==PAGE:28==
Subsamples of L.lactis strains were taken at different hybridization times, one batch at
5h and second batch at 15h with gradient formamide concentrations (10% up to 40%).
This experiment confirmed the importance of 15h hybridization in the probe permeabi­
lization and binding, whereas the maximum signal was observed for 15h hybridization
at 40% formamide, showing better hybridization and 2­log difference between the non­
specific control (NON338). The count of nonspecific control was independent from the
hybridization time and formamide concentration, while the positive count with EUB338
shows a linear logarithmic increase with increasing formamide concentration, which vali­
dates that the more concentrated the formamide, the more stringent and the more specific
the hybridization [44].
3.2.2
Successful Hybridization
Density and histogram plots, with the gating described in 2.4, indicate a successful hy­
bridization, which can be visualized with a distinct differentiation between the two probes.
The results can be visualized in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Flow cytometric analysis of L.lactis MS22338 strain with (A) positive probe
EUB338, and (B) negative probe NON338 at 20% formamide. Samples were processed
according to protocol 3.12 and fluorescence was recorded in the GFP/FITC­A channel
using 550 as B1 channel setting. (analysis designed in MACSQuantify 2.13.0., Miltenyi
biotec, Germany).
As can be observed on the figure, EUB338 and NON338 emit signal in the same fluores­
24
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:29==
cence intensity (1e1), therefore NON338 defines non­specific emitted signals, which can
be deducted from the final event number calculation. The specificity of the probe can be
determined according to the following equation:
nLs
TnL · 100 =
Number of positive events (EUB338)
Number of positive (EUB338) + Negative events (NON338) · 100
(3.1)
where nLs stands for the number of LAB strains that did not react with the probe and TnL
is the total of LAB strains examined [41]. Therefore, the calculated specificities for the
successful hybridization can be found on the table below:
Table 3.2: Specificity evaluation on gradient formamide concentration at two different hy­
bridization times (5h, 15h).
Formamide (%)
10%
20%
30%
40%
5 h hybridization
94.7
96.1
98.6
97.6
15 h hybridization
99.3
98.4
99.5
98.8
Like many biological assays, optimization depends on a balance between sensitivity and
specificity or signal to noise [24]. Higher specificitity values indicate a more reliable and
accurate probe, while achieving high specifity involves careful design and optimization.
Experimental validation is essential to confirm the probe’s specificity before using it in
actual flow­FISH experiments, something that would have facilitated an easier and more
accurate analysis. This suggestion is further expanded in chapter 3.6 future considera­
tions.
3.2.3
Unsuccessful Hybridization
Quantification
Taking into account, the increased stringency of the hybridization with gradient formamide
concentration, 30% formamide was used for all the following specificity testings, based
on [13] who is using the same stringency in all of his strains. The staining controls de­
scribed in 2.5 were used, utilizing different negative, positive and specific controls. Prob­
lems occurred with the reproducibility of the experiment, since after 6 repetitions, the high
specificity levels (reaching >90%) could not be achieved. Different fixation times, wash­
ing steps, serial dilutions and new buffers were tried out but the analysis had a similar
response. An important consideration in this evaluation was that the negative controls
(unstained and the negative NON338) showed a high signal intensity, which can be at­
tributed to high autofluorescence/ background signals and is indicative of unsuccessful
hybridization [38] [15].
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
25
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.4: Average percentage of cells hybridized with Fluorescein labeled oligonu­
cleotide probes by flow cytometry at 488 nm excitation. (A) Unstained control highlights
the background autofluorescence levels, (B) Negative NON338, verifies the effect of the
hybridization and determines false­positive signals, (C) Positive EUB338, can bind to all
the bacterial sequences and should have the highest signal, (D) Specific control, is used
to verify the target microorganism, (E) Non­specific as a third negative control to detect
possible autofluorescence.
The standard deviation (σ) was calculated for the unsuccessful hybridization experiment
to define the data spreading in relation to the mean quantification. It is observed that even
though the quantification does not have high specificity, the results are still on good cor­
relation with plate counts (section 3.5), defining the average range of microbial detection
3.5. This small deviation (<10%) further supports the selection of the specific probe in the
growth experiment 3.5 for monitoring the growth characteristics of each strain.
The standard deviation (σ) is calculated using the formula:
σ =
√∑n
i=1(xi −¯x)2
n
L. lactis
L. cremoris
Leuconostoc
Mean Value
7.47
7.79
8.17
Standard Deviation
6.31
7.04
7.31
Table 3.3: Standard Deviation describing the variation between the staining control re­
sults.
26
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:31==
Gating Visualization
The density plots of different straining controls revealed a consistently strong fluores­
cence signal quantification across identical gating margins, idependent of the staining
control type. This would further complicate the assessment between the target strains
in a mixed bacterial community experiment. The issue may be attributed either to the
similarly narrow sizes of the evaluated strains, which fall within the range of 0.5 to 1.8 mi­
crometers [57] or to elevated autofluorescence levels/background signals. Leuconostoc
exhibit a slightly different plot distribution in most analyses, with side scatter (SSC) val­
ues, initiating at a lower point than lactococci, which could be attributed to the bigger size
and more heterogenous shape of the species [58]. Nonetheless, all strains were located
in the exact same position in the gating, which makes further analysis with a mixed LAB
community, impossible to proceed. The analysis could be improved, by taking several
considerations into account outlined in part 3.3 Troubleshooting.
Figure 3.5: FSC­SSC gating and FITC­histogram plots for l.lactis, cremoris and leuconos­
toc strains. (analysis designed in MACSQuantify 2.13.0., Miltenyi biotec, Germany).
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
27
==PAGE:32==
3.3
Troubleshooting­ Technique Optimization
Autofluorescence and non­specific binding, is a multiparametric analytical problem arising
in cell fluorescence assays. Some indications that can be subject to future considerations,
and improvements, are presented in table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Optimization Steps in flow­FISH Protocol
Step
Indications to be further explored
Fixation
Overfixation of samples should be avoided, as it can lead to enhanced aut­
ofluorescence [46]. Optimization is required for each strain due to differ­
ences in the cell wall membrane. Start with a good percentage of live cells
(>90%) to avoid physical damage and cell lysis, which can result in cell
debris. Dead cells increase background fluorescence and false­positive
signals. To prepare homogenous single­cell suspensions, gently pipette
the cells and avoid mechanical processing like vortexing, which can lead
to cell disruption [46] [17].
Hybridi­
zation
While hybridization reactions are normally conducted under excess probe
conditions, it is important to optimize probe concentrations for optimal
signal­to­background ratios. Too high concentrations increase non­specific
staining, reducing the ratio between specific and non­specific signal [15].
Test multiple probe concentrations around 0.1 ng µl­1 for better distinction
[46]. Non­specific binding may occur if probes have significant homology
to other sequences in the ribosome. Standard DNA probes are susceptible
to degradation by cellular nucleases Breaking down into smaller oligonu­
cleotide pieces, might lead to binding with other available parts of the ribo­
some [12].
Storage
of cells,
solvents
and
probes
According to Amann [33], minimize autofluorescence by fixing cells in fresh
fixative solutions (not older than 24 h). Avoid long­term storage of cells in
the fixative. Perform analysis shortly after hybridization and avoid long
storage in the buffer. Avoid repeated freeze­thaw cycles of the probes to
avoid degradation [59].
Washing
Thorough washing of cells after each hybridization step is crucial to miti­
gate irreversible nonspecific binding that may arise due to unreacted dye
molecules forming covalent bonds with proteins through their aminoreac­
tive groups. Ensure effective elimination of unreacted dye molecules dur­
ing probe purification [17] [15].
Data
analysis
In order to distinguish the noise from bacterial availability, it is important to
define to what extent the variation in fluorescence intensity derives from
noise and to what extent it derives from microbiological variability. The
noise to signal ratio, can be standardised by using reference beads used
for the callibration of the flow cytometer [48].
28
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:33==
3.4
Plate Count vs FCM
FCM data was correlated with plate count data from M17/0.5% glucose agar in order to
validate the gating of FCM counts. Samples for plate counts were taken before fixation,
while flow­FISH samples underwent the whole sample preparation described previously in
2.3. Three experiment repetitions were performed both in plate counts and FCM, after 18h
incubation. The mean log values are reported in table 3.5. All the results were enumerated
according to the following equations:
Plate Counts:
Plate Number Counted · Dilution Factor
Volume Spread onto Plate (ml)
(3.2)
Flow Cytometry:
Event Number counted/(ml) × total dilution factor
(3.3)
Figure 3.6: Total dilutions performed during flow­FISH in comparison with relative plate
count serial dilutions. Dilutions in flow­FISH are necessary (a) during OD standardisa­
tion, (b) after washing step to reach the appropriate detection limit with a flow rate< 1000
events/sec. If the flow rate is higher, another dilution is required.
Interestingly, statistical data analysis indicated a difference between FCM data and plate
counts, with flow­fish enumeration being lower than plate counts. This conclusion is not
in major agreement with other studies which generally report a more consistent trend with
FCM overestimating viable populations compared with plate counts [1]. The underesti­
mated count from plate count is usually attributed to the sole detection of viable colonies
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
29
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.5: Comparison of 18h Incubation Results
L. lactis
Cremoris
Leuconostoc
Plate Count (CFU/ml)
6.76 × 108
6.88 × 108
8.83 × 107
hlog
8.83
8.84
7.95
Flow­FISH (cells/ml)
2.18 × 108
2.83 × 108
2.19 × 107
hlog
8.34
8.45
7.34
and occasional clumped distributions in the plate which leads to difficulty in accurate enu­
meration [5]. However, flow­FISH in contrast to a viability testing through flow cytometry,
has generally high cell losses due to the centrifugation washing steps after fixation and
hybridization [38]. A quantification of the cell loss could not be performed in this analysis,
but in the study of (Wilkinson, 2018) [1] a considerable loss of cells (∼29%) was noted
during the cell extraction procedure required for FCM analysis. In addition, (Conil,1998)
[7] reported a loss of 0.4 log during the fixation step and another loss of cells ranging from
0.2 to 0.4 log, after the hybridization step, mainly during the washing and centrifugation
steps [7].
3.5
Growth Experiment
The strains were incubated for a time period of 26h and samples were taken every 2h.
The mean values of 2 replicates are represented in the plots below and there is a gap
between 10 until 14h of incubation due to unavailability for sample collection. The gating
operated in this experiment was the same as specificity testing 2.4 and the probe used
for this analysis was the specific probe for each target microorganism. The negative
probe NON338, served as a negative control to verify autofluorescence signals, but the
control was unsuccessful, therefore the intensity of a specific hybridization could not be
normalized to the intensity of unbound negative probe. Thereby correcting for cell­to­
cell differences in rRNA content of availability was not possible and this might result in
higher event rate counted, since the background signals cannot be entirely removed from
the analysis. In this case, the relative count from the 1xPBS suspension buffer 1.2 ×
104 events/ml) was evaluated independently and was deducted from the calculations as
minimum background signals.
Photometric analyses of the growth status of pure cultures, yielded a characteristic growth
curve of lactic acid bacteria with an exponential growth phase initiating at the first 6h,
8h and 17h for L.Cremoris, L.lactis and Leuconostoc respectively, followed by a long
stationary phase as seen in figure 3.7. The spectrophotometer could not reach OD600
values higher than 2.5, therefore this explains the differentiation between higher log values
in graph (FITC vs time) 3.8, while in graph a (OD600 vs time) 3.7 all the strains have similar
OD600 on stationary phase.
The results of flow cytometric counts begin from log­values ranging from 6.5 to 7, since
the strains were brought to late exponential phase from a previous culture existing in
stationary phase. As expected, cells harvested in stationary phase exhibit lower fluo­
rescence intensity than those fixated during the exponential phase, which is a factor of
30
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.7: Optical Density (OD600) measurements of L.lactis (blue), L.cremoris (orange),
Leuconostoc (grey) versus incubation time evaluated every 2h over a growth period of
26h.
Figure 3.8: Growth curves of L.lactis (blue), L.cremoris (orange), Leuconostoc (grey) eval­
uated every 2h over a growth period of 26h. Gap of measurements between 10­14h of
incubation might lead to underestimation of L.lactis growth rate. Growth monitoring was
conducted using flow cytometry, with cell counts presented as the mean of two replicates.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
31
==PAGE:36==
both lower ribosomal content and lower cell number present in the sample [15]. L.lactis
and L.cremoris exhibit higher growth rates in M17/glucose medium with the relative event
count showing a 1.7 log increase. The growth curve from Leuconostoc spp. has a long
lag phase of approximately 17h, followed by a 2.2­log increase in the growth until reaching
stationary phase. It is observed that L.Cremoris is reaching exponential phase faster than
all the other strains and therefore is expected to enter the death phase first. L.cremoris
strains usually die off faster to autolyse and release inracellular enzymes, a quality that
contributes to the faster ripening in cheese [16] [60]. Similarly, Leuconostoc spp. usually
grow slower than Lactococcus spp on M17 medium/glucose, since they have different
metabolic pathways during glucose fermentation [61]. Due to the limitation of 26h, the
end of the stationary/death phase cannot be determined in this experiment.
3.6
Future Considerations
3.6.1
Coupling flow cytometry with other techniques is essential
Many reports suggest that defining accurately specific bacterial strains within a mixed pop­
ulation solely through the flow­FISH, proves to be exceptionally challenging [1]. In flow
cytometry, including negative controls is essential for evaluating the non­specific binding
of probes that result in a diffuse fluorescence background. These controls help to estab­
lish the gating of the analysis and set the appropriate thresholds [46]. However, these
background signals are not affecting image analysis in microscopy due to specific spot
recognition by analysis algorithms. In flow cytometric experiments, the background sig­
nals are recorded as elevated autofluorescence and in order to identify cells expressing
target rRNAs, they must exhibit higher fluorescence than those not expressing it [46] .
While microscopy or plate counts might be laborious and time consuming, a flow cyto­
metric analysis is always more accurate when more molecular techniques are coupled
together. Subsequently, flow cytometry should be used in conjuction with other methods
to verify the enumerated bacterial counts. As also observed from the reference paper of
(Friedrich, 2006) [13], the first step of the analysis is the stringency verification through
epifluorescence microscopy and then the FCM analysis is corellated with the results from
X­Gal­calcium citrate agar fermentation and qPCR methods.
Another method widely used in many assays for probe specificity evaluation prior to flow
cytometric analysis, is dot­plot hybridization. With dot­plot, additional target strains and,
e.g., closely related nontarget species can be quite rapidly examined [33]. The analytical
steps for performing dot­plot can be described in [32] and an illustration of the specificity
testing through dot­plot is presented in figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Dot­plot analysis for probe specificity evaluation utilised in many studies prior
to flow cytometric analysis.
Full dots indicate successful hybridization, half dots par­
tial hybridization and no­dots indicate non­binding with the target. Figure from study of
Manz,1992 [55].
32
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:37==
3.6.2
Dual Staining
One way to enhance sensitivity and overcome the background fluorescence limitation
could be the use of multiple probes or stains for one target organism [31][62]. The detailed
analysis conducted by (Batani, 2019) [12] is indicated below as a successful flow­FISH
analysis. It employed dual staining with the target fluorochrome (6­FAM) and Propidium
Iodide (PI), incorporating three negative controls (unstained, no probe, NON338). The
results of the analysis indicate: (a) the unstained control emitting signals at minimum
fluorescence intensity, (b) a positively stained population with the target fluorochrome
having high intensity on the Fam channel, (c) the negative probe NON338 highlighted with
same fluorofore as target probe in (b), displaying more widespread signals than unstained
sample but still at low fluorescence intensity (d) the no probe control, emitting similar
signals with unstained and NON338 samples and (e) a positively stained sample with
target probe and propidium iodide exhibiting high fluorescence signals in both channels.
Figure 3.10: Research study from (Batani et al,2019) [12] used as main inspiration for
staining control experimental analysis.
In line with the previous approach, samples previously treated according to protocol 3.12
utilizing fluorescein as primary fluorophore, were subsequently stained with 1ul of Propid­
ium Iodide and incubated for 15 min at 37oC. As expected there was a notable shift in
the main event count towards incresed B2­channel intensity, which is responsible for de­
tecting the PI stain. The shift is attributed to the cells being permeated during the fixation
process.
Figure 3.11: Dual staining trial with probe CREM62 and propidium iodide.
.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
33
==PAGE:38==
3.6.3
Sequence Verification
Prior to conducting the experiment, it is crucial to perform a detailed bioinformatics anal­
ysis to confirm the sequence specificity of the probes by using the databases [35] [36].
This step is essential to verify that the probes are homologous to the intended targets.
This verification was not carried out early in the study, because there was reliance on
(Friedrich,2006) [13] work. However, it is interesting that when the alignments were tested
through the software, there is a gap in homology of Cremoris strains and relevant helpers.
More importantly, it seems like the specific probe CREM62 does not bind in the target and
instead there is a zero­mismatch binding with LAC62 which serves as a non­target probe.
Figure 3.12: Schematic illustration of the 16S ribosomal RNA sequence alignment of
L.cremoris showing non­specific binding of target probe CREM62. Alignments were visu­
alized in CLC workbench software [39].
.
Lastly upon testing on CLC workbench, all the probes had relevant differences with the
binding sites outlined in the reference paper [13]. These variations could be attributed
to sequence variation across various databases. The results of the comparison are pre­
sented in Table 3.6 below.
Table 3.6: Comparison of probe alignments between reference paper [13] and CLC work­
bench software [39].
Probe
Reference Paper
CLC Workbench
EUB338
(338­355)
(344­361)
CREM62
(62­80)
No alignment
H44
(44­61)
(54­71)
H81
(81­99)
No alignment
LAC62
(62­80)
(62­79)
LEUC1026
(1026­1043)
(1299­1316)
H1009
(1009­1025)
No alignment
H1044
(1044­1061)
(1317­1334)
NON338
No alignment
No alignment
34
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:39==
4
Conclusion
This study tried to monitor the interactions between mixed communities of lactic acid bac­
teria (LAB), using as benchmark the work of (Friedrich, 2006) [13]. Despite the ambi­
tion, the complexity of microbial interactions coupled with the method limitations rendered
this goal unattainable. Nonetheless, the findings of this study can contribute valuable
insights to flow cytometric analysis, serving as a guide for future students in the depart­
ment. The results of the study highlighted the convenience of routine viability assess­
ment through flow cytometric analysis, which can enable faster live/dead quantification
in comparison to traditional plate counting. Proceeding with flow­FISH, the probe speci­
ficity evaluation demonstrated one successful hybridization, which was validated by a
distinct difference between the positive EUB338 and the negative NON338 probes with
specificity levels>96%. However, subsequent attempts at specificity testing encountered
challenges, primarily due to elevated autofluorescence and background noise, which is
a multi­parametric problem arising often in these assays. Recommendations for future
experiments to overcome these challenges include, (a) the careful pipeting of the cells in­
stead of applying mechanical processing (vortex), (b) frequent preparation of fresh buffers,
(c) pre­analysis via dot­plot hybridization or microscopy and (d) the use of callibration
beads as a control reference for positive signals.
Further on, the last part of the study included the monitoring of bacterial growth during a
26­hour incubation period, which highlighted a characteristic growth curve with L.cremoris
entering the exponential phase at 6h, followed by L.lactis at 8h and Leuocnostoc at 17h.
Due to absence of successful negative control, the percentage of relative autofluores­
cence could not be normalised, suggesting that the reported counts may overestimate
actual cell numbers. Nonetheless, there was a notable corelation between flow cytomet­
ric counts and traditional plate counts at 18h, affirming the credibility of flow­FISH despite
methological losses due to the washing steps. This study reaffirms the potential of flow­
FISH as an analytical tool for the quantification of specific bacterial populations. However,
the differentiation of mixed microbial communities remains challenging, necessitating ad­
vanced expertise in both molecular and flow cytometric methodologies. The absence of
a standardized flow­FISH protocol, creates the need for continuous optimization regard­
less of following the procedure of a successful assay. A significant bottleneck that arised
during the experimental design, was the need for formamide as supported from most pro­
tocols. Formamide, highly teratogenic, requires extra precautionary measures to avoid
contact and inhalation from pregnant women and sensitive groups. In a busy laboratory,
hosting more than 4 people working simultaneously, this proved to be a great challenge to
overcome. Future indication would be to perform the hybridization and post hybridization
washing steps during the laboratory’s off­peak hours to minimize exposure risks.
In conclusion, this research has enriched my knowledge across multiple fields includ­
ing food microbiology, flow cytometry, molecular biology and bioinformatics. I am deeply
grateful for the opportunity to broaden my understanding of microbial dynamics and exper­
imental design, alongside acquiring the skill to overcome methological challenges. While
my initial inexperience in these areas may have led to minor errors, given that the tech­
nique is overly sensitive, these have significantly contributed to my learning curve. This
journey highlights the potential for future research endeavors!
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
35
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
Martin G. Wilkinson. Flow cytometry as a potential method of measuring bacterial
viability in probiotic products: A review. Aug. 2018. DOI: 10.1016/j.tifs.2018.05.006.
[2]
Lawrence J.H Ward, Julie C.S Brown, and Graham P Davey. “Two methods for
the genetic differentiation of Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis and cremoris based on
differences in the 16S rRNA gene sequence”. In: FEMS Microbiology Letters 166.1
(Jan. 2006), pp. 15–20. DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.1998.tb13177.x.
[3]
Rhitika Poudel et al. “Comparison of growth and survival of single strains of Lacto­
coccus lactis and Lactococcus cremoris during Cheddar cheese manufacture”. In:
Journal of Dairy Science 105 (3 Mar. 2022), pp. 2069–2081. ISSN: 15253198. DOI:
10.3168/jds.2021-20958.
[4]
MICHÈLE Sadler. “2 Gut Flora and Health­Past, Present and Future RSM Forum
on Food and Health RSM, London I March 1996”. In: Nutrition Bulletin 21.2 (1996),
pp. 152–154.
[5]
Christine J. Bunthof and Tjakko Abee. “Development of a flow cytometric method to
analyze subpopulations of bacteria in probiotic products and dairy starters”. In: Ap­
plied and Environmental Microbiology 68.6 (2002), pp. 2934–2942. ISSN: 00992240.
DOI: 10.1128/AEM.68.6.2934-2942.2002.
[6]
Elena Zand et al. Potential of flow cytometric approaches for rapid microbial detec­
tion and chracterization in the food Industry—a review. Dec. 2021. DOI: 10.3390/
foods10123112.
[7]
N Connil et al. Enumeration of Carnobacterium divergens V41, Carnobacterium
piscicola V1 and Lactobacillus brevis LB62 by in situ hybridization­flow cytometry.
Tech. rep. 1998, pp. 302–306. URL: https://academic.oup.com/lambio/article/27/
5/302/6708121.
[8]
Casper Hyttel Clausen et al. “Bacteria detection and differentiation using impedance
flow cytometry”. In: Sensors (Switzerland) 18.10 (Oct. 2018). ISSN: 14248220. DOI:
10.3390/s18103496.
[9]
C R Harwood M R Barer. Bacterial viability and culturability. https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/10500845/. Accessed: February 2024.
[10]
Karoliny Brito Sampaio et al. An outlook on fluorescent in situ hybridization coupled
to flow cytometry as a versatile technique to evaluate the effects of foods and dietary
interventions on gut microbiota. Aug. 2022. DOI: 10.1007/s00203-022-03090-7.
[11]
Jaume Comas­Riu and Núria Rius. Flow cytometry applications in the food industry.
Aug. 2009. DOI: 10.1007/s10295-009-0608-x.
[12]
Giampiero Batani et al. “Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and cell sorting
of living bacteria”. In: Scientific Reports 9.1 (Dec. 2019). ISSN: 20452322. DOI:
10.1038/s41598-019-55049-2.
[13]
Udo Friedrich and Jan Lenke. “Improved enumeration of lactic acid bacteria in
mesophilic dairy starter cultures by using multiplex quantitative real­time PCR and
flow cytometry­fleorescence in situ hybridization”. In: Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 72.6 (June 2006), pp. 4163–4171. ISSN: 00992240. DOI: 10.1128/
AEM.02283-05.
[14]
Todd R Klaenhammer et al. “Influence of the dairy environment on gene expression
and substrate utilization in lactic acid bacteria”. In: The Journal of nutrition 137.3
(2007), 748S–750S.
36
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:41==
[15]
Günter Wallner, Rudolf Amann, and Wolfgang Beisker. “Optimizing fluorescent in
situ hybridization with rRNA￿targeted oligonucleotide probes for flow cytometric
identification of microorganisms”. In: Cytometry 14.2 (1993), pp. 136–143. ISSN:
10970320. DOI: 10.1002/cyto.990140205.
[16]
Martin Wilkinson. “Wilkinson, M.G. (2016). Flow Cytometry in Food Microbiology:
Challenges, Opportunities and Progress to Date. Técnicas de Laboratorio, 417,
722­ 728.” In: 417 (Dec. 2016), pp. 722–728.
[17]
“FACS ebook”. In: ().
[18]
BioRender. BioRender ­ The Easiest Way to Create Scientific Figures. Accessed:
insert access date here. 2023. URL: https://www.biorender.com/.
[19]
MACSQuantify™Software 2.13 User manual. Tech. rep. 2020. URL: www.miltenyibiotec.
com.
[20]
Marion G. Macey. Flow cytometry : principles and applications. Humana Press,
2007, p. 290. ISBN: 9781588296917.
[21]
AAT Bioquest. Fluorescein Fluorescence Excitation and Emission Spectrum. https:
//www.aatbio.com/fluorescence-excitation-emission-spectrum-graph-viewer/fluorescein.
Accessed: insert access date here. 2024.
[22]
AAT Bioquest. Propidium Iodide Fluorescence Excitation and Emission Spectrum.
https://www.aatbio.com/fluorescence-excitation-emission-spectrum-graph-viewer/
propidium_iodide. Accessed: insert access date here. 2024.
[23]
Author(s) not available. Theory of Fluorescence and Phosphorescence. URL: https:
/ / www . oceanopticsbook . info / view / scattering / level - 2 / theory - fluorescence - and -
phosphorescence.
[24]
Thomas Liehr. Thomas Liehr Editor Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH)­Application
Guide. Tech. rep.
[25]
Proteintech Group, Inc. Spectral Compensation in Flow Cytometry. URL: https://
www.ptglab.com/news/blog/spectral-compensation-in-flow-cytometry/.
[26]
Howard M Shapiro. Practical flow cytometry. John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
[27]
Gary Felsenfeld and H Todd Miles. “The physical and chemical properties of nucleic
acids”. In: Annual review of biochemistry 36.1 (1967), pp. 407–448.
[28]
JGJ Bauman et al. “A new method for fluorescence microscopical localization of
specific DNA sequences by in situ hybridization of fluorochrome­labelled RNA”. In:
Experimental cell research 128.2 (1980), pp. 485–490.
[29]
Alexander P. Young, Daniel J. Jackson, and Russell C. Wyeth. “A technical review
and guide to RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization”. In: PeerJ 8 (2020). ISSN:
21678359. DOI: 10.7717/peerj.8806.
[30]
16S rRNA and 16S rRNA Gene. https://help.ezbiocloud.net/16s-rrna-and-16s-rrna-
gene/. Accessed: February 2024.
[31]
Katrin Zwirglmaier. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) ­ The next generation.
May 2005. DOI: 10.1016/j.femsle.2005.04.015.
[32]
Maysoon Salama, William Sandine, and Stephen Giovannoni. Development and
Application of Oligonucleotide Probes for Identification of Lactococcus lactis subsp.
cremorist. Tech. rep. 1991, pp. 1313–1318. URL: https://journals.asm.org/journal/
aem.
[33]
Rudolf I Amann et al. Combination of 16S rRNA­Targeted Oligonucleotide Probes
with Flow Cytometry for Analyzing Mixed Microbial Populations. Tech. rep. 6. 1990,
pp. 1919–1925. URL: https://journals.asm.org/journal/aem.
[34]
Rudolf I Amann. In situ identification of micro­organisms by whole cell hybridization
with rRNA­targeted nucleic acid probes. Tech. rep.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
37
==PAGE:42==
[35]
Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center. GLBRC Data Sets: Ribosomal Database
Project. https://www.glbrc.org/data-and-tools/glbrc-data-sets/ribosomal-database-
project. Accessed: February 2024.
[36]
RNAcentral. https://rnacentral.org/. Accessed: February 2024.
[37]
S Tyagi. “Molecular beacons: probes that fluorescence upon hybridization”. In: Nat.
Biotechnol. 16 (1996), pp. 49–53.
[38]
Edith Nettmann et al. Development of a flow­fluorescence in situ hybridization proto­
col for the analysis of microbial communities in anaerobic fermentation liquor. Tech.
rep. 2013. URL: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/13/278.
[39]
QIAGEN CLC Main Workbench. https://digitalinsights.qiagen.com/products-overview/
discovery-insights-portfolio/analysis-and-visualization/qiagen-clc-main-workbench/.
Accessed: insert access date here. 2024.
[40]
Bernhard M Fuchs et al. Unlabeled Helper Oligonucleotides Increase the In Situ
Accessibility to 16S rRNA of Fluorescently Labeled Oligonucleotide Probes. Tech.
rep. 8. 2000, pp. 3603–3607. URL: https://journals.asm.org/journal/aem.
[41]
C. Almeida et al. “Fluorescence in situ hybridization method using a peptide nucleic
acid probe for identification of salmonella spp. in a broad spectrum of samples”. In:
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 76.13 (July 2010), pp. 4476–4485. ISSN:
00992240. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01678-09.
[42]
Annette Moter and Ulf B Göbel. “Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for di­
rect visualization of microorganisms”. In: Journal of Microbiological Methods 41.2
(2000), pp. 85–112. ISSN: 0167­7012. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-7012(00)
00152-4. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167701200001524.
[43]
Isam Eltoum, Jerry Fredenburgh, and William E Grizzle. “Advanced concepts in
fixation: 1. Effects of fixation on immunohistochemistry, reversibility of fixation and
recovery of proteins, nucleic acids, and other molecules from fixed and processed
tissues. 2. Developmental methods of fixation”. In: Journal of Histotechnology 24.3
(2001), pp. 201–210.
[44]
Thomas Liehr. Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) Application Guide Second
Edition. Tech. rep. URL: http://www.springer.com/series/8623.
[45]
Benedetta Bottari et al. “Application of FISH technology for microbiological analy­
sis: Current state and prospects”. In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 73.3
(2006), pp. 485–494. DOI: 10.1007/s00253-006-0609-0. URL: https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s00253-006-0609-0.
[46]
Riccardo Arrigucci et al. “FISH­Flow, a protocol for the concurrent detection of mRNA
and protein in single cells using fluorescence in situ hybridization and flow cytome­
try”. In: Nature Protocols 12.6 (June 2017), pp. 1245–1260. ISSN: 17502799. DOI:
10.1038/nprot.2017.039.
[47]
Junjie Gu et al. Application of Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) in Oral
Microbial Detection. Dec. 2022. DOI: 10.3390/pathogens11121450.
[48]
Luca Galbusera et al. “Using fluorescence flow cytometry data for single­cell gene
expression analysis in bacteria”. In: PLoS ONE 15.10 October (Oct. 2020). ISSN:
19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240233.
[49]
Michael K. Winson and Hazel M. Davey. “Flow Cytometric Analysis of Microorgan­
isms”. In: Methods 21.3 (2000), pp. 231–240. ISSN: 1046­2023. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1006/meth.2000.1003. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S104620230091003X.
[50]
C. R. Taitt and S. H. North. “Flow cytometry and pathogen screening in foods”. In:
High Throughput Screening for Food Safety Assessment: Biosensor Technologies,
38
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
==PAGE:43==
Hyperspectral Imaging and Practical Applications. Elsevier Inc., 2015, pp. 195–218.
ISBN: 9780857098078. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-85709-801-6.00008-3.
[51]
Julia Robertson et al. “Optimisation of the protocol for the liVE/DEAD®BacLightTM
bacterial viability kit for rapid determination of bacterial load”. In: Frontiers in Micro­
biology 10.APR (2019). ISSN: 1664302X. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00801.
[52]
Michael Berney et al. “Assessment and interpretation of bacterial viability by using
the LIVE/DEAD BacLight Kit in combination with flow cytometry”. In: Applied and
environmental microbiology 73.10 (2007), pp. 3283–3290.
[53]
Bacteria Counting Kit. Tech. rep.
[54]
Miltenyi Biotec. Title of the Document. https : / / static . miltenyibiotec . com / asset /
150655405641/document_6cdofjiif17j14sdl514m5gh29?content-disposition=inline. Ac­
cessed: insert access date here. 2024.
[55]
Werner Manz et al. Phylogenetic Oligodeoxynucleotide Probes for the Major Sub­
classes of Proteobacteria: Problems and Solutions. Tech. rep. 1992, pp. 593–600.
[56]
TAGC ­ The Applied Genomics Consortium. https://tagc.com/. Accessed: February
2024.
[57]
Michael E Stiles ’ and Wilhelm H Holzapfel. Lactic acid bacteria of foods and their
current taxonomy. 1997.
[58]
Stephanie A Vogelmann et al. “Adaptability of lactic acid bacteria and yeasts to
sourdoughs prepared from cereals, pseudocereals and cassava and use of compet­
itive strains as starters”. In: International journal of food microbiology 130.3 (2009),
pp. 205–212.
[59]
Edward F DeLong, Gene S Wickham, and Norman R Pace. “Phylogenetic stains: ri­
bosomal RNA­based probes for the identification of single cells”. In: Science 243.4896
(1989), pp. 1360–1363.
[60]
A Khosrowshahi et al. “Monitoring the chemical and textural changes during ripening
of Iranian White cheese made with different concentrations of starter”. In: Journal
of dairy science 89.9 (2006), pp. 3318–3325.
[61]
Denis Hemme and Catherine Foucaud­Scheunemann. “Leuconostoc, characteris­
tics, use in dairy technology and prospects in functional foods”. In: International
Dairy Journal 14.6 (2004), pp. 467–494.
[62]
Christopher J. Hewitt and Gerhard Nebe­Von­Caron. The application of multi­parameter
flow cytometry to monitor individual microbial cell physiological state. 2004. DOI:
10.1007/b93997.
Bacterial growth in food matrices monitored by in­situ hybridization
39
