==PAGE:1==
Assessment of the effect of cleaning agents on
Campylobacter with focus on the ability to
survive in a viable but nonculturable state
(VBNC)
Date: 5th February, 2024
Sofie Pauly Kofoed Mose, s183489
Master Thesis, 30 ECTS.
Supervisors at the Technical University of Denmark:
Senior researcher, Annette Nygaard Jensen
Researcher, Nao Takeuchi-Storm
Senior Researcher, Brian Lassen
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
National Food Institute
Research Group for Food Microbiology and Hygiene
Building 204
DK - 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
==PAGE:2==
5th February 2024
Preface and acknowledgement
This master thesis of 30 ECTS points has been conducted from September 2023 to February
2024 at the National Food Institute at DTU, under the supervision of Annette Nygaard
Jensen, Nao Takeuchi-Storm, and Brian Lassen.
Part of the thesis is done together with Agnes Sigrid Bjørnstad (s183469), meaning some of
the results are found in both theses. The following sections are: The comparison of DNA
methods(section 6.1), Evaluation of PMA-qPCR discrimination of viable and heat-inactivated
C. jejuni cell (section 6.2), Standard curve over the viable PMAtreated cell (section 6.3) and
LIVE/DEAD BacLight (section 6.4). The written part of results are done individual.
I want to thank Annette Nygaard Jensen, Nao Takeuchi-Storm, and Brian Lassen for this
amazing opportunity and their guidance and help during this project. A special thanks to
the three Laboratory Technicians, Pia Engelsmann, Resadije Idrizi, and Margrethe Carlsen,
for always helping in the laboratory.
==PAGE:3==
5th February 2024
Abstract
Campylobacter is Denmark’s leading cause of food-borne diseases. Despite national and
international efforts to reduce the number of campylobacteriosis cases, there is no indication
that the number of incidents is decreasing. One of the issues regarding Campylobacter
research is that the traditional culturing methods may underestimate the cells in a viable
but nonculturable state (VBNC). A more sensitive detection method is needed to detect
and quantify the viable Campylobacter to prevent infections. Therefore, this thesis aimed to
establish and optimize a method to distinguish the different states (live, dead, and VBNC) of
Campylobacter using propidium monoazide quantitative PCR (PMA-qPCR) and to investigate
how cleaning products affect the state of Campylobacterusing traditional plating and the
PMA-qPCR method. Additionally, BacLight Bacterial Viability (LIVE/DEAD BacLight)
two color fluorescence assays were tested to determine the different states of Camylobacter.
PMA-qPCR uses propidium monazite, which can inhibit DNA amplification from cells with
a compromised membrane. Together with qPCR, it allows PMA to detect only viable cells.
LIVE/DEAD BacLight can distinguish between live and dead cells based on membrane
integrity. LIVE/DEAD BacLight distinguishes between live and dead cells by using stains to
color live (green) and dead (red) cells. The PMA-qPCR and LIVE/DEAD BacLight were
tested on a 10-folded dilution series of C. jejuni (101 to 107 CFU/ml) of both viable and
heat-inactivated cells (15 minutes at 90℃). Following proof of concept, the PMA-qPCR was
used to detect C. jejuni exposed to cleaning products used on a poultry farm in different
concentrations. The effect was also tested withC. jejuni combined with 5% chicken juice to
stimulate the dirty environment on a farm.
The results show that PMA-qPCR can discriminate between viable and heat-inactivated
cells, but the concentration of PMA (20µM) used in this study may not be optimal. The
experiment with the cleaning agent (Kombinon Special) indicated that C. jejuni can form
colonies after being exposed to a concentration of ≤0.5%. At a concentration of 2%, all of
the C. jejuni went into the VBNC state. When the bacteria solution was added 5% chicken
juice, it seemed to prolong the survival of C. jejuni when exposed to Kombinon Special in
different concentrations. C. jejuni was capable of being cultured for up to 24 hours after
exposure to a 0.1% concentration of Kombinon Special when 5% chicken juice was added,
while colonies were not detected after 1 hour of exposure time without the 5% chicken juice.
The results from LIVE/DEAD BacLight did not give a clear result when trying to detect C.
jejuni in the different states. Future testing is needed to specify the methods when using C.
jejuni for detecting
This thesis showed that the PMA-qPCR method could detect C. jejuni in it VBNC state.
The PMA-qPCR methods can be used to assess the effectiveness of cleaning agents to inactive
==PAGE:4==
5th February 2024
C. jejuni, because it has the ability to detect the bacteria in its VBCN state. This can be a
major advantage in the action towards assessing the cleaning agents’ actual biocide properties
towards C. jejuni.
==PAGE:5==
5th February 2024
Resume
Campylobacter er den fødevarebårne sygdomme i Danmark, der er årsag til flest sygdom-
stilfølde. På trods af nationale og internationale bestræbelser på at reducere antallet af
campylobacteriosis-tilfælde er der intet, der tyder på, at antallet af hændelser er faldende. Et
af spørgsmålene vedrørende Campylobacter-forskning er, at de traditionelle dyrkningsmetoder
kan undervurdere de levedytige celler ved ikke at vise celler i den såkaldte levedygtige, men
ikke-dyrkningabre tilstand (VBNC). En mere følsom detektionsmetode er nødvendig for at
detektere og kvantificere den levedygtige Campylobacter for at forhindre infektioner. Derfor
var formålet med denne afhandling at etablere og optimere en metode til at skelne mellem
de forskellige tilstande (levende, død og VBNC) af Campylobacter ved brug af propidium-
monoazid kvantitativ PCR (PMA-qPCR) og til at undersøge, hvordan rengøringsmidler
påvirker tilstanden af Campylobacter ved brug af traditionel plettering og PMA-qPCR-
metoden. Derudover blev BacLight Bacterial Levedygtighed (LIVE/DEAD BacLight) to-
farvet fluorescensassay testet for at bestemme de forskellige tilstande af Camylobacter.
PMA-qPCR bruger propidium monoazide, som kan hæmme DNA-amplifikation af celler med
en ødelagt membran. Sammen med qPCR tillader det PMA kun at detektere levedygtige
celler. LIVE/DEAD BacLys kan skelne mellem levende og døde celler baseret på membranens
integritet. Metoden bruger farvning til at farve levende (grønne) og døde (røde) celler og
derved visuelt skelne mellem levende og døde celler. De to metoder blev testet på en 10-foldet
fortyndingsserie af C. jejuni (101 til 107 CFU/ml) af både levedygtige og varmeinaktiverede
celler (15 minutter ved 90℃). PMA-qPCR blev efterfølgende brugt til at detektere C. jejuni
påvirker af rengøringsmidler i forskellige koncentrationer. C. jejuni blev kombineret med 5%
kylling saft for at stimulere et beskidt miljø på en gård.
Resultaterne viser, at PMA-qPCR kan skelne mellem levedygtige og varmeinaktiverede celler,
men koncentrationen af PMA (20 µM) anvendt i denne undersøgelse er muligvis ikke optimal.
Forsøget med rengøringsmidlet (Kombinon Special) viste, at C. jejuni kan danne kolonier
efter at være blevet udsat for en koncentration på ≤0, 5%. Ved en koncentration på 2% var
alle C. jejuni i VBNC-tilstanden. Når bakterieopløsningen blev tilsat 5% kyllingesaft så det
ud til at forlænge overlevelsen af C. jejuni når de blev udsat for Kombinon Special i forskellige
koncentrationer. C. jejuni var i stand til at danne colonier i op til 24 timer efter eksponer-
ing af en koncentration på 0,1% Kombinon Special, når 5% kyllingesaft blev tilsat, mens
kolonier ikke blev påvist efter 1 times eksponeringstid uden 5% kyllingesaft . Resultaterne fra
LIVE/DEAD BacLight gav ikke et klart resultat, da man forsøgte at detektere C. jejuni i de
forskellige stater. Fremtidig test er nødvendig for at kunne bruge den til at undersøge C. jejuni
Denne afhandling viste, at PMA-qPCR metoden kunne detektere C. jejuni i den VBNC-
tilstand. PMA-qPCR-metoderne kan bruges til at vurdere effektiviteten af rengøringsmidler til
inaktive C. jejuni, fordi den har evnen til at detektere bakterierne i dens VBCN-tilstand. Dette
==PAGE:6==
5th February 2024
kan være en stor fordel i indsatsen for at vurdere rengøringsmidlernes faktiske biocidegenskaber
mod C. jejuni.
==PAGE:7==
5th February 2024
Contents
1
Abbreviations
1
2
Study background
2
3
Study objectives
3
4
Introduction
3
4.1
Campylobacter and campylobacteriosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.2
Viable but nonculturable state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.3
Detection of bacteria in VBNC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.3.1
PMA-qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.3.2
LIVE/DEAD Bacterial Viability Kit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.4
Cleaning product and Biocides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.4.1
Kombinon Special . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4.2
Glutack (NCÅ-Verodan A/S, Hadsund, Denmark) . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5
Material and Methods
10
5.1
Bacterial stock solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.1.1
Campylobacter jejuni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.1.2
E. coli (Negative Control) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.2
DNA extraction methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2.1
Fast DNA Stool Mini kit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2.2
DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.2.3
Cell lysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.3
PMA-qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.3.1
PMA treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.3.2
qPCR setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5.4
Discrimination of viable and heat-inactivated cells using the PMA-qPCR methods 14
5.4.1
Heat-treated cell control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.4.2
Standard curve over viable cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.5
Discrimination of viable and heat-inactivated cells using
LIVE/DEAD BacLight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.6
Cleaning agents effect on C. jejuni
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.6.1
Neutralization buffer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.6.2
Chicken Juice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.6.3
Phase 1: Pilot experiment with Kombinon Special . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.6.4
Phase 2: Instigation of the Washing step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.6.5
Phase 3: Testing Kombinon Special effect on C. jejuni under different
conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:8==
5th February 2024
5.7
Data analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Results
23
6.1
Comparison of DNA extraction methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Evaluation of PMA-qPCR discrimination of viable and heat-inactivated C.
jejuni cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.3
Standard curve over the viable PMA treated cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.4
Evaluation of LIVE/DEAD BacLight Discrimination of viable and heat-
inactivated C. jejuni cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.5
Effect of cleaning agents on C. jejuni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.5.1
Phase 1: Pilot experiment with Kombinon Special . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.5.2
Phase 2: Effect of washing step on the test procedure . . . . . . . . .
30
6.5.3
Phase 3: Experiment with cleaning product under different conditions
and concentrations over time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7
Discussion
35
7.1
Comparison of DNA extraction methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7.2
Evaluation of LIVE/DEAD BacLight detection of C. jejuni
. . . . . . . . .
35
7.3
Evaluation of PMA-qPCR detection of C. jejuni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.4
Standardcurve over PMA treated cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.5
Evaluation of the cleaning agents effect on C. jejuni . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.5.1
Phase 1: Evaluation of pilot experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.5.2
Phase 2: Evaluation of the washing step effect on the procedure . . .
39
7.5.3
Phase 3: Evaluation of C. jejuni influence of Kombinon Special in
different conditions and concentrations over time
. . . . . . . . . . .
40
8
Conclusion
43
9
Future perspectives
44
10 References
45
11 Appendix
49
==PAGE:9==
5th February 2024
1
Abbreviations
BA
Blood agar
BPR
Biocidal Products Regulation
Campy LNA
Campylobacter Locked Nucleic Acid
C. jejuni
Campylobacter jejuni
CFU
Colony Forming Units
ECHA
European Chemicals Agency
E. coli
Escherichia coli
EU
European Union
FAM
6-carboxyfluorescein
IAC
Internal Amplification Control
LIVE/DEAD BacLight
LIVE/DEAD Bacterial Viability Kit
LOQ
Limit of quantification
mCCDA
Modified Charcoal Cefoperazone Deoxycholate Agar
NC
Negative control
NB
Neutralization buffer
NTC
Non-template control
ON
Overnight
PC
Positive control
PCR
Polymerase Chain Reaction
PI
Propidium iodide
PMA
Propidium Monoazide
PC
Positive control
qPCR
Qquantitative Real-Time PCR
REACH
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
saline
saline (0.9% w/v NaCl)
VBNC
Viable but Non-Culturable
1 of 50
==PAGE:10==
5th February 2024
2
Study background
One out of four cases of diarrhea diseases is caused by Campylobacter globally [1]. Campy-
lobacter is the leading food-borne pathogen in Denmark. Even though the recovery of
Campylobacter infection is short, the economic burden of the disease in the health sector was
estimated to 124 million euro in Denmark back in 2019 [2]. The detection of Campylobacter
is done using the traditional culturing methods. The detection is based on colonies form at
selective agar plate, where the colony-forming units (CFU) is determinate [3]. The problem
by using the traditional culturing methods is because it often underestimate the viable cell
count. The reason is that many bacteria, including Campylobacter, are capable of using a
survival mechanism called viable but nonculturable (VBNC). When entering the VBNC state
the bacteria are unable to grow on culture media, but are still viable. They are capable
of maintaining the metabolic activity and may resuscitate to a virulence state, when being
under favorable conditions.
To overcome the problem with underestimated viable cell new detection methods for Campy-
lobacter is needed. Methods such as PMA-qPCR or LIVE/DEAD BacLight may be the new
candidates as detection method for Campylobacter [4]. PMA-qPCR are a method, which
combine propidium monoazide (PMA) and qPCR. PMA binds to DNA with compromised
membranes, and when exposed to light it modifies the DNA making it unavailable for PCR
amplification [5]. By treating the DNA with PMA before the qPCR reaction only the cells
with intact membrane(viable cells) is amplified. This make it possible to detect both the
culturable cells with traditional culturing method, and the VBNC cells using the PMA-qPCR
method. LIVE/DEAD BacLight is another method that in combination with traditional
culturing method may detect both culturable and VBNC cells. LIVE/DEAD BacLight are
using two different stain (SYTO9 and propidium iodide(PI)) to distinguish between viable
and dead cells. SYTO9 are capable of penetrating all bacteria membranes, and stain the cells
green, whereas PI only penetrate cells with a compromised membrane. The combination of the
two stain produce red fluorescence cells [6]. This mean the viable cells become green, whereas
the dead is red. In the same ways as for PMA-qPCR, may LIVE/DEAD Bac be able to detect
the VBNC cell, whereas the culturable cells is detected using the traditional culturing method.
When the detecting of Campylobacter has been overcomed the investigating of how to
avoid getting infected by Campylobacter can begin. It is known that the primary source of
Campylobacter infection comes from infected broilers [7]. It may therefor be necessary to
validate the cleaning procedure on a broiler farm, and maybe more specific what kind of
cleaning agents they are using. Different kind of cleaning agents are effecting the bacteria in
different way [8]. Meaning to remove Campylobacter from the broiler farm the right cleaning
product needs to be used .
2 of 50
==PAGE:11==
5th February 2024
3
Study objectives
The overall aim of this study was to establish and optimize the method propidium monoazide
quantitative PCR (PMA-qPCR) to distinguish the different states (live, dead, VBNC) of
Campylobacter and to investigate how cleaning products affect the states of Campylobacter
using traditional plating and PMA-qPCR methods.
To achieve the overall aim, the following specific objectives were pursued:
• Determine the ability of PMA-qPCR and BacLight to discriminate between viable and
heat-inactivated Campylobacter cells.
• Produce a standard curve using the PMA-qPCR method
• Determine the appropriate washing protocol for experiments with a cleaning agent
• Determine the effect on C. jejuni after treatment with cleaning agents with varying
concentration, exposure time and addition of organic material using plate counts and
PMA-qPCR.
• If time asses the presence/absence of Campylobacter in different states in samples
collected in the field.
4
Introduction
4.1
Campylobacter and campylobacteriosis
Campylobacteriosis has since 2007 been the most commonly reported foodborne gastroin-
testinal infection in humans in the European Union (EU) [9]. It has been estimated that
over 1.5 million people annually get infected in the United States [10]. Due to the mild and
self-limiting symptoms of campylobacteriosis, many infected people recover without help
from healthcare, which results in many underreported cases. Even though the majority of
the infected recover after a few days, the illness can lead to life-threatening complications for
people with weakened immune systems. As illustrated in figure 1, humans can get infected
through various routes. The three overall transmission routes are foodborne, environmental,
and direct contact with infected humans or animals. The overall routes from the farm to the
consumer have been evaluated to prevent humans from getting infected, and different actions
have been considered to help prevent campylobacteriosis. European Food Safety Authority
(EFSA) has four levels of control(farmer, manufacturing, distributor, and consumer), and
developed an action plan for each level of step where the infection may occur [11]. At the
farmer level, the plan revolves around stabilizing the biosecurity on-farm, whereas the three
others are to optimize proper product handling and hygiene.
3 of 50
==PAGE:12==
5th February 2024
Figure 1: Model over the different transmission route where Campylobacter can infect humans. The size of
the arrow illustrates the relevance of the transmission route. The illustration is taken from Campylobacter
Story map, ESFA [11]
Campylobacteriosis is caused by Campylobacter, which is a gram-negative, non-spore-forming,
zoonotic, and microaerophile pathogen. Two of the 27 species in the Campylobacter genus
are considered the most relevant when referring to human health [1]. The two species are
Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli, which are responsible for the majority of
Campylobacter infections in humans, C. jejuni 80-90% and C. coli 5-10% respectively [1].
Under laboratory conditions Campylobacter spp. require strict conditions for optimal growth.
They require a microaerobic atmosphere with an oxygen concentration of approximately 5%,
temperature at 42℃, and a pH of 6.5-7.5 for optimal growth [12].
Its natural reservoir is warm-blooded animals (including domesticated and wild), where
it rarely causes illness [11]. Campylobacter has been considered a commensal organism
in different animals’ gastrointestinal tracts, where poultry is the most common reservoir
[13]. Many factors influence how poultry gets infected, but it is known to rapidly spread
once Campylobacter is introduced to a broiler flock. Potential sources of infection can be
4 of 50
==PAGE:13==
5th February 2024
inadequate cleaning and disinfection, farmers wearing inappropriate clothing, environmental
contamination, or poor house maintenance. Still, it is common for Campylobacter to be
transmitted horizontally to the flock [7]. This may indicate that Campylobacter has a much
higher survival rate in its natural habitat than what is detected in the laboratory [14]. The
phenomenal indicates that Campylobacter may use a survival mechanism called viable but
non-culturable (VBNC) when exposed to non-favorable conditions.
4.2
Viable but nonculturable state
Many different bacteria can enter this survival mechanism called the viable but non-culturable
(VBNC) state, such as Listeria, Escherichia and Campylobacter [15]. Studies have shown
that when the bacteria are in the VBNC stage, the bacteria are still viable even though
they are non-culturable. In this stage, the bacteria retain their membrane integrity and
metabolic activity, but it is unknown to what extent the VBNC cells are still virulent [12, 15].
Nevertheless, when resuscitated, the cells regain their full infective phenotypes. How long
the bacteria can stay in the VBNC stage is still unknown, but researchers have shown that
several months may pass before the bacteria are resuscitated under favorable conditions [15].
Different factors may lead the bacteria to enter the VBNC state, meaning some bacteria
are more tolerant than others. Researchers have found that Campylobacter may be a less
tolerant bacteria, which means it may enter the VBNC state earlier than others [15].
4.3
Detection of bacteria in VBNC
Despite the knowledge that fastidious bacteria may go into VBNC when exposed to different
conditions, the current standard methods for detecting bacteria are still based on culturing
methods [14]. The detection of Campylobacter is done by following the ISO 10272-1:2017
and ISO 10272-2:2017 [16, 3], where the colony forming units (CFU) is quantified by plating
the bacteria on a selective agar plate under favorable conditions. The selective agar plate
for Campylobacter is the Modified Charcoal Cefoperazone Deoxycholate Agar (mCCDA)
plate. The method is effective on fresh samples such as fecal samples, but if the sample is
frozen or somehow affected, it may affect the detection of Campylobacter [14, ?]. Studies
have shown that growth on laboratory agar plates ceases when Campylobacter is exposed
to different stress conditions [15]. This means that Campylobacter is either dead or has
gone into the VBNC state. If Campylobacter has entered the VBNC state, it may not be
detected using traditional culturing methods and can give an incomplete picture of how many
viable Campylobacter cells there are at that given time [7]. This underestimation of viable
cells can significantly affect epidemiological studies and public health efforts. It may lead
to continued spread of the disease within the population without being able to detect it. A
response to an outbreak may be delayed or inadequate. It can lead to misguided policies
and recommendations and a lack of public awareness and education about the risks and
preventive measures.
5 of 50
==PAGE:14==
5th February 2024
Overall, it is important to detect bacteria in a valid, qualitative, and quick way to minimize
the risk to public health. In this study, two different detection methods (PMA-qPCR and
LIVE/DEAD BacLight) are tested to investigate if they can be used to detect Campylobacter
even if they are in the VBNC state.
4.3.1
PMA-qPCR
PMA-qPCR is a method that combines Propidium monoazide (PMA) and qPCR to help
distinguish between dead and viable cells in a sample. PMA is a photoreactive DNA binding
dye, and by exposing it to light, PMA covalently modifies the DNA, making it unavailable
for PCR amplification.[5]. PMA is membrane-impermeant, meaning it can only bind to DNA
with compromised membranes while leaving cells with intact membranes unmodified [17].
A normal qPCR reaction cannot distinguish between live and dead cells but amplifies the
total DNA in the sample [18]. Treating the sample with PMA before the qPCR reaction,
only the viable cells will be amplified, whereas the number of dead cells will stay unchanged.
As illustrated in figure 2, only the viable cells’ DNA will be amplified using the PMA-
qPCR methods. By combining PMA-qPCR with traditional plating, one should be able to
distinguish between the three different stages of a bacteria: viable, dead, and VBNC cells.
The viable cell can be found using plating. The VBNC cells are found by adding PMA to the
sample and running qPCR, whereas the dead is found by subtracting the quantity of cells
estimated by PMA-treatment from the total amount estimated wtihout PMA-treatment.
Figure 2: The model illustrates how PMA only interacts with DNA from cells with compromised membranes.
After PCR, only the cells with intact membranes are amplified. Inspiration for the illustration is from Biotum
[19]
This study uses a multiplex qPCR, using the two TaqMan probes simultaneously. The two
fluorescent reporter dyes are 6-carboxyfluorescein (FAM) and hexacholoro-6-carboxyfluorescein
(HEX). The advantage of using TaqMan is that different probes can easily be labeled with
different reporter dyes. The TaqMan probes are also specific, consisting of a single-stranded
oligonucleotide complementary to a sequence within the target template. The probe hybridizes
the sequence on the target template and gets digested by the 5’ exonuclease activity of the
Taq DNA polymerase [20]. FAM is the Campy probe to target Campylobacter in the sample.
If a negative response is indicated, it means no target sequence is present in the reaction.
HEX is used to target an Internal Amplification Control (IAC). The IAC is a nontarget DNA
sequence, and is amplified alongside the target DNA. Its primary purpose is to monitor the
reliability and efficiency of the qPCR reaction. If IAC gives a negative response, there is a
6 of 50
==PAGE:15==
5th February 2024
failure in the qPCR reaction [21]. An completed qPCR reaction with the two signals are
illustrated in figure
Figure 3: An amplification plot over a FAM signal(Green) and a HEX signal(Orange). The corresponding
thresholds is indicated as yellow for FAM and black for HEX.
4.3.2
LIVE/DEAD Bacterial Viability Kit
Combined with the traditional plating technique, the LIVE/DEAD Bacterial Viability
Kit (BacLight) could also be a promising candidate to detect bacteria in the VBNC state.
LIVE/DEAD BacLight is a rapid and visual method to distinguish between live and dead cells
based on membrane integrity [6]. The staining method utilizes two nucleic acid-binding stains,
SYTO9 and propidium iodide (PI), together with a fluorescence microscope. SYTO9 stains
the cells green and can penetrate all bacterial membranes, whereas PI can only penetrate cells
with compromised membranes. The combination of the two stains causes a reduction of the
SYTO9 stain, which lead the cell to stain fluorescent red [22]. The manufacturer instruction
from the LIVE/DEAD BacLight kit indicate that viable cells with intact membranes stain
green, while dead cells with damaged membranes are stained red. Combining the plating
methods with LIVE/DEAD BacLight, the difference between culturable and green viable
cells should indicate the cells in the VBNC states.
7 of 50
==PAGE:16==
5th February 2024
4.4
Cleaning product and Biocides
Through centuries, it has been known that proper hygiene can decrease the risk of becoming
sick. High hygiene is important in avoiding contamination, especially when handling animals,
food, and water. Hygiene often involves using different kinds of cleaning materials, which all
affect the surroundings differently depending on the active substrate. Biocides and cleaning
agents/detergents must be used for specific tasks to achieve the best result. The difference
between a biocidal product and a cleaning agent is that a biocidal product is intended to
prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate bacteria, fungi, or pests. In contrast, a cleaning agent is
used to remove unwanted substances [23]. The overall meaning is that biocidal affects the
harmful microorganism intended, and cleaning agents "just" remove it from the surroundings.
Whether or not a product is classified as biocidal, it is determined in the European Union
(EU) by the Biocidal Products Regulation (BPR) [23]. Biocidal products are divided into 22
different product types, with four main groups: disinfectants, preservatives, pest control, and
other biocidal products. All active substances must be evaluated by BPR and classified into
a product type. After the substance is approved, it may be used in all products of that type
[24].
Disinfectants typically have multiple target sites to attach/enter the bacterial cell, affecting
many bacterial species. [25]. The bactericidal effect of the biocides depends on the number of
targets affected and the severity of the damage done by them [8]. This means that to achieve
a product’s full potential, it is necessary to understand which kind of active substance is
needed for different situations. Besides understanding the active substance in the product,
proper handling of the product is necessary. Different factors like pH or concentration may
affect the biocide’s overall effect. A poor understanding of the product may lead to bacterial
survival, adaptation to the active substance, and, ultimately, bacterial resistance to the effects
[8].
A biocide’s different mechanisms of action can be divided into two major types: highly
reactive and less reactive. As indicated, does the Highly reactive biocide interact strongly
through chemicals or ionic binding, whereas a less reactive biocide has a weak physical
interaction with the organism [8]. Highly reactive biocides are, e.g., alkylating and oxidizing
agents, whereas alcohols, metal ions, and phenolics are classified as Less reactive biocides
[26].
The two cleaning agents tested in this project are those used on the broiler Farm where field
experiment in the project Safe Chicken is carried out. The products (Kombinon Special and
Glutack) are used for cleaning between rotations of broilers flocks. It is necessary to validate
the efficacy of these cleaning agents to remove Campylobacter from the broiler environment
to avoid Campylobacter infection of subsequent flocks.
8 of 50
==PAGE:17==
5th February 2024
4.4.1
Kombinon Special
Kombinon Special(NCÅ-Verodan A/S, Hadsund, Denmark) is an alkaline foam cleaning
agent with a pH of around 13.2 in its concentrated form. It consists of Sodium Hydroxide
and β-Alanine, N-(2-carboxyethyl-)-,N-coco alkyl derivs., disodium salts. According to the
manufacturer instruction, the concentration must be at 2-5%, the activation time 5-20min,
and the temperature must be between 0-60℃[27].
By ECHA (European Chemicals Agency) under REACH (Registration, Evaluation, Autho-
risation and Restriction of Chemicals Regulation), it has been given the product category
PC35, Washing and Cleaning Products [28]. This means the product does not contain a
biocidal active substance, which means the product does not intend to harm the organism.
Nevertheless, sodium hydroxide is known for removing protein and nucleic acids and can
inactivate different kinds of bacteria, viruses, yeast, fungi, and endotoxins. [29].
4.4.2
Glutack (NCÅ-Verodan A/S, Hadsund, Denmark)
Glutack is a broad-spectrum disinfectant with a pH of around 5 in its concentrated form.
It consists of Glutaral (Glutaraldehyde), Alkyl(C12-16) dimethylbenzyl ammonium chlo-
ride, Ethanol, Didecyldimethylammoniumchlorid and Poly(oxy-1,2-ethanediyl),alpha-(2-
propylheptyl)-omega-hydroxy-. The contact time is at least 1 hour. The concentration
depends on the temperature and the instrument used with spraying or fog equipment [30].
By EACH under REACH, it has classified as the product category PC8, Biocidal products
[28]. As mentioned above, BPR divides biocidal products into 22 different product categories.
Glutack is Product type 3 according to BRP, which is for use in veterinary hygiene, under
the main group 1 [?].
4 out of 5 of the compounds Glutack components are active biocide chemicals: Glutaral,
Alkyl(C12-16) dimethylbenzyl ammonium chloride, Ethanol, and Didecyldimethylammonium
chlorid.
Glutaral is a highly reactive biocide and is classified as an alkylating agent. It is known to
strongly interact with the outer layer of cells because of its ability to cross-link, which can
inhibit the transport of processes into the cell [31].
Alkyl(C12-16) dimethylbenzyl ammonium chloride and Didecyldimethylammonium chloride
are both classified as a quaternary ammonium substance (QAS), which are less-reactive
biocides [8]. QAS is known to target the cytoplasmic membrane in bacteria, leading to a
disruption of the inner membrane, which causes a leakage of the intracellular substance,
resulting in cell death. [31, 32].
Ethanol is also described as a less-reactive biocide. It disrupts the cytoplasmic membrane,
which leads to disorganized membranes and dehydration of the bacteria[26].
9 of 50
==PAGE:18==
5th February 2024
5
Material and Methods
The following experiment used the Campylobacter jejuni ATCC 33560 stain, originally isolated
from bovine feces [33]. The experiment has three parts: DNA extraction methods, testing
the detection methods (PMA-qPCR and LIVE/DEAD BacLight), and investigating cleaning
products’ effect on C. jejuni different states (live, dead, and VBNC). The first two parts
of the experiment were done in cooperation with Agnes Sigrid Bjørnstad (s183469), which
means the standard curve was the same in both of our Master Thesis.
Due to time limited was the field experiment not done.
5.1
Bacterial stock solution
5.1.1
Campylobacter jejuni
C. jejuni (ATCC 33560) were stored at −80℃in Lysogeny broth medium containing 15%
glycerol as a cryoprotectant. They were thawed by plating them onto a selective solid medium,
Modified Charcoal Cefoperazone Deoxycholate agar (mCCDA) plate(Art. no. 18209, SSI
Diagnostica, Hillerød, Denmark) and incubated at 41.5℃under microaerobic conditions for
48 hours. After incubation, they were isolated on a Blood agar (BA) plate (TSA Agarplade
m. 5% calf’s blood, Art. nr.98802, SSI Diagnostica, Hillerød, Denmark) and incubated at
41.5℃under microaerobic conditions for 24 hours.
A stock solution was prepared for C. jejuni by pouring 1 ml of saline (0.9% w/v NaCl) on
the BA containing the bacteria. The solution was mixed using a Drigalski spatula, and the
bacterial solution was collected into a 10 ml tube. The optical density (OD) was measured
on the solution and adjusted to OD600=0.6 (∼1.0 × 109 CFU/ml).
5.1.2
E. coli (Negative Control)
For negative control E. coli(ATCC 11229) was used. It was stored at −80℃in Lysogeny
broth medium containing 15% glycerol as a cryoprotectant. E. coli was thawed by plating it
onto a BA and incubated at room temperature for 24 hours. After incubation, it was isolated
on a BA plate and incubated at 37℃for 24 hours.
A stock solution was prepared for E. coli by pouring one ml of saline onto the BA plate
containing the bacteria. The solution was mixed using a Drigalski spatula, and the bacterial
solution was collected into a 10 ml tube. The optical density (OD) was measured on the
solution and adjusted to OD600=0.6 (∼1.0 × 109 CFU/ml).
A 10-fold dilution series ranging from 102 to 108 CFU/ml was created by mixing 100
µl of bacteria culture and 900 µl of saline. For enumeration of the stock solution, 100 µl of
dilution 102 to 104 CFU/ml was spread onto a BA plate and incubated at 37℃for 24 hours.
10 of 50
==PAGE:19==
5th February 2024
One ml of E. coli in 106 CFU/ml was added to an Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 7,500g
for 7 min. The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was stored at −20℃until DNA
extraction.
5.2
DNA extraction methods
Three DNA extraction methods were tested to investigate whether they could extract
DNA from PMA-treated samples.
All three methods were tested on C. jejuni in two
different concentration (107 and 106 CFU/ml). The DNA extraction was performed on
samples with and without PMA sample treatment (section 5.3.1). After DNA extraction,
NanoPhotometer® NP80 (Implen, Munich, Germany) with a range of 600 nm was used to
measure the concentration and quality of the extracted DNA.
5.2.1
Fast DNA Stool Mini kit
DNA extraction of the samples with and without PMA sample treatment was performed
using the QIAamp® Fast DNA Stool Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The DNA was
extracted using the following methods: One ml inhibits buffer was added to the bacteria
pellet and vortexed until homogenized. The suspension was heated to 70℃for 10 min. The
sample was then centrifuged for one minute at 13,000 rpm. 25 µl Proteinase K was added
to a tube. 600 µl of the supernatant from the sample was transferred to the tube with
Proteinase K. Followed by 600 µl Buffer AL and vortex for 15 sec. The sample was then
incubated at 70℃for 10 minutes. After incubation, 600 µl ethanol (96 −100%) was added
to the lysate and mixed with vortexing. 600 µl of the lysate was added to the QIAmp spin
column and centrifuged for one minute at 13,000 rpm. After centrifugation, the supernatant
was discarded. This step was repeated until all the lysate had been infiltrated. After the
lysate had run through the QIAmp spin column, it was placed in a new collection tube.
After filtration, 500 µl of Buffer AW1 was added to the QIAamp spin column. Then, it
was centrifuged for one minute at 13,000 rpm, and the collection tube with the filtrate was
discarded. The QIAmp spin column was placed in a new collection tube, and 500 µl of Buffer
AW2 was added. The column was then centrifuged for three minutes at 13,000 rpm. The
collection with the filtrate was discarded, and the QIAmp spin column was placed in a new
collection tube. To avoid carryover of the Buffer AW2, the tube was centrifuged for three min
at 13,000 rpm one more time. After centrifugation, the QIAmp spin column was transferred
over in a 2 ml microcentrifuge tube, and 100µl Buffer ATE was added to the column. It
was then incubated at room temperature for one minute and centrifuged for two minutes
at 14,000 rpm. The eluted DNA was stored at −20℃until qPCR was run. For each DNA
extraction, a Process control(a tube with no sample) was made to control the extraction.
11 of 50
==PAGE:20==
5th February 2024
5.2.2
DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit
DNA extraction using QIAamp®, DNeasy® Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany)
was performed using the method for Gram-negative bacteria. 180 µl ALT Buffer was added
to the bacteria pellet and vortexed. 20 µl proteinase K was added and vortexed. The
substrate was incubated at 56℃for 60 minutes while shaking. Afterward, the substrate was
vortexed for 15 seconds, and 200 µl Buffer AL was added and mixed by vortexing. 200 µl of
Ethanol (96-98%) was added, followed by vortexing. The substrate was transferred to the
DNeasy-column in a 2 ml collection tube and then centrifuged for 1 min at 10.000 rpm. The
DNeasy-column was placed in a new 2ml collection tube, whereas the old one was discarded.
500 µl of Buffer AW1 was added to the DNeasy-column and centrifuged for one minute at
10.000 rpm. The DNeasy-column was placed in a new 2 ml collection tube, whereas the old
one was discarded. 500 µl of Buffer AW2 was added to the DNeasy-column and centrifuged
for three minutes at 14.000 rpm. The DNeasy-column was placed in a 1,5 ml Eppendorf tube
and 100 µl of Buffer AE was added. Then, it was centrifuged for two minutes at 10.000 rpm.
The eluted DNA was stored at −20℃until qPCR was run. For each DNA extraction, a
Process control was made to control the extraction.
5.2.3
Cell lysis
The DNA was extracted using cell lysis by adding 200 µl of 10X TE buffer to the bacteria
pellet and then mixed thoroughly by vortexing. The mixture was incubated at 100℃for 10
minutes. A rack was placed on top of the tubes to prevent the lid from opening. Afterward,
the mixture was centrifuged at 10.000 rpm for five minutes. The supernatant was transferred
to the new Eppendorf tube and stored at −20℃until qPCR was run. A Process Control was
made to control the cell lysis.
5.3
PMA-qPCR
5.3.1
PMA treatment
20 mM PMA was dissolved in sterile distilled water to reach a concentration of 200 µM
PMA. Of this was 100 µl added to 900 µl from a sample for PMA treatment. The final
concentration of PMA was 20 µM. The samples were then incubated on a shaker for 5 min
in the dark. After incubation, the samples were placed in an LED-active blue machine (IB,
Applied Science) for 15 minutes and shaken by hand every 5 minutes. The samples were then
centrifuged at 7,500xg for 7 min. The supernatant was removed, and the pellet was kept on
−20℃until DNA extraction.
The samples without PMA treatment got the same amount of saline and were given the same
treatment as the PMA-treated samples.
12 of 50
==PAGE:21==
5th February 2024
5.3.2
qPCR setup
A multiplex TaqMan qPCR with two probes was used: a Campy IAC probe and a Campy-
locked nucleic acid (Campy LNA) probe. Table 1 illustrates the specific primers and probes
used for the qPCR reaction in this study. The primers(TAG Copenhage A/S, Denmark)
were diluted with water to achieve the right concentration, whereas the Campy LNA and the
Campy IAC probes were diluted with TE buffer. The primers and Campy IAC probe were
chosen based on Josefsen et al. (2004, [34]). The Campy LNA probes were chosen based on
Josefsen et al. (2010, [17]).
Table 1: The different primers and probes used in this study.
Prime/probe
Name (ID)
Sequence
Forward primer
OT-1559
5’-CTG CTT AAC ACA AGT TGA GTA GG-3’
Reverse Primer
18-1
5’-TTC CTT AGG TAC CGT CAG AA-3’
Probe
Campy LNA
5’-[6FAM]CA[+T]CC[+T]CCACGC-CGC[+T]
TGC[BHQ1]
Probe
Campy IAC
5’-[HEX]TTCATGAGGACACCTGACTTG
[BHQ1]
Primer
Campy IAC
5’-CTG CTT AAC ACA AGT TGA GTA GGC
AAC TCA GGT GCT CTC AGT AAT T..G AA-3’
(a) The three primers were produced and purchased from TAG Copenhagen A/S, Denmark. The two probes were produced and
purchased from Merck Life Science A/S, Denmark. The forward, reverse primer, and Campy IAC probe were selected based on
the study Josefsen et al. (2004, [34]. The Campy LNA probe was selected based on the study Josefsen et al. (2010,[17]
The qPCR was performed with a reaction volume of 25 µl. Table 2 indicates the different
reactions used per. sample for in the qPCR. The following controls were used for the standard
curve and the DNA extraction experiment: Three positive controls (PC) (C. jejuni in dilution
(1:10, 1:100, and 1:1000), one negative control (NC) (E. coli in dilution 1:100) and two NTC
(Non-template control). In the experiment with cleaning products, the following controls were
used: One PC (A sample from the standard curve), one NC (E. coli in dilution 1:100), two
NTC, one heat-treated C. jejuni sample with PMA and one heat-treated C. jejuni without
PMA both in a 107 CFU/ml concentration.
13 of 50
==PAGE:22==
5th February 2024
Table 2: The volume of the different reactions used in the qPCR
Reaction
Final concentration
Volume (µl)
in qPCR solution
per sample
H2O
2.22
PCR buffer for Tth DNA polymerase
10x conc.
2.50
MgCl2
25 mM
2.50
Glycerol
2.00
dNTP Mix with dUTP
12.5mM
1.20
Forward primer OT-1559
10 pmol/µl
1.25
Reverse primer 18-1
10 pmol/µl
1.25
Campy LNA probe
5 pmol/µl
0.38
Campy IAC probe
6 pmol/µl
0.25
Boivine serum albumin (BSA)
0.25
Tht enzyme (polymerase)
12.2 U/mol
0.20
Sum (Without CAmpy IAC)
14.00
Campy IAC
10-9 pmol/µl
1.00
Sum (With Campy IAC)
15.00
DNA template
10.00
Total
25.00
The mastermix was prepared by adding the different reactions to an Eppendorf tube and
mixed by vortexing. 15 µl of the Mastermix was added to a 96 PCR well plate, followed by
10 µl of the DNA template. The PCR well was closed using an Optical Adhesive Covers
(Applied Biosystems, Life technologies, Singapore) and then centrifuged for two minutes at
14.000g. Afterward, the qPCR reaction was run as follows: An initiation of 3 minutes at 95℃
followed by 40 cycles with 15 seconds at 95℃then 60 seconds at 60℃and the last 30 seconds
at 72℃. The Ct were collected at 60℃. The machine used for qPCR was QuantStudio 5
from Applied Biosystems (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA).
5.4
Discrimination of viable and heat-inactivated cells using the
PMA-qPCR methods
The PMA-qPCR ability to discriminate between viable and heat-inactivated cells was tested
on C. jejuni cells. The inspiration for the experiment was found in Josefsen et al. (2010,[17])).
An illustration of the procedure was found in figure 4, followed by a description below.
A standardized cell culture of C. jejuni at a 1.0 × 109 CFU/ml was created, as demonstrated
in section 5.1.1. A 10-fold dilution series ranging from 101 to 107 CFU/ml was created by
mixing one ml of bacteria culture and 9 ml of saline. For enumeration of the stock solution,
100 µl of dilution 102 to 104 CFU/ml was spread onto a BA plate and incubated at 41.5℃
14 of 50
==PAGE:23==
5th February 2024
under microaerobic conditions for 24 hours.
Figure 4: Illustration of the procedure for discriminating viable and heat-inactivated cells using the PMA-
qPCR method.
5.4.1
Heat-treated cell control
1800 µl of each dilution (101 to 107 CFU/ml) of C. jejuni was heat-inactivated at 90℃for 15
minutes. Afterward, 900 µl of each sample was added to two Eppendorf tubes. One tube was
treated with PMA, whereas the other was treated with saline. The treatment is described in
section 5.3.1. The DNA from both samples with and without PMA sample treatment was
extracted using the Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (described in section 5.2.1). The extracted DNA
was subsequently analyzed by qPCR as described in section 5.3.2. The obtained Ct values
from the qPCR reaction were plotted in an amplification plot to evaluate PMA influence on
the heat-treated C. jejuni cells.
To control that the heat-inactivation affected the bacteria, 100 µl of the samples from the
dilutions 102 and 104 CFU/ml were spread onto a mCCDA plate and incubated at 41.5℃
under microaerobic condition for 24 hours.
15 of 50
==PAGE:24==
5th February 2024
5.4.2
Standard curve over viable cells
From each stock dilution (101 to 107 CFU/ml), 900 µl was transferred into two Eppendorf
tubes. One of the tubes was treated with PMA, whereas the other was treated with saline.
The treatment is described in section 5.3.1. The DNA from both samples with and without
PMA sample treatment was extracted using the Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (described in
section 5.2.1). The extracted DNA was subsequently analyzed by qPCR as described in
section 5.3.2. The obtained Ct values from the qPCR reaction were plotted in an amplification
plot to evaluate PMA influence on the viable C. jejuni cells.
For enumeration of the stock solution, 100 µl of dilution 104 to 102 CFU/ml was spread onto
a mCCDA plate and incubated at 41.5℃under microaerobic condition for 48 hours.
The Ct values of the different dilutions with PMA treatment were plotted against their
respective Log(CFU/ml), calculated from the plates. A linear regression was performed
to convert Ct values from future samples into corresponding concentrations. The limit of
quantification (LOQ) was estimated from the standard curve.
Using the slope of the equation, the qPCR reaction efficiency was calculated using the
following equation:
E = 10(−1/slope) −1
(1)
An efficiency between 90-100% was accepted. The coefficient of determination, R2, was
accepted if R2 was ≥0.98. A lower R2 value may risk that the results are not reliable.
5.5
Discrimination of viable and heat-inactivated cells using
LIVE/DEAD BacLight
The experiment with LIVE/DEAD BacLight was generated to investigate if the methods
could discriminate between viable and heat-inactivated C. jejuni cells.
A stock solution of C. jejuni was created by following the instructions in section 5.1.1. For
the experiment C. jejuni was in a 109 CFU/ml concentration.
One ml of C. jejuni in a 109 CFU/ml concentration was added to two tubes.
One of
the tubes was heat-inactivated at 90℃for 15 minutes. 300 µl of the heat-inactivated cell and
300 µl of the viable cells were mixed by vortexing(Called mix). A dilution series range from
105 to 108 CFU/ml was created from viable, heat-inactivated, and mix cells by adding 900 µl
of saline and 100 µl of the bacteria suspension. 100 µl from each bacteria suspension mixture
was added to separated wells in a 96-well flat-bottom microplate. This was done in triplicates.
How they were placed was illustrated in figure 5
A solution of SYTO9 and PI was created in a ratio of 1:2 (10µl of SYTO9 : 20µl of
PI) in 5 ml of filter-sterilized dH2O and vortexed. 100 µl of the stain solution was added to
16 of 50
==PAGE:25==
5th February 2024
each well and thoroughly mixed by pipetting up and down several times.
A PC was created by adding 100 µl of C. jejuni in a 10 9 CFU/ml concentration in a
well. Three µl of SYTO9 dye was mixed with 500 µl of filter-sterilized dH2O. 100 µl of the
dye was added to the well and thoroughly mixed by pipetting up and down several times.
A NC was created by adding 100 µl of C. jejuni in a 10 9 CFU/ml concentration in a
well. Three µl of PI dye was mixed with 500 µl of filter-sterilized dH2O. 100 µl of the dye
was added to the well and thoroughly mixed by pipetting up and down several times.
Five None-dye-control was created by adding 200 µl of C. jejuni in different dilutions
in each well. The dilution ranged was from 5 to 9 CFU/ml.
The 96-well was incubated at room temperature in the dark for 15 min and placed in Im-
ageXpress Micro Confocal (Molecular Devices, California, United States) to measure the
fluorescence intensity.
Figure 5: The setup of each sample in the 96-well. Each color represents a sample of C. jejuni. Viable
in green, Heat-inactivated in red, Mix in pink, control in yellow and None-dye-control in blue. NDC =
None-dye-control. All of the test was done in triplicates.
5.6
Cleaning agents effect on C. jejuni
The experiment with cleaning agents had three phases.
First, a pilot experiment to investigate the cleaning agent effect on C. jejuni using the
17 of 50
==PAGE:26==
5th February 2024
PMA-qPCR methods as a detecting method. Secondly, a washing experiment to investigate if
the neutralization buffer and wash with saline affected the test material. Third, C. jejuni was
exposed to different concentrations of the cleaning agent under different conditions over time.
Due to the limited time, the experiment was only done on the cleaning product Kombinon
Special.
5.6.1
Neutralization buffer
The neutralization buffer (NB) was prepared according to the Dansk standard DS/EN
14349:2012, [35]. NB was used to stop the reaction between Campylobacter and the cleaning
product. It was assumed that the reaction was stopped when the NB was added. The NB was
prepared by dissolving 3g/l of Lecithin, 30g/l of Tween80, 5g/l of sodium thiosulphate, 1 g/l
of L-histidine and 30 g/l of Saponine in 0.9% w/v NaCl. The solution was mixed thoroughly
and then autoclaved at 121℃for 15 minutes. Afterward, it was stored at 4℃until used.
5.6.2
Chicken Juice
The chicken juice was produced and used to simulate a "dirty" environment on the farm. A
"dirty" environment with remains of organic material may affect the survival mechanism of
the bacteria. Chicken juice was prepared according to the method used in Birk et al. (2004,
[36].)
The chicken juice was prepared overnight by thawing commercial frozen chicken legs at room
temperature. The thawing chicken juice (almost 50 ml) was collected and mixed before
storage at −80℃overnight. The frozen chicken juice was then thawed at 4℃overnight. The
chicken juice was centrifuged at 10.000 rpm for 10 minutes to remove large particles. The
supernatant was transferred to a new tube and then sterilized using a 0.45-µm filter. The
sterilized chicken juice was stored at −20℃until used. When used, the chicken juice was
thawed at room temperature, and the OD was measured.
5.6.3
Phase 1: Pilot experiment with Kombinon Special
The pilot experiment with Kombinon Special and C. jejuni was performed as a single biologi-
cal trial, but duplicates were made for the qPCR reaction. Two concentrations of Kombinon
Special were tested: 0.5% and 2%. Samples were collected after 0, 5, 20, and 60 minutes of
reaction time. A control with the same amount of saline was generated for both concentrations.
The overall experiment ran as illustrated in figure 6, while a more elaborate description was
made below.
A stock solution of C. jejuni was created by following the instructions in section 5.1.1. The
start concentration of C. jejuni was in a 107 CFU/ml. For enumeration of the stock solution,
100µl of dilution 104 to 102 CFU/ml was spread onto a BA plate and incubated at 41.5℃
18 of 50
==PAGE:27==
5th February 2024
under microaerobic condition for 24 hours.
The experiment started by adding 200 µl or 50 µl of Kombinon Special to 9.8 ml or 9.95 ml of
C. jejuni, to achieve a concentration of either 2% or 0.5% of kombinon Special. The mixture
was then vortex. At a specific time, two ml of the sample was collected and added to 2 ml of
the NB. The mixture was then centrifuged at 7.500xg for seven min, and the supernatant
was removed. One ml of saline was then added to the tube and centrifuged at 7.500xg for
seven min. Afterward, the supernatant was removed, and 2.5 ml of saline was added to the
tube. The 2,5 ml was referred to as the final sample. 900 µl of the final sample was added
to two Eppendorf tubes: one for PMA treatment and one without PMA treatment. The
PMA treatment was made as described in section 5.3.1. The DNA from both samples with
and without PMA sample treatment was extracted using the Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit, as
demonstrated in section 5.2.1, followed by qPCR analysis, as described in section 5.3.2. To
emulate the culturable cells, 100µl of the mixture was plated onto a BA plate and incubated
at 41℃under microaerobic conditions for 24 hours.
Figure 6: Illustration over the washing test. The number indicates the different steps in the experiment.
1) Add the right amount of the bacteria mixture in a tube. 2) Add the cleaning productto reach the right
concentration. 3) Take two ml of the mixture out and add it to the NB. 4) Centrifuge 5) Remove supernatant
6) Add saline 7) Centrifuge 8) Remove supernatant 9) Add 2.5 ml saline 10) Transfer 900 µl to two tubes,
and 100 µl for plating. How the different settings for the centrifuge and amount of saline are described in
sections 5.6.3 and 5.6.4.
19 of 50
==PAGE:28==
5th February 2024
5.6.4
Phase 2: Instigation of the Washing step
Five washing experiments were created to determine the effect of the NB and washing step
with saline on C. jejuni.
A stock solution of C. jejuni was created by following the instructions in section 5.1.1. For
the experiment C. jejuni was in a 107 CFU/ml concentration. For enumeration of the stock
solution, 100µl of dilution 104 to 102 CFU/ml was spread onto a mCCDA plate and incubated
at 41.5℃under microaerobic condition for 48 hours.
The experiment was run at timepoint zero, i.e., the sample was collected right after Kombinon
Special was added. The cleaning agent Kombinon Special with a 2% concentration was used.
A control with the same amount of saline was also run for all 5 experiments. The overall
approach is the same as in phase 1 (section 5.6.3) and was illustrated in figure 6. The different
settings for the centrifuge and amount of saline for the five variations were shown in table 3.
Table 3: The amount of NB and saline together with the time and centrifugation used in the five different
experiments
NB
(mL)
Time and centri-
fugation with NB
Number of washes
with saline
saline
(mL)
Time and centri-
fugation with saline
W1
2
7 min. at 7500g
1
1
7 min. at 7500g
W2
4
7 min. at 7500g
1
1
7 min. at 7500g
W3
2
7 min. at 7500g
2
1
3 min. at 7500g
W4
2
7 min. at 7500g
3
1
3 min. at 7500g
W5
2
7 min. at 7500g
1
2
7 min. at 7500g
5.6.5
Phase 3: Testing Kombinon Special effect on C. jejuni under different
conditions
C. jejuni were exposed to two different growth conditions. One "clean" (saline and C. jejuni),
and one "dirty" (saline, C. jejuni and 5% chicken juice). Afterwards was C. jejuni(in the
two conditions) exposed to three concentration of Kombinon Special (0.1%, 2% and 10%).
This was done to investigate the chicken juice effect on C. jejuni growth when exposed to a
cleaning agent. For each condition, a control was created, meaning four samples from each
concentration were created: The four samples were: Clean control, Dirty control, Clean and
Dirty. The sample conditions are described in table 4. Samples were collected after 0 min, 5
min, 20 min, 1 hour, and 24 hours of reaction time. The cleaning product was prepared by
mixing it with saline to achieve the right concentration. An illustration of the experiment
was found in figure 7, while a description in more detail can be found below.
20 of 50
==PAGE:29==
5th February 2024
Table 4: The four conditions used in the experiment with cleaning products
Clean control
C. jejuni in saline
Dirty Control
C. jejuni in saline + 5% Chicken juice
Clean
C. jejuni in cleaning product
Dirty
C. jejuni in cleaning product + 5% Chicken juice
A stock solution of C. jejuni was created by following the instructions in section 5.1.1. The
start concentration of C. jejuni was at 108 CFU/ml.
9,5 ml of C. jejuni in a 108 CFU/ml concentration was added to four tubes. For the Dirty
control and Dirty, 500 µl of chicken juice was added to the tubes to reach a 5% chicken juice
concentration, whereas for the Clean control and Clean, 500 µl saline was added. Afterward,
five ml from each tube was added to four new tubes. Five ml of Cleaning product was added
to reach a 1:1 ratio between the bacteria substrate and the test subject in the Clean and
Dirty tubes. In the two controls, 5 ml of Saline was added. The reaction started when the
bacteria and test subjects were mixed and vortexed for 15 seconds. At different time points,
a sample of two ml was taken from the mixture. The sample was added to two ml of NB and
vortex for 15 seconds. The mixture was then centrifuged at 7500g for seven minutes, and the
supernatant was removed. One ml of saline was added to the tube. The sample was vortexed
for 15 seconds and centrifuged at 7500g for seven minutes.
Afterward, the supernatant was removed, and 2.5 ml of saline was added to the tube and
then vortexed for 15 sec. 2.5 ml of bacteria substrate was referred to as the final sample. 900
µl of the final sample was added to two Eppendorf tubes: one for PMA treatment and one
without PMA treatment(saline). The treatment was made as described in section 5.3.1. The
DNA from both with and without PMA sample treatment was extracted using the Fast DNA
Stool Mini Kit, as demonstrated in section 5.2.1, followed by qPCR analysis demonstrated in
section 5.3.2.
For cell count, 100 µl of the sample was plated onto a BA plate and incubated at 41℃under
microaerobic conditions for 24 hours.
21 of 50
==PAGE:30==
5th February 2024
Figure 7: Illustrating over the experiment in phase 3. The number indicates the different steps in the
experiment. Four tubes with C. jejuni in a 108 CFU/ml concentration where created. 1) Transfer 9.5 ml
of the bacteria substrate to a tube. 2) 500 µl of saline was added to two tubes, while the other two got 500
µl of chicken juice. 3) 5 ml from each tube was transferred to a tube. 4) The two controls got saline, while
the test got a specific amount of cleaning product to reach the right concentration. 5) Transfer two ml of
the sample to two ml of NB. 6) Centrifuge 7) Remove supernatant 8) add one ml saline. 9)Centrifuge 10)
Remove supernatant 11) add 2.5 ml saline. 10) Transfer 900 µl to two tubes and 100 µl for plating.
5.7
Data analyses
All plating was done in triplicates. The colonies were counted and converted to CFU/ml.
Colonies on plates with less than 300 colonies were used to calculate CFU/ml. The qPCR
analysis of each sample was performed in duplicate, except for the experiment where the
DNA methods were tested. They were done as a single trial.
The Ct values from the qPCR reaction were analyzed using Design & Analysis 2.7.0 Real-Time
PCR system from applied biosystems (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All quantitative data were
generated in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet.
dCt was calculated by subtracting the samples with PMA from those without PMA. This
was done on both viable and heat-treated cells from the standard curve. dCt was used to
determine PMA’s ability to inhibit the dead cells’ DNA amplification. According to the
product information about PMA ([19]), should the dCt for the viable cells be close to 0
(+/ −1), whereas for the heat-inactivated, was dCt > 4.
The percentage of viable cells on an unknown sample were calculated using the following
22 of 50
==PAGE:31==
5th February 2024
equation:
dCt = Ct8 = Ctsample,with PMA −Ctsample,without PMA
Fold reduction = 2dCt
%Viability =
100
Fold reduction
The threshold in the experiment with the cleaning product was set according to the Ct value
from the standard curve, which was used as a PC. This was done to ensure the Ct value from
the standard curve always had the same value in all experiments. The Ct from each sample
was converted to CFU/ml using the linear regression from the standard curve. To compare
the enumerated CFU/ml with the CFU/ml from the qPCR results, they were both converted
to Log(CFU/ml).
If no signal was given from a sample above the threshold, the Ct was not detectable and
was marked as Undetermined or UND. UND indicates that C. jejuni was not present in
a high enough amount or not present at all. The Ct of the IAC signal from each sample
was checked every time to ensure the qPCR reaction was run properly. The qPCR was run
again if the Ct value was not detectable for the IAC signal. The VBNC cells were calculated
by subtracting the enumerated Log(CFU/ml) from the PMA-treated Log(CFU/ml). The
percentage different was calculated to compare two samples using the following equation:
Percentage different = ABS
reference-sample
reference × 100

6
Results
6.1
Comparison of DNA extraction methods
The three DNA extraction methods were tested using two different concentrations of C.
jejuni, 107 and 106 CFU/ml. The test was performed on viable and heat-inactivated (dead)
cells with and without PMA treatment. The Ct values from the qPCR reaction was shown
in table 5. If the Ct value was undetermined, it was indicated with UND. All samples were
tested in the same qPCR run.
The FAST DNA Stool Mini Kit was the only one made in biological duplicates, meaning the
Ct values in table 5 are the average of the two replications. The two individual results are in
the appendix 1.
The IAC signal was apparent in all samples, which indicates that the qPCR reaction ran as
expected. The results are not shown.
23 of 50
==PAGE:32==
5th February 2024
Table 5: The Ct values obtained by the qPCR reaction from the three DNA extraction methods.
DNA extraction
method
Initial
CFU/ml
Viable cells
Dead cells
- PMA
+ PMA
- PMA
+ PMA
FAST DNA
Stool Mini Kit
107
16.3
17.9
21.3
UND
106
20.1
21.3
24.3
UND
DNeasy Blood
& Tissues Kit
107
UND
15.9
13.7
26.4
106
17.1
18.3
17.0
UND
Cell lysis
107
UND
UND
UND
38,64
106
UND
UND
UND
UND
(a) UND means the Ct was Undetermined. "- PMA" indicates samples without PMA treatment, and "+ PMA" indicates
samples with PMA treatment.
6.2
Evaluation of PMA-qPCR discrimination of viable and heat-
inactivated C. jejuni cells
The influence of PMA on cells with compromised membranes was investigated on a 10-
fold dilution series of C. jejuni ((101 to 107 CFU/ml). The cells were divided into four
groups: [Viable +PMA], [Viable -PMA], [Dead +PMA] and [Dead -PMA]. The cells were
heat-inactivated by incubation for 15 minutes at 90℃. Two samples, 102 and 104 CFU/ml,
were plated to check if the heat-inactivating worked. None of C. jejuni grew on any of the
plates, which indicated that the heat-inactivation worked in preventing colony growth. The
plates are not shown in this study. Figure 8 and 9 illustrated the amplification plot over the
obtained FAM signal by the qPCR reaction from the chosen standard curve. The standard
curve is chosen based on the description below (section 6.3). The samples with(red) and
without(blue) PMA sample treatment were shown in the duplicates from the qPCR reaction.
Only the dilution in 105, 106 and 107 CFU/ml gave a detectable Ct value for the dead cells,
whereas the viable cells gave detectable Ct value from 104 to 107 CFU/ml. No signal was
obtained from the qPCR reaction for the dead PMA-treated samples.
All samples obtained a detectable signal from the IAC signal, indicating that the qPCR
reaction proceeded flawlessly. A graph of all IAC signals from each sample is shown in
appendix 2.
24 of 50
==PAGE:33==
5th February 2024
Figure 8: Amplification plot over FAM signal obtained by the qPCR reaction from heat-treated C. jejuni
cells in a 10-fold dilution (101 to 107 CFU/ml) with(red) and without(blue) PMA sample treatment.
Figure 9: Amplication plot over FAM signal obtained by the qPCR reaction from the viable C. jejuni cells in
a 10-fold dilution (101 to 107 CFU/ml) with(red) and without(blue) PMA sample treatment.
The dCt was used to determine whether PMA adequately inhibited the amplification of the
25 of 50
==PAGE:34==
5th February 2024
Table 6: The obtained Ct values from both samples with and without PMA, together with the calculated dCt
CFU/ml
Ct
(-PMA)
Ct
(+ PMA)
dCt
107
14.9
15.3
0.3
106
16.8
19.9
3.0
105
21.8
21.0
-0.8
104
24.4
26.5
2.2
dead cells. A dCT close to 0 (+/ −1) for the live cells indicates that the PMA treatment
was not affecting the viable cells. Two of the dCT values were close to 0, where two of them
are above (tabel 6).
6.3
Standard curve over the viable PMA treated cell
The standard curve was produced over the obtained Ct value from the viable PMA-treated
C. jejuni cells in a 10-fold dilution series (101 to 107CFU/ml). They were plotted against
the calculated Log(CFU/ml) and were illustrated in figure 10. Log(CFU/ml) was calculated
using the plated C. jejuni in a 10-fold dilution series from 102 to 104 CFU/ml. The counted
colonies from the plating were converted to Log(CFU/ml).
The efficiency of the qPCR reaction was found to be 93.2 %. The LOQ for the standard curve
was estimated to 104 CFU/ml. The samples were run through qPCR reaction three times
to evaluate the efficiency and R2 value. The two other standard curves were illustrated in
appendix 3, and their efficiency was calculated to A = 88.36% and B = 84.18%, respectively.
None of the standard curves R2 value was above the acceptable value.
Therefore, the
standard curve was based on the calculated efficiency. From the chosen standard curve, the
concentration of C. jejuni was expressed by the equation:
Log(CFU/ml) = (Ct −34, 278)/(−3, 491)
.
26 of 50
==PAGE:35==
5th February 2024
Figure 10: Standardcurve over the viable PMA treated C. jejuni cells. The ct value obtained from the qPCR
reaction was plotted against the initial Log(CFU/ml).
6.4
Evaluation of LIVE/DEAD BacLight Discrimination of viable
and heat-inactivated C. jejuni cells
The LIVE/DEAD BacLight methods tested on C. jejuni in a 10-fold dilution serie ranged
from 105 to 109 CFU/ml. The cells were divided into three groups: [viable], [Dead], and
[Mix(50:50 of viable:dead)]. Three controls were constructed (PC, NC, and none-dye-control)
in a 109 CFU/ml concentration. Five none-dye-controls were also constructed in a 10-fold
dilution series ( 105 to 109 CFU/ml). The none-dye-controls were created to investigate if
C. jejuni were detectable without the stains. The position of the samples was illustrated in
figure 5. The fluorescence intensity of the green dye was high in the PC when the green dye
was detected only (figure 11a). For the NC the fluorescence intensity was slightly lower for
the red dye, as shown in figure 11b. No signal for either the green or red light was obtained
when the concentration of C. jejuni was lower than 109 CFU/ml. In the combination of the
two dyes, no clear signal was obtained for any of the samples (figure 11c).
27 of 50
==PAGE:36==
5th February 2024
(a) Emission of SYTO9 (green dye)
(b) Emission of PI(red dye)
(c) Emission from both SYTO9 and PI
Figure 11: Figures a and b illustrate the emission of the two stain individuals, while figure c illustrates the
emission of both stains. All samples were done in triplicate.
6.5
Effect of cleaning agents on C. jejuni
The experiment was constructed to investigate what effect the cleaning product has on the
status of C. jejuni(alive, dead, or VBNC). The experiment was divided into three phases to
easier follow the process of the experiment with the cleaning agents. All experiments were
run as a single biological trial but with duplicates in the qPCR reaction. Two things were
assumed through the experiment. First, the experiment started when the cleaning product
and C. jejuni got mixed. Second, the reaction stopped when the test substance came in
contact with the NB.
6.5.1
Phase 1: Pilot experiment with Kombinon Special
The experiment was generated to investigate the cleaning agent, Kombinon Special, effect on
C. jejuni different states (live, dead and VBNC) Figure 12 illustrates the results obtained
from the qPCR reaction over the pilot experiment. The Log(CFU/ml) was plotted against
the time in minutes. The culturable cells (grey) represent the alive and culturable cells.
Without PMA (blue) represents everything in the samples, while with PMA (red) represents
only the viable cells. The Log(CFU/ml) for the culturable cells was calculated based on the
detected colonies on the plate, while the Log(CFU/ml) from the samples with and without
the PMA sample treatment was calculated from the Ct value obtained in the qPCR reaction.
28 of 50
==PAGE:37==
5th February 2024
All of the plated controls gave detectable colonies. No colonies were formed, when C. jejuni
were exposed to 2% Kombinon Special, which indicated that all of the cells were in the VBNC
state. There were no detectable colonies at time zero when C. jejuni were exposed to 0.5%
Kombinon Special, but colonies were detected the rest of the time.
Figure 12a and 12b over the two controls illustrated that the Log(CFU/ml) for the culturable
cells was around 40% higher than the Log(CFU/ml) obtained from the samples without
PMA. Besides that does the results indicate for all three groups (culturable, with PMA and
without PMA) no major variation over time, meaning the graph shows almost a straight line.
When c. jejuni was exposed to Kombinon Special an instant decrease occurred in the number
of viable C. jejuni cells for both concentration (figure 12c and 12d). At time zero, the 0.5%
decreases around 25 %, whereas the 2% decreases around 36%. After five minutes, a further
reduction in the viable cells happened, but after this time-point, it looked like it flattened
out, possibly with a small increase in the number of viable cells over time.
(a) Control (0.5% Kombinon Special)
(b) Control (2% Kombinon Special)
(c) 0.5% Kombinon Special
(d) 2% Kombinon Special
Figure 12: The four graphs (Controls: a+b and test: c+d) illustrates the calculated Log(CFU/ml) from the
pilot experiment over time in minutes. The culturable cell (grey) are determined using the plated assays. The
Log(CFU/ml) over each sample with (red) and without(Blue) PMA sample treatment were obtained from the
Ct value found using the qPCR reaction.
29 of 50
==PAGE:38==
5th February 2024
6.5.2
Phase 2: Effect of washing step on the test procedure
Table 7: The percentage of vi-
ability of C. jejuni over the test
and control from the five washing
test
Test
Control
W1
30.2%
79.5%
W2
7.1%
85.6%
W3
17.2%
92.4%
W4
20.1%
66.9%
W5
20.3%
88.2%
W1 (table 3) was used as the reference washing test since
that procedure was used in phase 1. The tests were compared
individually between the samples with PMA and without PMA
and compared to the reference. Both control and test for each
experiment were used to investigate the influence of the washing
step. The mixture of C. jejuni and Kombinon Special is referred
to as "test."
Colonies were formed on all the controls, but none was formed
from the test. The results is not shown. Figure 13b illustrate the
samples with and without PMA for the five controls. Control
from W4 gave the highest percentage different at around 14%
between the samples with PMA and without PMA (table 8a). The percentage of the viability
of C. jejuni cells of the other four controls was around 79-88% (table 7).
(a) 2% Kombinon Special.
(b) Control
Figure 13: Estimated Log(CFU/ml) after treatment of C. jejuni with 0.5% Kombinon Special. Both the five
controls (a) and the five test (b) were presented as the PMA treated (red) and without PMA treatment (Blue)
from each sample.
The estimated Log(CFU/ml) of the test were illustrated in figure 13a. W5 gave the highest
amount of Log(CFU/ml) for both the sample with and without PMA. The biggest reduction
between a test own with and without PMA sample was found in W2 with a percentage
difference at 70.8%. The highest percentage of the viability was found in W1 (table 7). The
smallest difference was found between W5 and W1, with a percentage different at only 0.3 %.
30 of 50
==PAGE:39==
5th February 2024
Table 8: The absolute percentage difference over the five washing tests, both control and test.
Percentage difference
Control
Test
Between
each test’s own
+PMA and -PMA
Between W1
and each test
(+PMA)
Between
each test’s own
+PMA and -PMA
Between W1
and each test
(+PMA)
W1
7.9 %
–
35.1 %
–
W2
5.3 %
4.6 %
70.8 %
50.6 %
W3
2.8 %
9.6 %
49.6 %
19.2 %
W4
14.7 %
12.08 %
44.5 %
9.5 %
W5
4.0 %
12.07 %
42 %
0.3 %
(a) The test is indicated as the mixture of C. jejuni and 2% Kombinon Special. Columns 2 and 4 [Between W1 and each test
(+PMA)] indicate the absolute percentage difference between each test’s PMA-treated and untreated samples. Columns 3 and 5
[Between each test’s own +PMA and-PMA] indicate the absolute percentage difference between the reference (W1) and the rest
of the test for the PMA-treated samples
6.5.3
Phase 3: Experiment with cleaning product under different conditions
and concentrations over time
Two different condition were tested: One without chicken juice and one with chicken juice.
Each test had one control and one test. Table 4 describes the two condition with its individ-
ual control and test. The name of each condition will be used as reference to that specific
condition, such as "Clean control" referring to the substrate with "C. jejuni and saline". The
pH were taking for each concentration of Kombinon Special and gave the following results:
10 (0.1%), 12 (2%) and 13 (10%)
For each experiment, all conditions were plated. Colonies were formed on both controls,
which indicated that all viable cells were culturable. The results were not shown because
they were plated in a to high solution to count. For Clean and Dirty was colonies form
at a concentration of 0.1 %, Kombinon Special. Figure 15a and 15b illustrates that when
exposing C. jejuni to 0.1 % Kombinon Special more culturable cells were observed in Dirty
then in Clean. The Log(CFU/ml) at time-point zero was around 7 for Dirty, whereas for
Clean it were calculated to 4.3 Log(CFU/ml). After 24 hours, none of the C. jejuni cells
were culturable in Clean, whereas Dirty still got 2.5 Log(CFU/ml). No colonies were formed
in Clean or Dirty after increasing the concentration of Kombinon Special to 2% and 10%.
31 of 50
==PAGE:40==
5th February 2024
(a) Clean control (Mean)
(b) Dirty control (Mean)
Figure 14: The mean of the two different control conditions, Clean control, and dirty control. Their respective
Log(CFU/ml) was plotted against the time in minutes. The individual results were shown in appendix 4. Both
graphs present the results with PMA(red) and without PMA(Blue).
Three replicates were constructed for Clean control and Dirty control, respectively. The mean
from each was illustrated in figure 14. The individual results were shown in appendix 4.
The difference between the samples with PMA(red) and without PMA(blue) was larger for
the Clean control than the Dirty control, as shown in 14a and 14b. The percentage of viable
cells was calculated from each time point of both controls, shown in 9. The overall percentage
of viable cells was higher for Dirty control than Clean, where Dirty control varied from
88-96%, while Clean varied from 75-88%.
Table 9: The calculated percentage of viable cells for the Clean control and Dirty control.
Time
(Minutes)
Clean Control
Dirty Control
0
75.9%
91.9%
5
79.9%
96.3%
20
76.4%
88.2%
60
88,1%
94.0%
1440
87,3%
90.9%
While being in the two conditions was C. jejuni exposed to three different concentrations of
Kombinon Special (0.1%, 2%, and 10%). All of the samples without PMA obtained a Ct
value from the qPCR reaction (figure 15), whereas only Dirty at 0.1% and both Clean and
Dirty at 10% obtained a valuable Ct value from the qPCR after PMA-treatment (figure 15b,
15e and 15f).
32 of 50
==PAGE:41==
5th February 2024
Table 10: The percentage of the viability of C. jejuni in Clean and Dirt for the three concentration of
Kombinon Special.
Clean
Dirty
Time
(Minutes)
Concentration of
Kombinon Special
0.1%
2%
10%
0.1%
2%
10%
0
67.5%
-
9.6%
88.6%
18.1%
34.3%
5
32.1%
9.0%
37.1%
96.1%
18.2%
46.8%
20
-
9.5%
20.5%
89.8%
47.1%
45.0%
60
-
-
32.3%
95.9%
-
37.6%
1440
-
11.7%
57.3%
28.8%
-
47.8%
(a) "-" indicate that it was not possible to calculate the percentage of the viability.
To quantify the viability of C. jejuni in each sample the percentage of the viable cell, were
calculated for both Clean and Dirty in all three concentration (Table 10). The viability for
C. jejuni was general higher in Dirty then in Clean for all three concentration.
In a 0.1% concentration of Kombinon Special more viable C. jejuni cells more viable were
obtained in Dirty compared to Clean. At time-point zero a 4.2 Log(CFU/ml) were calcu-
lated from the sample with PMA in the Clean, whereas the Dirty were calculated to 5.3
Log(CFU/ml). After five minutes there was a reduction of the viable cells by half in the
Clean, while the Dirty still showed a viability at 96.1%. Between 1 hour and 24 hours, there
was a reduction in the viability of the cell from 95.9% to 28.8% in the Dirty.
As mentioned above was no colonies formed when increasing the concentration of Kombinon
Special to 2% and 10%. It was therefor assumed that all of the viable cells obtained from the
samples with PMA were in a VBNC state. After exposing C. jejuni for a 10% concentration
of Kombinon Special there were still 3.3 Log(CFU/ml) viable cells obtained in the Dirty after
24 hours. The clean indicated that between 1 hour and 24 hours of exposing C. jejuni to
10% Kombinon Special the viable cells increased from 3.1 Log(CFU/ml) to 4.3 Log(CFU/ml).
Beside the value obtained after 24 hours, was the the viability higher for the Dirty than the
Clean for C. jejuni in a 10% concentration of Kombinon Special (figure 15e and 15f.
33 of 50
==PAGE:42==
5th February 2024
(a) Clean (0.1% Kombinon Special)
(b) Dirty (0.1% Kombinon Special)
(c) Clean (2% Kombinon Special)
(d) Dirty (2% Kombinon Special)
(e) Clean (10% Kombinon Special)
(f) Dirty (10 % Kombinon Special)
Figure 15: The six plots illustrate the estimated Log(CFU/ml) over time in minutes. For each concentration
(0.1%, 2% and 10%) was, two different conditions tested: Clean (C. jejuni and Kombinon Special) (Graph:
a, c, and e) and Dirty (C. jejuni, 5% chicken juice and Kombinon Special) (Graph: b, c, and f). The
Log(CFU/ml) over the samples with(red) and without(blue) PMA treatment was calculated from the obtained
Ct values in the qPCR reaction. The Log(CFU/ml) over the culturable cells (grey) was calculated using the
plating assay.
34 of 50
==PAGE:43==
5th February 2024
7
Discussion
7.1
Comparison of DNA extraction methods
The three DNA extraction methods were compared to investigate if the right DNA extraction
methods were used. The original protocol used the FAST DNA Stool Mini Kit, but other
methods were tested on the samples due to undetectable DNA concentration when using
the Nanophotometer instrument. The results from the Nanophotometer instrument are not
shown. The experiment was short but could have been optimized by testing all three methods
at least twice as biological tests and in the qPCR reaction.
Nevertheless, the results in table 5 indicated that the Cell lysis did not gave any detectable
signal in the qPCR reaction. The different between the Ct results from FAST DNA Stool
Mini Kit and DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit did not gave the biggest difference, if the result
from DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit viable cell in 10 7 CFU/ml was excluded.
In the end, the FAST DNA Stool Mini Kit was chosen based on the fact that the method was
faster than the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit. The FAST DNA Stool Mini Kit were incubated
for 10 minutes, whereas DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit were incubated for 60 minutes.
7.2
Evaluation of LIVE/DEAD BacLight detection of C. jejuni
In combination with the traditional plating methods other studies has successfully been
capable to detect bacteria in the VBNC state using the LIVE/DEAD BacLight methods.
The methods distinguish the viable (green) and dead (red) cells using two different stains. By
measuring the fluorescence intensity of the two dye, the total amount of cell and the viable
cell can be found. No measurement was done doing the experiment, only the overall picture
of the fluorescence intensity were investigated (figure 11).
The PC gave a strong fluorescence intensity, where as the NC was slightly decreased (figure
11a and 11b). As excepted was no signal obtain in the none-dye-controls for either of the dyes.
The overall results from the experiment is not very clear since both stain obtained signal in
the viable and dead cell samples. The combination of the two dye should have decreased the
SYTO9 signal leaven all the dead cell stained red. By looking closer at the samples with only
the dead cells in figure 11c both green and red emission has occurred. A 1:2 (SYTO9:PI)
raio between the two stain was used, but the result may indicate that a higher ratio was
needed to obtain the wished result. On the other hand Magajna and Schraft (2015, [4]) were
using LIVE/DEAD BacLight in conjunction with confocal scanning laser microscopy and
got successfully results when using a ratio 1:2 (SYTO9:PI). In the study they investigate
LIVE/DEAD BacLight capability to detect C. jejuni cells in the VBNC state, and compared
it up against their results using the PMA-qPCR methods. The initiated concentration of C.
jejuni was at around 7 CFU/ml in Magajna and Schraft (2015, [4]), whereas no clear signal
was obtained for C. jejuni with a concentration of 109 CFU/ml in this study. Overall does
35 of 50
==PAGE:44==
5th February 2024
the results from this experiment indicate that furthered reaches were needed, but based on
the result from other studies should it be possible to use LIVE/DEAD BacLight methods to
detect C. jejuni in its different states.
7.3
Evaluation of PMA-qPCR detection of C. jejuni
PMA was known for binding to DNA from cells with compromised membranes. This means
when using the PMA-qPCR methods to distinguish between live and dead cells, it must
be assumed that cells with intact membranes were viable. The reason was that PMA only
provide knowledge about the integrity of the cell membrane and not anything about the
bacteria’s pathogenicity, infectivity, or metabolic activity [18]. A study from Krüger et al.
(2014,[37]) has suggested that cells harboring intact membrane could be called "intact and
putatively infectious units" (IPIU), which comprising CFU and VBNC. This definition could
help enhance the detection capability of Campylobacter through the whole food chain and
maybe uncover some of the unknown transmission routes of the pathogen.
This study defines the VBNC cells as the PMA-treated cells subtracted by the culturable
cells. If no colonies were on the plate, all of the PMA-treated cells were indicated as VBNC.
The protocol for the PMA-qPCR methods was created by taking inspiration from the study
Josefsen et al. (2010, [17]). Their study successfully obtained Ct values from all the samples
in the generated 10-folded dilution series of C. jejuni CCUG 11284 in chicken rinse (102
to 106 CFU/ml). Even though a different C. jejuni strain was used and the fact that the
bacteria were not rinsed in chicken in this study; there was a major difference in how many
of the samples which gave a valuable Ct value. As mentioned, all of the tested dilutions gave
a Ct value in the Josefsen et al. (2010, [17]) study, whereas only 105 to 107 CFU/ml gave
detectable Ct values from the heat-treated and 104 to 107 CFU/ml from the viable cells in
the present study. Different things may have influenced these results, such as DNA loss, too
few tests, or the concentration of PMA.
Loss of DNA may occur throughout the whole process, such as through DNA extraction
or when pipetting for the qPCR reaction. To monitor the loss of DNA, Pacholewicz et al.
(2019, [38], has developed an internal sample process control (ISPC). The ISPC was added to
each sample and contained a specific number of peroxide-killed C. sputorum cell. ISPC was
added right before the PMA treatment of the samples. By adding ISPC to the sample, it
would be possible to calculate the accurate number of DNA loss throughout the whole process.
In this study, the experiment to test how the PMA influences C. jejuni was only done as
a single biological trial, but three qPCR reactions were generated from it. To get a more
accurate results more then one biological trial were needed. Doing more than one biological
trial gives a more are reliable results
36 of 50
==PAGE:45==
5th February 2024
Using the optimal PMA concentration may also influence the outcome of the results. Treating
the sample with a too high PMA concentration may lead to the PMA starting to inhibit
the DNA amplification of viable cells, resulting in an underestimation of the viable cells. A
concentration of PMA that is too low could lead to an overestimation because the PMA
may not be able to inhibit the DNA amplification of the dead cells fully. The concentration
of PMA vary from study to study. The product information about PMA recommend a
concentration of PMA at 50 µM [19]. The used PMA concentration in this study was based
on the Josefsen et al. (2010, [17]) study, together with the study from Lv et al. (2020
[15]). In Josefsen et al. (2010, [17]), they used a concentration of PMA at around 23.71 µM,
whereas at Lv et al. (2020 [15]) they ended up with using a PMA concentration at 20 µM.
Lv et al. (2020 [15]) tested different concentrations of PMA on viable and heat-inactivated
cells at a 6 Log(CFU/ml). Their results showed that by using a concentration of PMA
at 20µM, PMA could effectively inhibit the DNA amplification of the dead cells without
influencing the viable cells significantly. Besides using different PMA concentrations, the two
studies used different strains of C. jejuni. Josefsen et al. (2010, [17]) used C. jejuni (CCUG
11284), where as Lv et al. (2020 [15]) where using different C. jejuni strains here among
C. jejuni (ATCC 33560). Bacterial strains within the same species may exhibit genetic
variation, meaning to find the optimal PMA concentration for the specific strain used in
a study, different concentrations must be tested to find the most promising for that specific one.
As figure 8 indicated, no signals were obtained from the qPCR reaction of the heat-inactivated
C. jejuni cells after they were treated with PMA. Based on that it may look like the PMA
successfully inhibited the DNA amplification from cells with a compromised membrane. To
determined if the PMA concentration was appropriate the dCt were calculated from the
viable cells. As figure 9 illustrate gave two of the viable samples not acceptable dCT value.
In table 6 was shown that the sample for 106 CFU/ml and 104 CFU/ml gave a dCT at 3 and
2.2, receptively. This indicate that the PMA may penetrate the living cells, hence lowing the
live cells estimation. If that was the case a lower PMA concentration may be the solution.
Either way further testing is needed to find the right DNA concentration for the C. jejuni
7.4
Standardcurve over PMA treated cells
Three standard curves were produced based on three replications of qPCR reactions on the
same set of samples. The samples were viable PMA treated C. jejuni cells from a dilution
series range from 101 to 107 CFU/ml. Figure 10 illustrates the chosen standard curve, whereas
the two others are in appendix 3. The viable C. jejuni cells with PMA were chosen for the
standard curve, because the PMA-qPCR method should be used to detect the VBNC cells of
the bacteria. It was assumed that the sample with PMA only detected the viable cells, and
the sample without PMA indicated everything in the sample. Therefore were, the sample
with PMA the most obvious choice.
37 of 50
==PAGE:46==
5th February 2024
The efficiency and R2 of the three curves were compared to determine which of the standard
curves was most efficient to use when calculating Log(CFU/ml) for unknown samples. The
reason for looking into these parameters was that both were important when quantifying if a
qPCR reaction was acceptable. The efficiency of the qPCR determined how well the target
DNA was amplified during each cycle. In contrast, the R2 (coefficient of determination)
describes how well the Ct value aligns with the expected concentrations [39]. As mentioned
earlier, efficiency is accepted at 90-100% whereas R2 needs to be ≥0.98 [40].
It was determined that the efficiency of the qPCR had the highest influence on which standard
curve was chosen. The reason for that was the important impact on the quantification of the
target DNA in an unknown sample [39]. Because the PMA-qPCR method should be used to
detect C. jejuni cell in the VBNC state, the qPCR needs to be effective and precise when
targeting the DNA. Therefore, the efficiency of the qPCR reaction needed to be as high as
possible. By looking closer at the three generated standard curves, only one gave an efficiency
above 90%, which determined the outcome of the chosen standard curve. Even though the
R2 was not above the acceptable value, the standard curve in figure 10 was chosen and used
for conversion of Ct to cell count estimation for future experiments.
7.5
Evaluation of the cleaning agents effect on C. jejuni
Due to time-limited only one cleaning product was tested throughout the whole experiment.
If there had been more time, more cleaning products would have been tested using the last
experiment described in phase three. Through the experiment was it assumed that the sample
with PMA was all viable cells, whereas the sample without PMA contained both dead and
viable cells.
7.5.1
Phase 1: Evaluation of pilot experiment
The first experiment with C. jejuni and the cleaning product Kombinon Special was a pilot
experiment to test was effect Kombinon Special had on C. jejuni.
When exposing C. jejuni to Kombinon Special in the concentration 0.5% and 2% most of
the bacteria does not get killed (Figure 12c and 12c). Most of the C. jejuni cells were still
culturable at a 0.5% concentration, whereas all of them had entered the VBNC state when the
concentration was reached to 2%. Figure 12c illustrate that over time was there in decrease
in the culturable cells, indicating that over time more and more of the cells had enter the
VBNC cells. This is based on the fact that the sample with PMA were increasing whereas
the culturable cell count were decreasing. Since the cell was exposed to a constant stress
from Kombinon Special it was excepted that more and more cells would enter the VBNC state.
38 of 50
==PAGE:47==
5th February 2024
The controls for both experiments indicate no significant difference between the samples with
and without PMA sample treatment (figure 12a and 12b). Nevertheless, it looks like there
was a loss of DNA in the process. For both controls was it observed that the calculated
Log(CFU/ml) over the culturable cells where slightly higher than the Log(CFU/ml) obtained
from the qPCR reaction. Beside DNA loss may the results also indicate an underestimation
of the PMA-qPCR methods, based on the fact that the PMA concentration may was to high.
7.5.2
Phase 2: Evaluation of the washing step effect on the procedure
The experiment was constructed to investigate if the amount of NB and wash with saline
affected the outcome of the combination of cleaning product and C. jejuni. Three aspects of
the washing step were tested: The amount of NB, the times of washing with saline, and the
amount of saline. The setting of the five test were found in table 3.
All five controls gave culturable cells, whereas no colonies were formed from the five tests. It
was therefor assumed that all of the viable C. jejuni cells obtained from the five test were in
their VBNC state.
The results from the controls indicated that the NB alone does not affect the C. jejuni. Even
by double the amount of NB, no significant decreasing occurred in the viable C. jejuni cells.
The largest difference between the samples with PMA and without PMA was found in W4.
The amount of NB seems to influence the outcome of viable cells in the combination of 2%
Kombinon Special and C. jejuni. By double the amount of NB, the viable cells go from 3.19
Log(CFU/ml) to 1.58 Log(CFU/ml), a reduction of 50.6% 13a. As mentioned, did the NB
not affect the bacteria. Still, in combination with cleaning products, it may not just stop the
reaction of the cleaning product but also start affecting the bacteria if the ratio is too large.
When testing the effect of disinfectant using the EU standards, both DS/EN 1656:2019, [41],
and DS/EN 14349:2012,[35] use a much higher amount of NB compared to the test substrate.
DS/EN 1656:2019 used a ratio of 8:1, (NB:test substance), whereas DS/EN 14349:2012 used
a ratio of 10:1 (NB:test substance). The results from W2 in figure ?? indicate an increase in
dead cells compared to W1. It’s unclear what specific had caused the increase in dead cells,
but the ratio between NB and test substrate seems to play an unspecific role.
Experiments W3 and W4 were produced to investigate if the number of washes with saline
affected the outcome. The results gave an ambiguous result. For W4 gave the controls a
decrease in the viable cells, whereas the test have a increase. On the other hand was the
largest decrease found in W3. It was expected that fewer cells may was obtained in W4 then
W3, since some of the bacteria may have been washed away. The control gave therefore a
more realistic picture of the process, then the test. Nevertheless, it is unclear what effect the
amount of washes with saline had on the process.
39 of 50
==PAGE:48==
5th February 2024
Increasing the amount of saline from one ml to two ml in the washing step seems to in-
crease the total amount of cells. Both the control and test from W5 had obtained a higher
Log(CFU/ml) for both viabel cells and the total cell count compared to W1. This may
indicate that more cells were gained in the final sample using a higher volume of saline.
In retrospect, it would have been more favorable to use 2 ml of saline in the washing step,
based on the fact that both the control and test gained a higher amount of total cells count.
Nevertheless, the washing step used for future experiments was determined to be W1. This
was done, because the percentage of viability of C. jejuni was highest for W1.
7.5.3
Phase 3: Evaluation of C. jejuni influence of Kombinon Special in different
conditions and concentrations over time
After the washing experiment was done, the ratio between the cleaning product and C. jejuni
was changed. This was done for two reasons. First, when the farms use the cleaning product,
it’s diluted in tap water, meaning it’s diluted before coming into contact with the bacteria. The
cleaning product was diluted in saline instead of Tap water to avoid stressing the bacteria even
more. Secondly, in DS/EN 1656:2019, [41], when testing a disinfectant, they use a ratio of 1:1
between the bacteria substance and the test substance. To follow the guideline used in DS/EN
1656:2019, the ratio between the cleaning product and C. jejuni were therefore changed to 1:1.
C. jejuni were exposed to two different conditions: a clean attempt and a dirty attempt.
The dirt attempt was created for trying to stimulate the conditions on a chicken farm. To
create the dirty condition C. jejuni was exposed to 5% chicken juice. This gave four different
test samples, two controls(Clean control and Dirty control), and two tests (Clean and Dirty)
(Table 4. As mentioned in section 6.5.3 will, the names of the four tests be used to compare
the different results.
The two controls (Clean control and Dirty control) were used to investigate if the influence of
chicken juice would have an effect on C. jejuni viability over 24 hours at room temperature.
The PMA-treated cells from the Dirty control in figure 14b are clearly more aligned with the
samples without PMA, compared to the Clean control in figure 14a. Based on the percentage
viability of the two controls, there was an overall pattern that more of the C. jejuni cells
were viable after 24 hours in the Dirty control compared to the Clean control. Based on
that assumption it looks like the C. jejuni grows better in combination with Chicken juice
than without. In T. Birk et al. (2003, [36]) they studied the C. jejuni strain (NCTC11168)
capability of surviving on different agar plates, whereas one of them contained chicken juice.
The experiment was constructed by incubating C. jejuni at two different temperature (5℃and
10℃), and was examined over 30 days. Here they discover that chicken juice prolonged the
viability of C. jejuni, which correspond with the result obtained in figure 14b. Moreover,
40 of 50
==PAGE:49==
5th February 2024
it does not look like the chicken juice affect the PMA treatment and the following qPCR
reaction in a negative way. Since all of the samples gave detectable Ct values from the qPCR
reaction.
When exposing C. jejuni to a 0.1% concentration of Kombinon Special, was it still possible to
detect 3.2 Log(CFU/ml) of culturable cells after 24 hours, when C. jejuni was in combination
with 5% chicken juice (Figure 15b). Without 5% chicken juice the culturable level of cells
where down to 2 Log(CFU/ml) after 1 hour, while none culturable cell where detected after 24
hours (Figure 15a). The calculated culturable cell were around 1.5 Log(CFU/ml) higher than
the obtained Log(CFU/ml) from the samples with and without PMA in the Dirty condition
at time point zero. This difference between the calculate Log(CFU/ml) could be due to
various factors. The Log(CFU/ml) of the culturable cells are calculated based on the plating
assay, whereas the sample with and without PMA were calculated based on the obtained
Ct value from the qPCR reaction. Since this were two difference ways of calculating the
Log(CFU/ml) the results may not add up. Another thing could be, as mentioned in section
7.3, that DNA loss may occur though the process of PMA-treatment, DNA extraction and the
qPCR reaction. Nevertheless, the result from the Dirty condition with a 0.1% concentration
of Kombinon Special indicate that all of the C. jejuni cell were in their culturable state after
been exposed for 20 min. After 1 hour has 18.8% of the viable cell enter the VBNC state,
while after 24 hours 22.2% were in the VBNC state. This indicate that more and more is
entering the VBNC state over time.
The results from both the Clean and Dirty with 2% Kombinon Special indicate clearly
a human error, since most of the results from the PMA-treated samples was not able to
obtain any valuable Ct values from the qPCR reaction. Together with that was it already
investigated how C. jejuni react to the clean condition in phase 1(12d and there all of the
sample with PMA gave valuable Ct values. The error could have happened in difference steps
of the process, but when doing the DNA extraction it was noted that the homogenization
and afterwards the first heating process may had needed more time. The combination of
cleaning product and chicken juice may influence the homogenization of the inhibitEX buffer
with the bacteria substrate. Nevertheless, figure 15c indicate that there were still viable C.
jejuni cells after 24 hours of been exposing to 2% Kombinon Special in the Clean condition.
Since figure 15b indicate the chicken juice may prolonged the viability of the C. jejuni it
would therefor have been excepted to see the same results when increasing the concentration
to 2%. It may therefor be assumed that there still would be viable cells after 24 hours of
exposing of 2% Kombinon Special in the Dirty condition.
By increasing the concentration of Kombinon Special to 10% VBNC cell were obtained from
both the Clean and Dirty condition. Figure 15e over the Clean results obtained from the
qPCR reaction, indicate that after 24 hours of been exposed to 10% Kombinon Special the
viability of C. jejuni was almost as high as the initiated total amount of cell in the sample
41 of 50
==PAGE:50==
5th February 2024
(Without PMA-treatment). On the other hand the results from the Dirty increase from zero
to five, where it afterwards diminishes quietly over time (figure 15f). After 24 hours the
viable cells were calculated to 3.3 Log(CFU/ml).
Kombinon Special was known to be an alkaline foam cleaning agent, which does not contain
any biocidal active substance[27]. This explain why most of the C. jejuni cell does not
get killed, but go into the VBNC state. The high pH developed a stress environment for
the C. jejuni when gets it to activate the survival mechanism. According to a study from
Kelana et al. (2002, [42]), were they investigated C. jejuni (strain ATCC 35921) in different
concentration of pH, where C. jejuni still capable of being culturable after being exposed
to a pH at 8.5 at a temperature of 22℃after one day. In this study were C. jejuni exposed
to a pH 10 and above.(0.1% = 10pH, 2% = 12 pH and 10% = 13pH) It was shown that
C. jejuni still were culturable at a pH around 10 after exposing it for 1 hour without 5%
chicken juice, whereas in the combination with 5% chicken juice they were still culturable
after 24 hours. When increasing the pH to 12 or above, none of the cell were culturable but
there were still viable cell detected using the PMA-qPCR methods. This indicate that if the
cleaning product where tested on C. jejuni with the tradition culturable method, the test
would had shown that C. jejuni was dead when increasing the pH to 12. This indicate that
PMA-qPCR can be used to detect C. jejuni in its VBNC state, when it is assumed that all
of the sample with PMA are viable cells.
This means if the farm only uses Kombinon Special, when cleaning between the broiler
rotations C. jejuni will not be killed. It may go into VBNC state, but if favorable condition
is reach it may become virulence and start infection the next broiler flock.
42 of 50
==PAGE:51==
5th February 2024
8
Conclusion
In this master thesis the protocols for of PMA-qPCR and BacLight was examied for their
ability to discriminate between viable and heat-inactivated C. jejuni cells based on a 10-fold
dilution series (101 to 107 CFU/ml). This study found that the DNA of the heat-inactivated
cells were modified making them unable to be amplified using qPCR reaction. On the other
hand was it unclear if the LIVE/DEAd BacLight methods cuold differentiate live, dead and
VBNC C. jejuni cells sufficiently. An underestimation of viable cells was seen with PMA
treatment, when comparing with the culturable cells. This may indicate that the concentra-
tion of PMA using in this study was too high, but future studies needed to verify that. Even
though the PMA concentration was not optimal, a standard curve over the samples with PMA
was produced. The standard curve was used to calculate the viable cells in an unknown sample
The NB did not affect the bacteria but in combination with the Kombinon Special it may
affect the viability of the cells. The amount of NB may therefore have an influence on the
washing step when testing the effect of cleaning agents on C. jejuni. The amount of saline
may have a positive effect on the total outcome of the cell count, but future testing are
needed to give a clear picture of that.
The tested cleaning product, Kombinon Special, was not capable of killing C. jejuni according
to the PMA-qPCR methods. Instead, exposure of Kombinon Special seemed to stimulate
C. jejuni into entering the VBNC state. By exposing the C. jejuni to 5% chicken juice the
viability was prolonged even further. This may indicate that C. jejuni in the combination with
chickens juice, as a proxy for a dirty environment, may improve survival. The PMA-qPCR
method can be developed to assess the effectiveness of cleaning agents to inactivate C. jejuni,
because it has the ability to detect the bacteria in its VBNC state. This can be a major
advantages in the action towards fighting C. jejuni.
43 of 50
==PAGE:52==
5th February 2024
9
Future perspectives
The thesis has proved that PMA-qPCR is capable of detecting C. jejuni in its different
states(live, dead and VBNC), but improvements of the method is needed. The concentration
of PMA needs to be optimized to avoid underestimating the viable cells. This can be done
using the PMA-qPCR method on C. jejuni at different concentrations and calculated the
dCt to find the optimal concentration.
Based on the results from this study, it is unclear if the LIVE/DEAD BacLight methods are
capable of detecting C. jejuni in its different states (live, dead and VBNC). Future studies
with different concentrations of the two stains must be done to find the right ratio to detect
C. jejuni using the methods.
The PMA-qPCR methods have great potential for determining a cleaning agent’s effect on
C. jejuni viability. The experiment in phase 3 showed promising results, although repeated
experiments are needed to confirm the results. However the developed protocol can be used
on other cleaning agents. By using the experiment it is possibleto assess the ability of cleaning
agents to effectively inactive C. jejuni. In the future, this experiment could be compared
with a field experiment, where the different cleaning agents used on a broiler farm could be
tested to see their effect on C. jejuni.
44 of 50
==PAGE:53==
5th February 2024
10
References
[1] J. Summers, A. Kvalsvig, N. French, M. G. Baker, and N. Zealand, “Campylobacter,”
vol. 2, pp. 95–110, 2024.
[2] S. M. Pires, H. G. Redondo, J. Pessoa, L. S. Jakobsen, and S. T. Thomsen, “Risk ranking
of foodborne diseases in Denmark: Reflections on a national burden of disease study,”
Food Control, vol. 158, no. November 2023, p. 110199, 2024.
[3] Microbiology of the food chain, “DS/EN ISO 10272-2:2017/Amd 1:2023 - Horizontal
method for detection and enumeration of Campylobacter spp. - Part 2: Colonycount
technique,” 2017.
[4] B. Magajna and H. Schraft, “Evaluation of propidium monoazide and quantitative PCR
to quantify viable Campylobacter jejuni biofilm and planktonic cells in log phase and in a
viable but nonculturable state,” Journal of Food Protection, vol. 78, no. 7, pp. 1303–1311,
2015.
[5] A. Nocker, C. Y. Cheung, and A. K. Camper, “Comparison of propidium monoazide
with ethidium monoazide for differentiation of live vs. dead bacteria by selective removal
of DNA from dead cells,” Journal of Microbiological Methods, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 310–320,
2006.
[6] L. Boulos, M. Prévost, B. Barbeau, J. Coallier, and R. Desjardins, “LIVE/DEAD(®)
BacLight(TM): Application of a new rapid staining method for direct enumeration of
viable and total bacteria in drinking water,” Journal of Microbiological Methods, vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 77–86, 1999.
[7] T. Battersby, P. Whyte, and D. J. Bolton, “The pattern of Campylobacter contamination
on broiler farms; external and internal sources,” Journal of Applied Microbiology, vol. 120,
no. 4, pp. 1108–1118, 2016.
[8] J. Y. Maillard and M. Pascoe, “Disinfectants and antiseptics: mechanisms of action and
resistance,” Nature Reviews Microbiology, 2023.
[9] EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC European Centre for Disease
Prevention Control), “The European Union Summary Report on Antimicrobial Resistance
in zoonotic and indicator bacteria from humans, animals and food in 2020/2021,” EFSA
Journal, vol. 21, no. 3, 2023.
[10] Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), “Campylobacter (Campylobacterio-
sis).”
[11] EFSA | European Food Safety Authority, “Campylobacter - Story maps,” 2023.
45 of 50
==PAGE:54==
5th February 2024
[12] D. Pokhrel, H. T. Thames, L. Zhang, T. T. Dinh, W. Schilling, S. B. White, R. Ra-
machandran, and A. Theradiyil Sukumaran, “Roles of Aerotolerance, Biofilm Formation,
and Viable but Non-Culturable State in the Survival of Campylobacter jejuni in Poultry
Processing Environments,” Microorganisms, vol. 10, no. 11, 2022.
[13] S. Pendleton, D. D’Souza, S. Joshi, and I. Hanning, Current Perspectives on Campy-
lobacter, vol. 2012. Elsevier Inc., 2015.
[14] K. Stingl, J. Heise, M. Thieck, I. F. Wulsten, E. Pacholewicz, A. N. Iwobi, J. Govin-
daswamy, V. Zeller-Péronnet, S. Scheuring, H. Q. Luu, V. Fridriksdottir, G. Gölz,
F. Priller, I. Gruntar, F. Jorgensen, M. Koene, J. Kovac, S. Lick, E. Répérant, A. Rohlf-
ing, A. Zawilak-Pawlik, M. Rossow, A. Schlierf, K. Frost, K. Simon, S. Uhlig, and
I. Huber, “Challenging the “gold standard” of colony-forming units - Validation of a
multiplex real-time PCR for quantification of viable Campylobacter spp. in meat rinses,”
International Journal of Food Microbiology, vol. 359, 2021.
[15] R. Lv, K. Wang, J. Feng, D. D. Heeney, D. Liu, and X. Lu, “Detection and Quantification
of Viable but Non-culturable Campylobacter jejuni,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 10,
no. January, pp. 1–8, 2020.
[16] Microbiology of the food chain, “DS/EN ISO 10272-1:2017/A1:2023 - Horizontal method
for detection and enumeration of Campylobacte spp. - Part 1: Detection method,” 2017.
[17] M. H. Josefsen, C. Löfström, T. B. Hansen, L. S. Christensen, J. E. Olsen, and J. Hoorfar,
“Rapid quantification of viable Campylobacter bacteria on chicken carcasses, using real-
time pcr and propidium monoazide treatment, as a tool for quantitative risk assessment,”
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 76, no. 15, pp. 5097–5104, 2010.
[18] B. Reichelt, V. Szott, K. Stingl, U. Roesler, and A. Friese, “Detection of Viable but Non-
Culturable (VBNC)-Campylobacter in the Environment of Broiler Farms: Innovative
Insights Delivered by Propidium Monoazide (PMA)-v-qPCR Analysis,” Microorganisms,
vol. 11, no. 10, 2023.
[19] G. P. f. Science, “Product Information of PMA,” tech. rep., Glowing Products for Science,
2023.
[20] E. Pestana, S. Belak, A. Diallo, J. R. Crowther, and G. J. Viljoen, “Real-Time PCR –
The Basic Principles,” in Early, rapid and sensitive veterinary molecular diagnostics -
real time PCR applications, ch. 3, pp. 27–46, Springer Science+Business Media B.V.,
Dordrecht 2010., 2010.
[21] J. Hoorfar, B. Malorny, A. Abdulmawjood, N. Cook, M. Wagner, and P. Fach, “Practical
Considerations in Design of Internal Amplification Controls for Diagnostic PCR Assays,”
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1863–1868, 2004.
46 of 50
==PAGE:55==
5th February 2024
[22] Molecular Probes Inc., “LIVE/DEAD ® BacLight TM Bacterial Viability Kits,” Product
information, pp. 1–5, 2004.
[23] D. Drohmann and L. Dickens, “Differentiation of Biocides and Cleaning Agents – Where
is the Boundary?,” International Chemical Regulatory and Law Review, vol. 3, no. 2,
pp. 61–68, 2020.
[24] THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN
UNION, “Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council,”
Official Journal of the European Union,, pp. 1–123, 2012.
[25] T. Battersby, D. Walsh, P. Whyte, and D. Bolton, “Evaluating and improving terminal
hygiene practices on broiler farms to prevent Campylobacter cross-contamination between
flocks,” Food Microbiology, vol. 64, pp. 1–6, 2017.
[26] J. Y. Maillard, “Bacterial target sites for biocide action,” Journal of Applied Microbiology
Symposium Supplement, vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 16–27, 2002.
[27] NCÅ-Verodan, “Safety Data sheet of Kombinon Special,” tech. rep.
[28] European Chemicals Agency., Guidance on information requirements and chemical safety
assessment : Chapter R.12 : use description, version 3.0 - December 2015. No. December,
2015.
[29] I. P. Notice, T. Biopharma, and G. E. Healthcare, “Use of sodium hydroxide for
cleaning and sanitization of chromatography resins and systems.,” Application note,
vol. KA29181104, no. March, pp. 1–9, 2020.
[30] NCÅ-Verodan, “Safety Data Sheet of Glutack,” tech. rep.
[31] G. McDonnell and A. D. Russell, “Antiseptics and Disinfectants: Activity, Action, and
Resistance,” Clinical Microbiology Reviews, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 147–179, 1999.
[32] European Chemicals Agency (ECHA), “Biocidal Products Committee (BPC): Alkyl (C12-
16) dimethylbenzyl ammonium chloride,,” vol. ECHA/BPC/3, no. December, pp. 1–11,
2021.
[33] ATCC, “Product Sheet: Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni 33560,” tech. rep., 10801
University Boulevard Manassas, VA 20110-2209 USA, 2023.
[34] M. H. Josefsen, N. R. Jacobsen, and J. Hoorfar, “Enrichment followed by quantitative
PCR both for rapid detection and as a tool for quantitative risk assessment of food-borne
thermotolerant campylobacters,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 70, no. 6,
pp. 3588–3592, 2004.
47 of 50
==PAGE:56==
5th February 2024
[35] European Standard, “DS/EN 14349:2012 - Chemical disinfectants and antiseptics – Quan-
titative surface test for the evaluation of bactericidal activity of chemical disinfectants
and antiseptics used in the veterinary area on non-porous surfaces without mechanical
action - Test,” 2012.
[36] T. Birk, H. Ingmer, M. T. Andersen, K. Jørgensen, and L. Brøndsted, “Chicken juice, a
food-based model system suitable to study survival of Campylobacter jejuni,” Letters in
Applied Microbiology, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 66–71, 2004.
[37] N. J. Krüger, C. Buhler, A. N. Iwobi, I. Huber, L. Ellerbroek, B. Appel, and K. Stingl,
“"Limits of control" - Crucial parameters for a reliable quantification of viable Campy-
lobacter by Real-Time PCR,” PLOS ONE, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[38] E. Pacholewicz, C. Buhler, I. F. Wulsten, B. Kraushaar, H. Q. Luu, A. N. Iwobi,
I. Huber, and K. Stingl, “Internal sample process control improves cultivation-independent
quantification of thermotolerant Campylobacter,” Food Microbiology, vol. 78, no. May
2018, pp. 53–61, 2019.
[39] P. Kralik and M. Ricchi, “A basic guide to real time PCR in microbial diagnostics:
Definitions, parameters, and everything,” Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 8, no. FEB,
pp. 1–9, 2017.
[40] G. Johnson, T. Nolan, and S. A. Bustin, “Real-time quantitative PCR, pathogen detection
and MIQE,” Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 943, pp. 1–16, 2013.
[41] European Standard, “DS/EN 1656:2019 - Chemical disinfectants and antiseptics - Quan-
titative suspension test for evaluation of bactericidal activity of chemical disinfectants
and antiseptise used in the veterinary area - Test method and requirements (phase 2,
step 1),” 2019.
[42] L. C. Kelana and M. W. Griffiths, “Use of an Autobioluminescent Campylobacter jejuni
to Monitor Cell Survival as a Function of Temperature, pH, and Sodium Chloride,”
Journal of Food Protection, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 2032–2037, 2003.
48 of 50
==PAGE:57==
5th February 2024
11
Appendix
Appendix 1
Table 11: The Ct value from the two biological tests of FAST DNA Stool Mini Kit.
DNA extraction
method
Biological
test
Initial
CFU/ml
Viable cells
Heat-treated cells
- PMA
+ PMA
- PMA
+ PMA
FAST DNA
Stool Mini Kit
1
107
16,98
17,67
21,04
UND
2
107
15,77
18,15
21,61
UND
1
106
19,74
20,72
23,1
UND
2
106
20,53
21,98
25,6
UND
Appendix 2
Figure 16: Amplification plot over the IAC signal from each sample, both PMA and without PMA. The
thick black line indicates the threshold.
49 of 50
==PAGE:58==
5th February 2024
Appendix 3
(a) Ct values from the obtained qPCR reaction on viable
PMA treated C. jejuni. The Ct value are plotted against the
LOG(CFU/ml)
(b) Ct values from the obtained qPCR reaction on viable
PMA treated C. jejuni. The Ct value are plotted against the
LOG(CFU/ml)
Figure 17: The other two standard curve produces over other qPCR reactions but the same samples as used
in figure 10
Appendix 4
(a) Control without PMA treatment
(b) Control with PMA treatment
(c) Growth control without PMA treatment
(d) Growth control with PMA treatment
Figure 18: The three individual and their means plotted from each sample with(B and D) and without(A
and C) PMA treatment. All four graphs present the three controls in green, orange, and yellow, whereas the
mean is present in grey. They are plotted with the LOG(CFU/ml) against time in minutes.
50 of 50
