==PAGE:1==
How to leverage the existing gas infrastructure in
the European energy transition?
Luca Dedrick Faust, s174402
under supervision of:
Marie M¨unster(1st supervisor)
Rasmus Bramstoft (2nd supervisor)
ABSTRACT
This study delves into the changing role of fossil gas in
Europe’s future energy landscape, driven by the EU’s commit-
ment to renewable gas production targets and an intensified
focus on energy security. As Europe increasingly turns to
hydrogen, the repurposing of redundant gas infrastructure
becomes crucial. This research explores plausible pathways
for the future role of the existing gas infrastructure and the
dynamics leading to an integrated European gas and hydrogen
network, using a fully sector-coupled energy system model
(Balmorel). Results indicate that gas scarcity has a minor
impact on a decarbonisation pathway aligned with limiting
the global temperature increase to 1.5°C. Additionally, the
discontinuation of gas imports from third-party nations has
been shown to lead to increased utilization of the existing
gas infrastructure. Finally, the study highlights potential bot-
tlenecks in repurposing Europe’s gas network for hydrogen
by 2030, arising from the ongoing extensive utilization of the
European gas infrastructure.
Figure 1. Annual fossil gas consumption and imports via pipelines
and LNG (EU 2019) [1] [2] [3]
I. INTRODUCTION
Background
In recent years, the European Commission has launched
several policy initiatives to decarbonise the EU energy
system, leading to a gradual phase-out of carbon-emitting
energy carriers [4] [5] [6]. In contrast to other fossil fuels,
fossil gas plays a considerably different role in the European
energy transition. Despite being of fossil origin, European
policymakers regard gas as a key transition fuel [7]. This
perspective mainly stems from the inherent techno-economic
and environmental advantages of fossil gas plants, such as
lower capital costs, faster ramp-up rates, and most importantly,
lower greenhouse gas emissions [8]. Fossil gas accounted
for approximately 22.6% of the final energy consumption by
product in the EU 27 countries in 2021 [9]. This underlines
the substantial reliance on this fuel, with a notable portion
of residential (33.5%) and industrial (32.7%) end-use being
met by fossil gas in the same year [10] [11]. Also on the
supply side Europe is heavily dependent on fossil gas with a
large share being imported either via pipelines or as liquefied
natural gas (LNG) by ships from third-party nations (see
Figure 1). When considering Norway as a domestic producer,
in 2019 around 70% of gas consumed was imported from
outside Europe [1]. As shown in Figure (1), a considerable
share of imported gas was coming via pipelines and ships
from Russia. In fact, 41% of gas imported by the EU27
+ UK in 2019 had Russian origin [3]. Overall, it can be
concluded that fossil gas currently plays a major role in the
European energy mix in terms of final energy supply and
energy dependency. However, with the introduction of the
RePowerEU package in response to the Russian invasion of
Ukraine in 2022, fossil gas has undergone a considerable
shift in its role in the future European energy landscape [6].
Besides the strong emphasis on energy security, several other
targets set in the plan, such as saving energy, diversifying
imports, and substituting fossil fuels by green alternatives,
will inevitably result in a decrease in fossil gas demand in the
medium to long term [12]. In the short term, when comparing
the European energy mix before and after the European
energy crisis of 2021, a noticeable drop in natural gas supply
becomes evident [13]. Interestingly, this decline in the supply
of fossil gas has been partially offset by an increased supply
of brown coal and petroleum products. This trend is also
1
==PAGE:2==
reflected in specific findings that will be elaborated upon in
the Discussion section (Section V).
The anticipated reduced demand of gas is expected to
be partially met by renewable gases, such as hydrogen, in
the future. As part of the RePowerEU package, a target
of 10 million tonnes of domestic hydrogen production and
an additional 10 million tonnes of imports has been set.
Amongst other key factors, dedicated hydrogen infrastructure
will play a pivotal role in achieving this target in a technically
feasible and economically affordable manner [12] [14]. On a
European policy level, the essential role for hydrogen pipeline
infrastructure in fostering market competition, security of
supply, and security of demand has been acknowledged
by the European Commission’s hydrogen and decarbonised
gas package published back in 2021 [15]. Beyond the
crucial role of developing dedicated hydrogen infrastructure,
leveraging
the
existing
gas
infrastructure
is
considered
essential to achieving these ambitious hydrogen production
targets [14]. The presence of a highly interconnected gas
transmission network with extensive geographical coverage
across Europe serves as an ideal foundation for a future
integrated gas and hydrogen network [12]. The European
hydrogen infrastructure vision promoted by the European
Hydrogen
Backbone
initiative
strongly
builds
on
this
foundation by highlighting how accelerating the development
of an integrated gas and hydrogen infrastructure is of primal
importance for a pan-European gas network by 2040 [14]. In
fact, the envisioned hydrogen network of the future is largely
based on repurposed existing natural gas infrastructure (60%
of network). Various studies conducted in 2022 by both the
public and private entities align with this vision suggesting
that repurposing existing natural gas pipelines may be both
a swifter and more cost-effective alternative to constructing
new hydrogen infrastructure and furthermore could avoid
decommissioning costs [12] [16].
The EU’s commitment to ambitious renewable gases pro-
duction targets, in conjunction with an increasingly redundant
existing gas transmission network presents a significant op-
portunity for the European energy transition. Consequently, it
becomes imperative to evaluate the most effective strategies
for optimally leveraging this infrastructure in response to
an evolving European energy landscape. Hence, this study
will explore the role of the existing gas infrastructure in a
changing European energy landscape while exploring dynam-
ics for the emergence of an integrated European gas and
hydrogen network. This research takes into account synergies
between energy vectors and sectors across Europe, aiming to
provide comprehensive insights into fundamental questions:
1) In light of the recent energy crisis leading to reduced gas
availability, how does it impact Europe’s energy landscape of
the future? 2) Which emerging technologies are anticipated
to bridge the energy gap? What specific roles will hydrogen
and other networks play in this transformation? 3) What
implications does the reduced availability of gas have on the
existing infrastructure? Furthermore, how does this influence
the development of an integrated European gas and hydrogen
network? To systematically address each of these questions,
the study uses energy system modeling as a method to
construct and evaluate firstly two reference scenarios built on
separate modeling approaches, and subsequently two distinct
yet plausible explorative scenarios.
Related literature
As previously introduced, a consortium of European gas
transmission companies presented a revised version of the
European Hydrogen Backbone vision in 2022 [14]. This
strategic concept outlines plans for a hydrogen transport
network in Europe. According to the 2020 version of the
concept, the projected infrastructure by 2040 is estimated to
cover approximately 50,000 kilometers. The plan involves
connecting hydrogen demand and production centers by
utilizing existing natural gas infrastructure for 60% of the
network and constructing new dedicated hydrogen pipelines
for the remaining 40%. However, as critiqued in [17], the
methodology that underpins this vision might be perceived
as somewhat constrained to the viewpoints and strategic
approaches of national gas and electricity transmission system
operators. Consequently, the breadth of this vision could be
considered as limited.
In recent years, several studies have focused on assessing
the role hydrogen networks assume within the context of
achieving net-zero emissions across Europe using a different
methodology, namely sector-coupled energy system models.
Considering sector coupling dynamics to investigate potential
synergies between energy vectors and sectors is crucial
as sector-coupling has shown to contribute significantly
to emission reductions [18] [19]. Neumann et al. [20]
performed an assessment of trade-offs between new electricity
transmission lines and a pan-European hydrogen network in a
transition towards a climate neutral continent. The results of
net-zero emission scenarios highlight substantial benefits in
terms of reduced system costs (up to 3.4%) when there is no
power grid expansion and the hydrogen network is vastly built
on repurposed natural gas pipelines (64 to 69%). Similarly,
Kountoris et al. [17] in their recent study used a fully
sector-coupled energy system model to investigate a clear
path toward a unified European hydrogen infrastructure with
particular emphasis on the infrastructure requirements. Also
in this study the paramount importance of swiftly expanding
the European hydrogen network leveraging a combination of
new and repurposed infrastructure is emphasized. Finally, in
view of the discontinuation of Russian gas supply to Europe
in response to sanctions imposed after the Ukraine invasion
2022, Pedersen et al. [8] used a sector-coupled energy system
model to investigate the role gas scarcity plays in European
net-zero emission scenarios. The outcomes of this study
revealed how a pathway to 1.5°C is overall less impacted
by gas limitation as Europe decarbonises earlier. However,
the repercussions of gas scarcity necessitate an accelerated
2
==PAGE:3==
deployment of heat pumps to replace gas as main heating
source and a delayed phaseout of coal and lignite.
The above referenced studies collectively shed light on the
prospective role of gas and its infrastructure in the energy
landscape of the future. While [8] primarily centers around
fossil gas and explores the implications of gas scarcity in
scenarios, both [20] and [17] indirectly address gas infras-
tructure by examining its potential repurposing for hydrogen
applications. Despite the pivotal influence of gas infrastructure
on the outcomes of these studies, a common research gap
is evident: the gas network is simplified and modeled as
a copper plate. This approach fails to capture the detailed
physical components and characteristics inherent to the ex-
isting gas transmission network. Moreover, the absence of
simultaneous co-optimization of gas and hydrogen networks
overlooks critical techno-economic factors. Particularly in the
realm of sector coupling, this oversimplification could lead to
an underestimation of the advantages gained through modeling
synergies between various energy vectors. For example, a
potential limitation in both [20] and [17] is the optimization of
gas infrastructure repurposing without considering optimal gas
flows. This lack of insight into the gas transmission network
could result in the repurposing of a pipeline that, while optimal
in isolation, may lead to sub-optimal outcomes when viewed
in the context of the broader network, particularly given its
ongoing significance in gas transmission flows. A novel aspect
to this study is to explore the development of an integrated
gas and hydrogen network in European net-zero emission
scenarios using a fully sector-coupled energy system model
which co-optimizes the power, gas, and hydrogen networks
simultaneously. Hereby, a more comprehensive understanding
of the interconnected energy landscape can be offered.
II. METHODOLOGY AND DATA ASSUMPTIONS
Energy system model: Balmorel
The method employed in this study makes use of the
open-source energy system model Balmorel [21]. Balmorel
is built for optimizing energy systems based on assumptions
of perfect market competition and economic rationality while
adopting a bottom-up approach. Furthermore, Balmorel is
a deterministic model allowing simulations with varying
yearly foresight—ranging from myopic to partial or full
resolution—and
supports
a
flexible
temporal
resolution,
extending to hourly intervals [22]. This partial equilibrium
model
simultaneously
optimizes
(seeking
the
least-cost
solution)
generation,
transmission,
and
consumption
of
various energy carriers to satisfy energy demands [23]. As
concisely formulated in [17], the model’s fundamental flow
can be summarized as following: initially, energy sources
are transformed into energy vectors, which, after undergoing
transmission, can either directly meet demands or serve as
inputs for conversion technologies across diverse energy
sectors. A detailed representation of the energy sources,
systems, and services optimized in Balmorel and the sector
coupling dynamics unfolding between the different energy
systems can be seen in Figure (2). In recent years, Balmorel
has seen various applications in energy transition scenarios
explorations providing detailed insights into decarbonisation
pathways and comprehensive evaluations of integrated energy
systems. The version of Balmorel used to perform this
analysis is outlined in [17]. Compared to the previous
version of the model, Kountoris et al. have performed
several enhancements crucial to this study. In particular,
improvements in techno-economic and geospatial data for
hydrogen and a detailed inclusion of all major sectors to
facilitate a comprehensive sector coupling lays fundamental
groundwork for this study.
The analysis period spans from 2025 to 2050, with simu-
lations conducted in 5-year intervals until 2030 and 10-year
intervals thereafter. A myopic modeling approach, decisions
based on short-term outcomes, is adopted for this study.
Time aggregation is based on 4 seasons (weeks 8, 22, 36,
and 50), each consisting of 32 representative time segments
(4 week/weekend days with 3-hour intervals). The chosen
time aggregation has been determined through an iterative
process, balancing computational tractability with an accurate
representation of methane demand (see Appendix 3.1 and
Section III)
Methane addon
To
provide
insights
into
the
fundamental
questions
delineated in Section (I), the model presented in [17] has
been extended with regards to both its mathematical modeling
formulation and input data. In terms of model development,
the most significant addition has been the implementation
of the European gas transmission network. This has been
accomplished by creating a Balmorel addon, a piece of code
that provides extensions to the functionality for the core model
version [24]. Given shared similarities in end-use services
provided as well as transmission and storage infrastructure
between gas and hydrogen, the Balmorel hydrogen addon has
been utilized as base for the methane addon. This addon has
firstly been introduced to Balmorel in [25] and since seen
further improvements throughout various studies [22] [18]
[17].
In the European model employed for this analysis, a
total of 35 countries are encompassed: EU27, Norway,
Switzerland, the UK, and the Balkan nations. These countries
are represented in the model with a three-layer spatial
resolution: area, regions, and countries. The power and
hydrogen networks are developed and optimized at a regional
level. Accordingly, the aforementioned countries are further
subdivided into 46 transmission regions. This division is
based on a one-node representation for the majority of
included countries, complemented by the regional split of the
Nordpool bidding zone for the Nordic countries.
Before introducing the methane addon, fossil gas could
be exploited by all the countries included in the model as
3
==PAGE:4==
Figure 2. Schematic overview of energy sources, systems, and demands in Balmorel
Figure 3. Modelled methane flows before (copper plate CH4) and after (value-chain CH4) methane addon integration
4
==PAGE:5==
an import commodity characterized solely by its price and a
maximum fuel availability limit set at a model level. Hence,
in the absence of precise physical, technical, and geospatial
limitations, in its previous implementation the gas network
could be considered as a copper plate. As the limits mentioned
above certainly pertain to a resource as intricate as fossil
gas, the primary objective of introducing the methane addon
was to offer a more authentic depiction of methane flows
in Europe at a regional level. From this point forward, the
original implementation will be referred to as ”copper plate
CH4” and the enhanced implementation as ”value-chain CH4”.
Furthermore, the incorporation of the entire value chain into
the model marks a shift from a sole focus on natural gas to
a broader range of methane-rich energy sources (which will
be discussed in detail later). Consequently, the transmission
and storage infrastructure, previously described as ”gas in-
frastructure”, will now be termed ”methane infrastructure” to
better reflect this expanded focus. Figure (3) represents the
methane flows before and after the integration of the methane
addon highlighting the different methane production sources
exploited to satisfy the methane demand of various services
(technologies). To integrate in the base model the represen-
tation of methane flows portrayed in Figure (3), a regional
methane demand balance has been set up. This balance ensures
the fulfillment of methane demands across different model
areas on a regional scale. Consequently, methane production,
consumption, transmission, and storage are now optimized
at a regional level. Further insights on methane production,
infrastructure and third country imports will be provided in
subsequent sections. The mathematical modeling formulation
for Balmorel can be found in the latest documentation [24],
and the specific formulation for the methane addon is detailed
in Appendix (1).
Methane addon: methane production and data
Within the model, methane can be used to produce power,
heat, and hydrogen aimed at satisfying the demands of
various services. The model incorporates a range of methane
production and consumption sources, which are depicted in
Figure (3). As illustrated, there are four methane production
sources that can be further delineated into domestic production
(encompassing both natural gas and biomethane) and import
(encompassing natural gas and LNG). It is important to note
that in this analysis, the import of natural gas and LNG
is modeled using production technologies, and therefore,
they are considered as part of methane production. On the
consumption side, both endogenous and exogenous methane
demands have been considered. However, due to the relatively
minor significance of fossil gas in the transport fuel mix,
the exogenous transport demand has been omitted [26].
Accordingly, endogenous methane demands for power, heat,
and hydrogen production by various technologies have been
considered.
The methane production technologies mentioned above
have been included in the model taking into consideration
specific
techno-economic
aspects.
Data
for
hourly
gas
production capacities by country has been sourced from
system development maps provided by Gas infrastructure
Europe (GIE) in collaboration with the European Network
of Transmission System Operators for Gas (ENTSOG)
for gas and the European Biogas Association (EBA) for
biomethane [27] [28]. As the ENTSOG/GIE 2021-2022
System Development Map is a pivotal reference throughout
this study, it has been included under Appendix (2.1) for ease
of access. Furthermore, since Norway’s domestic production
is not covered by ENTSOG, it has been acquired separately
from [29].
For projections into 2030, the domestic hourly biomethane
production capacities by country are based on figures from
the EBA Statistical Report 2023 [30]. Additionally, the latest
ENTSOG Ten Year Network Development Plan (TYNDP)
published in 2022 has been used as reference for hourly LNG
production capacity projections on a country level up to 2030
[31]. Due to the decadal scope of the TYNDP and largely
unchanged LNG capacities projected from 2030 to 2040, the
model aligns with the network outlined in the TYNDP up
until 2030. Moreover, only projects classified as ’advanced
level’ have been integrated into the model.
Prices for the fuels consumed by the methane producing
technologies, such as natural gas, LNG, and biogas, have
been included based on the latest review of EU28 fuel price
projections by Heat Roadmap Europe [32] (see Appendix
2.2). Due to insufficient transparency regarding the fixed
and variable operation and maintenance costs associated
with domestic natural gas production, it is assumed that
companies are operating competitively and thus set their
marginal production costs in line with market prices. The fuel
price considered for producing domestic biomethane reflects
both the fuel price of biogas and a supplement for upgrading
the biogas [33]. The import and subsequent regasification
of LNG is reflected in a fuel price equal to 1.9 times the
price of natural gas [34]. Imported natural gas is assumed
to be 10% more expensive than domestic natural gas based
on international reporting [35] [36]. This price premium
accounts
for
the
various
factors
that
influence
pricing
disparities between domestically extracted and imported
natural gas, as for example, production and transportation
expenses, market supply and demand dynamics, and taxation.
Thus, a 10% higher price has been deemed to be a justifiable
estimation.
Finally, all methane production technologies in the model
have been treated as pre-existing with a lifespan extending
to the end of the analysis period (2050). Consequently, no
capital expenditure costs have been included, and Balmorel is
not allowed to invest in new methane production capacity.
5
==PAGE:6==
Methane addon: methane infrastructure and data
For a given transmission region, once methane has been
either domestically produced or imported, it can be utilized
directly to meet the region’s endogenous demands, transmitted
to interconnected regions via the transmission network, or
stored in designated storage facilities. As previously outlined,
the modelled methane network follows the same level of
geographical aggregation as the power and hydrogen networks
and is modeled with transmission pipelines assuming bi-
directional flow [19]. Techno-economic attributes of the
methane transmission network have been included based
on data from ENTSOG. The regional hourly cross-border
transmission capacities have been incorporated according to
the previously introduced GIE/ENTSOG System Development
Map 2021-2022 [27] (see Appendix 2.1). It is important to
note that the cross-border transmission capacity is not uniform
but varies depending on the flow direction. These capacities
have been either kept unchanged, expanded, or reduced for
the years 2025 and 2030 in line with the ENTSOG 2022
TYNDP [31]. Once again, due to the decadal scope of the
TYNDP and largely unchanged cross-border transmission
capacities projected from 2030 to 2040, the network is
aligned with the TYNDP 2022 up until 2030. Besides the
modification to the existing methane transmission network
outlined in the TYNDP, Balmorel is not allowed to invest
in new methane transmission infrastructure. Finally, methane
transmission energy losses to keep the operating pressure of
the methane network have been included according to [37].
Methane storage facilities have been incorporated in the
model drawing on the latest release of the storage technology
data catalogue by the Danish Energy Agency [38]. Given that
a significant share of working gas volume in Europe is stored
in underground storage facilities, these have been identified
as the primary storage technology to be integrated in the
model [39]. Similarly to methane production and transmission
infrastructure, all storage facilities in the model have been
treated as pre-existing with a lifespan extending to the end of
the analysis period. Consequently, no capital expenditure costs
have been included, and Balmorel is not allowed to invest
in new storage capacity. Techno-economic data, including
fixed operation and maintenance costs, efficiency metrics, and
the hourly charging/discharging rates for underground storage
facilities have been sourced from the aforementioned storage
technology data catalogue. Additionally, country-specific data
on working gas volume is derived from the ENTSOG System
Development Map 2021/2022 [27] (see Appendix 2.1).
Methane addon: third country imports and data
As depicted in Figure (1), Europe significantly depends on
gas imports, which are primarily transported via pipelines or
as LNG by ships from third-party nations outside the defined
borders of the examined energy system. On a regional level,
as discussed in Section (II), LNG can be imported from third-
party nations by means of production technologies. In terms
of gas imports via pipelines, these nations are not included as
regions in the methane transmission network. However, should
the technical capacity be available, the model permits the
transmission regions to import gas from adjacent third-party
countries. Once again, the ENTSOG System Development
Map 2021-2022 has been used to extract hourly gas import
volumes on a country-level [27] (see Appendix 2.1). Key
gas-exporting third-party nations include Russia, the Caspian
Region, Algeria, and Libya. The energy system of these third-
party nations is neither co-optimized externally nor investment
decision in these countries are accounted for in an extended
energy system. Given the methodological decision to restrict
Balmorel from investing in new transmission infrastructure,
excluding investment expansion decisions from third-party
nations aligns with the overall modeling approach and is
deemed a justifiable simplification.
Other exogenous model inputs
In addition to the techno-economic aspects of methane
production, transmission, and storage outlined earlier, there
are also key exogenous assumptions critical for understanding
the methodology. As discussed in section (II), the fuel price
projections included in the model follow the latest EU28 fuel
price projections elaborated by Heat Roadmap Europe [32].
Furthermore, originally the model includes CO2 prices derived
from the latest Net Zero Emission by 2050 (NZE) scenario
part of the World Energy Outlook (WEO 2022) published by
the IEA in 2022 [40]. However, as will be elaborated in the
sensitivity analysis (Section III), the WEO22 NZE CO2 price
trajectory is reassessed and relaxed within the model. This
adjustment was required as it resulted in an unrealistically
swift reduction of natural gas consumption in the analysed
milestone years. Given the pivotal role of solar and wind in
driving the decarbonisation of the power sector, the assump-
tions concerning the availability of these renewable resources
are fundamental in interpreting the modeling outcomes. The
assumed country-level potentials for solar photovoltaic (PV),
onshore wind, and offshore wind are outlined in Appendix
(2.3). The national potentials incorporated into the model
have been extracted and subsequently cross-validated across
three distinct sources: atlite, TransnetBW, and ENSPRESO
database. More information on the methodology adopted can
be found in Section 1.7 of [41]. Furthermore, additional
assumptions regarding the technologies incorporated into the
model are comprehensively detailed in Section 3.1 of [41].
III. BASE CASE AND SCENARIOS
Base case: time aggregation analysis
Once the methane addon has been implemented according
to the outlined methodology and data assumptions, a series
of model runs have been performed to refine various aspects
of the model. Overall, these adjustments aimed to create a
more realistic representation of future methane consumption
in Europe for both the copper plate CH4 and value-chain CH4
base case. The initial step in this process involved selecting
appropriate timesteps for the model by means of an iterative
process based on a tradeoff between computational tractability
6
==PAGE:7==
and a meaningful representation of methane consumption.
Considering that fossil gas is a flexible energy source, it is even
more essential to ensure that the selected timesteps accurately
capture peak demand hours to properly depict the role of the
fuel in the power sector. In terms of selected timesteps, the
core model’s seasonality is maintained (weeks 8, 22, 36, and
50). Hence, while keeping the original seasons in the model
unchanged, several combinations of time segments (hours)
have been assessed. In these assessments, the computational
time required for the model runs varied significantly, reflecting
the depth of temporal detail included. When every hour of the
chosen 4 seasons has been included (4x168 time segments), the
computational time for the model including the methane addon
extended to 89 hours. In contrast, including 3-hour intervals
for 2 representative week/weekend days (4x16 time segments)
drastically reduced the computational time to just 4 hours.
The outcomes of this iterative process revealed an interesting
finding: by including 3-hour intervals for 4 representative
week/weekend days (4x32 time segments), the model achieved
very similar results for yearly fossil gas consumption to when
every hour of the chosen seasons is included (see Figure
1 Appendix 3.1). Considering the substantial difference in
computational time, 89 versus 12 hours for the base case
including the methane addon, this time resolution has been
included in the model.
Base case: sensitivity analysis
However, when comparing the fossil gas consumption ob-
tained in the two base cases to other studies employing similar
methodologies, such as [8], results revealed an extremely
accelerated phase-out of fossil fuels. In fact, as shown in
Appendix (3.1), when compared to 2019 levels (approximately
4700 TWh), fossil gas has decreased fourfold until 2025 [2].
Moreover, the already minimal consumption of fossil gas in
2025 continued to decline sharply, with projections showing
almost no fuel usage by 2040. Accordingly, a sensitivity anal-
yses has been performed to investigate the impact of varying
specific input parameters on the levels of fossil gas consump-
tion, hereby providing insights into their relative importance. A
first parameter identified to alter with respect to the base case
has been the endogenous build-out of solar and wind capacity.
When analyzing the results of the above-mentioned base cases,
a very strong trend towards electrification already by 2025
leading to a rapid shift away from fossil gas has been revealed.
In fact, when examining the endogenous build out of solar and
wind capacity, unrealistically high capacities were observed
(see Figure 2 in Appendix 3.2). The model results show a
build out of additional 231/212 GW of wind and 575/577
GW of solar capacity by 2050, respectively for the value-chain
CH4 and copper plate CH4 base case. To contextualize these
figures, Europe is expected to install 129 GW of wind capacity
in the period 2023-2027 and according to the latest revision,
of the EU27 aggregate National Energy and Climate Plans
(NECP) solar target for 2030 is currently set at 425 GW [42]
[43]. To address this discrepancy, a build-out ramping rate of
50 GW/year of solar and 20 GW/year of wind (both onshore
and offshore) capacity until 2030 has been incorporated into
the model by activating the Balmorel RampingVRE addon.
As shown in Figure (4), a comparison between the copper
plate CH4 base case with (CO2PRICE & RAMPING) and
without (CO2PRICE & NO RAMPING) ramping constraints
reveals a significant increases (68%) in fossil gas consumption
in 2025. However, the issue of rapidly diminishing fossil gas
usage by 2040 persists. Accordingly, the CO2 price trajec-
tory has been identified as another crucial parameter for the
sensitivity analysis. As mentioned in Section (II), the CO2
prices included in the model are aligned with the WEO22
NZE scenario. The swift phase-out of fossil gas from the
energy mix is evidently influenced significantly by the steep
CO2 price trajectory adopted in the WEO22 to attain the NZE
target while keeping the global temperature increase below
1.5°C. By including both ramping and relaxing the CO2 price
trajectory (NO CO2PRICE & RAMPING), the model not
only aligns the 2025 fossil gas consumption levels with those
reported in [8] but also demonstrates significant increases in
the 2030 and 2040 projections, as illustrated in Figure (4). In
this specific base case, NO CO2PRICE & RAMPING, fossil
gas consumption experiences a significant surge, rising by
52% in 2030 compared to the (CO2PRICE & RAMPING)
base case, and by an even more pronounced 142% compared
to the (CO2PRICE & NO RAMPING) base case. Further-
more, this upward trend intensifies drastically by 2040, with
an astonishing increase of 1475% relative to both the base
cases. Accordingly, both the ramping and relaxed CO2 price
trajectory have been included in the base cases and technical
scenarios discussed in the upcoming sections.
Figure 4. Sensitivity analysis on fossil gas consumption [TWh] for
the copper plate CH4 base case
Base case: copper plate CH4 vs value-chain CH4 modeling
approach
After integrating the previously discussed time aggregation,
ramping constraint, and CO2 price trajectory, a model run
has been performed to compare the results obtained from the
model using both the copper plate CH4 and value-chain CH4
modeling approach. From this point forward, these results
will be referred to respectively as BASE COPPER PLATE
and BASE VALUE CHAIN. Regarding computational time,
7
==PAGE:8==
a doubling of running time has been observed, with the
copper plate CH4 approach taking 6 hours to compile and
the value-chain CH4 approach requiring 12 hours.
Given that neither CO2 prices nor a CO2 budget have been
included in these model runs, the CO2 emissions obtained
from the two base cases have been benchmarked against the
CO2 budget detailed in a similar study [8]. This referenced
study defines cumulative CO2 budgets to 2050 at 25.7 Gt of
CO2 emissions to limit global temperature increases to below
1.5°C and at 73.9 Gt of CO2 emissions to keep increases
below 2°C. Since CO2 emissions from the transport sector
are not included in the model, they have been retrieved
externally
based
on
[44].
Consequently,
the
calculated
total CO2 emission for the BASE COPPER PLATE and
BASE VALUE CHAIN are respectively 28.8 and 28.2 Gt
of CO2 emissions. This indicates that, despite the absence
of CO2 prices or a CO2 budget in the model, the total
CO2 emissions fall within the range required to limit global
temperature increases to below 1.5°. Finally, the total CO2
emission trajectory for the two base cases is depicted in
Appendix 3.3.1.
In line with the specific focus on methane in this study,
the first results examined are the methane consumption
in the base cases. It is important to note that for the
BASE COPPER PLATE case, methane consumption occurs
exclusively in the form of natural gas flows. On the other hand,
for the BASE VALUE CHAIN case, methane consumption
levels include the four production commodities discussed
in Section (II). As depicted in Figure 3 and Table 1 in
Appendix (3.3.2), the results align with anticipated trends,
showing a lower methane consumption for electricity, heat,
and hydrogen production when the entire value chain of
methane is considered. However, although the percentage
decrease in methane consumption by energy commodity, as
shown in Table 1 (Appendix 3.3.2), may initially appear
substantial, a comparison of the energy mix for electricity,
heat, and hydrogen production between the two base cases
reveals only minor differences (as illustrated in Figures
4, 6, and 8 in Appendix 3.3.3). It should be noted that,
due to the wide variety of energy sources incorporated
in the model, only those contributing more than 1% of
the total annual production of the specific commodity are
included in the graphs. Figures 5, 7, and 9 (Appendix
3.3.3) emphasize the energy sources used to bridge the
methane
deficit
incurred
in
the
BASE VALUE CHAIN
case. Here, the BASE COPPER PLATE case serves as a
reference case. Accordingly, the results presented are for the
BASE VALUE CHAIN case, with positive values indicating
higher production from a specific energy source compared
to the BASE COPPER PLATE case, and negative values
indicating a reduction. When meaningful, a percentage is
included inside the bar in the graphs to show what portion of
the total production this difference represents. For instance,
Figure 5 (Appendix 3.3.3) shows a reduction (indicated in
the negative direction) in the 2025 methane consumption for
electricity production in the BASE VALUE CHAIN scenario,
amounting to 1.5% of the total electricity production.
Figures 5, 7, and 9 (Appendix 3.3.3) illustrate that in 2025,
the methane deficit is addressed through increased heat and
electricity production from biomass and a shift from steam
methane reforming to electrolysers for hydrogen production.
Additionally, there is an observed increase in electricity
production from coal, a trend that aligns with findings from
the preliminary EU27 energy balance of 2022 [13] and [8].
Starting in 2030, when ramping constraints are eased, wind
energy also contributes to covering the electricity production
deficit. From 2040 onwards, the methane deficit represents
only a marginal share of the total production, 0.2% for
electricity and 0.5% for heat. Consequently, the observed
differences in electricity and heat production from various
renewable sources are primarily due to discrepancies in the
capacities of installed renewable energy sources. In fact,
the need to address the methane deficit as early as 2025,
especially for heat production, and the constraints on ramping
up wind and solar capacity, have led to the installation of
significantly larger capacities in biomass combined heat
and power plants (CHP) in the years 2025 and 2030 for
the BASE VALUE CHAIN case (see Figure 10 and 11 in
Appendix 3.3.4). An accelerated installation of CHP plants
in 2025 and 2030 lead to comparatively lower endogenously
installed capacities of wind and solar in 2040 and 2050 in
the BASE VALUE CHAIN case (see Figure 10 Appendix
3.3.4). However, when assessing the proportion of the total
installed capacity by energy source that this difference
constitutes, it becomes evident that the discrepancies for
both wind and solar are negligible in 2040 and 2050. This
also partially accounts for the marginal reduction (<1%)
in the electrification of heating services observed in the
later years for the BASE VALUE CHAIN case (see Figure
11 Appendix 3.3.4). An interesting trend is observed in
Figure
10,
Appendix
(3.3.4),
regarding
the
percentage
decrease in endogenously installed capacities for electricity
production from methane. To note here, while no endogenous
capacity is installed in the BASE VALUE CHAIN scenario
in 2025, capacity is installed in 2030 and remains active
until 2050. This behaviour can be attributed to the rapid
scale-up of electricity production from wind and solar in
2030, leading to more intermittent production. This increase,
combined with the halting of endogenous investments in
electricity transmission capacity until 2035, requires the
flexibility offered by fossil gas. As previously mentioned,
the
BASE VALUE CHAIN
case
(Figure
9,
Appendix
3.3.3) exhibits a transition in hydrogen production from
steam methane reforming to electrolysers. This transition is
considerably highlighted by a 352% increase in the installed
capacity of electrolysers by 2030, as illustrated in Figure 12
(Appendix 3.3.4). This significant increase is attributable to
Balmorel being allowed to invest in hydrogen transmission
infrastructure from 2030, which enables the interconnection
8
==PAGE:9==
of hydrogen production and consumption locations. In fact,
Figure 13 and 14 in Appendix (3.3.5) demonstrate that for
the BASE VALUE CHAIN case, there is a 37% rise in
hydrogen transmission flows, supported by a 30% growth
in endogenously installed hydrogen transmission capacity
in 2030 when compared to the BASE COPPER PLATE
case. This trend of increased hydrogen transmission flows
and capacities continues throughout the analysis period for
the BASE VALUE CHAIN case, although with smaller
percentage differences. Regarding the electricity network, no
significant differences between the two base cases in terms
of electricity transmission flows and endogenously installed
capacities are observed (Figure 15 and 16 Appendix 3.3.5).
Finally, also in terms of electric, heat, and hydrogen storage
facilities utilization no significant differences are highlighted
when assessing the proportion of total energy withdrawn
by energy source these differences constitute (see Figure 17
Appendix 3.3.6). However, although minor in total terms,
there are considerable increases in energy withdrawn from
heat storage facilities in 2025 and 2030, in particular from
water tanks. The increased endogenously installed capacity
in heat storage facilities contributes to bridging the deficit
in heat production from electric boilers (less electrification)
observed in early years (2025-2030) (see Figure 18 Appendix
3.3.6).
As
illustrated
in
Figure
19
in
Appendix
(3.3.6),
CO2
emissions
are
substantially
diminished
in
the
BASE VALUE CHAIN
case,
given
a
reduced
methane
consumption. The accelerated installation of biomass CHP
plants to replace methane-based heat and electricity production
in 2025, along with the installation of capacity for other
renewable energy sources once the ramping constraint is
lifted in 2030, ensures that the lack of methane is only
partially met by fossil sources (see Figure 19 in Appendix
3.3.6). Besides a modest increase in coal consumption by 3%
in 2025 and 2030 compared to the BASE COPPER PLATE
case, no other significant emissions are incurred in response
to the methane deficit. In terms of the share of total CO2
emissions, decreases of 4%, 6%, and 3% are observed for
2025, 2030, and 2040, respectively. However, while this
shift is beneficial for emission reduction, it leads to a 1.5%
increase in system costs (see Table 2 in Appendix 3.3.6).
In addition to fuel costs, the rise in system expenses in the
BASE COPPER PLATE case is primarily attributed to the
fixed operation and maintenance costs associated with the
operation of methane storage facilities. The flexibility offered
by these storage facilities is extensively utilized wherever
available, with a typical seasonal pattern of methane storage
operations depicted in Figure 20 of Appendix (3.3.6).
Scenarios
To provide insights into the fundamental questions outlined
in Section (I), two distinct explorative scenarios have been
constructed. As discussed in the study’s contextualization,
these scenarios aim to investigate plausible future roles for
the existing gas infrastructure within a changing European
energy landscape, while exploring dynamics for the emergence
of an integrated European gas and hydrogen network. In line
with the European Commission’s REPowerEU strategy, which
emphasizes reducing gas imports from Russia by two-thirds
by the end of 2022 and enhancing overall energy security, gas
imports are a key parameter that varies across these scenarios
[6]. The following explorative scenarios have been identified
to assess changes in the energy system:
1) HIGH TENSION: Alongside the targeted reduction of
Russian imports by two-thirds by 2022, this scenario assumes
escalated political tensions leading to a complete halt of
Russian pipeline and LNG imports by 2025 [45].
2) ENERGY SECURITY 2030: This scenario extends be-
yond the discontinuation of Russian imports by 2025. It
envisions Europe’s decision to achieve complete energy inde-
pendence regarding gas imports, including discontinuing LNG
and pipeline imports from North Africa (Algeria and Libya)
and the Caspian region by 2030.
IV. RESULTS
Explorative scenarios:
HIGH TENSION and ENERGY SECURITY 2030
The
results
presented
in
this
section
highlight
the
differences between the previously evaluated base case with
the
methane
add-on
integrated,
BASE VALUE CHAIN,
and
the
two
scenarios:
HIGH TENSION
and
ENERGY SECURITY 2030. Hence, also in the explorative
scenarios the methane addon is integrated. From this point
forward, BASE VALUE CHAIN will be referred to as
the ’reference scenario’. The results previously detailed
in
Section
(III)
for
the
BASE COPPER PLATE
and
BASE VALUE CHAIN
comparison,
which
encompass
the
differences
in
energy
sources
and
endogenously
installed
capacities
for
electricity,
heat,
and
hydrogen
production
have
shown
specific
trends
and
outcomes
for the BASE VALUE CHAIN case. These trends and
outcomes are also exhibited in the HIGH TENSION and
ENERGY SECURITY 2030 scenarios. Accordingly, given
that marginal differences in these scenarios are observed
when compared to the BASE VALUE CHAIN reference
scenario, particularly in the context of a methane deficit and
its impact on production capacities, these results will not be
discussed in detail again.
Overall, the two scenarios demonstrate a reduction in
methane production compared to the reference scenario
(see Figure 5). This reduction, when analyzed in terms of
methane production technologies, reveals notable differences
in methane import quantities due to the limitations inherent to
the scenarios. In fact, these limitations result in a significant
shift in the origin of imports, as compared to the reference
scenario (see Figure 21 in Appendix 4.1). Figure (6) illustrates
the European countries importing methane from third-party
nations via pipelines. These European importers are color-
coded based on the origin these imports are sourced from.
9
==PAGE:10==
Here, red indicates imports of Russian origin, blue repre-
sents North-African imports (specifically from Algeria and
Libya), and green stands for imports from the Caspian Region.
Furthermore, percentages in the bars indicate the share of
total imports in the given year. It is important to note that
in scenarios without the discontinuation of Russian imports,
Russia covers a substantial portion of the total imports: 42%
in 2025 and 62% (largest share) in 2030.
Figure 5. Methane production by technologies [TWh]
Figure 6. Methane pipeline imports by country and origin as share
of total imports [%]
Additionally, it can be observed that domestic methane
production remains consistent across both the reference and
explorative scenarios. This consistency is primarily due to the
cost-effectiveness of domestic production, leading all countries
to maximize local exploitation up to their full capacity until
2040 (Figure 23 Appendix 4.1). Norway, however, is an
exception to this trend. As the only country with a domestic
methane production capacity that significantly exceeds its
local demand, Norway sees a decrease in its domestic
methane production levels by 2040 (Figure 24 Appendix 4.1).
This decline is attributed to a general reduction in methane
demand. As will be discussed in more detail later, Norway’s
substantial capacity for domestic methane production ensures
that, after fulfilling local demand, the surplus methane is
distributed to other European countries via the methane
transmission network. The domestic production capacities
by country are depicted in Figure 25 and 26 in Appendix
(4.1). Given the insignificant share, less than 1%, of domestic
biomethane production and LNG imports, these results are
presented separately (see Figure 22 and Table 3 in Appendix
4.1) and not discussed in detail. This marginal contribution to
overall methane production can be attributed to considerably
higher fuel prices (see Appendix 2.2). In conclusion, the
most notable differences in methane production across the
reference and two explorative scenarios are observed in
the realm of methane imports. In an unrestricted case, the
cost-optimal solution results in a significant proportion of
imports coming from Russia in both 2025 and 2030, along
with a marginally larger overall share of imports. However,
Norway’s substantial domestic methane production capacity,
combined with an overall decrease in methane demand, helps
to offset the discontinuation of Russian imports at marginally
higher system costs for the period 2025-2040 (see Table 2 in
Appendix 3.3.6). Additionally, a shift in the origin of methane
pipeline imports is observed as a response to the geographical
limitations imposed in the scenarios. Finally, especially in the
ENERGY SECURITY 2030 scenario, the deficit in methane
pipeline imports that is not offset by pipeline imports from
other sources, exhibits trends similar to those noted in the
BASE VALUE CHAIN case in Section (III) in terms of
technologies bridging the gap. However, these trends are
observed in a slightly more amplified manner.
Overall, cross-border methane transmission flows experi-
ence a significant increase when methane imports are limited
(see Figure 27 Appendix 4.2). In 2025, both explorative
scenarios show an astonishing 30% increase in methane flows
compared to the reference scenario. This trend continuous until
2030 but comes to a halt in 2040 due to overall lower methane
demands. Analyzing methane flows on a country-level basis
reveals that the increased levels are not reflected in flows from
Norway towards other interconnected European transmission
regions, as its full domestic methane production capacity is
consistently utilized in all three scenarios until 2030 (see Fig-
ure 28 Appendix 4.2). As previously introduced, this is due to
the cost-effectiveness of domestic production in Norway, with
a substantial portion of its domestically produced methane
being transported to other European countries via the methane
transmission network. Aligning with the ENTSOG/GIE Sys-
tem Development Map 2021/2022 cross-border pipeline ca-
pacities [27], the primary importing countries of domestically-
produced Norwegian methane are Germany, the UK, France,
the Netherlands, Belgium and Denmark. On a country level, no
significant differences are observed in methane transmission
flows from Norway to other European countries across the
different scenarios (see Figure 28 Appendix 4.2). To highlight
variations in cross-border methane transmission flow at a
country level, it is necessary to broaden the focus to encompass
all of Europe. Figure (7) provides an overview of methane
transmission flows among various European countries in 2025.
In this analysis, the 2025 results for the reference scenario,
which allows methane imports from all origins, serves as the
baseline for comparison.
10
==PAGE:11==
Figure 7. Methane transmission flows by country [TWh]. Reference
scenario - 2025
Figure 8. Difference in methane transmission flows by country
[TWh]. HIGH TENSION/ENERGY SECURITY
2030 vs
Reference scenario - 2025
Figure (7) illustrates that countries having the largest
methane transmission flows (indicated by a darker red
tone) are typically those with significant methane pipeline
import capacities from third-party nations (see Appendix
2.1). Examples include Germany and the Netherlands, which
import from Norway; Bulgaria and Slovakia, importing
from Russia; Greece, which relies on the Caspian region;
and Italy, importing from North Africa (specifically Algeria
and Libya). Additionally, these countries not only possess
extensive cross-border transmission capacities but are also
strategically located near other European countries with high
methane demand, thus forming vital pipeline import corridors.
For the year 2025, Figure (8) highlights the differences in
methane transmission flows resulting from the two explorative
scenarios. Since both scenarios impose limitations solely on
pipeline imports of Russian origin, they show identical patterns
in methane transmission. Consequently, a separate examination
of each scenario is not necessary. It is crucial to note that
Figure (8) depicts the differences in methane transmission flow
compared to the reference scenario: countries colored in grey
indicate no significant changes, green denotes an increase, and
red stands for a decrease in transmission flows within that
specific country. As anticipated, the most significant decreases
in methane transmission are observed in countries with the
largest proportion of Russian pipeline imports in 2025, as
identified in Figure (6) (Slovakia and Bulgaria). Conversely,
the diminished methane transmission from Eastern Europe
is compensated by significantly larger imports from third-
party nations through Italy, Greece, and Spain. Specifically,
the import corridor from North Africa to Italy, as previously
discussed, experiences a significant increase in methane trans-
mission flows. These flows are subsequently directed towards
Austria, which emerges as a crucial transmission flow hub
to mitigate the methane deficit in Eastern Europe. Similarly,
though to a lesser extent, another pipeline import corridor
is observed. This corridor, originating from North Africa,
passes through Spain and France, eventually connecting to
Switzerland, which becomes an important transmission hub
for third-party nation imported methane.
Figure 9. Difference in methane transmission flows by country
[TWh]. HIGH TENSION vs Reference scenario - 2030
11
==PAGE:12==
Figure (9) illustrates the differences in methane transmission
flows resulting from the two explorative scenarios compared
to the reference scenario. As previously mentioned, 2030
sees an overall decrease in methane pipeline imports and a
smaller variation in methane transmission flows across the
different scenarios (see Figure 5 and Figure 27 in Appendix
4.2). Consequently, the magnitude of differences in methane
transmission flows depicted in Figure (9) is significantly
reduced. When evaluating the ENERGY SECURITY 2030
and
HIGH TENSION
scenarios
separately
in
terms
of
methane
transmission
flow
differences
compared
to
the
reference
scenario,
marginal
variations
in
methane
transmission flows across the interconnected regions are
observed (less than 2% of total flow). Hence, the most
significant differences to be pointed out is a modest increase
in methane transmission from the Caspian region into Greece
in the HIGH TENSION scenario. Accordingly, Figure (9)
includes
the
differences
between
the
HIGH TENSION
scenario and the reference scenario in 2030 to present a more
comprehensive overview.
Despite the HIGH TENSION scenario permitting imports
from North Africa, there is no substantial difference in
methane transmission flows from Italy and Spain. This is
due to the relatively minor role of methane production from
pipeline imports in the overall context (see Figure 5). Although
the differences in methane transmission flow are relatively
minor in terms of magnitude, when analysing the utilization
for trans-regional pipelines for the HIGH TENSION scenario
in 2030, a pattern can be identified. Due to the absence of
Russian imports and no significant changes in imports from
other third-party countries, increased methane transmission
flows form a transmission corridor ranging from West to
East Europe. The methane transmission corridor, as depicted
in Figure (9), extends from the Netherlands and Germany,
passing through Austria, and reaches demand centers in
Eastern Europe. This corridor is strategically developed to
bridge the methane deficit in these regions. This pattern is
further highlighted when evaluating cross-border pipelines
that have seen a substantial increase, more than a doubling,
in utilization in the HIGH TENSION scenario (see Figure
29 in Appendix 4.2). For the year 2040, due to the absence
of methane imports, the entire methane demand is being
served with domestically-produced methane across the three
scenarios. Accordingly, no significant difference in methane
transmission flow are noted.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This study, leveraging a sector-coupled energy system
model analysis, investigated the evolving role of existing
gas infrastructure within the changing energy landscape of
Europe, while exploring dynamics for the emergence of an
integrated gas and hydrogen network. An initial comparison
of several energy system metrics obtained by adopting a
copper plate CH4 and a value chain CH4 modeling approach,
and a subsequent scenario analysis have been carried out to
provide insights into following fundamental questions: 1)
In light of the recent energy crisis leading to reduced gas
availability, how does it impact Europe’s energy landscape of
the future? 2) Which emerging technologies are anticipated
to bridge the energy gap? What specific roles will hydrogen
and other networks play in this transformation? 3) What
implications does the reduced availability of gas have on the
existing infrastructure? Furthermore, how does this influence
the development of an integrated European gas and hydrogen
network?
Results extracted and subsequently compared for the two
base cases and explorative scenarios included the entire
spectrum of an energy system: from the transformation of
energy sources, to the energy systems (including networks
and storage facilities), to finally energy services (demands).
Here, the production and endogenous capacities installed by
energy source, as well as network transmission flows and
capacities, and storage behaviour have been assessed for
electricity, heat, hydrogen, and methane, providing insights
into the fundamental questions listed above. The outcomes
from the base case comparison reveal that reduced gas
availability has a relatively minor impact on the European
energy mix of the future for electricity, heat, and hydrogen.
Similarly, changes in endogenously installed capacities by
energy source are minor when considering their proportion of
the total capacity. However, in terms of total CO2 emissions,
decreases of 4%, 6%, and 3% are observed for respectively
2025, 2030, and 2040. Yet, these emission reductions come at
price, resulting in a 1.5% increase in system costs. In the two
explorative scenarios, both trends are amplified: relatively
larger reductions of CO2 emissions and higher system costs
are observed. The methane deficit incurred when modelling
the entire value chain is addressed through increased heat and
electricity production from biomass CHP plants and a shift
from steam methane reforming to electrolysers for hydrogen
production. Additionally, there is an observed increase in
electricity production from coal in the early years, a trend
that aligns with findings from the preliminary EU27 energy
balance of 2022 [13]. In line with the significantly higher
endogenously installed capacities of electrolysers (+353%)
in 2030, there is a 37% rise in hydrogen transmission
flows, supported by a 30% growth in endogenously installed
hydrogen transmission capacity. Regarding the electricity
network, no significant differences in terms of electricity
transmission flows and endogenously installed capacities are
observed. Similarly, no notable differences are detected in the
utilization of electric, heat, and hydrogen storage facilities
when assessing the proportion of total storage withdrawals
by energy source these differences constitute. Overall, these
results align well with the findings of [8], revealing how a
decarbonisation pathway to 1.5°C is overall less impacted
by gas scarcity. Further findings of this study highlight the
accelerated deployment of biomass CHP plants and a delayed
phase-out of coal and lignite as repercussions of a gas deficit.
12
==PAGE:13==
The examination of methane transmission flows across
the three scenarios outlined in Section (IV) reveals that
discontinuing methane pipeline imports from third-party
nations results in an increased use of methane transmission
infrastructure in the medium to long term (period 2025-2030).
Accordingly, it can be concluded that in most European
regions, the methane transmission infrastructure continues to
play a significant role, especially when considering reduced
methane imports due to political tensions and energy security
efforts. Figures 30, 31, and 32 in Appendix (4.2) compare the
physical methane transmission flows with the firm technical
cross-border capacity of the interconnected model regions,
providing insights into the regional utilization levels. This
utilization
analysis
particularly
emphasises
a
significant
increase in physical flows at maximum capacity in the two
explorative scenarios for the year 2025. Additionally, an
overall rise in methane transmission flows in 2030 across
all scenarios, as illustrated in Figure 27 Appendix 4.2,
further reinforces this trend of high utilization, including the
reference scenario. When contextualizing these results within
the framework of the European Hydrogen Backbone (EHB)
strategy 2022, a European infrastructure vision covering 28
countries previously discussed in the introduction of the
study, several bottlenecks become evident [14]. This strategy
includes specific plans and considerations for repurposing
existing cross-border gas transmission pipelines to facilitate
hydrogen
transport
between
European
countries
starting
as early as 2030. Accordingly, the cross-border methane
transmission pipelines that have emerged as critical in the
utilization analysis, identified based on physical methane
flows at firm technical capacity in at least one of the scenarios,
have been compared to the envisioned EHB 2030 hydrogen
network map (see Figure 33 Appendix 4.2). When comparing
these selected pipelines to the targets outlined in the EHB,
it becomes visible that bottlenecks could be encountered in
Eastern Europe (see Figures 33 and 34 in Appendix 4.2).
Particularly Slovakia meets both criteria of critical utilization
levels of cross-border methane transmission capacity in 2030,
both in the direction of the Czech Republic and Hungary,
and being included in the EHB strategy as a country with
repurposed pipelines. Furthermore, also the repurposing of the
cross-border interconnection between France and Switzerland
could prove challenging as it experiences methane flows
at maximum capacity in all three scenarios. However, it is
important to acknowledge that the presentation of these results
is purely aimed at highlight the importance of considering the
European methane transmission network in the planning, as
conflicts in gas and hydrogen flow could result in sub-optimal
planning of an integrated gas and hydrogen network of
the future. Given the several limitations discussed below, it
becomes evident that much more in-depth research is required
to assess repurposing dynamics fully.
Several limitations of the study should be acknowledged,
best
summarized
in
three
broad
categories:
modeling
considerations, market and economic factors, and geopolitical
considerations. Firstly, regarding modeling considerations,
both temporal and spatial resolutions of the model are
restricted
for
computational
efficiency.
The
temporal
resolution
is
limited
to
specific
seasonal
and
hourly
aggregations, potentially overlooking peak demand hours
(important for gas modeling) and the variability introduced
by solar and wind power. Spatially, the resolution is confined
to large geographic regions, usually covering entire countries,
except for a regional split based on the Nordpool bidding zone
for the Nordic countries. Consequently, nonlinear dynamics
of gas flow, such as line packing, are disregarded due to
the lack of a granular distribution and transmission network
model. Furthermore, by modeling the different methane
production technologies simply with a fuel price, other
important dynamics influencing the dispatch of production
technologies, such as large investments incurred in building
out LNG terminals or biogas upgrading facilities and hence
a tendency to utilize this capacity, are disregarded in the
model. Secondly, in terms of market and economic factors,
the study faces limitations regarding assumptions made for
natural gas prices. The model employs a uniform annual price
for all regions, neglecting both hub and bilateral agreement
pricing. Therefore, important supply and demand dynamics,
geopolitical factors, and infrastructure characteristics are
overlooked. Furthermore, while the demand for fossil fuels
decreases over time, the fossil fuel prices are included
as increasing. Hence, the economical competitiveness for
renewable energy sources is over estimated. This can be
further observed as one of the factors pushing for an
accelerated decarbonisation even when removing the CO2
price trajectory from the model. Finally, the reliance on
biomass to offset the methane deficit introduces important
geopolitical and supply chain risks associated with import
dependency.
The previously discussed comparison of physical methane
transmission flows with the firm technical cross-border
capacity of interconnected model regions reveals that several
pipelines reach their maximum technical capacity in both
2025 and 2030. Based on this finding, it is recommended
to enhance the model by enabling Balmorel to invest in
additional methane transmission capacity in future studies.
Additionally, in the current model, methane and hydrogen
grids are treated separately. To implement repurposed lines, an
iterative process involving manual interventions is required.
Therefore, a further recommendation for future research
is to integrate a feature into the model that allows for
the endogenous decision to repurpose redundant methane
transmission infrastructure for hydrogen transmission. This
would facilitate a more dynamic and realistic assessment of
infrastructure adaptation in response to evolving energy needs.
In conclusion, Europe’s energy landscape of the future is
transitioning towards the vision of an integrated gas and hydro-
gen networks. This shift, driven by the EU’s ambitious targets
13
==PAGE:14==
revolving around the need to diversify energy sources and
reduce reliance on fossil fuels, involves repurposing existing
gas infrastructure for hydrogen. In fact, while gas networks
currently form the backbone of energy supply, the focus
is progressively shifting towards hydrogen to meet climate
goals. This transition involves substantial challenges, from a
technical, economical, and political perspective. Accordingly,
a careful balance between immediate energy needs and future
sustainability objectives needs to be found in a collaborative
effort. The discipline of energy system analysis can contribute
to this challenge, by providing useful insights on plausible
pathways towards an integrated gas and hydrogen network.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to extend my gratitude to my academic su-
pervisors for their patience and guidance, especially during
lengthy result presentations. I am also deeply thankful to
my supervisors at my company for their critical input on
the technical scenarios of this study. Their understanding and
willingness to provide me with the necessary space to focus on
my academic pursuits have been greatly appreciated. Lastly, a
special thanks goes to my girlfriend and family, whose support
during this long and often challenging journey has been my
pillar of strength. Their encouragement during moments of
exhaustion has been a source of motivation.
REFERENCES
[1] Eurostat,
“Energy
statistics
-
an
overview,”
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?
title=Energy statistics - an overview#Final energy consumption
[2] European
Commission,
“Quarterly
report
on
Euro-
pean
gas
markets
(EU)-2019Q4,”
2020.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/quarterly report on
european gas markets q4 2019 final.pdf.
[3] ——,
“From
where
do
we
import
energy?”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
?https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/infographs/energy/bloc-
2c.html#carouselControls?lang=en
[4] ——, “Clean energy for all europeans,” 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/b4e46873-
7528-11e9-9f05-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
[5] ——, “Fit for 55 - The EU’s plan for a green transition - Consilium,”
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/
green-deal/fit-for-55-the-eu-plan-for-a-green-transition/
[6] ——, “REPowerEU: A plan to rapidly reduce dependence on russian
fossil fuels and fast forward the green transition,” 2022. [Online].
Available: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP 22
3131
[7] ——, “Amending Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/2139 as regards eco-
nomic activities in certain energy sectors and Delegated Regulation (EU)
2021/2178 as regards specific public disclosures for those economic
activities,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/finance/docs/
level-2-measures/taxonomy-regulation-delegated-act-2022-631 en.pdf
[8] T. T. Pedersen, E. K. Gøtske, A. Dvorak, G. B. Andresen, and
M. Victoria, “Long-term implications of reduced gas imports on the
decarbonization of the european energy system,” Joule, vol. 6, pp.
1566–1580, 7 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.cell.com/joule/
pdf/S2542-4351(22)00297-5.pdf
[9] Eurostat,
“Simplified
energy
balances,”
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/NRG BAL
S
custom 4828709/default/table
[10] ——, “Energy consumption in households (2019),” 2023. [Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?
title=Energy consumption in households
[11] ——, “Final energy consumption in industry (2019),” 2023. [Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?
title=Final energy consumption in industry - detailed statistics
[12] D.
Grote,
R.
Nunes,
W.
Steinborn-Cheng,
M.
Paletar,
and
D. Anton, “Future regulatory decisions on natural gas networks:
Repurposing, decommissioning and reinvestments,” 2022. [Online].
Available:
https://www.acer.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/
Media/News/Documents/Future%20Regulation%20of%20Natural%
20Gas%20Networks%20-%20Final%20Report%20DNV.pdf
[13] Eurostat, “Preliminary 2022 data for energy show mixed trends,” 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-
news/w/ddn-20230705-2
[14] European Hydrogen Backbone, “European Hydrogen Backbone: A EU-
ROPEAN HYDROGEN INFRASTRUCTURE VISION COVERING 28
COUNTRIES APRIL 2022,” https://ehb.eu/files/downloads/ehb-report-
220428-17h00-interactive-1.pdf, 2022.
[15] European
Commission,
“Hydrogen
and
decarbonised
gas
market
package,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/ip 21 6682
[16] Gas
for
Climate,
“Gas
decarbonisation
pathways
2020–2050,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.europeanbiogas.eu/2020-gas-
decarbonisation-pathways-study/
[17] I.
Kountouris,
R.
Bramsftoft,
T.
Madsen,
J.
Gea-
Berm´udez,
M.
M¨unster,
and
D.
Keles,
“A
unified
euro-
pean
hydrogen
infrastructure
planning
to
support
the
rapid
scale-up
of
hydrogen
production
(preprint),”
2023.
[On-
line]. Available: https://assets.researchsquare.com/files/rs-3185467/v1
covered f1dad0f5-4da4-4945-85fd-29928ed9dd69.pdf?c=1690868914
[18] J. Gea-Bermudez, I. Jensen, M. M¨unster, M. Koivisto, J. Kirkerud,
Y. kuang Chen, and H. Ravn, “The role of sector coupling in
the green transition: A least-cost energy system development in
northern-central europe towards 2050,” Applied Energy, vol. 289, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/
pii/S0306261921002130
[19] J.
Gea-Berm´udez,
R.
Bramstoft,
M.
Koivisto,
L.
Kitzing,
and
A. Ramos, “Going offshore or not: Where to generate hydrogen
in
future
integrated
energy
systems?”
Energy
Policy,
vol.
174,
p. 113382, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0301421522006012
[20] F. Neumann, E. Zeyen, M. Victoria, and T. Brown, “The potential role
of a hydrogen network in europe,” Joule, vol. 7, pp. 1793–1817, 8
2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.05816
[21] H. Ravn, M. Hindsberger, M. Petersen, R. Schmidt, R. Bøg, P. E.
Grohnheit, H. Larsen, J. Munksgaard, J. Ramskov, M. Esop, G. Klavs,
A. Galinis,
R. Paprocki,
M.
Wawrzyszczuk, and
A.
Gloukhov,
“Balmorel: A model for analyses of the electricity and chp markets in
the baltic sea region. appendices,” 01 2001. [Online]. Available: https:
//balmorel.com/images/downloads/balmorel-a-model-for-analyses-of-
the-electricity-and-chp-markets-in-the-baltic-sea-region.pdf
[22] I. G. Jensen, F. Wiese, R. Bramstoft, and M. M¨unster, “Potential
role of renewable gas in the transition of electricity and district
heating systems,” Energy Strategy Reviews, vol. 27, p. 100446, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2211467X19301385
[23] F. Wiese, R. Bramstoft, H. Koduvere, A. Pizarro Alonso, O. Balyk,
J. G. Kirkerud,
˚Asa Grytli Tveten, T. F. Bolkesjø, M. M¨unster,
and H. Ravn, “Balmorel open source energy system model,” Energy
Strategy Reviews, vol. 20, pp. 26–34, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2211467X18300038
[24] H.
Ravn,
“The
balmorel
model
structure,”
2018.
[On-
line].
Available:
https://www.balmorel.com/images/downloads/model/
BMS303-20190311.pdf
[25] P. Meibom and K. Karlsson, “Role of hydrogen in future north
european power system in 2060,” International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1853–1863, 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S036031990902120X
[26] Eurostat,
“Final
energy
consumption
in
transport
by
type
of
fuel (2019),” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
databrowser/view/ten00126/default/table?lang=en
[27] ENTSOG
and
Gas
Infrastructure
Europe,
“System
De-
velopment
Map
2021/2022,”
2022.
[Online].
Avail-
able: https://www.entsog.eu/sites/default/files/2023-01/ENTSOG GIE
SYSDEV 2021-2022 1600x1200 FULL 240 clean.pdf
[28] European Biogas Association and Gas Infrastructure Europe, “European
Biomethane Map 2020: Infrastructure for biomethane production,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.europeanbiogas.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2020/06/GIE EBA BIO 2020 A0 FULL FINAL.pdf
14
==PAGE:15==
[29] Norsk
Petroleum,
“Historical
production:
Natural
gas,”
2024.
[Online]. Available: https://www.norskpetroleum.no/en/facts/historical-
production/
[30] European Biogas Association, “EBA Statistical Report 2023,” 2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.europeanbiogas.eu/eba-statistical-
report-2023/
[31] ENTSOG, “TYNDP 2022: Annex C1 – CH4 Capacities per Country,”
2022. [Online]. Available: https://tyndp2022.entsog.eu/downloads/
[32] Heat Roadmap Europe, “EU28 fuel prices for 2015, 2030 and 2050,”
2017. [Online]. Available: https://heatroadmap.eu/wp-content/uploads/
2020/01/HRE4 D6.1-Future-fuel-price-review.pdf
[33] International
Energy
Agency,
“Sustainable
supply
potential
and
costs
–
outlook
for
biogas
and
biomethane:
Prospects
for
organic
growth
–
analysis
-
iea,”
2020.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.iea.org/reports/outlook-for-biogas-and-biomethane-
prospects-for-organic-growth/sustainable-supply-potential-and-costs
[34] J. Hampp, M. D¨uren, and T. Brown, “Import options for chemical
energy carriers from renewable sources to germany,” PLOS ONE,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1–31, 02 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0281380
[35] Gov.UK, “Energy Trends: UK gas ,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/gas-section-4-energy-trends
[36] BusinessLine,
“Government
keeps
price
of
domestically-
produced
natural
gas
on
hold,”
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/govt-keeps-price-of-
domestically-produced-natural-gas-on-hold/article66684893.ece?ssp=
1&darkschemeovr=1&setlang=en&cc=IT&safesearch=moderate
[37] Danish Energy Agency, “Technology catalogue for transport of energy,”
2021. [Online]. Available: https://ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-
and-models/technology-data/technology-data-transport-energy
[38] ——, “Technology data for energy storage,” 2023. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-
data/technology-data-energy-storage
[39] CEDIGAZ, “Working gas volume in underground storage facilities in
europe in 2021,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.cedigaz.org/
underground-gas-storage-in-the-world-2021-status/
[40] International Energy Agency, “World Energy Outlook 2022 ,” 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-
2022
[41] I.
Kountouris,
R.
Bramsftoft,
T.
Madsen,
J.
Gea-Berm´udez,
M.
M¨unster,
and
D.
Keles,
“Supplementary
material:
A
unified European hydrogen infrastructure planning to support the
rapid
scale-up
of
hydrogen
production
(Preprint),”
2023.
[On-
line]. Available: https://assets.researchsquare.com/files/rs-3185467/v1
covered f1dad0f5-4da4-4945-85fd-29928ed9dd69.pdf?c=1690868914
[42] Wind Europe, “Wind energy in Europe: 2022 Statistics and the outlook
for 2023-2027,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://windeurope.org/
intelligence-platform/product/wind-energy-in-europe-2022-statistics-
and-the-outlook-for-2023-2027/#:∼:text=28%20February%202023-
,Overview,last%20year%20were%20onshore%20wind.
[43] SolarPower Europe, “EU countries’ solar targets for 2030 jump by
63% - but reality still outstrips ambition,” 2023. [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://www.solarpowereurope.org/press-releases/eu-countries-
solar-targets-for-2030-jump-by-63-but-reality-still-outstrips-ambition
[44] M. Victoria, E. Zeyen, and T. Brown, “Speed of technological
transformations required in europe to achieve different climate goals,”
Joule, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1066–1086, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2542435122001830
[45] H.
Zhou,
E.
Dahlem,
and
A.
Schmitt,
“EU
Energy
Outlook
to
2060:
power
prices
and
revenues
predicted
for
wind,
solar,
gas,
hydrogen
+
more,”
2023.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://energypost.eu/eu-energy-outlook-to-2060-power-prices-
and-revenues-predicted-for-wind-solar-gas-hydrogen-more/
15
==PAGE:16==
Appendix
1
Mathematical modeling formulation
As discussed in the Methodology, the mathematical modeling formulation for Balmorel can be found
in the latest documentation [24].
The mathematical modeling formulation of the methane addon
includes the regional methane demand balance (1), the hourly and inter-seasonal methane balances
regulating the methane storage technologies (2)(3), the methane storage limits (4)(5)(6), the methane
transmission limits (7), and the methane production limits (8). Finally, the extension of the objective
function is discussed. These equations are for a majority adaptations to recent advancements in the
mathematical modeling of the hydrogen addon outlined in [41]. As a general note, all parameter names
are indicated in lowercase letters and the variable names in uppercase. Furthermore, all variables
introduced bellow have been set as positive variables (lower bound fixed to 0).
1.1
Regional methane demand balance
X
a∈AR
r
g∈GCH4
P CH4
a,g,s,t +
X
r′∈Rimport
r′,r
lossesr′,rF CH4
r′,r,s,t −
X
r′∈Rexport
r,r′
F CH4
r,r′,s,t −
X
a∈AR
r
g∈GCH4,ST O
STOCH4,charge
a,g,s,t
+
X
a∈AR
r
g∈GCH4,ST O
STOCH4,discharge
a,g,s,t
= DCH4
r,s,t
∀r ∈R, s ∈S, t ∈T
(1)
P CH4
a,g,s,t represents the production of methane by various production and import technologies part of the
set g ∈GCH4. The endogenous methane demand for energy and non-energy purposes to produce power,
heat, and hydrogen aimed at satisfying various services are represented by the variable DCH4
r,s,t . The
variable F CH4
r′,r,s,t represents the methane transmission from region r to region r′. For incoming flows,
F CH4
r′,r,s,t for r′ ∈Rimport
r′,r
, transmission losses (lossesr′,r) are considered. F CH4
r,r′,s,t, representing outgoing
flows, has a negative sign. Finally, the methane storage charging (STOCH4,charge
a,g,s,t
) and discharging
(STOCH4,discharge
a,g,s,t
) variables are preceded with the sign reflecting whether they represent respectively
a methane consumption or production. The hourly and seasonal storage behaviour is discussed in
detail in the upcoming section.
1.2
Methane storage: seasonal and hourly inter-temporal balances
STOCH4,volume
a,g,(s,t+1)
= STOCH4,volume
a,g,s,t
+ γs,tSTOCH4,charge
a,g,s,t
−γs,t
STOCH4,discharge
a,g,s,t
efficiencyCH4
g
∀a ∈A, g ∈GCH4,ST O, s ∈S, t ∈T /{T}
(2)
ST OCH4,volume
a,g,(s,t+1)
+ ST OCH4,volume
a,g,
 s+1,t′
= (δs −1)


sto
CH4,volume
a,g,s
+ γs,t


ST OCH4,charge
a,g,s,t
−
ST OCH4,discharge
a,g,s,t
efficiencyCH4
g


−sto
CH4,volume
a,g,s,t′



+ V CH4
a,g,s,t + γs,tST OCH4,charge
a,g,s,t
−γs,t
ST OCH4,discharge
a,g,s,t
efficiencyCH4
g
,
a ∈A, g ∈GCH4,ST O, s ∈S, t ∈{T }, t′ ∈{0}
(3)
STOCH4,volume
a,g,s,t
≤capacityCH4,ST O
a,g
,
a ∈A, g ∈GCH4,ST O, s ∈S, t ∈T
(4)
STOCH4,charge
a,g,s,t
≤capacityCH4,ST O
a,g
chargehours
CH4
g
,
a ∈A, g ∈GCH4,ST O, s ∈S, t ∈T
(5)
==PAGE:17==
STOCH4,discharge
a,g,s,t
≤
capacityCH4,ST O
a,g
dischargehours
CH4
g
,
a ∈A, g ∈GCH4,ST O, s ∈S, t ∈T
(6)
Equations (2) and (3) are formulated to respectively model both the seasonal and hourly behaviour
of the methane storage. The balances are set up to model following behavior: the storage content
(STOCH4,volume
a,g,(s,t)
) at season (s + 1) and timestep (t + 1) is equal to the storage content at the time
segment (s, t) added to the storage content obtained by the difference between charging and discharging.
Furthermore, efficiency losses incurred during the storage charging/discharging process are accounted
for by the (efficiencyCH4
g
) term in the balances. Finally, both the terms δs and γs,t are included for
time aggregation reasons. While δs represents the number of seasons aggregated into one season s,
γs,t ensures that the correct chronological time segment (s, t) length is considered. Equations (4), (5),
and (6) are introduced to constraint the methane storage volume, charging and discharging based on
both the technical capacity (capacityCH4,ST O
a,g
) of the methane storage and hourly charging/discharging
limits (chargehours
CH4
g
/dischargehours
CH4
g
).
1.3
Methane transmission limit
F CH4
r,r′,s,t ≤capacityCH4,transmission
r,r′
,
∀r, r′ ∈Rexport
r,r′
, t ∈T
(7)
Equation (7) sets the upper bound to the methane transmission flow F CH4
r,r′,s,t between model regions.
For interconnected regions (r, r′), if a cross-border transmission capacity (capacityCH4
r,r′ ) exists, then
the methane transmission flow has to be smaller or equal to the given capacity.
1.4
Methane production limit
P CH4
a,g,s,t ≤capacityCH4,production
a,g
,
a ∈A, g ∈GCH4,production, s ∈S, t ∈T
(8)
Similarly to the methane storage and transmission flow variables, also the methane production variable
(P CH4
a,g,s,t) is constrained by the upper bound set in equation (8). As discussed in the Methodology
section, following production and import technologies are part of the set g ∈GCH4: domestic natural
gas production, domestic biomethane production, natural gas imports, and LNG imports.
1.5
Objective function extension
The Balmorel objective function can be found in [24]. As part of the mathematical modeling of the
methane addon, the objective function has been extended to incorporate total annual costs incurred
to satisfy methane demands. Hence, where appropriate, the newly introduced technologies and fuels
have been added to the existing sets the function iterates through. Here, investment and operational
costs for methane production, transmission, and storage have been discounted by means of an annuity
factor. As the original mathematical formulation has not been modified, it will not be restated here.
==PAGE:18==
2
Input data
2.1
ENTSOG/GIE System Development Map 2021/2022 [27]
F I N L A N D
N O R W A Y
S W E D E N
G E R M A N Y
S W I T Z E R L A N D
L A T V I A
E S T O N I A
L I T H U A N I A
P O L A N D
B E L A R U S
R U S S I A
R U S S I A
T U R K M E N I S T A N
G E O R G I A
A R M E N I A
A Z E R B A I J A N
T U R K E Y
A Z .
C Y P R U S
S A U D I  A R A B I A
J O R D A N
I S R A E L
L E B A N O N
I R A Q
E G Y P T
S Y R I A
K U W A I T
K A Z A K H S T A N
L I B Y A
T U N I S I A
A L G E R I A
M O R O C C O
B U L G A R I A
R O M A N I A
M O L D O V A
B O S N I A  
A N D
H E R Z E G O V I N A
S E R B I A
A U S T R I A
U K R A I N E
S L O V E N I A
C R O A T I A
H U N G A R Y
S L O V A K I A
C Z E C H
R E P U B L I C
A L B A N I A
U N M I
K O S O V O
C O R S I C A
S A R D I N I A
I T A L Y
M O N T E N E G R O
N O R T H
M A C E D O N I A
M A LT A
C R E T A
G R E E C E
S P A I N
P O R T U G A L
U N I T E D
K I N G D O M
D E N M A R K
I R E L A N D
I C E L A N D
B E L G I U M
T H E  N E T H E R L A N D S
L U X .
F R A N C E
I R A N
M A D E I R A
A Z O R E S
M A L L O R C A
T E N E R I F E
G R A N  C A N A R I A
M E N O R C A
A N D O R R A
L I E C H T .
G u l f  o f  B o t h n i a
Å L A N D
G O T L A N D
S H E T L A N D S
F A R O E
I S L A N D S
( D K )
G u l f  o f  F i n l a n d
C a s p i a n  S e a
W h i t e
S e a
P o m o r i y
S t r a i t
P e c h o r a  S e a
B a r e n t s  S e a
G u l f  o f  
R i g a
B l a c k  S e a
T u z  G ö l ü
P e r s i a n
G u l f
M e d i t e r r a n e a n  S e a
S e a  o f  A z o v
M e d i t e r r a n e a n  S e a
L i g u r i a n
S e a
T y r r h e n i a n  S e a
I o n i a n
S e a
S t r a i t  o f  G i b r a l t a r
B a l e a r i c
S e a
E n g l i s h  C h a n n e l
B r i s t o l  C h a n n e l
I S L E S  O F
S C I L L Y
N o r t h  C h a n n e l
S e a  o f  t h e  H e b r i d e s
I N N E R
H E B R I D E S
N o r t h
 S e a
I r i s h
 S e a
G u l f  o f
L i o n
B a y  o f  B i s c a y
A t l a n t i c  O c e a n
B a l t i c  S e a
S k a g e r r a k
K a t t e g a t
A e g e a n
S e a
A d r i a t i c  S e a
G u l f  o f  S a r o s
Strait
of
Hormuz
HELSINKI
BERLIN
BERN
OSLO
WARSAW
VILNIUS
RIGA
TALLINN
MINSK
KYIV
MOSCOW
TBILISI
YEREVAN
TEHRAN
ANKARA
BEIRUT
DAMASCUS
AMMAN
JERUSALEM
CAIRO
LA’YOUNE
MANAMAH
BAGDAD
TRIPOLI
RABAT
ALGIERS
BUCHAREST
CHISINAU
LJUBLJANA
PRAGUE
VIENNA
BRATISLAVA
ZAGREB
BUDAPEST
ROME
TIRANA
PRISTINA
SARAJEVO
BELGRADE
SKOPJE
PODGORICA
ATHENS
TUNIS
SOFIA
STOCKHOLM
LUX.
PARIS
COPENHAGEN
TEHRAN
CAIRO
LA’YOUNE
MANAMAH
SKOPJE
LONDON
DUBLIN
BRUSSELS
MADRID
KUWAIT
NICOSIA
LISBON
LA VALETTA
REYKJAVIK
K o l g u y e v
N o v a y a
Z e m l y a
I s l a n d
K a n i n
P e n i n s u l a
K o l a
P e n i n s u l a
B O R N H O L M
Siuntio (Pölans)
Inkoo
Hanko
Lohja
Tolkkinen
Kotka
Hamina
Lahti
Hameenlinna
Mäntsälä
Espoo
Tampere
Jyväskylä
Kyroskoski
Oulu
Tornio Manga
Skellefteå
Pori
Rauma
Nokia
Turku
Lappeenranta
Kouvola
Rimpar
Würzburg
Kienbaum
Oranienburg
Radeland
Groß Köris
Deutschneudorf
VIP Brandov
Hora Svaté Kateřiny
Olbernhau
Hradec Králové
Plzeň
Sayda
Dresden
Leipzig
Guben
Leonberg
Zürich
Lucerne
Griespass
Passo Gries
Rodersdorf
Leiblach
BaselWallbach
Fallentor
Thayngen
Lindau
Pfronten
Kiefersfelden
Inzenham
Wolfersberg
München
Finsing
Wertingen
Forchheim
Arresting
Regensburg
Nürnberg
Schwandorf
Rothenstadt
Kufstein
VIP Kiefersfelden / Pfronten
GDLux (BE) / 
Bras Petange (LU)
Haidach
Haiming
Burghausen
/Uberackern
Salzburg
Innsbruck
Oltingue
VIP
Germany-CH
Waidhaus
Wroclaw
Lasów
Gubin
Mallnow
Odolanów
Damaslawek
(PWP) PL
Point of Interconnection
GCP GAZ-SYSTEM/ONTRAS
Płoty
Kamminke
Szczecin
Poznan
Lwówek
Świnoujście
Rafnes
Stokke
Fredrikstad
Risavika
Bygnes
Avaldsnes
Karmøy
Haugesund
Stavanger
Bergen
Kollsnes
 Kårstø 
TROLL
Tjeldbergodden
Nyhamna
Trondheim
St. Fergus
Sullom Voe
Tampen Link
Gislaved
JönKöping
Örebro
Karlstad
Mariestad
Lidköping
Västerås
Östersund
Järna
Linköping Norrköping
Mlölby
Gnosjö
Lysekil
Vallby Kile
Varberg
Stenungsund
Faxe
Dragør
Brunnsviksholmen
(Nynäshamn)
Malmö
Trelleborg
Halmstad
Kaunas
Santaka
Kaliningrad
Kaliningrad
(FSRU)
Klaipéda LNG
(FSRU Independence)
Skulte
Incukalns
Paldiski
Pärnu
Muuga
Jauniunai
Kotlovka
Gdansk (FSRU)
Brunnsbüttel
Ellund
Stade
Wilhelmshaven
Šakiai
Skoczów
Cieszyn
Tworzen
Katowice
Rembelszczyzna
Lodz
Oświęcim
Budince
Výrava
Drozdwicze
Strachocina
Drozdovychi
Wysokoje
Hołowczyce 
Kondratki
Tietierowka
Lublin
Rozwadów (Charzewice) 
Wronów
Płońsk
Uniszki Zawadzkie 
Wloclawek
Gustorzyn
Jaroslaw
Rzeszow
Pogórska Wola
Hermanowice
Kędzierzyn-Koźle
Racibórz 
Gdansk
Olsztyn
Jurbarkas
Siauliai
Kuršėnai
Klaipéda
Visaginas
Daugavpils
Rezekne
Panevėžys
Izborsk
Misso
Luhamaa
Korneti
Liepaja
Värska
Karksi
Puiatu
Petrodvorets
Narva
Ust-Luga
Slantsy
Pskov
Iecava
Kiemėnai
Primorsk
Nevsk
Velikiya Novgorod
Volkhov
St. Petersburg
Mozyr
Gomel
Babryusk
Osipovich
Nezvizhskaya
Mogilev
Orsha
Krupskaya
Vitebsk
Navapolatsk
Sionim
Kobryn
Pogar
Sudzha
Lutsk
Sumy
Kharkiv
Zhytomyr
Rzhev
Kubinka
Kursk
Bryansk
Smolensk
Belgorod
Orel
Kirov
Kromy
Cherepet
Dorogobuzh
Kaluga
Kandalaksha
Murmansk
MURMANSK
Synya
Usinsk
Pechora
Imatra
Vyborg
Portovaya
Zelkov
Jaroslavi
Vologda
Gryazovets
Kineshma
Ivanovo
Vladimir
Tver
Borovichi
Petrozavodsk
Kerm
Archangelsk
Severodvinsk
Vichni Volochok
Torzhok
Valdai
Niznij Novgorod
Zavolzhe
Cheboksary
Ioshkar-Ola
Ukhta
Syktyvkar
Kotlas
Rudnichny
Perm
Izhevsk
Kirov
Mikun
Solikamsk
Sterlitomak
Ufa
Kazan
Orenburg
Samara
Uljavovsk
Kumertau
Buzuluk
Saratov
Saransk
Nicholsk
Korablino
Skopin
Voronez
Stary Oskol
Lipetsk
Yeletz
Tula
Razan
Mikhailov
Tambov
Michurinsk
Penza
Kasimov
Tskhinvali
Derbent
Makhachkala
Aktau
Bekdash
Sokhranovka
Prokhorovka
Valuyki
Serebryanka
Pisarevka
SOYUZ
Aleksandrov Gay
Aktyubinsk
Ostrogoznsk
Kamyshin
Mikhailovka
Volgograd
Rostov-on-Don
Stavropol
Elista
Majkop
Grozny
Mozdok
Nalchik
Cherkessk
Kislovodsk
Sochi
Dzhubga
Tuapse
Anapa
Russkaya
Krasnodar
Novorossiejsk
Gelendzjik
Tikhoretsk
Astrakhan
Budennovsk
Neftekumsk
Artezian
Salsk
Volgodonsk
Kamensk Shakhtinsky
Belaya Kalitva
Makat
Atyrau
Sai-Utes
Kulsary
Tengiz
Ağrı
Ardahan
Artvin
Sukhumi
Zugdidi
Kulevi (Poti)
Supsa
Kobuleti
Akhaltsikhe
Aghstafa
Gyumri
Sheki
Ismailly
Agdam
Stepanakert
Mingachevir
Lachin
Goris
Batman
Bayburt
Bingöl
Bitlis
Diyarbakır
Erzurum
Hakkâri
Iğdır
Kars
Mardin
Rize
Simak
Van
BAKU
Muş
Bazargan
Turkmenbashi
Belek
Hazar
Kapan
Astara
Nakhchivan
Kord Kui
Neka
Rasht
Qazvin
Hamadan
Qom
Sanandaj
Khermanshah
Khorramabad
Esfahan
Ahwaz
Bandar Mahshahr
Abadan
Borujerd
Arak
Balkanabat
Hatay
Samandağ
Adıyaman
Kutaisi
Siazan
Sangachal
Sabirabad
Vale
Elâzığ
Erzincan
Gümüşhane
Malatya
Şanlıurfa
Siirt
Trabzon
Tunceli
Adana
Tarsus
Afyon
Aksaray
Amasya
Antalya
Aydın
Balıkesir
Bartın
Bilecik
Bolu
Burdur
Bursa
Çanakkale
Çankırı
Çorum
Denizli
Düzce
Eskişehir
Gaziantep
Giresun
Isparta
Istanbul
Izmir
Kahramanmaraş
Karabük
Kastamonu
Kayseri
Kırıkkale
Kıyıköy
Kırşehir
Konya
Karaman
Kütahya
Manisa
Içel
Muğla
Nevşehir
Niğde
Eregli
Ordu
Osmaniye
Dörtyol
Iskenderun
Sakarya
Samsun
Sivas
Tekirdağ
Yalova
Yozgat
Zongulda
Vassilikos
Port Said
Damietta LNG
Alexandria
Idku LNG
Marsa Matruh
Mafraq
Hadera Oﬀshore
Haifa
Tel Aviv
Ashdod
Ashkelon
El Arish
Tanta
Dahshour
Asyut
Hurghada
Port Safaga
Sharm el Sheikh
Qena
Suez
Ain Sukhna
Sumed LNG
Taba
Eilat
Al’Aqabah
Hamah
Latakia
Banias
Tartus
Kilis
Halab
Dayr Az Zawr
Tadmur
Tishrin
Sidon
Khirbah
Matlout
Kocaeli
Bafra
Sinop
Toka
Uşak
Tripoli
Homs
Tikrit
Hadithah
Al Basrah
Mina al Ahmadi
Min Abdulla
T-1
Ganaveh
Assaluyeh
Kerman
Rafsanjan
Bafq
Yazd
Bandar-e Abbas
Kangan
Bandar
Dhahran
Ras Tannurah
Jubail
Al-Zour
Khanaqin
An Najaf
Al Kut
An Nasiriyah
Chemchemal
Baiji
Mosul
Dihok
Aqrah
Arbil
Amarah
Kirkuk
Mellitah
Tobruk
Bahr Es Salam
Sirte
Marsa el Brega
Benghazi
Al Khums
Misurata
Sarir
Melilla
Naama
Ceuta
Tangiers
Casablanca
Jorf Lasfar / El Jadida
Mohammedia
Arico-Granadilla LNG
(Tenerife)
Las Palmas
Agadir
Santa Cruz de Tenerife
Funchal
Arinaga LNG
(Gran Canaria)
Meknès
Fes
Sidi bel Abbes
Mascara
Djelfa
Relizane
Chlef
Beni-Saf
Saida
Tlemcen
El Aricha
El Gor
Ouled
Mimoun
Sebdou
Ouargla
Hassi Messaoud
Skikda
Bejala
Hassi R’Mel
Oran
Arzew
Sousse
Sfax
La Skhirra
Gabes
Koudiet Eddraouch
Annaba
Podișor
Slobozia
Urziceni
Bălăceanca
Bilciurești
Coroi
Onesti
Brașov
Șinca
Bacău
Ungheni
Lețcani
Fălticeni
Kaushany
Ananiv
Iaşi
Târgu Mureş
Sărmăşel
Isaccea
Orlovka
Constanța
Năvodari
Yalta
Sevastopol
Yevpatoria
Alushta
Chernomorsk
Odesa
Berdiansk
Kryvyi Rih
Nikopol
Melitopol
Mariupol
Mykolaiv
Kherson
Platovo
Donetsk
Zaporizhzhia
Kerch
Siret
Gherăești
Horezu
Ghercești
Bibeşti
Jupa
Hateg
Sibiu
Mediaș
Oleksiivka
Grebenyky
Bordano
Udine
Tarvisio
Istrana
Gallese
Montesano
Poggio
Renatico
Gorizia
Sempeter
Trieste
Ajdovščina
Umag
Koper
Pula
Vodnjan
Omišalj
Arnoldstein
Rijeka
Travnik
Gospič
Cersak
Kidričevo
Tornyiszentmiklós
Pince
Nagykanizsa
Lička
Jasenica
Zlobin
Bihač
Bos. Krupa
Cazin
Rakovica
Rogatec
Csanádpalota
Nagylak
Kiskundorozsma
Arad
Petrovaselo
Mokrin
Horia
Subotica
Sombor
Novi Sad
Banja Luka
Mediesu Aurit
Beregovo
Graz
Klagenfurt
Weitendorf
Uzhhorod
Ivano-Frankivsk
Lviv
Dolyna
Ternopil
Kremenchuk
Poltava
Kropyvnytskyi
Novopskov
Dnipro
Shebelynka
Vinnytsia
Novo Selo
Bačko
Zenica
Karlovac
Bosiljevo
Lučko
Okoli
Kozarac
Zabok
Tržac
Vel. Kladusa
České Budějovice
Mosonmagyaróvár
Hajdúszoboszló
Siófok
Városföld
Drávaszerdahely
Kozármisleny
Loznica
Slobodnica
Brod
Modrica
Donji Miholac
Zvornik
Beregdaróc
Satu Mare
Tekovo
Oberkappel
Linz
Kittsee
Baumgarten
Láb
Kuty
Lanžhot
Lakšárska Nová Ves
Zvolen
Nitra
Ivánka Pri Nitre
Balassagyarmat
Selešťany
Szada
Dorog
Vel’ké Zlievce
Vel’kéKapušany
Poprad
Jablonov
Košice
Nad Turňou
Žilina
Dolni Bojanovice
Brno
Břeclav
Sotin
Osijek
Piombino
Nuoro
Macomer
Oristano
Palmas Arborea
Sassari
Porto Torres
Alghero
Portovesme
Carbonia
Porto Botte
Sarroch
Cagliari
Firenze
Mazara del Vallo
Bastia
Rio Marina
Ajaccio
Olbia
Messina
Palermo
Agrigento
Campobasso Lucera
San Paolo
Napoli
Potenza
Bari
Otranto
San Foca
Melendugno
Taranto
Massafra
Brindisi
Matagiola
Vlorë
San Marino
Ancona
Ravenna
San Marco
Recanati
Monte Urano
Chieti
Larino
L’Aquila
Cellino
Bizzarone
Trento
Milano
Rennes
Lille
Bologna
Modena
Parma
Torino
Bilbao
Bilbao
Genova
FSRU 1 - SNAM
FSRU LE HAVRE
FSRU 2 - SNAM
Livorno
Flaibano
Treviso
Venezia
Porto
Viro
Kiseljac
G.Vakuf
Knin
Benkovac
Split
Imotski
Zagvozd
Posušje
Mostar
Ploče
Zadar
Murfeld
Tetovo
Gostivar
Sopot
Fier
Berat
Korce
Perugia
Catanzaro
Gioia Tauro
El Haouaria
Gela
Megalopoli
Lavrio
Thiva
Thisvi
Ag. Nikolaos
Trikala
Katerini
Thesprotia
Florovouni
Lamia
Agia Triada
Halkida
Aliveri
Inofyta
Ampelia
Nea Mesimvria
Thessaloniki
Plati
Trikala
Alexandroupolis
Komotini
Sidirokastron
Serres
Karperi
Lachanas
Volos
Larissa
Kafasan
Dumrea
Zaychar
Shtip
Negotino
Zidilovo
Niš
Bitola
Bilisht
Prilep
Evzoni
Gevgelija
Kavala
Xanthi
Almeria
Cartagena
Motril
Málaga
Tarifa
Cádiz
Sevilla
Badajoz
Campo Maior
Sines
Huelva
Carregado
Setubal
Bucelas
Cordoba
Jaén
Murcia
Alicante
Valencia
Palma de Mallorca
Castellón
de la Plana
Albacete
Ciudad Real
Toledo
Granada
Cáceres
I B I Z A
Shannon LNG
Cork
Limerick
Waterford
Galway
Londonderry
/ Derry
Gormanston
Loughshinny
Bellanaboy
Brest
Lannion
Cherbourg
Le Havre
Caen
Edinburgh
Glasgow
Moﬀat
Twynholm
Brighouse Bay
Teesside
Middlesbrough
Barrow
Leeds
Manchester
Birmingham
Bacton
Zelzate
Antwerpen
Opwijk
Zandvliet
Hilvarenbeek
Poppel
Tegelen
‘s Gravenvoeren
Alveringem
VIRTUALYS
VIP BENE
VIP THE-ZTP
VIP BEREG
Dunkerque
Zeebrugge
Maasvlakte
Dragon LNG
South Hook LNG
Isle of Grain
Quévy
Blaregnies
Taisnières
Raeren/Lichtenbusch
Eynatten
Stolberg
Broichweiden
Würselen
Köln
Düsseldorf
Essen
Duisburg
Dortmund
Herbstein
Gernsheim
Koblenz
Frankfurt
Lampertheim
Kaiserslautern
Karlsruhe
Medelsheim
Obergailbach
Remich
Pétange
Cheppy
Morelmaison
Nancy
Voisines
Dierrey-Saint-Julien
Le Mans
Orleans
Palleau
Etrez
Geneva
Lyon
Saint-Avit
Grenoble
Monaco
Saint-Martin-de-Crau
Cruzy (Hérault)
Toulouse
Barran
Barbaira
Figueras
Huesca
Pau
Lussagnet
Bordeaux
Castillon
Lacq
Irun
S. Sebastián
Vitoria
Pamplona
Larrau
Logroño
Villar de Arnedo
Burgos
Santander
Musel / Gijon
Oviedo
Lugo
Leon
Castropodame
Villafranca
del Bierzo
Santiago
de Compostela
Ourense
Tuy
Valença do Minho
Vale de Frades
Salamanca
Avila
Segovia
Barbolla
Soria
Zaragoza
Valladolid
Adradas
Guadalajara
Cuenca
Teruel
Tivisa
Castelnou
Tarragona
Barcelona
Fos Tonkin
Fos Cavaou
Panigaglia
Rovigo
Krk LNG
Cavarzere
Yuzhne
Revythoussa
Agioi Theodoroi
Dioriga Gas
Aliaga
Marmara
Ereglisi
Malta LNG (FSRU)
Toscana (FSRU)
OLT Oﬀshore LNG 
Arbós
Lérida
Hostalric
Sagunto
Celorico da Beira
Guarda
VIP IBERICO
VIP PIRINEOS
Mangualde
Porto
Cantalhede
Carriço
Pontevedra
Guitriz
Ferrol
Mugardos
A Coruña
Palencia
Biriatou
Tarbes
Marseille
Toulon
Nice
La Rochelle
Montoir de Bretagne
Nantes
Saint-Arnould 
des Bois
Bras
Gournay
Au am Rhein
Stuttgart
Reckrod
Kassel
Tilburg
Moerdijk
Nijmegen
Zevenaar Winterswijk
Enschede
Epe
Elten
Utrecht
Rotterdam
Den Haag
Ravenstein
Vlissingen
GATE Terminal
Terneuzen
Brugge
Gent
Dilsen
Bocholtz
Obbicht
Jemgum
Bünde
Folmhusen
Wardenburg
Nordlohne
Emsbüren
VIP TTF-THE-H
VIP DK-THE
VIP TTF-THE-L
Vlieghuis
Julianadorp
Balgzand
Wieringermeer
Ijmuiden
Lelystad
Zwolle
Apeldoorn
AMSTERDAM
Oude
Statenzijl
Groningen
Eemshaven
Drohne
Rehden
Ahlten
Hannover
Wolfsburg
Magdeburg
Münster
Legden
Werne
Bremen
Sülstorf
Wittenburg
Hamburg
Schwerin
Rostock
Levitzow
Kraak
Greifswald
Lubmin II
Lubmin
Steinitz
Emden
Delfzijl
Dornum
Quarnstedt
Kiel
Nybro
Egdved
Nyborg
Kongsmark
Odense
Aalborg
Helsingborg
Ljungby
Kalmar
Kristianstadt
Göteborg
Göteborg
GO4LNG
Theddlethorpe
Easington
Cardiﬀ
Warwick
Milford Haven
Point of Ayr
Douglas
Carrickfergus
Belfast
Killeen
O U T E R
H E B R I D E S
ISLE OF MAN
Hammerfest
Zamora
Smolyan
Kardzhali
Dimitrovgrad
Yambol
Provadia
Vetrino
Rupcha
Dobrich
Razgrad
Shumen
Targovishte
Veliko Tarnovo
Gabrovo
Lovech
Novi Iskar
Montana
Vratsa
Plovdiv
Pazardzhikk
Ihtiman
Pernik
Blagoevgrad
Bansko
Simitli
Gueshevo
Kyustendil
Strandzha
Malkoclar
Kırklareli
Edirne
Stara Zagora
Burgas
Valchi Dol
Ruse
Giurgiu
Silistra
Pleven
Lozenets
Varna
Negru Voda
Kardam
Kulata
Petrich
Dimitrovgrad
Kireevo
Botevgrad
NEL
RHG
NEL
NEL
OPAL
JAGAL
STEGAL
EUGAL
EUGAL
EUGAL
OPAL
OPAL
TENP
TENP
MEGAL
MEGAL
MEGAL
NORD
SCHWARZWALD
LEITUNG
EuRoPoL
WEDAL
ZEELINK
ZEELINK
ZEELINK
MIDAL
MEGAL
STATPIPE
ASGARD TR.
EUROPIPE II
NORTH
LANGELED
ASGARD TRANSPORT
POLARLED
POLARLED
HALTENPIPE
CATS
SEAL
ZEEPIPE
FRANPIPE
NOGAT
NORPIPE
EUROPIPE I
INTERCONNECTOR
BBL
NOGAT
NGT
NGT
CMS
CMS
EUROPIPE II
FULMAR
BRITANNIA
MEOR
WOSPS
SIRGE
UTSIRA
FLAGS NLGP
FUKA
VESTERLED
SAGE
MILLER
LANGELED SOUTH
VALEMON
TOGI
OGT
SLEIPNER CONDENSATE
STATPIPE
STATPIPE
ZEEPIPE IIA
ZEEPIPE IIB
LANGELED NORTH
GJOA
BALTIC PIPE
BALTIC PIPE
BALTIC PIPE
GIPL
GIPL
EuRoPoL
STORK
KKP
NORD STREAM I (NOT IN OPERATION)
BALTIC
CONNECTOR
Kyiv - West of Ukraine
UPU
Progress
AGRI
Trans-Caspian Pipeline
South Caucasus Pipeline
(SCPFX)
EAST MED / SOUTHERN LINE
EAST MED / NORTHERN LINE
EAST MED / NL
EAST MED / SL
Kipi
NVGC
AGP
Arab Gas Pipeline (AGP)
IGAT 7
MAGHREB-EUROPE GAS (MEG)
MAGHREB-EUROPE GAS (MEG)
MEDGAZ
GZ0-GZ5
MEDGAZ
GG1-GG2
GAZODUC ENRICO MATTEI
MEDGAZ
EGPDF
GK1-GK4
IBR
IBS
IBS
PIPELINE
TRANS-BALKAN
ATI
ATI, SDKRI, AI
SDKRI
TAG I
TAG II
SOL
TAG
BRUA
BRUA
BRUA
EASTRING
EASTRING
(Urengoy-Pomary-Uzhgorod)
UPU
PROGRESS
WAG
HAG
EASTRING
EASTRING
CZATi
TRANSMED
POSEIDON
TAP
ADRIATICA PIPELINE
GREEN STREAM
MELITA TRANSGAS
POSEIDON
IGI
IGB
TAP
TAP
POSEIDON
POSEIDON
TAP
INTERCONNECTOR 2
INTERCONNECTOR 1
SNIP
ARTERE DE L’ADOUR
GASCOGNE MIDI
MIDAL
NEL
DEUDAN
BLUE STREAM
TANAP
Trans-Anatolian Pipeline
TANAP
TANAP
TANAP
HADITHAH - MINA EL BAKR
IGAT 6
IGAT 5
Trans-Sinai Gasline
Egypt Gas Pipeline (AGP)
AGP
EMG Pipeline
AGP
AGP
LFF
LSF
TENP
MEGAL
PENTA WEST
EuRoPoL
YAMAL
IAP
IAP
IAP
IAP
EAST MED
NOWAL
NETRA
WAL
MONACO
MORAVIA
NORTHERN LIGHTS
Ananiv - Kremenchuk
SOYUZ
SDKRI
SOYUZ
EKKR
IGAT 1
IGAT 2
TURKSTREAM
L a d o g a  
L a k e
O n e g a
L a k e
SNØHVIT
7128/4-1
7125/4-1
ALKE
GOLIAT
7122/6-1
PESCHANO-OZER
POMOR
PIRAZLOM
BELUZEY
GULYAYEV N
KILDIN N
MURMAN
Sarajeh
Jaria Pika
Naft Khaneh
Tang-e-Bijar
Veyzenhar
Sarkhan
Par-E-Siah
Ramin
Bangestan
Haft Kel
Agha Jari
Gachsaran
Maleh Kuh
Halush
Kabir Kuh
Samand
Huleylan
Al Rasem
Bilas
Cherrife
Dohour
Abou
Al Zamleh-Ajouz
Soukhneh Najeeb
Al Hail
Arak
Al Hol
Sheikh Sulaiman
Jeribe
Gbeibe
Margada
Abou Rabah
F-Structure
G-3
Dalan
Aghar
Nar
Varavi
Tabnak
Namak West
Gashu South
Suru
Sarkhum
Gordon
Kuh-i-Mand
Pars North
Kish
Balal
SOUTH PARS / NORTH DOME
Henjam
HA-1
Bukha
Gavarzin
Salakh
Tel Ghazal
Mansuriyah
Khasm Al Ahmar
Qamar
Saddam
Jambur
Anfal
Khabbaz
Bai Hassan
Qaiyarah
Qasab
Gilabat
Meghil
Hassi M’dakane
Wafa
Alrar
Atshan
In Amenas
Ohanet
Tin-Fouye-Tabankort
Rhourde Nouss
Gassi Touil
ASKELADD
ASKELADD W
ALBATROSS
ALBATROSS S
NORNE
AASTA HANSTEEN
SKARV
DRAUGEN
ORMEN LANGE
MIDNATTSOL
NJORD
ASGARD
KRISTIN
HEIDRUN
HEWETT
PEON
AGAT
MAGNUS
SNORRE
KNARR
OSEBERG
BERYL
ALVHEIM
FRIGG
RHUM
GOLDENEYE
BREAGH
ATLANTIC
HEIMDAL
GRANE
SLEIPNER
EDVARD GRIEG
JOHAN SVERDRUP
GUDRUN
BRAE
VALEMON
MARTIN LINGE
BRAGE
TROLL
DRAUPNER
BRITANNIA
FORTIES
ELGIN FRANKLIN
EVEREST
AUDREY
W. SOLE
ULA
GYDA
EKOFISK
HOD
VALHALL
HARALD
SYD
ARNE
MURDOCH
AMETHYST
TYRA
GALLEON
LANCELOT
LEMAN
MARKHAM
B/13
HULDRA
VISUND
GULLFAKS
VESLEFRIKK
REV
GJOA
KALIAKRA
GALATA
KAVARNA
APHRODITE/ISHAI
LEVIATHAN
TANIN
TAMAR
DOLPHIN
DALIT
KARISH
ROSETTA
KAROUS
ABU SIR
ABU QIR N
SCARAB
BALTIM N
BALTIM S
BALTIM E
ROSETTA
SAFFRON
TAO
MARINE 1-2
KERSH
DARFEEL
THEKAH
KAMOSE
MARI-B
AKEN
LUCEAFARUL
ANA
DOINA
COBALCESCU
DOMINO
KERCH
GOLITSYNO
ODESSA
SHTORMOV
KRYM
STREIKOV
LEBADA
GAVIOTA
STATFJORD
CORRIB
KINSALE HEAD
SEVEN HEADS
SHAH DENIZ
Schelkovskoye
Kasimovskoye
Kaluzhskoye
Mikhailov
Yakshunov
Uvyazovskoye
Udmurt - Novotroitskoie
Karashurskoye 1 (Udmurd Complex)
Karashurskoye 2 (Udmurd Complex)
Bednodemyanovskoye
Kuschevskoye
Garadag
Galmaz
Nakchivan
Krasnodarskoye
Peschano-Umetskoye
Dmitrievskoye
Kiryushkinskoye 
Amanakskoye 
Bereznikovskoye
Stepnovskoye 1
Talovskoie
Stepnovskoye 2
Severo-Stavropolskoye 1
Severo-Stavropolskoye 2
Yelshano-Kurdyumskoye 1
Yelshano-Kurdyumskoye 2
Michailovskoye 
Kantchurinskoye
Sovkhoznoye
Musinskoye
Volgogradskoye
Soings-en-Sologne
Nussdorf / Zagling
Puchkirchen / Haag
Haidach 5
Schönkirchen / Reyersdorf
Tallesbrunn
Etrez
Trois Fontaines l’Abbaye
Saint-Illiers-la-Ville
Saint-Clair-sur-Epte
Céré-la-Ronde
Jemgum H
Wolfersberg
DE
Schmidhausen
Fronhofen-Trigonodus
Frankenthal
Stassfurt
EnergyStock
Grijpskerk
Bergermeer
Hill Top Farm
Hole House Farm
Aldbrough
Hornsea (Atwick)
Cheshire (Holford GS)
Hatfield Moor
Stublach
Hampshire
Norg
Allmenhausen
Katharina
Empelde
Reckrod
Breitbrunn/Eggstätt
Bierwang
Bilche-Volytsko-Uherske
Bohorodchanske
Dashavske
Hlibovske
Uherske (XIV-XV)
Kehychivske
Proletarske
Verhunske
Solokhivske
Inzenham-West
Rehden
Bremen-Lesum
Huntorf-L
Harsefeld
Etzel
Hähnlein
Sandhausen
Stockstadt
Bernburg
Rüdersdorf
Husow
Oparske
Kosakowo
Bad Lauchstädt
Eschenfelden
Peckensen
Kiel-Rönne
Kraak
Skallen
Kaliningradskoye
Inčukalns
Gatchinskoye
Nevskoye
Xanten
Uelsen
Epe
Beynes Profond
Beynes Supérieur
Tersanne
Carriço 
Manosque
Hauterives
Izaute
Gaviota
Serrablo
Yela
Marismas
Lussagnet
Chémery
Cerville
Gournay-sur-Aronde
Germiny-sous-Coulombs
Grubisno Polje
Banatski Dvor
Chiren
South Kavala
Tuz Gölü / Aksaray Sultanhani
Silivri (Marmara)
Mozyrskoye
Osipovichskoye
Pribugskoye
Loenhout
Haidach
Dolni Dunajovice
Hajdúszoboszló
Kardoskút-Pusztaszolos
Pusztaederics
Zsana-Nord
Okoli
Bilciuresti
Cellino
Collalto
Settala
Cotignola & San Potito
Poggiofiorito
Fiume Treste
Alfonsine
Sabbioncello
Târgu Mures
Moldova (Falticeni)
Sarmasel
Balanceanca
Urziceni
Cetatea de Balta
Ghercesti
Sergnano
Cornegliano
Bordolano
Ripalta
Brugherio
Cortemaggiore
Minerbio
Szöreg-1
Háje
Lille Torup
Stenlille
Štramberk
Dambořice
Třanovice
Strachocina
Krasnopopivske
Vel’ké Kapušany 
Swarzow
Brzeznica
Lobodice
Uhřice
Láb
Gajary-Baden
Dolni Bojanovice
Tvrdonice
Aigelsbrunn
Krummhörn
Rough
Deborah
Mogilno
Bonikowo
Daszewo
Nüttermoor
Berlin
Saltfleetby
Sultanhani
7 Fields
Chervonopartyzanske
Olyshivske
Alkmaar
Wierzchowice
Tarsus / Mersin
Islandmagee
TTF
VHP-THE
VTP-GAZ-SYSTEM
PEG
PVB
PSV
MGP
HTP
CEGH
OTE
ETF
GTF
IBP
NBP
ZTP
ZEE
C A N A R Y  I S L A N D S
Arinaga LNG
Las Palmas
Santa Cruz de Tenerife
Arico-Granadilla LNG
T E N E R I F E
G R A N  C A N A R I A
L A N Z A R O T E
F U E R T E V E N T U R A
GWh/d
2021
2022
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
 0
5 000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
7.020 GWh/d on 08/08/2021
24.2226 GWh/d on 25/01/2022
S U P P LY
D E M A N D
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT MAP
2021 / 2022
EUROPEAN DEMAND
EU Total 2021
5.189.480 GWh
EU 1 Apr 2021 - 30 Sep 2021
1.893.530 GWh
EU Min. Day
7.020 GWh/d
(08/08/2021)
(Summer)
(Winter)
(25/01/2022)
EU 1 Oct 2021 - 31 Mar 2022
3.127.848 GWh
EU Max. Day
24.226 GWh/d
EUROPEAN SUPPLY & DEMAND
Avenue de Cortenbergh 100
1000 Brussels - BELGIUM
T
Twitter @ENTSOG
+32 2 894 51 00
info@entsog.eu
www.entsog.eu
Avenue de Cortenbergh 100
1000 Brussels - BELGIUM
T
Twitter @GIEBrussels
+32 2 209 05 00
gie@gie.eu
www.gie.eu
The System Development Map 2021 / 2022 presents existing gas infrastructure and capacity information for 2022. Data presented in the capacity matrix were obtained from 
the ENTSOG members and approved by gas TSOs on 20 December 2022. Cross border capacities within countries sharing the same balancing zone (Denmark-Sweden and 
Estonia-Latvia) are not considered.
The 2021 / 2022 historical data on gas demand and supply are presented aggregated in the form of charts (using data during summer 2021 and winter 2021/2022 to allow the 
analysis of gas storage usage) – these data are available in the ENTSOG Summer and Winter Review Reports.
Information regarding the gas storage ﬁll rate was obtained from GIE AGSI platform.
The Country Proﬁles include demand data that represent actual country demand for the days / periods shown. Storages and LNG capacities were obtained from GIE AGSI / ALSI 
platforms according to the interconnection to the country's transmission system. Installed gas-ﬁred power generation capacity was obtained from ENTSO-E Transparency 
Platform. The gas production data reﬂects the maximum deliverability achieved. 
All data provided in the map are for information purposes, should be treated as indicative only, and should not be used for commercial purposes.
Intra-country or intra balancing zone points
Trading Points / Market Areas
Third country cross-border interconnection point
LNG  Terminals’ entry point
intro transmission system
LNG  Export Terminal
Virtual Point
LNG Import Terminal
Under construction or Planned
LNG Export Terminal
Under construction or Planned
Cross-Border third country import/export
Under construction or Planned
Cross-Border Europe
Under construction or Planned
KEYS
Map points
Data keys
36” and over
project
under 24”
24” to 36”
Transport by pipeline 
drilling platform
gas ﬁeld
Gas Reserve areas
Countries
EU Countries
Other Countries
Gas storage facilities
Salt cavity - cavern
multiple storage facilities 
operated by diﬀerent SSOs
Acquifer
Depleted (Gas) ﬁeld 
on shore / oﬀshore
Other type
Unknown
 Gas storage projects
Etzel*
ALGERIA
RUSSIA
(RU)
(NP)
(NO)
(DZ)
(LY)
(UGS)
(LNG)
NORWAY
NATIONAL 
PRODUCTION
LIBYA
(CA)
CASPIAN REGION
UGS
LNG
Cross-border interconnection point 
with third country (import)
Cross-border interconnection point
within Europe or export point to non-EU country
EU Storage / Injection / Withdrawal
Seasonal Proﬁle / GWh/d
Version :  December 2022
WGS 84 / Pseudo-Mercator projection
not operational
EU Daily gas demand proﬁle
Seasonal Proﬁle / GWh/d
TOTAL SEASONAL INJECTION : 712.316 GWh
2022
Jan
Feb
Mar
2021
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
GWh/d
-4.000
-6.000
-2.000
0
2.000
4.000
6.000
8.000
10.000
77,28 % FULL on 21/10/2021
Withdrawal max   8.198 GWh/d
Injection max  
5.302 GWh/d
Highest withdrawal
Key
Lowest stock level
Highest injection
Highest stock level
25,51 % FULL on 19/03/2022
TOTAL SEASONAL WITHDRAWAL : 725.463 GWh
8.198 GWh/d WITHDRAWAL on 21/12/2021
5.302 GWh/d INJECTION on 04/07/2021
UGS
Algeria
Russia
Norway
NP
Libya
Caspian
Region
LNG
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
0%
Key
Summer Supply
(01.01.2021 - 31.12.2021)
Winter Supply
Yearly Supply
EU Supply Sources
Seasonal & Yearly Supply Shares / %
on the minimum demand date UGS is not a part of 
the supply but of the demand due to the ﬁlling of storages
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
Key
Min. Day
Max. Day
UGS
Algeria
Russia
Norway
NP
Libya
Caspian
Region
LNG
EU Supply Sources
Shares on the lowest & the highest demand days / %
UGS in
UGS w
Algeria
Russia
Norway
NP
Libya
Caspian
Region
LNG
-15000
-10000
-5000
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Key
Min. Flow
Max. Flow
Capacity
EU Supply Sources
Minimum and Maximum use of import capacity / GWh/d
-30 000
-20 000
-10 000
 0
10 000
20 000
30 000
2022
Jan
Feb
Mar
2021
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
UGS WITHDRAWAL
CASPIAN SEA REGION
LNG
RUSSIA
NATIONAL PRODUCTION
LIBYA
ALGERIA
NORWAY
DEMAND
UGS INJECTION
EXPORTS
TO
TO
AT
BE
BA
BA
BA
BG
CH
CZ
DE
DK
EE
ES
FI
FR
GR
HR
HU
IE
IT
LT
LU
LV
MA
MD
MK
MT
NL
PL
PT
RO
RS
RU
SI
SE
SE
SE
SK
SM
TR
UA
UK
AT
BE
BG
CH
CZ
DE
DK
EE
ES
FI
FR
GR
HR
HU
IE
IT
LT
LU
LV
MA
MD
MK
MT
NL
PL
PT
RO
RS
RU
SI
SK
SM
TR
UA
UK
AT
BE
BG
CH
CZ
DE
DK
EE
ES
FI
FR
GR
HR
HU
IE
IT
LT
LU
LV
MA
MD
MK
MT
NL
PL
PT
RO
RS
RU
SI
SK
SM
TR
UA
UK
Total
FROM
Import Capacities
Cross-Border Capacities
DZ
CA
LNG
LY
NO
RU
UK
TR
DZ
CA
LNG
LY
NO
RU
UK
AT
BE
BG
CH
CZ
DE
DK
EE
ES
FI
FR
HU
GR
HR
IT
LT
LV
MD
NL
PL
PT
RO
RS
SI
SK
UA
AT
BE
BG
CH
CZ
DE
DK
EE
ES
FI
FR
HU
GR
HR
IT
LT
LV
MD
NL
PL
PT
RO
RS
SI
SK
UA
FROM
477
85
1.910
1.106
225
350
23
652
387*
780
1.149
498
227
122
744
22
965
168
1.074
1.113
1.914
121
200
1.616
7.878
493
5.091
5.992
2.021 2.447 1.226
919
55
400
658
433
262
3.104
80
387
90
560
59
670
149
22
256
584
79
2.771
694
2.506 4.864
326
1.207
TR
23
1.929
350
1.499
493
500
1.247
322
27
220
145
517
325**
105**
570
488
576
0
435
339
2.145
447
347
840
100
614
803
494
78
54
26
165
117
27
497
183
153
52
1.174
247
1.246
113
28
8
144
4
437
144
77
22
51
85
401
142
114**
32
55
90
637
49
24
338
510
326
322
58
174
28
124
91
0
182
1.232
4
416
334
1.387
1.223
90
65
21
80
259
66
494
338
223
270
224
55
443
194
1.570
14
246
73
517
129
1.297
522
497
4
1.865
149
114
0
543
282
144
908
848
0
27
55
32
90
73
87
2.331
0
1.170
131
117
1.778
55
245
90
215
3.392
2.592
1.013
663
2.092
2.104
14
3.116
121
0
0
1.914
0
0
0
0
1.113
200
1.302
1.876
22
0
0
0
105
0
447
2.139
387
517
85
598
1.676
365
2.690
27
322
1.747
0
0
576
1.617
0
0
* Part of this technical capacity (89.3 GWh/day) is allocated to PTL for Northern Ireland.
** Part of these technical capacities is only available for transit to a third country.
Import & Transmission Capacity
31 December 2022 (GWh/d)
(Lesser Rule applied - Lowest value submitted by cross border TSOs)
UNITED KINGDOM
-
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
346.509 GWh
446.604 GWh
855.671 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
1.458 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
3.713 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
850 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(31/03/2022)
3.713 GWh/d
Max. Day
(25/01/2022)
1.060
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
SWITZERLAND
-
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
8.975 GWh
26.084 GWh
35.404 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
33 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
191 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
18 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(31/07/2021)
203 GWh/d
Max. Day
(13/01/2022)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
SWEDEN
-
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
101
GWh
9
GWh/d
6
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
3.205 GWh
4.596 GWh
8.916 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
15 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
26 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
9 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(18/09/2021)
51 GWh/d
Max. Day
(06/12/2021)
0.3
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
SPAIN
29.927
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
3.500
GWh
218
GWh/d
132
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
1.910
GWh/d
21.955
GWh
Send-out
Storage
170.578 GWh
219.170 GWh
378.297 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
704 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
1.743 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
682 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(31/10/2021)
1.803 GWh/d
Max. Day
(18/01/2022)
4
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
SLOVENIA
626
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
3.808 GWh
6.307 GWh
10.186 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
13 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
45 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
12 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(01/08/2021)
48 GWh/d
Max. Day
(13/01/2022)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
SLOVAKIA
-
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
35.048
GWh
492
GWh/d
411
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
19.446 GWh
37.406 GWh
59.227 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
67 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
274 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
62 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(01/08/2021)
284 GWh/d
Max. Day
(12/01/2022)
2
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
SERBIA
486
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
- GWh
- GWh
- GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
- GWh/d
EU Min. Day
- GWh/d
EU Max. Day
- GWh/d
Min.  Day
-
- GWh/d
Max. Day
-
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
ROMANIA
2.218
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
32.794
GWh
312
GWh/d
265
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
36.546 GWh
78.334 GWh
119.742 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
142 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
636 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
110 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(01/08/2021)
636 GWh/d
Max. Day
(25/01/2022)
254
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
PORTUGAL
4.520
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
3.670
GWh
86
GWh/d
24
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
200
GWh/d
2.582
GWh
Send-out
Storage
31.793 GWh
30.831 GWh
61.683 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
88 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
227 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
58 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(01/01/2022)
259 GWh/d
Max. Day
(16/06/2021)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
POLAND
3.705
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
36.410
GWh
596
GWh/d
345
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
220
GWh/d
2.118
GWh
Send-out
Storage
79.297 GWh
119.400 GWh
207.616 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
359 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
777 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
343 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(11/09/2021)
895 GWh/d
Max. Day
(27/12/2021)
82
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
NETHERLANDS
18.530
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
138.991
GWh
2.783
GWh/d
1.405
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
741
GWh/d
4.602
GWh
Send-out
Storage
145.003 GWh
205.786 GWh
382.742 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
481 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
1.605 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
481 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(08/08/2021)
1.772 GWh/d
Max. Day
(22/12/2021)
1.191
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
LUXEMBURG
96
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
3.079 GWh
5.311 GWh
8.655 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
11 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
40 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
9 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(13/08/2021)
40 GWh/d
Max. Day
(11/01/2022)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
LITHUANIA
1.527
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
122
GWh/d
1.094
GWh
Send-out
Storage
9.846 GWh
11.345 GWh
24.186 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
31 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
63 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
29 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(21/12/2021)
110 GWh/d
Max. Day
(26/04/2021)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
LATVIA
1.162
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
24.074
GWh
315
GWh/d
178
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
3.371 GWh
7.495 GWh
12.526 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
7 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
53 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
6 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(11/07/2021)
86 GWh/d
Max. Day
(08/12/2021)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
ITALY
41.961
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
193.443
GWh
2.914
GWh/d
1.698
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
560
GWh/d
3.059
GWh
Send-out
Storage
294.365 GWh
507.127 GWh
799.401 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
1.039 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
3.997 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
999 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(08/08/2021)
3.997 GWh/d
Max. Day
(25/01/2021)
101
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
IRELAND
4.265
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
25.352 GWh
28.719 GWh
55.073 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
101 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
230 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
87 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(01/01/2022)
234 GWh/d
Max. Day
(24/01/2022)
51
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
HUNGARY
3.979
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
67.703
GWh
840
GWh/d
488
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
35.025 GWh
82.033 GWh
117.477 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
128 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
644 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
121 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(21/08/2021)
656 GWh/d
Max. Day
(24/01/2022)
85
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
GREECE
5.213
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
270
GWh/d
1.489
GWh
Send-out
Storage
35.005 GWh
36.240 GWh
70.150 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
193 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
299 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
88 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(09/05/2021)
311 GWh/d
Max. Day
(21/12/2021)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
GERMANY
30.553
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
245.452
GWh
6.879
GWh/d
4.029
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
331.000 GWh
648.500 GWh
1.005.600 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
1.092 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
4.750 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
1.021 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(15/08/2021)
5.001 GWh/d
Max. Day
(21/12/2021)
176
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
N. MACEDONIA
251
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
1.557 GWh
2.790 GWh
4.495 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
12 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
17 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
0,25422 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(25/06/2021)
19 GWh/d
Max. Day
(28/10/2021)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
FRANCE
12.391
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
132.605
GWh
2.483
GWh/d
1.201
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
1.253
GWh/d
8.871
GWh
Send-out
Storage
135.579 GWh
318.459 GWh
474.784 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
410 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
2.589 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
370 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(15/08/2021)
2.596 GWh/d
Max. Day
(22/12/2021)
19
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
FINLAND
1.935
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
8.775 GWh
10.704 GWh
25.088 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
45 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
64 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
19 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(15/05/2021)
143 GWh/d
Max. Day
(08/12/2021)
1
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
ESTONIA
94
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
1.546 GWh
3.207 GWh
5.123 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
6 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
20 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
4 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(23/06/2021)
42 GWh/d
Max. Day
(06/12/2021)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
DENMARK
1.621 
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
9.232
GWh
180
GWh/d
91
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
9.323 GWh
15.528 GWh
27.688 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
24 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
94 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
18 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(17/07/2021)
106 GWh/d
Max. Day
(04/12/2021)
20
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
CZECH REPUBLIC
1.240
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
43.774
GWh
705
GWh/d
504
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
32.361 GWh
61.838 GWh
100.333 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
107 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
424 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
97 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(31/07/2021)
471 GWh/d
Max. Day
(10/01/2022)
5
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
CROATIA
750
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
4.773
GWh
52
GWh/d
44
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
86
GWh/d
927
GWh
Send-out
Storage
11.315 GWh
17.888 GWh
29.634 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
55 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
141 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
28 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(06/06/2021)
143 GWh/d
Max. Day
(12/02/2021)
19
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
BULGARIA
1.266
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
5.803
GWh
40
GWh/d
38
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
14.577 GWh
19.708 GWh
35.325 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
60 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
155 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
53 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(10/10/2021)
155 GWh/d
Max. Day
(25/01/2022)
1
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
BOSNIA-HERZ.
-
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
-
GWh
-
GWh/d
-
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
-
GWh/d
-
GWh
Send-out
Storage
544 GWh
1.733 GWh
2.176 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
2 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
11 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
2 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(26/06/2021)
14 GWh/d
Max. Day
(24/01/2022)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
BELGIUM
6.819
MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
7.610
GWh
170
GWh/d
88
GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
477
GWh/d
3.801
GWh
Send-out
Storage
64.994 GWh
110.263 GWh
186.086 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
231 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
932 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
209 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(25/07/2021)
933 GWh/d
Max. Day
(10/01/2022)
-
GWh/d
Maximum
Production
AUSTRIA
PRODUCTION
DEMAND
POWER
GENERATION
4.449 MWe
Installed
gas-ﬁred
capacity
95.547 GWh
1.060 GWh/d
843 GWh/d
WGV
Deliverability
Injection
- GWh/d
- GWh
Send-out
Storage
1 Apr 2021 to 30 Sep 2021
1 Oct 2021 to 31 Mar 2022
Summer
1 Jan 2021 to 31 Dec 2021
Total 2021
Winter
30.757 GWh
64.442 GWh
96.194 GWh
Total 2021
Summer
Winter
106 GWh/d
EU Min. Day
466 GWh/d
EU Max. Day
102 GWh/d
Min.  Day
(31/07/2021)
494 GWh/d
Max. Day
(11/01/2022)
23 GWh/d
Maximum
Production
STORAGE
CAPACITIES
LNG
CAPACITIES
==PAGE:19==
2.2
Fuel prices included in the model [32]. Domestic biomethane includes
both the biogas price and a supplement for upgrading the biogas
Fuel prices [EURO 2016/GJ]
Domestic Natural gas
Import Natural gas
Import LNG
Domestic Biomethane
2025
7.61
8.37
14.46
15.06
2026
7.75
8.53
14.73
14.99
2027
7.89
8.68
15.01
14.92
2028
8.04
8.84
15.27
14.85
2029
8.18
9.02
15.54
14.78
2030
8.32
9.15
15.81
14.71
2031
8.4
9.24
15.96
14.64
2032
8.48
9.33
16.11
14.57
2033
8.56
9.41
16.26
14.51
2034
8.64
9.5
16.41
14.44
2035
8.72
9.59
16.56
14.37
2036
8.8
9.68
16.71
14.3
2037
8.88
9.76
16.86
14.23
2038
8.96
9.85
17.02
14.16
2039
9.03
9.94
17.17
14.09
2040
9.11
10.03
17.32
14.02
2041
9.19
10.11
17.47
13.96
2042
9.27
10.2
17.62
13.89
2043
9.35
10.29
17.77
13.82
2044
9.43
10.38
17.92
13.75
2045
9.51
10.46
18.07
13.68
2046
9.59
10.55
18.22
13.61
2047
9.67
10.64
18.37
13.54
2048
9.75
10.73
18.53
13.47
2049
9.83
10.81
18.68
13.40
2050
9.99
10.99
18.98
13.34
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Projected solar and wind energy potentials by country through 2050.
Included in the model base on Section 7.1 of [41]
Potential by technology (GW)
Country
Solar PV
Wind Onshore
Wind Offshore
AL
22
2
AT
63
10
BA
36
2
BE
29
9
8
BG
94
3
2
CH
58
1
CY
21
CZ
59
19
DE
398
103
75
DK
69
13
85
EE
26
18
ES
319
535
10
FI
29
15
35
FR
371
101
53
GR
106
12
10
HR
42
7
HU
73
1
IE
31
14
51
IT
284
39
10
LT
90
21
LU
1
1
LV
46
23
ME
12
MK
21
MT
1
NL
48
10
68
NO
23
14
90
PL
80
150
11
PT
41
24
10
RO
144
20
RS
1
1
SE
59
40
43
SI
17
1
SK
46
2
UK
273
120
166
==PAGE:21==
3
Base case results
3.1
Time aggregation analysis
Figure 1: Fossil gas consumption in the BASE COPPER PLATE and BASE VALUE CHAIN case obtained
from different time aggregation (the number in the name of the case indicates the amount of timesteps
included for each representative season
3.2
Sensitivity analysis
Figure 2: Endogenously installed solar and wind capacity [GW] for BASE VALUE CHAIN and
BASE COPPER PLATE case before ramping is introduced
==PAGE:22==
3.3
Base case comparison
3.3.1
CO2 emissions trajectory: BASE COPPER PLATE vs BASE VALUE CHAIN
3.3.2
Methane consumption [TWh]: BASE COPPER PLATE vs BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure 3: Methane consumption by commodity
[TWh] BASE VALUE CHAIN vs
BASE COPPER PLATE
Year
Methane consumption
Total: -14%
Heat
Hydrogen
Electricity
2025
-13%
-7%
-56%
Total: -20%
Heat
Hydrogen
Electricity
2030
-16%
-26%
-41%
Total: -6%
Heat
Hydrogen
Electricity
2040
-4%
-23%
-18%
Table 1: [%] reduction in methane consumption for
the BASE VALUE CHAIN case compared to
BASE COPPER PLATE
3.3.3
Annual energy commodity production [TWh]:
BASE COPPER PLATE vs BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure
4:
Electricity
production
by
energy
source
[TWh]:
BASE COPPER PLATE
vs
BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure 5: Difference in electricity production by en-
ergy source [TWh] in the BASE VALUE CHAIN case
shown as difference from BASE COPPER PLATE
(bar indicates % of total yearly electricity produc-
tion)
==PAGE:23==
Figure 6: Heat production by energy source [TWh]:
BASE COPPER PLATE vs BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure 7:
Difference in heat production by en-
ergy source [TWh] in the BASE VALUE CHAIN case
shown as difference from BASE COPPER PLATE
(bar indicates % of total yearly electricity produc-
tion)
Figure
8:
Hydrogen
production
by
energy
source
[TWh]:
BASE COPPER PLATE
vs
BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure 9: Difference in hydrogen production by en-
ergy source [TWh] in the BASE VALUE CHAIN case
shown as difference from BASE COPPER PLATE
(bar indicates % of total yearly electricity produc-
tion)
3.3.4
Endogenously installed capacities for electricity, heat, and hydrogen production [GW]:
BASE COPPER PLATE vs BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure
10:
Endogenously
installed
capac-
ities
for
electricity
production
[GW]
in
the
BASE VALUE CHAIN
case
shown
as
difference
from BASE COPPER PLATE (bar indicates % in-
crease/decrease in installed capacity of that specific
energy source)
Figure 11: Endogenously installed capacities for heat
production [GW] in the BASE VALUE CHAIN case
shown as difference from BASE COPPER PLATE
(bar indicates % increase/decrease in installed capac-
ity of that specific energy source)
==PAGE:24==
Figure 12: Endogenously installed capacities for hydrogen production [GW] in the BASE VALUE CHAIN
case shown as difference from BASE COPPER PLATE (bar indicates % increase/decrease in installed
capacity of that specific energy source)
3.3.5
Hydrogen/Electricity transmission network flows and endogenously installed capacities:
BASE COPPER PLATE vs BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure 13:
Hydrogen transmission flows [TWh]:
BASE COPPER PLATE vs BASE VALUE CHAIN
(bar shows % indicates in transmission flow for
BASE COPPER PLATE case)
Figure 14: Endogenously installed hydrogen trans-
mission capacity [GW]: BASE COPPER PLATE vs
BASE VALUE CHAIN (bar indicates % increase in
transmission capacity for BASE COPPER PLATE
case)
Figure 15:
Electricity transmission flows [TWh]:
BASE COPPER PLATE vs BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure 16: Endogenously installed electricity trans-
mission capacity [GW]: BASE COPPER PLATE vs
BASE VALUE CHAIN
==PAGE:25==
3.3.6
Other results
Figure 17: Electric, heat, and hydrogen storage
withdrawals [TWh]: BASE COPPER PLATE vs
BASE VALUE CHAIN
Figure 18:
Heat storage withdrawals [GWh] in
BASE VALUE CHAIN
case
shown
as
difference
from BASE COPPER PLATE (bar indicates % in-
crease/decrease of energy withdrawn)
Figure 19: CO2 emissions by energy source [Mton of CO2] for the BASE VALUE CHAIN case and two
scenarios HIGH TENSION and ENERGY SECURITY 2030 shown as difference from
BASE COPPER PLATE (bar indicates % increase/decrease of emissions by energy source)
Case
Objective value [Mmoney]
[%] increase from BASE COPPER PLATE
BASE COPPER PLATE
1.087E+12
-
BASE VALUE CHAIN
1.103E+12
1.5%
HIGH TENSION
1.104E+12
1.6%
ENERGY SECURITY 2030
1.105E+12
1.65%
Table 2: Objective value by base case/scenario and [%] difference in objective value from
BASE COPPER PLATE
==PAGE:26==
Figure 20: Methane storage injection/withdrawal for the region IT (Italy) in 2025
4
Scenario results
4.1
Methane production
Figure 21: Methane imports by origin [TWh]
Figure 22: Methane production from LNG imports [TWh]
==PAGE:27==
Figure 23: Domestic methane production vs maxi-
mum available capacity (excluding Norway)[TWh]
Figure 24: Domestic methane production vs maxi-
mum available capacity in Norway [TWh]
Figure 25: Available domestic methane production
capacity by country [TWh], based on [27]
Figure 26: Available domestic methane production
capacity by country (excluding Norway)[TWh], based
on [27]
[%] of available capacity utilized
Albania
Cyprus
Estonia
Finland
Greece
BASE VALUE CHAIN
<1%
HIGH TENSION
<1%
2030
ENERGY SECURITY 2030
<1%
<1%
BASE VALUE CHAIN
<1%
<1%
HIGH TENSION
<1%
<1%
1.6%
1.7%
2040
ENERGY SECURITY 2030
<1%
<1%
1.6%
1.6%
<1%
Table 3: Methane production from domestic biomethane shown as % of maximum yearly capacity by country
==PAGE:28==
4.2
Methane transmission
Figure
27:
Methane
transmission
flows
[TWh]
(bar
indicates
%
increase/decrease
compared
to
BASE VALUE CHAIN reference scenario)
Figure 28: Methane transmission flows from Norway to other European regions [TWh]
Figure 29: % increase in cross-border pipeline utilization in 2030 for the HIGH TENSION scenario compared
to BASE VALUE CHAIN (To notice here: corridor from West to East Europe)
==PAGE:29==
Figure 30: 2025 cross-border interconnections physical flow vs firm technical capacity for interconnected model
regions. BASE VALUE CHAIN vs HIGH TENSION/ENERGY SECURITY 2030
Figure 31: 2030 cross-border interconnections physical flow vs firm technical capacity for interconnected model
regions. BASE VALUE CHAIN vs HIGH TENSION vs ENERGY SECURITY 2030
Figure 32: 2030 cross-border interconnections physical flow vs firm technical capacity for interconnected model
regions with physical flows at technical capacity (100%) for at least one scenario. BASE VALUE CHAIN vs
HIGH TENSION vs ENERGY SECURITY 2030
==PAGE:30==
Figure 33: European Hydrogen Backbone vision for European hydrogen infrastructure in 2030 [14]. Here,
yellow lines indicate new hydrogen pipelines, dark blue lines indicate repurposed pipelines, and light blue lines
indicate subsea pipelines
Figure 34: Cross-border interconnection pipelines classified as ”critical” based on utilization at maximum firm
capacity (refer to Figure 32) across the three scenarios in 2030
