==PAGE:1==
Improve Cytokine Production in Mammalian
Cells through Secretory Pathway Engineering
Master Thesis
Pharmaceutical design and Engineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Improve Cytokine Production in Mammalian Cells through Secretory Pathway En-
gineering
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Vasileios Perros
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Kemitorvet, Build-
ing 220, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.bioengineering.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU Bioengineering, Department of
Biotechnology and Biomedicine, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Vasileios Perros - s213876
Signature
Date
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Biopharmaceuticals have gained prominence in recent years with a remarkable increase
in the market share and even more remarkable predictions. They are estimated to reach
an immense 800$ billion by 2030 globally. The silent hero driving this success is the
Chinese Hamster Ovary cells. Their ability to perform complex post-translational modi-
fications (PTMs), crucial for protein biocompatibility, stability and PK/PD values as well
as their potential for expansion and scaling is what sets them apart from other means
of biopharmaceutical production. It is also the reason why the majority of the approved
biopharmaceuticals today, about 70%, are produced in such cells
Cytokines have proven very valuable as biopharmaceuticals, for their roles in various
therapeutic applications. These applications include antiviral and anticancer effects that
can be exhibited by the cytokines alone or, most frequently, in conjunction with some other
therapy or carrying agent (fusion proteins of cytokines and antibodies). However, cytokine
production is challenging since it’s tightly controlled by cells.
Cytokines are secreted proteins and we hypothesized that modifying secretory machin-
ery can increase the cytokine production yield. According to a human secretome study,
some cytokines can be produced in low amounts (ex. GM-CSF and IL-21) while oth-
ers are not produced at all (ex.IL15) in CHO cells. To find effector secretory pathway
genes, the ARCHS4-human RNA-seq library was previously analyzed by co-supervisor
Ece Cagdas. After correlation and differential expression analysis, candidate genes were
selected among the glycosyltransferases, according to cytokine glycan structures. The
following where selected : GALNT3, GALNT10 and MGAT5 for GM-CSF, B4GALT1 for
IL-15, DPM1 and MGAT5 for IL21.
In a different study, another effector gene was found to increase GM-CSF expression:
BHLHE40. It was also selected to test its effect on GM-CSF production.
Cytokine-producing CHO cell lines were generated by inserting the relevant cytokine-
producing gene into the genome via targeted integration. Effector genes were transiently
transfected into cytokine-producing cells. Five-day batch runs were carried out and sam-
ples were collected on days 3, 4, and 5. The samples were tested for the presence of
the effector protein, and cytokine levels through Western Blot and ELISA respectively.
After confirming the presence of the intended effector genes, cytokine production was
compared to same-day samples from non-transfected cells. Results showed a slight but
statistically significant increase on day 4.
This study not only provides insights into overcoming challenges associated with cytokine
production but also suggests a scale-able approach that could be implemented in an in-
dustrial setting. Such advancements hold the potential to establish a more efficient and
robust cytokine production process to meet the demands of therapeutic applications.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Vasileios Perros, MSc Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering, DTU
Ece Cadgas, PhD Candidate,Co-Supervisor
Lasse Ebdrup, Senior Researcher, Supervisor
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Experiment Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Biopharmaceuticals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Mammalian cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Cytokines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4.1
Granulocye-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF) . . .
5
1.4.2
Interleukin15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.3
Interleukin 21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Pathway engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5.1
Glycosylation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5.2
Effector candidate genes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.5.3
BHLHE40 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
1.5.4
ARCHs4 Data analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2
Methods and Materials
16
2.1
Cell Culture Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.1
Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.2
Cell Passaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.3
Transfection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.4
Conditions and Sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2
Molecular Biology Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2.1
Molecular Cloning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2.2
Western Blot
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2.3
ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3
Analysis Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3.1
ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4
Reagents and Devices Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Results and Discussion
21
3.1
Trial Batch: Clones A8 and B9
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.1
Effector gene expression verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.1.2
GM-CSF Quanitifaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Epxanded Batch: Entirety of clones with respective effector genes . . . . . 25
3.2.1
Effector gene expression verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.2
GM-CSF Quantification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.2.3
IL-15 Quantification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Future Works
36
Bibliography
38
A Appendix
43
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Experiment Design
The hypothesis built from RNA-seq data analysis is that: The expression of certain secre-
tory pathway genes will increase the production of cytokines in mammalian cells. To test
this hypothesis, CHO cells were stably transfected using targeted integration. 3 biological
replicates were created for the 3 different cytokines in question; Granulocyte Macrophage-
Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF), Interleukin 15 (IL-15), and Interleukin 21 (IL-21).
Candidate effector genes will be constructed either via ligation protocols (USER cloning)
or purchased as plasmids directly. They will be transformed into competent bacteria cells
and grown under restrictive conditions (antibiotic) to select for those that have taken up
the plasmid.
Figure 1.1: Transformation
After acquiring sufficient quantities of the plasmids containing the genes, the aforemen-
tioned cell lines will be transiently transfected. They will be grown in 5-day batches, with
sampling on days 3,4 and 5. Following that, Western Blot and ELISA will be conducted
to ensure the presence of the effector genes’ expressed proteins and quantify any differ-
ences in cytokine expression. For the quantification, non-transfected samples from the
same days will be used as a negative control.
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: Batch cultivation
1.2
Biopharmaceuticals
The term “biopharmaceuticals” was established in the 1980s and refers to pharmaceuti-
cals produced in biotechnological processes using molecular biology methods [1]. These
molecules have several differences and advantages compared to their purely synthetic
counterparts. The main difference is the means of production where live cells (prokary-
otic or eukaryotic) are used. We also notice greater size and complexity in their structures
which is largely responsible for their intricate action. Biopharmaceuticals have been ob-
served to cause fewer side effects than conventional drugs [1], primarily due to their more
specific mode of action. They target particular cells, predominantly relying on specific
receptors, maximizing curative effects while minimizing damage to neighboring cells and
tissues.
The first biopharmaceutical to be produced and approved by the FDA was insulin in 1982
with the commercial name Humulin R (rapid) and N (NPH, intermediate-acting) [2]. It was
initially synthesized by David Goeddel and his colleagues four years prior to that, by utiliz-
ing and combining the insulin A- and B- chains expressed in Escherichia coli. Thereafter,
Genentech and Lilly signed an agreement to commercialize rDNA insulin. [2] [3]
Approval for biopharmaceuticals produced in mammalian cells didn’t lag behind. It was
realized in 1986 for the recombinant human tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA)[4].
R.J. Kaufman and his team of scientists aimed at producing the scarce protein in sufficient
quantities to take advantage of its thrombolytic properties and they succeeded[4]. The
drug was approved for the treatment of acute myocardial infarction (heart attack), making
it the first therapeutic recombinant protein produced from mammalian cells to make it to
the market[5].
That was the beginning of recombinant protein usage in pharma and of the blooming
of the biopharmaceutical industry. During the decades that followed, techniques have
been refined, reaching mass production level, driving the rapid growth of the industry.
In respect to that, the market value of biopharmaceuticals for 2021 was 343 billion US
dollars, which represents a conservative evaluation which, of course, is not attributed to
==PAGE:11==
smart marketing but to their immense impact on effective treatment of diseases such as
blood-borne malignancies[6].
Biopharmaceutical Classification
Based on their classes, biopharmaceuticals can be divided into (1) Recombinant native
peptides and proteins, which include cytokines hormones, and enzymes. (2)Monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) which can be modified depending on their intended use, (3)Antibody-
like molecules where the antibody domain can be substituted for the desired peptide,
(4)Combined products consisting of a protein therapeutic component, such as an antibody,
and a non-protein component, such as a toxin, a chemotherapeutic drug, or a radioactive
moiety (mAb conjugates).[7]
Based on their therapeutic goal they can be differently classified in (1)Replacement of
essential endogenous enzymes, peptides, or proteins that are lacking due to genetic or
acquired deficiency or insufficiency, (2) Supplementation of endogenous enzymes, pep-
tides or proteins to manage disease course, (3) Targeted cancer therapies, with mecha-
nisms such as inhibiting soluble growth factors, cancer cell-specific targeting through sur-
face receptors, blockade of receptor signaling, and immunostimulation, (4) Antimicrobial
therapies, (5) Targeted immunomodulation to specifically treat various immune-mediated
diseases.[7]
In terms of class, cytokines fall into category 1 as they are recombinant proteins. Their
versatility is evident when one examines the goals towards which they are used. IL-21
[8] and IL-15 [9]have gained prominence as biopharmaceuticals for targeted cancer ther-
apies, goal number 3, while GM-CSF has been used to stimulate the production of gran-
ulocytes and macrophages [10], to support immune function [10][11] and is involved in
immunomodulation to enhance immune response against tumors [12][13][14].
This thesis explores the optimization of cytokine biopharmaceutical production. Focused
on cytokines IL-21, GM-CSF, and IL-15, the study employs secretory pathway engineering
to enhance their production.
Tackling problems faced by the scientific community and the industry, this research aims
to contribute not only to the scientific understanding of cytokine production but also to the
practical advancement of therapies that hold immense potential for patients worldwide.
1.3
Mammalian cells
Mammalian cells have significant advantages when it comes to biopharmaceutical produc-
tion. Compared to prokaryotic cells (bacteria), mammalian cells are capable of perform-
ing post-translational modifications (PTMs) such as glycosylation, phosphorylation, and
disulfide bonding, all essential for proper folding, stability, and biological activity of many
biopharmaceuticals. These also play an important role in They can naturally secret pro-
teins, when a secreted protein is expressed, saving researchers and manufacturers some
trouble with downstream processing. An added benefit is that production in mammalian
cells is guaranteed to be endotoxin-free. Compared to their non-mammalian eukaryotic
counterparts (e.g. plant cells or yeast), mammalian cells hold the edge on various aspects.
Since they closely resemble human cells, the proteins produced are also similar to human
proteins which is important for biopharmaceutical production with optimal efficacy and re-
duced immunogenicity [15]. They provide PTMs that don’t occur in non-mammalian cells,
such as sialylation while they also have higher capacity for protein secretion. They are
capable of producing complex proteins with multiple sub-units making them ideal for an-
tibody, or other complex biopharmaceutical, production.[15] However, their maintenance
==PAGE:12==
demands meticulous attention due to their fragile nature compared to other cellular sys-
tems, such as E. coli or yeast. Drawbacks of protein production in mammalian cell lines
include the complex nutritional requirements, slow growth, fragility, and a relatively high
production time and cost. Currently, available mammalian expression systems include
Chinese hamster ovary cells, rodent cell lines (e.g., NS0, BHK, and Sp2/0), and human
cell lines (e.g., HEK293, PER.C6, HT-1080, and CAP). Among available mammalian cel-
llines, the Chinese hamster ovary cell line is the primary choice for recombinant protein
production, with 7 of the top 10 best￿selling biopharmaceuticals (from 2016) being pro-
duced in these cells[16].
Chinese Hamster Ovary cells (CHO)
Among mammalian cells, Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells have emerged as the pri-
mary choice for biopharmaceutical production. First isolated in 1957 by researchers Dr.
Theodore T. Puck and Philip I. Marcus [17], CHO cells have undergone extensive engi-
neering and differentiation to create various cell lines with distinct characteristics. This
has led to a complete genome mapping which allowed for a deep understanding of their
expression mechanisms as well as their metabolic pathways. In turn this has led to simpli-
fied genetic manipulation, ensuring robustness in bio-production processes. Notably, the
CHO-S cell line has gained prominence for its remarkable protein production capabilities,
leading the production from 100mg/L in the original cell line in the 1980s, to achieving
yields as high as 5g/L [18]. They can be grown both in adherent and suspension cultures
making them suitable both for research uses while also providing the choice of scaling
up to industrial settings where they are considered cost-effective. They can be stably or
transiently transfected, depending on the experimental or production needs. Their usage,
for over half a century, has allowed for many regulatory approvals on biopharmaceuticals
produced in such systems, making them trustworthy as a means for production. The most
important aspect of using mammalian cells is their advantageous ability to induce all the
necessary post-translational modifications as well as their resemblance to human cells.
Their robust endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus make for efficient protein
folding and secretion. This proves crucial when it comes to proteins that are subjected
to many post-translational modifications to exhibit their intended functions[18]. Such pro-
teins, and also valuable biopharmaceuticals, are cytokines.
1.4
Cytokines
Cytokines are soluble, usually glycosylated proteins that play a significant role in our body
regulating its homeostasis and orchestrating the immune response. There are more than
60 different cytokines[19] that affect nearly every biological process; from disease patho-
genesis, non-specific response to infection, specific response to antigen, to embryonic
development and stem cell differentiation[20]. They are produced and secreted by var-
ious immune cells; such as T cells, B cells, and dendritic cells as well as non-immune
cells such as fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and demonstrate specific effects on the
interactions and communications between them and the rest of our organism [19]. Their
action can be autocrine (acting on the same cells that produces them), paracrine (act-
ing on nearby cells) or endocrine (acting on distant cells)[21], and in that way, they can
be considered as the ”hormones” of the immune system[20]. Some cytokines influence
many types of cells, while others influence only a few, through the expression pattern of
each cytokine’s specific receptor. The response that a cytokine induces in a target cell is
typically related to amplifying an effector mechanism of the target cell. Some common ex-
==PAGE:13==
amples include epithelial cells, to induce antimicrobial proteins and resist intracellular viral
growth or on other immune cells, such as innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) that produce other
cytokines that amplify the immune response[19]. Their monomer sizes can vary from 5
to 30 kilo-Dalton (kDa), although their active form is frequently that of a homodimer, het-
erodimer or trimer. They are categorized, based on their roles in immune regulation and
tissue homeostasis, in interleukins (IL), interferons (IFN), tumor necrosis factors (TNF),
chemokines and growth factors. They regulate the immune system by influencing cell dif-
ferentiation and proliferation, playing a crucial role in tissue repair, and activation as well
as being able to both inhibit or promote immune cell activities. They are essential to an-
tiviral defense as they can inhibit proliferation of the viruses and they are responsible for
chemotaxis, the process of guiding cells of the immune system to the correct targets[19].
Out of the numerous cytokines produced in our organism, GM-CSF, IL15 and IL21 are
of great scientific interest due to their abilities to enhance the immune system and their
potential use as biopharmaceuticals.
1.4.1
Granulocye-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF)
Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF) is a cytokine with an im-
portant role in the generation of various myeloid cell subsets, which include neutrophils,
monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. These myeloid cells play essential roles
in responding to stress, infections, and cancer. GM-CSF serves as a critical mediator in
regulating these responses. It belongs in the hematopoietic growth factor family[19] and
its influence on the innate immune system is significant, as it modulates the functions of
these innate immune cells. This modulation serves as a bridge that activates adaptive
immune responses, thereby enhancing the overall host immune surveillance, particularly
under pathologic conditions. The delicate balance of GM-CSF levels is crucial. Too little
GM-CSF can lead to decreased production and activation of innate immune cells, which,
in turn, blocks the development of adaptive anti-cancer immune responses. On the other
hand, excessive recruitment of GM-CSF can have detrimental effects. It can lead to im-
mune cell exhaustion and promote cancer progression[11]. It exists as a glycoprotein,
with glycosylation playing a role in its stability and function. GM-CSF typically forms a
homodimer in its active state, with each monomer consisting of four alpha helices. The
monomers are held together by disulfide bonds. GM-CSF’s receptor-binding region is lo-
cated within the helical bundle, and it interacts with its receptors, including the GM-CSF
receptor alpha subunit (GM-CSFRα) and beta subunit (GM-CSFRβ), to initiate signaling
cascades. The structural details of GM-CSF are essential for its receptor binding and
downstream signaling, which regulate myeloid cell differentiation and function[22]. The
receptor is composed of one α chain and one signaling β chain subunit which is shared
for IL-3 and IL-5 receptors is expressed on myeloid cells, B cells, and non-hematopoietic
cells including brain cells, endothelial and alveolar cells. Activation of the GM-CSF recep-
tor is identical to other class I cytokine receptors and requires receptor dimerization and
tyrosine transphosphorylation of its cytoplasmic domains[23]
1.4.1.1
Role in homeostasis of immune cells
This glycoprotein is known for its role in myelopoiesis and myeloid cell function. It pro-
motes the generation of polymorphonuclear neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, and
dendritic cells from hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow. GM-CSF also plays and im-
portant role in regulating some non-hematopoietic cells such as epithelial cells, vascular
endothelial cells and fibroblasts. It is produced by lymphocytes, macrophages, fibroblasts,
endothelial cells, chondrocytes and cancer cells in response to immunogenic stimuli such
==PAGE:14==
as cytokines and toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists. Correlation to T-cell mediated cell im-
munity regulation was observed after GM- CSF-/- mice were reported to have poor T-cell
responses to antigenic challenge. [11],[19]
The importance of GM-CSF in cells of the myeloid lineage has been shown in GM-CSF-
transgenic mice where counts of myeloid subsets including macrophages, neutrophils,
and eosinophils are substantially increased in comparison to control. The importance of
this cytokine in this role has been confirmed in studies in GMCSF-/- mice, showcasing that
GM- CSF drives emergency myelopoiesis in response to infection, cancer, and stress but
is dispensable for basal myelopoiesis.[24]
1.4.1.2
GM-CSF: Dichotomy in Cancer treatment
The role of the Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF) in cancer
is indeed complex, as it can exert both pro-tumorigenic and anti-tumorigenic effects, de-
pending on various factors. Multiple studies have illuminated this dichotomy. Notably, in
patients with colorectal cancer, the production of GM-CSF by tumor cells has been as-
sociated with a favorable clinical prognosis. Conversely, in other tumor types such as
glioblastomas, bladder cancer, and head and neck cancers, upregulation of GM-CSF has
been linked to increased tumor aggressiveness. Understanding the precise mechanisms
governing these effects is essential for harnessing the potential of this cytokine in can-
cer treatment. Among its anti-tumorigenic effects, one prominent role of GM-CSF is its
ability to restore neutrophil-derived immune Responses. Cancer patients frequently ex-
perience severe neutropenia following bone marrow transplantation, chemotherapy, and
various therapies, rendering them highly susceptible to infections. Administering GM-CSF
to these patients can elevate neutrophil counts to levels necessary for protection against
life-threatening infections, including those associated with acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS). Furthermore, it is speculated that GM-CSF may confer an additional
benefit by supporting tumor regression, although further research is needed to elucidate
the underlying mechanisms.[24]
1.4.1.3
Anti-tumorigenic effects
GM-CSF promotes anti-tumor immune responses by activating monocytes/macrophages
and enhancing DC differentiation . GM-CSF induces an inﬂammatory proﬁle in human
monocytes, which includes an upregulated expression of HLA-DR and CD86 molecules
and increased production of TNF-a and IL-1b. GM-CSF-producing mouse and human
colorectal tumors enhance local recruitment and activation of DCs that present tumor
antigens to T cells in tumor-draining lymph nodes and activate other innate and adaptive
host immune cells such as granulocytes, macrophages, and natural killer (NK) cells.
In the absence of GM-CSF, it has been observed that T cells are indirectly impaired
through the downmodulation of APCs [13]. When GM-CSF is scarce or blocked, pro-
liferation of T cells is suppressed. It was also found to improve anti-tumor effects of B16
melanoma vaccine by increasing IFN-secreting T cells via DC activation. Moreover, it is
shown to dramatically enhance HIV specific CD4+T cells, suggesting that it may protect
against virus-derived tumors [11]. Lately is was also shown that GM-CSF drives CD4+
and CD8+ T cell immune response by activating IRF-5 in eosinophils in the tumor mi-
croenvironment. [11] [25]
Some tumors including colorectal, breast, and non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) aber-
rantly express GM-CSFR and secrete GM-CSF. In GM-CSF and GM-CSFR-expressing
cancers, GM-CSF suppresses the proliferation of malignant cells by inducing arrest at
==PAGE:15==
the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle and enhances their differentiation. Being an inducer of
differentiation, GM-CSF was also found to eradicate cancer stem cells (CSC), the thera-
peutically resistant and most immature population in tumors. Other than that, GM-CSF
has been shown to inhibit angiogenesis through a certain signaling cascade. Soluble vas-
cular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (sVEGFR-1) plays a regulatory role in VEGF-
mediated angiogenesis by sequestering VEGF from VEGFR2, the main signaling receptor
with tyrosine kinase activity. Eubank et al. showed that treatment of human monocytes
with GM-CSF upregulated sVEGFR-1 thereby inhibiting angiogenesis and endothelial cell
migration[24].
On the other side of the same coin, GM-CSF has been also shown to induce angiogenesis
in the tumor microenvironment through recruitment of myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) and tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). Once at the tumor site, MDSCs
and TAMs release various pro-angiogenic factors, including vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). These factors stimulate the growth
of new blood vessels, a process essential for supplying the tumor with oxygen and nutri-
ents, hence contributing to its growth[26].
The therapeutic action of GM-CSF is best exempliﬁed in patients with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL), acute myeloid leukemia (AML), Hodgkin- and non-Hodgkin- lymphomas
(HL/NHL), where recombinant human GM-CSF (Sargramostim or Leukine®) is used to
stimulate early stem cells in donors prior to their harvesting for peripheral stem cell trans-
plant and to stimulate recovery of HPCs after bone marrow transplantation. Overall im-
provement in patients was observed in those receiving chemotherapy for solid tumors
due to its action as an immunostimulatory adjuvant. The same principle applies to anti-
cancer vaccines where the anti-tumor-induced response is heightened by combining the
cytokine with them. For GM-CSF to express its anti-tumorigenic effects it needs to be
delivered intratumorally. For that, oncolytic viruses producing the cytokines are used,
showing promising results.[24]
1.4.2
Interleukin15
Interleukin-15 (IL-15) is a multifunctional cytokine belonging to the four α-helix bundle
family of cytokines. It has a molecular weight of approximately 14–15 kDa and exerts a
wide range of biological effects across various cell types. IL-15 plays a pivotal role in the
development of immune responses against microbial invaders and parasites. It achieves
this by modulating immune cells of both the innate and adaptive immune systems. IL-15
is part of a subgroup of class I cytokine receptors that share the common γ chain (γc)
of the IL-2 receptor. This chain is also used by receptors for cytokines such as IL-2, IL-
4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21. The gene encoding the common γ chain is located on
the X chromosome[19][27][28] One of IL-15’s critical roles is in the long-term survival and
proliferation of CD8 memory T cells. Memory lymphocytes, including CD8 memory T cells,
rely on the expression of receptors for cytokines like IL-7 and IL-15 to receive survival
signals. Furthermore, IL-15 plays a role in the immune response to damaged epithelial
cells. Injured cells can be recognized and eliminated by intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs).
The production of IL-15 by the damaged epithelial cells enhances this process, aiding in
the recognition and elimination of injured cells by IELs. In the context of autoimmune
diseases, IL-15 has been implicated in conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease,
rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis (MS). Patients with these diseases often exhibit
elevated levels of IL-15 in their body fluids, and there may be dysregulated expression
of IL-15 compared to healthy individuals. The aforementioned highlight IL-15’s duality of
==PAGE:16==
functions in immune regulation and autoimmune pathogenesis[29]
1.4.2.1
Expression and Regulation
Il-15 is a tightly regulated cytokine both in terms of transcription and regulation. A variety of
cell types constitutively express IL-15 mRNA, and these include monocytes, macrophages,
DCs, keratinocytes, epidermal skin cells, fibroblasts, various epithelial cells, bone marrow
stromal cells, and nerve cells [30]. In addition, IL-15 mRNA is also expressed in kidney,
placenta, lung, heart, skeletal muscle, and brain tissues. Despite its expression in various
cells, translation of IL-15 is inefficient due to the presence of multiple AUG initiation sites
in the 5’UTR of the IL-15 mRNA. In humans and mice alternative splicing also results in
the production of two mature isoforms of the IL-15 protein that differ only in the length of
their signal peptides.[29]
1.4.2.2
Signaling
IL-15 binds to the IL-15-specific high affinity binding protein IL-15Rα and signals through
a β chain and a γ chain signaling complex, leading to the recruitment of Janus kinase
(JAK) JAK1 by the β chain and activation of JAK3 that is constitutively associated with
the γ chain. Activated JAK1 and JAK3 then phosphorylate signal transducer and acti-
vator of transcription (STAT) proteins STAT3 and STAT5 respectively, to mediate IL-15
effects in T lymphocytes. Other pathways have been identified such as activation of PI3K
and subsequent activation of AKT promoting cell survival, mTOR activation, MAPK path-
way, phosphorylating the Extracellular Signal-Regulated Kinase, and the NF-κB pathway
leading to the transcription of pro-inflammatory genes.[27]
1.4.2.3
Therapeutic uses
IL-15 stimulates proliferation, activation, and expansion of NK cells, as well as T-cell pro-
liferation and generation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes and sustaining long-lasting antitumor
immunity. These characteristics have been exploited in the research for therapeutic uses,
especially in cancer. Either alone or, mostly, together with other substances such as IL-
21, monoclonal antibodies or as a vaccine adjuvant. Most notable is its use in oncolytic
therapy which uses viruses which preferentially infect and destroy cancer cells. Oncolytic
viruses expressing IL-15 can induce both potent oncolytic effect and activate effector im-
mune cells for a strong antitumor response. It has been shown that a vesicular stomatitis
virus which expresses IL-15 induced strong antitumor immunity in a mouse colon cancer
model. In addition, myxoma virus that expresses IL15Rα-IL-15 fusion protein presented
an augmented immune response in a B1-F10 melanoma model. A vaccinia virus express-
ing IL-15/IL-15Rα (vvDD-IL15-Ra) combined with anti-PD1 blockade was found to provide
significant antitumor activity in both colorectal and ovarian murine cancer models[27].
1.4.3
Interleukin 21
Interleukin-21 (IL-21) is a versatile cytokine that plays a crucial role in regulating immune
responses and maintaining immune homeostasis. It belongs in the same family as il15
previously described, and as such, follow similar activation pathways and mechanisms.
Produced primarily by activated CD4+ T cells and follicular helper T cells (Tfh), IL-21 ex-
erts its effects through a receptor complex composed of IL-21R and the common γ chain
(γc). This cytokine is known for its diverse functions, including the activation and differen-
tiation of various immune cell types, such as B cells, cytotoxic T cells, and natural killer
(NK) cells. IL-21’s ability to stimulate B cell proliferation and antibody production positions
it as a key player in humoral immune responses[31]. Moreover, it has been associated
==PAGE:17==
with autoimmune disorders and has both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory proper-
ties, making it a subject of interest in immunotherapy research. Its multifaceted roles in
immune regulation underscore its significance in understanding and modulating immune
responses[32].
1.4.3.1
Expression and Regulation
IL-21 plays a crucial role in regulating humoral immune responses, particularly in the
development of B cell immunoglobulin (Ig) responses.
While IL-21 is not necessary
for B cell development in the bone marrow or periphery, studies in mice with IL-21 re-
ceptor (IL-21R) knockouts have shown substantially reduced antigen-specific IgG1 re-
sponses, surprisingly coupled with increased IgE levels. This elevation in IgE is depen-
dent on IL-4, as double-knockout mice lacking both IL-4 and IL-21R have reduced lev-
els of all immunoglobulin isotypes, including IgE. This finding is reminiscent of the pan-
hypogammaglobulinemia observed in patients with X-linked severe combined immunod-
eficiency (X-SCID), indicating the importance of both IL-4 and IL-21 in normal B cell differ-
entiation. Notably, following hematopoietic cell transplantation in X-SCID patients, host
B cells lacking the common gamma chain (γc) can respond to IL-4 and IL-13 but not to
IL-21, unless donor B cells expressing γc successfully engraft. This alignes with the fact
that there is no signal transduction observed in in vivo studies concerning mice lacking the
γ chain. In vitro experiments with human B cells have shown that IL-21, in conjunction
with IL-4, can induce IgG1 and IgG3 production by promoting class switch recombina-
tion. While IL-21 alone does not induce IgE production in human B cells, it significantly
enhances IgE induction by IL-4[31]. In addition to its complementary actions with IL-4,
it’s worth noting that opposing actions of IL-21 and IL-4 have been observed in certain in
vitro assays of B cell immunoglobulin production. For instance, IL-21 can prompt CD40-
stimulated human naive B cells to undergo isotype class switching to IgA, but this induction
is hindered by the presence of IL-4. There have been some conflicting findings regarding
the interaction of IL-21 and IL-4, which may be related to IL-4’s ability to inhibit the effects
of IL-21 in naive B cells but not in memory B cells. Moreover, IL-21 can synergize with
transforming growth factor-β (TGDβ) to induce IgA isotype switching and facilitate hom-
ing to mucosal sites. Collectively, these observations suggest that the effects of IL-21 on
immunoglobulin production in vivo could be specific to the stage of B cell differentiation,
the site of action, and the presence or absence of other interacting factors. Understand-
ing these intricate interactions is of importance, particularly in the context of designing
vaccine strategies targeting various pathogens.[33]
1.4.3.2
Signaling
Belonging in the same family as Il-15, IL-21 follows a similar transduction path. Interleukin
21 receptor (IL-21R) is also a heterodimeric receptor formed by the IL-21Rα-chain and
the common γ-chain subunit that was previously mentioned to exist in IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-
9, IL-13 and IL-15 receptors. In the absence of γc, IL-21 can still bind to its receptor but
the cascade only starts when σc is present showing that α chain binding has no intrinsic
signaling capabilities. The γc binding activates the Janus kinase(JAK) signal transducer
activation of the transcription (STAT) signaling pathway, and much like the other cytokines
of the γc family IL-21 activates JAK1 and JAK3. These, in turn, activate STAT3 and STAT1
and weakly activate STAT5. IL-21 is also responsible for mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signal transduction as well as phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT signaling
pathways. It is responsible for transcription factors in various immune system cells, the
expression of which leads to their differentiated forms. The factors include B-cell lym-
==PAGE:18==
phoma 6 (Bcl-6), lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1 (Lef1), transcription factor 7 (Tcf7),
B-lymphocyte induced maturation protein 1 (Blimp-1) and c-Maf.[32]
1.4.3.3
Therapeutic uses: Another double edged sword
Interleukin-21 (IL-21) plays a dual role in cancer therapy, acting both as a potent antitu-
mor agent and potentially supporting tumor growth, depending on the context and spe-
cific cancer type. In solid non-haematopoietic tumors, IL-21 has demonstrated significant
antitumor activity, inhibiting the growth of melanomas and fibrosarcomas. This antitumor
effect is primarily mediated by natural killer (NK) cells and, to a lesser extent, CD8+ T cells.
Notably, IL-21 treatment avoids the toxic side effects associated with other cytokines like
IL-2. Moreover, IL-21’s efficacy is enhanced when combined with cytokines like IL-15, re-
sulting in long-term survival in preclinical models. In hematopoietic tumors, IL-21’s effects
are more complex. It can promote the apoptosis of certain cancer cells, but in some cases,
it may enhance tumor cell growth, particularly in follicular lymphoma. The role of IL-21 in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) remains somewhat contradictory, affecting both the
proliferation and apoptosis of CLL cells. Furthermore, IL-21’s synergy with other treat-
ments like antibody therapy, such as cetuximab, shows promise in enhancing antitumor
responses.
In clinical trials, IL-21 has demonstrated therapeutic potential, particularly in melanoma,
renal cell carcinoma, and metastatic colorectal cancer, often in combination with other
treatments. However, its use needs to be carefully tailored to specific cancer types and
individual patient profiles[31]
==PAGE:19==
1.5
Pathway engineering
The secretory pathway is an essential cellular process of the eukaryotic cells responsible
for synthesizing, properly folding, and packaging both membrane-bound and secreted
proteins. It ensures that the newly synthesized proteins are properly targeted to their
final destination to sustain cell structure and function. It involves the Endoplasmic Reticu-
lum, where proteins are synthesized, the Golgi Apparatus, where most PTMs occur, and
various types of vesicles involved in protein transportation in the cell. In the context of
biopharmaceutical production, the secretory pathway and its function are critical for the
effectiveness of cell factories both in terms of quality, to produce properly folded and
modified human-compatible proteins, and quantity. Secretory pathway engineering is the
way to exploit this cell machinery to our advantage. It involves the alteration of a certain
metabolic pathway in the cell to increase the production of a certain compound of inter-
est, to enhance a particular cellular function, or to introduce a completely new production
scheme to the cell’s genetic code. This can prove challenging in most cases since the
cells have evolved robust metabolic networks with tightly regulated molecular pathways.
A thorough understanding of cellular biology and precise knowledge of the pathway one
wishes to manipulate is a prerequisite in any metabolic pathway engineering endeavor[34].
In our case, the compounds of interest are the aforementioned cytokines. Since these
molecules are heavily glycosylated, we hypothesized that co-expression of certain glyco-
syltransferases would increase their production.
1.5.1
Glycosylation
Glycosylation is a biological process involving the addition of glycans, which are complex
sugar molecules, to proteins and lipids. Unlike DNA or RNA synthesis, glycosylation is
not template-driven, meaning there isn’t a strict pre-determined sequence or template for
the addition of sugar molecules. This lack of a template contributes to the complexity of
glycosylation, leading to a diverse and intricate array of glycoforms on a single carrier
molecule.[35] Protein glycosylation is a sophisticated post-translational modification that
involves the covalent attachment of said glycans to specific residues of proteins. This pro-
cess is essential for proper folding, oligomerization and solubility of the produced proteins.
The attached glycans improve the stability and half-life of proteins by shielding them form
proteolysis, the breakdown of proteins by enzymes. The most common protein glycosyla-
tion is the N-glycosylation of asparagine residue (Asn), while O-glycosylation of serin (Ser)
and threonine (Thr) residues is also crucial to proper folding hence protecting against gen-
eral or specific proteolysis.[36] Attached glycans dictate localization of proteins since they
determine the transport of proteins to different cellular compartments or to the extracellu-
lar matrix. They are responsible for protein interaction and recognition, especially in the
context of immunity as well as cell adhesion and communication. Additionally, glycosy-
lation is known to provide protection against molecular damage caused by free radicals,
highlighting its role in safeguarding proteins from oxidative stress. Protein glycosylation
dictates the functional landscape of proteins, influencing their roles in cellular processes
and contributing to the intricacies of biological systems The group of enzymes catalyzing
this important process of glycan addition to specific amino-acid residues is called glycosyl-
transferases.[36] Through careful data analysis of the ARCHs4 database we came down
to, and tested, certain effector genes that had the biggest potential to provide us with
the wanted result. Other than glycosyltransferase encoding genes, one more candidate
gene was found to increase cytokine production, GM-CSF in particular [37], is BHLHE40,
a gene encoding a certain transcription factor. Together these make up our candidate
genes.
==PAGE:20==
1.5.2
Effector candidate genes
1.5.2.1
GALNT3
GALNT3 is the gene encoding the glycosyltransferase; polypeptide N-acetylgalactose-
aminyltransferase 3 (ppGalNacT3) responsible for initiating mucin-type O-glycosylation.
As a member of the glycosyltransferase family, GALNT3 acts as a ”writer” by catalyzing
the addition of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to specific serine or threonine residues
on proteins, initiating the O-linked glycosylation pathway and contributing significantly to
post-translational modifications (PTMs). As such, it plays a pivotal role in the homeostasis
of human cells and tissues [38]. It is mainly located in the Golgi apparatus, a sub-cellular
organelle central for protein modification and trafficking. The localization of glycosyltrans-
ferases in the Golgi apparatus is paramount to their function since proximity to target
molecules is essential for them to exert their effects. The glycosylation process takes
place predominantly in the Golgi apparatus. It has also been discovered to localize in the
nucleus in smaller quantities.[38]. GLANT3 is part of various pathways, especially those
linked to its main function, mucin-type O-glycan biosynthesis. Deficiency or mutation of
the GLANT3 gene is responsible for diseases linked with problems in mucin-type O-glycan
biosynthesis, such as familial tumoral calcinosis. Studies have observed growth retarda-
tion and infertility in male mice as well as decreased circulating intact fibroblast growth
factor-23 (FGF23) hyperphosphatemia and increased bone density.
1.5.2.2
GALNT10
Another member of the UDP-GalNAc: polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases.
Same as GLANT3, GALNT10 plays a crucial role in initiating mucin-type O-glycosylation
and transfers GalNAc from UDP-GalNAc to either serine or threonine residues of polypep-
tide acceptors.[39] In mice, Galnt10 is prominently expressed in specific regions of the
brain, suggesting a potential role in the central nervous system. The human version of
Galnt10 is found to be widely expressed in various tissues, with the highest levels in the
small intestine and intermediate levels in the stomach, pancreas, ovary, thyroid gland,
and spleen. GALNT10 specifically acts on glycosylated peptides, showing little activity
towards non-glycosylated peptides. Notably, the catalytic domain of GalNAc-T10 is in-
volved in selecting sites on glycopeptides, while the lectin domain is not essential for its
catalytic function. There is a potential link between the expression of Galnt10 in the brain
of mice and human schizophrenia, however, more research is needed to fully understand
this association[40] In a clinical context, renal cell carcinoma patients with higher levels of
GALNT10 experienced significantly shorter overall survival (OS) and progression-free sur-
vival (PFS), especially in those treated with sunitinib. The relationship between GALNT10
levels and OS also held for patients treated with sorafenib. Importantly, GALNT10 was
identified as an independent prognostic factor for OS in metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(mRCC)[41].
1.5.2.3
MGAT5
MGAT5 (Alpha-1,6-Mannosylglycoprotein 6-Beta-N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferase) is an-
other enzyme that belongs in the family of glycosytranfserases. Its function is to catalyze
the addition of beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) to the alpha-linked mannose of
biantennary N-linked oligosaccharides present on the newly synthesized glycoprotein en-
abling the synthesis of tri- and tetra-antennary complexes[39]. This results in promotion
of cell migration through enhancing the interaction between certain dependant receptors
and their protein substrates while also promoting cell-cell adhesion. These porperties
==PAGE:21==
stemming from MGAT5 action are taken advantage in vrious cancers for proliferation
and metastasis of cancer cells. Interestingly enough, it is one of the first glycosyltrans-
ferases whose transcriptional regulation pathway was determined. The fact that the gly-
cans whose synthesis it regulates, were shown by several laboratories to be upregulated
in many types of cancers lead to that early discovery.[42]
1.5.2.4
B4GALT1
B4GALT1 is part of the beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase (beta4GalT) family, consisting of
seven genes. These genes encode glycoproteins anchored in the cell membrane that
specifically transfer galactose in a beta1,4 linkage to acceptor sugars such as GlcNAc,
Glc, and Xyl. Each beta4GalT has a unique role in glycoconjugate and saccharide struc-
ture biosynthesis. As type II membrane proteins, they contain an N-terminal hydrophobic
signal sequence directing them to the Golgi apparatus. Unlike other beta4GalT genes,
this gene stands out as it participates in both glycoconjugate and lactose biosynthesis.
In glycoconjugate biosynthesis, it adds galactose to N-acetylglucosamine residues, while
in lactose biosynthesis, it forms a heterodimer with alpha-lactalbumin to catalyze UDP-
galactose + D-glucose <=> UDP + lactose. Two transcripts result from alternate tran-
scription initiation sites and post-translational processing, encoding either a trans-Golgi
resident protein for glycoconjugate biosynthesis or a soluble lactose synthase. The longer
transcript produces the membrane-bound protein, while the shorter one yields the soluble
lactose synthase.
1.5.2.5
DPM1
DPM1 is the gene coding for the enzyme Dolichol-phosphate-mannose (DPM). This en-
zyme is a synthase that is required for the synthesis of the glycosylphosphatidylinosi-
tol (GPI) anchor, the last four mannoses in N-glycan precursor, the first mannose in O-
mannosylation and mannose in C-mannosylation [Dancourt2006]. It is comprised of 3
subunits, DPM1, DPM2 and DPM3. DPM1 is the catalytic subunit while DPM2 and 3 are
the regulatory subunits. Knockout studies performed on Lec15 cells (CHO cells) revealed
that DPM2 is paramount for the expression of DPM3. DPM3, in turn, is responsible for
stabilizing DPM1 in the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) membrane via a domain near the C
terminus of DPM3 establishing the subunit critical for enzyme activity [Dancourt2006][43].
Deficiency in DPM biosynthesis has been shown to cause congenital disorder of glycosyla-
tion (CDG) as well as developmental delay, seizures, hypotonia, and dysmorphic features.
These symptoms have been correlated to the decreased or complete lack of N-glycans
and GPI-anchored proteins[43]. It is synthesized from dolichol phosphate and GDP-Man
on the cytosolic surface of the ER membrane by DPM synthase[43]
1.5.3
BHLHE40
BHLHE40 is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor family. It binds
to class B E-box DNA sequences with the motif CACGTG and forms homodimers or het-
erodimers together with the closely related BHLHE41 transcription factor. It is involved in
the tight regulation of gene expression via repression. The best-known functional role of
BHLHE40 is in the regulation of the circadian rhythm. It suppresses transcription of genes
important in the “clock genes”, such as Period 1 (Per1), by competing for E box sequences
that the CLOCK: BMAL1 complex uses to activate Per1 expression. Stemming from this
action, BHLHE40 is a key regulator of immunity during infection, autoimmunity, and inflam-
matory conditions. The focus on the BHLHE40 transcription factor came from the finding
==PAGE:22==
of its preferential expression by all pro-inflammatory cell subsets acquired from different
donors as well as by other T helper cells; the highly proinflammatory Th1, Th17.[37] After
verifying the hypothesis by testing IL22+ and IL22- donor cells it was clear that BHLHE40
plays a crucial role in cytokine production. The mechanism by which it exerts its effect
was later revealed to be the repression of genes preferentially expressed in GMCSF- and
IL22- cells. Of these, the team focused on miR-146a, an established negative regulator of
NF-kB activation. The theory was confirmed, and subsequent transduction experiments
showed the negative effect that the BHLHE40 transcription factor exerts on the production
of miR-146a contributing to the increased production of cytokines during pro-inflammatory
conditions from the respective immunity cells.[37]
1.5.4
ARCHs4 Data analysis
Secretory Pathway Engineering is a successful method for increasing protein production
in various types of cells[44][45][46][47]. In the search for secretory pathway genes to
exploit and make use of secretory pathway engineering, we ended up with glycosyltrans-
ferases.
To identify those genes, publicly available human RNA-seq data were obtained from
ARCHs4.
ARCHs4 is a resource that provides access to gene and transcript counts
uniformly processed from all human and mouse RNA-seq experiments from the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) and the Sequence Read Archive (SRA). 187,946 samples
are accessible through ARCHS4 with 103,083 mouse and 84,863 human samples. Tran-
script TPM and Gene level expression datasets were retrieved from the library. Spear-
man’s correlation analysis was performed on the Transcript TPM expression data to fish
out highly expressed secretory pathway genes with high cytokine expression levels(for
each cytokine). Positively correlated effector genes were selected for further analysis. To
further verify candidate genes, differential expression analysis was performed in gene-
level expression dataset. The glycan structure corresponded to the genes of interest,
meaning that the genes revealed through data analysis were indeed responsible for the
glycan structure observed on the cytokines.
It is important to note that, to test the selected genes they had to be expressed in low
levels in CHO cells. From our in-house RNA-seq data from CHO cells, it was evident
that they were not expressed or expressed in low levels, hence they were chosen for
experimentation.
==PAGE:23==
Motivation It is common knowledge that cancer has been on the rise over the last cen-
tury. This increase could be attributed to civilization surpassing natural selection, allow-
ing genes linked to certain cancers to accumulate in human gene pools[48]. It could also
be attributed to the modern hectic lifestyle, poor nutrition, and constant exposure to car-
cinogens such as tobacco and heavily processed foods[49]. Regardless, the undeniable
fact is that cancer stands as one of the leading causes of death worldwide, with nearly
10,000,000 deaths reported in 2020 [ferlay 2018].
Despite progress in various cancer treatments, the death toll persists, highlighting the
complexity of cancer biology. Each type of cancer has unique characteristics and exploits
intricate molecular mechanisms to thrive, making the interplay complex and not well un-
derstood for many cancers. Despite medical and biotechnological advancements, devel-
oping innovative cancer therapies remains a significant challenge. Contributions to this
endeavor, regardless of size, are not only worthwhile but necessary, especially if they offer
more general approaches applicable to multiple cancer types or therapies. By exploring
ways to boost cytokine production, particularly IL15 and IL21, we can contribute to cancer
treatment. Enhancing affordability for patients and industry profitability becomes feasi-
ble. The similarities between IL15 and IL21 are evident, and their potential as therapeutic
agents, combined with GM-CSF to enhance the immune response to cancer, presents
a promising approach to a generalized cancer therapy scheme. The versatility of these
cytokines extends beyond cancer, holding potential for addressing various diseases due
to their impactfull effects on the human organism.
==PAGE:24==
2
Methods and Materials
2.1
Cell Culture Methods
2.1.1
Cells
A CHO-S cell line was previously stably transfected for cytokine production. Nine distinct
cell lines were generated by inserting cytokine genes with targeted integration. Three
biological replicates were created for each cytokine, namely; A6, A8, B7 for GM-CSF,
C7, C10, C11 for IL-15, and A7, A11, and B9 for IL-21. Cell lines were where retrieved
from -180°C and thawed rapidly in a 37°C water bath. One tube of each cell line, con-
taining 10E6 cells/ml was mixed with 6-8ml medium in 15ml Falcon tubes. Medium was
prepared as 1L of CD-CHO Medium(#10743029 ,Gibco) with 41ml (8mM) L-Glutamine
(#25030081, Gibco™) and 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic (100X) (#15240096, Gibco™) Tubes
were centrifuged at 250g for 5 minutes and the supernatant was discarded. Cells were
re-suspended in 1ml medium and introduced to a 6-well plate with 2ml media. Plates were
transferred to a humidified incubator set at 37°C with 5%CO2 and shaking at 130rpm.
2.1.2
Cell Passaging
For the cell lines to mature and acclimate in the media, passaging is required. Passaging
was conducted by seeding a certain number of cells to fresh media. Fresh culture was
seeded 5E6 cells/mL for two days and 3E6 cells/mL for 3 days before the next passaging.
Cell count was conducted in a NucleoCounter® NC-3000 ™(Chemometec™) using 2μl
Solution 13 AO•DAPI (#910-3013, Chemometec) and 40μl sample on an NC-Slide A8
(#942-0003, Chemometec). After three passages cells were ready for transfection.
2.1.3
Transfection
The day before transfection (D-1), 6-well plates were seeded with 3ml per well of 1.4E6
cells/ml. On the day of transfection, D0, cell cultures were centrifuged and re-suspended
in fresh media to achieve 2.2E6 cells/ml. Following re-suspension there was a 4-hour
incubation before transfection. Two tubes, tube A and tube B, were prepared. Tube A
contained the plasmid and OptiPRO SFM(#12309019, Gibco™) while tube B contained
PEI (3mg/ml) and OptiPRO SFM. After mixing and incubating at RT for 10 minutes, we
added 75% of the mixture to the corresponding cells. To ensure the transfection took place,
we conducted a pMax transfection as control. The ratio is 1μg of plasmid per 2.2E6 cells.
1% Anti-Clumping Agent (#0010057DG, Gibco) was added on Day 2.
2.1.4
Conditions and Sampling
Transfected cells were incubated at 37°C with 130rpm shaking and 5% CO2 for one day
(D0). On day 2 (D2) they were transferred to 32C°C and 1% anti-clumping was added.
Sampling was conducted at Day 0 after resuspension in fresh media and at D3(72h),
D4 (96h), and D5 (120h) after that. Sampling volume was decided based on viable cell
density which was 2E6 for D3 and 6E6 for D4 and D5. Samples were centrifuged at 250g
for 5min and the supernatant was separated from the cell pellet. Both the supernatant
and the pellet were kept at -70°C for future analysis.
16
==PAGE:25==
2.2
Molecular Biology Techniques
2.2.1
Molecular Cloning
Mach1 competent E. coli cells were retrieved from the -80°C freezer and thawed on ice.
10 µL cells were distributed to 1.5mL eppendorf tubes with careful pipetting, including a
no DNA control sample. 2ml of diluted plasmid solution (5ng/ul) was added to the corre-
sponding Eppendorf tubes with competent E. coli cells. The mixtures were incubated on
ice for 30 minutes, transferred to a 42°C thermo block for 30 seconds and then returned
to ice for 1 minute. 90 µL 2xYT medium was added to each mixture and incubated at 37°
C degrees for 60 minutes shaking 800 rpm. 100 µL supernatant was discarded using a
pipette. The cell pellets were resuspended and the remaining media and plated on LB
plates with ampicillin. The plates were incubated bottom-up at 37°C O/N. Starter culture
was produced in 2xYT medium from a single colony all from previously transformed cul-
ture with the plasmid. Maxi-prep protocol instructions was followed and the plasmid was
isolated.
2.2.2
Western Blot
Pellets from transfected and non-transfected samples from D0, D3, D4, and D5 were re-
trieved from -70°C and thawed on ice. 200μl of Pierce™RIPA buffer(#89901, Themro)
together with 0.5μl of protease inhibitor mixture (#P8340-1ML, Sigma-Aldrich) were added
to lyse the cells and the mixture was incubated on ice for 15 minutes (100ul of RIPA buffer/
10e6 cells). Following that, centrifugation at 15000g at 4°C was conducted and the super-
natant was collected. The supernatant was heated at 98C for 3 minutes. Samples were
prepared as 5μl of LDS Sample Buffer (4X) (#NP0007, Invitrogen) and 2μl of Reducing
agentNuPAGE™Sample Reducing Agent (#NP0004, Invitrogen) were added to 13μl of
supernatant. The whole mixtures were added in the SDS-page gel(#NP0321BOX, Them-
rofisher) wells together with 5μl of PageRuler™Prestained Protein Ladder, 10 to 180 kDa
(#26617, Thermofisher) in a separate well. The gel was run at 200V for 35 minutes. After
transferring onto a nitrocellulose and polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane using
iBlot ™2 Gel Transfer Device (# IB21001, Invitrogen) and iBlot™2 Transfer Stacks follow-
ing the Thermo-Fischer protocol, membranes were blocked with 15ml of blocking solution
(2.1a) under gentle rocking. The blocking solution was discarded and the membrane was
incubated overnight with the primary antibody. was washed three times with wash buffer
under gentle rocking for 5 minutes each and incubated for 1h with the secondary HRP-
conjugated antibody (3.1). After the final wash in the same manner, 1ml of ECL™Prime
Western blotting detection reagent(#RPN2236, Cytiva), prepared as a 1:1 ratio between
reagent A and reagent B, was added and the membrane was imaged in Amersham Imager
600 on Chemnilumeniscence mode with colorimetric marker and auto-exposure.
2.2.3
ELISA
Samples were diluted appropriately for them to be in the detection range. DuoSet Hu-
man GM-CSF (#DY215-05, RnD Systems) and DuoSet Human IL-15 (#DY879-05, RnD
Systems) Kit instructions were followed according to the manufacturer.
2.3
Analysis Methods
2.3.1
ELISA
For analyzing raw ELISA data, a four-parameter logistic curve analysis tool was available
on the webpage myassay.com
==PAGE:26==
Standard Curve The Standard Curve plots the standard data points (red dots) on a semi-
log axes with the measured values versus the specified concentrations. (The logarithmic
x-axis is used for the concentrations and the linear y-axis shows the measurements.)
The thick black line shows the curve calculated from these standards. Here the curve is
the result for the Four Parameter Logistic (4PL) fit.
Fit Results
The Fit Results table lists, the calculated four parameters of the 4PL (the coefficients a,b,c,
and d)
• The Goodness of Fit Measures:
• MSE – The Mean Square Error. (The closer to zero, the better the fit.) R² - This is 1
minus the ratio of SS / (the sum of the squares of the differences between Y fit and the
mean Y value). This will equal 1 for a good fit (SS = 0) and tend towards 0 for a bad fit.
SS - The sum of the squares of the residuals (errors). (The closer to zero, the better the
fit.) SYX - The standard deviation of the residuals. This is the square root of (the sum of
the squares of the residuals divided by (number of data points – number of coefficients)).
(The closer to zero, the better the fit.)
Calibrators Table The Calibrators Table lists the details of the standards used to generate
the Standard Curve. For each calibrator, the following details are listed:
• Calibrator - Sample Name
• Conc. - Specified concentration
• Wells - The positions on the layout designated as containing the sample
• SEM - Standard Error of the Mean
• Backfit – This is the raw data interpolated using the curve to calculate the concentration.
This should compare favorably with the specified concentration of the standard. For the
lowest or highest standard, it is often this because the accuracy of the curve is poor
• Recovery % - The percentage recovery is the ratio between the known concentration and
the backfit (i.e. observed/expected). Where the curve fit perfectly models the biochemistry
there will be 100% recovery. This measure indicates the accuracy of the curve at each
standard point.
Results Table
The Results Table lists the details of the calculations for each of the samples. For each
sample, the following details are listed:
• Sample – The Sample Name, e.g. Unknown1. For unknown samples, the name will be
replaced by any provided Sample ID (under Sample IDs section in the calculation page).
• Dilution - The Dilution Factor. For unknown samples, if the samples was diluted then this
value lists the specified dilution. (From Dilution Factors section in the calculation page).
• Wells - The positions on the layout designated as containing the sample (as provided in
the Microplate section).
• Raw – The raw measurement values (as provided in the Measurements section).
• Background Corrected - If a blank group is used this column is included and reports the
corrected value which is the Raw measurement minus the average of the Blank1 group.
==PAGE:27==
• Conc. –The concentration is calculated by interpolating the measurement (raw or back-
ground corrected) on the Standard Curve. If the sample has diluted, the reported concen-
tration is the value read from the standard curve multiplied by the specified dilution.
• Conc. (Average) – The average of the concentrations calculated for the sample.
• %CV – The percentage coefficient of variation. Typically assay samples are replicated
and the %CV is useful for measuring the deviation between the replicates. The %CV
is calculated for each sample as the % of the standard deviation (SD) of the replicate
measurements divided by their mean. Typically for replicates, one might expect a %CV
value to be < 15. A value greater than this might indicate a preparation or layout error.
Acceptable limits depend on the application.
• SD – Standard Deviation of the sample population.
• SEM – Standard Error of the Mean.
Samples in the table will be highlighted for one of the following reasons:
• outside the range of the standard calibrator. In this case, a concentration may be re-
ported although it is an extrapolated value rather than interpolated.
• outside the range of the curve (see Additional Notes).
In either case, it is recommended that highlighted samples be diluted and re-assayed.
Additional Notes A concentration or backfit result may be reported as:
< Curve – this means that the measured value is lower than the lower asymptote of the
4PL. This usually indicates that the sample was too concentrated to give an accurate
result.
> Curve – this means that the measured value is greater than the upper asymptote of the
4PL. This usually indicates that the sample was too dilute to give an accurate result.
The 4PL is a sigmoidal curve with upper and lower asymptotes (reflected by the a and
d coefficients of the fit). Thus, the 4PL curve can only be used to calculate results for
measurements within the Y range defined by the a and d coefficients. The curve cannot
be used to interpolate results outside this range.
The nature of the 4PL means that the accuracy of the interpolated reduces as measure-
ment values get closer to the asymptotes (i.e. a small change in the measurement results
in a large change in the calculated concentration). Thus, for samples that are close to the
asymptotes, it is recommended that those samples be diluted and re-assayed.[50]
2. Analysis methods 2.1 Statistical methods- logarithmic logistic curve equation and write
which software you used to make that analysis, what parameters you write 2.2 VCD and
productivity calculation you need to have specific productivity in the results
==PAGE:28==
2.4
Reagents and Devices Overview
Reagents and devices used during this project are listed in the tables below.
(a) Reagents
(b) Devices
==PAGE:29==
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Trial Batch: Clones A8 and B9
3.1.1
Effector gene expression verification
To get familiar with the techniques required in the cell lab and to assess our production, we
initiated our process by selecting one cytokine-producing clone, for each of the proteins
we are interested in producing: GM-CSF represented by clone A8, and IL-21 represented
by clone B9. These clones are biological replicates they should be representative of how
the rest of the clones will behave as well. 5 Day trial batch was run and cell pellet samples
from days 3, 4, and 5 were analyzed for the presence of the transfected effector genes.
Two 6-well plates were prepared for GM-CSF, namely one transfected with GALNT3 and
one with MGAT5. One 6-well plate was prepared for IL-21 transfected with MGAT5
Antibodies and dilutions were used as described in 3.1. For the Western results to be
trustworthy we had to ensure similar sample loading. To do that, we used the housekeep-
ing genes: Cyclophilin A and Beta-tubulin. Their use was decided based on the sizes of
the proteins in question (3.2a). Beta-tubulin was first for GLANT3 and MGAT5 analysis. It
proved difficult to distinguish between GALNT3 and beta-tubulin. Cyclophilin A was later
chosen to analyze all the samples and their respective transfected genes as it was com-
patible to do so. Compatibility is based on a large enough difference in size between the
housekeeping and the analyzed protein (figure 3.2a).
Figure 3.1: Antibodies and working dilutions
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) glycosyltransferases sizes
(b) corresponding genes and cytokines
Figure 3.2
(a) trial batch membrane
(b) protein sizes
Figure 3.3: Trial Batch Western Blot
In Figure 3.3a bands on the top represent MGAT5 and on the bottom, beta-Tubulin. We
observe the most intense bands on lanes 5 and 8, followed by days lanes 4 and 7, and
finally 6 and 9. We also observe that loading is relatively even on most samples (lanes
1,3,7-10). Even though lane 5 is not loaded equally, optical intensity is higher. Other
than confirming the transfection, we can safely assume that the effector proteins have the
highest expression on day 4 followed by day 3 and day 5. If the hypothesis stands and
the overexpression of effector genes is connected to increased cytokine productivity, we
expect it to follow the same pattern.
==PAGE:31==
3.1.2
GM-CSF Quanitifaction
Having a rough estimate of GM-CSF production to be between 80ng/ml and 160ng/ml
from my supervisor, serial dilutions of 1:5000 and 1:10.000 were conducted to reach a
concentration within the detection limit of the DuoSet Human GM-CSF (#DY215-05, RnD
Systems) which is between 15.6pg/ml and 1000pg/ml.
Figure 3.4: Standard curve (left) and fit results (right)
Figure 3.5: ELISA results. CV%:Coefficient of Variation SD: Standard DeviationSEM:
Standard Error of the Mean
==PAGE:32==
In Figure 3.5 we observe that the dilution 1:5000 is still too little as it is outside of the
standard curve (yellow highlights), hence it cannot be trusted. For day 3 there, concen-
tration is practically the same. On day 4 we observe an increase of 9,7% which cannot
be definitive on its own but pushes us towards the right direction for the next analysis.
==PAGE:33==
3.2
Epxanded Batch: Entirety of clones with respective
effector genes
3.2.1
Effector gene expression verification
To test our hypothesis we chose to overexpress the candidate effector genes in their
respective cell lines. For GM-CSF, each of the A6, A8, and B7 clones was transiently
transfected with the glycosyltransferase genes GLANT3, GLANT10 and MGAT5 as well
as with the regulatory gene BHLHE40. For IL-21, cell lines A7, A11 and B9 were tran-
sientrly transfected with DPM1 and MGAT5 while the IL-15 cell lines C7, C10, C11 were
transientrly transfected with B4GALT1. These transfections produced twenty-one 6-well
plates. Western blot was conducted for all transfections except IL-21 clones transfected
with DPM1.
(a) Anti-for BHLHE40 Western Blot and Cyclophilin A,
Clones A6 and A8
(b) Anti- BHLHE40Western Blot and Cyclophilin A loading
control, Clone B7
Figure 3.6: BHLHE40
Westenr Blot. In both western blots, the band at 48kDa is not clear. It can be better
described as a smear. The clearest band is the one for A6 D4 on 3.6a. On 3.6b we
observe insufficient separation of the ladder and conclude that there is insufficient
separation of the proteins as well. The loading control (CyclophilinA 3.1) on the bottom
suggests equal loading. The bands for the transfected clones are intense but not sharp
(45-55kDa).
==PAGE:34==
(a) Anti-GALNT3 Western Blot and Cyclophilin A
(b) GALNT3 protein size
Figure 3.7: Anti-GLANT3 Western blot. The bands are clear for the effector protein. The
transfection worked. Some bands are visible on the loading control as well but it cannot
be used to assess equal loading
(a) Anti-B4GALT1 Western Blot and Cyclophilin A, D3 and
D4
(b) B4GALT1 protein size
Figure 3.8: Anti-B4GALT1 Western blot. The bands are clear for the effector protein. The
transfection worked. Some bands are visible on the loading control as well but it cannot
be used to assess equal loading
The loading control used for the Western Blot analysis displayed above has not functioned
as it should have. Insufficient washing can be ruled out since the washing steps used
were the same for both parts of the membrane and the dilutions were suggested by the
manufacturer (3.1). Considering dilutions and non-specific blocking, the whole process
of western blot analysis was repeated with higher dilution for Cyclophilin A and overnight
blocking. They resulted in the same tainted bottom half but without the bands which
means that dilution or blocking the membrane was not the problem. The bottom parts
were washed repeatedly but the problem persisted. Considering the previous Western
Blot for MGAT5 and the extended batch Western Blots, the most intense bands were
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.9: Anti-B4GALT1 Western Blot and Cyclophilin A, D5, Auto- and 0.1sec exposure.
The bands are not sharp. Their presence indicates the transfection worked. Cyclophilin
loading control cannot be used as there are no clear bands
confirmed to be on day 4 followed by day 3 and day 5. This is the trend we expect to see
in the quantification data.
==PAGE:36==
3.2.2
GM-CSF Quantification
(a) Standard curve (left) and fit results (right)
(b) Calibrator Table
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.11: Results Table
==PAGE:38==
(a) Standard curve (left) and fit results (right)
(b) Calibrator Table
Figure 3.12
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.13: Results Table
==PAGE:40==
Figures 3.10 and 3.11 showcase the results from the second GM-CSF quantification using
DuoSet Human GM-CSF (#DY215-05, RnD Systems). The samples used are all from Day
4 while for A8 MGAT5, a sample from the trial batch is used. There is a clear increase in
cytokine production between transfected and non-transfected B7 BHLHE40, A8 MGAT5,
and A6 BHHE40. While the increase is not significant the results cannot be trusted since
the Reagent Dilutent used in the analysis was past the expiration date and it was also
used in place of PBS
Figures 3.12 and 3.13 showcase results from the third GM-CSF quantification ELISA. It is
a repeat of the previous one with fresh Reagent Dilutent and correct usage of all reagents.
The increase is still evident although the yellow color states that the sample is outside
of the standard curves and, hence cannot be trusted. This is due to a mistake during
the serial dilutions of the samples where they were diluted 100-fold over what they were
supposed to.
==PAGE:41==
3.2.3
IL-15 Quantification
(a) Standard curve (left) and fit results (right)
(b) Calibrator Table
Figure 3.14
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.15: Results Table
Figures 3.14 and 3.15 showcase results from IL-15 quantification using DuoSet Human
IL-15 (#DY879-05, RnD Systems). Results are inconsistent even from the same clone
but different dilutions. The high %CV in most samples is evidence of poor analysis. The
results cannot be trusted. The same expired reagent was used for the whole analysis and
again instead of PBS
Discussion
Looking at the western blots it is evident that some effector genes are missing. Transfec-
tions for GM-CSF GLANT10, GM-CSF MGAT5 and IL-21 MGAT5 did not work as there
were no bands visible on the membranes (see Appendix). The reason that some trans-
fections worked and some did not is still unconfirmed We can only speculate that some-
thing went wrong while executing the PEI transfection protocol. Due to the high volume
of transfections in the respective cell lines (figure 3.2b), incubation times may not have
been followed as suggested.
As far as the quality of the western blots is concerned, there are several reasons why the
obvious problem of the bottom parts of the analysis was not clear with very high back-
ground noise.
Higher antibody dilutions are frequently the reason behind this effect. This is ruled out
since we followed manufacturer instructions and used the lowest dilution recommended.
When we repeated the analysis for all the transfections with lower anti-Cyclophilin A con-
centration, the result was non-existent bands and persistence of the noise.
Having ruled that out, another reason for high background noise is insufficient blocking.
This can also be ruled out since both parts of all membranes were blocked with the same
blocking solution for the same time in the same temperatures and only then were they cut
to incubate with the different primary antibodies. Contamination of the membrane is also
==PAGE:43==
ruled out when we consider the same handling of the two parts of the membrane and the
fact that the blocking solution was prepared fresh on the day of the analysis. To ensure
blocking was not the case, overnight incubation with blocking solution was conducted
randomly on some membranes both in the first analysis and the repeat. Both times the
result was the same.
Insufficient washing can also be ruled out based on the same handling of the two parts of
the membrane. Even then, more washing steps were carried out for longer incubation in
the washing reagent and the noise persisted once again.
The primary antibody should not have been compromised since it was stored at -20 since
it arrived. Non-specific binding of the secondary antibody can also be ruled out since it
was used for imaging of all the rabbit-derived primary antibodies.
What we failed to consider at the time is the non-specific binding of the primary anti-
Cyclophilin A antibody to the membrane itself or the blocking solution.
==PAGE:44==
4
Future Works
While the current study has provided valuable insights into cytokine production, in the end,
there are more questions raised than answered. Based on the results produced, there
are no definitive answers on which effector genes increased or did not increase cytokine
production in our cells. What became evident during the span of this project, particularly in
the last few days, was that research in mammalian cells requires time. Trying to overcome
obstacles by sheer work is not enough.
A re-run of the same batch is an immediate takeaway from this project. Optimizing the
transfection of effector genes, as well as dividing the work over three days instead of one,
will help ensure the avoidance of handling mistakes. That way, one could greatly increase
their chances of successful transient transfection.
The same applies to the rest of the analysis. To enhance the clarity of our Western blot
results and mitigate background noise, it is important to implement pre-testing procedures
for antibodies and optimization of blocking solutions. Incubating with a blank membrane
and a blank membrane blocked with blocking solution would rule out or validate primary
antibody non-specific binding. Were that the case, one would continue either with finding
another anti-housekeeping gene antibody, changing the membrane from PVDF to nitro-
cellulose, or changing the blocking solution from 5% milk to BSA.
As far as ELISA is concerned, clearly labeling the reagents used with manufacturing and
expiration dates, following the manufacturer’s original protocol, and careful serial dilution
will certainly lead to trustworthy results.
Moreover, cell cultures are open to further optimization in regards to environmental con-
ditions as well as the concentration of additives to the media, to specifically study their
effects on cytokine production as well as to maximize cytokine yields.
In the case where the hypothesis is further investigated and promising genes are validated,
many research routes open up. The next logical step would be to expand the batch culti-
vation for over five days and closely monitor the batch. Find days for peak production of
cytokines using ELISA as well as establish the exact time when the cells start to lose the
transiently transfected genes. Stable transfection of the best candidate effector genes is
also an opportunity worth exploring, especially when we consider scaling up possibilities
in industrial continuous bioreactors.
More disciplines such as bioinformatics and systems biology could greatly contribute to
that cause, by pointing out all the important variables in the scaling-up endeavor. Even
with transient transfection, scaling-up approaches should be considered and modeled to
establish whether there is significant industrial interest.
Bioinformatics techniques can integrate multi-omics data, including genomics, transcrip-
tomics, and proteomics, to identify more candidate effector genes and pathways associ-
ated with cytokine production. Computational methods can predict the impact of genetic
variations or mutations on cytokine production, while network reconstruction enables the
modeling of signaling pathways and gene regulatory networks involved in cytokine pro-
duction.
Systems biology models can simulate the dynamic behavior of cytokine production path-
ways over time, identifying key parameters and variables influencing cytokine production.
36
==PAGE:45==
Integrating experimental data with computational models enables validation and refine-
ment of model predictions, ultimately advancing our understanding and therapeutic appli-
cations of cytokines in biomedical research and clinical practice.
This integrated text provides a comprehensive overview of the current project’s challenges
and proposed strategies, as well as the potential contributions of other disciplines in ad-
dressing these challenges and advancing the study of cytokine production.
==PAGE:46==
Bibliography
[1]
Malgorzata Kesik-Brodacka. “Progress in biopharmaceutical development”. In: Biotech-
nology and Applied Biochemistry 65 (3 May 2018), pp. 306–322. ISSN: 14708744.
DOI: 10.1002/BAB.1617.
[2]
Celeste C Quianzon and Issam Cheikh. “History of insulin”. In: Journal of Commu-
nity Hospital Internal Medicine Perspectives 2 (2 2012), p. 18701. DOI: 10.3402/
jchimp.v2i2.18701. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?
journalCode=zjch20.
[3]
FDA. 100 Years of Insulin | FDA. 2022. URL: https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/fda-
history-exhibits/100-years-insulin.
[4]
R J Kaufman et al. “Coamplification and coexpression of human tissue-type plas-
minogen activator and murine dihydrofolate reductase sequences in Chinese ham-
ster ovary cells.” In: Molecular and Cellular Biology 5 (7 July 1985), p. 1750. ISSN:
0270-7306. DOI: 10.1128/MCB.5.7.1750. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC367294/?report=
abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC367294/.
[5]
Florian M. Wurm. Production of recombinant protein therapeutics in cultivated mam-
malian cells. Nov. 2004. DOI: 10.1038/nbt1026.
[6]
Gary Walsh and Eithne Walsh. “Biopharmaceutical benchmarks 2022”. In: (). DOI:
10.1038/s41587-022-01582-x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01582-x.
[7]
Wendy Halpern and David Hutto. “Biopharmaceuticals”. In: Haschek and Rousseaux’s
Handbook of Toxicologic Pathology, Third Edition: Volume 1-3 1-2 (Jan. 2013),
pp. 751–782. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-415759-0.00025-X.
[8]
Saskia J.A.M. Santegoets et al. “IL-21 in cancer immunotherapy At the right place
at the right time”. In: OncoImmunology 2 (6 2013), p. 24522. ISSN: 2162402X. DOI:
10.4161/ONCI.24522. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?
journalCode=koni20https://doi.org/10.4161/onci.24522.
[9]
Menghan Cai et al. “Research progress of interleukin-15 in cancer immunotherapy”.
In: Frontiers in Pharmacology 14 (May 2023), p. 1184703. ISSN: 16639812. DOI:
10.3389/FPHAR.2023.1184703/BIBTEX.
[10]
Laia Egea, Yoshihiro Hirata, and Martin F Kagnoff. “GM-CSF: a role in immune and
inflammatory reactions in the intestine”. In: (2010). DOI: 10.1586/egh.10.73.
[11]
Anil Kumar et al. GM-CSF: A Double-Edged Sword in Cancer Immunotherapy. July
2022. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.901277.
[12]
Sulayman Benmerzoug et al. “GM-CSF targeted immunomodulation affects host
response to M. tuberculosis infection”. In: Scientific Reports 2018 8:1 8 (1 June
2018), pp. 1–15. ISSN: 2045-2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-26984-3. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41598-018-26984-3.
[13]
Palash Bhattacharya et al. “GM-CSF: An immune modulatory cytokine that can sup-
press autoimmunity”. In: Cytokine 75 (2 Oct. 2015), pp. 261–271. ISSN: 1043-4666.
DOI: 10.1016/J.CYTO.2015.05.030.
[14]
Hillard M. Lazarus et al. “Sargramostim (rhu GM-CSF) as Cancer Therapy (System-
atic Review) and An Immunomodulator. A Drug Before Its Time?” In: Frontiers in
Immunology 12 (Aug. 2021), p. 706186. ISSN: 16643224. DOI: 10.3389/FIMMU.
2021.706186/BIBTEX. URL: www.frontiersin.org.
[15]
Jianwei Zhu. “Mammalian cell protein expression for biopharmaceutical production”.
In: (2011). DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2011.08.022. URL: www.fda.gov;.
38
==PAGE:47==
[16]
Malgorzata Kesik-Brodacka. “Progress in biopharmaceutical development”. In: Biotech-
nology and Applied Biochemistry 65 (3 May 2018), pp. 306–322. ISSN: 14708744.
DOI: 10.1002/BAB.1617.
[17]
Ningning Xu et al. “Comparative proteomic analysis of three Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) host cells”. In: Biochemical Engineering Journal 124 (2017), pp. 122–129.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bej.2017.05.007. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2017.05.007.
[18]
C Du. “2.03 Cellular Systems”. In: (2011).
[19]
Kenneth (Kenneth M.) Murphy, Casey Weaver, and Charles Janeway. Janeway’s
immunobiology, p. 904. ISBN: 9780815345053.
[20]
Charles A. Dinarello. “Historical insights into cytokines”. In: European Journal of Im-
munology 37 (SUPPL. 1 Nov. 2007). ISSN: 00142980. DOI: 10.1002/EJI.200737772.
[21]
Jun-Ming Zhang and Jianxiong An. “Cytokines, Inflammation and Pain”. In: (). DOI:
10.1097/AIA.0b013e318034194e.
[22]
Timothy R Hercus et al. “The granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor re-
ceptor: linking its structure to cell signaling and its role in disease”. In: 114 (2009),
pp. 1289–1298. DOI: 10.1182/blood-2008. URL: http://ashpublications.org/blood/
article-pdf/114/7/1289/1322072/zh803309001289.pdf.
[23]
Xinquan Wang et al. “Structural Biology of Shared Cytokine Receptors”. In: Annual
review of immunology 27 (2009), p. 29. ISSN: 07320582. DOI: 10.1146/ANNUREV.
IMMUNOL.24.021605.090616. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC3981547/%20/pmc/articles/
PMC3981547/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC3981547/.
[24]
Yifan Zhan, Andrew M. Lew, and Michael Chopin. The Pleiotropic Effects of the GM-
CSF Rheostat on Myeloid Cell Differentiation and Function: More Than a Numbers
Game. Nov. 2019. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02679.
[25]
Isabelle C. Arnold et al. “The GM-CSF–IRF5 signaling axis in eosinophils promotes
antitumor immunity through activation of type 1 T cell responses”. In: The Journal
of Experimental Medicine 217 (12 Dec. 2020). ISSN: 15409538. DOI: 10 . 1084 /
JEM.20190706. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC7953737/%20/pmc/articles/PMC7953737/
?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7953737/.
[26]
Craig Murdoch et al. The role of myeloid cells in the promotion of tumour angiogen-
esis. Aug. 2008. DOI: 10.1038/nrc2444.
[27]
Karolina Pilipow et al. IL15 and T-cell stemness in T-cell-based cancer immunother-
apy. Dec. 2015. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1498.
[28]
Mübeccel Akdis et al. “Interleukins (from IL-1 to IL-38), interferons, transforming
growth factor β, and TNF-α: Receptors, functions, and roles in diseases”. In: Jour-
nal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 138 (4 Oct. 2016), pp. 984–1010. ISSN:
10976825. DOI: 10.1016/J.JACI.2016.06.033/ATTACHMENT/37979BDC-86F0-
44E4-BF67-9792F020AE14/MMC4.DOCX. URL: http://www.jacionline.org/article/
S0091674916307151/fulltext%20http://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091674916307151/
abstract%20https://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(16)30715-1/abstract.
[29]
Pin-Yu Perera et al. “The role of Interleukin-15 in inflammation and immune re-
sponses to infection: implications for its therapeutic use”. In: (). DOI: 10.1016/j.
micinf.2011.10.006.
[30]
Jason C. Steel, Thomas A. Waldmann, and John C. Morris. “Interleukin-15 biology
and its therapeutic implications in cancer”. In: Trends in Pharmacological Sciences
33 (1 Jan. 2012), p. 35. ISSN: 01656147. DOI: 10.1016/J.TIPS.2011.09.004. URL:
/pmc/articles/PMC3327885/%20/pmc/articles/PMC3327885/?report=abstract%
20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3327885/.
==PAGE:48==
[31]
Yuan Tian and Allan J Zajac. “IL-21 and T cell differentiation: consider the context
HHS Public Access”. In: Trends Immunol 37 (8 2016), pp. 557–568. DOI: 10.1016/
j.it.2016.06.001.
[32]
Tohid Gharibi et al. “Biological effects of IL-21 on different immune cells and its
role in autoimmune diseases”. In: Immunobiology 221 (2 Feb. 2016), pp. 357–367.
ISSN: 0171-2985. DOI: 10.1016/J.IMBIO.2015.09.021.
[33]
Rosanne Spolski and Warren J. Leonard. Interleukin-21: A double-edged sword
with therapeutic potential. 2014. DOI: 10.1038/nrd4296.
[34]
Jens Nielsen and Jay D Keasling. “Leading Edge Review Engineering Cellular Metabolism”.
In: (2016). DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.004. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2016.02.004.
[35]
Hudson H. Freeze. “Genetic defects in the human glycome”. In: © 2006 Nature
Publishing Group 7 (2006). URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/nrg1894.pdf.
[36]
Peter Goettig. “Molecular Sciences Effects of Glycosylation on the Enzymatic Ac-
tivity and Mechanisms of Proteases”. In: (). DOI: 10.3390/ijms17121969. URL: www.
mdpi.com/journal/ijms.
[37]
Stefan Emming, Niccolò Bianchi, and Sara Polletti. “A molecular network regulat-
ing the proinflammatory phenotype of human memory T lymphocytes”. In: Nature
Immunology vol 21 (2020), pp. 388–399. DOI: 10.1038/s41590-020-0622-8. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-020-0622-8.
[38]
Yohana Camila Garay et al. “Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosamine transferase 3: a
post-translational writer on human health”. In: Journal of Molecular Medicine 100
(2022), pp. 1387–1403. DOI: 10.1007/s00109-022-02249-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00109-022-02249-5.
[39]
UniProt. MGAT5 - Alpha-1,6-mannosylglycoprotein 6-beta-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase
A - Homo sapiens (Human) | UniProtKB | UniProt. URL: https://www.uniprot.org/
uniprotkb/Q09328/entry.
[40]
Kentaro Kato, Lars Hansen, and Henrik Clausen. “Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-
Associated Phenotypes in Mammals”. In: Molecules 26 (18 Sept. 2021). ISSN: 14203049.
DOI: 10.3390/MOLECULES26185504. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC8472655/%20/pmc/
articles/PMC8472655/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC8472655/.
[41]
Li Liu et al. “Prognostic role of N-Acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 10 in metastatic
renal cell carcinoma”. In: Oncotarget 8 (9 Feb. 2017), p. 14995. ISSN: 19492553.
DOI: 10.18632/ONCOTARGET.14786. URL: /pmc/articles/PMC5362461/%20/pmc/
articles/PMC5362461/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC5362461/.
[42]
James W. Dennis, Maria Granovsky, and Charles E. Warren. “Glycoprotein glycosy-
lation and cancer progression”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General
Subjects 1473 (1 Dec. 1999), pp. 21–34. ISSN: 0304-4165. DOI: 10.1016/S0304-
4165(99)00167-1.
[43]
Hisashi Ashida, Yusuke Maeda, and Taroh Kinoshita. “DPM1, the Catalytic Subunit
of Dolichol-phosphate Mannose Synthase, Is Tethered to and Stabilized on the En-
doplasmic Reticulum Membrane by DPM3 *”. In: THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL
CHEMISTRY 281 (2 2006), pp. 896–904. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M511311200.
[44]
Lili Xu et al. “Secretory pathway engineering enhances secretion of cellobiohydro-
lase I from Trichoderma reesei in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Journal of Bio-
science and Bioengineering 117 (1 Jan. 2014), pp. 45–52. ISSN: 1389-1723. DOI:
10.1016/J.JBIOSC.2013.06.017.
==PAGE:49==
[45]
Emmanuel A. Margolin et al. “Engineering the Plant Secretory Pathway for the Pro-
duction of Next-Generation Pharmaceuticals”. In: Trends in Biotechnology 38 (9
Sept. 2020), pp. 1034–1044. ISSN: 18793096. DOI: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.03.004.
URL: http://www.cell.com/article/S0167779920300640/fulltext%20http://www.
cell.com/article/S0167779920300640/abstract%20https://www.cell.com/trends/
biotechnology/abstract/S0167-7799(20)30064-0.
[46]
Mohamed Mahameed et al. “Engineering receptors in the secretory pathway for
orthogonal signalling control”. In: Nature Communications 2022 13:1 13 (1 Nov.
2022), pp. 1–15. ISSN: 2041-1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-35161-0. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41467-022-35161-0.
[47]
Haomin Huang et al. “A novel strategy to produce high level and high purity of bioac-
tive IL15 fusion proteins from mammalian cells”. In: (2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2018.
03.010. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pep.2018.03.010.
[48]
Wenpeng You and Maciej Henneberg. “Cancer incidence increasing globally: The
role of relaxed natural selection”. In: Evolutionary Applications 11 (2 Feb. 2018),
pp. 140–152. ISSN: 17524571. DOI: 10.1111/EVA.12523.
[49]
P Kanavos. “The rising burden of cancer in the developing world”. In: Annals of
Oncology 17 (2006), pp. 15–23. DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdl983.
[50]
MyAssay. Four Parameter Logistic Curve Report Contents - MyAssays. URL: https:
//www.myassays.com/four-parameter-logistic-curve-report-contents.html.
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
put backbone and gene sequences put failed ELISAs Reason for last ELISA. Want to
repeat MGAT5 from previous experiment and needed better results with different dilution.
Put cell counts Raw data
43
==PAGE:52==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 220
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.bioengineering.dtu.dk/
