==PAGE:1==
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
Data-drevne surrogate modeller til fysik-baserede numeriske modeller
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
Data-drevne surrogate modeller til fysik-baserede numeriske modeller
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Emil Siim Larsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration
with Danish Hydraulics Institute, DHI, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science
in Engineering, M.Sc. Eng.
AUTHOR
Emil Siim Larsen, M.Sc. Student,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
ACADEMIC SUPERVISOR
Allan Peter Engsig-Karup, M.Sc.(Eng.), Ph.D.
Associate Professor in Scientific Computing,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, DTU.
INDUSTRY SUPERVISOR
Jesper Sandvig Mariegaard, M.Sc.(Eng.), Ph.D.
Research Scientist,
Danish Hydraulics Institute, DHI.
Emil Siim Larsen - s183988
Signature
Date
ii
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
13. February, 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis aimed to explore the potential of data-driven surrogate models as pos-
sible replacements for DHI’s MIKE model, focusing on the Øresund strait as a case study.
Using a year-long, high-fidelity dataset that was simulated using DHI’s MIKE model, wa-
ter surface elevations, depth-averaged current velocities, boundary- and wind conditions
within Øresund were made available for exploratory data analysis (EDA) and model-building.
The EDA demonstrated an excellent variance-to-compression ratio of the PCA for both
the surface elevation- and full-state data, with both datasets requiring less than 1% of
their dimensions to retain practically all data variance.
The model building resulted in three surrogate models being tested: PCA linear regres-
sion, Dynamic Mode Decomposition with Control (DMDc), and Extreme Gradient Boosted
(XGB) regression.
The results showed the PCA linear regression- and DMDc model performing well on both
datasets, while the XGB model performed poorly on both. Additionally, the DMDc- and
linear regression models both managed to forecast surface elevation data more than 1000
times faster than DHI’s MIKE model with mean snapshot RMSEs less than 3 cm, which
far surpassed the accuracy and performance success criteria of deviating less than 8 cm
and achieving a speed-up of at least 100, set forth by experts at DHI.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Allan and Jesper, for all the help they have given me
and for our great discussion. Your guidance was highly appreciated, and I am sure that I
would never have come as far as I did without your help.
Similarly, I would also like to thank DHI and its wonderful employees for supplying great
discussions and very calm yet positive study environments,
On top of that, I would also like to give thanks to my big brother, Nicolai, who has supported
me a lot throughout this thesis, and especially towards the end.
Finally, I would like to thank my girlfriend, Line, for all her love and support, and for never
doubting me. It would not have been the same without her, and I am forever grateful for
everything she has done for me.
iv
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Data
2
2.1
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Data Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theory
11
3.1
Dynamical Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Flow Maps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Model Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4
Data-driven models
28
4.1
Baseline models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Reconstruction models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Regression models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Results
31
5.1
Visual results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2
Numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
60
A Appendix
63
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In most physical engineering settings, simulations are crucial for understanding the un-
derlying dynamics of systems as well as predicting future states of said systems. For
simulations that deal with small simple systems, being highly efficient is usually not a re-
quirement, since most computers these days are powerful enough to complete simulations
within reasonable timeframes. However, when the complexity and scale of simulations
increase, it often becomes necessary to have an efficient way of simulating.
One class of simulation problems that are notoriously known for being computationally ex-
pensive are those that involve fluid dynamics, colloquially known as Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD). In general, CFD simulations involve solving sets of partial differential
equations (PDEs) that describe the dynamics of a fluid. These equations are typically de-
rived from the Navier-Stokes equations: a set of PDEs that describe the motion of a fluid.
With most PDEs being nonlinear and having no analytical solutions, the equations must
be discretized and solved numerically. A high level of discretization is typically needed
for obtaining solutions that yield a suitable level of accuracy, but this also entails a higher
computational cost. Hence, there is a trade-off between accuracy and computational cost.
In recent years, data-driven approaches have seen an increase in popularity for solving a
wide range of problems. In the context of CFD simulations, data-driven approaches have
been suggested as an alternative to the traditional physics-based models. The idea be-
hind data-driven approaches is to derive the underlying model from the data itself, rather
than building it from the underlying physics. This is typically done by using machine learn-
ing techniques to learn the mapping between the input parameters of a CFD simulation
and the corresponding output. The advantage of using data-driven approaches is that
they are typically much faster to evaluate than the original CFD simulation and retain a
reasonable level of accuracy.
For this master thesis, a case study of Øresund will provide the data foundation for delving
into the application of data-driven surrogate models as a possible alternative for physics-
based models. The available dataset was generated by the Danish Hydraulic Institute
(DHI) using their state-of-the-art physics-based MIKE model to simulate the hydrodynam-
ics of the Øresund strait.
The goal of this thesis is to investigate the feasibility of using data-driven surrogate models
as an alternative to physics-based models for CFD simulations. To assess the feasibility
of the data-driven surrogate model, it will be compared to the physics-based model on
both accuracy and computation time.
The following two success criteria were established for the surrogate model, based on the
expert domain knowledge of the external supervisor from DHI:
• The surrogate model must be able to predict the output of the physics-based model
with an average deviation of less than 8 cm (measured by RMSE).
• The surrogate model must run at least 100 times faster than the physics-based
model.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Data
The data foundation for this master thesis consists of a large dataset that was simulated
in MIKE — A simulation software developed by DHI. The simulation was run on version
17.2.0.13162 of MIKE and generated using geometry-, boundary-, and wind data for the
Øresund strait, from which the water surface elevation, longitudinal-, and latitudinal un-
derwater current velocities were computed.
In Figure 2.1, the outline of the Øresund strait in MIKE is depicted alongside a conventional
satellite image of Øresund. To establish a connection between the two and illustrate how
accurately the outline in MIKE matches the satellite image, a third visual on the right shows
the outline from MIKE overlaid translucently on the satellite image.
(a) Outline.
(b) Satellite [1].
(c) Combined.
Figure 2.1: Top-down views of Øresund.
Figure 2.1a shows the outline of the shape that represents the strait in MIKE.
Figure 2.1b shows the strait as seen in typical satellite imagery. Figure 2.1c
shows the translucent outline from MIKE mapped onto the satellite image via
scaling, rotation and translation.
The combined visual shows the outline from MIKE matching the satellite-derived geometry
of Øresund impeccably.
2.1
Data Generation
The MIKE 21 software package provides a numerical toolbox for simulating coastal and
marine environments. For coastal environments that are sufficiently shallow, such as Øre-
sund, the correspondingly named shallow water equations are typically used to simulate
hydrodynamics within these regions. Using the Flow Model FM of MIKE 21’s hydrody-
namic module, the Øresund strait is simulated by solving the 2D depth-integrated shallow
water equations over a flexible mesh taking both wind forcing and boundary conditions
into account [2].
2
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:11==
Due to the lack of initial conditions, the state variables start by being completely homoge-
neous and thus, need to be influenced several times before the simulation is trustworthy.
Hence, the first 48 time stamps corresponding to 24 hours are discarded.
Figure 2.2 shows Øresund covered by the flexible mesh comprising 3- and 4-sided poly-
gons of varying sizes. As the background of the mesh is white, and the polygon edges
are black, the regions of high and low density within the mesh can be distinguished by the
different colour intensities. Interestingly, the high-density regions of the mesh are seen to
primarily be located near the edges of the outline, whereas the lower-density regions are
localized more towards the centre of the mesh.
Figure 2.2: Visualization of the Flexible Mesh Geometry.
Inspecting the outline edges further, it becomes clear that many of the non-trivial geome-
tries require a higher number of smaller polygons to cover the uneven edge regions ad-
equately. Similarly, the rough geometry of the outline is also expected to add further
complexity to the dynamics of the Øresund strait.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Data Summary
The MIKE-generated file format .dfsu holds the data in the data structure called Dataset
which holds multiple DataArray items. Working with the data in Python, the Dataset
and DataArray data structures may be considered as dictionaries with the DataArray
data structure being a sub-dictionary of the Dataset data structure. The Dataset data
structure holds the following dictionary keys: dims, time, geometry, and items, that are
explained briefly in the following part:
• dims: The dims key stores the name of the dimensions of the data. In this case,
time and element are the two dimensions of the data.
• time: The time key stores a DatetimeIndex object which holds the time stamps of
the data stored in the format YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS, with consecutive timestamps
being spaced 30 minutes apart.
• geometry: The geometry key holds a Dfsu2D object, aka Flexible Mesh Geometry.
The Flexible Mesh Geometry holds the coordinates of the mesh nodes and the con-
nectivity of the mesh elements that make up the region that represents the Øresund
strait. Besides this, the object also contains other geometry-related data, however,
these are irrelevant to this thesis.
• items: The items key holds a list of keys that can be used to access the corre-
sponding DataArray dictionary stored in the Dataset. These keys are Surface
elevation, U velocity, V velocity, and Total water depth, of which only the
first three keys corresponding to the water surface elevation, (East) latitudinal-, and
(North) longitudinal underwater current velocities are used. Note that since these
keys collectively fully describe the state of the hydrodynamic system in this simple
setting, they will colloquially be referred to as state variables.
For each state variable, there are approximately 18,000 mesh elements and time stamps,
meaning that the combined state variables data matrix contains more than 900 million
data points. Additionally, the data is strictly numerical and has no missing values.
Due to the computational load of keeping all data in memory at once, the modelling parts
of this thesis reduce the working number of timestamps to 1600.
Thus, for each timestamp, a row vector of 18000 surface elevations, U-, and V-velocities
are concatenated, yielding a total of 54000 data points for each timestamp.
4
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:13==
2.2.1
Boundary Condition Data
Besides the state variable dataset, two additional datasets are also available. These
datasets contain boundary condition (BC) data for the north and south boundary of the
Øresund strait.
In Figure 2.3, the location of the north and south boundary is visualized, where the north
is shown in blue and the south is shown in red.
Figure 2.3: The north and south boundary, for which data is avail-
able, are visualized in blue and red, respectively.
The datasets are structured similarly to the state variable dataset, but with the exception
that each BC datasets only contain 7 data features for each boundary, as opposed to the
18000 data features that are available for each state variable. With the BC data comprising
only surface elevations and no current velocities, they essentially set the height of the
water level at the north and south boundaries of the Øresund strait, effectively controlling
the inflow and outflow of water.
2.2.2
Wind Condition Data
Finally, two more datasets are available, in the form of wind conditions (Wind). The wind
conditions contain the U- and V-velocities of the wind at over 25 locations in the Øresund
strait, all of which were used, in combination with the BC data, to simulate the state of
Øresund.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
5
==PAGE:14==
In Figure 2.4, the locations of the wind conditions are visualized, where each location is
represented by a green arrow.
Figure 2.4: Overview showing the locations of the wind condition
data.
The wind conditions above show a very high density of wind locations towards the south
of the Øresund strait, while the northern part of the strait is less densely covered.
6
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:15==
2.3
Data Analysis
In Table 2.1 below, some descriptive statistics for each state variable are shown.
Statistic
Surface
elevation
[m]
(East)
U velocity
[m/s]
(North)
V velocity
[m/s]
Mean
-0.0484
-0.0005
-0.0126
Std
0.1875
0.0752
0.1306
Min
-0.9802
-0.8998
-1.3897
2.5%
-0.4090
-0.1716
-0.3137
25%
-0.1640
-0.0263
-0.0660
50%
-0.0540
0.0001
-0.0024
75%
0.0673
0.0270
0.0494
97.5%
0.3201
0.1624
0.2328
Max
0.7330
0.9916
1.0026
NaN-values
0
0
0
Table 2.1: Univariate descriptive statistics for the state variables.
The statistics show the observed averages of the current velocities being very close to
zero, while the average surface elevation is approximately 5 cm below the centre. The
surface elevation and longitudinal (V) velocity also exhibit more variability than the latitu-
dinal (U) velocity measured by standard deviation. The difference in variability between
the velocities is likely explained by the fact that the water predominantly flows longitudi-
nally between the northern inflow and southern outflow. Hence, it is natural to expect the
longitudinal velocities to vary more than the latitudinal ones.
Looking at the quantiles of the state variables, it is clear that the observed longitudinal
velocities span the largest range of values, while the surface elevation values span the
smallest range. Moreover, the change in surface elevation between the min/max value
and the nearest quantile is much smaller than the change between the min/max value
and the nearest quantile of the velocities. Thus, both the U- and V-velocities show very
little variation in the data, while a few of their values are more extreme.
To get an even better understanding of how the data is distributed, the quantile data is
accompanied by the empirical densities of Figure 2.5.
The visuals of Figure 2.5 support the previous insights derived from the quantile data in Ta-
ble 2.1, but also show the longitudinal (V) and latitudinal (U) velocities closely resembling
a Gaussian distribution. In addition, the velocity state variables also seem fairly balanced
and symmetric, while the distribution of the surface elevations seems to have light tails.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.5: Empirical densities of surface elevation- and velocity
values. The densities in the figure are constructed using a random
subset of all data that comprise 10000 data points of each state
variable.
Using Principal Component Analysis (PCA), the data feature variance is analysed by in-
troducing a new orthogonal coordinate system that aligns with the directions of maximum
variance. By projecting the data onto the new coordinate system, the data is transformed
into a new set of uncorrelated variables, called principal components (PCs), that are or-
dered by their explained variance, i.e. the amount of variance they capture.
Initially, the PCA is performed on each of the three state variable datasets along with one
for the combined dataset, totalling four PCA’s. Below, the explained variance of each PCA
can be found.
Figure 2.6: Explained variance of the principal components for
each PCA. The explained variance is plotted for each principal
component, where the first PC is the most important and the last
PC is the least important.
Figure 2.6 shows the explained variance of all PCs plotted for every PCA. Interestingly,
8
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:17==
the first 2 PCs of the surface elevation PCA capture very high amounts of data variance,
while the data variance covered by the third and fourth PCs are between 1 and 10, and the
remaining are practically zero. The explained variances of the velocity PCA’s show trends
similar to what is seen for the surface elevation, but with explained variances decreasing
less rapidly. The gradual decrease in both velocity datasets indicates that a higher dimen-
sional subspace is needed to capture an equivalent amount of data variance compared
to the surface elevation dataset. Hence, the velocity datasets are more complex.
Finally, the explained variances of the combined dataset’s PCA are considered. These
variances are seen to always be higher than the explained variances of the individual
datasets and the general trend seems to be a combination of the explained variance
trends seen in the individual datasets.
Additionally, the cumulative explained variance ratios of the PCA’s are plotted in Fig-
ure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Cumulative explained variance ratios of the principal
components for each PCA. The cumulative explained variance is
plotted for each principal component, where the first PC is the most
important and the last PC is the least important.
The ratios plotted in Figure 2.7 show a comparison of the explained variance of the PCA’s.
Here, it is seen that the first PC of each PCA captures 60 and +80 percent of the data
variance for the surface elevation and velocities, respectively. Besides supporting the
previous findings, the cumulative explained variance ratios also show that a very small
fraction of the total number of PCs is needed to capture 99% of the data variance across
all data sets. While the surface elevation requires just 2 PCs to reach above the 99%
mark and the velocities require around 16 PCs.
An interesting observation regarding the ratios of the combined dataset is that the number
of PCs needed to capture 99% of the data variance is less than the sum of the number
of PCs needed for the individual datasets. Notably, the combined dataset requires ap-
proximately the same number of PCs as the velocities to reach the same mark of 99%
of data variance. Thus, the combined dataset’s PCs can likely be expressed as a linear
combination of the individual datasets’ PCs.
Finally, the reconstruction errors of the PCA’s are plotted in Figure 2.8.
For the individual datasets, the reconstruction errors of Figure 2.8 are computed using
the mean of the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE). For each time step, the RMSE of
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.8: Reconstruction errors using different numbers of PCs
for each dataset, the combined dataset. Additionally, the sum of
the reconstruction errors for the individual datasets is also plotted.
all mesh elements are computed, called snapshot RMSE, and afterwards the mean of
all snapshot RMSE’s are taken, yielding the average snapshot RMSE. Conversely, the
reconstruction error of the combined dataset is computed using the sum of the average
snapshot RMSE, where each snapshot RMSE is first computed for the individual datasets
and then summed together. The final reconstruction error (Sum of variables) is the sum
of the reconstruction errors for each individual dataset.
Interestingly, the surface elevation reconstruction error is seen to drop rapidly compared
to the rest, and ends up being at least an order of magnitude lower than the other errors.
In contrast, the remaining reconstruction errors decrease very similarly at a slower rate,
where the U-velocity error is slightly lower than the V-velocity error. Likewise, the Sum
of variables error is slightly lower than the reconstruction error for the combined dataset,
although the difference is very small.
As the Sum of variables reconstruction error is a three-way sum, the number of actual PCs
being used for the reconstruction is three times the number of PCs used for the combined
dataset. Hence, very little seems to be gained from compressing the data separately, and
this further supports the idea of the combined dataset’s PCs capturing much of the data
variance of the individual datasets.
In conclusion, the PCA’s show that the velocity datasets are more complex than the sur-
face elevation dataset, and that the combined dataset’s PCs capture much of the data
variance of the individual datasets.
10
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:19==
3
Theory
The following chapter of this thesis introduces the theory of dynamical systems, reduced
order modelling, along with the theory that underlies the building blocks of the models
presented in Chapter 4.
3.1
Dynamical Systems
The general concept of dynamical systems is introduced initially, as the dynamics in the
data can be seen as a discrete-time dynamical system. According to Perko [3], a linear
system of ordinary differential equations can be expressed as:
˙x(t) = Ax(t)
(3.1)
where x(t) is a n-dimensional state vector, A is an n × n matrix, and ˙x(t) is defined as :
˙x(t) = dx(t)
dt
=


dx1(t)
dt
...
dxn(t)
dt


(3.2)
However, as most of the methods discussed later on are data-driven, the continuous-time
dynamical system in Equation (3.1) is not suitable for modelling discrete-time dynamics.
Fortunately, it can be discretized by the following steps; starting from Equation (3.1):
xn+1 −xn
tn+1 −tn
= Axn
(3.3)
xn+1 −xn = Axn(tn+1 −tn)
(3.4)
xn+1 = Axn(tn+1 −tn) + xn
(3.5)
xn+1 = (A(tn+1 −tn) + I) xn
(3.6)
xn+1 = Bxn
(3.7)
where t denotes a time scalar, B = (A(tn+1 −tn) + I) denotes a new system matrix, and
I is the identity matrix of the same dimensions as A. Equation (3.7) thus represents a
discrete-time linear homogeneous dynamical system, which lays the foundation for data-
driven models forecasting state-vectors in discrete time.
To allow for external inputs to also impact the dynamical system, an additional term can
be added to the right side of Equation (3.7). This results in a discrete-time linear inhomo-
geneous dynamical system that has the general form:
xn+1 = Bxn + Cun
(3.8)
where un is a control input vector and C is a matrix that maps the control inputs to the
states of the state vector. As will be discussed in Section 3.2.1, using the formulation of
Equation (3.8) has its relevance since it allows for the dynamics resulting from external
inputs to be differentiated from the internal dynamics of the system when B and C are
derived from data.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
11
==PAGE:20==
3.1.1
Dimensionality Reduction
The concept of dimensionality reduction, also called compression, covers methods that
aim to map data from a high-dimensional space into a low-dimensional representation
such that the meaningful properties of the original data are retained. These methods are
motivated by the naturally occurring sparsity of raw high-dimensional data and algorithms
that are computationally intractable for these data [4].
Examples of high-dimensional data that occur naturally include many physical systems in
nature, such as oceans and rivers characterized by complex dynamics, but also speech
recordings and digital imagery that are encountered daily [5]. An example of a computa-
tionally intractable algorithm that may easily be applied to the above-mentioned settings
is the matrix inversion operation; a pivotal building block for many techniques that scales
poorly. By the conventional approach of Gauss-Jordan Elimination, the time complexity
for matrix inversion scales with the cube of the matrix dimension [6] denoted by O(n3).
Thus, increasing the data resolution tenfold results in a computation time scaled by 103.
Although recent advancements have managed to lower the time complexity for matrix in-
version [7, 8], it remains too high for these operations to be practical in high-dimensional
settings.
Fortunately, it appears to be a universal truth that high-dimensional datasets exhibit strong
patterns along low-dimensional manifolds [9, 10], and exploiting this property is precisely
the purpose of dimensionality reduction. The methods used for dimensionality reduction
are typically divided by whether their compression is linear or nonlinear. Linear compres-
sion methods, such as SVD and PCA, utilize matrix decompositions to produce a set of
matrices required for mapping between the low- and high-dimensional representations,
requiring only a single iteration. Conversely, nonlinear compression methods, such as
t-distributed Stochastic Neighbour Embedding (t-SNE) [11] and autoencoders, rely on it-
erative schemes to produce respectable compressions. It is worth noting that the underly-
ing algorithms of nonlinear compression techniques can differ quite drastically, with some
methods optimizing probability distributions, while others optimize back-propagated loss
terms.
Deciding which compression method to use is no easy feat, and although the realm of
nonlinear methods should, in theory, cover the linear methods, it is preferable to use the
linear methods whenever possible as they tend to provide higher levels of interpretability
than their nonlinear counterpart.
Kolmogorov n-Width
The Kolmogorov n-width can be a useful measure to consider when presented with the
choice between linear and nonlinear compression methods. It is effective for determining
the optimal linear trial subspace and is formally defined as:
dn(M) := inf
Ln sup
f∈M
inf
g∈Ln ||f −g||,
(3.9)
where M denotes the manifold of solutions that span all time and parameters, and Ln
denotes all n-dimensional linear subspaces of the original state space. Specifically, the
rate of decay of the Kolmogorov n-width is of significant interest, as it is a useful guide
for choosing between linear and nonlinear compression methods. In general, a fast rate
of decay is indicative of a linear compression being appropriate, while a slow rate of de-
cay suggests that a nonlinear compression is better suited. As the rate of decay of the
12
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:21==
Kolmogorov n-width is not easily computed, the rate of decay of singular values is often
used as an approximation instead [12, 13].
3.1.2
Linear Compression methods
The two linear compression methods covered in this section are Singular Value Decom-
position and Principal Component Analysis.
Singular Value Decomposition
The singular value decomposition (SVD), as described by Brunton et al. [14] is a uniquely
defined matrix factorization that exists for all complex-valued matrices. For an arbitrary
complex-valued matrix, X ∈Cn×m, the SVD is formally defined as:
X = UΣV ∗
(3.10)
where U ∈Cn×n and V ∈Cm×m are complex unitary matrices with orthonormal columns,
and Σ ∈Rn×m is a real-valued diagonal matrix of non-negative entries. The ∗in Equa-
tion (3.10) signifies the complex conjugate transpose, while the diagonal elements of Σ
are called singular values. The columns of U and V are known as the left- and right sin-
gular vectors of X and these are linked to the singular values, such that the n’th singular
value scales the n’th singular vectors. These singular vectors and values are typically
ordered such that the singular values are in decreasing order along the diagonal in Σ.
For tall non-square matrices, i.e. n > m, the n × m Σ-matrix will at most contain m non-
zero diagonal entries. Consequently, the full matrices of U and Σ are not needed. Initially,
Σ can be re-written as follows:
Σ =


ˆΣ
0


(3.11)
where ˆΣ ∈Rm×m and 0 is a zero-matrix. Inserting Equation (3.11) into Equation (3.10)
results in the right-most columns of U, ˆU ⊥, being nullified:
X = U


ˆΣ
0

V ∗=
h
ˆU
ˆU ⊥
i


ˆΣ
0

V ∗= ˆU ˆΣV ∗
(3.12)
This yields the right-most expression of Equation (3.12) that is known as the economy
SVD. Thus, using the matrices of Equation (3.12) instead of Equation (3.10) yields the
same results, while requiring fewer computations [14].
An additional benefit of the SVD is that the matrices U, Σ, V ∗are easily modified to com-
pute optimal low-rank matrix approximations. Following the work of Eckart and Young,
1936 [15], the optimal rank-r approximation to X, denoted by ˜
X, is defined as:
argmin
˜
X, s.t. rank( ˜
X)=r
X −˜
X

F = ˜U ˜Σ ˜V ∗
(3.13)
where ˜U and ˜V correspond to the first r leading columns of their respective matrices, ˜Σ
is the square sub-matrix of Σ that holds the r leading singular values along the diagonal,
and ∥·∥F is the Frobenius norm defined as:
∥X∥F =
v
u
u
t
m
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
|xij|2
(3.14)
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
13
==PAGE:22==
where X ∈Cn×m can be any complex-valued matrix. Thus, approximating the original
matrix X optimally in a least-squares sense is straightforward via SVD [14]. One applica-
tion of the truncated SVD matrices is highlighted in Section 3.2.1.
Principal Component Analysis
The principal component analysis (PCA) is an application of the SVD that provides signifi-
cant statistical insight into data. The method consists of processing data and constructing
a new coordinate system, from which the directions of maximum data variation are easily
identified [16].
The following steps showcase an algorithm for extracting the principal components. Let
X ∈Rn×m be a real-valued matrix with column features. Initially, the average row, ¯x, is
computed:
¯x =
h
¯x1, ¯x2, . . . ¯xj
i
,
¯xj = 1
n
n
X
i=1
Xij
(3.15)
The average row ¯x is then replicated n times and stacked, making up the matrix ¯
X:
¯
X =
h
1
. . .
1
iT
¯x
(3.16)
which when subtracted from X yields the zero-centred matrix B:
B = X −¯
X
(3.17)
From B the covariance matrix C can be computed by the following formula that is derived
from the standard definition of sample covariance [17]:
C =
1
(n −1)B∗B
(3.18)
where ∗refers to the transpose of the matrix. As the covariance matrix C is symmetric
and positive semi-definite, it follows that there exists an eigendecomposition:
CQ = QΛ
(3.19)
where Λ is a diagonal matrix comprising the eigenvalues of C and the columns of the
eigenvector matrix, Q, are eigenvectors of the covariance matrix, C, which in turn are the
principal components of X [18, 19].
3.2
Flow Maps
The flow map is a discretization of the mathematical term, flow, that relates to solution
curves of differential equations associated with dynamical systems [20]. In contrast to the
continuous setting of flows, flow maps deal with evolving dynamical systems in discrete
time, which is often the case in data-driven settings. Throughout this section, flow maps
will be divided into two classes — linear and nonlinear.
3.2.1
Construction of Linear Flow Maps
The linear flow maps are characterized by their use of a single matrix to represent the
linear transformation that propagates the state vector of a system forward in time. Thus,
for each method covered in the following sections, a linear map in the form of a matrix
will be computed as part of the method, which in turn can be used to evolve the system
forward in time.
14
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:23==
Linear Regression
Regression deals with establishing a relationship between an input, x, and an outcome, y,
such that y = f(x). For linear regression, the model, f, is a linear function of x, meaning
that it has the form:
f(x) = β0 + β1x
(3.20)
where β0 and β1 are the coefficients that need to be estimated. Hence, each outcome
and input is related by the following:
yi = β0 + β1xi
(3.21)
To estimate these coefficients, the least squares estimators found in Equation (3.22) are
traditionally used:
ˆβ1 =
P
i(yi −¯y)(xi −¯x)
P
i(xi −¯x)2
,
ˆβ0 = ¯y −ˆβ1¯x
(3.22)
where xi and yi denote the individual inputs and outcomes, while ¯x and ¯y denotes the
averages of inputs and outcomes [21].
A generalization of linear regression is multiple linear regression, which allows the out-
comes to depend on multiple inputs instead of just one. Hence, the sum of Equation (3.20)
can be extended to include an arbitrary number of inputs, xi, as seen below:
f(x) = β0 +
X
i
βixi
(3.23)
Similar to before, the outcomes and inputs are then related by the following expression:
yj = β0 +
X
i
βixij
(3.24)
which can be rewritten as this matrix-vector product:
y = XβT
(3.25)
using the following definitions:
y = [y1, y2, . . . ]T ,
X =


1
x11
x12
. . .
x1j
1
x21
x22
. . .
x2j
...
...
...
...
...
1
xi1
xi2
. . .
xij


,
βT = [β0, β1, . . . ]
(3.26)
From Equation (3.25), the β-coefficient can readily be approximated by:
y = XβT =⇒βT ≈X†y
(3.27)
where † denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse that is computed via the SVD: [22].
X = UΣV ∗=⇒X† = V Σ−1U ∗
(3.28)
Finally, Equation (3.25) can be generalized even further into what is known as a general
linear model that provides a compact way of writing numerous multiple linear regression
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
15
==PAGE:24==
models in short form. By substituting the vectors y and βT with the matrices Y and A,
numerous multiple linear regression models can be condensed into the following formula-
tion:
Y = XA
(3.29)
where each column of X, except the first, contains a set of inputs for one of the indepen-
dent variables, and each column of Y contains a set of outcomes for one of the dependent
variables. Finally, the matrix A consists of all the coefficients that are estimated. Similar
to what was done for the standalone multiple linear regression, the pseudo-inverse of X
is again used to compute A by the matrix-matrix product X†Y [23].
Dynamic Mode Decomposition
Dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) is a relatively new method [24] that was originally
developed for analysing fluid dynamics. The method combines dimensionality reduction
with temporal frequency identification by exploiting attractive parts of SVD and FFT (Fast
Fourier Transform). The subsequent steps of the DMD algorithm are a reformulation of
the steps provided by Brunton and Kutz [25].
Assuming that X is a (n × (m + 1)) snapshot matrix as shown below:
X =


|
|
|
x(t1)
x(t2)
. . .
x(tm+1)
|
|
|


(3.30)
then each row contains m+1 temporally spaced observations, while each column contains
n spatially spaced observations.
Step 1: From Equation (3.30), the DMD algorithm initially extracts the first- and last (m)
columns of X and denotes them by X and X′:
X =


|
|
|
x(t1)
x(t2)
. . .
x(tm)
|
|
|


(3.31)
X′ =


|
|
|
x(t2)
x(t3)
. . .
x(tm+1)
|
|
|


(3.32)
thereby overwriting the original snapshot matrix.
Step 2: Secondly, the SVD of the new X is computed:
X ≈˜U ˜Σ ˜V ∗
(3.33)
where ˜U ∈Cn×r, ˜Σ ∈Cr×r, and ˜V ∗∈Cr×m, and r ≤m allows for either an exact or low
rank approximation of X.
Step 3: As the third step of DMD, the best-fit linear operator A is computed. This operator
is defined as
A = argmin
A
X′ −AX

F
(3.34)
16
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:25==
which relates the two snapshot matrices by X′ ≈AX and similarly each column vector
of temporal observations by xk+1 ≈Axk. To compute A, the method of pseudo-inverse
(†) used to solve Equation (3.29) is again employed. This yields:
A = X′X† = X′ 
˜V ˜Σ
−1 ˜U ∗
(3.35)
Furthermore, the matrix A is projected onto the column space of ˜U that is an orthonormal
basis for the column space of X, denoted by ˜
A. Note that the column space of ˜U is often
also called the proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) modes in ˜U. For spatial observa-
tions arranged as columns, the matrix ˜U can be geometrically interpreted as encoding the
spatial patterns of X, meaning that the flow map A is projected onto the spatial patterns
of X, which tends to reduce dimensionality. Computationally, the projection is given by
˜
A = ˜U ∗A ˜U = ˜U ∗
X′ 
˜V ˜Σ
−1 ˜U ∗
˜U = ˜U ∗X′ ˜V ˜Σ
−1
(3.36)
For sufficiently large column vectors, the full matrix, A, can quickly become impractically
large, leading to long computation times. However, knowing that the reduced matrix, ˜
A,
has the same non-zero eigenvalues as the full matrix, A, it follows that there is no need
to work with the high-dimensional A matrix.
In addition to bypassing long computations, the reduced matrix, ˜
A, also unveils a new
linear model, which propagates the POD projected column vectors forward in time:
˜xk+1 = ˜
A˜xk
(3.37)
where ˜x = ˜U ∗x
Step 4: The fourth step of the DMD algorithm involves the eigendecomposition of the
reduced matrix, ˜
A. Similar to Equation (3.19), the decomposition is computed as
˜
AW = W Λ
(3.38)
where the columns of W are the eigenvectors of ˜
A and its eigenvalues are stored in
the diagonal matrix, Λ. Moreover, it has also been shown that the eigenvalues in Λ are
eigenvalues of both ˜
A and A [26].
Step 5: The fifth step of the algorithm consists of computing the high-dimensional DMD
modes by the following formula:
Φ = X′ ˜V ˜Σ
−1W
(3.39)
which is very comparable to Equation (3.35). In essence, the main difference between
the equations is that Equation (3.35) projects the dynamics onto the POD modes of X,
while Equation (3.39) projects the dynamics onto the eigenvectors of ˜
A [25].
Dynamic Mode Decomposition with Control
Expanding upon the DMD, the dynamic mode decomposition with control, known as
DMDc, provides an extension of the original DMD, such that the internal dynamics of
a system can be distinguished from the dynamics originating from external inputs, such
as control input. In many instances of data-driven modelling, it is not unusual to not know
how external inputs affect the dynamics of a system, let alone what the internal dynamics
of a system are. Thus, this needs to be derived from data. Using Equation (3.8) as a
reference, it corresponds to not knowing the matrices B and C. Below, a walkthrough of
the DMDc algorithm inspired by Proctor et al. [27] is shown.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
17
==PAGE:26==
Step 1: To begin with, let X and X′ be the snapshot matrices defined by Equation (3.31)
and Equation (3.32), and let Y ∈Cl×m denote a snapshot matrix of control inputs where
data is arranged the same way as in X. Using these matrices, the DMDc algorithm seeks
to recover the matrices B and C associated with the following system:
X′ = BX + CY
(3.40)
which can be expressed as the following matrix product:
X′ = GΩ,
G =
h
B
C
i
,
Ω=

X
Y


(3.41)
where Ωis known as the input space.
Step 2: At the second step of the algorithm, the SVD of the input space is computed:
Ω= UΣV ∗≈˜U ˜Σ ˜
V ∗
(3.42)
where ˜( ) denotes the truncated versions of the matrices with truncation value p. The
dimensions of these SVD matrices are ˜U ∈C(n+l)×p, ˜Σ ∈Cp×p, and ˜V ∗∈Cp×m, and
depending on the value of p ≤m the decomposition is either approximate or exact, with
the latter requiring p = m.
Step 3: The third step consists of computing the SVD of the output space, i.e. X′.
X′ = U ′Σ′V ′∗≈ˆU ˆΣ ˆ
V ∗
(3.43)
where ˆ( ) denotes the r-truncated versions of the matrices, and r < p ≤m implies that
the input space must remain of higher dimension than the output space.
Step 4: The matrix G from Equation (3.41) is isolated:
G = X′Ω†
(3.44)
and then approximated by:
G ≈X′ 
˜V ˜Σ
−1 ˜U ∗
(3.45)
From the results of this approximation, the approximate B and V matrix can be found by
deconstructing ˜U ∗=
h
˜U ∗
1
˜U ∗
2
i
, where ˜U1 ∈Cn×p and ˜U2 ∈Cl×p. Thus, the matrices B
and C can be approximated by the following formulas:
˜
B = ˆU ∗X′ ˜V ˜Σ
−1 ˜U ∗
1 ˆU
(3.46)
˜C = ˆU ∗X′ ˜V ˜Σ
−1 ˜U ∗
2
(3.47)
Step 5: Second to last, the eigenvalue decomposition of ˜
B is computed:
˜
BW = W Λ
(3.48)
where the columns of W are the eigenvectors of ˜
B and its eigenvalues are the diagonal
entries of Λ.
Step 6: As the final step of the algorithm, the dynamic modes of the high-dimensional
matrix, B, is computed using the following expression:
Φ = X′ ˜V ˜Σ
−1 ˜
U1 ˆUW
(3.49)
Thus, the high-dimensional internal dynamics can be distinguished from the external forc-
ing, without needing to work with the high-dimensional matrices B and C directly [28].
18
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:27==
3.2.2
Construction of Nonlinear Flow-maps Construction
In contrast to linear flow maps, non-linear flow maps are not restricted to only linear trans-
formations and may thus involve all types of functions, which can quickly make the overall
transformation rather obscure. Hence, instead of seeking a linear transformation in the
form of a single matrix, the non-linear flow maps will seek a function.
Regression Trees
Regression trees, as described by Herlau et al. [29], are a subcategory of decision trees
that provide a framework for predicting continuous values using rather simple but logical
systems that resemble upside-down trees. The framework consists of nodes and leaves
that are connected by branches, where nodes represent conditional splits and leaves rep-
resent possible prediction values. At each node, the input is compared against a condition
such as is input greater than 1?, and if true the left branch is traversed. Conversely, the
right branch is traversed if the condition is not met. By sequentially comparing the in-
put to the nodes of the tree, the input is moved down from the root of the tree to a leaf
corresponding to a continuous-value prediction.
To motivate the use of regression trees, consider the following function:
yi = f(xi) = cos (sin(xi) · xi) · xi + ϵi
(3.50)
where x ∈[0, 2π] and ϵ ∈[0, 0.2] is a uniformly distributed noise term.
In Figure 3.1, the points, (x, y), are plotted as a scatter plot using a non-uniform sample
of x, along with the points (x, ˆy), where the ˆy-values are predictions of a linear regression
model fitted to the data.
Figure 3.1: Linear regression model fitted to data.
From Figure 3.1 it is evident that the linear regression model does not approximate the
oscillatory behaviour of the nonlinear function well due to the model not being very flexible.
Note that this is only true when the input to the linear model is the raw data. If additional
data is added in the form of raw data transformed by basis functions such as x2, x3, cos(x),
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
19
==PAGE:28==
etc., then the linear model can become more flexible. However, this may quickly become
prohibitively expensive to work with, assuming that the underlying model is complex and
unknown.
Returning to regression trees, the algorithm for constructing a generic one is fairly simple
and requires only a loss measure, a dataset, and a splitting criterion. Below, an example
inspired by Herlau et al. [29] can be found:
1. Construct a regression tree of depth 0 by computing the mean of all y-data and
letting it correspond to the predicted value at the root node, as shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Scatter plot of 80 (x, y) data points and (x, ˆy) data
predictions from a regression tree with depth 0.
2. Compute the loss measure for the root node L(r).
3. Consider all possible ways of splitting the data into two subsets. For each split, let
the leaves of the two disjoint subsets (y1, y2) predict their corresponding means, and
compute the difference in loss between only keeping the root and adding the leaves,
using the following formula:
∆= L(r) −
2
X
k=1
N(yk)
N(r) L(yk)
(3.51)
where ∆denotes an arbitrary gain and N(·) denotes the number of data in a set.
Hence, the loss of each leaf is scaled by the proportion of data within said leaf. Vi-
sually, this step corresponds to dividing the horizontal line of Figure 3.2 into two, and
shifting the two ends up or down such that they overall predict their corresponding
split better.
4. Criteria for splitting: Keep the split that provides the first (or most) positive gain, ∆.
5. Finally, each node can be considered as a root node, for which steps 2-4 can be
executed until the tree provides satisfactory results.
20
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:29==
Note: Regression trees are very prone to overfitting and therefore, it is often advisable to
scale the summed loss of splits by a regularization factor to avoid overfitting.
In Figures 3.3a to 3.3c, regression trees that extend the regression tree of Figure 3.2 can
be found.
(a) Regression tree of depth 1.
(b) Regression tree of depth 2.
(c) Regression tree of depth 3.
Figure 3.3: For all figures, the left-hand plot shows the regression
tree predictions plotted along with the data, while the right-hand
graph shows the conditional nodes and prediction leaves of the
regression tree. In this framework, the left and right branches of
a node correspond to the condition of a node being true and false,
respectively [30].
Gradient Boosted Trees
As opposed to having one large connected tree, the method of Gradient-Boosted Regres-
sion Trees (GBRTs) builds upon the standard regression tree method, by sequentially
building small trees where the initial tree predicts the output using the input, while the sub-
sequent trees predict the output using the prediction residuals of previous trees. Thus,
the GBRT starts by providing a rough prediction and iteratively refines the predictions
by appending new small trees that also attempt to predict the output, however using the
residuals of previous trees rather than the input.
The following algorithm describes the process of building a GBRT model:
1. The algorithm starts by defining the following loss function L(y, F(x)) for measuring
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
21
==PAGE:30==
the difference between the true output, y, and the predicted output, F(x):
L(y, F(x)) = 1
2(y −F(x))2
(3.52)
2. The initial model F0(x) is defined as the constant value that minimizes the loss func-
tion:
F0(x) = arg min
γ
n
X
i=1
L(yi, γ)
(3.53)
which in the case of the mean squared error loss function, is just the mean of the
output values.
3. The algorithm then goes on to construct a sequence of trees F1(x), F2(x), ..., FM(x),
looping over the following sub-algorithm M times, starting with m = 1:
(a) The (pseudo) residuals of the previous model are computed by the following
expression:
rim = −
∂L(yi, F(xi))
∂F(xi)

F(x)=Fm−1(x)
(3.54)
Using the chain rule, the partial derivative simplifies to the following:
∂L(yi, F(xi))
∂F(xi)
= ∂L(yi, F(xi))
∂F(xi)
· ∂(y −F(xi))
∂F(xi)
(3.55)
= 2 · 1
2(yi −F(xi)) · ∂(yi −F(xi))
∂F(xi)
(3.56)
= 2 · 1
2(yi −F(xi)) · (−1)
(3.57)
= −(yi −F(xi))
(3.58)
which leads to the following expression for the residuals:
rim = −(yi −Fm−1(xi))
(3.59)
(b) Next, a new tree is fitted to the residuals, rim, with terminal regions (aka. leaves)
Rjm, for j = 1, 2, ..., Jm, where Jm is the number of leaves in the tree. For each
leaf, the value, γjm, is computed by minimizing the following expression:
γjm = arg min
γ
X
xi∈Rjm
L(yi, Fm−1(xi) + γ)
(3.60)
which is a rather simple optimization problem.
(c) Lastly the new tree, Fm(x), can now be defined by the following expression:
Fm(x) = Fm−1(x) + ν ·
Jm
X
j=1
γjm · I(x ∈Rjm)
(3.61)
where ν is the learning rate; a small positive number that scales the contribution
of each tree, and I(x ∈Rjm) is an indicator function that outputs 1 when x
terminates at leaf Rjm and 0 otherwise.
22
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:31==
4. The final model is then defined as the sum of the initial model and the sequence of
trees:
F(x) = F0(x) +
M
X
m=1
ν · Fm(x)
(3.62)
which concludes the algorithm.
3.3
Model Evaluation
Another important aspect concerning model building is the model evaluation. To quote
the famous saying of British statistician George E. P. Box from 1978 all models are wrong,
but some are useful [31] and thus, models are bound to have flawed outputs of varying
severity that need to be addressed. Depending on the specific model, its outputs, and the
modelling context, different evaluation metrics may be used to obtain valuable insight into
the model’s performance.
3.3.1
Model Evaluation Metrics
The evaluation metrics used in this thesis are the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE),
Mean Error (ME), Max Absolute Error (MaxAE), and a variation of the Mean Absolute
Percentage Error (MAPE*), where the asterisk denotes that it’s a variation.
For each error metric, it should be noted that they are computed using observed and
forecasted snapshot matrices, and thus the subsequent definitions of metrics may be
different from their standard one-dimensional counterparts. To help convey the formulas,
the matrix, D, which has h samples/observations of w features/attributes, will be used as
the reference snapshot matrix of difference.
D =


|
|
|
d(t1)
d(t2)
. . .
d(tw)
|
|
|


(3.63)
Root Mean Squared Error - RMSE
The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) will be used as the preferred metric of average
deviation, as it offers errors that can be interpreted in the same unit as the data. The
following steps are used to compute the RMSE of the D matrix:
1. Square the differences element-wise, using the Hadamard product (⊙):
D2 = D ⊙D
2. Compute the column vector of sample-wise means:
¯d2
i = 1
w
w
X
j=1
D2
ij
3. Take the column-wise mean of the square root of the column vector:
RMSE = 1
h
h
X
i=1
q
¯d2
i
Thus, the RMSE is computed as the mean of the RMSE for each snapshot.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
23
==PAGE:32==
Mean Error - ME
The Mean Error (ME) is used to estimate the bias of the models and is computed using
the following steps:
1. Compute the column vector of sample-wise means:
¯di = 1
w
w
X
j=1
Dij
2. Take the column-wise mean of the column vector:
ME = 1
h
h
X
i=1
¯di
Maximum Absolute Error - MaxAE
The Maximum Absolute Error (MaxAE) alludes to the expected magnitude of the largest
error within a single snapshot and is computed using these steps
1. Compute the column vector of sample-wise maxima:
(dmax)i =
max
j ∈[1,w] |Dij|
2. Take the column-wise mean of the column vector:
MaxAE = 1
h
h
X
i=1
(dmax)h
Mean Absolute Percentage Error - MAPE*
The final error metric that will be used to evaluate the performance of the models is a
variation of the Mean Absolute Percentage Error. As the traditional MAPE takes the ab-
solute value of the difference between the observed and forecasted values divided by the
observed, the measure is very sensitive to observed data that is close to 0. To overcome
this limitation, the denominator is replaced with the 2.5- and 97.5% quantiles (Q0.025 and
Q0.975) of the observed data, thus scaling the errors with a scale that is less sensitive to
outliers.
The steps taken to compute the MAPE* are as follows:
1. Scale the differences by the quantile range using the Hadamard product:
Dscaled = D ⊙
1
Q0.975 −Q0.025
2. Compute the column vector of sample-wise means:
(dscaled)i = 1
w
w
X
j=1
|(Dscaled)ij|
3. Take the column-wise mean of the column vector:
MAPE* = 1
h
h
X
i=1
(dscaled)i
24
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:33==
3.3.2
Model Validation
The process of model validation consists of multiple aspects that are used to ensure that
the final models exhibit high reliability and generalize well.
Train-Test Split
The first step of model validation requires that the data is split in two: A training- and testing
dataset. Generally, the two datasets are separated by randomly allowing for individual
samples to be part of either the training or testing data. In this project, however, the data
consists of time series that are highly correlated since all mesh elements are connected
and therefore, the data is instead separated into two consecutive data blocks without
randomizing the data ordering within each block, as visualized in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Conceptual visualization of splitting the dataset into
training and testing datasets.
Thus, the training dataset is used to fit the model to the data, while the testing dataset is
used to evaluate the model’s performance on unseen data. Naturally, the model’s perfor-
mance on the testing dataset is expected to be lower than on the training dataset, but the
difference should not be too large, as this would indicate that the model is overfitting the
training data.
Forecast Length
The forecast length refers to the number of snapshots that are sequentially forecasted
into the future and is also a relevant aspect to consider when validating the forecasting
models.
Since the data is temporally correlated, the advantage of knowing the initial state of the
system is expected to heavily influence the initial few forecasts, while the effect diminishes
as the forecasts go further into the future. Utilizing the maximum forecast length ensures
that the models learn to forecast the future states without relying on observed data that
generally is not available in real-world applications.
Cross Validation
To further ensure that the models generalize well, the concept of cross-validation may
also be applied. To cross-validate the models, the testing dataset is set aside, while the
training dataset is viewed as the entire dataset. Next, the entire dataset is subdivided
into k equally sized sub-datasets, where each sub-dataset is referred to as a fold. The
process of cross-validation now consists of training the model on k−1 folds and validating
the model on the remaining fold, which is repeated k times.
For time series data that is temporally connected and correlated, the data within each fold
should not be randomly selected. Instead, the samples within each fold should adhere
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
25
==PAGE:34==
to the sequential ordering of the original datasets. Furthermore, the ordering of the folds
is also important, as it is only sensible to use past data to predict future data. Thus, the
folds should be ordered in a way that respects the chronological ordering.
In Figure 3.5 the concept of cross-validation folds and rolling window cross-validation is
visualized.
Figure 3.5:
Conceptual visualization of rolling window cross-
validation. The figure shows the training dataset split into training
and validation data, with the previous validation data being a part
of the following training data for each fold.
Here, the entire dataset is again split into k folds, however, with the training and validation
datasets being defined differently. For the rolling window approach, the training- and
validation datasets start by being equally sized, with the CV Fold 0 used for training the
model and CV Fold 1 used for validation. Subsequently, the training dataset is extended
by adding CV Fold 1 to the training dataset, while CV Fold 2 becomes the validation
dataset. This process is repeated until all but CV Fold 0 have been used for validation,
after which the individual and averaged errors of the cross-validation can be considered.
[32]
Hyperparameter Optimization
The final consideration regarding model validation is the optimization/tuning of the model’s
hyperparameters. The hyperparameters are parameters that are not directly learned from
the data but are instead set before training the model.
26
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:35==
An example of this could be the number of principal components to use for projecting the
data into a lower-dimensional space, or similarly the max acceptable depth of a decision
tree.
With the models of this project being part of a larger SciKit-Learn Pipelines, as expanded
upon in Chapter 4, there are both model hyperparameters and preprocessing hyperpa-
rameters that can be optimized. The number of hyperparameters varies greatly across
the different models, with some models having no hyperparameters at all, while others
have multiple. Depending on the range of attainable values for each hyperparameter, the
tuning process can be quickly become computationally intractable, as the number of possi-
ble combinations of hyperparameters grows exponentially. Hence, the hyperparameters
are tuned using a randomized grid search.
The randomized grid search consists of randomly selecting multiple combinations of hy-
perparameters and evaluating the model’s average performance on the validation dataset
for each combination. Depending on the number of iterations, the search process can also
be computationally expensive and thus, only a limited number of iterations are run. At the
end of the randomized grid search, the best combination of hyperparameters is selected
and thereafter used to train and evaluate the model on the original train-test data split.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
27
==PAGE:36==
4
Data-driven models
The data-driven models presented in this chapter are split into three groups: baseline
models, reconstruction models, and regression models. The baseline models provide
baselines for the level of accuracy that is expected when using simple averages as fore-
casts. In contrast, the reconstruction models will provide optimal forecasts because their
errors are entirely due to reconstructions and not forecasting. Finally, the regression mod-
els provide data-driven approaches that actively try to minimize the forecasting error.
The matrix, X, presented in Equation (4.1) represents the overall data that all models
take as input. The input shape will vary depending on whether a model forecasts surface
elevations only or includes current velocities for state variable data, and similarly, whether
the boundary- (BC) and/or wind conditions (Wind) data are also included.
X =


|
|
|
x(t1)
x(t2)
. . .
x(tm+1)
|
|
|


(4.1)
To accommodate for the possible variations of regression models and inputs, all models
are constructed as SciKit-Learn pipelines [33]. These pipelines consist of multiple se-
quentially linked steps, denoted data transformers, where each transformer is either a
processing or modelling module. Traditionally, built-in data transformers such as Stan-
dardScaler(), which scales centred data features and is found in the SciKit library, are
implemented directly into the pipeline for sufficiently simple models. However, as the
input data is manipulated differently depending on the model and input, the built-in trans-
formers are not practical and therefore custom-made transformers are needed.
A general pipeline is constructed by combining the following 9 custom data transformers:
• GetDicts: Transforms input matrix to dictionaries of input matrices.
• DataScaler: (Optional) Scale dictionary matrices individually.
• DataProjector: (Optional) Project dictionary matrices individually.
• DataLagger: Create backwards shifted state variable data.
• ExtraLagger: Create forward and backwards-shifted BC- and/or Wind data.
• FixIndices: Combine data matrices and remove NaN-rows.
• Regressor: The regressor is swapped depending on the specific model.
• RecoverDict: Split data matrix into dictionaries.
• DummyEstimator: Reproject and rescale the dictionary matrices.
from which the baseline, reconstruction, and regression models (pipelines) are derived by
appropriately changing the modelling transformer, enabling or disabling the scaling and
projection, and setting the correct lag and lead of the state variable-, BC-, and Wind data.
28
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:37==
4.1
Baseline models
The baseline models are unique in the sense that they require only the state variable data
and no additional information such as BC- or Wind data. Moreover, the baseline models
are also simple as they only use averages of the state variable data to forecast the output.
4.1.1
Spatio-temporally averaged model
The first baseline model is the spatio-temporally averaged model, which calculates the
spatio-temporal average of the training data and forecasts this value for all mesh elements
across all time steps. Thus, the average of all mesh elements across all time steps of the
training data is computed and forecasted for all time steps of both training and testing
data.
4.1.2
Temporally averaged model
The second baseline model is the temporally averaged model, which calculates multiple
temporal averages from the training data and forecasts these values. Hence, all time
steps of the training data for each mesh element are used to compute an average for every
mesh element, which is then used for forecasting. Hence, the multiple values forecasted
in the temporally averaged model may vary for different mesh elements, while all mesh
elements of the spatio-temporally averaged model are forecasted with the same value.
4.2
Reconstruction models
The reconstruction models utilize the state variable data and projection while excluding
scaling, BC-, and Wind data. Put simply, these models take the state variable data and
project it in and out of a subspace, such that the only source of error is due to reconstruc-
tion, i.e. non-lossless compression.
4.3
Regression models
The regression models are the most complex ones and are the only models that have the
option of including BC- and Wind data along with the choice of scaling and projecting the
state variable data. Additionally, these models also offer the use of backwards-shifting
the state variable data, and forward- and backwards-shifting BC- and Wind data, which
allows for numerous potential inputs to the regressor of the pipeline.
4.3.1
Linear regression models
The first regression model is the linear regression model. Conceptually, the simplest ver-
sion of this model finds the best linear relationship for predicting the (k+1)-th state variable
data using the current k-th state variable data. The model is further extended by allowing
the (k −n, ..., k −1)-th previous state variable data to be included in the model input along
with the BC- and Wind data. Contrary to the state variable data, it is not only the previ-
ous BC- and Wind data that may be used, but also the future data BC- and Wind data
(k + 1, ..., k + m) that may be included in the model, due to these data being forecasted
ahead of time.
4.3.2
DMD regression models
The second regression model is the DMD regression model which uses the DMD algorithm
to forecast the state variable data. This model is unique in the sense that it combines fre-
quency analysis and compression to compute a linear operator which forecasts the state
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
29
==PAGE:38==
variable data in latent space. In contrast to the linear regression model, the standard DMD
algorithm utilizes only the current state variable data to forecast the next state variable
data. However, by utilizing the DMDc algorithm instead, the model is extended to also
include BC- and Wind data, which in turn may consist of previous and future data w.r.t.
the current state variable data.
4.3.3
XGBoost regression models
Finally, the third regression model is the XGBoost regression model. This model is a
gradient-boosting algorithm that uses decision trees to forecast the state variable data.
The XGBoost model differs from the others by being a traditional machine learning model
that is neither based on linear regression nor frequency analysis. In addition, the XGBoost
model also differs by allowing for numerous hyperparameters to be tuned, which is not
possible for the other models. As with the linear regression model, the XGBoost model
is also allowed to use multiple previous state variable data, and both previous and future
BC- and Wind data.
30
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:39==
5
Results
Figure 5.1: Outline of Øresund showing 5 colour-
coded positions. The legend shows each posi-
tion’s closest mesh element, identified by its in-
dex position in the mesh.
The following chapter introduces the
results of the models from Chapter 4.
Overall, the following results are split
between two types — numerical and
visual, and further segregated by
their data partition. Within each result
type, the first subsection deals with
model results forecasting surface ele-
vation only, while the second subsec-
tion covers the full-state model fore-
cast results (surface elevation and
water current velocities). Going for-
ward, the water current velocity will
be referred to as current velocity, and
at times, the surface elevation will
be referred to as elevation. Addition-
ally, each data partition subsection is
also split into the model subsections:
baseline, reconstruction, and regres-
sion.
The results are evaluated numeri-
cally and visually, as each evaluation
form provides different insights. Nu-
merically, the performance of each
model is evaluated using different er-
ror metrics that aggregate the pair-
wise differences between mesh ele-
ments data and prediction, without
taking the structure of data into ac-
count. Conversely, the visual evalu-
ation consists of looking at multiple
data simultaneously, such as snap-
shots and individual time series, to
gain additional insight into the tempo-
ral/spatial structure of the model out-
put.
Due to the high fidelity of the flexible mesh, it is not practical to consider all the time
series for each mesh element. Therefore, specific locations within Øresund are selected
as seen in Figure 5.1, for which the index of the mesh element that lies closest to the
location is also provided. The selected locations provide spatially distant sample points,
that represent different regions of Øresund and thus, by visualizing the time series data
and predictions of the corresponding mesh element, the actual and predicted dynamics
in the local subregions can be compared.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
31
==PAGE:40==
5.1
Visual results
5.1.1
Surface elevation forecasts
In this section, the visual results of the surface elevation forecasts are presented. Initially,
the observed surface elevations are visualized, followed by the forecasts of the baseline,
reconstruction, and regression models.
Figure 5.2: The observed surface elevations in the 5 different lo-
cations.
In Figure 5.2, the observed surface elevations of the 5 locations are visualized, where
each time series corresponds to a location and the vertical lines represent the split be-
tween data used for training and testing. The different time series show the three middle
mesh elements exhibiting fairly correlated dynamics, while the dynamics of the top and
bottom mesh elements display other correlated dynamics.
32
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:41==
Baseline models
In Figures 5.3 and 5.4, the surface elevation of the 5 locations of Øresund are visualized
along with the forecasts of the two baseline models.
Figure 5.3: Spatio-temporal
mean forecasted surface el-
evations.
Figure 5.4: Temporal mean
forecasted
surface
eleva-
tions.
The two figures show the baseline models forecasting poorly in all locations, with both
models failing to capture any of the dynamics in the surface elevation time series. Al-
though the temporal mean model allows for forecasting different elevations depending on
the location, this feature is seen to be of little use, as the mean elevations of the different
locations are generally close to the overall mean elevation of Øresund.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
33
==PAGE:42==
Reconstruction models
In Figures 5.5 to 5.7, the reconstructed and observed surface elevations of the 5 Øresund
locations are shown for 3 different PCA models.
Figure 5.5: PCA(1) recon-
structed surface elevations.
Figure 5.6: PCA(10) recon-
structed surface elevations.
Figure 5.7:
PCA(100) re-
constructed surface eleva-
tions.
Before commenting on the results, it should be noted that the vertical line present in all
the figures depicts the split between the training and testing data. Therefore, it is only the
training data that is used to fit the PCA, while both are reconstructed by first compressing
the data and then decompressing it. Hence, the training data reconstructions are expected
to be better than the test data reconstructions.
The 3 models respectively use 1, 10, and 100 principal components to reconstruct the
surface elevations, with the latter two producing reconstructions that are indistinguishable
from one another and the observed surface elevations. On the other hand, the first model
using 1 principal component, is seen to reconstruct the top (8103) and bottom (9337) mesh
elements poorly, while the remaining mesh elements are reconstructed fairly well. As
34
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:43==
expected, the training data is reconstructed better than the testing data, but interestingly
the top and bottom reconstructions show clear deviations from the observed training data.
This contrasts the other mesh elements, where the reconstructions match the training data
almost perfectly, and suggests that the dynamics of the top and bottom mesh elements
are less common than those of the other mesh elements.
For all 5 locations, the reconstructed test data generally fit the observed data worse than
the reconstructed training data. Moreover, the large fluctuations observed in the middle
snapshots of the test data seem to prove especially difficult to reconstruct regardless of the
mesh element. Nevertheless, the top and bottom mesh elements remain the most difficult
to reconstruct overall, while the one second from the top is reconstructed the best.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
35
==PAGE:44==
Regression models
In Figures 5.8 to 5.10 the surface elevation forecasts of the 3 initial regression models are
visualized along with the observed surface elevations. The initial models refer to models
constructed with the simplest possible hyperparameters and hence, the models are not
expected to perform well.
Figure 5.8: Initial Linear Re-
gression forecasted surface
elevations.
Figure 5.9: Initial DMDc Re-
gression forecasted surface
elevations.
Figure 5.10: Initial XGB Re-
gressor forecasted surface
elevations.
For each regression model, the model tries to minimize the one-step-ahead forecast er-
rors considering all pairs of observed surface elevations, i.e. the first data is fitted to the
second, the second to the third, and so on. In contrast, it is only the k first observed state
variable data of both the training and test datasets that are used for initializing the fore-
casts, as the following forecasts use the most recently forecasted state variable data as
input to the model.
The initial regression models show both the DMDc and XGB models performing very
poorly, with the forecasts produced by the XGB model being completely stationary and
36
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:45==
capturing no dynamics. Unlike the XGB model, the DMDc model captures some dynam-
ics, but the forecasts remain poor and nowhere close to the observed surface elevations.
Thirdly, the linear regression model shows very promising results early on, with the fore-
casts matching the observed surface elevations relatively well, in all but the top and bottom
mesh elements (8103 and 9337).
The models shown in Figures 5.11 to 5.13 are the final regression models, whose hyper-
parameters were optimized using a randomized grid search with several iterations. (See
Tables 5.5 and 5.6 for information regarding the search grid and final parameters).
Figure 5.11:
Final Linear
Regression forecasted sur-
face elevations.
Figure 5.12:
Final DMDc
Regression forecasted sur-
face elevations.
Figure 5.13: Final XGB Re-
gressor forecasted surface
elevations.
The final regression models show a significant improvement over the initial models, with
both the linear regression- and DMDc models now capturing the dynamics of the surface
elevations very well, while the XGB model still falls behind the other two. Especially, the
top and bottom mesh elements (8103 and 9337) are forecasted much better by the linear
regression- and DMDc model, but still not quite as well as the other mesh elements.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
37
==PAGE:46==
To get a better view of the specific forecasts, the forecasts of mesh element 9337 for all
models are inspected separately, as seen in Figure 5.14.
Figure 5.14: Final surface elevation forecasts of mesh element 9337.
The forecasts shown in Figure 5.14 illustrate the linear regression- and DMDc model ef-
fectively capturing most of the observed surface elevation dynamics, with only minor dif-
ferences being visible near the wave peaks and valleys.
The forecasts in Figure 5.14 clearly show the linear regression- and DMDc model cap-
turing most of the observed dynamics of the surface elevation, with only a few of the
elevation peaks and valleys being forecasted slightly off. The XGB model, on the other
hand, is seen to forecast wave-like elevations that are much smaller than the observed
surface elevations. Moreover, a few of the XGB forecasts near the 1300th snapshot, are
also seen to be a sequence of constant elevations, likely indicating that the model requires
more flexibility.
In addition to inspecting the forecasts of mesh element 9337, the difference between the
observed and forecasted surface elevations of snapshot 1255 is also visualized for all
38
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:47==
models, as seen in Figures 5.15 to 5.17. Previously, this snapshot was seen to be partic-
ularly challenging to forecast for all models, and thus, a closer inspection is warranted.
Figure 5.15:
Final Linear
Regression forecasted sur-
face deviations at snapshot
1255.
Figure 5.16:
Final DMDc
Regression forecasted sur-
face deviations at snapshot
1255.
Figure 5.17:
Final XGB
Regressor forecasted sur-
face deviations at snapshot
1255.
The snapshots visualized in Figures 5.15 to 5.17 show the observed snapshot subtracted
from the forecasted one, meaning that the negative (blue) values correspond to the model
forecasting below the observed data, while the positive (red) values correspond forecasts
above the observed data.
Across all models, two distinct snake-like shapes are seen in the difference plots, with
the top one being longer and more prominent than the shorter one found below it (See
the XGB model in Figure 5.17 for the most prominent example). Although visible in all
models, the snake-like shapes are much harder to identify in the linear regression model
compared to the other two, due to the deviations near the snakes being similar in direc-
tion and magnitude to the deviations within them. On the other hand, the two snakes
are easily identified in the DMDc model with both them being partially and completely
coloured in white, respectively. When considering the underlying mechanics of the DMDc
model, these results become interesting, as the high level of accuracy suggests that the
white parts of the snakes contain strong frequencies that the model picks up in the form
of dynamic modes. Besides the snakes, the DMDc deviations also show clear signs of
undershooting, with most of the deviations being negative, and only very few being pos-
itive. This problem is also seen in the linear regression deviations but to a lesser extent.
Comparing the DMDc- and linear regression deviations, the southern part of the Øresund
strait is generally forecasted below the observed elevation by both models, except for
an interesting arch-like shape that lies close to the edge of the strait, where the models
forecast above the observed elevation.
In contrast to the two other models, the XGB deviations show a much simpler pattern due
to most deviations exceeding 4 cm. Additionally, the deviations are seen to be mostly
positive, with the aforementioned snakes being the only negative ones. An interesting
observation regarding the snakes in the XGB model is that the top one is seen to be split
in the middle, with the upper part deviating less than the lower part. Comparing this with
the corresponding snake of the DMDc model, it is possible that the lower part, which the
XGB model struggles with, contains strong frequency signals that instead make the DMDc
model perform well.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
39
==PAGE:48==
However, taking all the results into account, it seems that the linear regression model
performs best and the XGB model worst.
5.1.2
Full-state forecasts
In this section, the full-state forecasts of the 5 locations in Øresund are visualized. The
full-state forecasts include both the surface elevation and current velocities, and are only
visualized for the reconstruction and regression models.
Figure 5.18: The observed surface elevations and current veloci-
ties in the 5 different locations.
The time series in Figure 5.18 show the observed surface elevations and current velocities
of the 5 locations in Øresund. These data are again used to visually evaluate the forecasts
of the regression models and the reconstructed data of the PCA models.
The visual results of the baseline models are excluded, due to their poor performance on
the surface elevation data, which suggests that they are not likely to fare any better when
applied to the full-state data.
40
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:49==
Reconstruction models
Revisiting the PCA models, the full-state reconstructions of the 5 locations in Øresund are
visualized in Figures 5.19 to 5.21.
Figure 5.19: PCA(1) reconstructed surface elevations and current velocities.
Figure 5.19, shows the PCA(1) model yet again struggling to reconstruct surface eleva-
tion data of the top and bottom mesh elements, while the remaining mesh elements are
reconstructed relatively well. Interestingly, the additional work of also reconstructing the
current velocities using one shared PC, does not seem to have a significant impact on
the reconstruction quality of the surface elevations, as the reconstructions are very simi-
lar to the surface elevation reconstructions of the previous PCA(1) model. Moreover, the
current velocities are reconstructed impressively well, considering that the quality of the
surface elevation reconstructions seem to remain the same. Again, this is likely due to
the variance structure of the velocity data being similar to the surface elevation data.
The results of the PCA(10) model in Figure 5.20, show the model reconstructing the sur-
face elevations and current velocities so well that the reconstructions are indistinguishable
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
41
==PAGE:50==
from the observed data in these figures.
Figure 5.20: PCA(10) reconstructed surface elevations and current velocities.
Increasing the number of principal components tenfold, the PCA(100) model provides
even better reconstructions than the PCA(10) model. However, due to the limited reso-
lution of the figures, the reconstructions of the PCA(100) model, as seen in Figure 5.21,
cannot be distinguished from the reconstructions of the PCA(10) model.
42
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.21: PCA(100) reconstructed surface elevations and current velocities.
Once more, this suggests that using more than 10 principal components does not signif-
icantly improve the visual quality of the reconstructions, and that the PCA(10) model is
likely the most reasonable reconstruction model among the three.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
43
==PAGE:52==
Regression models
In this section the visual results of the initial full-state regression models are left out and
thus, only the final regression models are visualized.
Figure 5.22 shows the final linear regression model forecasting the surface elevations and
current velocities.
Figure 5.22: Final Linear Regression forecasted surface elevation and current veloc-
ities.
Above, the figure shows the surface elevation forecasts matching the observed data well,
while the velocity forecasts are seen to be less accurate, with multiple forecasts in se-
quence underestimating the observed velocities.
44
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:53==
In Figure 5.23, the final DMDc model shows similar results to the linear regression model,
with the surface elevation forecasts matching the observed data well, while the velocity
forecasts are seen to be less accurate. Compared to the linear regression model, the
DMDc model also yields satisfactory forecasts for the surface elevation, while the velocity
data tends to be forecasted above the observed data.
Another interesting difference between the two models is that the DMDc model displays
noticeable forecasting errors in the training data of mesh elements 6984 and 3506, while
it is nowhere to be found in the forecasts of the linear regression model when looking at
the same mesh elements.
Figure 5.23: Final DMDc Regression forecasted surface elevation and current veloc-
ities.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
45
==PAGE:54==
The final XGB model, as seen in Figure 5.24, once again shows poor forecasting results.
The surface elevation forecasts are seen to follow the general trend of the observed data,
but seem insensitive to the rapid changes and often provide forecasts that are too damped
when compared to the observed data. Similarly, the velocity forecasts are also not worth
much, as they seem even less responsive to the changes seen in the observed data.
Figure 5.24: Final XGB Regression forecasted surface elevation and current veloci-
ties.
In addition to the full-states forecasted as time series, the difference between the ob-
served and forecasted surface elevations and current velocities of snapshot 1255 is also
visualized for all three full-state regression models, as seen in Figures 5.25 to 5.27
The linear regression deviations seen in Figure 5.25 show similar patterns to the surface
elevation deviations in Figure 5.15, while the deviations of the current velocities are com-
pletely new. The current velocity deviations show very different results, with the U-velocity
deviations being both positive and negative, while the V-velocity deviations are practically
all negative. Besides this, the V-velocity deviations also show very few patterns and are
46
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:55==
generally seen to just have large negative deviations. Hence, nearly all V-velocities are
forecasted below the observed data. In contrast, the U-velocity deviations vary in both
direction and magnitude, with some deviations being within 1 cm/s of the observed data,
as depicted by the white colour. Furthermore, the U-velocity deviations also seem very
chaotic, with only very few patterns being visible.
The most interesting patterns are yet again, the previously mentioned snake-like shapes
that are present in both the U-velocity deviations and the surface elevation deviations. For
the U-velocity deviations, the upper part of the top snake has dark red colours, indicating
forecasts that are higher than the observed data.
Figure 5.25: Final Linear Regression deviations of forecasted surface elevation and
current velocities.
Conversely, the lower part has both dark blue and light red colours, indicating forecasted
velocities that are slightly above and below the observed data. In contrast to the linear
regression model that forecasts only surface elevations, it is interesting that parts of the
snakes for this model have blue and white stripes, which implies that this model can
forecast surface elevations that lie close to the observed data in regions that the simpler
linear regression model seemingly struggled with.
Contrary to the linear regression model, the DMDc deviations seen in Figure 5.26 show
the top and bottom snakes of the surface elevations being forecasted above the observed
data, with a small chunk of the deviations in the top snake being close to the observed data,
as indicated by the white colour. Besides the snakes, the surface elevation deviations are
very similar those of the full-state linear regression model and thus, many of the previous
reflections also apply here. Another contrast to the full-state linear regression model, is
the U-velocity deviations.
In the middle figure, the U-velocity forecasts land very close to the observed data, for
quite many regions of the Øresund strait, while the remaining forecasts predominantly
shoot too high and a small number shoot too low. Thus, the U-velocities of the DMDc
model seem better than those of the linear regression model. The V-velocities are also
forecasted much better for the DMDc model, where most velocities are forecasted closer
to the observed data than they were for the linear regression model. Moreover, the struc-
ture derived from the colour differences of the visualized surface elevation and V-velocity
deviations also hints at the two data being connected, but the connection is not entirely
clear.
Lastly, the XGB deviations seen in Figure 5.27 show the surface elevation deviations being
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 5.26: Final DMDc Regression deviations of forecasted surface elevation and
current velocities.
very different from the two other models, with the deviations showing very little structure
and being mostly positive.
Figure 5.27: Final XGB Regression deviations of forecasted surface elevation and
current velocities.
Hence, the model generally overestimates both surface elevations and velocities, while
the U-velocity deviations are both positive and negative. Similar to the smaller XGB model,
the full-state XGB model also shows two snakes in the surface elevation. Interestingly, the
top snake is only visible in the U-velocity deviations, which show different velocities being
forecasted within 8 cm/s, while the V-velocity deviations depict practically all velocities
being forecasted 8 cm/s above the observed data.
48
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:57==
5.2
Numerical results
In this section the numerical results of the models are presented. The numerical results
are presented in the form of cross-validated (CV) test scores and multiple different error
metrics for both the training and test data. The error metrics include the root mean squared
error (RMSE), mean error (ME), maximum absolute error (MaxAE), and a variation of
mean absolute percentage error (MAPE*) modified to handle regression around zero.
5.2.1
Surface elevation forecasts
The numerical results of the surface elevation forecasts are presented in the following
tables starting with the baseline models.
Baseline models
In Table 5.1, the cross-validated (CV) test scores of the baseline models are presented,
showing the Spatio-Temporal Mean (S-T Mean) model to have the lowest CV mean score,
while the Temporal Mean (T Mean) model has the highest CV mean score. This shows
that the added flexible of being able to forecast multiple mean values for each location
ends up hurting the performance of the T Mean model. Interestingly, the CV standard
deviation of the T Mean model is lower than that of the S-T Mean model, which suggests
that the T Mean model is more consistent across the different CV folds.
Models
CV Fold 1
CV Fold 2
CV Fold 3
CV Fold 4
CV Mean
CV Std.
S-T Mean
0.1848
0.1396
0.1978
0.1095
0.1579
0.0353
T Mean
0.1548
0.2171
0.1767
0.1371
0.1714
0.0299
Table 5.1: RMSE CV test scores for baseline models.
Applying the two baseline models on the training and test data, the results in Table 5.2
show the S-T Mean model to have the highest RMSE, ME, MaxAE, and MAPE* scores in
the training data, while it has the lowest RMSE and MAPE* of the test data.
Model
Training Data
Testing Data
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
S-T Mean
0.1621
0.0343
0.2592
0.2130
0.1547
0.0354
0.2467
0.1730
T Mean
0.1564
0.0313
0.2370
0.2086
0.1759
0.0443
0.2707
0.1970
Table 5.2: Error metrics for baseline models.
Hence, the S-T Mean model is seen to perform better than the T Mean model, which likely
manages to fit the training data better due to its higher flexibility.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
49
==PAGE:58==
Reconstruction models
The reconstruction models, as seen in Table 5.3, clearly show the PCA(100) model to have
the lowest CV mean score, while the PCA(1) model has the highest CV mean score.
Models
CV Fold 1
CV Fold 2
CV Fold 3
CV Fold 4
CV Mean
CV Std.
PCA-1
0.0677
0.0688
0.0779
0.0615
0.0690
0.0059
PCA-10
0.0014
0.0018
0.0024
0.0012
0.0017
0.0005
PCA-100
0.0001
0.0004
0.0002
0.0001
0.0002
0.0001
Table 5.3: RMSE CV test scores for reconstruction models.
Hence, the results are as expected.
Considering the error metrics of the reconstruction models in Table 5.4, the PCA(1) model
is seen to produce an average reconstruction error of 11 cm for the testing data, while the
PCA(10) and PCA(100) models produce average errors of 0.18 cm and 0.01 cm, respec-
tively.
Model
Training Data
Testing Data
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
PCA-1
0.0662
0.0062
0.1225
0.0915
0.1086
0.0200
0.1756
0.1289
PCA-10
0.0012
0.0000
0.0314
0.0013
0.0018
0.0000
0.0515
0.0016
PCA-100
0.0000
0.0000
0.0005
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0013
0.0001
Table 5.4: Error metrics for reconstruction models.
Furthermore, percentage-wise error metrics show the PCA(1) model to have an average
error of 13%, while the PCA(10) and PCA(100) models on average are well within 1% of
the correct value. Interestingly, the largest observed errors of the reconstruction models
are seen to be 18, 6, and 0.2 cm, and thus the difference between the average and
maximum error is quite large for the simple models.
50
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:59==
Regression models
For the regression models, a high dimensional grid of hyperparameters is sampled many
times to find a good set of hyperparameters for each model. The possible value for each
of the hyperparameters can be found in Table 5.5 below:
Hyperparameter
Linear Regressor
DMDc Regressor
XGB Regressor
Extra Input
[BC, BC + Wind]
Input Scaling
[None]
Input Projection: PCA(X)
X = [2, 4, ... , 20]
X = 100
X = [1, 2, ... , 10]
Input Lag
[1,2,3,4]
1
[1,2,3,4]
Extra Lag
[1,2,3,4]
[1,2,3,4]
[1,2,3,4]
Extra Lead
[1,2,3,4]
[1,2,3,4]
[1,2,3,4]
Model-hyperparameters
DMDc Input Modes
[2, 4, ... , 20]
XGB Estimators
50
XGB Max Depth
[1, 2, 3]
XGB Learning Rate
[0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9]
Table 5.5: Hyperparameter search grid for regression models.
This table shows that some hyperparameters are shared among all models, while the
individual models vary in how many model-hyperparameters they have available. Overall,
the range of available values for each hyperparameter was balanced in such that the
numerous grid searches could be completed within reasonable time.
In total, each model is allotted 50 grid searches and the results of these searches are
presented in Table 5.6.
In Table 5.6, all final models are seen to use the input projection very differently, with the
Linear Regressor ending up with 4 PCs, while the XGB Regressor utilize 10 PCs. Although
it cannot be directly derived from the table, the effective number of latent dimensions used
for the DMDc Regressor corresponds to the input modes. Hence, the model uses an 18-
dimensional latent space for modelling. Furthermore, the lag and lead of the extra data
(BC and/or Wind) are also seen to be relatively similar for all three models, with the lead
being set to 4 for the DMDc and Linear Regressor, and 2 for the XGB Regressor, while the
extra lag of all models is set to 2. Furthermore, the Linear Regressor is the only model
that utilizes lagged state variable data. Hence, if there is anything to be gained from
knowing the most recent state variable data, then this model may prove superior to the
rest. Additionally, it is also worth noting that the XGB model uses the maximum number
of possible PCs and the smallest possible learning rate. Thus, it is likely that the model
could perform even better if these parameters were allowed to take on values outside the
set of available values.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
51
==PAGE:60==
Models
Hyperparameters
Extra
Input
Input
Scaling
Input
Projection
Input
Lag
Extra
Lag
Extra
Lead
Model
Parameters
Initial
Linear Regressor
BC + Wind
None
PCA(1)
1
1
0
None
DMDc Regressor
BC + Wind
None
PCA(100)
1
1
0
Input Modes = 1
XGB Regressor
BC + Wind
None
PCA(1)
1
1
0
Estimators = 1
Max Depth = 1
Learning Rate = 0.3
Gamma = 1
Lambda = 1
Alpha = 0
Final
Linear Regressor
BC
None
PCA(4)
2
2
4
None
DMDc Regressor
BC
None
PCA(100)
1
2
4
Input Modes = 18
XGB Regressor
BC
None
PCA(10)
1
2
2
Estimators = 50
Max Depth = 2
Learning Rate = 0.1
Gamma = 1
Lambda = 3
Alpha = 0
Table 5.6: Hyperparameter overview for regression models.
Looking at the cross-validation results in Table 5.7, all but the Linear Regressor are seen
to perform poorly with the initial models. The final models that utilize tuned hyperparam-
eters are seen to perform fairly well, as the average CV test score of the worst model
(XGB) is less than the best average CV test score of the initial models. Although the
DMDc Regressor provides the smallest average CV test score, the Linear Regressor has
a standard deviation of CV test scores that is 3-4 times lower than the Linear Regressor,
while its average CV test scores are not much worse than the DMDc Regressor.
Models
CV Fold 1
CV Fold 2
CV Fold 3
CV Fold 4
CV Mean
CV Std.
Initial
Linear Regressor
0.0858
0.0759
0.0896
0.0655
0.0792
0.0094
DMDc Regressor
1.8285
0.5861
0.1932
0.3624
0.7426
0.6423
XGB Regressor
0.1545
0.1903
0.1869
0.1069
0.1596
0.0335
Final
Linear Regressor
0.0271
0.0243
0.0253
0.0224
0.0248
0.0017
DMDc Regressor
0.0180
0.0168
0.0261
0.0101
0.0177
0.0057
XGB Regressor
0.0832
0.0619
0.0777
0.0834
0.0765
0.0088
Table 5.7: RMSE CV test scores for regression models.
In Table 5.8, the error metrics of the three regression models are shown before and after
hyperparameter tuning, denoted by initial and final, respectively. Overall, all models see
improvements in forecasting the training and testing data after tuning their hyperparame-
ters. As expected, the final regression models generally predict their training data better
52
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:61==
than their test data as seen by the RMSE, ME, and MaxAE. Interestingly, the MAPE* of
the final Linear Regressor is seen to be lower in the test data than in the training data.
This along with the very similar RMSE values show that the Linear Regressor is a very
balanced model.
Models
Training data
Testing data
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
Initial
Linear Regressor
0.0717
0.0068
0.1315
0.0966
0.1161
0.0213
0.1929
0.1328
DMDc Regressor
0.1775
0.0418
0.2683
0.2354
0.2064
0.0565
0.3128
0.2293
XGB Regressor
0.1648
0.0337
0.2476
0.2199
0.1678
0.0407
0.2592
0.1874
Final
Linear Regressor
0.0233
0.0007
0.0557
0.0301
0.0271
0.0009
0.0623
0.0296
DMDc Regressor
0.0119
0.0002
0.0325
0.0146
0.0298
0.0013
0.0795
0.0316
XGB Regressor
0.0680
0.0061
0.1288
0.0896
0.1062
0.0184
0.1847
0.1150
Table 5.8: Error metrics for regression models.
Lastly, the test data MaxAE of the final regression models is seen to come very close
to the test data MaxAE for the PCA(10) reconstruction models. Specifically, the Linear
Regressor’s test data MaxAE is 6.23 cm, whereas the PCA(10) reconstruction model has
a test data MaxAE of 5.15 cm. Hence, the test data MaxAE of the two models are almost
equal, while the test data RMSE of the PCA(10) model is far smaller than that of the Linear
Regressor.
Performance Statistics
The final set of results for this subsection consists of the performance statistics, where
the execution time, number (#) of predictions, and test RMSE are compared.
Models
Execution Time
# of Predictions
RMSE
Performance
Speed-Up
S-T Mean
0.0686 s
1600
0.1129
23339.7781
preds / s
≈46000
T Mean
0.0582 s
1600
0.1337
27477.5066
preds / s
≈54000
Linear Regressor
2.8133 s
1590
0.0271
565.1709
preds / s
≈1100
DMDc Regressor
0.7756 s
1590
0.0298
2049.9641
preds / s
≈4000
XGB Regressor
11.3586 s
1594
0.1062
140.3348
preds / s
≈280
MIKE
41010.0700 s
18161
0.0000
0.4445
preds / s
1
Table 5.9: Performance statistics for forecast models.
In Table 5.9, the performance statistics of the previously covered models are introduced
and compared with DHI’s MIKE model. Here, the MIKE model is seen to provide flawless
predictions, but at the cost of a very long computation time. Disregarding the baseline
models, the DMDc Regressor provides the fastest results by forecasting more than 2000
snapshots per second, which is equivalent to a speed-up of 4000. Similarly, the Linear-
and XGB Regressor also forecasts much faster than the MIKE model with 550 and 140
snapshots per second, respectively. Including the RMSE in the model comparison, the
DMDc Regressor undoubtedly provides the best trade-off between speed and accuracy,
while the Linear Regressor provides more accuracy at the cost of speed.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
53
==PAGE:62==
5.2.2
Full-state forecasts
The numerical results for models that forecast both surface elevations and current ve-
locities are presented in the coming tables. These models predict state variable data
in multiple units, and thus the errors presented in these tables are the averages of the
unit-averaged errors.
Baseline models
Table 5.10 shows the cross-validation test scores of the baseline model forecasted surface
elevations and current velocities. These models show the mean and standard deviation
of the CV test scores of both models being incredibly close to each other and thus, no
difference in performance is expected.
Models
CV Fold 1
CV Fold 2
CV Fold 3
CV Fold 4
CV Mean
CV Std.
S-T Mean
0.1290
0.0975
0.1290
0.0856
0.1103
0.0192
T Mean
0.0986
0.1416
0.1188
0.0828
0.1105
0.0221
Table 5.10: RMSE CV test scores for baseline models.
Looking at the error metrics of the baseline model, as seen in Table 5.10, the Temporal (T)
Mean model is seen to perform best during training and worst during testing. The model
is not able to effectively capitalize on the added flexibility of multiple mean values, and
thus the Spatio-Temporal (S-T) Mean model ends up performing better.
Model
Training Data
Testing Data
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
S-T Mean
0.1127
0.0180
0.4362
0.1780
0.1129
0.0194
0.3801
0.1545
T Mean
0.1035
0.0157
0.4158
0.1621
0.1337
0.0263
0.4776
0.1849
Table 5.11: Error metrics for baseline models.
Reconstruction models
The cross-validation results of the reconstruction models are found in Table 5.12. Again,
the PCA(100) model is seen to have the lowest CV mean score, while the PCA(1) model
has the highest CV mean score. Interestingly, the PCA(10) model has a lower CV mean
score than the PCA(1) model, while the standard deviation of the PCA(10) CV test scores
is higher than the standard deviation of the PCA(1) CV test scores. Naturally, the addi-
tional flexibility of the PCA(10) model allows it to fit the training data better, but whether
this is enough to explain the higher standard deviation is not clear.
54
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:63==
Models
CV Fold 1
CV Fold 2
CV Fold 3
CV Fold 4
CV Mean
CV Std.
PCA-1
0.0502
0.0531
0.0654
0.0518
0.0551
0.0060
PCA-10
0.0239
0.0259
0.0185
0.0076
0.0190
0.0071
PCA-100
0.0106
0.0111
0.0071
0.0023
0.0078
0.0035
Table 5.12: RMSE CV test scores for reconstruction models.
Inspecting the error metrics for the three PCA reconstruction models, as seen in Ta-
ble 5.13, the PCA(1) model is seen to produce an average reconstruction error of 5.45 for
the testing data, while the PCA(10) and PCA(100) models produce average errors (RM-
SEs) of 0.82 and 0.26. Due to the errors being composed of errors in different units and
scales, the error values are not directly comparable to the results of the surface elevation
forecasts.
Model
Training Data
Testing Data
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
PCA-1
0.0481
0.0036
0.3594
0.0724
0.0545
0.0058
0.3274
0.0714
PCA-10
0.0071
0.0001
0.0907
0.0113
0.0082
0.0001
0.1054
0.0114
PCA-100
0.0016
0.0000
0.0172
0.0027
0.0026
0.0000
0.0293
0.0038
Table 5.13: Error metrics for reconstruction models.
Regression models
The hyperparameter search grids that the full-state regression models are tuned with are
presented in Table 5.14. The table shows most of the hyperparameter space being iden-
tical to the one used with the surface elevation regression models, except for the param-
eters related to dimensionality reduction. The range on these hyperparameters are seen
to be extended 3-fold, with the DMDc Regressor having its Input Modes spaced the most,
while keeping the number of possible values the same. In contrast, the spacing of the
PCA hyperparameter for both the Linear- and XGB Regressor are kept the same, thus
making the set of attainable values approximately 3 times bigger.
In Table 5.15 an overview of the tuned hyperparameters of the full-state regression models
is shown. Initially, it should be noted that the XGB Regressor was tuned using just 1
sample on the search grid, due to the computational limitations, while the DMDc- and
Linear Regressor were tuned using 50 randomly sampled grid points on their respective
search grids. Judging by the inclusion of only BC data as the extra input for the Linear- and
DMDc Regressor, the Wind data likely provides very little forecasting power. Observing
the Linear Regressor’s Input Projection and DMDc’s Input Modes, the state variable data
of the DMDc Regressor is seen to be compressed into 24 dimensions, while the Linear
Regressor uses only 4 dimensions. Additionally, both models are seen to agree on the
number of Input Lags and Extra Leads, while the DMDc Regressor uses four times the
Extra Lag, compared to Linear Regressors Extra Lag of 1. Thus, the hyperparameter
tunings yield quite different results depending on the Regressor.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
55
==PAGE:64==
Hyperparameter
Linear Regressor
DMDc Regressor
XGB Regressor
Extra Input
[BC, BC + Wind]
Input Scaling
[None]
Input Projection: PCA(X)
X = [2, 4, ... , 64]
X = 100
X = [1, 2, ... , 32]
Input Lag
[1,2,3,4]
1
[1,2,3,4]
Extra Lag
[1,2,3,4]
[1,2,3,4]
[1,2,3,4]
Extra Lead
[1,2,3,4]
[1,2,3,4]
[1,2,3,4]
Model-hyperparameters
DMDc Input Modes
[6, 12, ... , 60]
XGB Estimators
50
XGB Max Depth
[1, 2, 3]
XGB Learning Rate
[0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9]
Table 5.14: Hyperparameter search grid for regression models.
Models
Hyperparameters
Extra
Input
Input
Scaling
Input
Projection
Input
Lag
Extra
Lag
Extra
Lead
Model
Parameters
Initial
Linear Regressor
BC + Wind
None
PCA(3)
1
1
0
None
DMDc Regressor
BC + Wind
None
PCA(100)
1
1
0
Input Modes = 3
XGB Regressor
BC + Wind
None
PCA(3)
1
1
0
Estimators = 1
Max Depth = 1
Learning Rate = 0.3
Gamma = 1
Lambda = 1
Alpha = 0
Final
Linear Regressor
BC
None
PCA(4)
1
1
3
None
DMDc Regressor
BC
None
PCA(100)
1
4
3
Input Modes = 24
XGB Regressor
BC + Wind
None
PCA(20)
4
4
4
Estimators = 50
Max Depth = 1
Learning Rate = 0.1
Gamma = 1
Lambda = 3
Alpha = 0
Table 5.15: Hyperparameter overview for regression models.
The results in Table 5.16 show the cross-validation test scores of the full-state regression
models before and after hyperparameter tuning. Again, it should be noted that the XGB
Regressor is not tuned, but rather randomly sampled due to the computational limitations.
Comparing the final individual CV test scores of the different models, the DMDc Regres-
56
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:65==
sor provides the lowest test scores across all four folds, while the test scores of the third
and fourth CV fold shows the forecasts of the Linear- and XGB Regressor performing sim-
ilarly. In contrast to the CV results of the surface elevation regression models, the Linear
Regressor no longer performs well, as its average CV test score is almost three times as
high as the lowest one. Conversely, the DMDc Regressor again shows very promising
results, with the lowest average CV test score of 0.0377 and also very little standard devia-
tion across all four CV folds. Interestingly, the randomly sampled XGB Regressor shows
better CV results than the Linear Regressor. Hence, the added complexity of multiple
data with different units might explain the relative advantage that the XGB Regressor has
on the Linear Regressor.
Models
CV Fold 1
CV Fold 2
CV Fold 3
CV Fold 4
CV Mean
CV Std.
Initial
Linear Regressor
0.0784
0.0501
0.0586
0.8672
0.2636
0.3487
DMDc Regressor
0.1839
0.1552
0.1251
0.0938
0.1395
0.0336
XGB Regressor
0.1096
0.1376
0.1305
0.0713
0.1122
0.0258
Final
Linear Regressor
0.2057
0.0573
0.0916
0.0592
0.1034
0.0606
DMDc Regressor
0.0309
0.0435
0.0493
0.0269
0.0377
0.0091
XGB Regressor
0.0799
0.0856
0.0868
0.0645
0.0792
0.0089
Table 5.16: RMSE CV test scores for regression models.
The error metrics of Table 5.17, show the average test error (RMSE) of the Linear- and
XGB Regressor being close to one another, while the corresponding training error favours
the Linear Regressor. In addition, the MaxAE of these models are also very different, with
the maximum absolute error of the Linear Regressor at 2.08 being 5-6 times larger than
that of the XGB Regressor at 0.39.
Models
Training data
Testing data
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
RMSE
ME
MaxAE
MAPE*
Initial
Linear Regressor
0.0298
0.0011
0.2678
0.0477
0.1147
0.0285
1.8053
0.1455
DMDc Regressor
0.1101
0.0186
0.4231
0.1719
0.1249
0.0238
0.4570
0.1739
XGB Regressor
0.1078
0.0170
0.4479
0.1676
0.1189
0.0209
0.4792
0.1643
Final
Linear Regressor
0.0288
0.0010
0.2962
0.0446
0.1108
0.0246
2.0781
0.1220
DMDc Regressor
0.0275
0.0010
0.2705
0.0442
0.0847
0.0112
0.8052
0.1211
XGB Regressor
0.0785
0.0084
0.3910
0.1251
0.1089
0.0177
0.3877
0.1516
Table 5.17: Error metrics for regression models.
The DMDc Regressor is again seen to provide the best average test error, measured by
RMSE, while its MaxAE lands between the two others at 0.81. Furthermore, the MAPE*
of the final regression models also show the percentage errors of the Linear Regressor
being almost identical to those of the DMDc Regressor, while the XGB Regressor has a
slightly higher one. Hence, the best model appears to be very dependent on which error
metric is deemed the most important.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
57
==PAGE:66==
Comparing these results to the simpler surface elevation regression models, the average
increase in all error metrics when going from the training to testing, is overall much larger
for the full-state regression models than it was for the simpler model counterparts.
Performance Statistics
The final set of results for this chapter is shown in Table 5.18. Here, the performance
statistics for the full-state baseline and regression models are shown in comparison to
DHI’s MIKE model. The results overall show an increase in the execution time for all
models except MIKE, when compared to their simpler counterparts and thus, the perfor-
mance is also decreased by a factor of 1-2. In contrast to the simpler models, the test
RMSE measures show all models performing very similarly, except for the DMDc Regres-
sor which is the only one that manages to lower the test RMSE below 0.1. Considering
the speed-ups of the regression models, all of them are seen to be well above 100 with
the DMDc Regressor showing the largest speed-up of 2800.
Comparing the test RMSEs of the baseline models to that of the regression models, the
accuracy of the regression models seems very poor, considering the amount of effort that
is put into tuning and testing the regression models. However, revisiting the CV test scores
of Table 5.16, the increase in forecast error seen in the RMSE of the test data can likely
be attributed to the very long forecast period of 800 and the test data containing more
dynamics than the training data.
Models
Execution Time
# of Predictions
RMSE
Performance
Speed-Up
S-T Mean
0.1145 s
1600
0.1129
13969.4885
preds / s
≈28000
T Mean
0.1432 s
1600
0.1337
11173.6742
preds / s
≈22000
Linear Regressor
2.8868 s
1594
0.1108
552.1640
preds / s
≈1100
DMDc Regressor
1.1401 s
1588
0.0847
1392.8716
preds / s
≈2800
XGB Regressor
9.5435 s
1586
0.1089
166.1861
preds / s
≈330
MIKE
41010.0700 s
18161
0.0000
0.4445
preds / s
1
Table 5.18: Performance statistics for forecast models.
58
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:67==
6
Conclusion
The overarching goal of this master thesis was to investigate whether data-driven surro-
gate models had the potential to replace DHI’s MIKE model.
Using a case study of the Øresund strait, a year-long high-fidelity dataset with water sur-
face elevations, (North) longitudinal-, and (East) latitudinal depth-averaged water current
velocities were simulated using MIKE, which laid the data foundation for the project.
In particular, the thesis first sought to find relevant variance-retaining latent space rep-
resentations for the high-fidelity dataset and secondarily, develop data-driven surrogate
models that explored different flow map discovery methods.
The Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was found to provide sufficient low-dimensional
variance-retaining subspaces that proved useful in compressing high-fidelity data with
only minimal losses.
Furthermore, three data-driven surrogate models were developed, respectively employing
(multivariate) linear regression, Dynamic Mode Decomposition with Control - DMDc, and
Extreme Gradient-Boosted Regression - XGB, where each was evaluated by their ability
to forecast the surface elevation data alone, and the full-state data, consisting of surface
elevations and current velocities. Additionally, the models were also tested against two
success criteria of forecasting within 8 cm and being at least 100 times faster than MIKE,
which were criteria established by the domain experts at DHI.
For the surface elevation data, the linear regression and DMDc models showed promising
results, with both models having a mean RMSE within 3 cm and being more than 1000
faster than MIKE. Conversely, the results of the full-state regression models were less
conclusive, as the numerical error metrics were averaged over surface elevations and
current velocities, thus yielding errors in an undefined metric. However, both models still
executed 1000 times faster than MIKE.
The visual results of both models were also considered, which showed weaker long-term
forecasting capabilities for the current velocities, while the short-term forecasts seemed
to overlap decently with the observed data.
In conclusion, multiple of the surface elevation regression models presented in this thesis
satisfy both the accuracy and speed-up criterion, while the full-state regression models
were only confirmed to satisfy the speed-up criterion.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
59
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[1]
Alphabet Inc. Satellite Image of the Sound, Google Maps. en-DK. URL: https://www.
google.com/maps/@55.7219863,12.2142495,9.4z?entry=ttu (visited on 02/06/2024).
[2]
Danish Hydraulics Institute DHI. “MIKE 21 Flow Model FM - Hydrodynamic and
Transport Module”. en. In: (2024), p. 3.
[3]
Lawrence Perko. “Dynamical Systems”. en. In: Differential Equations and Dynami-
cal Systems. Third. Texts in Applied Mathematics 7. Springer New York, 2001, p. 1.
[4]
Wikipedia. Dimensionality reduction. en. Page Version ID: 1182290201. Oct. 2023.
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dimensionality_reduction&oldid=
1182290201 (visited on 01/16/2024).
[5]
TiCC Tr. “Dimensionality Reduction: A Comparative Review”. en. In: ().
[6]
Wikipedia. Computational complexity of mathematical operations. URL: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_complexity_of_mathematical_operations (visited
on 01/14/2024).
[7]
Volker Strassen. “Gaussian elimination is not optimal”. en. In: ().
[8]
Virginia Vassilevska Williams. “Multiplying matrices in O(n2.373) time”. en. In: ().
[9]
Thomas Peters. “Turbulence, Coherent Structures, Dynamical Systems and Sym-
metry, 2nd edn., by P. Holmes: Scope: monograph. Level: researchers”. en. In: Con-
temporary Physics 53.5 (Sept. 2012), pp. 442–442. ISSN: 0010-7514, 1366-5812.
DOI: 10.1080/00107514.2012.699471. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.
1080/00107514.2012.699471 (visited on 01/14/2024).
[10]
J. L. Proctor et al. “Exploiting sparsity and equation-free architectures in complex
systems”. en. In: The European Physical Journal Special Topics 223.13 (Dec. 2014),
pp. 2665–2684. ISSN: 1951-6355, 1951-6401. DOI: 10.1140/epjst/e2014-02285-8.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1140/epjst/e2014-02285-8 (visited on 01/16/2024).
[11]
Geoffrey Hinton and Sam Roweis. “Stochastic Neighbor Embedding”. en. In: (Jan.
2002).
[12]
Kookjin Lee and Kevin T. Carlberg. “Model reduction of dynamical systems on
nonlinear manifolds using deep convolutional autoencoders”. In: Journal of Com-
putational Physics 404 (Mar. 2020), p. 108973. ISSN: 0021-9991. DOI: 10.1016/
j . jcp . 2019 . 108973. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0021999119306783 (visited on 01/17/2024).
[13]
William D. Fries, Xiaolong He, and Youngsoo Choi. “LaSDI: Parametric Latent Space
Dynamics Identification”. en. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and En-
gineering 399 (Sept. 2022), p. 115436. ISSN: 00457825. DOI: 10.1016/j.cma.2022.
115436. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0045782522004807 (vis-
ited on 01/14/2024).
[14]
Steven L Brunton and J Nathan Kutz. “Singular Value Decomposition”. en. In: Data-
Driven Science and Engineering - Machine Learning, Dynamical Systems and Con-
trol. Second. Nov. 2022, pp. 5–9.
[15]
Carl Eckart and Gale Young. “The approximation of one matrix by another of lower
rank”. en. In: Psychometrika 1.3 (Sept. 1936), pp. 211–218. ISSN: 0033-3123, 1860-
0980. DOI: 10.1007/BF02288367. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF02288367
(visited on 01/19/2024).
[16]
Wikipedia. Principal component analysis. en. Page Version ID: 1195770965. Jan.
2024. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principal_component_
analysis&oldid=1195770965 (visited on 01/19/2024).
60
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:69==
[17]
Jim Pitman. Probability. en. New York, NY: Springer New York, 1993. ISBN: 978-
0-387-94594-1 978-1-4612-4374-8. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4612-4374-8. URL: http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4612-4374-8.
[18]
Steven L Brunton and J Nathan Kutz. “Principal Component Analysis”. en. In: Data-
Driven Science and Engineering - Machine Learning, Dynamical Systems and Con-
trol. Second. Nov. 2022, pp. 23–24.
[19]
Wikipedia. Eigendecomposition of a matrix. en. Page Version ID: 1189921206. Dec.
2023. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eigendecomposition_of_a_
matrix&oldid=1189921206 (visited on 01/20/2024).
[20]
Lawrence Perko. “Flow of Differential Equations”. en. In: Differential Equations and
Dynamical Systems. Third. Texts in Applied Mathematics 7. Springer New York,
2001, p. 95.
[21]
Per B Brockhoff et al. “Linear Regression”. en. In: Introduction to Statistics at DTU.
2018.
[22]
Steven L Brunton and J Nathan Kutz. “Pseudo-Inverse, Least-Squares, and Regres-
sion”. en. In: Data-Driven Science and Engineering - Machine Learning, Dynamical
Systems and Control. Second. Nov. 2022, pp. 16–19.
[23]
Alvin C. Rencher and William F. Christensen. Methods of multivariate analysis. en.
Third Edition. Wiley series in probability and statistics. Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley,
2012. ISBN: 978-0-470-17896-6.
[24]
Peter J. Schmid. “Dynamic mode decomposition of numerical and experimental
data”. en. In: Journal of Fluid Mechanics 656 (Aug. 2010), pp. 5–28. ISSN: 0022-
1120, 1469-7645. DOI: 10.1017/S0022112010001217. URL: https://www.cambridge.
org/core/product/identifier/S0022112010001217/type/journal_article (visited on
01/21/2024).
[25]
Steven L Brunton and J Nathan Kutz. “Dynamic Mode Decomposition”. en. In: Data-
Driven Science and Engineering - Machine Learning, Dynamical Systems and Con-
trol. Second. Nov. 2022, pp. 260–263.
[26]
Jonathan H. Tu et al. “On Dynamic Mode Decomposition: Theory and Applications”.
en. In: Journal of Computational Dynamics 1.2 (2014). arXiv:1312.0041 [physics],
pp. 391–421. ISSN: 2158-2505. DOI: 10.3934/jcd.2014.1.391. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1312.0041 (visited on 01/22/2024).
[27]
Joshua L. Proctor, Steven L. Brunton, and J. Nathan Kutz. “Dynamic mode decom-
position with control”. In: SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 15 (1 2016),
pp. 142–161. ISSN: 15360040. DOI: 10.1137/15M1013857.
[28]
Joshua L. Proctor, Steven L. Brunton, and J. Nathan Kutz. “Dynamic Mode Decom-
position with Control”. en. In: SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 15.1
(Jan. 2016), pp. 142–161. ISSN: 1536-0040. DOI: 10.1137/15M1013857. URL: http:
//epubs.siam.org/doi/10.1137/15M1013857.
[29]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. “Regression Trees”. en. In: In-
troduction to Machine Learning and Data Mining. 2020, pp. 160–162.
[30]
SciKit-Learn.org. sklearn.tree.plot_tree. en. URL: https://scikit-learn/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.tree.plot_tree.html (visited on 01/24/2024).
[31]
All models are wrong. en. Page Version ID: 1192633656. Dec. 2023. URL: https:
//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=All_models_are_wrong&oldid=1192633656
(visited on 02/13/2024).
[32]
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. “Cross validation of time-series
data”. en. In: Introduction to Machine Learning and Data Mining. 2020, pp. 182–185.
[33]
SciKit-Learn.org. sklearn.pipeline. en. URL: https://scikit- learn/stable/modules/
classes.html (visited on 02/05/2024).
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
==PAGE:71==
A
Appendix
See attached zip-folder for relevant Python and Jupyter Notebook files.
Data-driven surrogate models for physics-based numerical models
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
