==PAGE:1==
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
Udforksning af 5G angreb og mitigering
af udvalgte angreb
Master Thesis
February, 2024
By
Authors:
Søren Kaare Rasmussen S175202
Patrick Marcell Madsen S175209
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Patrick Marcell Madsen, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, 348, Ørsteds
Pl., 2800 Kongens Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5 months, outlining the preface for the Department of Ap-
plied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
As mobile networks continue to evolve with the latest generation 5G, playing a pivotal role in
industrial applications, telecommunications, and critical devices, they also become increasingly
complex and vulnerable to attacks. This research aims to investigate the security aspects of the
cellular generations, ranging from the 2nd generation up to the modern 5th generation, and their
communication with the User equipment (UE). More specifically, we explore and analyze three
attack vectors: examining threats of tracking-, privacy, and availability attacks, to highlight the
prevalent vulnerabilities in the mobile network. Through a combination of theoretical analysis
of network exploitation and practical experiments, including the deployment of an international
mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) catcher and the execution of a downgrade attack, this thesis
uncovers the current security measures and how they fail to protect us against these threats.
As a result, proposed mitigations and countermeasures will be explored, aiming to secure the
current and future mobile networks.
Keywords: mobile network, cellular security, IMSI-catcher, jamming, practical attacks, down-
grade attack, mitigations
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Authors:
Søren Kaare Rasmussen S175202
Patrick Marcell Madsen S175209
Master of Science in Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Creators of this thesis.
Main Supervisor
Birger Andersen
Department of Engineering Technology and Didactics
Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisor
Henrik Tange
Department of Engineering Technology and Didactics
Technical University of Denmark
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose and scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Report Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The Evolution of Cellular Networks
5
2.1
1G: The start of cellular network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
2G: Digitizing the network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
3G: The Rise of Mobile Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
4G/LTE: High-Speed Wireless Connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
5G: The Era of Ultra-Fast Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Mobile Network Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6.1
Infrastructure Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6.2
Security Technology Specification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.7
5G’s New Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.7.1
Massive MIMO and Beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.7.2
Network Slicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.7.3
Software defined networking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.7.4
Network Functions Virtualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.7.5
Cloud-based Networking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
Mobile Network Attacks and Vulnerabilities
33
3.1
Network Security Threats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.1
IMSI-Catching (IMSI catcher/CSS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.2
Bidding-down attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.1.3
5G SA SUCI-Catcher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.1.4
Jamming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.1.5
Interception exploitation by SS7
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.1.6
Phone number catching / Phone spoofing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.2
Attack/Threat Vectors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4
Implementation of Experiments
52
4.1
Ethical Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2
Reason of Choice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3
Design of implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4.1
Downgrade Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4.2
IMSI Catching on GSM network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.4.3
GSM Packet Sniﬀing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5
Countermeasures and mitigations
71
5.1
Anti-Jamming methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
v
==PAGE:7==
5.2
Dual SIM Swapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.3
IMSI Catcher detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.4
Risk Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Discussion
79
6.1
Research question answers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7
Future works
83
8
Reflection
84
9
Conclusion
86
A Appendix
93
A.1 ITU IMT-2000 Multifunctional Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Acronyms
Acronym
Full Form
Acronym
Full Form
UE
User Equipment
AMPS
Advanced Mobile Phone System
3GPP
Third Generation Partnership Project
GSM
Global System for Mobile Communications
UMTS
Universal Mobile Telecommunications Sys-
tem
LTE
Long Term Evolution
VoLTE
Voice over Long Term Evolution
NR
New Radio
SIM
Subscriber Identity Module
USIM
Universal Subscriber Identity Module
FDMA
Frequency Division Multiple Access
TDMA
Time Division Multiple Access
CDMA
Code Division Multiple Access
OFDMA
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple
Access
OTA
Over-the-Air
ITU
International Telecommunication Union
DoS
Denial of Service
IMSI
International Mobile Subscriber Identity
MITM
Man-in-the-Middle
TMSI
Temporary Mobile Subscriber Identity
IoT
Internet of Things
SUCI
Subscription Concealed Identifier
SUPI
Subscription Permanent Identifier
GUTI
Globally Unique Temporary Identity
SMS
Short Message Service
MMS
Multimedia Messaging Service
MSC
Mobile Service Switching Center
VLR
Visitor Location Register
AuC
Authentication Center
EIR
Equipment Identity Register
HLR
Home Location Register
NSS
Network Switching Subsystem
BSS
Base Station Subsystem
AMF
Access and Mobility Management Function
ME
Mobile Equipment
BTS
Base Transceiver Station
UTRAN
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network
E-UTRAN
Evolved-UTRAN
RAN
Radio Access Network
RRU
Remote Radio Unit
BBU
Bandwidth-Based Unit
MCN
Mobile Cloud Networking
MAC
Message Authentication Code
CN
Core Network
MME
Mobility Management Entity
HSS
Home Subscriber Server
S-GW
Serving Gateway
P-GW
Packet Data Network Gateway
PCRF
Policy and Charging Rules Function
AKA
Authentication Key Agreement
EPS-AKA
Evolved Packet System Authentication Key
Agreement
AES
Advanced Encryption Standard
ZUC
Zu Chongzhi
SN ID
Serving Network ID
E-nodeB
Evolved Node B
NAS
Non-Access Stratum
AS
Access Stratum
MIMO
Multiple Input Multiple Output
NSA
Non-standalone
SA
Standalone
gNB
Next Generation Node B
BS
Base Station
PCF
Policy Control Function
UDM
Unified Data Management
SMF
Session Management Function
NEF
Network Exposure Function
AF
Application Function
UPF
User Plane Function
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Acronyms
Acronym
Full Form
Acronym
Full Form
AUSF
Authentication Server Function
NSSF
Network Slice Selection Function
SEAF
Security Anchor Function
CSI
Channel State Information
FDD
Frequency-Division Duplexing
TDD
Time-Division Duplexing
SLA
Service Level Agreement
MANO
Management and Orchestration
RAT
Radio Access Technology
SDN
Software Defined Networking
NFV
Network Function Virtualization
NFVI
NFV Infrastructure
VNF
Virtual Network Functions
VNFC
VNF Components
NFVO
NFV Orchestrator
VNFM
VNF Manager
VIM
Virtualized Infrastructure Manager
NIC
Network Interface Card
EMS
Element Management System
EM
Element Manager
TSP
Telecommunication Service Provider
CAPEX
Capital Expenditure
OPEX
Operational Expenditure
MCC
Mobile Country Code
MNC
Mobile Network Code
MSIN
Mobile Subscriber Identification Number
CSS
Cell Site Simulator
RRC
Radio Resource Control
SDR
Software Defined Radio
LA
Location Area
SS7
Signalling System 7
PTSN
Public Telecommunication Switching Net-
work
SSP
Signal Switching Point
STP
Signal Transfer Point
SCP
Signal Control Point
MSISDN
Mobile Subscriber International Subscriber
Directory Number
ARFCN
Absolute Radio Frequency Channel Num-
ber
BCCH
Broadcast Control Channel
SDCCH
Standalone Dedicated Control Channel
FHSS
Frequency-Hop Spread Spectrum
ICC
IMSI Catcher Catcher
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Cellular network has changed its definition over the past decades - evolving from a sys-
tem only capable of low-quality voice calls to a limited amount of people, to a system
network that can provide high- quality calls, multimedia streams, seamless internet, and
connectivity for around 13 billion different internet-connected devices daily [75]. It is a
technology that has fundamentally transformed our way of life, serving as the essential
network that has defined our methods of communication. The outcome of our intercon-
nected society has led to modern opportunities such as IoT devices, wearable gadgets,
autonomous vehicles, and enterprise machinery being increasingly prevalent and acces-
sible.
The mobile network is based on heterogeneous technologies from different generations.
This involves the utilization of diverse standards such as the vulnerable 2G GSM, the
versatile 3G UMTS, the high-performing 4G LTE, and the modern 5G network. With
billions of devices already heavily relying on these mobile technologies, and even more
are expected to follow suit, it becomes crucial to investigate and examine the security
measures of the networks that these devices make use of. While the 3rd Generation
Partnership Project (3GPP) plays a central role in providing and improving security
measures and standards in the mobile infrastructure, but many security concerns and
threats remain.
As of 2023, approximately 60% of all internet traﬀic was generated from mobile phone
users [51], which is expected to grow even further as mobile data becomes more acces-
sible and convenient for the individual user. However, this trend also makes exploiting
the mobile infrastructure and devices more attractive and appealing to individuals with
malicious intent [58].
It has unfortunately proven to be the case, indicating an increase in occurrences of cyber-
criminal cases. Numbers show that in 2022 the number of cyber-attacked IoT devices
amounts to about 112 million. That is a 3.5 times increase compared to the number of
attacks in 2018 with 32 million cases [9]. This rapid growth in cyber-attacks against
mobile devices reveals the critical concerns of mobile network security. It is an indica-
tion that serves as a reminder of the need to strengthen cyber-security protection and
mitigate malicious attacks to provide privacy, integrity, and reliability on the mobile
network.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
1
==PAGE:11==
It becomes crucial to explore and understand the exploits and mechanisms by which the
current mobile network can be compromised. Common attacks such as International
Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) Catching, have remained a security concern across
generations and are still a privacy and security issue. These IMSI catchers are capable
of various security attacks with the following: spoofing user’s identity in calls and texts
[82], capturing 2G metadata information for decryption [14] to eavesdrop on text and
voice calls or tracking a user’s location either by GPS [78] or using trilateration [79] to
pinpoint the target. In combination with downgrade attacks, which can strip away the
security mechanism and network protocols, forcing devices to use old and less secure
technologies [47], they become one of the most prevalent threats to mobile networks.
The shift towards a society driven by IoT and smart devices enhances eﬀiciency, pro-
duction, and user experience, however, it also opens up a great number of security chal-
lenges and vulnerabilities. These devices play a vital part in our daily lives, with crucial
functionalities and sensitive information, which highlights the importance of security
protection, protocols, and standards. The challenges are complex however, security is
an essential part of the network and is fundamental when developing the future of mo-
bile communication.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
2
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Purpose and scope
This thesis aims to address and provide insight into the security perspective of the cur-
rent cellular network. The cellular network is not comprised of one singular generation,
but multiple generations ranging from 2G to 5G. Because of this, an overview of the
infrastructure and system technology of all generations will be briefly explained, how-
ever, the in-depth details of the individual interfaces, services, and protocols for 2G,
3G, and 4G are out of scope in this thesis since they have already been explored and
well-documented.
The thesis is scoped around the security aspects of the entire cellular network involving
an examination and investigation of various attack vectors as well as analysis of several
proposed mitigation strategies. Additionally, it explores the new features of 5G to pro-
vide insights into the capabilities and potential security problems that it may have. The
project will involve different practical experiments, to reveal the security flaws that are
still present within our current mobile data network, uncover the problems, and deter-
mine possible potential countermeasures and mitigations.
Furthermore, security measures related to specific software, applications, and/or hard-
ware devices (e.g., Windows, Linux, Android, iOS, IoT devices and gadgets) are out
of scope. Instead of exploring the physical infrastructure of the cellular network, our
primary emphasis will be on the wireless aspect, focusing on over-the-air (OTA) com-
munication between the network and the User Equipment (UE).
1.2
Research Questions
• How have security in mobile networks evolved, and what vulnerabilities and se-
curity improvements have appeared over time?
• What is required to implement an IMSI catcher?
• What is required to implement a Downgrade Attack?
• What are the possible implications of being a victim of an IMSI-catching attack?
• What countermeasures can be implemented to mitigate the security issues associ-
ated with both IMSI-catching and Downgrade Attacks?
1.3
Limitations
Before going forward, we would like to clarify some limitations regarding this project:
Experiments will be conducted appropriately and ethically, therefore we can not analyze
and perform any kind of interference with the real base stations or their core networks in
practice. Also due to the time constraint, we will only follow through with a few major
security attacks thoroughly.
1.4
Report Structure
The remainder of this paper is organized into the following main sections: Section 2
briefly introduces the background, improvement of security measures, and flaws for
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
3
==PAGE:13==
each generation. Section 3 will describe the details of some network security threats and
known issues. In section 4, we discuss our choice of security experiments, the reason-
ing, strategies, and methodologies that are considered while conducting our practical
experiments, as well as the results and evaluations of them. In Section 5, we identify
valid and possible mitigations against our choice of security attacks. We also explain
other countermeasures to attacks mentioned in Section 3, which we did not experiment
with. In section 6, we discuss our findings, examining and evaluating different identified
countermeasures. Additionally, a summary of the thesis’s objectives will be presented.
Section 7 explores the need for continued research and motivation for further studies
to build upon our findings. Section 8 reflects on our work and experience during the
project. Lastly in Section 9, we conclude and summarize the key findings discovered
over the course of this thesis.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
4
==PAGE:14==
2
The Evolution of Cellular Networks
In the early 1980s, a technology was developed that fundamentally revolutionized com-
munication and data transmission through a wireless cellular network, which we better
know as the mobile network. Since then, the evolution of cellular networks has under-
gone significant advancements and changes from one generation to the next to provide
a more scalable, secure, and reliable infrastructure as we are heading closer to a fully
wirelessly connected society.
This chapter offers an overview of the foundational background and infrastructure, as
well as the security threats and vulnerabilities associated with each generation. It pro-
vides an insight into the characteristics alongside the challenges of the different gener-
ations. A detailed exploration of the advanced features in 5th generation network will
also be examined to identify and understand some of the security measures offered by
the newest generation.
2.1
1G: The start of cellular network
In the 1980s, the first generation of telecommunication, now commonly known as 1G,
was introduced [72]. At that time, it was only capable of low-quality voice communica-
tion. However, it marked the beginning of a new era of mobile communication.
It had several network standards [8] including the Nordic Mobile Telephone (NMT)
in 1981, Advanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS) in 1982, and subsequently Total Ac-
cess Communication System (TACS) in 1985. The most notable among the system stan-
dards was AMPS, which utilized the technique called Frequency Division Multiple Ac-
cess (FDMA) that allowed multiple users to share the same communication resource
simultaneously. Figure 2.1 illustrates a common architecture of a 1G network based on
AMPS.
AMPS operated across two frequency bands both being 25MHz wide. One channel was
responsible for sending (824 MHz to 849 MHz) while the other channel was allocated for
receiving (869 MHz to 894 MHz), a configuration now commonly referred to as uplink
and downlink.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
5
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Architecture of AMPS - Redrawn based on [41]
Being the first generation of cellular networks, it unsurprisingly came with many un-
expected challenges and situations during its time. Issues concerning security, privacy,
performance, and scalability were not a priority and were not considered. 1G did not
have any kind of encryption support, delivered poor voice transmission, and utilized
the frequency spectrum ineﬀiciently due to the analog nature [36].
2.2
2G: Digitizing the network
The second generation of cellular networks (2G) improved on the previous generation
by digitizing the transmission technology in the 1990s. It was the first to introduce data
services over the wireless network. 2G provided reliable and improved voice transmis-
sions, as well as support for new services such as Short Message Service (SMS) and
Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS).
2G operates on digital communication which allows for the eﬀicient utilization of the
spectrum and also prevents frequency interference. The adoption of digital methods
also brought about the introduction of new multiplexing systems, such as Time Division
Multiple Access (TDMA) and Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA). These systems
expand the amount of simultaneously connected users on a shared medium. The most
widely used cellular standard for 2G was Global Systems for Mobile Communications
(GSM), which comprises 3 major functional subsystems, illustrated in figure 2.2:
• Mobile Station: Mobile Equipment (ME) that is able to communicate over the
cellular network. Additionally, contains a small chip, the Subscriber Identification
Module (SIM), that allows for identification, authentication, and security for the
subscriber.
• Base Station Subsystem: Consists of a Base Transceiver Station (BTS) that is re-
sponsible for receiving signals from Mobile Station (MS) and transmitting them
to the Base Station Controller (BSC), which handles and allocates radio channels
for each mobile station.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
6
==PAGE:16==
• Network Switching Subsystem (NSS): The NSS involves multiple functional parts.
The Mobile Service Switching Center (MSC) is the central part that serves and
manages the mobile services. It is responsible for maintaining registration, authen-
tication, identification, and more through different databases. These databases are
as follows: the Visitor Location Register (VLR), containing temporary information
about the subscriber, the Authentication Center (AuC) used for verifying secret
keys based on given SIM information for authentication, the Equipment Identity
Register (EIR) responsible for identifying banned or monitored ME’s, and the
Home Location Register (HLR) which stores permanent information about the
subscriber on a central database [81].
Figure 2.2: 2G GSM Architecture - Redrawn based on [37]
2G GSM was essentially the first mobile network to introduce structured architecture
that established the foundation for modern mobile networks, with the use of a physical
SIM card for subscriber identification, authentication, and generation of security keys.
Security in GSM
The GSM standard also addresses the security features and mechanisms that the pre-
vious generation lacked. ME’s are now required to pass an authentication procedure
to connect to the GSM network. The security operations involve three main algorithms
called A3, A5, and A8. The A3 is used in conjunction with A8 which works as a hash-
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
7
==PAGE:17==
ing function for authentication and generation of cipher keys, which are located in the
SIM card and the GSM AuC. The A5 algorithm is stored on the hardware of the device
which the BTS decrypts and encrypts the OTA communication links to ensure privacy
and confidentiality. GSM encryption is based on different 64-bit sized ciphering algo-
rithms [12, 5, 54]:
• A5/0: No encryption at all.
• A5/1: Strongest encryption at the time.
• A5/2: Weaker encryption due to export control regulations.
• A5/3: Much stronger encryption, created by 3GPP and was introduced much later,
also known as KASUMI algorithm.
The ’strong’ A5/1 was the original algorithm used in the US and Europe, however, other
countries made use of the much weaker A5/2, which could be decrypted on low-end
equipment [68].
Additionally, the GSM network provides a new one-way authentication process to val-
idate the UE and initiate a connection to the network. The authentication process is
based on a shared secret key Ki, which is stored on the UE’ SIM and the GSM home
network AuC. It is important to note that this secret is not communicated over the air
and will only work as an internal function to generate the necessary values during the
establishment of the connection.
During the initial authentication handshake seen in figure 2.3, the mobile device first
provides its International mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) to the transceiver station in
plaintext, the transceiver station then forwards the IMSI to the home network. The AuC
then validates the subscriber. The AuC generates a Session Key Kc by utilizing the A8
algorithm using the shared secret key Ki and a random number Kc = A8(Rand, Ki),
as well as an authentication challenge using the A3 algorithm SRES = A3(Rand, Ki).
The home network sends the Session key, the authentication challenge, and the associ-
ated response to the MSC which it stores. In step 4 the MSC requests an authentication
using the random number provided by the home network. Afterwards, the UE’s SIM
generates the response by using the A3 and Ki and sends it back to the MSC. In step 6
the MSC compares the response from the UE and the response from the home network.
If the values are identical, the authentication is then established and encryption can be
done with the use of the session key Kc, which the MSC knows and which the UE can
generate based on the A8 algorithm Kc = A8(Rand, Ki) [65, 15, 74].
Notice the assigned TMSI to the UE in step 7. This value is the Temporary Mobile Sub-
scriber Identity (TMSI) which is sent to the UE, temporarily replacing the IMSI to avoid
unnecessarily sending the IMSI over plaintext in later messages. This is to ensure some
protection for the IMSI, however, it does not completely prevent the security flaw of
the transmission of the IMSI in plaintext. The issue of transmitting IMSI without en-
cryption is a security concern that can lead to multiple potential network attacks. A
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
8
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: Initial GSM authentication procedure
study by Threat Lab[78] showed, that with the use of an IMSI-catcher1 the user’s loca-
tion could be pinpointed with exact GPS coordinates. This is also possible even with
the TMSI, however, given the permanent nature of IMSI, an adversary could potentially
identify and follow high-profile individuals.
The second generation incorporates numerous additional security measures and protec-
tion compared to its predecessor. Nevertheless, this does not imply it is entirely secure.
As an example, in a study conducted by Barkan et al., a significant security vulnerability
in all the A5 encryption algorithms was revealed, allowing for the decryption of cipher-
text in a matter of milliseconds [14]. Furthermore, due to the one-way authentication,
which only authenticates the subscriber, a malicious rogue base station has the potential
to act as a Man-In- The-Middle (MITM) between the ME and the legitimate tower. This
can result in the unauthorized access to the ME’s IMSI and interception of communica-
tions from any connected devices [48].
These issues are some of the major concerns regarding cellular security, due to 2G still
being fully operational in 2023, with almost 1 billion devices still connected to the legacy
network (2G/3G) [32]. Moreover, discussions of retiring 3G and still keeping the inse-
cure, but widely supported, 2G infrastructure is considered and is even carried out in
some countries. The reason being that 4G replaces 3G for better security and network
while important legacy systems such as emergency services, and other telemetry ser-
vices can remain connected with 2G [29, 73].
1acts as a malicious base station. This will be explained further in Section 3.1.1
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
9
==PAGE:19==
2.3
3G: The Rise of Mobile Data
The third generation (3G) of cellular networks, developed by the International Telecom-
munication Union (ITU), was released at the start of 2000 [36]. 3G was the generation
that extended the use case of mobile telecommunication from only allowing low data-
rate voice communication and short messages, to include mobile data that can access the
internet. It became the generation that provided a new way of life that later on became
one of the most essential parts of our society today. ITU also defined and illustrated (see
appendix A.1 ) the transmission/data rate that would be capable of up to 2 Mbps in of-
fices and homes or at 144kbps in less accessible places. The 3G network migrated from
GSM to Universal Mobile Telecommunications Systems (UMTS) developed by 3GGP.
UMTS consists of two main systems which are also illustrated in figure 2.4:
Figure 2.4: Arcitecture of 3G UMTS - Redrawn based on [42]
• Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (UTRAN): Consists of a station transceiver
called the NodeB which works similarly to the previous GSM BTS and is respon-
sible for communication between the mobile station and the Radio Network Con-
troller (RNC). The RNC’s main functions are to manage radio resources, allocate
channels, and voice management. Additionally, the RNC is also responsible for
a recent extension, namely data packet handling to provide internet communica-
tion.
• Core Network (CN): The core network is an extension to the existing 2G GSM
network that includes a Mobile Switching Center, which is the main element that
processes and serves the UEs. The CN consists of multiple components:
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
10
==PAGE:20==
– The MSC checks the UE’s information, details, and records and tracks the
network. The MSC is also connected to the HLR or the VLR database which
contains temporary details of the subscriber to authenticate the UE.
– The Gateway MSC (GMSC) acts as the interface between the MSC and the
Public Telecommunication Switching Network (PTSN). It is responsible for
the connection between the mobile network and external Telecommunication,
and for routing outgoing and incoming calls to the appropriate UE.
– Serving GPRS (General Packet Radio Service) Support Node (SGSN) has the
role of managing and controlling the connection sessions of the UE within the
network. It provides secure and controlled packet transmission with authen-
tication and quality of Service (QoS). SGSN is also responsible for activating
the Packet Data Protocol (PDP) to associate the UE with the connected SGSN
and the GGSN.
– Gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN) is the node responsible for the com-
munication between the UE and the external network. The GGSN serves
users by checking if the user’s PDP is active and then assigns the IP address
to the connected subscriber.
– Home Location Register (HLR) is similar to the 2G HLR which holds the
profile of the subscriber with essential information, details, identity, and lo-
cation. The HLR serves as the central authentication database in the Core
Network, which all components utilize to authenticate every UE.
Security in UMTS
The third generation provides greater security and privacy protection, ensuring a more
resilient network. This includes a more powerful Universal Subscriber Identity Module
(USIM) within the MS, which offers better encryption and authentication methods. The
USIM makes use of a new 128-bit cipher encryption protocol named KASUMI to replace
GSM’s weak and faulty A5/1 encryption [14], which later replaced GSM’s encryption
method and is referred to as A5/3 [61].
Another significant security improvement is the implementation of mutual authentica-
tion between the UE and the network before establishing a connection. This new authen-
tication method allows the user to verify the legitimacy of the network and prevent the
prevalent issue of malicious rogue towers. While the UMTS authentication procedure
shares many similarities with the previous generation, it introduces new elements that
establish confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity over the air between the UE and the
network.
As seen in figure 2.5 one of the differences is that the UE sends its security capabilities
(1. step), in order to agree on a security algorithm, that includes integrity and confiden-
tiality protection which is agreed upon in step 11. UMTS also introduces a component
called authentication vectors in step 4. The authentication vector includes the following
[28]:
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
11
==PAGE:21==
• RAND: Random challenge to be solved.
• CK: Cipher key to ensure the confidential property of the data being sent OTA.
• IK: The integrity key provides the integrity property, which the receiver can use
to verify if the information has been tampered with or modified. One of the core
integrity algorithms used in UMTS is the SNOW algorithm [31].
• AUTN: The authentication token holds an important role in the mutual authentica-
tion and the generation of IK and CK. The AUTN contains a sequence number, an
Authentication management field, and the Message authentication code (MAC).
• XRES: The challenge-response of the given RAND.
The mutual authentication is performed in step 7. The UE’s USIM calculates an inter-
nal/expected MAC by using the RAND, its secret key, as well as the elements inside
the AUTN, including the sequence number and Authentication management field. The
USIM then compares the expected MAC with the MAC supplied in the AUTN. If they
are the same then the UE can trust the network and the USIM generates the IK, CK, and
XRES. The XRES response is then sent to the SGSN, which then verifies the authentic-
ity in step 9. This process establishes mutual authentication as well as confidentiality
agreement and integrity control [74, 13, 69]. It is important to note that this is the ini-
tial attach request to the network and the IMSI will therefore still be sent in plaintext.
However, after the authentication, the TMSI will be used instead.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
12
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.5: Mutual Authentication procedure in 3G UMTS
3G UMTS addresses some of the major problems compared to GSM. The improvements
include preventing MITM attacks by using mutual authentication, utilizing sequence
numbers to avoid replay attacks, and integrity keys to mitigate data tampering [56].
However, the 3G network still has shortcomings and drawbacks, which we will elaborate
on in Section 4. Among the more common weaknesses is the risk of Identity-catching by
impersonating the UMTS network. While the UMTS network has made more efforts to
address impersonation compared to GSM, it remains susceptible to IMSI catching and
location tracking [44]. Another potential threat is Denial of Service (DoS) by exploiting
signallings in UMTS causing system instability [46].
2.4
4G/LTE: High-Speed Wireless Connectivity
Around 2010, the fourth-generation (4G) mobile network emerged, creating numerous
new opportunities and prioritizing enhancing the user experience in cellular data ser-
vices. The 4G network is commonly known as Long Term Evolution (LTE), which refers
to the evolution of the previous network technology UMTS, as LTE still incorporated
most of the existing UMTS standards with additional elements and modifications. The
objective of 4G LTE was to address the huge user demand for mobile data, increase per-
formance, and decrease latency. This opened up new opportunities, shifting towards a
more interconnected society with high-end smartphones, smart homes, wearable gad-
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
13
==PAGE:23==
gets, IoT devices, and autonomous vehicles.
In contrast to the 3G UMTS, LTE transitions telecommunication from circuit switching
to exclusively IP-based technology. This shift means that instead of handling circuit
and packet transmissions, LTE will only facilitate packet management, resulting in a
cost-effective network setup and enhanced data transfers, while maintaining the same
services using Voice over LTE (VoLTE). VoLTE is a digital packet technology that moves
from voice communication using circuit-switching to IP-based technology, offering sev-
eral benefits, including improved voice quality, fast call setup & handover, better battery
life and more [4]. 4G leverages a significantly more sophisticated and eﬀicient form of
multiplexing technology known as Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Accesses
(OFDMA). This technology enables a higher number of subscribers to share the same
frequency link and eﬀiciently makes use of the frequency spectrum compared to the pre-
vious generation CDMA. In combination with LTE’s flexible spectrum allocation, which
supports bandwidths of 1.4-, 3-, 5-, or even up to 20MHz, this enables data speeds rang-
ing from 100Mbps to 1Gbps. The flexible spectrum allocation in LTE also allows for
controlling the network flow, by allowing adjustments in the frequency based on traﬀic
volume. This feature allows for the network to allocate a bandwidth of 1.4MHz during
high network congestion and 20MHz on less active hours [27].
The architecture of 4G LTE builds upon the existing UMTS infrastructure with modifi-
cations to the subsystems. These systems have been altered and rebranded to Evolved
UTRAN (E- UTRAN) and Enhanced Packet Core (EPC). The EPC is composed of sev-
eral components responsible for the overall functionality and control of communication
which is depicted in figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Architecture of 4G LTE network
• MME - The Mobility Management Entity (MME) is the management node, that
processes the signal from the UE and authenticates by verifying the subscriber’s
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
14
==PAGE:24==
information with the HSS database. When verified the MME allows the UE to
access the network.
• HSS - The Home Subscriber Server is the central database for the subscriber’s de-
tails. It provides relevant data such as the identification of the subscriber, location
state, service profile and authentication information.
• S-GW - The Serving Gateway is the anchor node that handles the communication
between the E-UTRAN and the EPC. It is responsible for controlling and process-
ing the incoming and outgoing packets to the right signal routes back to the E-
NodeB.
• P-GW - The node that serves the connection between UE and external IP is the
network Packet Data Network Gateway (P-GW). The P-GW allocates the UE with
an assigned IP address and enforces rules and policies to ensure security within
the network.
• PCRF - The Policy and Charging Rules Function is the server that oversees the flow
of the network, enforcing rules and policy control and subsequently manages the
quality of service.
Security in LTE
The security in LTE is based on the previous 3G UMTS infrastructure but differs in some
mechanisms and security protocols. A notable feature is the use of the Evolved Packet
System Authentication Key Agreement (EPS-AKA), the successor of the 3G AKA. This
includes stronger cryptographic algorithms with Advanced Encryption Standard (AES-
128) cipher keys for encryption. A new integrity algorithm is also introduced in LTE
utilizing the 128-bit ZUC (Zu Chongzhi) algorithm for stream ciphering. This algorithm
offers greater robustness and resistance against cyber- attacks compared to the previous
generations; SNOW algorithm [76, 60].
Another notable difference is the procedure of authentication in LTE seen in figure 2.7.
Here the UE sends an attach request to the MME with the IMSI and its security capabili-
ties. However, when the MME forwards the request to the HSS, it includes the informa-
tion of the base station (SN ID), which then the HSS uses to generate the KASME key
for the corresponding UE. This ensures an extra layer of security since the key will only
be used on that E-nodeB connection. This method also means that the UE has to make
new keys for every different base station. This approach enhances protection against
potential threats and ensures that keys are unique to each connection.
The LTE also introduces two new functionality procedures after the initial authentica-
tion, which are the Non-Access Stratum (NAS) and the Access Stratum (AS). They func-
tion as an extra layer in the network stack to handle different communication functions.
The NAS procedure ensures a high-level network function, including session manage-
ment and security procedures. This is first done after the authentication procedure
where the MME initiates a security mode command. The UE will then check the NAS-
MAC of the command message given from the MME and validate if it is identical to
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
15
==PAGE:25==
the derived MAC, similar to the authentication procedure. Upon successful verification,
the UE derives the integrity key, KNASint, and encryption key, KNASenc. This guaran-
tees that the security command remains unaltered and the subsequent communication
between the UE and core network will now transmit encrypted and integrity-protected
messages [62].
The AS procedure is another layer that has the responsibility for handling the radio
interface between the UE and the base station. This includes connection management to
the network, mobility management such as cell selection and handover processes, radio
resource management, and security control. The AS procedure happens after the NAS
procedure has been completed, which the MME then issues another pair of KASME keys
in order for the UE to authenticate and generate the corresponding keys for integrity and
encryption on the radio interface ensuring security between the UE and the E-NodeB.
Figure 2.7: Authentication procedure of 4G LTE
4G LTE mainly focuses on improving the user experience for the user by increasing the
data transfer speed and reducing the latency as well as developing an infrastructure
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
16
==PAGE:26==
that is much more scalable and can hold even more concurrent users over the same
channel. However, LTE also improves upon the security aspect of the network by uti-
lizing different key structures compared to GSM and UMTS [23, 72]. LTE applies 3 sets
of cryptographic 128-bit key algorithms for both ensuring integrity and confidentiality,
which is a significant security improvement.
However, 4G is still susceptible to exploitation and security attacks. Since the 4G LTE
network has established itself as an entirely IP-based network, it is vulnerable to the
same network threats and malicious attacks we see in computer devices, servers, and
other services that utilize IP addresses. This can also include device-to-device attacks
[11], botnet, malware attacks, and DoS attacks [50]. Additionally, the cellular network
is still prone to downgrade attacks allowing rogue base stations to be installed and po-
tentially connect with a 2G GSM network, which has significant security vulnerabilities
[47].
2.5
5G: The Era of Ultra-Fast Networks
The 5G network is the latest generation of mobile network which began its large-scale
deployment in 2019 [33] . It introduces new capabilities and a flexible way for device
interaction through the 5G New Radio (NR).
While 4G was primarily designed for the huge demand for mobile phone network traﬀic,
5G was planned to support diverse devices. These include smart home devices, smart
gadgets, Autonomous vehicles, and Virtual Reality devices, thus creating a more versa-
tile network environment. It is a network that brings new opportunities such as utilizing
ultra-high-speed mm-Wave frequencies, slicing the network depending on specific user
demands, eﬀiciently directing the frequency to the UE using beamforming with massive
MIMO, and moving the traditional cell-centric-based network to a more user-centric net-
work.
5G currently comes in two different forms when implementing the infrastructure of 5G.
These are 5G NSA (Non-standalone) and 5G SA(Standalone). The way these implemen-
tations differ from each other is that, as the names suggest, 5G NSA cannot stand on its
own and uses the existing 4G LTE infrastructure for the core network while supplement-
ing it with 5G infrastructure such as 5G New Radio (NR) base stations. Whereas 5G SA
is true 5G, possessing its dedicated infrastructure. This includes newer technologies
that make the new features of 5G possible.
That is not to say that 5G NSA does not have its merits. It is easier and more cost-effective
to deploy while also making it easier to transition to 5G SA later down the line since part
of the necessary infrastructure has already been built. 5G NSA also carries less risk to
implement due to the previously mentioned points, while also allowing the operators to
gain experience with the implementation of the different parts of the 5G infrastructure.
These benefits are a good reason for operators to start with implementing 5G NSA and
then gradually upgrade it to 5G SA. [17, 70, 34]
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
17
==PAGE:27==
(a) 5G NSA architecture
(b) 5G SA architecture
Figure 2.8: Simplified architecture of 5G Non-Standalone and 5G Standalone. Redrawn
based on [19]
The architecture shown in figure 2.8a, illustrates a typical 5G NSA model. 5G NSA uti-
lizes the existing 4G infrastructure as the core network and instead deploys 5G gNB
(Next Generation Node B) tower stations as the serving cell. The deployment of gNB di-
rects the data over the user plane interface to the 4G EPC, while the control plane, which
handles and maintains the communications, is handled by the E-NodeB. This allows ca-
pabilities such as higher frequencies, improved data rates, lower latency, and new tech-
nologies including MIMO and beamforming with minimal modification required on the
current 4G network. This aspect makes 5G NSA very appealing for telecommunication
providers to deploy, as it also gradually transitions towards a 5G SA network.
5G SA on the other hand, substitutes the EPC network with the 5G Next-Generation core
(NG Core) network shown in 2.8b. This new NG Core network consists of decomposed
components derived from the 4G EPC, along with additional advanced elements.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
18
==PAGE:28==
• AMF (Access and Mobility Management Function): Manages user access and mo-
bility, responsible for registration, connection, and mobility management. The
AMF is the main component that retrieves the user information and forwards it to
the services in the core network, which corresponds to the MME in LTE EPC.
• PCF (Policy Control Function): Provides policy rules for control plane network
functions. It is responsible for QoS, usage monitoring, network slicing manage-
ment, and charging rules. Similar to PCFR in EPC.
• UDM (Unified Data Management): Manages subscriber identities, authentication
credentials, and subscription data. Equivalent to the HSS in previous generations.
• SMF (Session Management Function): Manages session establishment, modifica-
tion, and release. The SMF is also responsible for allocating IP addresses to sub-
scribers.
• NEF (Network Exposure Function): The NEF is a new component that acts as an
API gateway for services to interact with. It is responsible for offering a controlled
and secure interface to provide network services to external entities for third-party
application access.
• AF (Application Function): Provides the network applications and influences the
routing traﬀic, meaning that it handles data rates, latency, or bandwidth depend-
ing on the application as well as policy control to ensure a certain QoS.
• UPF (User Plane Function): The UPF is the only core network component that han-
dles the user plane data. It is responsible for routing and forwarding the received
packet to the IP network, handling QoS, and inspection of packets.
• AUSF (Authentication Server Function): Handles authentication and security. The
AUSF is responsible for the authentication of users and generating security keys
for secure communications.
• NSSF (Network Slice Selection Function): The NSSF is another component intro-
duced in 5G and is responsible for managing and storing information about net-
work slice instances (Network slices are essentially virtual networks and will be
covered later in the section).
Ultimately, the decomposed core network structure compared to 4G’s relatively central-
ized infrastructure is caused by 5G’s adoption of a service-based architecture. This
means that components are more modular and independent, making scaling and de-
ployment of services much more flexible. Additionally, the shift towards a service-based
architecture allows for better control of user demand while also effectively operating vir-
tual networks using network slicing and differentiating between use cases (this will be
explained further in Section 2.7).
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
19
==PAGE:29==
Security in 5G NR
5G NR includes a multitude of new advanced features offering increasing data rates,
minimal latency, better user experience, and most importantly, significantly enhanced
network security. NR utilizes a 256-bit AES encryption key, providing a more robust
level of security compared to the 128-bit AES encryption used in LTE. Additionally, a
fundamental difference lies in the authentication method known as 5G-AKA.
The authentication method is carried out with different services compared to other gen-
erations for separation of roles to allow flexibility. In addition, 5G NR also employs two
new temporary identifiers for authentication, known as subscription concealed identi-
fier (SUCI) and Globally Unique Temporary Identity (5G- GUTI), similar to TMSI. The
SUCI is the identifier of the UE, which is an encrypted form of the Subscription Perma-
nent Identifier (SUPI), equivalent to IMSI, by using the public key of the home network.
Thus, making the initial request to the network more secure by concealing the user’s
identity, which addresses the persistent security issue that has affected all former gen-
erations.
The authentication procedure initially starts with a registration request from the UE to
the serving network, Security Anchor Function (SEAF), which is shown in figure 2.9.
The SEAF is another element whose primary role is to maintain a security context be-
tween the UE and the network, meaning that it is responsible for the authentication and
generation of session keys for encryption and integrity. Note that the SUCI is handed
over on the registration request and thus does not send the identifier in plaintext. The
SEAF confirms the request by sending an authentication request to AUSF with the Serv-
ing Network ID (SN ID). The AUSF then identifies the SN ID to verify its legitimacy and
afterward forwards the request to the UDM.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
20
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.9: 5G NR Authentication procedure
Upon receiving the authentication request, the UDM authenticates the UE by decrypting
the SUCI to get the SUPI. Hereafter, the UDM checks which authentication protocol it
should use, which can be either 5G- AKA, EAP-AKA, or EAP-TLS, depending on the sub-
scription information (for this illustration the UDM selects 5G- AKA). The UDM also
generates the authentication vector consisting of the token AUTH, anchor keys KAUSF
(equivalent to KASME used in LTE) and an expected response token XRES. An authenti-
cation response is sent back to the AUSF with the generated authentication vector, along
with the SUPI if no 5G-GUTI was supplied in the authentication request.
The AUSF computes the hash on the expected response (HXRES) to ensure the integrity
of the data. After generating the HXRES, the AUSF sends the AUTH and HXRES to the
SEAF. The SEAF stores the HXRES and forwards the AUTH token to the UE. After re-
ceiving the AUTH token, the UE verifies the token by using its secret key and generates
a response token (RES) upon verification. The UE replies to the SEAF as an authentica-
tion response with the RES included, whereafter the SEAF compares the RES with the
XRES. If they match, the RES is sent over to the AUSF. The AUSF is ultimately the one
that decides whether the authentication is legitimate by verifying the RES. After authen-
tication, the AUSF uses the anchor key KAUSF to generate a session key KSEAF for the
SEAF to use for generating encryption and integrity keys. The session key is then sent
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
21
==PAGE:31==
to the SEAF along with the SUPI for the AMF to later generate a temporary 5G-GUTI to
the UE. Note that the SUPI have only been transmitted after a complete authentication.
Finally, The AUSF also notifies the UDM about the authentication events to which the
UDM logs [1, 20].
All in all, 5G-AKA has adopted and further developed the EAP-AKA which has led to
UE’s now encrypting their SUPI before transmitting over the air to ensure privacy for
the user. The network is also checked by different authentication processes to later be
confirmed by the central authentication service AUSF and make the final decision as well
as logging activities and identify abnormal events. This is a major security improvement
in the mobile network environment.
5G offers a lot of new and innovative changes that significantly change the way of in-
teracting with the network. We will delve deeper into 5G’s ingenious technologies and
advancements, in the upcoming section to give an understanding of how these features
impact the mobile network and the user.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
22
==PAGE:32==
2.6
Mobile Network Specification
As the mobile network has progressed, each generation from 1G through the latest 5G, has introduced new sys-
tems, protocols and methods. Each new generation yields significant improvement in both performance and
security. The following tables present a comparative overview of the infrastructural and security specifications
for each generation. Table 2.1 outlines the infrastructural evolution, showing the advancements such as data rate,
latency and the new characteristics that define each generation. Table 2.2 showcases the security aspect, high-
lighting the advancements in authentication technique, encryption method, key length, and integrity control.
2.6.1
Infrastructure Specification
1G
2G
3G
4G
5G
Year
≈1980
≈1990
≈2000
≈2010
≈2020
Standard Protocol
AMPS
GSM
UMTS
LTE
NR
Bandwidth
30KHz
25 MHz
25 MHz
100 MHz
500MHz - 2GHz
Data Rate
2.4kbps
10 kbps
384kbps - 5Mbps
100Mbps
-
200Mbps
10Gbps - 50Gbps
User Latency
>1000ms
300–1000ms
100–500ms
40-50ms
≤1ms
Transmission
Method
Circuit Switching
Circuit Switching
Circuit
Switch-
ing
and
Packet
Switching
Packet Switching
Packet Switching
Characteristics
Analog Voice
Digital Voice, SMS,
MMS
Multimedia
Fea-
tures, Video Calls
High
Data
Rate,
HD Streaming
Ultra HD features,
Virtual
Reality,
High
Precision
Applications
Multiplexing Tech-
nique
FDMA
TDMA, CDMA
CDMA-2000,
WCDMA
OFDM
OFDM
Table 2.1: Network specification from 1G to 5G. Data based on [64, 49, 52, 16, 26]
2.6.2
Security Technology Specification
1G
2G
3G
4G
5G
Authentication
technique
-
Shared-secret cryp-
tography
Mutual Authentica-
tion
EPS-AKA
5G-AKA,
EAP-
AKA & EAP-TLS
Encryption
method
-
A5/1
&
A5/2
stream ciphers
KASUMI
AES
AES
Encryption
Key
length
-
64-bit
128-bit
128-bit (192-256)
256-bit
Integrity control
-
-
Yes
Yes
Yes
Integrity
Algo-
rithm
-
-
SNOW
ZUC
128-NIA1,
128-
NIA2, 128-NIA3
Table 2.2: Security technology and encryption protocols for 1G to 5G. Data based on [71, 77, 72]
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
23
==PAGE:33==
2.7
5G’s New Technologies
5G introduces seveNl advanced technologies and components, which enhance user ex-
perience and performance, while also placing a strong emphasis on security within the
mobile network. This section examines the technologies, providing an insight into the
modern network we are transitioning into.
2.7.1
Massive MIMO and Beamforming
Massive MIMO (multiple input multiple output) is a technology in which a base station
is equipped with a large number of antenna elements. Each of the antennae can handle
communications with one UE, also sometimes referred to as a terminal. One of the
benefits that comes from this is that each of the terminals can be provided with the full
bandwidth [39].
Massive MIMO makes use of several other technologies to provide some benefits that
are very relevant for 5G infrastructure, some of which are improved spectral eﬀiciency,
better coverage at the edge of the cells, improved capacity, and better latency.[39]
One of the important technologies is SDM (spatial division multiplexing) which im-
proves spectral eﬀiciency and capacity. The improvement in spectral eﬀiciency is be-
cause UE connected to the same base station can make use of the same time-frequency
resources, meaning they use the same frequency at the same time, thereby increasing
the amount of data that can be sent using the same resources[39].
Furthermore, massive MIMO can have vastly improved radiated energy eﬀiciency due
to the large number of antennas they deploy, because the signals that they send out will
add constructively to each other at the intended recipient’s location and destructively to
each other elsewhere. When this is supplemented with beam forming it can also reduce
the latency to a minimum by avoiding fading dips, that would otherwise occur when
the signal comes from multiple different directions and then destructively interferes
with each other. This is because beam forming is used to focus a signal to the intended
terminal location, by having the signals from the antennae array interfere constructively
in the path to the intended terminal while cancelling out beams of interfering signals.
For this to work the network needs to obtain the Channel State Information (CSI) for
the connection between the UE that is being communicated with and the BS.
This CSI can be obtained by either using a measured estimate or using an assumed esti-
mate. Massive MIMO makes use of the measured estimate due to it being more scalable
since it allows base stations with any number of antennas to be usefully employed with-
out having to tighten array tolerance. Since the system uses measured channel estimates,
the CSI is obtained using pilot messages that consist of known training data. These pi-
lot messages can be sent by either the BS or the UE and the receiver can then use the
received message to estimate the channel and thereby obtain the current CSI. However,
the CSI needs to be obtained multiple times during a connection because the movement
of the user changes the CSI. This also means that there are limits to how much time the
training can take and how long the CSI is good for. Because of this, both the training
and the actual data transmission itself are placed in a slot with a duration wherein none
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
24
==PAGE:34==
of the participants have moved more than a fraction of the wavelength of the used fre-
quency. The duration of the slot dictates how fast the UE can move, with smaller slots
allowing more mobility with the disadvantage of lowering the transmission rate of the
actual data due to using more time on training. Two different approaches can be taken
by Massive MIMO systems for channel estimation, one using Time-Division Duplexing
(TDD) and the other using Frequency-Division Duplexing (FDD)[39, 55, 6].
2.7.2
Network Slicing
Network slicing is a principle in which a physical network is divided into multiple iso-
lated logical networks. These logical networks are divided/sliced based on different
principles depending on how it is implemented. An example of this would be to slice
the network on a per-service basis, such that each service has its own logical network
with the properties that are important for that service[35]. One of the reasons for want-
ing to have separate logical networks for the different services is that certain properties
of the network are of higher importance to some types of services than they are for oth-
ers. Furthermore, these network slices are end-to-end slices that are isolated from other
slices. The slices can potentially be opened up such that a third party can fully control
and reconfigure them[35]. The logical networks are made possible by virtualizing the
Figure 2.10: Diagram showcasing the importance of the properties of the network for
different types of services. The closer to the edge the shape is, the more important the
nearby property is. This diagram is inspired by a similar diagram in [35]
underlying infrastructure and this can be set up to run automatically, such that slices
can be created and torn down as needed. This is done by having a customer, who wants
and or needs the specific network slice, provide a Service Level Agreement (SLA) to the
Communications Service Provider (CSP). The SLA includes all the requirements for the
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
25
==PAGE:35==
network slice, which could be in regards to latency, reliability, needed mobility, etc. The
SLA is then used by a service orchestrator to set up the network slice according to its spec-
ifications using the controllers for the different parts of the network infrastructure[79].
Figure 2.11: Diagram showing hypothetical slices in a 5G network.
This diagram is inspired by a similar diagram in [79]
Network slicing architecture can be generalized to having three different layers and a
MANO (Management and Orchestration), the different layers are the Infrastructure
layer, network layer, and service layer. The infrastructure layer is generally the phys-
ical infrastructure as well as the management of its resources and it also controls how
these are exposed to other layers. In regards to the infrastructure, there is a consensus
on using generic hardware such that it is easier to implement the virtual network func-
tions.
Network layer
The network layer encapsulates the life cycle management, configuration, and related
operation of the network functions that conform to meet the constraints and require-
ments that are described in the service design / SLA of the specific network slice. Vir-
tual network functions are an important part of the network layer and there are some
considerations to be made in the design of these virtual network functions. One such
consideration is how coarse or fine-grained the function should be, regarding how much
functionality there should be in one function. The reason why, is that there are posi-
tives and negatives to both the coarse-grained approach, where each function contains
a large amount of the network functionality/operations, as well as the fine-grained ap-
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
26
==PAGE:36==
proach, where the network functionality/operations are more spread out among the
functions[35].
With the coarse-grain approach, it is simpler and easier to deploy and manage the dif-
ferent network functions for a slice. However, it also makes it less flexible and thereby
harder to adapt to changes in conditions in the underlying network. This can make it
harder to fulfill the conditions and requirements set for the slice in the SLA. With the
fine-grained approach, we have more flexibility since we have smaller functions and
therefore have an easier time replacing them with other network functions if the under-
lying network conditions change and thereby necessitate the change.
However, this comes with a catch. The catch is that we now have more network functions
and therefore need more interfaces to have them working together. This is problematic,
especially in the scenario where a third party is making some virtual network functions
available. The reason for this being a particular issue is that if there are no common inter-
faces, one cannot know whether these network functions will be able to operate together
with other functions. Though, there are some workarounds for this with one being the
use of containers to wrap the functions and then use them through the container[35].
Service layer
The service layer focuses on defining the requirements for how the slice should be de-
scribed, and how these requirements are mapped to the underlying network compo-
nents and the architecture of network slicing managers and orchestrators. In regards
to the way the requirements for the slice should be described, there are two general
approaches to it. The first approach is simply listing requirements for the traﬀic charac-
teristics and additional services that are needed in the service, which is also called the
manifest. The second approach involves describing the needs for the slice in more detail,
by listing the specific functions and Radio Access Technologies (RATs) that should be
used to create the slice.
The first approach makes the job of the orchestrator harder since it needs to identify all
the functions and technologies that the slice will need to fulfill the requirements given
in the service description. The second approach on the other hand gives a much more
detailed description of what should be used for the creation of the slice, which makes
it easier for the orchestrator to create the slice. However, this can be less eﬀicient since
the orchestrator is limited in how it can create the slice. For that, the service description
would need to be well made to get an eﬀicient slice[35].
Some technologies network slicing relies on, to be able to provide the services and ben-
efits that it promises are Software Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Function
Virtualization (NFV). These technologies are described in greater detail below, but they
are essential to the inner workings of network slicing.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
27
==PAGE:37==
2.7.3
Software defined networking
SDN is a technology that makes it easier to manage networks and allows them to be
programmable. This is achieved by decoupling the forwarding plane and control plane,
as well as making the control plane centralized in an SDN controller [2]. SDN archi-
tectures can generally be divided into three layers: The network application layer, the
control plane layer, and the data plane layer.
The network application layer is where the network applications that manage and mod-
ify the network are running/located. The network applications monitor and manage
the network through the interface of the control plane / SDN controller. Through the
interface, the network applications can access the state of the underlying network, as
well as control the behavior of the network using rules and policies that are set in the
different network applications[2].
The control plane is where the SDN controller is located. The SDN controller is the
link between the network application layer and the data plane layer. It has interfaces
on both sides that enable it to communicate with the data plane layer and the network
application layer. The data plane layer is comprised of the forwarding switches of the
network. These switches can be physical switches that are hardware based or it can be
virtual switches that are software based. No matter which kind of switch is used, its
role is to perform actions on the packets it receives based on specified rules[2].
These rules are stored in a table called the flow table. If the data plane does not have
a rule that applies to the packet it has received, it sends it to the SDN controller in the
control plane to ask what actions it should perform on the packet. If the network is
very large, multiple SDN controllers can be set up and distributed. This then requires
that they also have an interface where they can exchange information such that they can
effectively manage the network together[2].
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
28
==PAGE:38==
Figure 2.12: Diagram visualizing the SDN architectures
2.7.4
Network Functions Virtualization
NFV is a technology that among other things enables specialized network hardware to
be replaced with general-purpose computing hardware. The computing hardware runs
software that, through virtualization, provides the same services as the specialized hard-
ware that they replaced in the form of Virtual Network Functions (VNFs). NFV archi-
tecture can generally be divided into three parts: The NFV Infrastructure (NFVI), the
VNF layer, and the MANO. The NFVI is comprised of the physical hardware resources,
the virtualization layer, and the virtual resources. The Physical hardware is comprised
of computing hardware, storage hardware, and networking hardware. The computing
hardware is normally in the form of servers, while the storage hardware usually uses
common storage devices such as SSDs or HDDs in one of the following configurations:
Direct Attached Storage, Network Attached Storage, or Storage Area Network. The net-
working hardware consists of devices such as switches and Network Interface Cards
(NICs)[18].
The virtualization layer is responsible for the virtualization of the physical resources.
This is usually done through a hypervisor. It is also possible to use container technolo-
gies, such as Docker, to do the virtualization. However, there are clear upsides and
downsides with both approaches. The hypervisor has the benefit of better isolation than
containers, but containers have less overhead since they can use the host operating sys-
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
29
==PAGE:39==
tem, while the hypervisor needs to use guest operating systems. The virtual resources
are the virtualized resources that the VNF can make use of[18].
The MANO used for NFV architecture has many different implementations that all have
their upsides and downsides due to the focus that they each have. However, they are all
responsible for the same role, which is to manage the entire virtualized context in the
architecture for NFV. This includes the virtualization mechanisms, the orchestration of
hardware resources, the life cycle management of the VNF instances, and the manage-
ment of the interfaces of the different modules. The MANO is generally divided into
three distinct parts that collectively incorporate all the responsibilities of the MANO.
These parts are the VNF Manager (VNFM), the NFV Orchestrator (NFVO), and the
Virtualized Infrastructure Manager (VIM). As the name suggests, the VNFM is respon-
sible for managing the VNFs, and the NFVO is responsible for managing the NFVI and
its resources, as well as the life cycles of VNFs. It is also the NFVO that orchestrates and
chains VNFs together to provide network services when needed. The VIM manages and
controls the resources in the NFVI. The VIM can also be customized and specialized to
better handle specific resources in the NFVI such as network, compute, or storage. An
example of a VIM that has been specialized to handle network resources is a WAN in-
frastructure manager. The specifications do not specify the exact implementation of the
MANO but it is often implemented as one entity due to the overlapping nature of the
previously mentioned three parts[18].
The VNF layer consists of VNFs and the Element Management System (EMS), which
are further composed of VNF Components (VNFCs) and Element managers (EMs) re-
spectively. The EMS is just the set of EMs that are responsible for directly managing the
VNF instances in terms of their instantiation, execution, and deployment during their
life cycles. Each EM can be responsible for more than one VNF. VNFs can have just a
single VNFC, which is when the VNF is run on just a single VM (Virtual Machine), or
it can have multiple components. If it has more than one component, then each compo-
nent is in its own VM. They will then need to be able to communicate between the VMs
to provide the functionality of the VNF they are a part of. These VNFs make use of the
virtualized resources from the NFVI to provide their network functionality[18].
NFV promises some valuable benefits, such as having the hardware and software inde-
pendent of each other, which makes their further development not limited by each other.
There is an increase in flexibility when deploying network functions and their connec-
tions, this is due to the decoupling of software and hardware which enables you to have
one type of hardware that can be deployed with necessary network functions. Addition-
ally, if a deployed network function is no longer needed, the same hardware can be used
to deploy another network function. NFV also makes it easier for Telecommunication
Service Providers (TSPs) to scale their network, since they can use the same hardware to
deploy whatever network functions they need and thereby increase the performance of
VNFs as the need arises. TSPs can also reduce their Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) and
Operational Expenditure (OPEX) through the use of NFV. The CAPEX is reduced since
there is no longer a need for specialized hardware for the different network functions.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
30
==PAGE:40==
Figure 2.13: Diagram showing the general NFV Architecture.
This diagram is inspired by a similar diagram in [18]
This enables the TSPs to use cheaper general-purpose computing hardware thereby low-
ering their CAPEX. The OPEX is reduced due to the dynamic scalability that NFV pro-
vides. This scalability is both for upscaling and downscaling, enabling a reduction in
power consumption by up to 10% of their current power consumption, through down-
scaling [7].
The use of NFV introduces some new security threats to the network that were not
present before. One of these threats is a denial-of-service attack (DoS). These attacks
work by flooding the server with traﬀic and thereby making the service it provides un-
available to users. The issue with NFV is that everything is running on VMs, hosted on
the same physical hardware, where each VM has a limited amount of memory. Conse-
quently, if an attacker targets a VM, it will try to scale in response to the traﬀic thereby
consuming more resources. Given the amount of resources is finite, it will end up starv-
ing the other VMs of resources and thereby impacting their performance[7]. Many of
the threats that are introduced with the use of NFV are due to shared resources. Since
the resources are shared, some attacks can enable users to get access to information or
resources that should not be available to them. Another type of threat that is introduced
with NFV is that it relies on multiple providers and platforms. Each of these needs to
be properly secured. Otherwise, it might be a weakness that an attacker can use to gain
information about the system and or its users[7].
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
31
==PAGE:41==
2.7.5
Cloud-based Networking
Another new approach for networking that is available to 5G is the idea of using cloud-
based networking. The structure of this contains the mobile cloud, Cloud Radio Access
Network (Cloud RAN), Configurable networks, and Big data center. The idea of Cloud
RAN is to make use of virtualization and other technologies to overcome the limitations
of traditional RAN. The configurable network is networks that make use of both NFV
and SDN and therefore has the benefits of both of these technologies. The Big data
centers work as both traditional data centers, providing remote resources, and they also
optimize the network based on traﬀic and behavior[21].
Cloud RAN compared to traditional RAN changes the relation between the Remote Ra-
dio Unit (RRU) and the Bandwidth-Based Unit (BBU). In cloud RAN these two are no
longer directly coupled but an RRU is connected to a virtual BBU while the processing
has been moved to virtual base stations that are running on general-purpose proces-
sors in a centralized baseband processing pool. This makes it possible to reduce the
number of base stations and the RRUs can be deployed more easily and require less
maintenance. An advantage that cloud RAN also has is that the RRUs are placed in
a high-density manner, such that the user is closer to an RRU compared to traditional
RAN. This shorter distance means that the emission power is reduced, which results in
lower power consumption[83, 59].
The goal of Mobile Cloud Networking (MCN) is to provide the entirety of the basic net-
work infrastructure as a service by creating a virtual cellular network by utilizing NFV
and cloud computing technologies. This is meant to make the network more flexible
than the traditional network and provide the benefits of NFV and cloud computing[83].
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
32
==PAGE:42==
3
Mobile Network Attacks and
Vulnerabilities
The Internet is an ever-evolving interconnected infrastructure that has become one of the
most essential and indispensable components of our everyday lives. The extensive flex-
ibility and versatility of the network extend across different functions including making
calls or texting, accessing entertainment, social networking, production services, IoT- &
sensor connection, transactions & payments and much more. The Internet is a funda-
mental part of our lives to the extent that we require it everywhere and at all times. This
has been made possible through the evolution of mobile networks.
Since the introduction of the first commercially available device with internet access in
1996 [40]. Billions of new devices have joined the network since then, but some devices
continue to use the same cellular protocol as that in 1996. To date, mobile networks have
evolved through numerous generations, aiming to create a scalable, reliable, and secure
virtual society. Despite these advancements, we continue facing lots of persisting prob-
lems and vulnerabilities susceptible to malicious exploitation, which will be explored
in detail in this following section.
Here we will take a look into the security aspects of the mobile network. The section
examines the different security weaknesses that aim to compromise the privacy of the
subscriber utilizing the current mobile network. The primary objective of this chapter
is to provide insight into the threats that continue to or potentially will pose a threat to
the integrity of the mobile network and the privacy of its users.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
33
==PAGE:43==
3.1
Network Security Threats
This section aims to describe different security attacks that threaten the security of mo-
bile devices across the different generations of the mobile network.
3.1.1
IMSI-Catching (IMSI catcher/CSS)
International mobile subscriber identity or IMSI, is the unique identifier that is a funda-
mental part of mobile networking, utilized across all generations from 2G to 5G (though
in 5G it is equivalent to SUPI). The IMSI number is stored inside the SIM and is used
to authenticate the UE when establishing a connection with the mobile network. It is
represented as a 15 or 16-digit number, which is divided into 3 parts [63]: the MCC,
MNC, and the MSIN which is shown in figure 3.1. The MCC which refers to the Mobile
Country Code represents the first 3 digits. The following 2 or 3 digits (depending on
European standard or American Standard) represent the Mobile Network Code (MNC).
Last but most importantly comes the Mobile Subscriber Identification Number (MSIN).
This number is essentially the identifier of the mobile subscriber that mobile carriers use
to authenticate and validate the subscriber.
Figure 3.1: Construct of IMSI divided into MCC, MCN and MSIN. Redrawn based on
[63]
There are different types of IMSI-catchers or Cell Site Simulators (CSS) as they are some-
times referred to. These different types are capable of different attacks depending on
their complexity. Some simply snoop on the IMSIs of nearby phones without interacting
with the victim’s phones. This is the reason for the name ”IMSI catchers” as they simply
catch or capture the IMSI and nothing more. However, other types of attacks require
more interaction with the victim’s phone. In general, there are three main categories of
IMSI attacks[78]:
• Communication interception.
• Denial of service, and downgrading.
• Location tracking.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
34
==PAGE:44==
We will start by explaining how the simple active IMSI-catchers work with 2G GSM. The
CSS pretends to be a real base station to get phones to connect to it. In GSM networks, a
phone will always connect to the base station providing the strongest signal if it can. So
an IMSI catcher can make phones connect to it by making it have a higher signal strength
from the perspective of the phone than the other base stations that the phone can con-
nect to. This can be done by simply sending a stronger signal, moving the IMSI catcher
closer to the target phone, or a combination of both. Once the IMSI-catcher has been se-
lected by the target phone as the best base station, the phone, and the IMSI-catcher start
to negotiate a connection where the phone is asked to send its encryption capabilities to
the base station. Here the IMSI-catcher can simply set the connection to have no encryp-
tion. Thereafter the base station will send an Identity Request to the phone, which then
responds with its IMSI. Now that the IMSI-catcher has obtained the IMSI it terminates
the connection since it got what it needed, this can then be continuously repeated to
collect more IMSIs from other nearby phones. The IMSI is transmitted because it serves
as the unique identifier for the SIM card, and it is used to identify you as a subscriber of
the mobile carrier, thereby granting you access to use the phone network[66].
However, it is not as easy to obtain the IMSI when a phone operates on generations
beyond 2G, due to the use of TMSI, which makes sending the IMSI in plaintext less
common. Even though the security has been improved from generation to generation
there are still a multitude of ways for an IMSI catcher to capture the IMSI of a target UE.
One of the ways to force a UE on newer-generation networks to send its IMSI in plaintext
involves executing a downgrade attack and forcing the UE onto a 2G connection. This
approach is elaborated in greater detail later in this section with a focus on 4G, though
it is also possible to implement for 5G. Nevertheless, some techniques do not require
downgrading to 2G but instead, work by exploiting features in newer generations to
make the UE disclose its IMSI[66].
These methods usually involve using one or more of the NAS messages that can be sent
before a secure connection has been established. One of these messages is the ”Track-
ing Area Update Reject” after cell reselection. Cell reselection happens when the UE at-
tempts to connect to a new BS, due to one of the following reasons: The signal strength of
the BS that the UE was previously connected has dropped below the acceptable thresh-
old. Another reason is due to the UE finding a BS that is using a frequency that holds
a higher priority than the frequency of the BS that it was previously connected to. Re-
gardless of the reason why the UE performed cell reselection if the new BS it tries to
connect to is within a Tracking Area (TA) for which the UE is not registered, then the
UE will perform a ”Tracking Area Update Request” message. This message is normally
intended to inform the new BS that the UE is not registered in the TA that the BS is in.
In response to the message, the MME connected to the BS is prompted to retrieve infor-
mation on the UE from the network. This allows the UE to keep using its TMSI instead
of performing an ”Attach Request”, which would involve sending its IMSI in plaintext
over the air[66].
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
35
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.2: Diagram showing the basic steps for Tracking Area Update Request after cell
reselection
However, there is a way for an attacker to force the ”Attach Request”. This is accom-
plished by having the attacker’ IMSI catcher be the BS that the UE connects to during
cell reselection. When the attackers’ IMSI catcher receives the ”Tracking Area Update
Request” from the UE it will prompt its own malicious MME, which will send a ”Track-
ing Area Update Reject” with cause 9 ”UE identity cannot be derived by the network” to
the UE. This essentially tells the UE that the MME could not get the UE’s information
from the network. This then results in the UE sending an ”Attach Request” to register
itself in the network. The request will contain the IMSI of the UE in plaintext which the
attacker can then simply collect. A similar attack can be made by exploiting the same
reject cause but a different message. This other message is the ”Service Request” mes-
sage. This message can be sent by either the UE or the Network depending on whether
there is downlink data to be sent to the UE or uplink data to be sent from the UE. The
important part from an attacker’s viewpoint is that a malicious MME can respond to a
”Service Request” message with a ”Service Reject” message with cause 9 ”UE identity
cannot be derived by the network”. This is the same cause as the previously mentioned
”Tracking Area Update Reject” and will therefore also result in the UE performing the
attach procedure and thereby exposing its IMSI to the attacker[66].
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
36
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.3: Diagram showing IMSI Catcher forcing the Attach Request from the UE
using Tracking Area Update Reject message
For communication interception attacks with an IMSI-catcher, it should only be possible
when the option to use no encryption is available, or encryption that can be broken in
real-time due to either weak encryption algorithms or because the key for the encryption
is already known. This type of attack is a Man-in-the-middle attack (MITM), where the
IMSI catcher positions itself between the victim’s phone and a real cell tower. To do
this the IMSI-catcher will first need to obtain the IMSI using the previously mentioned
method, though for this attack the connection to the phone is not terminated after the
IMSI is obtained. The IMSI catcher can then connect to a BS by masquerading as the
victim’s phone. For 2G GSM, this can be done by sending a Location Update Request,
the BS then responds with an Identity Request that the IMSI catcher can respond to with
the IMSI of the victim’s phone. The BS will then send a cryptographic challenge to verify
that the IMSI catcher is who it claims to be. However, the IMSI catcher cannot solve this
challenge since it requires a secret key that is stored on the SIM card of the victim. The
IMSI catcher gets around this by forwarding the challenge to the victim’s phone, which
solves the challenge and sends it back to the IMSI catcher, which forwards it to the cell
tower that accepts the connection since the challenge was solved correctly. The IMSI
catcher now has a connection to the victim’s phone as a base station and a connection
to a legitimate cell tower masquerading as the victim’s phone[78].
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
37
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.4: Diagram showing the steps for the IMSI catcher to position itself between
the victim’s phone and a legitimate cell tower
After this setup, phone communication from the victim will pass through the IMSI
catcher who forwards it to the legitimate BS. This means that the IMSI catcher has access
to the data that is sent from the victim’s phone, including calls and texts. Furthermore,
the IMSI catcher can turn off encryption for the connection when the connection is get-
ting established. The reason why this works for 2G GSM is that it is possible to use no
encryption and even when encryption is forced it is still possible to break most of the
encryption in real-time[78].
For GSM/2G it was simple to get the target phone to connect to the IMSI catcher since
the phone will just connect to the base station with the highest signal strength that it
can access. However, if the target phone is using LTE/4G it will behave differently in
several ways. One of the ways is that the phone will not attempt to find towers with
higher signal strength, as long as the signal strength of the currently connected tower is
above a certain threshold. Furthermore, it will also have a list of ”nearest neighbours”
that are broadcasted from the tower the phone is connected to. These ”nearest neigh-
bours” are the first towers that the phone will attempt to connect to if it loses its current
connection and will do this before scanning for other towers in the area. Therefore, a
different approach is needed to get the phone to connect to the IMSI catcher. One such
method is to masquerade as a tower on the nearest neighbours list while making sure
that the signal strength of the IMSI catcher is the highest on the list for the target phone.
One approach is to either wait for the target phone to connect to it eventually, or actively
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
38
==PAGE:48==
jam the frequency of the tower to which the target phone is connected. Thereby, mak-
ing the phone switch tower, because of the signal strength falling below the threshold.
However, there is also another exploitation. LTE is using a method called ”absolute
priority-based cell reselection”, which involves assigning priorities to different frequen-
cies. These priorities take precedence over the other rules for which tower the phone
will connect to. This means that if we set the IMSI catcher to masquerade as a tower, us-
ing a higher priority frequency, then the target phone will connect to the IMSI catcher
as soon as it discovers it. Furthermore, these higher-priority frequencies can be found in
the configuration messages that base stations send out. These messages are in plaintext
so anyone can read them if they have access to them[78].
Location tracking attacks
The types of location-tracking attacks that can be performed using an IMSI catcher can
generally be categorized into two categories: Presence testing, and fine-grained location
tracking. Presence testing refers to testing whether or not a phone is present in a specific
Location Area (LA), whereas fine-grained location tracking involves obtaining the GPS
coordinates of the phone. These coordinates can be imprecise or accurate depending on
the method used to obtain them[78].
One of the attacks that allow an attacker to obtain the exact location information of the
target phone first requires getting the victim to connect to the IMSI catcher. This can be
achieved using the previously discussed methods. After the target phone is connected
to the IMSI catcher, the IMSI catcher will create an ”RRC Connection Reconfiguration”
message containing the cell IDs from some neighbouring base stations, with the number
needing to be at least 3 or higher. This message is then sent to the target phone and it
is the response to this message that holds interest for the attacker. The response from
the target phone varies depending on how modern the phone is and what features it
supports.
For example, if the phone supports the ”locationInfo-r10” feature, then the response
will contain the GPS coordinates of the phone, thus achieving the objective of the attack.
However, even if the ”locationInfo-r10” feature is not supported, the response will still
hold all the information needed to locate the phone. The response message will reveal
the signal strength of the neighbouring base stations, whose IDs were included in the
”RRC Connection Reconfiguration” message. These signal strengths can be used to pin-
point the phone using a method called trilateration[78].
Some tracking attacks designed to locate a phone can be implemented without the need
for an IMSI catcher but instead by using simple radio equipment. This equipment could
be an SDR with an antenna and a laptop. These simpler attacks take advantage of ”RRC
paging messages” that are being used in mobile networks. Paging messages are sent
out when the network has a message that needs to be routed to a phone, and the mes-
sages are broadcast to all phones listening on the paging frequency. The messages are
addressed using TMSI, IMSI, and or IMEI but mostly TMSI, and are ignored by phones
whose identifiers do not match the addressed ones. Furthermore, there is a priority
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
39
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.5: Diagram showing trilateration.
The circle radius is a function of the signal strengths of the towers to the target phone.
The phone’s location is the intersection of all the circles.
to messages depending on the type of message the network is trying to route to the
phone, this priority changes how this paging message is broadcasted. Normally a pag-
ing message will be broadcasted from the last BS that the phone is addressed to, but if
the message is of a higher priority then it will be broadcasted by all base stations in the
last Location Area the phone was connected to[78].
These simpler attacks are presence detection attacks and work by having the attacker
listen to paging messages in an LA that he believes the target phone to be in. The at-
tacker then triggers a paging message to the target phone by calling their phone number
and almost immediately hanging up, this is repeated 10-20 times to get enough paging
messages such that if the target phone is in the LA that the attacker is observing, then
the attacker can use set intersection to find the TMSI of the target phone. The attacker
now knows that the target phone is in the observed LA and can continue with a similar
attack to get a more accurate location of the target phone. This similar attack makes
use of ”smart paging”, which is where if a message that is not high priority needs to be
routed to a phone then the paging message will only be sent from the last BS that the
phone was connected to. The attacker then essentially uses the same approach as they
did in the earlier attack but instead of an LA, they select a cell in the LA. Then they trig-
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
40
==PAGE:50==
ger the paging messages and do the set intersection analysis, but instead of using phone
calls, they use general data messages, which can for example be messages sent through
common communication applications such as Facebook Messenger and WhatsApp[78].
3.1.2
Bidding-down attacks
Bidding-down attacks reduce the security of a mobile network connection[47]. There
exist different bidding-down attacks and some have been known for some time and have
mitigations formulated in the specifications of newer generations of networks. The dan-
ger of bidding-down attacks is that they can enable other attacks that should otherwise
not be possible. An example of a bidding-down attack could be an MITM attack where
the attacker intercepts the Attach Request of the target UE and then changes the security
capabilities to only include no encryption and forwards it to the network, this results in
a connection between the target UE and the network that uses no encryption[47].
It should however, be noted that this kind of attack will not work on all UEs and net-
works, it depends on the operators’ configuration of the network as well as the specific
implementation of the baseband vendor used by the manufacturer of the UE. The flaws
that enable the previously mentioned attack have mitigations that are both formulated
and present in specifications but are not implemented in all networks and devices, which
leads to these kinds of attacks still being possible for some UEs and networks. Another
example of bidding-down attacks is downgrade attacks. These attacks will attempt to
have a UE use a lower-generation network than it is capable of using[47].
The danger of downgrade attacks is that they can make devices vulnerable to attacks
that have already been addressed in newer protocols by forcing devices to use older pro-
tocols. There are multiple ways to perform downgrade attacks on the mobile network,
with the simplest being to jam the frequencies of the protocols you want to exclude. An
example of this could be to jam the frequencies used for 5G and 4G in an area, to force
phones in that area to use 3G instead. However, this can be troublesome due to the sheer
amount of frequencies that an attacker would need to jam depending on how much the
attacker wants to downgrade. Another way to perform a downgrade attack is to utilize
an IMSI catcher which effectively acts as a rogue base station.
If the attacker has lured the target phone to connect to their IMSI catcher then when
the phone sends its ”Tracking Area Update Request” (TAU) the IMSI catcher can re-
spond with a ”TAU Reject” message. This message contains a field called ”EMM cause
number”, which is meant to indicate why the ”TAU Request” was rejected. An attacker
can then leverage this by setting the ”EMM cause number” to a value that will disable
certain services on the UE. An example of this is that an attacker could set the ”EMM
cause number” to 7 ”LTE services not allowed”, this results in the UE thinking that its SIM
card is not capable of using LTE/4G, and will thereafter try to connect to a 3G network.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
41
==PAGE:51==
An attacker can leverage this to launch attacks against a UE that should not be vul-
nerable to them. An example of this could be to downgrade a phone to 2G and then
do the communication interception attack that was mentioned in one of the previous
sections[78]. There also exists a similar attack for 5G SA that is explored in a study
by Bedran Karakoc et al. [47], which involves having the IMSI catchers respond to the
UE’s attempt to connect with a reject message containing a cause, resulting in the UE
disabling its 5G capabilities. This is then repeated for each generation until the desired
generation is reached. Typically, the attacker aims to downgrade the network genera-
tion to 2G, since it has the lowest level of security. The attack can also be changed to a
Denial of Service (DoS) attack if the right reject cause is used resulting in the targeted
UE not having access to mobile services.
There are also several other ways to do bidding-down attacks such as sending invalid
UE security capabilities, redirecting to older generations, message replays, etc. In [47]
they investigated many of these ways to perform bidding-down attacks and found that
many commercial networks that are in use are vulnerable to these attacks. Furthermore,
one of the reasons for many of these attacks being possible is that optional security fea-
tures are left unimplemented in some commercial networks. Another reason for some
of these attacks being possible also seems to be a lack of specification, this is particularly
for 5G NSA[47]. A particularly dangerous problem is the poor handling of invalid UE
security capabilities. One of the ways it is handled is that the network falls back on null
encryption, which is a concerning issue since it invalidates the confidentiality of the con-
nection between the UE and the network[47].
3.1.3
5G SA SUCI-Catcher
In 5G SA, they have done away with the traditional IMSI and replaced it with the Sub-
scription Permanent Identifier (SUPI). Additionally, security enhancements in 5G SA
allow encrypting this SUPI with asymmetric encryption using the operator’s public key.
This creates what is called the Subscription Concealed Identifier (SUCI). The SUCI is
meant to be sent out instead of the SUPI, as a protective measure against IMSI-Catchers,
ensuring that the UE’s identifier is never sent in plaintext. This is an effective counter-
measure, as IMSI-Catchers depend on the IMSI being transmitted unencrypted. Scenar-
ios, where the IMSI-Catcher would force the UE into sending its IMSI, would now be
impossible. Furthermore, the SUCI is also created such that every transmission uses
a different SUCI, which makes tracking UE’s by the SUCI impossible since a UE will
always use different SUCI’s. However, there are still certain location tracking attacks
possible when the UE is using an SUCI, even if we ignore Downgrade attacks. This is
possible using an SUCI-catcher, which works similarly to IMSI-catchers but with differ-
ent mechanisms after establishing itself as the MITM. There are two phases to a SUCI-
catcher attack. First, there is the discovery phase where it needs to learn all the SUCI that
are of interest. In the discovery phase, the attacker will need to gather SUCIs by either
sniﬀing the network traﬀic for SUCIs or by actively requesting them through identity re-
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
42
==PAGE:52==
quests as a fake base station. Alternatively, if the attacker already has the IMSIs/SUPIs
of interest then they can derive the SUCIs by encrypting them with the operator’s public
key. This is possible since the operator’s public key is known and the operator can be
derived from the IMSI if needed[22]. After the SUCIs have been collected the attacker
Figure 3.6: Diagram showing a simplified version of the Discovery phase of the SUCI
catcher attack.
This figure is inspired by a similar figure in [22]
would need to connect them to persons of interest. One way to accomplish this would be
to collect the SUCIs in an area where the attacker knows the locations of the persons of
interest. This can be done in many ways such as knowing their schedule, using surveil-
lance cameras or other measures. This way the attacker knows that the SUCI belonging
to the persons of interest are in the set of collected SUCIs, as illustrated in figure 3.7. A
follow-up that could be performed if the attacker wants to remove SUCIs that are not
from persons of interest, would be to either repeat the SUCI catching in multiple differ-
ent locations that contain the persons of interest and use set intersection to exclude the
SUCIs that are not present in all the sets or only present in one set.
Another way could be to perform the SUCI catching attack in a different area contain-
ing the persons of interest and then discard all previously collected SUCIs that could
not be detected in the area. Another alternative could be to limit the power of the SUCI
catcher and then be physically near the persons of interest when collecting the SUCIs.
This would reduce the number of SUCIs that are collected while still collecting the SU-
CIs from the persons of interest, provided that the power is configured correctly such
that all the persons of interest are in the effective range of the SUCI-catcher. This should
be feasible since a portable IMSI catcher can be built in a size that can fit inside a large
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
43
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.7: Diagram showing a simplified version of the Attack phase of the SUCI
catcher attack. This figure is inspired by a similar figure in [22]
backpack and it can therefore be assumed that a SUCI catcher can likely be built in a
similar size [66].
The other phase is the attack phase where the actual attack takes place. The attack takes
advantage of the fact that a UE will respond differently to an Authentication Request
depending on whether the SUCI in the request belongs to the specific UE or not. The
way SUCI catching works is that the SUCI catcher acts as a fake base station, which the
UEs then connect to by sending a Registration Request. The SUCI catcher then acts as
the MITM and forwards this request to the network as well as forwarding the associated
Authentication Request from the network and the Authentication Response from the UE.
This part of the attack, without the first Registration Request, is called the ”Reset and
Sync” part in [22] and is included to enable an attacker to perform more than two ”SUCI
Probes” on each UE. The reason why ”Reset and Sync” is necessary for this is that a UE
will stop its registration attempt if it fails two consecutive times. The ”SUCI Probe” part
of the attack is where an attacker checks if an SUCI is present in the area. The ”SUCI
Probe” works by having the SUCI catcher send a Registration Request to the network
with the SUCI that it wants to probe for as the identifier, as seen in figure 3.8. The corre-
sponding Authentication Request from the network can then be sent to the connecting
UE and the UE’s response will then tell the SUCI catcher whether the SUCI included
in the request belongs to the UE or not. This is because if the probed SUCI belongs to
the UE, it will then either respond with an Authentication Response or an Authentica-
tion Failure with the cause ”Sync Failure”. Whereas if the SUCI does not belong to the
UE, then it will only be able to respond with Authentication failure with cause ”MAC
Failure”. The reason for this is that the Authentication Request from the network is cre-
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
44
==PAGE:54==
ated such that only the UE with the corresponding SUCI can answer [22]. It should
be mentioned that the ”Reset and Sync” should only be necessary if the attacker has
more than one SUCI that they want to probe, which is very likely, but if the attacker is
only tracking one person then it should be unnecessary. One of the important things
Figure 3.8: Diagram showing the SUCI catcher attack phase
about the SUCI catcher attack is that it works on 5G SA without using any of the weak-
nesses of the older generations or downgrade attacks to bypass the security of 5G SA.
However, there are still some assumptions that this attack relies on, which is important
to address to mitigate or prevent this form of attack. One of these critical assumptions
is that the network will not impose limits on the issuing of authentication challenges
and that the authentication challenges are fresh[22]. This is important since the SUCI
catcher relies on the network to create the authentication challenges that it uses to probe
the UE’s SUCI. Therefore if there is any kind of limit to this it will affect the attack, it
might not prevent the attack but it will mitigate it to a certain extent. The other assump-
tion that the attack makes is that the UE will answer the challenge that it receives. This
is crucial to the attack since it is the UE’s response to the authentication challenge that
indirectly discloses if the associated SUCI belongs to that UE[22]. Some mitigations to
this kind of attack are already implemented in commercial networks today according to
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
45
==PAGE:55==
[22]. They found that most networks applied throttling after the first few authentication
requests, which resulted in the attack running fairly slow when larger groups of UE’s
were checked. However, when the attack only checked small groups of 10 or fewer then
it scaled well.
3.1.4
Jamming
There exist different jamming techniques that each have their strengths and weaknesses.
Below is a list of some of the existing jamming techniques.
• Regular Jamming: This type of jamming is the most common. It continuously
sends out a signal on a chosen frequency or channel. What is contained in the
signal can be either random noise or actual data is irrelevant. The important factor
is that this signal occupies the frequency, thereby disrupting the legitimate signals
operating on the same frequency. The strength of jamming this way is that it is
easy to do, and with enough power can effectively stop/(drown out) all signals
transmitted on that frequency. However, the downsides are that it uses a lot of
electricity, especially if it needs to stop high-power signals, and that it only targets
one frequency[10].
• Sweep Jamming: This jamming technique tries to jam multiple different frequen-
cies but does so by focusing its full power on one frequency at a time, and then
rapidly switching between the other frequencies that the attacker wants to jam.
The strength of this technique is that it can affect multiple different frequencies
without needing to have multiple jammers. However, it is not as effective as hav-
ing multiple jammers doing regular jamming on the target frequencies since it can
only ever jam one frequency at any one point in time. However, depending on
what system the attacker is targeting with the jamming, it can still be an effective
attack[57].
• Barrage Jamming: This technique focuses on jamming a range of frequencies at
the same time. The obvious strength of this technique is that it affects a range of
frequencies and not just one. This can be very useful if there are multiple frequen-
cies that one wants to jam, that are relatively close to each other. The weakness of
this technique is that as one would expect when the jamming signal is spread over
a larger range of frequencies the power of the jamming is reduced proportionally
[57].
• Delusive/Deceptive Jamming: This jamming technique is fairly unique compared
to other jamming techniques, it functions by sending what seems like legitimate
data, and this can therefore force the receiver to be in a listening state, and thereby
disrupt communication with actual legitimate sources. The strength of this jam-
ming technique is that it can be very hard to detect since the signal that is sent out
looks like a legitimate one[10].
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
46
==PAGE:56==
• Random Jamming: This technique is used in conjunction with other jamming tech-
niques. The way that this jamming method works is by using a technique, such
as regular jamming or deceptive jamming, to disrupt a specific frequency for a
certain duration before stopping and going idle. Then, after it has been idle for
a while, it will reactivate and start jamming again. The jammer will then contin-
uously follow this pattern. The strength of this technique is that it saves power,
since it is not constantly active, and depending on the timing it can also be harder
to detect, than something like the regular jammer[10].
• Responsive Jamming: This jamming technique aims to improve the power eﬀi-
ciency of the jam by not jamming continuously. The technique works by having
the jammer monitor the frequencies that the attacker wants to target and only start
jamming when it detects that signals are being transmitted over the targeted fre-
quencies. The strength of this technique is that it minimizes power consumption
by only jamming when there is something to jam. This type of jammer is cate-
gorized as a reactive jammer since it reacts to traﬀic, while the other previously
mentioned jammers are categorized as active jammers [10].
• Go-Next Jamming: This technique involves having the jammer follow the trans-
mitter if it does frequency hopping1. The strength of this technique is that it is
harder to counteract than regular jamming since it follows the transmitters’ fre-
quency [10].
• Control channel jamming: This jammer targets control channels that are used to
initialize communication. This jamming happens before communication is estab-
lished and can be used to do DoS attacks and or deny nodes from having network
access[10].
5G networks have some vulnerabilities to jamming, many of which are specific channels
that can be selectively jammed. One of them is the downlink broadcast channel. This
channel is vulnerable to attacks from selective jammers due to its design[10]. Another
part of 5G that is vulnerable to jamming is massive MIMO. The jamming attacks against
massive MIMO target the channel estimation procedure, since an accurate channel esti-
mation is needed for massive MIMO to function[10].
3.1.5
Interception exploitation by SS7
One of the most concerning methods of attacks involves exploiting the SS7 protocol.
The SS7 protocol is referred to as the Signalling System No. 7, which is the fundamental
telecommunication component that manages the public switched telephone network
(PTSN), and allows subscribers to establish and tear down telephone communications
for 2G and 3G. It was adopted globally in 1980 [24] and has been a standard in 2G and
3G, which also led to added functionality to serve SMS and roaming services. The SS7
acts as a closed environment accessible only to operators, and is responsible for handling
1Frequency hopping is a signal technique that constantly changes frequency during communication/-
transmission.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
47
==PAGE:57==
the set-up and teardown of communication links, location-based services for roaming
and billing as well as passing SMS messages between subscribers.
Figure 3.9: Typical SS7 architecture. Nodes are redundantly interconnected with each
other to allow for a reliable connection and prevent complications if a point fails.
The architecture of the SS7 protocol is mainly based on three different components illus-
trated in figure 3.9.
• Signal Switching Point (SSP): Responsible for generating the initial signal message
for the network to understand, tearing down the link, and managing the connec-
tion. This includes passing the signals to the STP for routing. SSPs are the end
nodes of SS7 which are placed all around places to facilitate and enable call/SMS
services for UE’s across a wide range.
• Signal Transfer Point (STP): The purpose of STP is to exchange signal messages
reliably and eﬀiciently to the appropriate subscriber within the network. They
are located centrally and serve large numbers of SSP connections. The STP also
measures telecommunication usage for billing and is usually paired with the SCP.
• Signal Control Point (SCP): The SCP is a database that contains information on
network services. It is responsible for determining how the message should be
routed, validating the phone number, and checking the availability of the service
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
48
==PAGE:58==
and nodes.
Despite its many benefits it also comes with a lot of security risks. SS7 was not built
with security, in mind, meaning that no encryption was implemented, and instead re-
lied on trusting telecommunication operators to not disclose the SS7 network and secure
a controlled environment. Although SS7 was originally designed as a closed system, it
later became more accessible to the open, due to the global expansion of telecommunica-
tion networks, and the increase in mobile operators. This of course resulted in security
concerns, since it was then possible for attackers to eavesdrop, intercept, and manipu-
late signals in the network if they got access to the network. These signals would then
be used to steal sensitive information such as voice interception, SMS interception, and
location tracking [53].
Performing an SS7 attack can be achieved with minimal components of an SDR capable
of full-duplex communications, which can be bought for around 10.000 DKK 2 with an
SS7 SDK [3]. If the attackers also have information on the SS7 network, then the attacker
can establish himself as a node on the network. This can even be the signalling switching
point which generates and receives message signals from the subscriber. If the attacker
manages to exploit these vulnerabilities, it could lead to serious consequences, such as
interception of SMS, voice calls and location tracking.
SS7 was a central and reliable component in mobile networks for 2G and 3G but faced
security concerns due to its design flaws and its lack of encryption.
3.1.6
Phone number catching / Phone spoofing
In LTE the IMSI is the only component that the subscriber transmits to the mobile net-
work for the initial authentication process. This has been a privacy problem due to IMSI-
catchers as mentioned in previous sections. However, another security threat that has
recently been discovered by Chuan Yu et. al. [82], shows that you can exploit the LTE
network and obtain the Mobile Subscriber International Subscriber Directory Number
(MSISDN). This number refers to the mobile phone number of the subscriber. Despite
the MSISDN never being transmitted over the air; the network translates the IMSI to
MSISDN when a call or SMS request is initiated, which displays the mobile number on
the called phone.
This attack requires two SDRs capable of LTE and GSM frequencies with full-duplex
communication and a UE capable of 4G LTE. The attack is performed by setting up one
SDR as a rogue LTE E-NodeB station with open-source software, srsRAN3. As well as a
rogue GSM base station 4. Furthermore, a mobile phone is required, which would act
as the victim’s phone by using open-source software, OsmocomBB 5.
Figure 3.10 depicts the process of phone capturing. The victim initially establishes a
2USRP B205mini-i: https://www.ettus.com/all-products/usrp-b205mini-i-board/ (Jan. 2024)
3Open source 4G LTE software radio suite https://github.com/srsran/srsRAN_4G
4Open source 2G GSM Base Transceiver Station https://github.com/osmocom/osmo-bts
5Open source software https://osmocom.org/projects/baseband/wiki
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
49
==PAGE:59==
Figure 3.10: Process of a phone number capture/phone impersonator based on [82]
connection with the rogue LTE station through a Tracking Area Update request to es-
tablish a connection. Following this, the rogue tower issues a redirectedCarrierInfo mes-
sage to the UE. This message is an RRC command that happens in the RRC procedure of
LTE, which can be sent even before the authentication process. The redirectedCarrierInfo
command would tell the UE to use another frequency, which would be redirected to the
rogue GSM base station instead. Acting as a GSM tower, it is then possible to spoof the
victim by requesting the identity of the victim, and relaying the IMSI from the attacker’s
UE to authenticate using the GSM network. Moreover, the attacker is now capable of
completely isolating the victim’s UE from the legitimate network to avoid conflicting
IMSI on the network. After finalizing the authentication process, the malicious UE can
now initiate a call to another phone to display the number of the victim. This attack is
a relatively simple method of gathering the MSISDN from the victim, thereby posing
a privacy threat to the user. Meanwhile, the attacker can be completely anonymous
and undetected by both the user and the telecommunication operators, with the use of
affordable SDRs and a regular phone[82].
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
50
==PAGE:60==
3.2
Attack/Threat Vectors
Threat
Attack
2G
3G
4G
5G
Privacy
IMSI-Catching
Phone number catching
Interception exploitation by SS7
Availability attack
Cellular Jamming
Downgrade Attack
- 6
Location Tracking
Trilateration/Cell Tower Triangulation
SUCI Catching
-
-
-
Table 3.1: Table showing an overview of the attacks from the previous section, their associated threat, and
the generation that they affect
6Lowest generation to be downgraded
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
51
==PAGE:61==
4
Implementation of Experiments
In this chapter, we explore the security aspect of mobile networks by performing prac-
tical experiments focusing on the deployment and analysis of IMSI Catchers, and DoS
exploits with an emphasis on Downgrade attacks.
The primary objective of this chapter is to give an understanding of the strategies and
mechanisms used behind operating attacks such as IMSI catching and Downgrade at-
tacks. By demonstrating these experiments, we aim to gather findings and analyze the
outcomes, to give an insight into the present security vulnerabilities found in our current
mobile networks.
As we go through this chapter we will clarify our reason for our chosen experiments and
their relevancy, as well as the design and strategies used. Lastly, we examine the attacks
with analysis and evaluation to later open up opportunities for potential mitigations and
solutions in the next chapter.
4.1
Ethical Consideration
In this Section, we go through some experiments which are prohibited for a normal
individual in public spaces, and we therefore strongly advise not to perform these ex-
periments. If not done with a proper setting and environment, this can result in caus-
ing interference in the public network. All following experiments are done on school
grounds at our university in a controlled space. Each observation is carried out appro-
priately with the attention of limiting any form of interference frequency distance no
greater than 1 meter. Subsequently, any kind of sensitive information collected from
external sources will be deleted and removed. Experiments will only target our devices
and displayed in the following Section.
4.2
Reason of Choice
We had originally wanted to implement active IMSI catchers for different generations,
primarily 2G, 4G, and 5G NSA using open-source software from Github. Furthermore,
when we had these experiments working we wanted to attempt mitigation of these at-
tacks using different means such as using a dual SIM setup to switch between SIM cards
to avoid IMSI catcher. More details on possible mitigations can be found in a later chap-
ter.
To prepare for these extra experiments we rooted a 5G capable Android smartphone as
well as acquired a SIM card from another operator than the SIM cards we already had
available. However, we encountered some problems when setting up these experiments.
The problem we encountered was that we were in possession of the incorrect model
of the Ettus USRP SDR. We had the Ettus E312 USRP SDR, whereas our experiment
required Ettus B210 or B200 USRP SDR. We needed the other Ettus SDR, because the
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
52
==PAGE:62==
E312 is an Embedded unit, and cannot be used as a peripheral, whereas both the B210
and B200 are peripheral SDRs.
This is important, since we later learned, that all the open-source software that we found
was meant to be run with peripheral SDR devices and does not work with the embedded
Ettus SDR. We attempted to make it work by cross-compiling the code to the embedded
SDR but kept encountering problems in the form of missing libraries and failed compila-
tions that ultimately did not lead to a working implementation of an active IMSI catcher.
However, we did succeed in setting up some experiments with the Hack RF One that
we also had available, as well as getting a passive IMSI catcher for GSM working with
the Ettus E312 USRP SDR.
We set up a jamming experiment where we will attempt to jam 5G NSA frequencies in an
attempt to make 5G unavailable for our test phone. The reason for choosing this attack is
that jammers are easy and cost-effective to implement and if it can successfully disrupt
5G connectivity, it serves as a way to bypass the security of 5G by making the target
phone use 4G. Another reason is that jamming is often used to enhance IMSI catching
attacks by forcing a target UE to disconnect from the base station that it is currently
connected to.
Alongside our jamming experiment, we also set up a passive IMSI catcher for GSM. This
demonstration was chosen because it was suitable with the SDRs that we had available
and it would also serve to show how easy it is to get IMSIs on the GSM network. Fur-
thermore, it also allowed us to conduct an experiment where we sniffed metadata on
GSM and explored what data was available from just passively sniﬀing on GSM.
4.3
Design of implementation
The downgrade attack will work by using the NetMonster app to get information about
the cell phone tower that the phone is connected to. Among this information is the AR-
FCN number. This number can be put into an ARFCN calculator that is available online
to get the frequency and bandwidth that this tower uses. The frequency and bandwidth
information are used to configure the jammer to disrupt communications with the tar-
geted tower. Subsequently, the NetMonster app will be used to confirm whether the
phone has switched to a connection with a different cell tower than the one under jam-
ming. The jammer can then be turned off and we can verify if the phone will reconnect
to the previously jammed tower.
For the next part of the experiment, the jammer is set to switch between different jam-
ming settings for both frequency and bandwidth. This is so the jammer switches be-
tween jamming the frequencies of the different available 5G cell towers. The exact speed
of the switching will be experimented with to find the most effective one. The goal for
the first part of the experiment is that we can jam a connection between a phone and a
cell tower. In the second part of the experiment, our objective is to prevent a phone from
connecting to a 5G tower by switching between the jamming of the different available
5G towers.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
53
==PAGE:63==
The IMSI catching on GSM network experiment will work by running the IMSI catcher
code with the SDR, setting the test phones to use mobile data, and limiting the mobile
data to only 2G. We will then proceed to observe the captured IMSIs and switch the
test phones on and off airplane mode to get them to reconnect to the cell tower multiple
times. Thereby allowing the IMSI catcher to catch their IMSI. In continuation, we will
send SMS to and from the test phones to observe if we can also capture and decode these
messages. The hope for the experiment is that we can obtain the IMSI of the test phones
and that the SMS messages are also captured and is able to be decoded/decrypted.
Before the experiment is run we will obtain the IMSI of our test phones by connect-
ing them to our computer using ADB-debugging and running the following command:
”shell service call iphonesubinfo 8” to obtain the IMSI number. However, this requires root
access to the phone so we will use the Android phone that we had rooted previously.
There are other methods to obtain the IMSI number from the SIM card depending on
the phone, and its operating system with some not requiring root to work. We opted for
this approach since we already had a rooted phone available to us.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
54
==PAGE:64==
4.4
Experiments
This section will contain the experiments that have been performed, their process, the
tools and applications required, and the methodology behind selecting the tools and
software.
4.4.1
Downgrade Attack
To perform a downgrade attack one will need to force a UE down to a lower generation.
An attacker will usually have a target generation that they will want to downgrade to,
usually 2G in the end due to its low security. One way of doing this is by jamming.
An example of this would be that one wants to downgrade from 5G by jamming the fre-
quencies used by the available 5G base stations. This will then force the phone to use 4G
instead which has lower security, and one can keep downgrading to even lower genera-
tions such as 3G or 2G which will lower the security even more. This attack is generally
taking advantage of the backward compatibility that phones and mobile devices have
and that manufacturers prioritize.
There are multiple ways of doing a downgrade attack, we decided to use the jamming
approach where we jam the frequencies used by the available 5G base stations.
Tools and Applications
The tools needed for this experiment are the following:
Required hardware
• 1 x SDR with antenna capable of 6GHz frequency (e.g. HackRf One)
• 1 x Laptop with linux
• 1 x Android phone
Required software
• GNU-radio & GNU-radio-companion
• ModMobJam (PentHerz) github 1
• NetMonster app 2
The knowledge of the required hardware and software mentioned above was obtained
through online research. More specifically, GitHub was searched to find a repository
containing software for jamming. The ReadMe for the ModMobJam (PentHerz) reposi-
tory was then consulted for prerequisites and compatible devices. This resulted in most
of the required hardware and software. For the NetMonster app, we researched apps
that can show active mobile network connection information and thereby found an app
capable of this in NetMonster.
A picture of the full physical setup can be seen in figure 4.1.
1ModMobJam Github repository https://github.com/PentHertz/Modmobjam
2App
can
be
found
in
google
play
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=cz.mroczis.
netmonster&hl=da&gl=US
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
55
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.1: A picture showing the full physical setup for the jamming experiment
Process
Our process for this attack can be split into the following: Installing the necessary soft-
ware, configuring the software, and executing the attack.
The first thing to do is to install the open-source Gnu-Radio-Companion, which is a
development toolkit that provides us with an interface to configure the properties of
the signals and frequencies. It is essential when working with SDR hardware and will
be necessary in order to modify our SDR into a jamming device.
Installing the open-source ModMobJam tool provides us with a ready-to-use configu-
ration for a jammer. It operates on Python in combination with Gnu-Radio, which is
compatible with any kind of SDR’s. Lastly, we used the NetMonster mobile application
on Android to monitor the connections of cell towers that our mobile phone could reach,
so we could see if the connection changed when the jammer was turned on.
When it comes to the configuration of the jammer it consists of changing the properties
of the signal the jammer sends out, to target the available 5G signal. This meant that the
frequency had to be adjusted to target the 5G spectrum as well as the sample rate and the
bandwidth, which is highlighted in figure 4.2. Another matter to take into consideration
is the effective range of the jammer. In our observations, setting the Radio Frequency
gain (shown as RF gain) to 30 resulted in an effective jamming radius of about 1 meter
from the SDR.
We also needed to identify the cell tower that our phone was connected to. For this pur-
pose, we used the NetMonster application to get detailed information on any connected
cell tower, as shown in 4.3a. The key information here is the Absolute Radio Frequency
Channel Number (ARFCN). The ARFCN is put into an ARFCN calculator that pro-
vides the frequency spectrum used by the base station, among other information, as
illustrated in figure 4.3b. Depending on the Gnu-Radio-Companion version, you might
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
56
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.2: GNU radio companion showing the jammer configuration with the values
that needed configuration marked with red
need another dependency in order to run the program. This is done by installing the
gr-osmdr, which extends the tool and adds additional signal blocks, which the standard
Gnu-Radio lacks.
Finally, after installing the above software and dependencies, it is now possible to per-
form the attack by first running the grc file in the ModMobJam repository that generates
the Python script jammer.py with the configurations that were previously set in Gnu-
Radio-Companion. The jammer.py script is then ready to be run to perform the actual
jamming, thereby turning the SDR into a jammer. A screenshot of the jammer running
can be seen in 4.4 and connectivity on the phone shows a network switch on figure
screenshot 4.6b
Figure 4.4: Screenshot of the jammer running
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
57
==PAGE:67==
(a) NetMonster app screenshot showing connection
information for the phone’s network connections
(b) ARFCN calculator showing frequen-
cies and bandwidths
Another matter to consider is the fact that MobMobJam and Hack RF One’s single an-
tenna, only makes it possible for us to disrupt one frequency at a time. With this limita-
tion in mind, another possible method is to interfere with multiple frequencies in small
intervals to prevent a stable connection between the mobile phone and the cell tower.
This can be done with the same setup, though we have to determine which channels
to target to utilize smart jamming. Shown in figure 4.5 illustrates the method of sweep
jamming, which essentially rapidly switches between different frequencies, effectively
creating interference over multiple frequencies in quick succession. Despite utilizing
sweep jamming, we did not find it to be very effective and barely experienced any inter-
ruptions in the communication.
Figure 4.5: Running smart jamming script
Results and analysis
The outcome of this experiment has demonstrated the implementation of a jammer to
conduct a possible downgrade attack. We managed to successfully configure a commer-
cially available and affordable SDR to jam frequencies used by 5G base stations. The ob-
servation showcased the simple procedure and accessible tools required to operate an
effective jammer. Although we did not measure the full potential range of the jammer,
for ethical reasons. We can assume that a small SDR such as the Hack RF One should be
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
58
==PAGE:68==
(a) Connected to 4G LTE channel 2100 BE-
FORE jamming
(b) Connected to 4G LTE channel 900 AF-
TER jamming
Figure 4.6: Netmonster showing successful jamming
able to achieve an effective jamming range of 10 or more meters, in an open space, if the
RF gain is suﬀiciently increased. This might not be a lot, however, enhancing the jammer
with an amplifier, can expand the effective range further, with the enhancement being
dependent on the used amplifier. This extended reach could disrupt mobile networks
in smaller settings such as apartments, houses, and other small areas.
Although this was a small experiment, it shows the possibility of what a malicious user
can do and the threats that it can have. A small DoS attack might not in itself harm
the subscriber. However, given the low-cost and accessible tools & free software, this
can evolve into a potential Downgrade attack and interfere with mobile communication
such that phones in the area can only establish a connection to the less secure networks.
In the extreme, it could result in phones in the area being forced from 5G to use the 2G
GSM network instead.
The accessibility of software and the affordability of SDRs make jamming and DoS at-
tacks on mobile networks particularly appealing. The malicious individual could poten-
tially disrupt network services in complete anonymity, impacting users within a local-
ized area, and combined with other attacks strip them of their security and privacy.
Evaluation
During our observation, we encountered a certain limitation. This constraint was using
the HackRF One, equipped with a single antenna, which meant we could transmit only
one signal at a time. This posed a challenge, as our location of experimentation was
within range of multiple 5G base stations. To address this, we explored various meth-
ods of jamming more than one frequency, including transmitting a signal with a wider
bandwidth and thereby affecting multiple frequencies simultaneously. This ended up
not working, likely due to the signal strength of the jammer not being powerful enough
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
59
==PAGE:69==
to cover a wide spectrum. This problem could potentially have been mitigated by adding
an amplifier to the setup to boost the signal strength thereby potentially giving the jam-
mer the power necessary to effectively jam the wider spectrum.
Another method was to use sweep jamming to disrupt different frequencies in quick
succession. Unfortunately, this approach was also unsuccessful, which could be due to
certain factors. One reason could be that the transition speed was either too low or too
high. Modern network generations have an interruption/handover time of 30-60ms for
4G and even less for 5G [67]. Consequently, the transition speed of the sweep jamming
is crucial and requires to be precise. If the transition is too slow the UE will have enough
time to switch between the towers.
If however, the sweep happens too fast the jammer may not effectively disrupt the tar-
geted frequency. Furthermore, depending on the SDR there are also some limits to how
fast it can change the frequency of the signal that it sends out, which limits the switch-
ing speed for the sweep jamming. Given more time, we could have tried to do control
channel jamming where we targeted the control channels to prevent the target phone
from ever establishing a connection to the base station. This might have been advanta-
geous since the procedure to establish communications usually takes longer than the
handover procedure.
Even though we failed in jamming the signals of all the available 5G base stations in the
area, we still managed to prove that it is possible and even trivial to jam one frequency
with the hack RF One SDR. Therefore, if an attacker has access to multiple SDRs or SDRs
with multiple antennas then it seems likely that they will be able to prevent connections
to 5G in a specific area within the range of their jammers. Furthermore, being able to jam
one base station’s frequency is enough to enhance other attacks, such as IMSI catching
attacks by having a target phone’s connection to a base station terminated such that the
phone then connects to a malicious base station instead.
Overall, this experiment has showcased the process of implementation of a jammer ca-
pable of DoS attacks. It also demonstrates the issue of a Downgrade attack to push the
UEs down from 5G to a less secure older generation, reducing the security protocols.
This ultimately, gives an insight into some of the vulnerabilities regarding DoS in mo-
bile networks and the need for robust security measures.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
60
==PAGE:70==
4.4.2
IMSI Catching on GSM network
This experiment will go through the requirements and process to install a simple IMSI
catcher described in Section 3. The experiment will only be set up to passively moni-
tor and eavesdrop on the GSM communications and will therefore not engage in any
unethical activities or disrupt the network.
Tools and Applications
The tools needed for this experiment are the following:
Required hardware
• 1 x Ettus E312 SDR (any kind of SDR capable of half-duplex communication)
• 1 x Laptop with Linux OS
• 1 x Android phone with SIM
Required software
• GNU-radio & GNU-radio-companion 3
• Kalibrate-rtl / Kalibrate-hackrf 4
• Gnu-Radio GSM (grgsm) 5
• IMSI-catcher application script 6
The knowledge of the required hardware and software mentioned above was sourced
through online research. More specifically, the GitHub page for the IMSI catcher appli-
cation was located by searching through GitHub repositories mentioning IMSI catchers.
The README from this repository was then consulted and reviewed to determine the
required hardware and other software for its operation.
A full hardware setup of the experiment is shown in figure 4.7
3Gnu radio repository:https://github.com/gnuradio/gnuradio
4for an USRP device:https://github.com/steve-m/kalibrate-rtl for hackrf: https://github.com/scateu/
kalibrate-hackrf
5gr-gsm GitHub repository https://github.com/ptrkrysik/gr-gsm
6Python script of a simple IMSI catcher https://github.com/Oros42/IMSI-catcher
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
61
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.7: Setup of our GSM IMSI catcher
Process
This experiment required a lot more configuration and time since we utilized an em-
bedded SDR device, which involved setting up a cross-compilation environment before
anything could be run. This part could be skipped if a peripheral device was operated
instead.
When a successful cross-compilation has been installed and activated. Gnu-radio is the
next application to be installed inside the same environment in order for the SDR and the
host laptop to understand each other when executing commands and code. Therefore,
everything should be installed from the source and directed into the cross-compilation
environment7. Depending on which SDK was used during the cross-compilation, you
will need to install missing packages and configure executable paths.
Next is to install Kalibrate-rtl into the environment which is specifically used to scan
various GSM frequency spectrums. Kalibrate-rtl is a tool that allows us to scan the sur-
rounding GSM base stations and identify the frequency channel as well as the power of
the signal by using an SDR capable of receiving frequencies in the range of 800MHz to
1000MHz. The result outputs the channel, frequency of the base station(s), and power,
which indicates how good the connection to the station is. The output of the application
is shown in figure 4.8.
Once the surrounding GSM frequencies have been identified, we can then utilize gr-gsm.
The open-source application gr-gsm is a tool that allows for monitoring and analyzing
7Guide for installing gnu-radio into the cross-compilation environment from source https://wiki.
gnuradio.org/index.php?title=LinuxInstall#From_Source
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
62
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.8: Kalibrate-rtl scan for Extended GSM with findings
the GSM over-the-air signals. The tool operates purely passively and does not intervene
with any existing connections, instead, it listens to them. It also enables decoding and
extracting information over the GSM network such as voice calls, data, and SMS mes-
sages. So by using gr-gsm and deciding on a GSM frequency that we want to listen to,
we can eavesdrop on the GSM traﬀic.
This alone is suﬀicient to gather information on the connected devices and their IMSI.
With the use of a simple script. In this case, we used a Python script named IMSI-catcher
by Oros42 8, which looks through the monitored traﬀic from gr-gsm and lists the IMSI,
operator information, and cell tower id seen on figure 4.9. Please be aware that we only
intend to show our own IMSI associated with a temporary Lebara SIM card. Neverthe-
less, our purpose is to highlight the relevancy and threat of an IMSI catcher even if it is
in the context of a 2G GSM network.
Figure 4.9: List of caught IMSI, with operator and cell tower information with the use
of IMSI-catcher Python script
Results and Analysis
The objective of this experiment was to examine and analyze the feasibility of listening
to transmitted IMSIs within the cellular network. It successfully achieved this, demon-
strating the uncomplicated process involved in passively detecting GSM frequencies and
capturing the surrounding subscribers’ IMSI and TMSI.
Detecting surrounding GSM cell tower frequencies is done by iterating through the
whole frequency spectrum that GSM utilizes and broadcasts. In our demonstration,
the SDR was able to identify a strong GSM channel, which was later used to eavesdrop
on the traﬀic. This issue is unfortunately unavoidable, due to the communication struc-
ture of the cellular network, making passive IMSI capturing highly eﬀicient. With that
8https://github.com/Oros42/IMSI-catcher
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
63
==PAGE:73==
said, IMSI and TMSI do not contain sensitive information of the subscriber and there-
fore can not be used for exploitation. It is, however, possible to track the individual UE
and follow their location when jumping on different cell towers.
In regards to IMSI catching it can be done in different approaches; either passively or
actively. Passive catching which we described, does not harm or affect the structure of
the network or communication. However, active IMSI catching has a bigger security
impact, since it is based on a MITM attack. The active catcher essentially acts as a rogue
base station to capture all incoming and outgoing traﬀic of the UE that is connected to
the rogue tower. An attacker performing active IMSI catching on the GSM network will
therefore also be able to intercept voice calls and SMS messages, because of the lack
of integrity protection in 2G and the possibility of using no encryption. Active IMSI
catching is one of the biggest threats in mobile networks, which can exploit generations
from 2G up to 4G LTE and even 5G. 5G SA managed to protect the IMSIs from catching
by introducing the concept of SUCI (encrypted IMSI) to replace the IMSI but is still
vulnerable to the MITM attack of an IMSI catcher.
While there are limited measures to counteract the passive interception of IMSI catch-
ing, its impact on security and privacy is not as severe. However, if the attacker has
the tools, capabilities, and time, he could potentially brute force and intercept the en-
crypted messages from a victim on the GSM network (we will explore this in the next
experiment). Regarding security strategies to mitigate active IMSI catching, there are
several viable and effective methods, involving SIM swapping, catcher detection, and
more. These methods will be discussed in detail in section 6.
Evaluation
In conclusion to this experiment, we explored methods of creating a passive IMSI-catching
device with the use of open-source software and an SDR capable of low-frequency re-
ception. The whole setup could even be operated on a small SDR receiver dongle costing
approximately 400 DKK. Nevertheless, this clearly shows the requirements involved in
implementing an IMSI-catcher. Furthermore, it also shows that it is fairly easy for an at-
tacker to implement this simple IMSI catcher attack if they have the correct equipment,
a basic understanding of code, and some experience with using the command line. The
hardest part of our experimental setup was the cross-compiling, with the actual use of
the programs being fairly straightforward.
This experiment also shows that GSM is still used a fair amount even if it is not used by
most people in their everyday lives. This is seen from the sheer amount of IMSIs that
we managed to collect with the IMSI catcher in a very short time span. We managed to
capture hundreds of IMSIs in a couple of minutes of running the IMSI catcher.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
64
==PAGE:74==
4.4.3
GSM Packet Sniﬀing
This experiment will be a further investigation of the GSM network. In this part, we
explore communication traﬀic between the BTS and the UE. We will show the require-
ments and demonstrate the process of what it takes to be able to eavesdrop and sniff out
GSM packets. The demonstration aims to give an insight into how the communication
between the UE and the BTS is exchanged in practice when sending an SMS using 2G.
Required hardware
• 1 x HackRF One SDR (any kind of SDR capable of half-duplex communication)
• 1 x Laptop with Linux OS
• 1 x Android phone with SIM
Required software
• GNU-radio & GNU-radio-companion 9
• Gnu-Radio GSM (grgsm) 10
• Wireshark 11
The knowledge of the needed hardware and software for this experiment was obtained
through the README of the IMSI catcher repository, that was used in the previous ex-
periment. However, unlike the previous experiment, the usage section of the README
highlighted Wireshark as a necessary tool for packet inspection. The knowledge of the
rest of the required hardware and software was gained in the process of performing the
previous experiment.
Process
For this experiment, we will utilize the grgsm tools, which allow us to monitor and de-
code GSM channels. Before we can decode the traﬀic, we need to save a captured in-
stance of the communication by using grgsm_capture. Capturing the traﬀic requires
connecting the SDR to a laptop and running the capture command, shown in 4.1. Here
the command captures the 2G GSM frequency 934.2M with a sample rate of 1e6 for 30
seconds and outputs the file as capture.cfile.
1
grgsm_capture -f 934.2M
-s 1e6 -T 30 capture.cfile
Listing 4.1: grgsm_capture command
After capturing the communication between the Base Station and the UE it can be in-
spected and analyzed by decoding it with grgsm_decode command, as shown in 4.2.
9Gnu radio repository:https://github.com/gnuradio/gnuradio
10gr-gsm github repository https://github.com/ptrkrysik/gr-gsm
11Application link https://www.wireshark.org/
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
65
==PAGE:75==
1
grgsm_decode -f 934.2M -s 1e6 -c capture.cfile -m BCCH -t 0
Listing 4.2: grgsm_decode command for decoding broadcast frequency
The parameter BCCH is the channel mode, which we use as the initial channel as that is
the Broadcast Control channel that is used as the known base station downlink channel
for UE to make their initial connection with a default timeslot of 0 (We will explain the
difference in channels in the next section).
When executing this command any traﬀic that was present on the BCCH channel on the
specified frequency will be decoded, and reveal metadata used for GSM communication.
Different kinds of commands are issued from and to the base station. However, when
performing targeted eavesdropping, the most important command is the Immediate
Assignment command. When the base station has received a request for data to be sent
or received by the UE, the base station will allocate a dedicated channel and timeslot for
the UE for communication with an Immediate Assignment command. Upon receiving
the command, the UE will move to the reserved channel and timeslot on which it will
then agree on an encryption protocol with the base station.
Figure 4.10: Wireshark snippet of Immediate Assignment packet
Figure 4.10 shows the metadata inside an Immediate Assignment message. The impor-
tant information to observe is the channel description, which is the information of the
allocated channel that is issued to the UE when it is requesting data transmission. Inside
the description, it tells the UE to go to the allocated communication channel SDCCH8,
which is the Standalone Dedicated Control Channel, to which the reserved timeslot is 2.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
66
==PAGE:76==
It is also important to note that GSM is capable of frequency-hopping, which will make
identifying traﬀic a lot more diﬀicult, however, this connection does not use this option.
Now that we know of the allocated communication channel for the UE, it is then possible
to use the same decode command. By specifying the control channel and the timeslot,
we can decode the traﬀic on the dedicated channel and listen in on the communication.
1
grgsm_decode -f 934.2M -s 1e6 -c capture.cfile -m SDCCH8 -t 2
Listing 4.3: grgsm_decode command for decoding dedicated channel SDCCH
When decoding the dedicated channel and monitoring the traﬀic with Wireshark, we are
able to analyze the communication link between the base station and the assigned UE.
This channel is exclusive to the UE and here we can follow the initial connection setup,
which includes the choice of encryption algorithm, base station identity, and subscriber
identity. Figure 4.11, displays the Ciphering Mode Command which is the agreement of
the encryption algorithm.
Figure 4.11: Wireshark: capturing Ciphering Mode Command packet
The captured messages indicate that the A5/3 (KASUMI 64-bit) encryption algorithm
is being used. This information reveals the specific encryption method the UE uses on
the dedicated channel to encrypt their data.
Decrypting keys such as A5/1, A5/2, and A5/3 can be done. However, we do not possess
the right tools to do so and will therefore explore in theory how these security keys can
be uncovered in the next sections.
Results and analysis
The outcome of this demonstration was aimed to provide a better understanding of the
GSM network and how it communicates with the subscribers’ UE. We will now further
explain the concept of some of the important GSM channels and communication ele-
ments, which is illustrated in a simplified figure 4.12.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
67
==PAGE:77==
Figure 4.12: GSM Signalling channels
The GSM network utilizes various channels for different use cases. To illustrate the func-
tion of signal channels, we follow our experiment of sending an SMS.
1. The BTS broadcasts its network information to all UE on the broadcast channel
BCCH, which the UE will store. This information makes it possible for the UE to
later establish a communication link with the BTS.
2. The UE sends the request by using the RACH uplink channel to request data trans-
mission over the network.
3. The BTS receives the request and replies by allocating a dedicated channel SDCCH
for the UE to communicate over.
4. The UE moves to the designated channel and agrees on an encryption algorithm.
After an agreement has been performed the SMS will now be sent from the UE
with encryption.
This small scenario illustrates the application within the GSM network, showcasing how
various channels and command messages are issued for the successful transmission of
SMS messages.
In the course of this experiment, we have retrieved multiple interesting packets. One
such packet can be seen in figure 4.13, which reveals all metadata for a location update
request. The location update request is used by the UE to inform the network of its new
location and to establish a connection to the network. This request therefore holds either
the TMSI or the IMSI of the UE. Furthermore, we can identify which location area the
phone is connected to by its MNC and MCC, which can potentially be used to target a
specific operator.
Overall, this sniﬀing experiment provided insight into the packet exchange and chan-
nel designation for the UE to communicate with the GSM network. We have explored
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
68
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.13: Wireshark snippet of a Location Update Request on GSM
multiple exchanged messages that showcased the establishment of the connection to the
network, requesting data transmission from the UE and issuing encryption agreements.
Evaluation
Throughout this experiment, we managed to successfully show the flow of the GSM
communication of a UE sending data over the network. We, however, experienced the
limitation of identifying our security keys from our mobile phone to showcase the de-
cryption of data that is transmitted from the UE to the BTS.
Although we could not retrieve our A5/3 (KASUMI) encryption key, it is possible. This
can either be done by using a mobile phone and executing an AT+CSIM command (How-
ever, it only works on some phones). The command essentially allows us to access the
phone interface and send raw command data directly to the SIM 12. Another possible
exploitation is the one proposed by Dunkelman et. al. [30], which ultimately reduces
the time complexity from 262 to 232 to crack the encryption key in a few minutes. If the
key is retrieved it can be used to decrypt the messages by using the same decode com-
mand with additional parameters, as displayed on 4.4.
1
grgsm_decode -f 949.2M -s 1e6 -c capture.cfile -m SDCCH8 -t 2 -e 3 -k [
KEY]
12Guide for accessing encryption key KC https://osmocom.org/projects/security/wiki/A5_GSM_AT_
tricks (Accessed 22. Jan.)
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
69
==PAGE:79==
Listing 4.4: Decoding command on A5/3 encryption key
Here we can specify the encryption algorithm required for decryption. In this case, 3
corresponds to A5/3, as identified from the earlier ciphering mode command. Next, the
exact A5/3 key associated with the connection must be provided. Once this is done, any
communication between the UE and BTS will be exposed to the attacker allowing the
intruder to view SMS messages and listen in on voice calls.
If however, the less secure A5/1 or A5/2 encryption methods were used instead, the
attacker could easily crack and intercept the sensitive information. An exploit to crack
the two encryption keys is by using rainbow tables [45] and the brute force cracking tool
Kraken13.
It is important to note that, this simple experiment only gathers messages that all our
phones (old ones) are constantly listening to and does not expose highly sensitive data.
However, we presented a potential security threat that could be exploited to intercept
and decrypt messages sent on 2G.
In conclusion, we managed to passively monitor and analyze the GSM network and the
communication with a UE using minimal resources. This would only require the at-
tacker to have an SDR capable of GSM frequencies and a computer for monitoring and
allows the attacker to sniff on the GSM network targeting a UE on a dedicated chan-
nel and identifying the encryption algorithm used, for which he could determine an
appropriate technique for decryption of either A5/1, A5/2 or even A5/3.
13Kraken tool git repository: https://github.com/joswr1ght/kraken
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
70
==PAGE:80==
5
Countermeasures and mitigations
The following section will present a variety of potential strategies centered around net-
work threats identified in this project. It will be based around ensuring the protection
against tracking-, privacy- and availability attacks. While these solutions are not ex-
haustive, they offer multiple security enhancements that benefit the mobile network as
a whole, rather than focusing on isolated solutions for each generation.
5.1
Anti-Jamming methods
Given the nature of Radio communication and signals, they are challenged with a noto-
rious and persistent issue which is the vulnerability to Denial of Service (DoS) attacks.
Mitigating a jammer that interferes with frequencies in its surroundings is a diﬀicult
feat to accomplish, but not impossible.
A strategy for mitigating eavesdropping and jamming attacks is frequency-hop spread
spectrum (FHSS) which is a common concept regarding radio frequencies. This tech-
nique involves dividing the frequency bands into numerous smaller channels. The trans-
mitter sends packets in small bursts over these channels, then both UE and base station,
hop to a different determined channel for the next transmission. The order of which
channel to switch to is determined by a pseudo-random sequence shared between the
transmitter and receiver, telling which channel to switch to [43]. This mechanism of
rapid frequency shifting would essentially complicate potential eavesdropping and jam-
ming attacks that interfere with a few channels. Partially disrupting the frequency band,
does not completely block off the transmission which utilizes FHSS, as illustrated in
figure 5.1. Despite this, FHSS does have certain limitations for mobile networks, par-
ticularly because mobile frequencies are regulated to use public bands with limited
bandwidth. This constraint means that an attacker could jam all transmissions within
that spectrum if the bandwidth is narrow. However, generations like 5G, which have a
broader bandwidth reaching 1GHz [38], would require the attacker to deploy a much
stronger jamming device to disrupt the frequency band effectively or selectively disrupt
channels.
Some methods of FHSS are used on mobile networks, even in earlier generations, such
as 2G GSM. However, in some cases, this technique is not enabled, which was witnessed
in our experiment of sniﬀing the GSM packets 4.4.3. Applying and activating this mech-
anism would enhance the resilience of mobile networks to interference, while also re-
ducing the risks associated with tracking and packet sniﬀing.
Beamforming is another anti-jamming strategy, which is one of the many advanced sig-
nalling features that was introduced with 5G. This technique focuses the transmission
signal directly to the UE by utilizing an array of antennas and adjusting their signal
phases and amplitude. By controlling the multiple phases they can align the waves
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
71
==PAGE:81==
Figure 5.1: Frequency-Hop Spread Spectrum over three channels with attacker jamming
one channel
in a particular direction and also cancel each other out in other directions [6]. This
would essentially allow for a stronger signal strength in the direction of the connected
UE. Beamforming would mitigate frequency interference by strengthening the signal.
This would require the attacker to have a powerful jammer to disrupt the signal effec-
tively. Moreover, transmitting signals in directional areas would reduce the chances of
an attacker interfering with the frequency if the attacker is not located in the same path
as the directed beam.
5.2
Dual SIM Swapping
Carriers operate on different frequency channels due to regulatory compliance, inter-
national standards, and effective network management. Each network generation is as-
sociated with a specific frequency channel as well, which varies among operators. Ad-
ditionally, operators do not necessarily achieve the same network security levels. Al-
though they must comply with basic regulatory frameworks and directives, some op-
erators might only meet the minimum requirements, potentially leaving vulnerabilities
that attackers could exploit. This may result in attackers narrowing the frequency spec-
trum, targeting operators that might lack security protection.
A possible mitigation for operator-specific attacks is the dual SIM swapping method.
This method provides a unique approach meant to enhance network security and main-
tain the user’s connectivity by swapping between SIM cards from different operators. If
a UE does not receive a signal from an already established connection due to jamming,
then the UE would be able to swap to another operator network, as illustrated in 5.2.
Another solution would be for the UE to identify the downgrade or bidding-down attack
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
72
==PAGE:82==
Figure 5.2: Attacker targeting a specific operator’s network with DoS attack
and swap SIM for a more secure connection. This scenario would involve features built
into the mobile phone itself since SIM cards and the mobile network should not have the
responsibility of checking if the UE can swap SIM. Mitigation measures could involve
the SIM card determining the security context of the connection, and identifying the
network generation in use. A SIM swap could be initiated when the UE detects abnormal
behaviour on the connection, such as an unexpected establishment of an old generation
through an RRC redirection command to a 2G/3G tower, or establishing a connection
with security capability that lacks encryption.
In such unusual cases, it is highly probable that they indicate a bidding-down or down-
grade attack against the UE. Utilizing a dual SIM setup can prevent such attacks by
allowing the UE to switch to a more secure connection provided by an alternative op-
erator, one that is not compromised or targeted by the attacker, as depicted in figure
5.3.
Figure 5.3: Attacker targeting a specific operator’s network with a Downgrade attack
The implementation of Dual Swap SIM can be performed through various ways to en-
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
73
==PAGE:83==
sure the safety of the subscriber. A technique that can be adopted by the UE is to check
for any anomalies in the communication link. Potential indications of network anoma-
lies could be the following:
• Use of old standards: One of the biggest security concerns in cellular networks
is the operational older and less secure network generations. Having the UE con-
nected to weaker connections would enable the attacker to easily perform mali-
cious activities on the victim. The anomaly check could be done by checking the
frequencies of the communication channel. Another possibility is to listen to ab-
normal RRC commands that redirect the UE from secure connections such as 5G
and 4G connections to a 2G GSM, which were explored in section 3.10 allowing
the attacker to perform a downgrade attack.
• Repeated authentication requests: The behaviour of repeated authentication re-
quests is often an indication of IMSI catchers. The attacker may try to identify the
victim by refusing the TMSI of the victim, which will lead to the victim issuing
the IMSI instead. Recognizing this malicious behaviour and switching to another
carrier network would prevent sharing the IMSI with possible rogue towers.
• No encryption method: One of the most abnormal actions that the network would
make is to issue a communication channel without any encryption agreement. If
the BTS requests a no-encryption ciphering mode, then there is a high chance
of it being a rogue BTS for malicious intent. Checking the ciphering mode com-
mand (which we explored in experiment 4.4.3) and recognizing non-encryption
requests, would trigger SIM swap and connect to another carrier network.
• Sudden signal loss: Loss of radio signal is not an unusual issue, and can occur
during fast movement or in isolated areas. However, experiencing an abrupt and
complete loss of service in an area where it is typically consistent and without any
movement is uncommon. This occurrence can be an indication of a jamming attack
and would possibly be avoided when connecting to another frequency channel
from another SIM, as carriers use different frequency channels.
The implementation of SIM swapping anomaly check should not require additional
hardware, since we demonstrated packet exchanges in section 4.4.3 in practice which
the UE constantly listens to and acts upon. Despite these listed indications, it is still
a diﬀicult feat to accomplish anomaly detection, since telecommunication capabilities
vary among cities and countries and can therefore not be implemented universally. It is
also important to understand that these anomalies are not a guarantee of an attack in-
cident however, they give suspicion to a malicious attack, and by recognizing the issue
beforehand, the UE can avoid giving any information to the attacker.
Dual SIM swapping could also in theory help mitigate SUCI catcher attacks. The way
dual SIM swapping could be used to mitigate SUCI catcher attacks is by having the UE
bind the SIM cards to different Location Areas (LA). There could be different schemes
in how the different LAs are bound to each SIM card. The way that this would mitigate
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
74
==PAGE:84==
the SUCI catcher attack is that if they have only gotten the SUCI from one of the SIM
cards then they will only be able to correctly check the presence of the UE in LAs that
use the SIM card to which the captured SUCI belongs to. Furthermore, if the UE is set
to not use the same SIM in adjacent LAs it will make tracking more diﬀicult for the at-
tackers. This way if an attacker wants to track a person of interest then they would need
to capture their SUCI twice in different locations, which is not impossible but makes
the discovery phase longer and more demanding. This would become even more of a
problem if there are multiple people of interest that the attacker wants to track.
In summary, the use of dual SIM swapping technique is a viable method for mitigating
certain network attacks, offering an additional way to secure the connection between the
network and UE. Nevertheless, this approach should be considered as a supplementary
measure, complementing the security for the UE device and the subscriber, since it does
not actively prevent the attack from happening, and instead avoids the attack by SIM
swapping.
5.3
IMSI Catcher detection
IMSI catchers are used for many of the attacks that we have described in earlier sections
and one of the ways to counter these IMSI catchers is something called an IMSI Catcher
Catcher (ICC). These ICCs are supposed to detect the presence of IMSI catchers through
different methods depending on the implementation. However, they all focus on some
part of the abnormalities that are introduced by the presence of an IMSI catcher. The way
that they accomplish the IMSI catcher detection is different depending on the intended
use case for the ICC. One implementation is to have fixed location detectors spread out
in a cell that constantly monitors the network and thereby can detect the abnormality of
a sudden appearance of an IMSI catcher[25].
These detectors are constantly running and detecting if an IMSI catcher is present but
only in the area that they are placed in. This can be used for different use cases. It can
be adapted by the government to detect IMSI catchers and send out law enforcement to
remove and possibly apprehend the person responsible. Alternatively, it could be set up
with another system and an accompanying app where users of the app, who are in the
detection area will receive a warning about a potential IMSI catcher in the area. Another
implementation and use case is to create an app for smartphones that will monitor differ-
ent parameters and warn the user if there is a high risk of an IMSI catcher being present.
In [25] they describe one possible implementation of such an app. This implementa-
tion of such an app would function by having the phone collect all available data from
cells in the area and store this information while also correlating the data with its loca-
tion. This way the application will slowly get an understanding of the network topology
of the locations that the user has visited while the app is running. This concept is similar
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
75
==PAGE:85==
to ”fog of war” found in video games, where you gradually uncover the map by explor-
ing it, thus removing the fog and gaining information about the surroundings. This is
a fairly apt description since the application would only be able to detect anomalies in
areas that the user has visited previously due to it not having any pre-existing data on
the network topology in that location.
It is also proposed in [25] that the app could show screens varying in colour depending
on how certain the app is of an IMSI catcher being nearby. The reason for having differ-
ent colours rather than informing the user that there is an IMSI catcher is that some of
the anomalies associated with IMSI catcher are not always indicative of their presence.
Thus, these anomalies might occur even without an IMSI catcher being present. It is
therefore wise to not overreact when there are only a few anomalies present but still ad-
vise the user to proceed with caution. This approach would allow to use of the network
but might hold off on using it for tasks that involve sensitive information.
One way that the ICCs can be implemented is with soft computing. This could be with
the use of machine learning that would use the parameters that an IMSI catcher normally
affects as input and use this to deduce whether an IMSI catcher is present or not. One of
the ways this could be implemented is outlined in [80] and focuses on creating different
anomaly detectors through offline learning and then combining them with an ensem-
ble detector. The ensemble detector can use different methods to combine the anomaly
detectors, with majority voting being the simplest approach. However, weighted voting
could also be considered especially if some of the anomalies are found to be stronger
indicators of the presence of an IMSI catcher.
In [80] they have three different anomaly detectors that each focus on one of the follow-
ing parameters: The change in ratio between the number of phones on 2G and 3G, the
temporary disappearance of phones from the network, and the disabling of encryption.
Having the disabling of encryption as a parameter is a good indicator of the presence of
an IMSI catcher in most circumstances since encryption is normally always enabled for
normal consumer phones. The temporary disappearance of phones from the network
is a valid parameter to use because IMSI catcher often wants their targets to use GSM
which can be forced using jamming. However, such jamming typically affects all of the
signals in the area and thereby has a high amount of phones that temporarily disappear
until the jamming is stopped.
The change between the number of phones on 3G and 2G also makes sense in some
capacity since an IMSI will often want their target to use the more insecure protocols
than the more secure protocols present in newer generations. The number of phones on
3G might make less sense now since 4G is fairly widespread and this parameter could
therefore be changed to look at the number of phones using 2G vs non-2G. There are
some problems with this approach to ICCs. One is that the data collection is not that
simple since the different generations split the network differently so getting a good
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
76
==PAGE:86==
dataset becomes a more complicated process[80].
Another problem with the approach is the training of the anomaly detectors since there
would be a need to have someone qualified to verify if the result is a true positive when
the anomaly detectors detect an IMSI catcher.
There is also the problem that these systems would need to be trained for each area
in which one would want to set them up since networks in two different locations can
be vastly different. This would also likely mean that ICCs that make use of machine
learning in the way that is described above would be of the stationary kind. However,
this does not exclude the possibility of using machine learning in some way in an ICC
that runs on a consumer-grade phone.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
77
==PAGE:87==
5.4
Risk Matrix
Attack
Risk level
Impact level
Countermeasure
IMSI-Catching Passive
Dual SIM swapping 5.2
IMSI-Catching Active
Dual SIM swapping 5.2, Catcher detection 5.3
Downgrade Attack
Dual SIM swapping 5.2, Anti-Jamming tech-
niques 5.1, Catcher detection 5.3
SUCI catching
Authentication request throttling (5G SA
SUCI-Catcher 3.1.3)
Phone number catching
Catcher detection 5.3, Dual SIM swapping 5.2
Jamming 1
Anti-Jamming techniques 5.1, Dual SIM swap-
ping 5.2
Trilateration/Cell Tower Triangulation
Dual SIM swapping 5.2
Location exploitation by SS7
Dual SIM swapping 5.2
Table 5.1: Risk matrix with associated probability (risk) and their consequences (impact) as well as corresponding
countermeasures
- High
- Moderate
- Low
1Referring to all forms of jamming explored in Section 3.1.4
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
78
==PAGE:88==
6
Discussion
It might seem obvious but terminating old legacy networks will improve security for
mobile devices since these networks have weaker security and are often exploited to en-
able security attacks. Bringing 2G GSM as well as 3G UMTS to an end, would have a
significant impact and reduce the threat vectors in mobile networks considerably, mak-
ing downgrade attacks, jamming, and simple eavesdropping less of a threat.
Achieving this goal involves considerable preparation since a lot of industrial IoT de-
vices still rely on legacy network protocols. This means that if the legacy networks are
terminated, then it would need to be done in a way that does not compromise these
IoT devices. A practical approach could therefore be, to target base stations exclusively
serving mobile phones for termination first. This would help prevent several attacks
on mobile phones while still allowing critical devices to continue to function. This ap-
proach would provide more security for mobile phones while allowing IoT devices that
use these legacy networks to have more time to transition to newer networks.
Another possible consideration is to allow users to deactivate old generations from their
network preferences completely. As of now, standard mobile phones are only capable of
downgrading their network type, leaving them vulnerable to downgrade attacks. The
problem with this solution compared to simply removing 2G and 3G base stations that
serve mobile phones, is that this solution would only protect the users that have actively
disabled 2G and 3G on their phones unless they are disabled by default. This is a rea-
sonable concern since most average users do not interact with these types of settings on
their phones. Downgrade attacks exploit the inherent security weaknesses of 2G GSM
networks, significantly simplifying the exploitation process for attackers.
Furthermore, in many countries such as Denmark, there is no real need for a standard
mobile phone to use 2G or even 3G due to the countrywide 4G and 5G coverage. There-
fore, the inability to deactivate older generations only acts as a security vulnerability.
However, there might still be some citizens who have and use phones that cannot use 4G
and newer networks due to their age. The number of citizens that fit this criterion might
not be a significant part of the population, depending on the exact location observed.
However, this does not mean that they should not be considered. One way to accomplish
out phasing 2G and 3G to some degree, while still allowing 2G and 3G to be accessible to
UEs that cannot use newer generations, could be to remove 2G and 3G as mobile network
options from newer phones and phones that are still supported. This would not improve
security as much as just phasing out 2G and 3G networks for all mobile phones but
would still improve security for new phones and phones that are still receiving security
updates.
Generally, there are pros and cons to each of the approaches that we have mentioned,
and what approach should be implemented depends on the specific situation in the
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
79
==PAGE:89==
locations it will be implemented. Though, regardless of which solution is implemented
it will ultimately result in improved security for the mobile network.
Many of the attacks that we have discussed in the previous sections of the report can
be made more diﬀicult and complex to implement for an attacker. This could be ac-
complished by implementing some of the many optional security features that exist in
the standards. Many of these security features should be implemented to improve the
security of mobile networks. One of the more important security features that should
be addressed, is that 5G can be set to use null encryption by providing invalid UE ca-
pabilities, specifically if the encryptions that the UE is capable of are tampered with. It
could be changed such that a standard smartphone will not accept a connection to a base
station that issues a null encryption channel to the UE. Such a connection should not be
made with a standard smartphone, since most smartphones that can access 5G would
be capable of using at least one of the available encryption schemes that 5G makes use of.
Many of these types of problems that lead to potentially serious security risks happen
despite the specifications detailing how to avoid having these security problems. This
happens because some networks are not set up, such that they correctly follow the spec-
ification. These types of problems could therefore be prevented to some extent if there
were more control, regarding whether a network follows the specifications correctly, en-
suring the expected level of security for that particular network type. Generally, there
needs to be more incentives for the operators that set up the mobile networks, to imple-
ment the specification correctly. These approaches would help eliminate security issues
for which have known and specified solutions, from the network.
Furthermore, changing many of the optional security features to mandatory features
would improve security by ensuring they are implemented by operators in newer mo-
bile networks.
Another reason for some of the security flaws that can be used to perform bidding-down
attacks is the lack of specification. It is particularly notable for 5G NSA since it is a mid-
point between 4G and 5G SA, meaning it is not 4G but also not true 5G. This is awkward
regarding the specifications because 5G NSA is not covered by 4G nor 5G, but has its
specifications which are lacking compared to 4G and 5G specifications.
The mitigations and countermeasures that we explored in section 5 are not perfect and
have some caveats. For example with dual SIM swapping depending on how sensitive
it has been implemented to be regarding the network anomalies it could result in the UE
swapping SIM when it does not need to thereby worsening the user experience. Another
part to consider is that a user would need to have two SIM cards from different operators
and therefore needs to have two different phone plans, which might be doable for most
people but it is an extra expense. However, it still provides some protection against
IMSI catcher attacks which for people in certain positions would be valued more than
just user experience.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
80
==PAGE:90==
ICCs can be implemented in different ways, each having its pros and cons. The app
implementation has the pro that it can run on a user’s phone and directly warn them if
there are suspicions of an IMSI catcher in the area. However, it is limited in how accurate
it can be due to having limited data available to it. This could potentially be overcome
by using machine learning built on data from stationary ICCs, which can collect more
data about the network. However, there are still some problems with this approach
since the network can vary significantly from location to location, and machine learning
might only work in the area in which it has been trained or work poorly in areas where
it has not been trained. With stationary ICCs, they can constantly monitor a network in
a specific area and locate potential IMSI catchers, though the challenge here lies with
what to do with the information. It could be set up with an app such that all users of
that app who are in the area get a warning about a potential IMSI catcher. The problem
with this approach is that it needs to have the stationary ICCs set up in the area before
it works and this would likely limit its use to larger cities since it would get expensive to
ínstall stationary ICCs everywhere. ICCs also generally have the problem that they are
not certain that something is an IMSI catcher since many of the signs of an IMSI catcher
can also sometimes appear in normal networks with no IMSI catchers present.
The anti-jamming methods that we described in 5.1 are also not without flaws. For
example FHSS can be defeated by an attacker if they figure out the pattern
6.1
Research question answers
We started this project with some research questions that we wanted to answer. The
questions were as follows:
1 How has security in mobile networks evolved, and what vulnerabilities and secu-
rity improvements have appeared over time?
2 What is required to implement an IMSI catcher?
3 What is required to implement a Downgrade attack?
4 What are the possible implications of being a victim of an IMSI-catching attack?
5 What countermeasures can be implemented to mitigate the security issues associ-
ated with both IMSI-catching and Downgrade Attacks?
Question 1 was addressed by investigating the architecture and their initial handshake
process used to establish connections for each generation in Section 2. This exploration
also included examining the security features, highlighting how generations progres-
sively improved relative to their predecessors. Additionally, a comparative overview
of the specification of each generation was presented, illustrating the advancements
achieved over time in Section 2.6.
For question 2 we found different types of IMSI catchers. The simplest of catchers would
only require any kind of SDR and open-source software, which we explored in Section
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
81
==PAGE:91==
4.4.2. On the other hand, setting up a more advanced version of an IMSI catcher would
require an advanced SDR such as the Ettus USRP B210 SDR, along with open-source
software.
For question 3 we found that a downgrade attack can be implemented with a simple SDR
by jamming the available channels in Section 4.4.1. We experimented with the jamming
and forced a phone to connect to another base station using a hack RF one. Even though
we only stopped connections to one base station we still proved that with more signals,
through more antennas and or radios it is possible to stop connections to all available
5G base stations.
For question 4 we found that there are multiple different implications for victims of
an IMSI catcher attack depending on how advanced the IMSI catcher was which was
investigated in Section 3.1.1. Some of the common implications were that the victim
could now be tracked by the attacker using the captured IMSI. However, if the catcher
was more advanced it could have led to the attacker disabling encryption and snooping
on the data that the victim was sending out, such as SMS and calls, found in Section
3.10. The attacker would also have been able to deny service to the victim’s phone such
that they would not be able to receive calls, SMS, or make use of mobile data until the
phone is restarted.
For question 5 we have discussed different countermeasures and mitigations in Section
5 and 6. These countermeasures and mitigations consist of observations on what would
need to be changed to remove some of the existing weaknesses that are exploited to per-
form IMSI catching and downgrade attacks, and schemes and techniques that should,
in theory, mitigate downgrade attacks and IMSI catching and its related attacks. The
most interesting of which is the dual SIM swapping that should make it more diﬀicult
for an attacker to do IMSI catching and downgrade attacks through switching between
two SIM cards from different operators. It does not make it impossible for an attacker to
pull off these kinds of attacks, but it increases the amount of intel and equipment that
the attacker would need to make the attack successful.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
82
==PAGE:92==
7
Future works
There are many things that we would have liked to do if we had more time. One of the
things we would have done would be to acquire the Ettus B210 USRP SDR, which we
could have used to create an active IMSI catcher to more thoroughly test what it takes to
create different IMSI catchers. Furthermore, had we achieved success with the creation
of the active IMSI catcher then we would have been able to create and perform experi-
ments to demonstrate our proposed mitigations to attacks using the active IMSI catcher.
This is something we very much would have liked to do, such that our proposed miti-
gation would be supported through novel experiments and the outcomes derived from
them.
Another thing we would have liked to work on had time not been a problem would
be to make the Ettus E312 USRP SDR able to act as an active IMSI catcher. Since all
the open-source software that we found said it supported Ettus USRP SDRs then they
should technically work on the E312 however, the installation and compilation were not
made to support an embedded device like the E312. Our goal would have been to fig-
ure out all the necessary steps to compile and install the software on the E312 while also
making a script to automate the process. We would only do this if we had more time be-
cause we already used a considerable amount of time on it and could see that we would
not be able to obtain the result that we wanted in the time that we had available.
The reason why it would be relevant to make the E312 capable of being an active IMSI
catcher would be to make it easier for researchers to test more diverse scenarios of IMSI
catcher attacks since having the E312 as an IMSI catcher would be more mobile than us-
ing a peripheral device like the B210 together with a laptop that it is connected to. Not
that mobile IMSI catchers are not possible using peripheral devices like the B210, such a
device was created and tested in [66] using both the B210 and a Raspberry Pi. However,
that setup required the authors to create a mobile power supply for the Raspberry Pi,
and not everyone is capable of doing this, so if the E312 by itself would be capable of
working as a mobile IMSI catcher then it would lower the requirements needed to test
explore the different aspect in a mobile IMSI catcher.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
83
==PAGE:93==
8
Reflection
During the process of writing this thesis, we have researched the mobile network and
looked at the different generations, how they differ from each other, and how security
has changed from generation to generation. Furthermore, several different attacks that
affect the different generations and some of the vulnerabilities that they have were ex-
plored. We realized that the mobile network was not as safe and secure as we initially
assumed. The software needed to run some of the attacks was also readily available on
GitHub, such that the biggest question in whether an attack could be performed or not,
was whether one could get access to the equipment that is needed.
Many attacks are possible in some of the network generations and some attacks force a
user to a specific generation where a follow-up attack is performed. We designed a num-
ber of experiments and attempted to implement them but realized that we did not have
the right equipment for certain desired experiments. The setup that should have been
easy for these attacks ended up being very diﬀicult due to this lack of equipment. We
therefore ended up doing some simpler experiments that still showcased some of the
vulnerabilities that are present in mobile networks. However, we also came to realize
through performing the experiments and writing the thesis that there are countermea-
sures to these attacks and that some of the attacks are only possible if the operators have
configured their networks incorrectly. Furthermore, we also came up with some ways
to mitigate some of these weaknesses/vulnerabilities that the attacks make use of. A
number of the mitigations were fairly simple while others were more complex and will
remain theoretical at the moment. This is because we were unable to conduct the ex-
periments aimed at testing these mitigations, due to the lack of equipment to set up the
attacks themselves. We are therefore hopeful for the future of mobile networks. It ap-
pears that many are aware of the vulnerabilities that plague mobile networks and there
is an active effort to come up with and test countermeasures against these vulnerabili-
ties.
There were many things that we wanted to achieve for this thesis that we did not manage
to do for different reasons. One of the reasons was that the realization of the available
equipment limitations did not become apparent until we were too far into the project.
Since we realized this too late, and due to budget issues, we were not able to get our
hands on the equipment needed for the experiments that we had originally planned.
This meant that we could not test our mitigation in practice since we could not set up
the attacks that we wanted to mitigate.
This has provided us with a valuable lesson that we can take with us. The lesson is
that there can be large differences in what similar equipment can do and it is always im-
portant to limit and verify one’s assumptions as early as possible to give oneself as much
time as possible to course correct if the assumptions end up not holding. It is not that
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
84
==PAGE:94==
we did not know this at the start but we did not have any experience with some of the
equipment that we should use, specifically SDR, and had therefore ended up making
some assumptions about the equipment we had available due to various reasons. Had
we started with the IMSI catcher experiment instead of the easier and simpler jamming
experiment, we might have realized the limitations of our equipment earlier. Thereby
allowing us more time to find a way around this problem.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
85
==PAGE:95==
9
Conclusion
In conclusion, our exploration into the current mobile network has uncovered various
security vulnerabilities, involving issues regarding tracking-, privacy- and availability
attacks. We have presented the main components of the heterogeneous mobile network,
illustrating the infrastructure, protocols, and distinct features between network gener-
ations. A clear view of the communication between a UE and the mobile network is
presented.
We demonstrate three attack experiments on the mobile network. The passive 2G GSM
IMSI-catcher attack showcases the simple method of obtaining IMSI from nearby UEs.
Furthermore, the attack reveals a surprising number of devices still connected to the
insecure 2G network. Based on 2G GSM we demonstrate the process of sniﬀing net-
work packets on different frequency channels and examining the metadata information,
which can be used with malicious intent. Finally, we perform a DoS attack in the form
of a Downgrade-Attack. This attack illustrates the issue of modern generations such as
5G and 4G, capable of moving down to old exploitable generations. As a result, we ex-
amine and analyze the risks and impact of all three attacks and explore situations that
can unfold during a real-world attack.
Based on our findings, we discuss potential mitigations and countermeasures with em-
phasis on tracking-, privacy- and availability attacks. Although these security imple-
mentations are not an exhaustive evaluation of the mobile network, they offer a good
starting point for readers who have an interest in mobile security.
As a result of this thesis, it can be concluded that while the current mobile network
presents numerous opportunities and solutions for our society, it also introduces a range
of security challenges. Addressing these challenges is essential for securing both the
current mobile network and its future developments.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
86
==PAGE:96==
Bibliography
[1] M. A. Abdel-Malek, M. M. Sayed, and M. Azab. UAV-Based Privacy-Preserved
Trustworthy Seamless Service Agility for NextG Cellular Networks. Sensors, 22(7),
4 2022.
[2] A. A. Abdul Ghaffar, A. Mahmoud, T. Sheltami, and M. Abu-Amara. A Survey
on Software-Defined Networking-Based 5G Mobile Core Architectures. Arabian
Journal for Science and Engineering, 48(2):2313–2330, 2 2023.
[3] Adam Weinberg. A Step by Step Guide to SS7 Attacks. firstpoint, 4 2023.
[4] W. Ahmad. Voice over LTE: New Voice Dynamics. Technical report, 2016.
[5] S. Al-Tarawneh and B. Al-Twal. GSM Authentication Algorithm ’COMP128’. Tech-
nical report, Jordan University of Science and Technology, 8 2005.
[6] E. Ali, M. Ismail, R. Nordin, and N. F. Abdulah. Beamforming techniques for mas-
sive MIMO systems in 5G: overview, classification, and trends for future research,
6 2017.
[7] A. M. Alwakeel, A. K. Alnaim, and E. B. Fernandez. A Survey of Network Function
Virtualization Security. 2018.
[8] Amit Kumar, Yunfei Liu, Jyotsna Sengupta, and Divya4. Evolution of Mobile Wire-
less Communication Networks: 1G to 4G. 1(1), 12 2010.
[9] Ani Petrosyan. Annual number of Internet of Things (IoT) malware attacks world-
wide from 2018 to 2022, 5 2023.
[10] Y. Arjoune and S. Faruque. Smart Jamming Attacks in 5G New Radio: A Review.
Technical report, 2020.
[11] F. M. Asmare and L. G. Ayalew. Security challenges in the transition to 4G mobile
systems in developing countries. Cogent Engineering, 10(1), 2023.
[12] M. Bakaul, M. Ashikul, H. M., and S. Rahman. Security in GSM Networks. Inter-
national Journal of Computer Applications, 177(29):36–39, 1 2020.
[13] T. Balderas-Contreras and R. A. Cumplido-Parra. Security Architecture in UMTS
Third Generation Cellular Networks. Technical report, 2004.
[14] E. Barkan, E. Biham, and N. Keller. Instant ciphertext-only cryptanalysis of GSM
encrypted communication. Journal of Cryptology, 21(3):392–429, 7 2008.
[15] M. Becher, F. C. Freiling, J. Hoffmann, T. Holz, S. Uellenbeck, and C. Wolf. Mobile
security catching up? Revealing the nuts and bolts of the security of mobile devices.
In Proceedings - IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, pages 96–111, 2011.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
87
==PAGE:97==
[16] N. Bhandari, S. Devra, and K. Singh. Evolution of Cellular Network: From 1G to
5G. International Journal of Engineering and Techniques, 3.
[17] S. A. Bjerre, M. W. Klaebel Blomsterberg, and B. Andersen. 5G Attacks and Coun-
termeasures. In International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Commu-
nications, WPMC, volume 2022-October, pages 285–290. IEEE Computer Society,
2022.
[18] Bo Yi, Xingwei Wang, Keqin Li, Sajal k. Das, and Min Huang. A comprehensive
survey of Network Function Virtualization. 2018.
[19] G. Brown. Designing 5G-Ready Mobile Core Networks. 2016.
[20] CableLabs. A Comparative Introduction to 4G and 5G Authentication. Technical
report, 2019.
[21] M. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Hu, T. Taleb, and Z. Sheng. Cloud-based Wireless Network:
Virtualized, Reconfigurable, Smart Wireless Network to Enable 5G Technologies.
Mobile Networks and Applications, 20(6):704–712, 12 2015.
[22] M. Chlosta, D. Rupprecht, C. Pöpper, and T. Holz. 5G SUCI-catchers: Still catching
them all?
In WiSec 2021 - Proceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on Security and
Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks, pages 359–364. Association for Computing
Machinery, Inc, 6 2021.
[23] J. Cichonski, J. M. Franklin, and M. Bartock. Guide to LTE security. Technical report,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 12 2017.
[24] Cisco Press. Signaling System No. 7: The Role of SS7, 2004.
[25] A. Dabrowski, N. Pianta, T. Klepp, M. Mulazzani, and E. Weippl. IMSI-Catch me if
you can: IMSI-Catcher-catchers. In ACM International Conference Proceeding Series,
volume 2014-December, pages 246–255. Association for Computing Machinery, 12
2014.
[26] R. Dangi, P. Lalwani, G. Choudhary, I. You, and G. Pau. Study and investigation
on 5g technology: A systematic review, 1 2022.
[27] A. Z. Dodd.
PRAISE FOR THE ESSENTIAL GUIDE TO TELECOMMUNICA-
TIONS, FIFTH EDITION. Technical report, 2012.
[28] J. R. Dohmen, L. Sømo, and O. Grimstad Norway. UMTS Authentication and Key
Agreement-A comprehensive illustration of AKA procedures within the UMTS
system. Technical report, 2001.
[29] Duncan McLeod. ‘Kill 3G, not 2G’. https://techcentral.co.za/kill-3g-not-2g/197983/,
2017.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
88
==PAGE:98==
[30] O. Dunkelman, N. Keller, and A. Shamir. A practical-time related-key attack on
the KASUMI cryptosystem used in GSM and 3G telephony. Journal of Cryptology,
27(4):824–849, 2014.
[31] P. Ekdahl, T. Johansson, A. Maximov, and J. Yang. A new SNOW stream cipher
called SNOW-V. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology, 2019(3):1–42, 2019.
[32] ericsson. Cellular IoT connections expected to reach 3 billion in 2023. ericsson.
[33] N. Fazle Rabbi. Introduction to 5G. 2020.
[34] H. Fehmi, M. F. Amr, A. Bahnasse, and M. Talea. 5G Network: Analysis and Com-
pare 5G NSA/5G SA. In Procedia Computer Science, volume 203, pages 594–598.
Elsevier B.V., 2022.
[35] X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashfi, and M. K. Marina. Network Slicing in 5G:
Survey and Challenges, 5 2017.
[36] A. I. Gardezi. Generations Of Cellular Networks 2.1. 2G and 2.5G 2.2. 3G 2.3. 3G-
UMTS Architecture 3. Security Issues 3.1. Limitations Of Cellular Networks 3.2.
Security Issues. Technical report, 2006.
[37] P. D. Giotopoulou. The evolution of mobile communications: Moving from 1G to
5G, and from human-to-human to machine-to-machine communications. Techni-
cal report, NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF ATHENS, 11 2015.
[38] GSMA. 5G Spectrum GSMA Public Policy Position. Technical report, 2022.
[39] A. Gupta and R. K. Jha. A Survey of 5G Network: Architecture and Emerging
Technologies, 2015.
[40] G. Hall.
The first cell phone and the origins of the modern mobile.
https://ting.blog/the-first-cell-phone/, 2021.
[41] H. Hodara and E. Skaljo. From 1G to 5G. Fiber and Integrated Optics, 40(2-3):85–183,
2021.
[42] H. Holma and A. Toskala. WCDMA FOR UMTS. Technical report, 2004.
[43] N. Hossein. Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum: An Effective Way to Improve
Wireless Communication Performance. In Advanced Trends in Wireless Communica-
tions. InTech, 2 2011.
[44] M. Jakobsson, A. Perrig, and ACM Digital Library. A Man-in-the-Middle Attack on
UMTS. ACM Press, 2004.
[45] M. Kalenderi, D. Pnevmatikatos, I. Papaefstathiou, and C. Manifavas. BREAK-
ING THE GSM A5/1 CRYPTOGRAPHY ALGORITHM WITH RAINBOW TA-
BLES AND HIGH-END FPGAS. Technical report.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
89
==PAGE:99==
[46] G. Kambourakis, C. Kolias, S. Gritzalis, and J. H. Park. DoS attacks exploiting
signaling in UMTS and IMS. Computer Communications, 34(3):226–235, 3 2011.
[47] B. Karakoc, N. Fürste, D. Rupprecht, and K. Kohls. Never Let Me Down Again:
Bidding-Down Attacks and Mitigations in 5G and 4G. In WiSec 2023 - Proceedings
of the 16th ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks,
pages 97–108. Association for Computing Machinery, Inc, 5 2023.
[48] Kelly Jackson Higgins. Researcher Intercepts GSM Cell Phones During Defcon
Demo. 2010.
[49] H. Kheddar. From 2G to 4G Mobile Network: Architecture and Key Performance
Indicators. 10 2022.
[50] M. Khosroshahy, D. Qiu, and M. K. Mehmet Ali. Botnets in 4G cellular networks:
Platforms to launch DDoS attacks against the air interface. In 2013 International
Conference on Selected Topics in Mobile and Wireless Networking, MoWNeT 2013, pages
30–35. IEEE Computer Society, 2013.
[51] Layla Varela and David Mercado. What Percentage of Internet Traﬀic Is Mobile?
skillademia, 1 2023.
[52] M. Lopa and J. Vora. EVOLUTION OF MOBILE GENERATION TECHNOLOGY:
1G TO 5G AND REVIEW OF UPCOMING WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY 5G. Tech-
nical report, 2015.
[53] Lorenz G., Moore T., Manes G., Hale J., and Shenoi S. Securing SS7 Telecommuni-
cations Networks. Technical report, 2001.
[54] M. Madani and S. Chitroub. Enhancement of A5/1 Stream Cipher Overcoming its
Weakneses. Technical report, 2014.
[55] T. L. Marzetta. MASSIVE MIMO: AN INTRODUCTION. Technical report, 2015.
[56] M. A. Mobarhan. Evaluation of Security Attacks on UMTS Authentication Mecha-
nism. International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications, 4(4):37–52, 7 2012.
[57] A. Mpitziopoulos, D. Gavalas, C. Konstantopoulos, and G. Pantziou. A survey on
jamming attacks and countermeasures in WSNs. IEEE Communications Surveys and
Tutorials, 11(4):42–56, 2009.
[58] Nikolina Cveticanin. Hacking Statistics to Give You Nightmares. dataprot, 7 2023.
[59] Nikos Koutsouris, Apostolos Voulkidis, and Kostas Tsagkaris. A framework to facil-
itate management of services in
}cloud based 5G environments. IEEE, 2017.
[60] F. Nilofer and J. Qaddour. Comparative Study of Vulnerabilities in LTE Cryptographic
Algorithm. Technical Report 25, 2018.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
90
==PAGE:100==
[61] F. Njoroge and L. Kamau. A Survey of Cryptographic Methods in Mobile Network Tech-
nologies from 1G to 4G A Survey of Cryptographic Methods in Mobile Network Technolo-
gies from 1G to 4G View project A Survey of Cryptographic Methods in Mobile Network
Technologies from 1G to 4G. Technical report, 2018.
[62] NMC Consulting Group. Netmanias Technical Document: LTE Security II: NAS and AS
Security ￿LTE Security II: NAS and AS Security. Technical report, 2014.
[63] M. Olsson, S. Sultana, S. Rommer, L. Frid, and C. Mulligan. Mobile Broadband and the
Core Network Evolution. In EPC and 4G Packet Networks, pages 3–13. Elsevier, 2013.
[64] T. E. Opeoluwa, U. Nsima, O. Mike, O. Chibuzo, and Akintayo Johnson Akinyoade. From
1G to 5G, What Next. 2018.
[65] O. Oyinloye, B. Alese, F. Thompson, and A. Adetunmbi. A Proposed Lower Computational
Complexity Secret Key Mirroring System on GSM. Journal of Computer Science &
Systems Biology, 10(1), 2017.
[66] I. Palamà, F. Gringoli, G. Bianchi, and N. Blefari-Melazzi. IMSI Catchers in the wild: A
real world 4G/5G assessment. Computer Networks, 194, 7 2021.
[67] H. S. Park, Y. Lee, T. J. Kim, B. C. Kim, and J. Y. Lee. ZEUS: Handover algorithm for 5G
to achieve zero handover failure. ETRI Journal, 44(3):361–378, 6 2022.
[68] S. Petrovic, A. F. Sabater, S. Petrovi, and A. F. Uster-Sabater. CRYPTANALYSIS OF
THE A5/2 ALGORITHM. CRYPTANALYSIS OF THE A552 ALGORITHM. Technical
report, 2000.
[69] K. Prakash and Balachandra. Security Issues and Challenges in Mobile Computing and
M-Commerce. International Journal of Computer Science & Engineering Survey,
6(2):29–45, 4 2015.
[70] J. Rischke, P. Sossalla, S. Itting, F. H. Fitzek, and M. Reisslein. 5G Campus Networks: A
First Measurement Study. IEEE Access, 9:121786–121803, 2021.
[71] D. Rupprecht, A. Dabrowski, T. Holz, E. Weippl, and C. Popper. On security research
towards future mobile network generations. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tuto-
rials, 20(3):2518–2542, 7 2018.
[72] F. Shokoor, W. Shafik, and S. M. Matinkhah. Overview of 5G & Beyond Security. EAI
Endorsed Transactions on Internet of Things, 8(30):e2, 6 2022.
[73] Simon
Rockman.
WHY
2G
WANTS
TO
LIVE
FOREVER.
https://www.cambridgewireless.co.uk/news/cw-journal/why-2g-wants-live-
forever/, 2 2022.
[74] E. Southern, A. Ouda, and A. Shami. Wireless Security: Securing Mobile UMTS Com-
munications from interoperation of GSM. Technical report, 2012.
[75] Statista. IoT connected devices worldwide 2019-2030, 1 2024.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
91
==PAGE:101==
[76] A. G. Sulaiman and I. F. A. Shaikhli. Comparative studo on 4G cryptographic algorithms.
Technical report, 2014.
[77] G. Theses, A. Jose Perez, and A. Jose. Scholar Commons An Architecture for Global Ubiq-
uitous Sensing Scholar Commons Citation. Technical report, 2011.
[78] Threat Lab. Gotta Catch ’Em All: Understanding How IMSI-Catchers Exploit Cell Net-
works (Probably). Electronic Frontier Foundation, 2019.
[79] D. Upadhyay, A. Gupta, N. Mohd, and B. Pant. A review of network slicing based 5G. In
AIP Conference Proceedings, volume 2782. American Institute of Physics Inc., 6 2023.
[80] T. Van Do, H. T. Nguyen, N. Momchil, and v. T. Do. Detecting IMSI-catcher using soft
computing. In Communications in Computer and Information Science, volume 545,
pages 129–140. Springer Verlag, 2015.
[81] W. Webb. An Introduction to the 5th Generation Mobile Networks. 2021.
[82] C. Yu, S. Chen, and Z. Cai. LTE Phone Number Catcher: A Practical Attack against
Mobile Privacy. Security and Communication Networks, 2019, 2019.
[83] Y. Zhang and M. Chen. Cloud based 5G wireless networks. Springer, 2016.
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
92
==PAGE:102==
A
Appendix
A.1
ITU IMT-2000 Multifunctional Network
Figure A.1: ITU’s proposed vision of the 3G network called IMT-2000 (International
Mobile Telecommunication) to be the standard of 3G
Investigation of 5G attacks and mitigation
of selected attacks
93
==PAGE:103==
Technical
University of
Denmark
348, Ørsteds Pl.
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
