==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Use of congestion revenues to manage 
the volume and price risks related to 
offshore bidding zones in combination 
with hybrid wind projects
Sarah Emilie Clemmesen Magid 
Sigrid Winge
DTU Wind-M-0735
February 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M0735
February 2024
ECTS: 35
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Lena Kitzing
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Leonardo Meeus
Florence School of Regulation,
the European University Institute
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Authors:
Sarah Emilie Clemmesen Magid & Sigrid Winge
Title:
Use of congestion revenues to manage the 
volume and price risks related to offshore bidding 
zones in combination with hybrid wind projects
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisors, Leonardo Meeus and Lena Kitzing. Leonardo, thank you for initi-
ating our collaboration on this exciting topic. You took the time to meet us every week to give feedback,
and advice and engage with us in valuable discussions. This was truly a great support for us and we want to
thank you for this and your endless enthusiasm. Lena, thank you for taking this Thesis on board and being
our supervisor at DTU. Your specific feedback and instructions have been very helpful, and your critical
questions made us reflect on our work. Also thank you to Ellen Beckstedde for supporting us in the modeling
phase with your helpful advice and cheerful spirit.
We would also like to thank the people from the Danish Energy Agency, the Danish Utility Regulator,
Elia, Energinet, KU Leuven, the Technical University of Denmark, Wind Europe, and Ørsted, who took the
time to talk to us during the writing of our Thesis. You gave us valuable insights into the topic, by explaining
different perspectives and helping us understand the details of the problem we were investigating.
i
==PAGE:4==
Executive summary
An ambitious scale-up of offshore wind energy plays an important role in the plans to achieve the green
transition targets set by the European Union. Hybrid offshore projects can bring increased socio-economic
welfare with the installation of wind generation capacity in combination with interconnection capacity which
increases market integration. Many studies agree that the most efficient integration of hybrid projects into
the European electricity system is through offshore bidding zones (OBZs). The market configuration with
OBZs ensures efficient dispatching of energy as well as pricing of energy and transmission.
However, in
comparison to integration in an onshore bidding zone, the OBZ configuration leads to volume and price
risks for hybrid offshore wind farms.
This arises due to its dependence on market access which can be
reduced by Transmission System Operators (TSOs) and potentially cause curtailment and price collapse in
the OBZs. Price collapse means that the spot price in the OBZs drops to the marginal cost of the wind
farms, which in our scenarios is modeled to be 0 e/MWh, instead of converging to prices in neighboring
zones. In these events, TSOs earn congestion rent on the transmission lines connected to the OBZs. In
a study for the European Commission, ENGIE Impact conceptualized the Transmission Access Guarantee
(TAG) compensation mechanism to address this problem. TAG is a redistribution of congestion rent from
TSOs to hybrid offshore wind farm owners and will be included in the upcoming electricity market reform.
However, the exact design and implementation of TAG is not yet decided. The purpose of this Thesis is to
address why restricted market access and price collapse occur, and to what extent different designs of TAG
mitigate these occurrences.
Our research is based on a model simulating hourly snapshots of the transmission system in the Cen-
tral/Northern European region by 2030. The system includes three interconnected OBZs in the North Sea
linked to Denmark, Germany, and the Netherlands.
The OBZs contain wind farms (WFs) with a total
capacity of 17 GW. The day-ahead market is modeled with a linear optimization model incorporating flow-
based market coupling. The results demonstrate that price collapse and curtailment of the OBZs can occur
under different circumstances. It can occur due to capacity restrictions in neighboring countries, restrictions
between countries further away from the North Sea as well as from the transmission system not being struc-
turally able to transport all the wind generation to the location of demand. Three archetypes of a TAG
were defined and investigated based on the different EU bodies’ proposals of TAG design. The archetypes
differ from each other based on four defined design parameters: 1) when is TAG activated, 2) the amount
of electricity to be compensated, 3) the compensation price, and 4) who should pay. The first archetype,
TAG 1, aims to provide a simplistic and large compensation, TAG 2 is designed to enforce the polluter pays
principle, and TAG 3 aims to provide a small compensation.
TAG 1 (simple) is easy to implement as it is simply the TSO in the exclusive economic zone(EEZ) of the
OBZ who will pay compensation in case of a price difference between them. This design can however also
lead to events where a TSO must pay TAG even though none of its transmission lines have been reduced in
capacity. It can furthermore lead to scenarios where the wind farms in all three OBZs experience price collapse
and curtailment but not all three of them receive TAG compensation due to a spot price of zero in one of
the EEZs. TAG 2 (polluter pays) results in large compensation payments that should be paid by responsible
TSOs, also if they are in a bidding zone distant from the OBZs. This design and our scenarios illustrate the
difficulty of finding the responsible TSOs and dividing the payment fairly between them. It is complicated
to assess and implement in our simple model, and this will only be more demanding in Euphemia. In several
scenarios, TAG 1 and 2 payments constitute more than 100% of the congestion rent earned by the TSO on
its restricted line that hour. The legislation proposals refer to a limit for the annual TAG payments but the
ii
==PAGE:5==
details of its implementation are not clearly defined in all of the texts. It can therefore be discussed whether
these large payouts resulting from TAG 1 and 2 would even be allowed, or if some of the compensation
would have to be repaid to TSOs. TAG 3 (small) results in significantly smaller and less frequent payouts
than the other two designs. The small payout highlights the importance of how the parameter ’amount of
electricity to be compensated’ is defined. TAG 3 compensates only the curtailed amount, whereas the other
two compensate the total available generation bid to the day-ahead market. This design thereby only tackles
the volume risk and not the price risk of the remaining electricity production that is sold for 0 e/MWh.
Furthermore, TAG 3 is only activated if a capacity reduction on any line in the system violates the 70% rule,
leading to less frequent payouts.
A sensitivity analysis of the TAG 2 design was conducted such that it resembles the TAG design expected
from the final market reform. This was done by changing two parameters. First, when is TAG activated to
include the 70% rule on all CNEs, except those connecting the OBZs to shore. Second, the compensation
price parameter was changed to an ex-post price found in the OBZs in case of no restrictions, instead of using
the spot price in the polluting bidding zone. This is assumed to be a better proxy for what the WFs would
have earned without capacity restrictions but also a more complex compensation price requiring additional
runs of the market coupling algorithm. The sensitivity analysis showed that adding the 70% rule and ex-post
pricing can lead to larger, smaller, or identical compensation payouts compared to the baseline TAG 2 design.
There is therefore not one actor who consistently benefits from these design additions in our scenarios. The
scenario results do however indicate that the introduction of the 70% rule in general reduces TAG payouts.
In this Thesis, we have investigated various design and implementation options for TAG and how they
each affect the revenues of wind farms and TSOs. The final electricity market reform amendment is soon to
be published, but the final TAG design and its implementation are not established. As shown with the three
archetypes, diverse designs of TAG can lead to very different payouts.
Our research has also shown that designing TAG is a compromise between simplicity and meeting possible
compensation objectives. This is particularly seen with the implementation of compensation prices and the
division of responsibilities between the polluting TSOs. If the WFs in an OBZ should be compensated similar
to what a WF in the home zone could have earned, the simple implementation using the spot price in the
EEZ might not be a bad proxy. If the WFs in an OBZ should be compensated with the amount they would
have earned in the case without capacity restrictions, it requires ex-post pricing. To calculate such prices,
the complex EUPHEMIA algorithm would need to be re-run. Subsequently, dividing the responsibility fairly
between TSOs in line with the polluter pays principle is not simple when there are many restrictions in the
system, not even in our linear optimization model. There are several ways it could be done, and it will only
be more demanding in EUPHEMIA.
iii
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
AHC
Advanced Hybrid Coupling
PTDF
Power Transfer Distribution Factor
BE
Belgium
RAM
Remaining Available Margin
BZ
Bidding zone
REMIT
Regulation on Wholesale Energy
Market Integrity and Transparency
CR
Congestion rent
RES
Renewable energy sources
CNE
Critical Network Element
SHC
Standard Hybrid Coupling
DEA
Danish Energy Agency
TAG
Transmission Access Guarantee
DE
Germany (Deutchland)
TSO
Transmission System Operator
DK
Denmark
WF
Wind farm
EU ETS
European Emissions Trading System
ENTSO-E
European Network of Transmission
System Operators for Electricity
EEZ
Exclusive economic zone
FBMC
Flow-Based Market Coupling
FR
France
GSK
Generation Shift Key
H2H
Hub-to-hub
H2S
Hub-to-shore
HM
Home Market
IEA
International Energy Agency
MC
Marginal cost
NTC
Net Transfer Capacity
NL
the Netherlands
NETP
Nordic Energy Technology Perspective
NS
North Sea
NSWF
North Sea wind farm
NSWPH
North Sea Wind Power Hub
OBZ
Offshore bidding zone
O&M
Operations and maintenance
PV
Photovoltaics
PL
Poland
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Executive Summary
ii
List of Abbreviations
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review and our contributions
2
3
Background
4
3.1
Flow Based Market Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Transmission Access Guarantee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Methodology
7
4.1
Research approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Modelling assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
Mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Scenario generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
TAG design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Results
22
5.1
Scenarios with TAG compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Behavior change with TAG anticipation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Model limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
TAG design and implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
Scenario results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.4
Recommendations for future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Conclusion
51
Appendix
59
I
Generation capacity specifications
59
II Reform texts on TAG
60
IIITAG responsibilities
61
IV Scenario details
62
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
To reduce climate change and live up to the Paris Agreement, the European Union has committed itself to
reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels and to have net zero
emissions in 2050. This will be ensured via the long-term strategy, the European Green Deal from 2019, and
the European Climate Law which puts the deal into legislation [1]. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
in 2022, EU has made the REPowerEU plan to further speed up the green transition [2]. And on October
9th, 2023 the adoption of a new Renewable Energy Directive increased the target for renewable energy in the
total energy consumption in the EU by 2030, from 32% to 42.5% [3]. To reach these emission and renewable
targets, more wind power is needed and therefore EU has in October 2023 made a European Wind Power
Action Plan, to support the wind industry [4].
Even though there is a high demand and high ambitions for massive scale-up of wind power in Europe, there
are also several uncertainties for the wind industry affecting the investment climate. These include among
other things inflation, high interest rates, restricted access to raw materials, and also risks related to being
located in an offshore bidding zone (OBZ). This type of bidding zone (BZ) is intended to be introduced
in the EU, since it will increase the social welfare and efficient dispatching compared to the home market
design. Power can be distributed from the OBZ to any of its neighboring and connected countries depending
on demand, and the OBZ will have its own electricity spot market price. A concern from the industry is
the risks that will occur for a hybrid offshore wind farm (WF) in an OBZ, caused by the unique topography
of the OBZ. In this context, the term ”hybrid” refers to the project being interconnected to two or more
bidding zones. A hybrid WF in an OBZ is facing volume risks and price risks. These are the risks that
access to the electricity market will be restricted for some hours limiting the volume that can be exported
and causing a decreased price in the OBZ compared to neighboring BZs. These risks worsen the business
case for the WFs in OBZs compared to WFs connected to a home zone and can ultimately lead to fewer
investments in offshore wind power, hindering the fast expansion of wind power that the EU aims for. In the
recently published proposals amending the electricity market reform, there is an attempt to tackle this risk
via a mechanism called Transmission Access Guarantee (TAG). The details of its implementation are not
established, but what is certain about TAG is that it is compensation paid to the WFs or other renewable
generators in OBZs, in cases where market access has been restricted for the generators. The compensation
is paid by transmission system operators (TSOs) using congestion rent.
Thesis Objective
The main objective of this Master’s Thesis is to analyze how to use congestion revenues to manage the volume
and price risks related to OBZs in combination with hybrid wind projects. More specifically for OBZs in
the North Sea when flow-based market coupling (FBMC) is used for capacity allocation. A mathematical
optimization model of the day-ahead market with OBZs in connection with the mainland bidding zones,
represented by a few critical nodes, will be developed based on the model presented in Kenis et. al [5]. This
model will be used to simulate different scenarios where the day-ahead market access for the WFs is reduced,
causing losses that could be mitigated through economic compensation of the WFs.
Past studies have analyzed these risks and identified the need for compensation. We investigate these
risks in a system setup with three OBZ in the North Sea under FBMC and different interpretations and
implementations of the TAG put forth in the upcoming electricity market reform. Since the EU electricity
market reform, including the amendments introducing TAG, was under development in parallel to the making
1
==PAGE:9==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW AND OUR CONTRIBUTIONS
of this Thesis, the purpose of this work is not to conclude how TAG should be implemented, but instead
to show a conceptual framework of TAG. It should conceptualize the different dimensions that TAG can be
designed from and look at which dimensions are the critical ones. The results and analysis of these simulations
will provide valuable insights to answer the two research questions:
1. Why can day-ahead market access be reduced and to what extent does it create price and volume risks
for hybrid offshore wind projects when placed in an OBZ in the North Sea under flow-based market
coupling?
2. How does redistribution of congestion income via different designs of Transmission Access Guarantee
mitigate this price and volume risk and how does it impact the revenue of TSOs?
The remainder of this Thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 presents a literature review and our
research contributions. Chapter 3 gives background knowledge of flow-based market coupling and TAG used
in the remainder of the Thesis. Chapter 4 presents the methodology with an introduction of the research
approach, followed by modeling assumptions, a presentation of the mathematical model as well as the scenario
generation approach and TAG design. Chapter 5 illustrates the results of the scenarios with different TAG
compensation mechanisms and is rounded off with a sensitivity analysis and brief considerations of how TAG
could affect the behavior of TSOs and WF owners. In Chapter 6, the model limitations are discussed, as well
as the TAG design choices, its implementation, and results. The discussion ends with suggestions for future
work. Chapter 5 concludes the Thesis and derives policy recommendations.
2
Literature review and our contributions
The plan for the EU to reach its emission and renewable targets includes a massive build-out of offshore wind
and energy hubs. Hybrid offshore projects combine interconnection and generation capacity and can be a
cost-effective solution to help push the green transition in Europe. Different researchers and consultancies
have investigated several types of market configurations for the optimal integration of hybrid offshore hubs
in the electricity markets. The main configurations under consideration are the home market(HM) and the
offshore bidding zones(OBZ) setup. In the HM setup, the offshore nodes are integrated into the mainland
bidding zone they are connected to and share Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) with. In the OBZ setup, the
offshore nodes constitute separate bidding zones and have separate spot prices.
In a report for the European Commission published by THEMA Consulting in 2020, different market
arrangements for hybrids in the North Sea were studied. The study was conducted using dispatch modeling
towards 2050 employing their advanced, fundamental TheMa power market model that covers European
markets. They concluded that the OBZ configuration is more efficient than the HM, while it is also consistent
with regulatory principles. However, they highlight that the OBZ configuration may allocate lower revenues
to the offshore generation owners compared to the HM configuration.
THEMA suggests that potential
mitigation measures could be to allow for the reallocation of congestion rent(CR) to WFs or to enable
joint ownership of generation and transmission assets such that project costs and revenues are considered
aggregated [6].
Several other papers also conclude that the OBZ market configuration is more efficient than the HM
configuration. In both (Kitzing and Gonz´alez, 2020) and (Gea-Berm´udez, Kitzing, and Keles, 2024) different
market configurations are investigated for renewable hubs in the North Sea, using the complex energy system
model Balmorel. In (Kitzing and Gonz´alez, 2020) economic scenarios are optimized, and the study finds that
2
==PAGE:10==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW AND OUR CONTRIBUTIONS
having OBZs is more economically efficient than having a HM setup or granting financial transmission rights
to the offshore WF operators [7]. In (Gea-Berm´udez, Kitzing, and Keles, 2024) the market configurations’
impact on congestion revenues, prices, emissions, and operational costs are investigated. The study finds
that nodal OBZ setup, with one OBZ per hub, is the most cost-effective market configuration. It also results
in the lowest CO2 emissions, compared to HM configuration and zonal OBZ setup, with several hubs in an
OBZ [8]. In (Hardy et al., 2023) HM, nodal OBZ, and zonal OBZ are also compared. This study uses the
modeling language Julia to model a grid in the North Sea, and network expansion investment optimization
is included in the model. The study concludes that the nodal OBZ setup results in the highest social welfare
as well as the lowest average electricity prices [9]. In (Kenis et al., 2023) a simple model is used on a smaller
fictive network, to investigate the distribution of welfare under the OBZ setup. The study uses both Standard
Hybrid Coupling and Advanced Hybrid Coupling to include the offshore DC transmission lines in FBMC.
The study finds that compared to HM, the OBZ setup better signals transmission scarcity but also transfers
welfare from the offshore generation owners to the TSOs [5]. Ørsted and the North Sea Wind Power Hub
(NSWPH) consortium agree that OBZ is the best market configuration and highligts the importance of
coordinated and integrated planning between countries to realize the build-out of hybrid offshore projects
([10], [11]).
In 2022, a report for the European Commission was published by ENGIE Impact [12]. They address
the issue, that there can be hours where TSOs have reduced transmission capacity such that the offshore
generators in an OBZ do not have full access to the interconnector to shore, and thereby the market. In
these situations, the offshore generators will experience a loss of revenue, and to mitigate this, Engie Im-
pact suggests that redistribution of CR from TSOs to the offshore generators should be implemented in the
legal framework. Three market-based options to redistribute CR are assessed the the report. These are
Congestion Income-Financial Transmission Rights (CI-FTR), Congestion Income-Contracts for Difference
(CI-CfD), and the Transmission Access Guarantee (TAG). FTRs allow for the hedging of locational risks
between two neighboring BZs in a specified direction. It is proposed that CI-FTRs are allocated for free
to hybrid projects to shift the relevant CR from TSOs to offshore generators. A CfD, typically provided
through a tender from governmental bodies, allows the CfD holder a certain strike price for their production.
ENGIE Impact investigate a CI-CfD design with a variable strike price equal to the market price in the
onshore BZ which shares EEZ with the OBZ. According to ENGIE Impact, both of these options result in
overcompensation for the risks faced by hybrid offshore generators. The generators would be compensated
not only when transmission capacity is reduced by TSOs but in every instance of a price differential between
OBZ and neighboring onshore BZ. As an alternative, ENGIE Impact conceptualized the third option, TAG.
This compensation should be paid by TSOs when they have reduced transmission capacity, such that the
offshore generator cannot export its entire production capacity to shore. In their report, simple illustrations
and numerical examples of TAG compensation based on an offshore hub connected to two nodes are provided.
The concept of TAG was then introduced in the proposal for amendment of electricity market reform by the
European Commission [13] in the spring of 2023.
With our project, we can build on the knowledge of past studies that have identified the socio-economic
benefits of offshore hybrids in OBZ setup and found that the business case for these could be improved with a
compensation mechanism. In this Thesis, we will analyze the OBZ market configuration in combination with
TAG compensation through a model of the day-ahead market under FBMC in the North Sea region. The
model is complex enough to show how some of the restrictions and flows of various lines in the system can
3
==PAGE:11==
3
BACKGROUND
affect the North Sea wind farms (NSWFs), and simple enough to illustrate what specific parameter changes
in the system cause the restricted market access and price collapse effects on the NSWFs.
The model is an approximation of how the system is projected to look by 2030, as this is the year we
assume the first hybrid NSWFs could be built. The FBMC methodology was chosen instead of the Net
Transfer Capacity (NTC) methodology because FBMC is the preferred methodology in the EU.
We contribute to the literature on TAG by conducting an in-depth investigation of different possible TAG
compensation designs. We do this with a model that adds more complexity and thereby understanding, than
the past study with simple numerical examples of TAG by ENGIE Impact. Our analysis can give insights as
to how the designs compensate differently in various scenarios that could occur in the electricity system of
the North Sea region. Our research is timely, as the upcoming electricity market reform soon to be published
includes TAG while the detailed implementation measures are yet to be defined.
3
Background
In this chapter, the Flow-Based Market Coupling methodology will be presented to understand how it adds
value to our model and analysis compared to the Net Transfer Capacities approach. This is followed by a
brief description of the background of TAG and how TAG is included in the proposals for the next electricity
market reform.
3.1
Flow Based Market Coupling
Flow-Based Market Coupling is the target model to calculate and determine exchange capacities in the
European day-ahead and intraday markets. It is currently used in the core region and will go live in the
Nordic region by October 2024 [14]. The available exchange capacities have an important influence on the
day-ahead clearing prices and both of these are essential outputs for our research on TAG. In many energy
system models and large parts of Europe, the market coupling between zones is not based on FBMC but on
the Net Transfer Capacities(NTC) approach [15]. However, this bilateral exchange capacity approach cannot
capture the physical reality of the transmission grid, which ultimately results in unused potential in the grid.
That is because the NTC approach cannot account for how exchanges between two zones affect all the other
AC-connected zones. To compensate for that, the NTC approach requires the TSOs to conservatively limit
the exchange capacity to ensure feasible flows for a stable grid operation.
The commercial electricity exchanges do not completely match the actual power flow that follows the
physical network parameters. FBMC was introduced to overcome some of these limitations and utilize a
larger potential of transmission lines compared to NTC. The solution domain for the exchange capacities is
larger with FBMC than the NTC approach [16]. By increasing the trade opportunities in FBMC, the aim is
maximization of welfare while simultaneously increasing grid security and resiliency [17].
For FBMC to run in EUPHEMIA at the day-ahead time frame (D-1), the TSOs must give information
about the available transmission capacities in their grid. With the unbundled structure of the European
electricity sector, it is not known to the TSOs which power plants are bidding in the market and how much
they participate in the commercial exchange. The TSOs therefore rely on an approximation of the flows and
net export positions to forecast the grid use. This is called the base case two days ahead (D-2). It can be
noted that linearized approximations of power flows (DC load flow) form the basis for FBMC calculations.
As explained in [15] the linearization of the active power and reactive power constraints of an AC steady
state network lead to the definition of the transfer admittance matrix. This is also known as the node-to-line
4
==PAGE:12==
3
BACKGROUND
Power Transfer Distribution Factor (PTDF) matrix and it represents the fraction of power injection at node
n that flows through line l. This node-to-line PTDF is exogenous to FBMC as it is derived from the network
topology and line reactances. It is however not all transmission lines in each BZ that are included in the
node-to-line PTDF matrix, but only those affected by the cross-border exchanges to a certain extent based
on a threshold. This threshold is set by the TSOs and requires the performance of contingency screenings to
identify possible grid outages to be avoided for a secure operation. The elements that are included are called
Critical Network Elements and Contingency (CNEC) [17] and can be cross-border lines as well as internal
lines. CNECs can also be transformers, but in this Thesis, only lines are considered.
It follows from the PTDF matrix that a net injection of power in one node is partly sent through many of
the other connected lines in the meshed AC grid. Using FBMC compared to the NTC approach can therefore
capture some of the problematic loop flows caused by exchanges within a zone that can restrict the capacity
of CNECs in other countries.
In the core region of Europe, Standard Hybrid Coupling (SHC) is used to represent the flow-based
domain.
This means that AC lines are represented with flow-based methodology whereas the DC lines
are represented with the NTC methodology. In the future, SHC might be replaced by Advanced Hybrid
Coupling (AHC) which considers the impact of DC-flows on AC-flows. AHC should allocate the capacity
on the interconnections between capacity calculation regions more efficiently than SHC. AHC is however
computationally much more expensive and not yet technically feasible in EUPHEMIA, and it furthermore
raises issues of discriminatory access to capacity [18].
The market coupling works with zonal information, not nodal, and the FBMC therefore needs zone-to-line
PTDF matrices to measure how zonal net export positions affect the lines. This is computed by the TSOs
from a weighted sum of node-to-line PTDFs using Generation Shift Keys (GSKs) as weights. The GSKs
are estimations from each TSO as to how an injection at node n affects the zonal net position. The correct
GSK depends on the market clearing, which is unknown at the point of D-2. There are different strategies
to estimate the GSKs. One of these is the capacity-weighted unit strategy based on the assumption that the
larger the unit, the more it participates in market changes. A description of all strategies will not be detailed
here, but one can refer to (Sch¨onheit et. al, 2021) for further explanations of these [19].
Once the TSO has made a base case D-2 forecast of flows and net positions, these forecasts together with
the zone-to-line PTDFs will be used to determine the Remaining Available Margin (RAM) on the CNECs.
RAM determines the commercial exchange capacity given to the market, which will never be the full physical
capacity. That is partly due to loop and transit flows and partly due to the need for a Flow Reliability
Margin (FRM) as a security factor to account for the forecast and calculation uncertainties. The Clean En-
ergy Package introduced the minRAM criterion imposing that at least 70% capacity must be made available
to the market for cross-zonal trade. As analyzed and shown by CREG (the Belgian Federal Commission
for Electricity and Gas Regulation) this has proven difficult for the TSOs in some hours, and some TSOs
therefore use an Adjustment of Minimal RAM (AMR) to increase RAM ([20], [21]). This is a virtual capacity
that decreases the impact of the base case D-2 flows. But the regulation also allows for temporary derogation
of the minRAM criterion under certain strict conditions.
5
==PAGE:13==
3
BACKGROUND
Illustrative example of FBMC in day-ahead market
BE
DE
DK
FR
NL
PL
NS DK
NS DE
NS NL
DC line
Congested DC line
AC line
Congested AC line
Figure 3.1: Price formation different from the marginal
cost of generators
The example of an hour of the day-ahead market
clearing shown in figure 3.1 is useful for explain-
ing how FBMC can affect price formation.
It is
a scenario with congestion on internal critical net-
work elements(CNEs) in Germany. The spot price
in all countries, except Germany, is equal to the bid
price of the marginal generator within the bidding
zone(BZ). The marginal generator in Germany is
a renewable source with a bid price of 0 e/price
whereas the spot price in Germany is 16.4 e/MWh.
The spot price in a BZ is found from the dual vari-
able of the zonal power balancing constraint, equal
to the increase of the objective value when adding
one MW of demand in the BZ. When adding an extra
MW of demand in Germany there is a small increase
in nuclear production in Belgium, a decrease in nu-
clear production in France, a tiny increase in NSWFs
production as well as in the Polish thermal genera-
tor. This is because the PTDFs force a change in
all of the AC lines when power injection in one zone
changes. These prices of 13.5, 0, and 104.4 e/MWh and the small alterations in production lead to the price
of 16.4 e/MWh in Germany. With two of their lines being fully constrained they are forced to have this
higher price, instead of converging to the price of zero like in the DK, NL, and NSWF neighboring zones.
This shows how the PTDFs and FBMC can explain the resulting spot prices.
Intuitively, the price in two neighboring zones should be the same, unless the line that connects the zones is
congested. But in the example, this is not the case with DE and PL, and the reason is the PTDFs. These
specify that a flow to/from the Polish zone will create additional flow on the other AC lines in the system,
and since some of these AC lines are congested, an additional flow to PL is not a possibility. Thereby the
prices in PL and DE do not converge.
3.2
Transmission Access Guarantee
Transmission Access Guarantee (TAG) is a compensation mechanism developed to mitigate volume and price
risks that generators in an OBZ will face due to the possibility of reduced market access. The wind power
hubs that are to be placed in OBZs will fully depend on transmission access via the hub-to-shore cables. If
this access is reduced it can lead to curtailment of the offshore generators and price collapse in the OBZ. This
means that the price in the OBZ drops to the marginal cost of the OBZ generators instead of converging to
the price of the neighboring onshore BZs. It is difficult to predict, how often this type of situation will occur
but the risk of it happening harms the business case of the future generators in OBZ. This is the reason why
a compensation mechanism like TAG has been proposed.
As explained in chapter 2, the concept of TAG was introduced in the report Support on the use of
congestion revenues for Offshore Renewable Energy Projects connected to more than one market from August
2022, written by Engie Impact for the European Commission [12].
The TAG has also been included in
6
==PAGE:14==
4
METHODOLOGY
the proposals for the new EU electricity market reform, however, without specific mention of the name
Transmission Access Guarantee. The reform was initiated by the European Commission in March 2023 [13]
and developed during the writing of this Thesis with the EU Parliament publishing its adjustments [22] in
the summer and the EU Council [23] in the fall of 2023. The three published versions of the amendment
introducing TAG in the EU regulation can be seen in Appendix II. TAG is a compensation given to hybrid
renewable projects in offshore bidding zones if there is a loss of revenue because of restricted access to the
market. TAG is paid by TSOs using congestion income. The specific details of TAG, however, differ between
the different proposals for TAG. In Engie Impact’s report, the authors are quite specific about their design
of TAG which includes using the spot price in a reference BZ to define the power compensation price. In
each of the proposals for electricity market reform, there is in general more room for different interpretations
and methods of implementation than in Engie Impact. One notable difference between the three proposals
for TAG in the market reform is the size of capacity reductions allowed before TAG can be activated. The
proposal of the Commission does not allow any capacity reductions, while both the Parliament’s and the
Council’s proposals refer to the 70% rule for available capacity on the CNEs that are not connecting the
OBZs to shore. However, the Parliament’s proposal is also referring to possible derogations from this 70%
rule. Further details of how the TAG proposals can be interpreted are elaborated in our methodology section
4.5 on TAG design.
4
Methodology
This chapter is initialized with an overview of our research approach, which is then followed by a description
of our modeling and data assumptions. Furthermore, the mathematical model and methodology used for
scenario generation are presented, and the chapter ends with our interpretation of TAG design parameters
and specification of three different TAG archetypes.
4.1
Research approach
Over the past six months, we have been working on this Thesis, and an overview of our workflow is depicted
in figure 4.1. Our process of scoping the Thesis project was initiated with supervisor meetings and discussion
of the topic with relevant stakeholders from the industry. We then delved into the thesis work through a
literature review. This included studies on different market configurations, especially with a North Sea focus,
technical details of FBMC, different ways of modeling the transmission system, as well as the different TAG
regulation text drafts and the report by Engie impact introducing TAG. As part of the literature review, we
spent some time understanding M. Kenis’ model that we would base our mathematical model on. As his
model was implemented on data from a fictive network, a part of our literature review was to find relevant
input data needed to represent a more realistic network in the North Sea region. The data and data processing
will be described further in the methodology section. Following this initial process, we could implement the
first version of our model in Julia. It took several iterations to debug and completely understand the output
of the model. During the process, we had to change some of the input data and simplify our model to better
understand the mechanisms within it. With a simple model, we could then add one layer of complexity at a
time, and in the end, we implemented a model of the full system incorporating FBMC. To validate the model
we recreated various scenarios of the day-ahead market with and without OBZs as it was seen in studies by
Engie Impact [12], THEMA Consulting [6] and the CREG [21], [24].
7
==PAGE:15==
4
METHODOLOGY
Figure 4.1: Our research approach
Once the model was validated we could begin generating different scenarios where TAG compensation would
be needed. In parallel with developing the model, we studied the TAG design proposal by Engie Impact
and the published proposals from different EU bodies. Based on our interpretation and discussions with
supervisors and stakeholders we came up with four design parameter variations. This led us to define three
TAG archetypes with different compensation purposes to investigate further. Analyzing the scenarios and
TAG results based on three different TAG designs allowed us to delve into the details of how each design
parameter can impact the TAG payout and affect the TSOs and wind farms in different ways. From analyzing
the results, we also found new interesting scenarios to investigate. The results have been presented to and
discussed with different stakeholders as well as our supervisors along the way, which gave us interesting inputs
for our Thesis.
4.2
Modelling assumptions
4.2.1
Data
Modeling the day-ahead market in European countries of the North Sea region requires different input
parameters on generation capacities and costs, electricity demand, and transmission system metrics.
As
mentioned previously, our model is based on the work by (Kenis et al., 2023) optimizing the day-ahead
market using FBMC. In his study, a comparison between the OBZ and HM configurations was conducted
using input data from a fictive network [5]. However, we intended to investigate a realistic network in parts
of Europe adjacent to the North Sea. Therefore, relevant input data had to be found.
In a study done by P. Gunkel [15] the open-source energy system model Balmorel was used to model
a simple representation of the European transmission system. The purpose of this study was to compare
the system representation using FBMC to the NTC approach in the Balmorel energy system model for
8
==PAGE:16==
4
METHODOLOGY
investment optimization. Each country in the Northern parts of Central Europe is represented in one node,
except Germany which has four nodes. Additionally, only the Western bidding zone in Denmark, DK1, has
been included in the system. We chose to use this representation of the onshore transmission system as it
came with enough simplification to ease the computation and understanding of the results, but also enough
spatial fragmentation to capture some of the important loop flows that occur in central Europe. The system
is depicted in figure 4.2.
BE
DE
DK
FR
NL
PL
DC line
AC line
Figure 4.2: The onshore transmission system modeled
Furthermore, the data used in the study was publicly available on GitHub [25],[26] and included the flow-based
parameters needed when implementing an optimization model with FBMC. This was data for the onshore
transmission system, and we furthermore added three wind power hubs in the North Sea and connected them
to the system as will be explained later in this chapter. The electricity consumption, generation capacities,
CO2 emission price, and North Sea hub capacities were found outside of the Balmorel data files for more
precise predictions of 2030 data. Table 1 displays an overview of all the input parameters used, including the
original references.
9
==PAGE:17==
4
METHODOLOGY
Table 1: The model input parameters with units and references to the data sources
Parameter
Unit
References
Average hourly electricity
consumption per region in 2030
[MWh]
ENTSO-E [27] and projections by
each country [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33]
Generation capacity
installed in 2030
[MW]
Balmorel [25], ENTSO-E TP [27],
European Commission [34]
Fuel efficiency
[ - ]
Balmorel [25], IEA ETSAP [35]
Variable O&M
[EUR2023/MWh]
IEA ETSAP [35]
Fuel price
[EUR2023/MWh]
Balmorel [25],
NETP 2016 (IEA) [36], DEA
CO2 emission per fuel type
[ton/MWh]
Balmorel [25],
ETC/ACC [37], DEA [38]
NTC of DC lines
[MW]
Balmorel [25],
TYNDP 2018 [39], Nordpool [40]
PTDF matrix of AC lines
[ - ]
Balmorel [26], PyPSA [41]
RAM of AC lines
[MW]
Balmorel [26], Scigrid [42]
CO2 emission price
[EUR2023/ton]
EU ETS [43]
North Sea hub capacities
[MW]
Plans from each country
DK [44], DE [45], NL [46]
NTC, PTDF, and RAM values
As mentioned above, a simple representation of the European transmission system was developed in the
paper by P. Gunkel [15]. As explained in the paper, this flow-based add-on to Balmorel, which is originally
NTC-based, has been developed using the energy and transmission system model PyPSA-Eur which includes
a detailed representation of the European system [41]. The PyPSA-Eur data has been simplified using a
clustering algorithm based on bus distances. The PTDF matrix of the AC grid has then been calculated with
the adjustment of excluding line impedances to buses outside the modeled region. This method has created
three AC subsystems: a Scandinavian, Central European, and Baltic subsystem linked by DC lines. In our
model, only the Central European subsystem as shown in figure 4.2 is included. This is due to the assumption
that including the Nordics and Baltics connected to Central Europe with DC cables, would increase modeling
complexity while not improving the representation of flows and loop flows important for the price formation
in the North Sea offshore hub significantly. The AC grid data used for the clustering algorithm is from 2016,
so to represent grid expansions until 2020, these have simply been added as DC lines following the approach
in [15]. With this method, the PTDF matrix found from the clustered 2016 grid data did not need to be
recalculated. The resulting grid capacities might not be as large as grid expectations for 2030, however,
it is somewhat counteracted by the fact that the clustering method overestimates the capacity [15]. The
available RAM data of the AC lines in the system are given as fixed values that are identical in the positive
10
==PAGE:18==
4
METHODOLOGY
and negative directions. The thermal assumptions forming the basis of RAM of AC lines in the aggregated
system originate from Scigrid [42]. We have used the publicly available data and flow-based parameters from
this work to define the grid in our model. With this RAM benchmark for each AC line, we cannot model
every single predictive parameter that a TSO can affect (contingency threshold to find CNECs, GSKs from
different strategies, and AMR). However, we can simulate this discretion of the TSO by directly changing
the RAM given to the market. This will be used, among other parameter changes, to create scenarios.
The PTDF matrix given in the data was the node-to-line PTDF of the simplified transmission system
with most countries represented by one node and Germany with four nodes. To model the day-ahead market
with SHC, we needed to calculate zone-to-line PTDF. It is assumed that the use of SHC to represent the
flow-based domain gives a realistic representation of the day-ahead market clearing in Europe in the coming
years, as AHC is not yet ready to be implemented. To calculate the zone-to-line PTDFs, one should use
GSKs. We used the capacity-weighted strategy, considering the conventional units in Germany, to estimate
GSKs. As explained previously this strategy is based on the assumption that the larger the unit, the more
it participates in market changes. Each of the four nodes in Germany is thereby weighted based on the
thermal generation capacity in that node compared to the total German capacity. Those weights for each
German node are the GSKs. For the countries represented by only one node, the GSKs are equal to one.
The zone-to-line PTDF was computed as a weighted sum of the node-to-line PTDF with GSKs as shown in
equation 1.
PTDF Z
l,z =
X
∀n
GSKn,z · PTDF N
l,n
(1)
For the countries represented by one node, the zone-to-line PTDFs will be equal to the corresponding node-
to-line PTDFs.
Electricity consumption
The mathematical model used in this thesis produces snapshot scenarios of one hour. To get a baseline
assumption for average hourly demand, the annual electricity demand projection for 2030 of each country
was divided by the number of hours of the year. In the Balmorel data [25], the electricity demand for 2030
was projected to decrease compared with 2023, which is not in line with the expectations of increased electri-
fication [47]. Instead of using Balmorel data, the most recent projections published by each modeled country
were found (see table 1). In some of the references, the projection was stated as TWh consumed in 2030,
while in others it was a relative or absolute increase in consumption compared to 2023. In these cases the
average of the 2023 year ahead load data published by each TSO on the ENTSO-E Transparency platform
[27] was used as the baseline. The demand is assumed to be price-inelastic.
Electricity generation
For the simplicity of our model, we only model electricity flows, and thus exclude the heat and storage tech-
nologies. The baseline scenario created here is not intended to be an exact projection of the power system
in 2030, but merely an example of how an hour in the day-ahead market could come about. To estimate the
2030 capacities of different types of generators in each zone, data from the Entso-E transparency platform[27]
for 2023 installed capacities have been used, together with 2030 capacity projections from the EU Commis-
sion[34] and 2025 data from Balmorel for the size relation of similar generators [25]. The details on how
the capacities were computed are explained in Appendix I. Renewable electricity generation from onshore
wind, solar PV, hydropower, and offshore wind constitutes the main fraction of the generation capacity for
11
==PAGE:19==
4
METHODOLOGY
the system in 2030. This is illustrated in Figure 4.3, which shows the installed capacities of renewable and
dispatchable generators together with the projected average demand.
BE
DE
DK
FR
NL
PL
NS1
NS2
NS3
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
GW
Average demand
Dispatchable generators
Renewable generators
Figure 4.3: Installed generation capacity and average demand in each zone in 2030. Note that for Denmark
we are only considering DK1.
Marginal cost
The marginal cost(MC) of each generator is an important factor, as this is used in the mathematical model to
derive the day-ahead prices in each bidding zone. MC is calculated in EUR2023 based on electrical efficiency
(η), fuel price, CO2 emission costs, and variable O&M as shown in equation 2.
MCg = 1
η · (Fuel Price + CO2 emissions · EU ETSprice) + var O&M
(2)
As seen in table 1, the parameters used to calculate MC are from various reference sources. This meant that
fuel price, CO2 price, and variable O&M were given in monetary real values with different base years. To
convert them all to real 2023 values, the consumer price index evolution in Denmark was used as a measure
of inflation [48].
The CO2 emission factors used in our model are based on [37]. This reference is used for all fuels except
municipal waste, because it defines the emission factor of waste to be zero, based on the assumption that the
waste will be fully biogenic in the future. However, the Danish Energy Agency projects that a small fraction
of the waste will remain fossil in 2030 which leads to a positive emission factor [38]. We have therefore chosen
to use this non-zero factor for municipal waste in our model.
Offshore bidding zones in the North Sea
The network topology we use for the offshore bidding zones in the North Sea is based on recent work published
by the North Sea Wind Power Hub Consortium (NSWPH) [49]. The NSWPH consortium was founded in
2017 and consists of the TSOs Energinet, Gasunie, and TenneT. It is co-financed by the Connecting Europe
Facility of the European Union.
In the NSWPH’s Hubs and spokes - viable beyond theory concept paper from 2022, the scenario envisioned
12
==PAGE:20==
4
METHODOLOGY
for 2030 connects Denmark, Germany, and the Netherlands through three offshore hubs connected triangu-
larly.
The NSWPH consortium suggests that this hub-and-spokes model allows for a modular build-out
which is of great importance to accommodate possible future build-outs [11]. In the Modular Hub and spoke:
specific solution options paper the NSWPH consortium found that an initial hub-and-spoke project in the
early 2030s might be fully electric offshore, due to expectations of immature GW scale P2X technology [50].
Instead, P2X could be located onshore to address congestion issues. Based on the above-mentioned work,
we have decided to model a purely electric offshore system with a Danish, German, and Dutch hub as shown
in Figure 4.4. Additional electricity demand can then be added to our onshore bidding zones, to simulate
scenarios with P2X technology located onshore.
Figure 4.4: The base case network topology of the North Sea offshore hubs
The paper from NSWPH outlining the offshore network topology does not specify the specific capacities
of the wind farms and transmission lines [49]. Therefore, we have studied the goals of the individual countries
(DK, DE, and NL) for the offshore wind build-out in the North Sea. The Danish hub is assumed to have
a capacity of 3 GW in the early 2030s based on a political agreement adopted by the Danish government
in 2020 [44]. The German hub is assumed to have a capacity of 10 GW based on the recently published
plan from Germany’s Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Protection together with the TSO’s
50Hertz, Amprion, and TenneT [45]. The Netherlands’ hub is assumed to have a capacity of 4 GW which
would correspond to the Doordewind I and II wind parks appointed by the Dutch Government [46]. In total,
these hubs create an additional capacity of 17 GW in the system and each of the three hubs constitutes
an OBZ. We chose to have three OBZs in the model instead of one OBZ containing all the hubs, to avoid
situations where redispatch would be needed offshore. And because a nodal OBZ setup is found to be more
efficient, as demonstrated in our literature review. We assume that the already installed capacity of offshore
wind in our data, based on the Entsoe-E transparency platform, is radially connected to and included in the
home market zone and will therefore not be affected by TAG.
The hub-to-shore(H2S) transmission lines are assumed to have the same capacity as the offshore wind
farm, such that all wind power can be evacuated to shore. This assumption is in line with what has been
done in several studies modeling fully electric offshore hubs in the North Sea ([6], [8], [51]). Furthermore, it
13
==PAGE:21==
4
METHODOLOGY
is assumed that the TSO in the EEZ of the OWF has 100% ownership of the H2S line.
The lines between the North Sea wind farm hubs are denoted hub-to-hub (H2H) lines. Their transmission
capacities are what determine the interconnection capacities between DK, DE, and NL through the hub.
These lines could potentially be built with the same capacities as the wind farms. However, it can be argued
that in hours with large offshore wind production, the power from each hub will be evacuated to shore via
H2S lines, and trade on the H2H lines will therefore be blocked. H2H cables in this GW scale are expensive
to build and thereby expensive to leave unused in many hours of high wind production. Smaller H2H cables,
however, limit the benefits of the interconnection and can create bottlenecks in our system that would not
occur with larger capacities. In line with previous studies modeling purely electric hybrid OWF in the North
Sea ([6] and [8]) we chose H2H capacities in our base case that are considerably smaller than hub capacities,
more precisely we assume the capacity to be 1/4th of the largest connected hub as seen in figure 4.4. This
parameter will be doubled in one of our scenarios, to simulate a potential larger build-out. But in most
scenarios, we will investigate, there is a large wind production from the hubs which will be evacuated to the
highest-priced onshore bidding zones. This is in most cases not expected to cause congested H2H lines, as
the H2S lines will be congested first.
For the OBZs, it is assumed that they each have the same TSO as the onshore BZ they are directly connected
to. This is the reason we also assume that the TSOs own 100% of the H2S cable connected to their onshore
zone, and that they each own 50% of the H2H cables connected to the OBZ in their EEZ.
Congestion revenue distribution methodology
When we calculate the congestion revenue earned on each line between two zones, it follows the methodology
set by ACER for lines modeled with NTC approach and lines modeled with the flow-based approach [52].
For the DC lines, it is calculated as the price difference between the connected BZs multiplied by the flow
resulting directly from the model algorithm. For the AC lines, the commercial flow is found by multiplying
the zonal PTDF matrix with the net position of the zones. This commercial flow is then multiplied by the
price differential between zones to get the CR on the line. For the H2S lines, the entire CR earned is allocated
to the TSO of the connected onshore BZ, whereas for interconnections between BZs the CR is allocated 50/50
between the two connected TSOs. Our methodology is, however, a simplification of reality. Since the system
modeled is seen as one region with internal flows only, external flows on the borders to other neighboring
regions, such as the Nordic or Baltic countries, are excluded. These external flows are included in the ACER
methodology.
4.3
Mathematical model
To simulate the day-ahead electricity market, we developed a linear optimization model based on the model
presented in Kenis et al. [5]. Our model was implemented in the programming language Julia and the code
is publicly available on GitHub via this link 1.
The sets, parameters, and decision variables of the mathematical model are presented in table 2.
1All input data and the model code is available at: https://github.com/SarahEmilieM/MSc-Thesis-TAG-Design
14
==PAGE:22==
4
METHODOLOGY
Table 2: Sets, parameters, and decision variables of the mathematical model
Sets
Z
Zones
G & G(Z)
Dispatchable generators & dispatchable generators in zone z
H
AC lines
L
DC lines
N(Z)
Nodes in zone z
R & R(Z)
Renewable generators & renewable generators in zone z
Parameters
IAC
l,n
Flow direction convention of AC line l seen from node n, ∈{−1, 0, 1}
IDC,1n
h,n
& IDC,2n
h,n,n′
Flow direction convention of DC line h, seen from node n & nodes n and n′, ∈{−1, 0, 1}
MCg
g
Marginal cost of dispatchable generator g, [e/MWh]
MCr
r
Marginal cost of renewable generator r, [e/MWh]
NTCn,n′
NTC of DC line connecting node n and n′, [MW]
PFr
Power factor of renewable generator r, ∈[0, 1]
Qd
z
Average demand in zone z, [MW]
Qr
r
Capacity of renewable generator r, [MW]
Qg
g
Capacity of dispatchable generator g, [MW]
RAMl
RAM of AC line l, [MW]
zPTDFl,z
Zonal PTDF for line l and zone z, ∈[−1, 1]
Decision variables
cr
Curtailment of renewable r
f AC
l
Flow on AC line l
f DC
h
Flow on DC line h
pAC
z
AC power export from zone z
vg
Relative production of dispatchable generator g
The EUPHEMIA algorithm is used in the day-ahead market to allocate energy production and electricity
prices while maximizing the socio-economic welfare of the system [53]. This is approximated in our model
by minimizing day-ahead generation costs as defined in our objective function in equation (3a). The cost of
dispatchable generation from a generator g depends on its marginal cost, and its power production in the
simulated hour, which is the capacity of g times its relative production vg. The cost of renewable generation
also depends on marginal cost and produced power. For a renewable generator, the power produced is the
capacity of the generator, times the power factor of the simulated hour minus the amount of power that is
curtailed. Even though the consumer’s cost also impacts the socio-economic welfare, it is not included in
the objective. This is because the demand in our model is inflexible which entails that it will not affect the
model’s outcome.
Equation (3b) dictates that the curtailment of a renewable energy source(RES) has to be a non-negative
value smaller than or equal to the production potential of the RES. Equation(3c) says that a dispatchable
generator’s relative production must be between zero and one, i.e. the generator cannot produce more or less
than its capacity allows. The power balance for each zone is defined in Equation (3d). This states that the
sum of power produced from dispatchable and renewable generators in the zone minus demand and flows on
15
==PAGE:23==
4
METHODOLOGY
lines connected to the zone has to be zero. These flows are divided into flows on DC lines and flows on AC
lines. For both types of flows, the direction of the flow is defined by the operational sign of both the flow f
and the relevant element of the I matrix. All the elements of the IAC
l,n and IDC
h,n matrices are either -1, 0 or
1. The element is zero if the node and the concerned line are not connected. The element is either -1 or 1,
if the node and concerned line are directly connected, and for two nodes connected to the same line, the two
I-values related to the line will be of opposite operational sign. As an example, DC-line 1 connects nodes 1
and 3, and IDC
1,1 = 1 while IDC
1,3 = −1. For all other nodes n: IDC
1,n = 0. The I matrices are included to ensure
that the flow on a line between two zones is modeled as entering one of the zones and exiting the other.
Other methods for simulating this are possible, but the ones we have encountered included non-linearity and
are therefore not used here.
Minimize
vg,f AC
l
,f DC
h
,cr,pAC
z
DAC =
X
g∈G
 MCg
g · Qg
g · vg

+
X
r∈R
(MCr
r · (PFr · Qr
r −cr))
(3a)
0 ≤cr ≤PFr · Qr
r
∀r ∈R (3b)
0 ≤vg ≤1
∀g ∈G
(3c)
Zonal balance
X
g∈G(Z)
 Qg
g · vg

−Qd
z +
X
r∈R(Z)
(PFr · Qr
r −cr)
−
X
l∈L
X
n∈N(Z)
 f AC
l
· IAC
l,n

−
X
h∈H
X
n∈N(Z)

f DC
h
· IDC,1n
h,n

= 0
∀z ∈Z (3d)
AC flows
pAC
z
=
X
l∈L
X
n∈N(Z)
f AC
l
· IAC
l,n
∀z ∈Z
(3e)
−RAMl ≤
X
z∈Z
zPTDFl,z · pAC
z
≤RAMl
∀l ∈L
(3f)
DC flows
−NTCn,n′ ≤
X
h∈H
f DC
h
· IDC,2n
h,n,n′ ≤NTCn′,n
∀n ∈N, ∀n′ ∈N
(3g)
where
f AC
l
∈R
(3h)
f DC
h
∈R
(3i)
pAC
z
∈R
(3j)
Equation (3e) - (3g) allows the AC lines to be represented with flow-based methodology and the DC lines with
NTC methodology, in line with the SHC representation of the flow-based domain. Equation (3e) defines the
decision variable pAC
z
which is the AC flow entering/exiting zone z. In Equation (3f) the flow on each AC line l
is restricted by the RAM on the line, in both directions. The flow on each AC line l is
 P
z∈Z zPTDFl,z · pAC
z

which corresponds to the sum of all zone’s contributions to the flow on the line. Equation (3g) restricts the
DC flow between two nodes n and n′ to the NTC in the given direction, and since the NTC matrix is not
symmetrical, NTCn,n′ and NTCn′,n might not be the same. Since the NTC matrix is two-dimensional, the I
matrix used for this equation had to be three-dimensional to account for both line numbers and two different
node numbers. But besides the extra dimension, IDC,2n
h,n,n′ is similar to IDC,1n
h,n
. Equations (3h)-(3j) state that
the decision variables for flow on the lines can only take real values.
16
==PAGE:24==
4
METHODOLOGY
4.3.1
Redistribution of curtailment and flows offshore
Because of the nature of the mathematical model, it will in general choose to curtail one of the North Sea
wind farms(NSWFs) more than the others, even if it is possible to curtail all 3 of them equally. Therefore,
we chose to redistribute the curtailment of the NSWFs after running the model so each of the NSWFs is
curtailed with 1/3 of the total curtailment, if possible.
Similarly, the model will in many cases choose to let some of the flows between the NSWFs take an extra
loop offshore because the model does not include losses. These additional, unnecessary flows are removed
ex-post via a small mathematical model that ensures nodal balance in the NS nodes and minimizes the sum
of flows between the nodes.
4.4
Scenario generation
The data in our model is a simplistic representation and projection of the central European electricity system
in 2030, assuming three NSWFs of 17GW in total connected to DK, DE, and NL. Different input parameters
can be tweaked to create scenarios representing hours with e.g. windy weather conditions and transmission
capacity reductions on cables to the NSWFs. The scenarios to be modeled simulate hours where the NSWFs
will experience losses relevant to the activation of TAG compensation.
The input parameters representing grid topology, installed generation capacities, and factors impacting
the marginal costs of thermal generators are kept constant. The parameters that will be varied to simulate
the different scenarios are hourly consumption, power factor of RES, bid price of RES, and NTC & RAM of
transmission lines. The power factor of each renewable technology is defined as the ratio of power generation
to the theoretical full capacity. Changing these factors allows us to create snapshots of possible situations
that could occur, e.g. a winter day with low solar PV production but high wind and high demand plus
some bottlenecks in the transmission grid. Our model can simulate snapshots of different hours, but cannot
predict how often over a year such situations will occur. Nevertheless, the scenarios we have created should
represent realistic scenarios based on our knowledge of the electricity system, weather conditions, and the
statistical data revealing low margins available on CNEs for cross-zonal exchanges in the Central European
region recently ([24], [21]).
In our scenarios there will often be curtailment of RES. If all the onshore and radially connected offshore
RES as well as the NSWFs are bidding with a marginal cost of 0 e/MWh, the model will randomly choose
which assets to curtail. Sometimes it can be onshore installed RES and other times one or more of the NSWFs.
To have modeling consistency in our scenario generation, the onshore and radially connected offshore RES
are assumed to bid with a price of −0.1 e/MWh whereas the NSWFs bid with 0 e/MWh. The model will
prefer the negatively priced bids and thereby remove randomness in the choice of curtailment. Consistency
is needed since the curtailment of NSWFs is decisive for the TAG mechanism. This allocation of marginal
prices of the RES’ was chosen with the assumption that onshore and radially connected RES are located
closer to the sources of demand and thereby preferred to the more distant NSWFs. In most of the scenarios
relevant for TAG, the day-ahead prices are non-negative, and it is therefore comparable to all RES bidding 0
e/MWh because the slightly negative bids do not set the electricity price. In other scenarios where negative
prices do occur, it can be debated how realistic an assumption it is to have the RES bidding at negative
prices. The RES could bid negatively and still gain revenue if they were under a support scheme with a fixed
top-up. However, if this support scheme was designed to yield no support payments in hours of negative
spot prices, the RES should not give negative bids. Negative spot prices can also occur in hours of e.g. low
17
==PAGE:25==
4
METHODOLOGY
demand where some thermal generators prefer to stay online and bid with negative prices to avoid expensive
ramping costs for shutting down and starting up. One could therefore interpret the negative spot prices as
a representation of this rather than RES bidding negatively.
4.5
TAG design
In the scenarios that we will create, the NSWFs will experience losses because of the unique character of
the OBZs. A way of compensating for these losses is through TAG. Based on the different TAG proposals,
we have identified four relevant design parameters for TAG that can vary and impact its outcome. These
parameters and different options for their designs will be described. Thereafter, they will be used to define
three different TAG archetypes. In the following, references are made to the proposals for the electricity
market reform, and unless anything else is stated the reference refers to the amendment of Regulation (EU)
2019/943, Article 19.2, point c. As mentioned earlier, the proposals for this amendment can be seen in
Appendix II.
4.5.1
Design parameters
When is TAG activated
This parameter describes in which situations there should be a TAG payment. We have defined three different
options for this parameter. For one of these options, the expression ”the OBZs onshore EEZ” is used. This
expression will also be used later in the text and should be understood as the onshore bidding zone to which
the OBZ is directly connected and whose EEZ the OBZ is located in.
The three parameter options are:
1) If there is curtailment of renewables in the OBZ, because of capacity restrictions on elements in the system.
This means that if the capacity of a line given to the market is less than 100% and this causes curtailment
in the OBZ, TAG will be activated. This is what would be expected from the Commission’s proposal:’[...]
if access to interconnected markets has been reduced in such a way that one or more transmission system
operators have not made enough capacity available on the interconnector or the critical network elements
affecting the capacity of the interconnector, resulting in the offshore plant operator not being able to export
its electricity generation capability to the market’ [13].
2) If there is a curtailment of renewables in the OBZ, because of capacity restrictions larger than 30% on
elements in the system. This means that if a TSO gives less than 70% capacity of a system element to
the market and this causes curtailment in the OBZ, TAG will be activated. From the final market reform,
it is expected that this 70% minRAM criterion will be implemented for critical network elements not di-
rectly connected to the OBZs, as proposed by the Council: ’The compensation applies where one or more
transmission system operators have not made available the capacity agreed in the connection agreement on
the interconnector or have not made available the capacity on the critical network elements pursuant to the
capacity calculation rules in Article 16 (8) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943.’ [23]. This article 16(8) that is
referred to defines the obligation for TSOs to give at least 70% of the capacity of the CNEs to the market.
3) If there is a price difference between the OBZ and its onshore EEZ. This criteria for TAG activation
does not require that curtailment of the WFs occur. This is similar to what is described for TAG in the
Parliament’s proposal, where compensation applies when restricted market access is [...] leading to the si-
multaneous loss of revenue of the offshore renewable generator and an excess revenue on the interconnector
[22]. This option can also lead to TAG payments in situations without capacity reductions which would not
be allowed under the Parliament’s version of TAG.
18
==PAGE:26==
4
METHODOLOGY
The purpose of this option is to respond to the risk of price collapse in the OBZ in cases both with and
without curtailment of the renewables.
Amount of electricity to be compensated
We have defined two options for the amount of electricity to be compensated.
1) Total generation available. This option was suggested by Engie Impact, in their equation for TAG com-
pensation: ’Max(Reference BZ price - OBZ price, 0) x total offshore generation available’ [12]. This should
compensate the offshore generator for the missed-out revenues it would have been able to collect for the entire
generation, in a situation without price collapse.
2) The curtailed amount. This option is included since the Parliament in their proposal writes that TAG
should be ’contributing to the partial compensation to offshore renewable generators’ [22]. Only compensating
the curtailed amount of electricity would be one way of giving such partial compensation.
The difference between the amount of TAG payment under the two different options for this parameter
can be quite large. This can be illustrated with a small example:
In the figure below, a system with a 200MW wind farm in an offshore bidding zone is connected to two
onshore bidding zones, A and B, via two 100 MW interconnectors. In the hour we are looking at, the WF
is producing at full capacity but the TSOs in zones A and B have both only given 90 MW of their OBZ
interconnector to the market. Thus, the WF can only export 180 MWh to the market and the last 20 MWh
potential is curtailed. The price in the OBZ becomes the price of the WF power, which is 0 e/MWh, whereas
the prices in zones A and B are 15 e/MWh and 10 e/MWh, respectively.
Onshore bidding zone B
Price: 10 €/MWh
Onshore bidding zone A
Price: 15 €/MWh
90/100MW 
available
90/100MW 
available
200 MWh 
available
90MWh 
90MWh 
OBZ
Price: 0 €/MWh
Figure 4.5: Simple example illustrating the difference between options for the parameter ”amount of electricity
to be compensated”.
In this example, each of the two TSOs in zones A and B have made the same capacity reduction and it is
chosen that they should each compensate half of the MWh, with the electricity price in their zone, in the
given hour. For option 1 of the design parameter, the total generation of 200 MWh will be compensated and
each of the two TSOs will compensate 100 MWh, giving the following total TAG payment to the WF:
100 MWh · 15 e/MWh + 100 MWh · 10 e/MWh = 2500e
(4)
For option 2, the curtailed power of 20 MWh will be compensated and each of the two TSOs will compensate
19
==PAGE:27==
4
METHODOLOGY
10 MWh, giving the following total TAG payment to the WF:
10 MWh · 15 e/MWh + 10 MWh · 10 e/MWh = 250e
(5)
In this simple example, the TAG payment for option 1 is ten times larger than for option 2. This illustrates
that the parameter ”amount of electricity to be compensated” can have a large impact on how large the TAG
payments will be.
Compensation price
This parameter defines which price the WFs will receive per MWh as compensation. We have chosen 2
different options for this.
1) Difference between price in the onshore EEZ and price in the OBZ. Using the onshore EEZ as the reference
is an option suggested in the report from Engie Impact [12]. This simple option relates the compensation
price to a price that could approximately be expected for the WF in a HM setup.
2) Difference between price in the market(s) with congestions and price in the OBZ. So if several TSOs are
responsible for the curtailment, they each pay TAG based on the spot price in their own BZ. This is a way
of relating the compensation price to the responsible TSO(s) and the congestion rent earned by the TSO(s).
As mentioned previously, TAG should be paid using congestion rent.
In some cases, the compensation price will be the same under the two options since there will be cases
where the only relevant congestions are caused by the onshore EEZ TSO. It would also be an option, to find
the compensation price via an ex-post analysis evaluating the spot price in the OBZ in the same scenario,
but with no capacity reductions in the system. However, to keep our analysis simple, we have chosen only
to do this ex-post evaluation in a sensitivity analysis.
Who should pay
This parameter defines which TSO(s) should pay. We have chosen 2 different options for this.
1) TSO in onshore EEZ. This option gives a simple way to find the TSO who should pay. It also signals that
the onshore EEZ TSO has the primary obligation towards the WF.
2) The TSOs responsible, with the payment divided fairly between them. Letting the responsible TSOs pay
is also the expected outcome of the final market reform and it is in line with the polluter pays principle.
For option 1, it is easy to find the TSO(s) who should pay while it is more complex for option 2 since
it requires both a definition of who is responsible and how much they are responsible for. In this analysis,
we have chosen to label a TSO as responsible if one of their interconnectors or internal CNEs is capacity-
restricted and congested. It is assumed that the TSOs in DE, DK, and NL each have full ownership of
the cable from the OBZ in their EEZ to their mainland BZ. DE also owns its internal CNEs while the
ownership of all onshore interconnectors is assumed to be 50/50 by the TSOs of the two connected BZs. If
more than one TSO is seen as responsible, the responsibility of each TSO is defined based on how much
they have restricted the congested system elements, in absolute values, compared to what the other respon-
sible TSOs have restricted. The responsibility for restrictions on an interconnector between two onshore
BZs will be shared 50/50 by the two TSOs. This division of responsibility could have been based on other
measures, but this approach was chosen because it relates to how much capacity the TSOs have kept from
the market. The details and an example of how the responsibilities are calculated are written in Appendix III.
20
==PAGE:28==
4
METHODOLOGY
For each of the 4 parameters presented above, there could be more design options but to keep the anal-
ysis simple and clear we have only chosen a few options for each parameter.
A fifth important design parameter for TAG was also identified. This parameter relates to the annual TAG
payment, and it is expected to be included in the final market reform. In the proposal from the Council,
it is defined with the sentence: ’On an annual basis, this compensation shall not exceed the total congestion
income generated on interconnectors between the concerned bidding zones’ [23]. Hence, there is a limit on
how much TAG can be paid over a year. This parameter is not considered in the main analysis, since our
model only considers stand-alone hours, but we reflect upon it in the discussion chapter.
4.5.2
TAG archetypes
The different TAG parameter options can be put together in many combinations, to create numerous TAG
designs. To keep it simple, we have chosen to make three TAG archetypes that each have their own objectives.
This Thesis was produced during the development of the market reform where the TAG implementation
details has not yet been developed. Thus we could not predict the future TAG design, and therefore the
TAG archetypes are not meant to resemble a specific design that could be expected from the EU reform.
The three TAG designs and their parameter options are presented in Table 3. Design 1 comprises parameter
options that allow for a simple calculation of the TAG, and it is also intended to deliver large compensations as
it compensates the total generation available. This TAG 1 is also activated in any case where there is a price
difference between the OBZ and its onshore EEZ and does thereby not require curtailment for its activation.
Design 2 is called ”polluter pays” and is activated when a TSO has reduced transmission capacity which
causes curtailment in the OBZ(s). This design makes the responsible TSO(s) pay for the total generation
available. The third design aims to include a TAG with a small compensation. This TAG is activated if a
TSO reduces the capacity of an element below 70%, and only the curtailed electricity will be compensated.
For this design, it is also the TSO(s) responsible that will pay for the TAG.
Table 3: The three TAG designs that will be used for the analysis
TAG 1
Simple, large compensation
TAG 2
Polluter pays
TAG 3
Small compensation
When is TAG
activated
When there is a price difference
between OBZ and onshore EEZ
If there is curtailment in OBZ,
because of capacity restrictions
If there is curtailment in OBZ,
because of capacity restricted to <70%
Amount of electricity
to be compensated
Total generation available
Total generation available
Curtailed amount
Compensation price
Price in onshore EEZ
- price in OBZ
Price in market with congestions
- price in OBZ
Price in market with congestions
- price in OBZ
Who should pay
TSO in onshore EEZ
TSO(s) responsible
TSO(s) responsible
21
==PAGE:29==
5
RESULTS
5
Results
In the first part of this section, we will show scenarios relevant to TAG compensation and illustrate how the
three TAG designs compensate the NSWFs in these cases. These results are grouped into three subsections.
The first section demonstrates the differences between the TAG designs and the influence of the design
parameters. This is done using simple scenarios representing restricted market access for the NSWFs due to
capacity reductions in the EEZs of the NSWFs. The second group of scenarios illustrates how a reduction
in transmission capacities between onshore bidding zones further from the NSWFs can influence spot prices
and curtailment of NSWFs and result in TAG payouts. The third group of scenarios illustrates hours where a
price collapse in the OBZs occurs, but only TAG 1(simple) results in a payout. These scenarios demonstrate
what type of risks TAG 2 and TAG 3 do not address. The next part of the result section is a sensitivity
analysis. In this analysis, we seek to replicate a TAG design similar to what is expected from the final market
reform by altering two of the design parameter definitions of TAG 2 (polluter pays). An overview of how the
TAG payout would change in each scenario with these alterations of the TAG 2 design is presented. Lastly,
we assess some of the behavior change incentives that anticipation of TAG payouts could give TSOs or WF
owners.
5.1
Scenarios with TAG compensation
5.1.1
Capacity reductions to/in neighboring bidding zones
This group of four scenarios with capacity reductions from the OBZs to the neighboring BZs and restrictions
inside Germany are used to illustrate the differences between the three TAG designs and highlight interesting
design parameter impacts.
Scenario 1: Hub-to-shore line restricted
This first scenario represents an hour with relatively low solar generation, medium onshore wind, high offshore
wind generation, and average demand. These conditions can represent a typical cloudy and windy autumn
day in Northern Central Europe. Furthermore, the line capacity from the NS DE hub to Germany is reduced
to 60% of its full capacity which simulates that the German grid cannot always receive a large in-feed of
power from the North. The specific parameter changes made in the model to create this scenario are shown
in Table 4. The resulting scenario outcome is shown in Figure 5.1 where line colors represent whether the
lines are congested or not, arrows indicate the direction of the flow, and the resulting spot price of each
bidding zone is noted in e/MWh (real 2023 value). A line can be congested also when 100% of its capacity
is available to the market. This is seen in most of our scenarios, and therefore we always indicate in the text
which lines have been reduced in capacity as this is decisive for the TAG compensation.
This scenario leads to a total curtailment of 600 MWh for the NSWFs. With a day-ahead spot price of
0 e/MWh in the OBZs, no revenue is earned by the WFs for the remaining 13 GWh of wind power that is
produced and exported to DK, DE, and NL. The price collapses to 0 e/MWh offshore because the congestion
on all three lines to shore causes the price to be set by the marginal generator in the OBZs. The three NSWFs
are the only producers and each has a marginal cost of 0 e/MWh which therefore becomes the price in each
OBZ.
22
==PAGE:30==
5
RESULTS
Parameter
Set point/ change
from baseline
PF sun
0.1
PF Water
0.1
PF On Wind
0.4
PF Off Wind
0.6
PF NSWFs
0.8
Hub-to-DE
-40%
Table 4: Set point of RES PFs and parame-
ters change from their baseline used to cre-
ate Scenario 1
Figure 5.1: System results of Scenario 1
Figure 5.2 shows the TAG payout in absolute value that each NSWF receives under the three TAG designs
in this scenario, from each of the TSOs. In TAG 1 (simple) each of the three TSOs (DK, DE, and NL)
should compensate the NSWF in their EEZ based on the available production capability. Since the reference
price for TAG 1 compensation is based on the spot price in the onshore EEZ BZ, the three TSOs pay 13.5
e/MWh of electricity in this scenario. The German hub, NS DE, receives the largest compensation as this
is the hub with the largest capacity and thereby the largest available power production. Under the TAG 2
(polluter pays) design it is solely the German TSO who pays compensation to the NSWFs since this was the
only ’polluting’ TSO with reduced capacity on a cable. The reference price used to calculate TAG 2 payout
is the spot price in Germany, the polluting BZ. Since this is 13.5 e/MWh, identical to the price in DK and
NL, the payout received by each of the NSWFs is identical to the case of TAG 1.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
TAG payments
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
 
TAG 1
 
 
TAG 2
 
 
TAG 3
 
  DE
  DK
  NL
Figure 5.2:
TAG payments to each
NSWF in Scenario 1
TAG % of offshore congestion rent for TSO in given hour
TAG 1
TAG 2
TAG 3
0
50
100
150
200
%
DE
DK
NL
Figure 5.3: The amount of TAG com-
pared to the CR earned, in Scenario 1
23
==PAGE:31==
5
RESULTS
TAG 3 (small) stands out with its significantly smaller compensation to the NSWFs compared to TAG 1
and TAG 2. That is because TAG 3 only compensates the amount that is curtailed, which is just 600 MWh.
Each NSWF receives the same payout in absolute value, as the curtailment is assumed to be divided equally
between them.
Figure 5.3 shows what fraction the total TAG payout from each TSO constitutes of the congestion rent
earned on the H2S line by the TSO. The figure shows that in TAG 1 (simple) the Danish and Dutch TSOs
pay 80% of the earned CR on their H2S lines and the German TSO pays around 130% of the earned CR on
their H2S line. The reason for this number being larger for the German TSO is that they earn CR based
on the reduced flow of 6 GWh on H2S line whereas the hub can produce 8 GWh in this hour. This entire
production should be compensated by the German TSO. In TAG 2 (polluter pays), where the German TSO
is considered the only responsible TSO to compensate the entire available production from all three offshore
hubs, the percentage is naturally higher. It is above 200% of the CR earned in that hour on Germany’s
offshore cable. The TAG 3 (small) pay-out constitutes a smaller fraction of just 10% of the CR earned by
the German TSO.
Scenario 2: Several hub-to-shore lines restricted
Scenario 2 illustrated in Figure 5.4 is an hour of high demand, low sun, and high wind production. This
represents a typical windy winter day with increased demand due to cold weather. Furthermore, all three
hub-to-shore lines are restricted to 75% of the total capacity. In our simple model, the reduced capacity on
the H2S lines is also a way to represent congestion on CNEs inside the countries that are represented by a
single node. The market coupling results in 850 MWh being curtailed from the NSWFs while 12.75 GWh
are sold at 0 e/MWh. The high prices of around 85 e/MWh in the neighboring countries indicate a large
loss of revenue for the NSWFs.
Figure 5.4: System results of Scenario 2
The TAG 1 and 2 payments in this scenario, see Figure 5.5, are almost a factor of 10 larger than in Scenario
24
==PAGE:32==
5
RESULTS
1 due to the high spot prices onshore used as reference. TAG 1 (simple) again illustrates that each TSO
must compensate the available production of the NSWF in their economic zone. For each TSO this payout
is 107% of the CR earned. It is above 100% since the available power to be compensated is larger than the
flow on the lines. The percentage is identical for the three TSOs as a result of the fact that each of the H2S
lines is restricted by the same percentage of their total capacity.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
TAG payments
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
 
TAG 1
 
 
TAG 2
 
 
TAG 3
 
  DE
  DK
  NL
Figure 5.5: TAG payments related to Scenario 2
The results of TAG 2 (polluter pays) demonstrate that all three polluting TSOs are responsible for the
curtailment and thereby for the TAG payment to each NSWF. The responsibility of each TSO under TAG 2
is calculated based on how much their line is restricted in absolute values. This method of dividing responsi-
bility results in the three TSOs paying an equal share of their CR earned on the H2S lines. Similar to TAG
1, they all pay 107% of the CR earned. TAG 3 (small) results in no compensation at all because the lines
are limited to 85% capacity and not below 70% which is a criterion to activate compensation payment under
the TAG 3 design.
Scenario 3: Internal congestion in Germany
This scenario, illustrated in Figure 5.6, can represent a cloudy hour in the middle of the day when demand
is lower than average, with low sun and medium to high wind. It is an hour with internal congestions in
Germany, where the RAM on two internal German CNEs is limited to 20% capacity. As reported by the
CREG, such large capacity reductions have been happening lately due to individual validation adjustments
by TSOs [24]. As a result of these scenario parameters, the spot price in Germany is pushed up to 16.44
e/MWh. However, only renewable sources with marginal costs of 0 e/MWh are actively supplying power in
Germany at that hour. The spot price in Germany can be different from the cost of the marginal generator
in the zone because of their internal bottlenecks and the functioning of FBMC as explained in section 3.1.
Furthermore, the medium-high wind production in combination with low demand at this hour, causes the
need for curtailment of some RES. The assumption we made regarding slightly negative-priced renewable
power in the onshore BZs makes their production preferred over the NSWFs’ production. This results in a
large curtailment of the NSWFs while the H2S lines are used for export from low-priced zones to Germany.
This is indicated in the figure by the flow on the Danish and Dutch H2S lines pointing in the direction of the
hub and then towards Germany.
25
==PAGE:33==
5
RESULTS
Figure 5.6: System results of Scenario 3
The resulting TAG payments, shown in Figure 5.7, reveal that in all three designs, the German TSO is
the only one to pay TAG. TAG 1 (simple) does not result in payouts to NS DK and NS NL because the
compensation is defined as the difference between the OBZ and the onshore EEZ spot price which is zero at
this hour. Thus it is only the NS DE hub that receives compensation. In TAG 2 (polluter pays) all three
NSWFs receive payment from the German TSO, since this is the only polluting TSO in this scenario. The
payout is again based on the spot price in the German market. TAG 3 (small) compensates each NSWF
based on the curtailed amount. In this scenario, there is not an equal division of the curtailment between
the three hubs. The model chooses to curtail the NS NL wind farm the most, to make room for an export of
∼3 GW from NL to DE. The NS NL hub is therefore also the WF that receives the largest TAG 3 payment.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
TAG payments
NS DK | NS DE | NS NL
NS DK | NS DE | NS NL
NS DK | NS DE | NS NL
 
TAG 1
 
 
TAG 2
 
 
TAG 3
 
  DE
  DK
  NL
Figure 5.7: TAG payments related to Scenario 3
The TAG payouts compared to the CR earned offshore by the German TSO, are ∼60% for TAG 1, 102%
for TAG 2, and ∼40% for TAG 3. Even though Germany pays a much larger TAG compensation under the
26
==PAGE:34==
5
RESULTS
TAG 2 design, it is only slightly above 100% of the CR earned on the H2S line. This is because the power
factor of the NSWFs in this hour was 60%, resulting in a total available production of 10.2 GWh, while the
German TSO earns CR on the H2S line based on a flow of 10 GWh.
Scenario 4: Internal congestion in Germany plus H2S lines restricted
The scenario illustrated in Figure 5.8 represents an hour with high wind production and additional demand
in DE, DK, and NL compared to the average. This could represent the installation of electrolysis with a
demand of 3800 MWh, 600 MWh, and 2500 MWh, respectively, in the onshore nodes of the three countries.
Furthermore, the capacity is reduced to a RAM of 20% capacity on internal lines in Germany, while all three
H2S lines are reduced to 80% capacity.
Figure 5.8: System results of Scenario 4
A positive market price occurs in DE and NL,
but the spot price in all three hubs converges 0
e/MWh, which is also the price in DK. Even
though the DC line from the NS hub to DK
could be used to transfer more power towards
the mainland, the NSWFs are curtailed by 950
MWh. This amount cannot be transported to
Denmark and further south in the European
system due to congestion in the system, espe-
cially the CNEs in Germany, and must there-
fore be curtailed. In total, 11.8 GWh of elec-
tricity produced by the NSWFs is being sold
and evacuated to shore at zero price.
When looking at the system figure, one could
be puzzled about the direction of the flow on
the AC line from DE-DK, as power would need
to flow from the North toward Germany. How-
ever, the flow on the parallel DC line from DK
to DE is larger, meaning that the net flow be-
tween the countries is towards Germany. Fur-
thermore, there are several non-intuitive flows in this hour where electricity flows from a higher-priced bidding
zone towards a lower-priced zone. This is an outcome of the FBMC as there are large internal restrictions
in Germany which causes flows on other lines to be bounded by the PTDF matrix. When maximizing social
welfare, the market coupling algorithm can result in these non-intuitive flows.
The resulting TAG payments for this scenario are shown in Figure 5.9. TAG 1 (simple) results in a payout
favoring the German hub over the others because the spot price is high in DE, low in NL, and zero in DK.
According to the design of TAG 2 (polluter pays), the responsibility for curtailment is assigned to the German
and Dutch TSO because some of their lines were reduced in capacity and congested. Since the H2S line to
DK was not congested, the reduction in the capacity on that line does not assign TAG responsibility to the
Danish TSO. The German TSO has the largest share of the payment as larger capacity reductions were seen
on German lines compared to the Dutch lines. As a result of this design, all three NSWFs are compensated
with a large payout since the main portion is based on the German price of 22.8 e/MWh. The TAG 3 (small)
design solely assigns responsibility to the German TSO due to the 70% rule.
27
==PAGE:35==
5
RESULTS
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
TAG payments
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
 
TAG 1
 
 
TAG 2
 
 
TAG 3
 
  DE
  DK
  NL
Figure 5.9: TAG payments for Scenario 4
TAG % of offshore congestion rent for TSO in given hour
TAG 1
TAG 2
TAG 3
0
50
100
150
%
DE
DK
NL
Figure 5.10:
Amount of TAG paid com-
pared to the CR earned in Scenario 4
Figure 5.10 shows the size of the TAG payment relative to the CR earned on the H2S lines by the TSOs.
Under TAG 1 (simple) the percentage is equal for the Dutch and German TSO, whereas in TAG 2 (polluter
pays) it is higher for the more polluting German TSO (even above 140%) who also has to compensate with
a higher compensation price. The payout under the TAG 3 (small) design is very small for the German TSO
compared to the two other designs.
5.1.2
Restrictions between onshore bidding zones
Thus far, the three TAG designs have been illustrated using scenarios with reduced transmission capacity on
lines from the OBZs to shore and within the neighboring country Germany. In this section, three scenarios
with capacity reductions between countries that are not directly connected to the NSWFs will be illustrated
to highlight how capacity reductions distant from the hubs can also result in price collapse and curtailment
of the NSWFs.
Due to the definition of compensation price in TAG 2 (polluter pays) and TAG 3 (small), the scenarios in
this section will lead to some TAG compensation prices equal to the spot prices of BZ further away from the
OBZs. These spot prices could have been less likely to occur in the OBZs in the given hours.
Scenario 5: Reduced capacity between Netherlands and Belgium
Scenario 5, shown in Figure 5.11, is an hour of low sun, medium onshore wind, and high offshore wind while
the demand is average. The capacity on the interconnector between BE-NL is reduced to a RAM of 70%
capacity. This causes a situation where both the TSO in NL and BE earn CR on the interconnector between
them. The NSWFs are curtailed by 1150 MWh, while 12.4 GWh are produced and sold at the price of zero.
28
==PAGE:36==
5
RESULTS
Figure 5.11: System results of Scenario 5
The TAG payouts in absolute values are shown in Figure 5.12. The TAG 1 (simple) design can only assign
payment responsibility to the three TSOs in the EEZs of the NSWFs. Since the spot price in DK and NL
is zero, only the German TSO would pay the NS DE hub in this scenario. The payout is ∼80% of the CR
earned by the German TSO on the H2S line.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
TAG payments
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
 
TAG 1
 
 
TAG 2
 
 
TAG 3
 
  BE
 DE
Figure 5.12: TAG payments related to the Scenario 5
The payment responsibility under TAG 2 (polluter pays) is divided 50/50 between BE and NL. Their TAG
payout is calculated as spot price x 50% x available wind power. Because the spot price in the Netherlands is
zero, the Dutch TSO does not pay whereas the Belgian TSO pays TAG to compensate 50% of the available
wind power production. This payment corresponds to ∼400% of the CR it earns on the BE-NL interconnec-
tor. It can be discussed whether this is a good way of handling this case, or if the TAG reference price should
have been based on another benchmark. For example, it could have been based on the price difference on
the congested line between BE-NL. Such a definition of reference price would force the Dutch TSO to also
29
==PAGE:37==
5
RESULTS
pay TAG, because the TSO earns 50% of the CR on the line. According the the TAG 3 (small) design there
is no TAG payout since the 70% rule was not violated.
Scenario 6: Restrictions between France and Germany
Figure 5.13: System results of Scenario 6
Scenario 6, illustrated in Figure 5.13, has the
same weather and demand forecasts as Sce-
nario 5 (low sun, medium onshore wind, and
high offshore wind while the demand is av-
erage).
The interconnector between DE and
FR is restricted to 69% of total capacity. This
causes a total curtailment of 450 MWh in the
NSWFs and the remaining 13.15 GWh is sold
for 0 e/MWh.
In this scenario, TAG 1 (simple) leads to no
payout since the spot prices in the three neigh-
boring BZs are 0 e/MWh. According to the
TAG 2 (polluter pays) design, the French and
German TSOs share the curtailment responsi-
bility 50/50. As the spot price in Germany is
zero the TSO in Germany does not pay at all,
whereas the French TSO compensates 50% of
the wind production resulting in this TSO pay-
ing ∼300% of the CR it earns on the DE-FR
interconnector. Since the capacity of the DE-
FR line was restricted to a RAM just below 70%, TAG payment under the TAG 3 (small) design is activated.
Since the responsibility and reference price is calculated the same way as in TAG 2, only the French TSO
will pay TAG and it corresponds to ∼11% of its CR on the DE-FR interconnector. The payout is much
smaller in comparison to TAG 2 because only the curtailed amount is compensated.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
TAG payments
NS DK | NS DE | NS NL
NS DK | NS DE | NS NL
NS DK | NS DE | NS NL
 
TAG 1
 
 
TAG 2
 
 
TAG 3
 
  FR
Figure 5.14: TAG payout results of Scenario 6
Both scenarios 5 and 6 resulted in a TSO distant from the OBZs paying a TAG 2 compensation much larger
30
==PAGE:38==
5
RESULTS
than the CR earned on the restricted cable.
Scenario 7: Many restrictions in the system
The previous scenarios have been simplistically generated with one or few capacity restrictions leading to
curtailment and price collapse in the OBZs. Scenario 7 is created with many restrictions located both close
to and far from the North Sea hubs, which better resembles what the system will look like in reality in a
typical hour. In the scenario, there is a relatively low solar generation, medium onshore wind, high offshore
wind generation, and average demand. The restrictions and resulting scenario outcomes are shown in the
table and figure below. The spot prices in the OBZs are 0 e/MWh and the NSWFs are curtailed with 1.5
GWh in total.
Parameter
Change from
baseline
DE internal lines
-30%
RAM DE-FR line
-20%
RAM & NTC DE-DK lines
-25%
RAM & NTC DE-NL lines
-20%
RAM DE-PL line
-10%
NTC Hub-DE
-10%
RAM NL-BE line
-25%
Figure 5.15: System results of Scenario 7
Due to the spot prices in three onshore EEZ BZs of the OBZs, it is only the German TSO who will pay
compensation under the TAG 1 design.
As in the previous scenarios, the calculation method we use to
find the responsibilities for the curtailment of NSWFs in TAG 2 and 3 is based on the absolute capacity
reduction in each congested and restricted line. Thus, the restricted lines that are not congested do not add
responsibility to the TSOs. The resulting responsibilities when sharing interconnectors 50/50 between two
neighboring countries are as follows:
TSO
DE
NL
BE
DK
PL
Responsibility
31%
22%
21%
18%
8%
Figures 5.16 and 5.17 show TAG payments in this scenario. Focusing on TAG 2 (polluter pays) it is shown
that even though NL and DK are responsible for 40% of the capacity reductions together, they do not pay
TAG due to their zero spot prices. Even though the Polish TSO has the smallest relative responsibility, it pays
the largest absolute value to the NSWFs because their share of the payment is based on the high spot price in
Poland. Their payment is ∼60% of the CR earned that hour on the restricted and congested interconnector
31
==PAGE:39==
5
RESULTS
to Germany. The German TSO has the largest responsibility due to the reduction and congestion on the
lines to DK, PL, BE, and NL. The sum of the CR belonging to the German TSO on these lines is considered
as their CR reference value in Figure 5.17. Despite their large share in responsibility, the German TSO pays
a low amount because of the low spot price in Germany, and the payout constitutes less than 10% of the CR
earned. The Belgian TSO should compensate ∼20% of the available wind generation and this amounts to
∼160% of the CR they earn on the congested interconnector to NL. They also earn CR on the cables to FR
and DE, however, this is not included in the comparison as these lines were not capacity-restricted.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
TAG payments
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
NS DK | NS DE |NS NL
 
TAG 1
 
 
TAG 2
 
 
TAG 3
 
  BE
  DE
  PL
Figure 5.16: TAG payment in Scenario 7
TAG % of congestion rent for TSO on responsible lines
TAG 1
TAG 2
TAG 3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
%
BE
DE
PL
Figure 5.17: TAG payout relative to CR
One thing to notice from this scenario is the effect of the compensation price. For both of the activated
TAG designs, we see that the size of all of the TSOs’ payouts are highly dependent on their compensation
price. This illustrates the importance of the compensation price as a design parameter. When planning the
details of TAG implementation, it’s important to consider the impact of the chosen method for determining
compensation prices.
In this scenario, the favorable wind conditions allowed for the production of 13.6 GWh of power from the
NSWFs. The transmission restrictions result in 1.5 GWh of curtailment and thereby 12.1 GWh of wind
power being exported from the NS hubs. If the capacity reduction of one congested line was relieved, while
all other restrictions were kept in the system, the curtailment of the NSWFs would be reduced as shown in
the table below (percentage of total curtailment shown in brackets):
Connection
DE-NL
DE-DK
DE-PL
NSWF-DE
NL-BE
Change in curtailment
if no restriction
-20 MW
(1%)
-120 MW
(8%)
-360 MW
(23%)
-515 MW
(33%)
-1300 MW
(84%)
This type of analysis identifies the connection between NL-BE to have a significantly larger impact on the
NSWFs’ curtailment than all other restricted lines. It could therefore be used to argue for a larger respon-
sibility of the Belgian and Dutch TSOs, than what is defined with our simple method considering absolute
capacity reductions.
One way of considering this could be as follows: calculate the responsibilities based on the change in cur-
tailment when relieving the lines. E.g. such that NL is responsible for half of the change in curtailment of
32
==PAGE:40==
5
RESULTS
both DE-NL and NL-BE (20 MW · 0.5 + 1300 MW · 0.5 = 660 MW) out of the total change in curtailment.
Using this procedure, the responsibilities would be those found in the bottom row of the table below. The
first row of the table repeats the responsibilities as they were initially calculated in TAG 2.
TSO
DE
NL
BE
DK
PL
Responsibility
from TAG 2
31%
22%
21%
18%
8%
Responsibility
from relieving lines
33%
29%
28%
3%
8%
This way of identifying the responsible TSO, taking the change in curtailment caused by each capacity
reduction into consideration, leads to a different outcome. The results show that the responsibility of the
compensation payout given to DK in the TAG 2 design might have been too large and for NL and BE too
small compared to what was reasonable. One could expect many hours of a typical day to similarly have
numerous capacity reductions on CNEs throughout the European system, and thus many hours where it
could potentially be more complicated to define the ”true” responsible TSO(s). Running the EUPHEMIA
algorithm with this type of additional responsibility analysis would be time-consuming and complicated.
5.1.3
Price collapse and no TAG 2 or TAG 3 payment
In this section, scenarios with a price collapse in the OBZs but without TAG 2 and TAG 3 compensation
will be illustrated. This can show which risks TAG 2 and 3 do not address, but also the possible over-
compensation by TAG 1.
Scenario 8: Price collapse but no curtailment
Figure 5.18: System results of Scenario 8
Figure 5.18 represents a scenario where the ex-
pected wind generation is exactly equal to the
capacity available on the hub-to-shore lines.
All the wind power produced can be exported
to shore, however, the price collapses to 0
e/MWh in the OBZs while it is ∼85 e/MWh
in the neighboring onshore BZs. This price col-
lapse can occur, even though all wind power
is exported, due to verticals in the aggregated
merit order curves of the BZs [54]. The inelas-
tic demand curve is a vertical line that in this
hour intersects with a vertical step in the sup-
ply curve from 0 to 85 e/MWh. Our optimiza-
tion model chooses the price 0 e/MWh for the
OBZs in this situation. In EUPHEMIA there
might be ways to detect such verticals and rules
for how to allocate prices in the BZs.
This
scenario of price collapse but no curtailment
might therefore not happen in EUPHEMIA.
33
==PAGE:41==
5
RESULTS
However, the scenario is included because we assume that a rule of choosing the lowest price of the ver-
tical step would be realistic.
With the design of TAG 1 each of the three TSOs pays the entire CR earned on the hub-to-shore cable to
the NSWF in their EEZ. This corresponds to the amount of revenue the WFs would have gained if the prices
converged to that of the neighboring BZs instead of collapsing. Since TAG 2 (polluter pays) and TAG 3
(small) are activated only if there is curtailment of the NSWFs due to capacity restrictions, none of these
designs lead to a payout in this scenario.
When the H2S cables from the OBZs have the same total capacity as the WFs in the OBZs, which is cur-
rently the case with most radially connected WFs ([55], [56], [57], [58]), this situation could potentially happen
often if wind conditions are favorable. This risk of price collapse is not covered in the designs of TAG 2 and 3.
Scenario 9a: OBZ connection used as interconnector
Scenario 9, shown in Figure 5.19, represents an hour of low sun and medium wind generation where the
demand in all countries except the Netherlands is lower than average. This could represent a mid-day hour of
a warmer but cloudy day. There is a higher than average demand in the Netherlands which could simulate the
installation of electrolysis or some special event in the country leading to larger power off-take. Furthermore,
the renewable energy plants in Germany are set to bid at a negative price of −2 e/MWh, to simulate hours
of negative prices. As explained previously, a renewable operator could bid at a negative price and still earn
a profit if it had a fixed top-up subsidy scheme yielding a payout in negative-priced hours. However, one
could also see this as a representation of another kind of power-generating facility in Germany bidding at the
negative price, which might as well be thermal generators willing to stay online due to ramping constraints.
Figure 5.19: System results of Scenario 9a
As seen from Figure 5.19, there is a flow from DE towards DK and NL through the offshore hubs because
the negative-priced power is more attractive than the 0 e/MWh power from the NSWFs. The Danish and
German hubs are fully curtailed, while the Dutch hub produces 0.5 GWh. The reason that this hub is not
34
==PAGE:42==
5
RESULTS
fully curtailed is that just 3.5 GWh of electricity from Germany can be sent to NS NL, while 4 GWh can be
exported from NS NL to the Netherlands.
TAG 1 (simple) yields a payout for NS NL due to the price difference between the Netherlands and NS NL.
This payout is 50% of the CR earned by the Dutch TSO as it should compensate the available generation from
the NSWF which was 50% of full capacity. Since there are no price differences between the two remaining
OBZs and their respective onshore EEZs, there is no TAG 1 payout for these TSOs. Since none of the TSOs
had made reductions on their transmission lines TAG 2 (polluter pays) and TAG 3 (small) do not activate
any payout.
This scenario illustrates a situation where the use of the H2H line to transport negative-priced electricity
from Germany is the factor that congests the Hub-to-NL cable causing a price collapse in NS NL and thereby
a loss for the WF.
Scenario 9b: OBZ connection used as interconnector, increased hub-to-hub capacity
This scenario, illustrated in Figure 5.20, has the same parameter inputs as Scenario 9a, but with the hub-to-
hub lines’ capacities doubled in size. This results in full curtailment of all NSWFs since the export capacity is
utilized to the advantage of cheaper power from Germany. In this case, 7 GWh of negatively priced electricity
is transported from DE to DK and NL. In the Scenario 9a, only 5 GWh could be exported.
Figure 5.20: System results of Scenario 9b
As expected, TAG 2 (polluter pays) and TAG 3 (small) are again not yielding any payout, since no capacity
reduction of lines caused the curtailment. TAG 1 (simple) will in this case still yield a payout from the Dutch
TSO to NS NL, but also from the Danish TSO to NS DK, since there is a price difference between NS DK
and Denmark. For both the TSO in NL and DK the payout is 50% of their CR because the NSWFs available
power was 50% of nominal power.
In this situation, the two hubs are compensated by TAG 1, even though they were curtailed because of the
merit-order effect. Their bid price was higher than the alternative from DE, which was therefore prioritized
35
==PAGE:43==
5
RESULTS
over the NSWF power. This scenario is thus an illustration of how the TAG 1 design can result in over-
compensation of the wind farms.
Scenario 10a: Curtailment but no capacity reductions
Scenario 10a simulates an hour with low-medium sun, high wind, and high demand. None of the transmission
lines have been reduced in capacity.
The total demand in the system is larger than the available RES
generation, and despite this, the NSWFs are curtailed. This is because the grid is not structurally able to
receive and transport all the offshore generated power to the location of demand. The price in the OBZs
converges to zero even though most of the BZs have positive spot prices.
Figure 5.21: System results of Scenario 10a
In this scenario, only TAG 1 (simple) leads to a payout since no capacity reductions are made. One can
therefore observe that the TAG 2 and 3 designs do not incentivize a build-out of the grid, which could allow
for a larger uptake of electricity from the OBZs. This was also not the original aim of the TAG, but it is an
important risk for the NSWFs that the grid might not be able to structurally take up all the electricity in
some hours.
Scenario 10b: Curtailment and few reductions leading to TAG 2 payout
In this scenario, we have the same weather and demand conditions as in Scenario 10a, but add a 10% decrease
in RAM on the cable between NL and BE. This leads to more curtailment of the NSWFs than in Scenario 10a
and also a payout of TAG 2. Since we know the state of the system without the capacity reduction between
BE and NL, from Scenario 10a, we know that these two TSOs are not responsible for the entire curtailment
of the NSWFs. But looking at the results of Scenario 10b in isolation, BE and NL are held responsible for
the full curtailment under TAG 2 design and should pay full compensation. This would result in a large TAG
2 payout from the Belgian TSO as this TAG design places 50% of the entire responsibility on them. The
Netherlands should not pay anything in TAG design 2, because their spot price is zero at that hour.
36
==PAGE:44==
5
RESULTS
The detailed results of Scenario 10a and 10b are shown in Table 5. It depicts how much each NS hub is
curtailed in the two scenarios and what the TAG 2 compensation paid by the Belgian TSO is. From these
results, it is seen that Scenario 10b has 977 MW more total curtailment than Scenario 10a, and thus it could
be argued that the NL-BE capacity reduction is responsible for 977MW/4235MW = 23% of the curtailment.
But as mentioned earlier, TAG design 2 would analyze Scenario 10b without considering Scenario 10a, and
therefore the Belgian TSO would be seen as responsible for 50% of curtailment and have to pay 358% of its
CR earned on the BE-NL interconnector as TAG. This way of assigning more responsibility to the TSOs
than what is in line with the polluter pays principle is not the intention of TAG 2. But with a design like
TAG 2, this is a risk. Additionally, if the scenario is more complex, like in Scenario 7 (many restrictions), it
will be more complicated to find out if the system layout causes any of the curtailment.
Table 5: Curtailment and TAG results for Scenario 10a and 10b
Curtailment
NS DE
Curtailment
NS DK
Curtailment
NS NL
Total
curtailment
Total TAG
payment by BE
TAG % of CR earned
by BE on BE-NL line
Scenario 10a
1086 MW
1086 MW
1086 MW
3258 MW
-
-
Scenario 10b
1100 MW
1100 MW
2035 MW
4235 MW
181.5 thousand e
358%
This Scenario 10b is in itself similar to Scenario 5 and 6, with restrictions between countries. But for these
two scenarios, it was indeed the restrictions on the interconnectors that caused the curtailment of the NSWFs.
5.2
Sensitivity analysis
The proposal for TAG by the Council, which is similar to the design expected from the final market reform
text, outlines a TAG design that resembles TAG 2 (polluter pays) but adds some additional complexities
to the implementation. It includes the 70% minRAM criterion in the design and points towards using an
ex-post reference price for TAG. In this section, we will present these additions and analyze how they change
the compensation outcome compared to TAG 2 (polluter pays) in the scenarios from our base case results.
In the proposal by the Council, it is stated that TAG compensation applies if ”one or more transmission
system operators have not made available the capacity agreed in the connection agreement on the interconnec-
tor or have not made available the capacity on the critical network elements pursuant to the calculation rules
in Article 16(8)” [23]. From this sentence it can be understood that on the H2S lines, the entire capacity
agreed in the connection agreements should be available, otherwise, TAG will be activated. Whereas for the
remaining CNEs, TAG is only activated if less than 70% capacity is available to the market. In our TAG 3
design (small), the 70% rule was used for the H2S lines as well as for the remaining CNEs. In this sensitivity
analysis, we only add it to the remaining CNEs and assume that the entire capacity of the H2S lines would be
included in the connection agreements. Thus, TAG is still activated in case of any capacity restriction on the
H2S lines. When the 70% rule is mentioned in the remainder of this section, we refer to the above-mentioned
implementation.
It is not yet defined how the reference price for TAG compensation should be found. In the proposal
by the Council, it is written that CR should be used for compensation if market access has been reduced
such that the available generation cannot be exported and, where relevant, there is ”a corresponding price
decrease in the offshore bidding zone, as compared to without capacity reductions” [23]. This last phrase of
37
==PAGE:45==
5
RESULTS
the text suggests that an objective of TAG could be to compensate with the amount that would have been
earned by the NSWFs if full capacity on the restricted lines had been available for trade. This would be a
more sophisticated and complicated calculation of the reference price compared to the method used in our
three TAG archetypes. In this sensitivity analysis, we have implemented the suggested objective from the
Council through an ex-post analysis of the price. This was done by running every scenario a second time
where 100% capacity is available on all CNEs and H2S lines. Another approach could have been to relieve
the restricted lines to 70% capacity since restrictions smaller than this would be allowed under the 70% rule.
The ex-post analysis results in a new set of spot prices in each zone.
The ex-post spot prices found in
the OBZs are then used as the TAG compensation price for the responsible TSO(s) instead of their own
day-ahead spot price(s) for the given hour.
Table 6: Sensitivity analysis 70% rule and ex-post reference price results
Scenario
description
Total TAG 2
payout
thousand e
TAG% of
relevant CR
70% rule,
change in
total payout
Ex-post,
change in
total payout
Combined,
change in
total payout
New % of
CR
1
Hub to DE
restricted
184
DE: 227%
-
-
-
-
2
All H2S lines
restricted
1158
DE & DK &
NL = 107%
-
-
-
-
3
DE internal
congestions
168
DE: 102%
-
-100%
-100%
DE: 0%
4
DE internal
congestions +
H2S lines
263
DE: 144%,
NL: 37%
-
-37%
-37%
DE: 86%,
NL: 65%
5
Restriction
between BE-NL
161
BE: 408%
-100%
+14%
-100%
BE: 0%
6
Restriction
between FR-DE
92
FR: 292%
-
+100%
+100%
FR: 292%,
DE: 292%
7
Many
restrictions
123
BE: 157%,
PL: 55%,
DE: 6%
-77%
-10%
-10%
BE: 0%,
PL: 0%,
DE: 70%
10b
Curtailment
and small
restriction
149
BE: 294%
-100%
-100%
-100%
BE: 0%
Table 6 shows the results of this sensitivity analysis where the 70% rule and an ex-post compensation price
are added to the TAG 2 design. The two design parameters have been added one at a time and thereafter
in combination to show the modifications to TAG 2 they can cause, separately and in combination. The
first column of Table 6 gives an overview of the eight scenarios that resulted in TAG 2 payouts. The second
column depicts the TAG 2 results of those scenarios by defining the total TAG 2 payout given to the three
wind farms, and what % of the relevant CR this represents for each paying TSO. The next two columns show
38
==PAGE:46==
5
RESULTS
the relative change in total payout compared to TAG 2 when implementing the 70% rule or ex-post reference
price. The last column represents results with a TAG design resembling the design expected from the final
market reform. It shows the change in total TAG payout and the new TAG percentage of CR when adding
both the 70% rule and the ex-post reference price to the TAG design. The sign ’−’ is used when results are
identical to TAG 2.
Scenario 1 illustrated an hour where the Hub-to-DE line was restricted to 60% capacity resulting in all
three H2S lines being congested and prices collapsing to zero in the OBZs. The spot price in Germany
of 13.5 e/MWh defined the reference price for TAG 2, as the German TSO was the polluter who should
pay. Including the 70% rule would not change the TAG payout since any restriction on a H2S line would
still activate TAG. The ex-post reference price occurring in the OBZs when running the scenario with 100%
capacity on the hub-to-DE line was identical to the German spot price, and would therefore not change the
TAG payout. In combination, the two parameters would not cause any change. Scenario 2 was a similar case
with all three H2S lines restricted and congested, and the TAG payment would not change with the additions
due to the same reasons as for Scenario 1.
Scenario 3 was an hour of large internal congestion in Germany that resulted in a high German spot price
of 16.4 e/MWh while it was 0 e/MWh in the OBZs, DK, and NL. Adding the 70% rule on its own would not
change anything, since TAG would indeed need to be paid due to less than 70% RAM available on German
CNEs. The ex-post price parameter would on the other hand change the result since the price in the OBZs
when relieving the German restrictions is 0 e/MWh. This means that the German TSO responsible would
have this as the TAG reference price resulting in no payout. The combination of the two parameters would
therefore lead to no TAG payout. Similar results can be seen for Scenario 4 which was an hour with internal
German restrictions as well as H2S line restrictions. The 70% rule would not change the result, however, the
ex-post reference price causes changes. The spot prices in DE and NL were 22.8 and 7.7 e/MWh respectively,
but without any capacity reductions, the prices in OBZs and neighboring countries would converge to 13.5
e/MWh. As a result, when including the ex-post reference price parameter, the German TSO would pay less
and the Dutch TSO would pay more than in TAG 2. With the German TSO having the largest responsibility
and thereby largest influence on payout volume, the total payout would decrease by 37%. This would also
be the case when both the 70% rule and ex-post price were added.
Scenario 5 showcases an example where adding the 70% rule would remove TAG payout whereas the
ex-post price on the contrary would increase the payout, but in combination, the 70% criterion overrules
which results in no payout. This was an hour with a 30% decrease in RAM on the interconnector between
BE-NL which is exactly allowed within the minRAM criterion. The Belgian and Dutch TSOs would therefore
not be held responsible for the curtailment of the wind farms in this scenario when including the 70% rule
and no TAG payout would be given. When running the ex-post analysis of the scenario, the price in the
OBZs would be 13.5 instead of 0 e/MWh. This would be the reference price for BE and NL instead of their
spot prices of 23.7 and 0 e/MWh respectively. In total, the lower payout from Belgium and higher payout
from the Netherlands would effectively increase the TAG payout by 13%. However, when adding both design
parameters to TAG, the increase otherwise caused by the ex-post price is overruled by the 70% rule such
that no payout would be given in the end.
Scenario 6 was an hour with a restriction on the interconnector between FR-DE leaving 69% RAM
available for cross-border exchange. This also resulted in curtailment of the NSWFs, for which the French
and German TSO shared the TAG compensation responsibility 50/50. The reference prices defining the
TAG 2 payout were the spot prices of 13.5 and 0 e/MWh in FR and DE, respectively. Adding the 70%
39
==PAGE:47==
5
RESULTS
rule would not change the TAG payout due to the amount of capacity withheld from the market being more
than 30% RAM. The ex-post reference price in the OBZs would be 13.5 e/MWh which doubles the TAG
payments compared to TAG 2. This is because, under the TAG 2 design, the German TSO with 50% of the
responsibility would not pay anything based on its spot price of 0 e/MWh. In combination, the two design
parameters also result in a doubling of the total TAG payout, and both FR and DE would pay 292% of the
CR they have earned on the congested interconnector.
In Scenario 7, there were many restrictions close to and far from the NSWFs. TAG 2 assigned partial
responsibility to several TSOs, but with the addition of the 70% rule, only Germany would be held responsible.
This is because the small capacity reduction on the H2S line to Germany activates TAG responsibility,
whereas the small reductions on remaining CNEs are subject to the 70% rule and do not activate TAG in
this sensitivity analysis of the scenario. Because the 70% rule assigns the full TAG payout responsibility to
Germany and the fact that their spot price was low, the total TAG payout is reduced by 77% compared to
the TAG 2 design. When running the ex-post scenario with 100% capacity on all lines, the price in the OBZs
becomes 13.5 e/MWh. Having all the responsible TSOs using the ex-post price to compensate the available
wind power causes a compensation reduction of 10% compared to TAG 2 where they would use their own
spot prices as reference prices. The payout is reduced mainly because Poland had a high spot price of 108.8
e/MWh which increased the TAG 2 payout. The combination of the two design parameters assigns the full
compensation responsibility to Germany with the reference price of 13.5 e/MWh. Thus, the total payout is
identical to when only the ex-post parameter was included, however, with the combination of the two it is
solely the German TSO who pays instead of all the TSOs that were responsible according to TAG 2. As a
result, the German TSO pays a TAG that is 70% of the CR earned on all the restricted lines from DE to the
other countries, compared to 5% in TAG 2.
Lastly, Scenario 10a was the case where the NSWFs were curtailed even though the demand was larger
than production. The curtailment was a consequence of the grid not being structurally able to receive all
the RES production. The addition of a small decrease in RAM on the cable between NL-BE in Scenario 10b
led to curtailment responsibility for NL and BE and thereby a TAG 2 payment. Including the 70% rule on
its own would remove the responsibility for NL and BE and therefore also the TAG payment. The ex-post
analysis reveals that the price in the OBZs would be 0 e/MWh when the BE-NL line is relieved and thereby
no TSO should pay TAG. In combination, the two design parameters lead to no TAG payout.
In conclusion, the addition of the 70% rule and ex-post reference price changes the TAG payout in different
ways depending on the situation. In some scenarios the payout would be lower, in some it would be higher
and in others unchanged. The implications of this will be discussed further in chapter 6.
Ex-post prices vs. the other compensation prices
Now that we have found a new compensation price through ex-post analysis, which we believe will in general be
a better proxy for what the WFs would have earned in a system without restrictions, it makes sense to compare
this price to the ones obtained under the original TAG designs. In Table 7 the different compensation prices
are listed for the scenarios that the sensitivity was performed on. For TAG 1 and TAG 2, the compensation
prices of the TSOs who are considered responsible for the payment are listed. In scenario 6 there is no price
difference between the OBZ and their onshore EEZ BZs, thus there are no TSOs responsible for payment
under TAG 1. TAG 3 has not been included in the list, since the TSOs will have the same compensation
prices as TAG 2, the only difference is that in some scenarios, fewer TSOs are responsible under TAG 3.
Under ex-post pricing, there is only one compensation price.
40
==PAGE:48==
5
RESULTS
What we see from the comparison of the compensation prices is that for scenarios 1 and 2, the compensation
prices are the same under all three pricing schemes.
But for the rest of the scenarios, there are some
significant differences between the ex-post price and the compensation prices for the original TAG designs.
This indicates, that the methods initially used for finding compensation prices do not always result in good
proxies for what the WFs would have received in a case without restrictions in the system. However, the
onshore EEZ price, used in TAG 1, might instead be a good proxy for what the WFs would have received in
a home market setup, which could also be the desired outcome of that compensation price.
Table 7: Compensation price under TAG 1, TAG 2, and ex-post pricing.
Scenario
TAG 1 compensation
price [e/MWh]
TAG 2 compensation
price [e/MWh]
Ex-post compensation
price [e/MWh]
1
13.5
13.5
13.5
2
∼85
∼85
∼85
3
16.4
16.4
0
4
22.8, 7.7
22.8, 7.7
13.5
5
3.5
23.7, 0
13.5
6
-
13.5, 0
13.5
7
3.5
23.7, 3.5, 0, 108.8
13.5
10b
3.5, 2.9
23.7, 0
0
5.3
Behavior change with TAG anticipation
In the following text, two scenarios are used to show how the anticipation of TAG payout could incentivize
changes in the behavior of WFs or TSOs, to increase their revenues.
Figure 5.22: Scenario 2
Scenario 2, which is repeated in Figure 5.22, show-
cases an hour where all three H2S lines are reduced
to 75% of full capacity and the power factor of the
NSWFs is 80%.
This combination causes a slight
curtailment of the NSWFs and a price collapse in
the OBZs. This scenario would result in large TAG
2 payouts from the three TSOs with compensation
prices of ∼85 e/MWh. As discussed in section 5.2
the TAG payout does not change when the 70% rule
and ex-post compensation price are added to the de-
sign. Anticipation of TAG in such a situation could
incentivize various behavior changes. If the NSWF
developers could foresee that the availability of the
H2S lines would be lower than their forecasted wind
production, they could benefit from giving a more
optimistic production bid to the market. This is be-
cause they are compensated with TAG for the full
available production, and a few extra MWh in the
bid would therefore result in a larger TAG payout. They will not be punished for not being able to deliver
41
==PAGE:49==
5
RESULTS
the full bid, as those extra MWh will be curtailed. However, this behavior could be seen as a REMIT breach.
If the TSOs could foresee this scenario, they would be incentivized to avoid this situation as their TAG 2
payout is larger than 100% of the CR earned offshore. They could avoid it in two ways, either by increasing
the capacity on the lines with some Adjustment of Minimal RAM (AMR) measures, or by investing in grid
expansion so all the power from the NSWFs can be transported to consumers. Investing in grid expansions
would of course only be done by the TSOs, if it would be financially beneficial in the long term. To sum
up, this scenario can induce both positive and negative behavior from a system perspective. The possible
artificially large bids from wind farm developers to gain more TAG payout is a negative behavior. When a
TSO uses AMR measures, it can shift the problem to the internal network in the BZ, leading to an increased
need for redispatch.
This is also not optimal seen from a system perspective.
However, investments in
grid expansions could positively affect socio-economic benefits due to the increase in import/export capacity
through the countries, as long as overinvestments are avoided.
We also have several scenarios where the NSWFs experience price collapse without receiving any TAG
payment. This is more often the case under the TAG 2 and 3 designs as well as the design presented in the
sensitivity analysis. With this anticipation of the system bottlenecks and TAG, the WFs have an incentive to
give a more conservative production bid than predicted in their weather forecasts. One example is Scenario
6 (Figure 5.13) with a restriction on the line between France and Germany causing the price to collapse to 0
e/MWh in the OBZs and no TAG payment according to the design expected from the final market reform.
If the NSWFs would decrease their bids from an amount corresponding to a power factor of 0.8 to 0.77, the
bottlenecks would be relieved and prices in the OBZs would converge to 13.5 e/MWh resulting in significant
revenue gains. The decrease in wind power production would thus significantly benefit the WFs but it is a
negative behavior from the perspective of society and the green transition. If the WFs do this, it could also
be discussed whether the three wind farms would be cooperating or competing with each other in the given
situation. If only one of the wind farms lowered its bid enough to relieve the bottlenecks in the grid, the two
remaining wind farms would benefit the most as they could receive the non-negative spot price for their full
potential production, whereas the WF with a reduced bid would only sell the reduced amount. This topic
could be elaborated through the use of behavioral game theory, however, this is out of the scope of our analysis.
In this section, we have given a few examples to illustrate how the different actors could modify their strategic
behavior to affect the outcome of TAG, especially in the short term.
42
==PAGE:50==
6
DISCUSSION
6
Discussion
To follow up on the presentation of our methodology and results, we will in this chapter discuss and reflect
upon model limitations as well as our TAG design parameter choices and implementation of TAG. Subse-
quently, the scenario results and differences between the three TAG archetypes are discussed and finally, the
chapter is concluded with recommendations for future research.
6.1
Model limitations
Data assumptions
Our model aims at simulating the day-ahead market of the central-northern European transmission system
as it could look in 2030. The input data regarding generation capacities installed, average electricity con-
sumption, fuel prices, fuel efficiency, CO2 emissions, and emission costs in 2030 are based on various sources
that all come with assumptions and uncertainties. Our model should not be seen as a forecast of the future,
but more as a simple, somewhat realistic, representation of the system we can use to study the dynamics of
TAG compensation. To create scenarios with high price differentials and curtailment of the NSWFs, large
adjustments in the RAM and NTC capacities were made. The most extreme adjustments might not be real-
istic or something that will occur often. However, it is a way to represent the discretion of the TSOs and the
capacity calculation process in our simplistic and clustered representation of the system. The scenarios are
not intended to be an exact estimation of what will happen, instead, they are intended to show interesting
scenarios where the outcome of different TAG designs can be analyzed.
In the North Sea area, there is an ambition to install 120 GW offshore wind by 2030, as defined in the
Ostend Declaration from May 2022 [59]. Thus, the three NSWFs of 17 GW capacity we have modeled in
OBZs only constitute a fraction of the envisioned wind power in the North Sea in 2030. Apart from the three
NSWFs, our input data includes other offshore wind farms connected to the countries in our model. These
are all modeled as being radially connected to an onshore BZ. However, more of this offshore wind might be
located in OBZs by 2030.
Furthermore, the transmission capacity of the H2H and H2S lines could potentially be built larger, relative
to the WF capacity, and this consideration was not included in our model. We modeled the H2H lines to
have only one-fourth of the capacity of the largest connected hub and the H2S lines as having the same
capacity as the connected hub. This could have caused congestion in the system, that might not occur with
larger H2H lines. However, the scenarios relevant to TAG compensation are those where a lot of wind power
is produced. Most of this power would need to be evacuated to the neighboring onshore zones through the
H2S lines and to a lesser extent via the H2H lines. Thus, increasing the size of the H2H cables would in
many of our scenarios not have affected the results. An increase in capacity of the H2S lines could on the
other hand reduce the amount of hours with curtailment offshore, and thereby reduce the need for TAG. This
would however only be the case if the onshore grid is also structurally capable of receiving the electricity and
transporting it to the locations of demand.
As explained in section 4.2.1 the AC grid data used to represent the PTDF matrix and RAM of the
lines was from 2016. Three additional DC lines have been added to reflect the grid expansions until 2020.
Two of them are in parallel with an AC line to represent the expansion of that AC connection (DE-DK and
DE-NL). Adding this capacity as a DC line avoids the calculation of a new PTDF matrix. But since we have
used projections of supply and demand for 2030, this combination of 2020 and 2030 data could have caused
some bottlenecks in our scenarios that might not have arisen if the grid was further expanded. However,
43
==PAGE:51==
6
DISCUSSION
the possible restricted grid capacities are to some extent counteracted by the fact that the system-clustering
method overestimates the capacity of lines [15].
It should be noted that we have used the RAM input
parameters as a proxy for the capacity of the AC lines. Since RAM will always be less than the thermal
capacity, it is an underestimation of the grid capacity. If the grid had been modeled with larger line capacities,
we might not have seen the type of scenario with price collapse due to the grid not being structurally able
to transport the power. Furthermore, a larger grid would more often allow for price convergence. This could
reduce the frequency of hours with TAG activation, and might also lead to lower TAG payouts compared to
what we saw in the three archetype designs. That is because more price convergence can lead to lower prices
which would then be used as the reference price for TAG.
Our system data assumptions are useful for showing potential scenarios where TAG compensation is
needed, how TAG can be designed in different ways, and what this can mean to TSOs and wind farm owners.
System granularity and snapshot simulations
Some studies use large energy system models predicting the DA-market outcome every hour for several years.
We have a simple linear optimization model using a highly clustered representation of the grid that can create
snapshot scenarios. Both types of models come with assumptions and are not exact pictures of future events.
With our type of model, it is easier to understand what parameter changes drive the results, which is useful
to learn about and analyze TAG design with all its implementation details. However, our model cannot
predict the frequency of events. This limits the potential of our analysis as we cannot predict how TAG will
impact the yearly cash flows for the wind developers and thereby their business case. We can also not predict
the annual congestion income for TSOs and the share that TAG has in this. These elements could in turn
also be difficult to project accurately with a large energy system model due to the many assumptions and
uncertainties about the future.
Most countries in our model are simply represented by one node, whereas Germany is represented with
four nodes. This allows us to capture some of the important loop flows that occur in the system, but an
increased granularity could have improved the model and allowed a better projection of the real system. For
example, all our scenarios resulted in congestion towards Poland which is left idle from the rest of the system.
In reality, the Polish grid is interconnected with other neighboring grids and would also be affected by the
export possibilities to these. Additionally, it also leads to our model not considering the CR earned on lines
to other neighboring regions.
When modeling scenarios with restrictions on internal lines, this was only possible in Germany. But one
should keep in mind that the restrictions we made between other countries, or on the H2S lines, could be
a representation of internal restrictions in these countries. If the internal CNEs cannot take up the entire
interconnector capacity, this can indeed be modeled by restricting the interconnector.
For the OBZs, we chose a specific setup with three hubs connected to three countries, based on the sce-
nario envisioned for 2030 by the NSWPH consortium. But we cannot be sure that this will be the actual
layout of the OBZs in the NS if the hubs are to be built. Additionally, the consortium envisions, among other
things, a gradual build-out of the OBZ connections to the UK, Belgium, and Norway [49]. Such changes in
the layout of the OBZ area could of course influence the TAG results. It could be expected that TAG would
be less needed if the hubs were connected to additional onshore BZs.
44
==PAGE:52==
6
DISCUSSION
Modeling limitations
The mathematical model we use is based on the paper by M. Kenis where he investigates OBZs under FBMC
[5].
Concerning the modeling of FBMC and Standard Hybrid Coupling, we could not model the entire
methodology using the system data available to us. As explained in section 3.1, the Remaining Available
Margin is an outcome of forecasts and discretionary actions by the TSOs, e.g. contingency screenings and
definition of GSKs. In our Thesis, we instead used the predefined benchmarks for the RAM of the lines as
input data and then adjusted these for scenario generation. If we had modeled several consecutive hours, it
could have been interesting to include the dynamics e.g. of electricity storage or block orders in our model, to
see how this would affect the outcome. But since we only model one hour at a time, this was not a possibility.
Advanced Hybrid Coupling (AHC) could have been used in our model instead of SHC if the necessary
system data had been accessible. We could also have chosen to include offshore electrolysis in the model.
Both of these factors could change the results such that TAG is not needed as often. The introduction of
AHC would likely increase the flow-based domains, meaning curtailment and price collapse should happen
less frequently [12]. Including offshore electrolysis would add demand in the OBZ that would reduce the
dependency on the interconnector capacity and could prevent price collapse from happening. It was also
specifically stated in TAG article 19c of the European Parliament draft, that TAG compensation could only
be activated ”provided that any consumption in the bidding zone is not a co-driver of the price formation”
[22]. Even though AHC and electrolysis could have been modeled, it is not yet decided or known whether
AHC will be used instead of SHC and if large-scale electrolysis technology will be mature and built together
with the first hybrid offshore wind farms in the OBZs([18], [50]). Therefore, our implementation of SHC and
pure electricity production in the OBZs is just as relevant to investigate.
6.2
TAG design and implementation
TAG design parameter choices
When studying the proposals of TAG by Engie Impact and the EU bodies, it is seen that several details
of the design are not yet defined. This for example holds for the amount of power to be compensated, the
compensation price, and how to divide the payment between TSOs. To understand how the texts could
be interpreted, we talked to our supervisors and relevant stakeholders from the industry.
Based on our
understanding of the texts and the different standpoints we got from these discussions, we came up with a
few options for each of the defined design parameters. We then created three TAG archetypes with different
objectives for the compensation. Another approach could have been to replicate each of the TAG proposals,
however, the ambiguity in these texts did not properly allow for that. In this section, we will discuss and
reflect upon the choices for our parameters and consider other parameter options that could have been
included.
The first parameter is ’When is TAG activated?’. TAG 2 and 3 are activated if the NSWFs experience
curtailment due to capacity reductions in the grid.
This seems to be the mechanism intended for TAG
activation in the Commission text draft. The 70% rule can then be included or not, and our implementation
of this rule in TAG 3 can be discussed. The Parliament and Council mandate introduce the 70% rule only on
onshore CNEs, and not the H2S lines as we did in TAG 3. One could therefore argue that our implementation
of the 70% rule in TAG 3 was not realistic, however, it was in agreement with the purpose of TAG 3: to limit
compensation. Furthermore, we did include the methodology of the Parliament and Council texts in the
sensitivity analysis. Our TAG 1 design is activated whenever there is a price difference between the OBZ and
the onshore EEZ. This was a parameter choice we made based on the proposal by the European Parliament.
45
==PAGE:53==
6
DISCUSSION
In their text, TAG should be paid if the WFs experience a loss of revenue while there is excess revenue
on the interconnector. It does not point toward curtailment as an activation factor but instead, a price
difference causing congestion revenue on the interconnector. Furthermore, this design allowed us to address
some interesting cases with OBZ price collapse where only TAG 1 led to a payout. Scenario 8 represented an
hour where WF production is equal to the H2S line capacity and OBZ price collapses although there is no
curtailment. In hours like this, it seems unfair to the WFs that compensation will not be activated under the
TAG 2 and TAG 3 designs. In other scenarios like 9b where the OBZ connection is used as an interconnector
in favor of cheaper power from other BZs, TAG 1 would result in overcompensation which is therefore unfair
for the TSOs.
The second design parameter is the ’amount of electricity to be compensated’ where we chose the two
options: 1) total generation available and 2) the curtailed amount. In many scenarios, these will lead to
large differences in TAG payout where option 2 is an insignificant compensation for the WFs. It is relevant
to note that option 1 is an attempt to mitigate both price and volume risk, whereas option 2 only mitigates
the volume risk. The amount to compensate is defined by Engie Impact as the total generation available
whereas no clear definitions are given in the texts from the EU bodies. In the Parliament proposal, they
do however mention it to be a ’partial compensation’ of the WFs, and compensating the curtailed amount
is one way of doing that.
Furthermore, the recital text from the council states that TAG should never
lead to double compensation, ’for example if the risk is already covered under a contract for difference, or
another relevant support scheme’. If such a support scheme ensures a stable price for the exported amount and
thereby mitigates the price risk, a suggestion could be to combine it with TAG compensation for the curtailed
amount which would mitigate the volume risk. Thereby the WFs could possibly recover the entire missed-out
revenues while avoiding double compensation. Another option to consider could be to compensate the total
wind production available in real-time, instead of the day-ahead forecast as we have otherwise assumed in this
thesis. The difference between a day-ahead forecast and real-time production can be large and significantly
impact the compensation. The amount to compensate could also be related to a combination of the day-ahead
and intraday market bids. Further analysis of this is however out of the scope of our work.
The third parameter is ’compensation price’. For this, we used the spot prices in the onshore EEZs as
the reference in TAG 1, and the spot price(s) in the polluting TSO(s) BZ(s) in TAG 2 and 3. If the purpose
of TAG would be to compensate the OBZ with the price it could have earned in a home zone, the onshore
EEZ price could probably be a good approximation for that. If the purpose would be to compensate with
the amount that could have been earned by the WFs in case of no capacity reductions, a good proxy will not
always be the spot prices in onshore BZs. A better proxy would require an ex-post analysis, which is more
computationally demanding and difficult to implement. Our choice of compensation price was made to have
a simple approach that would be easy to follow. Another approach for this parameter could have been to
base the compensation on the congestion rent earned by the polluting TSO(s). In each of the scenarios with
restrictions between BE-NL and FR-DE, there was a polluting TSO with a spot price of zero who should
therefore not pay TAG according to TAG designs 2 and 3. However, these TSOs did earn CR, and would
therefore be paying a TAG if the compensation price had been based on CR. In a case with restrictions on
internal lines only, no CR is earned on the restricted elements. Thereby, the TSO with internal restrictions
would not pay TAG if the compensation price was based on CR earned. Thus, in such a case, a compensation
price based on the CR earned on restricted lines does not seem appropriate.
The fourth parameter is ’Who should pay?’. We considered the two options: 1) TSO in onshore EEZ and
2) the TSOs responsible, with payment divided fairly between them. The first option is simple, and it signals
46
==PAGE:54==
6
DISCUSSION
that the TSO in the EEZ has the primary obligation towards the WF. However, it can require an onshore
EEZ TSO to pay, even when the TSO is not responsible for any restrictions in the grid. On the other hand,
the TSOs in the EEZs earn CR on the H2S cable in all scenarios with a price collapse in the OBZ and a
positive price in their own BZ, also when they have not caused restrictions. One could therefore argue that
it is appropriate to use some of this CR to compensate the WF in the EEZ, which does not earn any revenue
on the power it sells. The second option is intended to be in line with the polluter pays principle and divides
the payment fairly between the responsible TSOs. We divided the responsibility based on absolute capacity
reductions on the congested and restricted cables. This requires more calculation and is not as simple to
implement as the first option. The division of responsibility could have been done in many different ways,
which only increases the complication of its implementation. An alternative method was suggested in our
analysis of Scenario 7 with many restrictions in the system. Here we relieved the restriction of one line at a
time to estimate how big an impact that line had on the NSWFs’ curtailment. These impacts could then be
used to distribute the responsibilities of TAG payment between the responsible TSOs.
Annual TAG payment
In the proposals for the electricity market reform, a limit on the annual TAG payment is defined. It is not
clear from the texts what the specific definition of this limit will be. Since our analysis is not annual we could
not include the annual TAG as a design parameter, instead, its impact will be discussed here.
In the market reform proposal of the European Council, the limit is defined in the sentence: On an annual
basis, this compensation shall not exceed the total congestion income generated on interconnectors between
the concerned bidding zones. [23] From this text, it is clear that the annual TAG payment should be limited
to the earned CR. But it is unclear how this amount of CR earned is defined and calculated, because what
are the concerned BZs? Is it only the OBZs and the BZs they are directly connected to? Or can it also be
BZs further from the North Sea? Or is the definition something else? In the proposal from the Parliament,
the limit of annual TAG payment is more clearly defined: On an annual basis, the total compensation of all
generators in the concerned bidding zone shall not exceed the total congestion income generated on intercon-
nectors between the offshore bidding zone and neighboring bidding zones concerned during the specific market
settlement periods where such compensation applies. [22] From this, it seems like the annual TAG should be
limited by the CR earned on the H2S lines, in the specific hours where there is a TAG payment. In our anal-
ysis, we saw several cases where TAG payout in the specific hour was more than 100% of the CR earned on
the H2S lines. The definition of an annual limit from the Parliament might thereby reduce the TAG payout
over a year compared to what our TAG designs would otherwise allow for. Even if the limit was designed
in another way than the one proposed by the Parliament, the high TAG % of CR we saw in some of our
scenarios indicates that limiting the TAG by some CR could result in yearly TAG refunds from WFs to TSOs.
Definition of an interconnector
One of the keywords in the market reform proposals for TAG is ’interconnector’. An essential sentence in
the Council’s proposal reads as follows: The compensation applies where one or more transmission system
operators have not made available the capacity agreed in the connection agreement on the interconnector
[...] [23]. In our analysis, we have assumed that ’the interconnector’ is the H2S line from the OBZ to the
onshore BZ. We could only see this interpretation making sense from the given context. But in Regulation
(EU) 2019/943 [20] (that will be amended by the TAG text) it is defined that: ”‘interconnector’ means a
transmission line which crosses or spans a border between Member States and which connects the national
47
==PAGE:55==
6
DISCUSSION
transmission systems of the Member States” [20]. Thus, the connection between an OBZ and an onshore BZ
does not fit into this definition of an interconnector, since the OBZ is not in a different Member State. In the
Directive (EU) 2019/944, however, ’interconnector’ is defined as ”equipment used to link electricity systems”
[60]. This is quite different from the definition in Regulation (EU) 2019/943. This definition would apply to
the H2S lines and is thereby more in line with how the word is used in the TAG amendment.
6.3
Scenario results
From the first group of scenarios, ”capacity reductions to/in neighboring bidding zones”, the purpose of
each TAG archetype was clearly illustrated. TAG 1 would let the TSOs in the onshore EEZs pay large
compensations, TAG 2 would let the polluter pay, and TAG 3 would let the polluter pay a small compensation,
but only when the 70% rule was violated on any line in the system. Under the TAG 1 design, there are
scenarios where some TSOs must pay compensation for curtailment caused by restrictions on elements that
they do not own. In some cases with TAG 1, only one or two of the NSWFs receive compensation, even
though it might not be reasonable that only some of the WFs should be compensated. Thus, the simple
design of TAG 1 has some downsides which can negatively impact the TSOs as well as the WFs. From
the first four scenarios, it could also be observed that there can be situations where the TAG 1 and TAG
2 compensation constitute more than 100% of the CR earned by the TSO on the relevant H2S line. We
can also notice that a reduction in capacity on inter-zonal lines leads to a decreased flow on the given line
and thereby a decreased CR for the relevant TSO, while simultaneously leading to increased responsibility
in TAG 2 and 3. Thus, in several cases where a TSO has to pay TAG 2 or TAG 3, there will also be less
congestion income to use for this payment.
From the second group of scenario results, ”restrictions between onshore bidding zones”, it is shown that
capacity reductions on elements further away from the OBZs can impact the day-ahead market outcomes in
the OBZs. We also see that the method for defining the compensation price in TAG 2 and 3 can lead to
one TSO paying a large compensation while another responsible TSO pays nothing at all. But in the same
hour, both TSOs earned CR on the restricted interconnector. It is noted that when the compensation price
was partially based on a very high spot price in Poland (Scenario 7), it is not a good proxy for what the WF
could have earned either in a home zone or in the case without capacity reductions. There are also scenarios
where the spot prices in the BZs neighboring the OBZs are 0 e/MWh which indicates that there maybe
should not have been a TAG payment. In general, these things illustrate how important it is to thoroughly
consider the consequences of the method chosen for finding a TAG compensation price. In the scenarios with
restrictions further away from the OBZs, there is a larger risk for TAG 1 to let non-responsible TSOs pay the
compensation. However, in the specific scenarios 5-7 there was in most cases price convergence between the
OBZs and their onshore EEZ, resulting in very few TAG 1 payouts. In Scenario 7 with many restrictions, it
was shown that when it gets more complex, the relatively simple way of dividing the TSOs’ responsibilities
under TAG 2 design can potentially lead to a false image of how much responsibility each TSO bears. On
the other hand, using a more advanced methodology can be very computationally demanding.
In the ”price collapse and no TAG 2 or TAG 3 payment”-scenarios, problems related to OBZs that TAG
2 and TAG 3 do not mitigate were illustrated. In these scenarios, there were no capacity restrictions in the
system and therefore it can also be discussed if a TSO should be asked to pay compensation, as they do
under the TAG 1 design. In Scenarios 9a and 9b, it was observed that using H2S lines as interconnectors
can affect price formation in OBZs and that the size of the H2H cables can influence the results. Scenario
9b resulted in a TAG 1 payout even though paying compensation in this hour does not make sense since
48
==PAGE:56==
6
DISCUSSION
the cheaper renewables from DE were preferred over the NSWF power. Scenario 10a showed how TAG 2
and TAG 3 do not compensate for system inadequacies, where the grid cannot structurally transport all
the power. These system inadequacies could, however, still cause volume and price risks for the WFs in an
OBZ. So if a TAG design similar to TAG 2 or TAG 3 is implemented, it could be discussed if an additional
subsidy or compensation mechanism will be needed for the renewables in OBZs. In extension of Scenario
10a, Scenario 10b underlined the risk for a TSO to be held responsible for curtailment and price collapse that
is actually caused by the system layout rather than capacity reductions.
Overall, the presented scenarios illustrate that the three TAG designs have quite different outcomes and that
small differences in design parameters can result in large TAG payout differences. The results also show that
all three TAG designs can result in situations with very little to no compensation to the WFs, even though
they have experienced a large loss of revenue. Furthermore, the TAG 1 and 2 designs can result in TSOs
having to pay more than the CR earned in the given hour.
Sensitivity results
In the sensitivity analysis, TAG 2 was adjusted to make the design more similar to what is expected of TAG
in the final market reform. This was done by including ex-post pricing and the 70% rule on non-H2S CNEs.
The sensitivity showed that including these two adjustments can result in larger, smaller, or identical TAG
payouts compared to the TAG 2 baseline. Based on these scenario results, none of the actors can therefore be
said to consistently benefit from these additions to the design. However, the 70% rule will in some (probably
many) cases remove all responsibility from the TSOs and thereby remove TAG payout. In other cases, it will
change the responsibility from several TSOs to one or a few TSOs, who will then have to pay a larger fraction
of their CR. Because it can remove responsibility and payout of TAG, we would expect that the addition of
the 70% rule on onshore CNEs will cause a lower annual TAG payout compared to TAG 2 (polluter pays).
Adding ex-post compensation pricing corresponds to what would be the expected price in the OBZs without
capacity restrictions. Furthermore, this method is in line with the polluter pay principle where every TSO
will have the same compensation price in each hour, instead of having cases where one TSO compensates
with e.g. 23.7 e/MWh and another compensates with 0 e/MWh.
It should be noted that the ex-post analysis would be more computationally heavy and time-demanding with
re-runs of EUPHEMIA, while a method using the existing spot price results from the algorithm would be
much simpler to conduct. Nevertheless, comparing the ex-post prices to the methods using existing spot
price results, we saw that the spot prices might not be good proxies for the price that the WFs would have
received in a system without restrictions.
We implemented the ex-post analysis by re-running the scenario with ’100% capacity’ on all lines. As it
was discussed, one could also allow capacity reductions up to 30% on CNEs. This would reveal the price that
WFs could have earned in the OBZs under a scenario with full capacity on H2S lines but small reductions
allowed on the remaining CNEs in line with the 70% rule. Implementing the ex-post analysis in this way
could possibly lower the resulting TAG payout. That is because small reductions allowed with this method
could result in more scenarios where the ex-post scenario would still entail a price collapse in the OBZs.
It should be noted, that this sensitivity TAG design will not give compensation to the WFs in the price
collapse and no TAG 2 or TAG 3 payment scenarios.
49
==PAGE:57==
6
DISCUSSION
Behavior change
Introducing TAG would probably incentivize behavior change for the TSOs and WF owners. Analyzing such
behavior changes was not the main purpose of this Thesis, but we made a simple analysis of two scenarios
and the behavior changes they might cause. This analysis showed that TAG could give incentives to both
positive and negative behavior changes seen from the system’s perspective. One potential behavior change
we analyzed related to the WFs bidding with a more optimistic production forecast, to receive a larger
TAG payout. Another potential change relating to scenarios with price collapse and no TAG payment was
an incentive to lower the production bids such that grid bottlenecks are relieved. This could cause price
convergence, such that a TAG compensation was not needed. However, it is out of the scope of this Thesis,
to go into further details of the exact expected actions of the stakeholders when TAG is introduced.
6.4
Recommendations for future research
The topic of our Thesis offers many opportunities for future research and some of these will be presented in
this section.
It would first of all be interesting to make a similar in-depth analysis of how TAG mitigates the volume
and price risks for hybrid offshore wind farms in OBZs using a more sophisticated energy system model, with
long-term predictions. With an advanced model giving a good indication of how often hours of curtailment
and price collapse will occur, it would give a better foundation to address TAG’s influence on the investment
climate for WF developers. Is it a good business case to invest in a hybrid offshore WF in the North Sea that
will be placed in an OBZ and receive TAG compensation? This is an important question, as huge investments
will be needed as soon as possible to speed up the offshore wind farm installation, an essential part of the
green transition in Europe. And for these investments to be made, a robust business case is needed.
When the final market reform is published and the details of its implementation of TAG are known, it
would be relevant to examine how this specific design mitigates the volume and price risks of hybrid projects
in OBZs. As our results have shown, the influence of each design parameter can have a large influence on the
TAG payout. With the description of TAG in the current market reform proposals being open to different
interpretations, the expected compensation is unpredictable for wind farm developers. It will be interesting
to see if the final TAG compensation is more predictable for wind farm developers.
As mentioned in the section on behavior change with TAG anticipation, one could dive more into the
incentives that TAG creates and what changes in behavior could be realistic for TSOs and wind farm owners
to make in response to this. In this context, game theory could be used for modeling and one could delve
into the possibilities of cooperation versus competition between wind farms as well as TSOs.
50
==PAGE:58==
7
CONCLUSION
7
Conclusion
As identified by previous studies, hybrid offshore wind farms can efficiently be integrated into the existing
electricity market using the OBZ market configuration. However, with their full dependence on the availability
of the interconnectors to surrounding markets, which can be reduced in capacity, the wind farms face an
increased volume- and price risk when located in an OBZ. TAG is being introduced as a mitigation measure
to tackle these risks. It is a redistribution of congestion revenues from TSOs to the wind farms in situations
where the wind farms experience a loss of revenue because of reduced market access. In this Thesis, we have
developed an optimization model of the day-ahead market and used it to explore why curtailment and price
collapse in the OBZs occur. We thereafter investigated how various designs of TAG mitigate these situations.
The model incorporates flow-based market coupling and represents a clustered version of the transmission
system in the Northern/Central European region. The system includes three interconnected OBZs in the
North Sea with a total capacity of 17 GW. These are linked to Denmark, Germany, and the Netherlands.
With the first research question, we aimed to understand why the reduction of day-ahead market access
occurs and to what extent it creates price and volume risks for hybrid offshore wind farms in OBZs. TSOs
can take actions that reduces access to transmission capacity, in order to ensure system reliability. Capacity
reductions on hub-to-shore lines and CNEs in bidding zones directly connected to the OBZs, as well as
reductions in CNEs further away, can lead to curtailment of the wind farms and price collapse in the OBZs.
In many scenarios we have modeled, there is a high electricity production with a small curtailment. As there
is no source of demand in the OBZs the price collapses to 0 e/MWh and this leads to large volumes of
electricity being sold with no revenue for the wind farm owners. The hybrid offshore wind farms also face
the risk of the grid not being structurally capable of transporting their electricity production to the location
of demand, which can also cause curtailment and price collapse.
The purpose of the second research question was to investigate different designs of TAG and how these
mitigate the identified risks. TAG was conceptualized by Engie Impact and was thereafter included in the
proposals for the amendment of the electricity market reform by the European Commission, the Parliament,
and the Council. Based on these texts we have defined four design parameters for TAG that all can be changed
based on the desired outcome of TAG. This shows that TAG can be designed in many ways and its design
has a large impact on the outcome of TAG. The first parameter, ’When is TAG activated’, could be based
on a price difference between OBZ and the neighboring mainland BZ, or it could depend on a curtailment
offshore due to capacity reductions in the system. The first option can lead to TAG payouts in hours where
there is a price collapse but no curtailment, which is a risk the second option does not address. However,
it can also lead to compensation in cases where no TSO has induced transmission capacity reductions. The
second option, requiring curtailment and capacity reductions, can include the 70% rule or not. The addition
of this rule reduces the number of hours with TAG compensation. The second parameter, ’Amount to be
compensated’, could be the curtailed amount or the full generation available. This has a large impact on the
compensation payout, as the curtailment could be a few MWh while the generation available is in the GWh
scale. The third parameter, ’Compensation price’, could be defined as the spot price in the onshore bidding
zone directly connected to the OBZ, or it could be the spot price in the bidding zone(s) of the polluting
TSO(s). These are both simple to implement, as the price is already an outcome of the market coupling. On
the other hand, it is not necessarily a fair price for the TSO(s) to pay or for the wind farms to receive when
comparing with the CR collected that hour, or the price that would have been received by the wind farm
in a case without capacity reductions. A more sophisticated implementation of compensation price would
require an ex-post analysis. This would mean that the market coupling algorithm should be re-run for the
51
==PAGE:59==
7
CONCLUSION
scenario, without capacity reductions. The price resulting from this re-run in the OBZ would then be the
compensation price. This is assumed to be a better proxy for the price that the WFs would have received in a
case without restrictions but it is much more complex to implement in EUPHEMIA. The fourth parameter is
’Who should pay’. The simple solution would be to always have the neighboring TSO in the EEZ of the OBZ
to pay. However, this could make some TSOs pay for another TSO’s capacity restrictions. Another option is
to let the polluter pay, which would be the TSO(s) in the zone(s) with capacity restrictions. However, with
many restrictions in the system, it becomes difficult to allocate the responsibility fairly between the TSOs.
We divided the responsibility based on the capacity reductions in absolute values that could be allocated to
each TSO. This was relatively simple to implement in our model, but not necessarily fair to the TSOs since
a reduction of 100 MW in one CNE might not have as big an impact on the WF curtailment as a 100 MW
reduction in another CNE. The options defined for each design parameter were choices we made based on
our reading of the texts and discussions with various stakeholders, but they could also have been designed in
other ways.
By combining the parameter options in different ways, we created three designs of TAG with different
aims to show how design choices can result in very different payouts. The first design was characterized by
a simple implementation resulting in large compensation in most scenarios. This design would also lead to
compensation in certain scenarios with price differences but no curtailment or capacity reductions, where the
two other designs were not activated. The second design aimed at making the polluter(s) pay for the entire
generation available. The responsibility of the polluters proved complicated to define. In several scenarios,
this design resulted in some of the polluting TSO(s) paying a TAG compensation that was larger than the
congestion rent earned on the restricted line(s). The third design aimed to let the polluter pay small and less
frequent TAG payouts with its compensation of only the curtailed amount and inclusion of the 70% rule on
all lines. These objectives shined through in the results of this design, which was activated in fewer scenarios
and gave much smaller compensation compared to the other designs.
With our research, we have shown how the design and implementation of TAG have an important impact
on compensation payout, and that some versions of TAG are more suitable for certain situations than others.
Policy recommendations
At the moment, the electricity market reform is being finalized and it includes an amendment introducing
TAG. Although this text will soon be published, it is unclear how much compensation offshore wind investors
can expect through TAG. Therefore, it is important to consider what the implementation specifications of
TAG in the EU promote.
If TAG only compensates the curtailed power in an OBZ, it will not improve the business case of the OBZ
wind farms significantly with its small payout. The 70% rule is expected to be included for non-’hub-to-shore’
CNEs in the final market reform, and this will most probably lead to more situations with a loss for the wind
farms but no TAG compensation. Our analysis has shown that both the price in the onshore EEZ and the
price in the zone with congestions were not always good proxies for the price that would have occurred in
a case without capacity reductions. A better proxy of this compensation price could be found through an
ex-post analysis, but this would be much more complex and require re-running of EUPHEMIA. However,
the price in the onshore EEZ might be a good proxy for what a wind farm would have received in a home
market setup. Through our analysis, we also found that there are some situations with losses for the offshore
generators, that only some versions of TAG compensate. The TAG design expected from the market reform
does not give compensation in these scenarios. The above observations illustrate that it is important to be
52
==PAGE:60==
7
CONCLUSION
aware of the details of the chosen TAG design and implementation, and whether it gives a proper incentive
for investment in wind farms in OBZs. And if it does not, one should consider if these wind farms need other
types of compensation or support.
We also found that capacity reductions further away from the OBZs can cause curtailment of the wind
farms. Therefore it should be an option to let other TSOs pay TAG and not only the TSOs in the BZs
neighboring the OBZs. However, finding the responsible TSO(s) and defining their share of responsibility
can be difficult because of the complexity of the system. An ex-post analysis could be an option for defining
the responsibilities more fairly, but it is also a method that requires more computation. When implementing
TAG, it is important to be aware if some TSOs will be held responsible for curtailment, and thereby TAG
payment, in situations where their system has not caused restricted market access for the OBZ wind farms.
It was observed, that certain designs of TAG resulted in hours where the compensation paid by a TSO
would be up to ∼300% of congestion rent earned on the responsible CNE. The occurrence of such scenarios
indicates that it can be difficult to implement a TAG design that gives a large compensation to the wind
farm owners while not using more than the congestion rent earned by the involved TSOs, in the given
hours. Additionally, there will most probably be an annual limit on TAG payouts in the market reform, and
depending on the implementation of this, it might cause reductions in the large TAG payouts.
Our analysis of various TAG designs has shown differences between how well the designs compensate
and thereby mitigate the volume- and price risks in certain scenario snapshots. Choosing a TAG design is a
compromise between simplicity and reaching the possible objectives of the compensation mechanism.
53
==PAGE:61==
REFERENCES
References
[1]
European Commission, European Climate Law. [Online]. Available: https://climate.ec.europa.eu/
eu-action/european-climate-law_en.
[2]
European Cimmission, REPowerEU: A plan to rapidly reduce dependence on Russian fossil fuels and
fast forward the green transition, May 2022. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/
presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_3131.
[3]
Council of the European Union, Renewable energy: Council adopts new rules, Oct. 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/10/09/renewable
-energy-council-adopts-new-rules/.
[4]
European Commission, Commission sets out immediate actions to support the European wind power
industry, Oct. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/
en/ip_23_5185.
[5]
M. Kenis, E. Delarue, K. Bruninx, and F. Dominguez, “Off-shore Bidding Zones under Flow-Based Mar-
ket Coupling”, in 2023 IEEE Belgrade PowerTech, PowerTech 2023, Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronics Engineers Inc., 2023, isbn: 9781665487788. doi: 10.1109/PowerTech55446.2023.10202755.
[6]
THEMA Consulting Group and European Commision, Market arrangements for offshore hybrid projects
in the North Sea. 2020, isbn: 9789276253259. doi: doi/10.2833/36426. [Online]. Available: https:
//op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/28ff740c-25aa-11eb-9d7e-01aa75ed
71a1/language-en.
[7]
L. Kitzing and M. Garz´on Gonz´alez, “Market arrangements for offshore wind energy networks”, Tech.
Rep., 2020.
[8]
J. Gea-Berm´udez, L. Kitzing, and D. Keles, “Offshore Market Design in Integrated Energy systems: A
Case Study on the North Sea Region towards 2050”, The Energy Journal, Oct. 2023, issn: 01956574.
doi: 10.5547/01956574.45.4.jgea. [Online]. Available: https://www.iaee.org/en/publications/
ejarticle.aspx?id=4176.
[9]
S. Hardy, A. Themelis, K. Yamamoto, and D. Van Hertem, “Optimal Grid Layouts for Hybrid Offshore
Assets in the North Sea under Different Market Designs”, 2023.
[10]
Orsted, “Regulatory set-up for hybrid offshore wind projects”, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[11]
North Sea Wind Power Hub Programme, “Unlocking the North Sea as a Green Powerplant Key Insights
2022”, Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available: https://northseawindpowerhub.eu/knowledge/unloc
king-the-north-sea-as-a-green-powerplant.
[12]
Engie Impact, L. Arnaud, K. Gerd, and H. Pierre, “Support on the use of congestion revenues for
Offshore Renewable Energy Projects connected to more than one market”, Tech. Rep., 2022.
[13]
European Commission, “Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council
amending Regulations (EU) 2019/943 and (EU) 2019/942 as well as Directives (EU) 2018/2001 and
(EU) 2019/944 to improve the Union’s electricity market design”, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52023PC0148.
[14]
Nordic RCC, FBMC Nordic go-live, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://nordic- rcc.net/flow-
based/.
54
==PAGE:62==
REFERENCES
[15]
P. A. Gunkel, H. Koduvere, J. G. Kirkerud, F. J. Fausto, and H. Ravn, “Modelling transmission systems
in energy system analysis: A comparative study”, Journal of Environmental Management, vol. 262, May
2020, issn: 10958630. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110289.
[16]
Energinet, Svenska Kraftnaet, Fingrid, and Statnett, “Methodology and Concepts for the Nordic Flow
Based Market Coupling Approach”, Tech. Rep., 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.nordicene
rgyregulators.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/CCM-Supporting-doc-second-amendment-
final.pdf.
[17]
R. Finck, “Impact of Flow Based Market Coupling on the European Electricity Markets”, Sustainability
Management Forum — Nachhaltigkeits Management Forum, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 173–186, Jun. 2021, issn:
2522-5987. doi: 10.1007/s00550-021-00520-w.
[18]
The European Federation of Energy Traders and Market Parties Platform, “ENTSO-E consultation
on the Core advanced hybrid coupling implementation”, Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.efet.org/files/documents/EFET-MPP%20response%20ENTSO-E%20consultation%20on%
20Core%20advanced%20hybrid%20coupling.pdf.
[19]
D. Sch¨onheit, M. Kenis, L. Lorenz, D. M¨ost, E. Delarue, and K. Bruninx, “Toward a fundamental
understanding of flow-based market coupling for cross-border electricity trading”, Advances in Applied
Energy, vol. 2, May 2021, issn: 26667924. doi: 10.1016/j.adapen.2021.100027.
[20]
The European Parliament and The Council of the European Union, Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the internal market for electricity, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://eur- lex.europa.eu/legal- content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
32019R0943&from=EN.
[21]
CREG, “Functioning and design of the Central West European day-ahead flow based market coupling
for electricity: Impact of TSOs Discretionary Actions Non confidential”, Tech. Rep., 2017. [Online].
Available: www.creg.be.
[22]
European Parliament, “Amendments by the European Parliament to the Commission proposal - Pro-
posal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulations (EU)
2019/943 and (EU) 2019/942 as well as Directives (EU) 2018/2001 and (EU) 2019/944 to improve the
Union’s electricity market design”, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
doceo/document/A-9-2023-0255_EN.html.
[23]
Council of the European Union, “Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the
Council amending Regulations (EU) 2019/943 and (EU) 2019/942 as well as Directives (EU) 2018/2001
and (EU) 2019/944 to improve the Union’s electricity market design”, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-14339-2023-INIT/en/pdf.
[24]
CREG, “Study on the functioning of the Core day-ahead flowbased market coupling mechanism and
the impact of low margins available for cross-zonal exchanges”, Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.acer.europa.eu/events-and-engagement/news/press-release-acer-publishes-
its-final-assessment-eu-.
[25]
H. Ravn, Balmorel Community Data. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/balmorelcommunity/
Balmorel_data.
[26]
H. Ravn, Balmorel Community Flow-based data. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/balmorel
community/Balmorel_data/blob/master/FB_AC_PTDF.inc.
55
==PAGE:63==
REFERENCES
[27]
Entso-e, Entso-e Transparency Platform. [Online]. Available: https://transparency.entsoe.eu/
generation/r2/installedGenerationCapacityAggregation/show.
[28]
Enerdata, Forecast of German electricity consumption, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.enerd
ata.net/publications/daily-energy-news/germanys-electricity-forecast-reach-658-twh-
2030.html.
[29]
Elia Group, “Powering Industry towards Net Zero”, Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.elia.be/-/media/project/elia/shared/documents/press-releases/2022/20221118_
visionpaper_en.pdf.
[30]
Energistyrelsen, “Klimastatus og -fremskrivning 2023 (KF23) Forbrug af el”, Tech. Rep., 2023. [Online].
Available: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Basisfremskrivning/kf23_sektornotat_8b_
forbrug_af_el.pdf.
[31]
Energy In Demand and RTE, France will reach the level of electricity consumption expected in 2050 as
early as 2030-2035, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://energyindemand.com/2023/06/17/france-
will-reach-the-level-of-electricity-consumption-expected-in-2050-as-early-as-2030-
2035/.
[32]
Netbeheer Nederland, “Transition of the Dutch energy system: scenarios 2030-2050”, Tech. Rep., 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://www.netbeheernederland.nl/_upload/Files/Management_summary_
Transition_of_the_Dutch_energy_system__scenario_s_2030-2050_272.pdf.
[33]
Aurora Energy Research and Dentons, “2023 outlook for the Polish Energy Market”, Tech. Rep., 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://www.dentons.com/en/insights/guides-reports-and-whitepapers/
2023/june/7/2023-outlook-for-the-polish-energy-market.
[34]
S. Busch, R. Kasdorp, D. Koolen, A. Mercier, and M. Spooner, “Economic and Financial Affairs The
Development of Renewable Energy in the Electricity Market”, European Commission, Tech. Rep.,
Jun. 2023. doi: 10.2765/411281. [Online]. Available: https://economy-finance.ec.europa.eu/
publications/development-renewable-energy-electricity-market_en.
[35]
International Energy Agency and Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme, Technology Char-
acteristics (GDATA), 2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.iea-etsap.org/index.php/energy-
technology-data/energy-supply-technologies-data.
[36]
IEA, Nordic Energy Research, DTU, et al., “Nordic Energy Technology Perspectives 2016”, Tech. Rep.,
2016.
[37]
A. Herold and ETC/ACC, “Comparison of CO2 emission factors for fuels used in Greenhouse Gas
Inventories and consequences for monitoring and reporting under the EC emissions trading scheme”,
Tech. Rep., 2003.
[38]
Energistyrelsen, “Klimastatus og-fremskrivning 2023 Affaldsforbraending Forudsaetningsnotat”, Tech.
Rep., 2023.
[39]
Entso-e, “TYNDP 2018 Technical Appendix”, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[40]
Nordpool and Entso-e, “Nordpool maximum NTC”, Tech. Rep., 2016. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.nordpoolgroup.com/globalassets/download-center/tso/max-ntc.pdf.
[41]
J. H¨orsch, F. Hofmann, D. Schlachtberger, and T. Brown, “PyPSA-Eur: An open optimisation model
of the European transmission system”, Energy Strategy Reviews, vol. 22, pp. 207–215, Nov. 2018, issn:
2211467X. doi: 10.1016/j.esr.2018.08.012.
56
==PAGE:64==
REFERENCES
[42]
W. Medjroubi and C. Matke, “SciGRID Open Soursce Transmission Network Model Userguide”, Tech.
Rep., 2015.
[43]
EU ETS and Trading Economics, EU ETS Carbon Emission Allowance, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://tradingeconomics.com/commodity/carbon.
[44]
Socialdemokratiet, Venstre, Dansk Folkeparti, et al., Klimaaftale for energi og industri 2020, 2020.
[45]
BMWK, 50Hertz, TenneT, and Amprion, Germany’s initial plans for interconnecting offshore wind
farms in the North Sea. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.bmwk.de/Redaktion/DE/Pressemitt
eilungen/2023/02/20230227-bmwk-und-uenb-veroeffentlichen-plaene-zur-vernetzung-von-
offshore-windparks-in-der-nordsee.html.
[46]
Wind op Zee, Offshore wind energy by 2030 in the Netherlands, 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.windopzee.net/en/wind-op-zee/.
[47]
Entso-e and Entso-g, “TYNDP 2022 Scenario Results - Demand”, Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://2022.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/scenario-results/.
[48]
Statistics Denmark, Consumer Price Index, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.dst.dk/en/
Statistik/emner/oekonomi/prisindeks/forbrugerprisindeks.
[49]
North Sea Wind Power Hub consortium, “Hubs and spokes – viable beyond theory Concept paper 2022”,
Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available: https://northseawindpowerhub.eu/files/media/document/
NSWPH_Hubs%20and%20spokes%20%E2%80%93%20viable%20beyond%20theory_nov.%202022_1.pdf.
[50]
North Sea Wind Power Hub, “Modular Hub-and-Spoke: Specific solution options Case studies have
demonstrated technical feasibility”, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[51]
Roland Berger, U. Weichenhain, S. Elsen, T. Zorn, and S. Kern, “Hybrid projects: How to reduce costs
and space of offshore developments North Seas Offshore Energy Clusters study”, Tech. Rep., 2019. doi:
10.2833/416539.
[52]
ACER, “Congestion income distribution methodology in accordance with article 73 of the Commision
Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24 July 2015”, Tech. Rep., 2021.
[53]
NEMO Comittee, “EUPHEMIA Public Description”, Tech. Rep., 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.nordpoolgroup.com/globalassets/download- center/single- day- ahead- coupling/
euphemia-public-description.pdf.
[54]
L. Meeus, L. Vandezande, S. Cole, and R. Belmans, “Market coupling and the importance of price
coordination between power exchanges”, Energy, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 228–234, 2009, issn: 03605442. doi:
10.1016/j.energy.2008.04.013.
[55]
B. Brard, “The regulation of radial grid connection systems for offshore windfarms”, Delft University
of Technology, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[56]
TenneT, BorWin1 About the project, 2010. [Online]. Available: https://www.tennet.eu/projects/
borwin1.
[57]
TenneT, SylWin1 About the project, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.tennet.eu/projects/
sylwin1.
[58]
TenneT, HelWin1 About the project, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.tennet.eu/projects/
helwin1.
57
==PAGE:65==
REFERENCES
[59]
T. Van der Straeten, L. Aagaard, A. Pannier-Runacher, et al., “Ostend Declaration of Energy Ministers
on the North Seas as Europe’s Green Power Plant”, Tech. Rep., 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//kefm.dk/Media/638179241345565422/Declaration%20ENERGY_FINAL_21042023.pdf.
[60]
The European Parliment and The Council of the European Union, “DIRECTIVE (EU) 2019/944 OF
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 5 June 2019 on common rules for the
internal market for electricity and amending Directive 2012/27/EU”, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32019L0944.
[61]
International Trade Administration U.S. Department of Commerce, Belgium - Country Commercial
Guide, Jan. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.trade.gov/country- commercial- guides/
belgium-energy-natural-gas-and-lng.
[62]
A. Shaw, Germany to keep coal-fired power stations on this winter, Oct. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.power-technology.com/news/germany-to-keep-coal-as-power-source-this-
winter/.
[63]
Energi- Forsynings- og Klimaministeriet, “Energiaftale 2018 - effektiv brug af energi”, Tech. Rep., 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://kefm.dk/Media/8/9/handouts_energiaftale%20a.pdf.
[64]
P. Messad, France extends life of last coal-fired plants to avoid winter shortfalls, Aug. 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.euractiv.com/section/coal/news/france-extends-life-of-last-
coal-fired-plants-to-avoid-winter-shortfalls/.
[65]
The Hague Court Trade Division and Translation Agency of Alberta, “Judgment of November 30,
2022”, Tech. Rep., Oct. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://climatecasechart.com/wp-content/up
loads/non-us-case-documents/2022/20221130_ECLINLRBDHA202212628-ECLINLRBDHA202212635-
ECLINLRBDHA202212653_decision.pdf.
[66]
Euractive and Reuters, Poland keeps coal phase-out target as top utility PGE seeks quicker exit, Aug.
2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.euractiv.com/section/coal/news/poland-keeps-coal-
phase-out-target-as-top-utility-pge-seeks-quicker-exit/.
[67]
R. Alkousaa, ‘A new era’: Germany quits nuclear power, closing its final three plants, Apr. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://edition.cnn.com/2023/04/15/europe/germany-nuclear-phase-out-
climate-intl/index.html.
[68]
M. Strauss, Belgium and Engie agree on nuclear reactor extensions, Jun. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/belgium-engie-agree-nuclear-reactor-extensio
ns-2023-06-29/.
[69]
World Nuclear Association, Nuclear Power in the Netherlands, Jun. 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//world-nuclear.org/information-library/country-profiles/countries-g-n/netherlands.
aspx#:~:text=In%201994%20the%20Dutch%20parliament, phase%2Dout%20decision%20was%
20abandoned..
[70]
World Nuclear Association, Nuclear Power in France, Aug. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://world-
nuclear.org/information-library/country-profiles/countries-a-f/france.aspx#:~:text=
Government%20policy%2C%20set%20under%20a,consider%20building%20a%20further%20eight.
58
==PAGE:66==
I
GENERATION CAPACITY SPECIFICATIONS
Appendix
I
Generation capacity specifications
To estimate the capacities of different types of generators in each zone, data from the Entso-E transparency
platform [27] for 2023 installed capacities have been used, together with 2030 capacity projections from the
EU Commission [34] and 2025 results from the model of the paper by Gunkel et al. [15].
In the Balmorel data [25] used for the analysis in [15], specifications such as variable operation and main-
tenance cost and efficiency are specified for different types of generators. This very generator-specific data
was extracted from the Balmorel data set. For each bidding zone in the model, it is also noted how large the
capacity of each conventional generator in Balmorel is, compared to the total capacity of generators running
on the same fuel in the generator’s bidding zone. This number will in the following be named CapFracg,z
for generator g in zone z.
In the discussion paper The Development of Renewable Energy in the Electricity Market from the EU Com-
mission, installed electricity generation capacities in different categories for EU in 2020 are presented together
with projections for 2025 and 2030, fulfilling the REPowerEU objectives [34]. The corresponding values for
2023 are assumed to be the mean of the 2020 and 2025 values. If each category’s percentage of the total
installed capacity in the EU is compared to the ENTSO-E data for the 6 investigated bidding zones[27],
it is seen that the numbers are quite close to each other. This validates the two data sets, the 2023 data
found from interpolation, and that the installed electricity generation in our 6 bidding zones makes a good
representation of EU’s electricity generation. This makes it reasonable to use the projection for all of the EU
to create a projection for the 6 bidding zones only.
The 2023 and 2030 data extracted from the Commission paper are compared to find out what the expected
growth in total capacity installed in the EU is between these years - this number is 55%. The total capacity
installed in each category(c) for each of the 6 bidding zones(z) is calculated as follows - in brackets is the
source of the values:
CapacityCategoryZone2030c,z = TotalCapacity2023(entsoe) · 1.55·
(6)
CategoryFractionOfTotal2030(Commission)c · ZonesFractionOfCategory2023(entsoe)c,z
The capacity of each type of generator in each zone is then calculated as:
CapacityGenerator2030g,c,z = CapacityCategoryZone2030c,z · CapFracg,z
The different generators will have different characteristics based on which Balmorel generator they are
referred to.
With nuclear, coal, and waste generators, the capacities were not calculated in the above-described way,
instead, they were set based on the very specific goals of the countries.
All of the modeled countries,
except Poland, are planning to phase out coal in electricity production before 2030 ([61], [62], [63], [64], [65],
[66]). Thus the coal generation capacities are set to zero for Belgium, Germany, Denmark, France, and the
Netherlands, while Poland’s coal generation capacity is set equal to the 2023 fossil hard coal capacity of
the country from Entso-E. With nuclear generation, it is expected that there will be nothing in Poland and
Denmark by 2030 because nothing is installed in 2023. Germany is planning to phase out all nuclear by
2030 [67], so they are also given a capacity of zero, and Belgium will do a partial phase-out and still have
2077MW nuclear in 2030 [68]. The Netherlands and France are not planning on any phase-outs [69], [70] and
59
==PAGE:67==
II
REFORM TEXTS ON TAG
are expected to have the same nuclear capacity in 2030 as in 2023. We do not expect a total phase-out of
generators with waste as fuel, so the same quite small capacities are assumed for 2023 and 2030, even though
waste generators are not mentioned in the paper from the Commission.
Some of the categories in the different data sources were not the same, and therefore some categories were
merged for some of the calculation steps. As an example, waste is considered a part of the biomass category.
Table 8 shows the installed capacities based on the fuel type used as input data in our model.
Table 8: Total installed capacities in different fuel categories in each bidding zone in 2030 [GW]
BE
DE
DK1
FR
NL
PL
Solar
16.4
159.4
4.3
37.0
57.1
26.3
Wind offshore
6.5
23.4
3.7
1.4
9.3
0
Wind onshore
6.0
115.7
7.9
41.9
12.4
18.0
Hydropower
2.2
21.1
0.007
37.3
0.05
3.4
Biomass
0.9
10.2
0.8
1.6
0.5
0.8
Natural gas
7.6
36.3
1.1
14.2
20.1
4.5
Oil
0.6
5.2
0.2
3.3
0
0.5
Coal
0
0
0
0
0
19.0
Nuclear
2.1
0
0
61.4
0.5
0
The thermal power generators, which run on different fossil and bio-based fuels, are split into condensing
plants, extraction plants, and backpressure plants. The condensing plants are pure power generation plants,
whereas the two other types are combined heat and power(CHP) units. To model the electricity generation
of the CHP units, the electrical capacity was found using the individual technology data for each generator
[25].
II
Reform texts on TAG
In this part of the appendix, the different proposals to the text on TAG in the electricity market reform are
presented. The reform is a piece of regulation amending two EU regulations and two EU directives. TAG is
introduced as an amendment of paragraph 2 in Article 19 ’Congestion Income’ of Regulation (EU) 2019/943
stating: The following objectives shall have priority with the respect to the allocation of any revenues resulting
from the allocation of cross-zonal capacity. In the current regulation text there exists point (a) and (b) to
have priority, and TAG is introduced as point (c).
The European Commission
The market reform proposal from the European Commission was published in March 2023 and the part on
TAG is:
‘(c) compensating offshore generation plant operators in an offshore bidding zone if access to interconnected
markets has been reduced in such a way that one or more transmission system operators have not made
enough capacity available on the interconnector or the critical network elements affecting the capacity of
the interconnector, resulting in the offshore plant operator not being able to export its electricity generation
capability to the market.’[13]
60
==PAGE:68==
III
TAG RESPONSIBILITIES
European Parliament
The market reform proposal from the European Parliament was published in July 2023 and the part on TAG
is:
‘(c) as part of the permitting process and following a coordinated decision taken by the Member States
concerned, on the implementation of offshore bidding zones and on the design of the support mechanism,
contributing to the partial compensation to offshore renewable generators in an offshore bidding zone where
there is not enough capacity available on the interconnector as agreed in the connection agreement or in critical
network elements affecting the capacity of the interconnector, pursuant to capacity calculation rules laid down
in Article 16 (3), (8) and (9), leading to the simultaneous loss of revenue of the offshore renewable generator
and an excess revenue on the interconnector, provided that any consumption in the bidding zone is not a
co-driver of the price formation; only the excess interconnector revenue shall be used for the compensation of
offshore renewable generators. On an annual basis, the total compensation of all generators in the concerned
bidding zone shall not exceed the total congestion income generated on interconnectors between the offshore
bidding zone and neighbouring bidding zones concerned during the specific market settlement periods where
such compensation applies.
By 31 December 2024, the Commission shall amend Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 in accordance with Article 59
of this Regulation as regards the implementation details of the partial compensation, outlining a methodology
for calculation of the partial compensation and including the conditions under which the measure may
expire.’[22]
Council of European Union
The market reform proposal from the European Parliament was published in October 2023 and the part on
TAG is:
‘(c) compensating offshore renewable electricity generation plant operators in an offshore bidding zone di-
rectly connected to two or more bidding zones if access to interconnected markets has been reduced in such
a way that it results in the offshore renewable electricity plant operator not being able to export its electric-
ity generation capability to the market and, where relevant, a corresponding price decrease in the offshore
bidding zone, as compared to without capacity reductions. The compensation applies where one or more
transmission system operators have not made available the capacity agreed in the connection agreement on
the interconnector or have not made available the capacity on the critical network elements pursuant to the
capacity calculation rules in Article 16 (8) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943. On an annual basis, this com-
pensation shall not exceed the total congestion income generated on interconnectors between the concerned
bidding zones.”
III
TAG responsibilities
For the ”who should pay” parameter and the option ”The TSOs responsible – payment divided fairly between
them” the following has been decided, to define which TSOs are responsible and for which fraction of the
curtailment of the NS WFs:
A line with reduced capacity which is also congested is considered responsible for the curtailment of the
NSWFs and thus the TSO(s) who own the given line will be given a responsibility. When it is a H2S line
or an internal CNE, there is only one responsible TSO who is considered 100% responsible.
If it is an
61
==PAGE:69==
IV
SCENARIO DETAILS
interconnector between two BZs, the two TSOs share the responsibility 50/50. The responsibilities of TSOs
are based on the capacity reduction in absolute values. Each TSO’s responsibility in percentage will be
calculated as:
TSO′s capacity restrictions [MW]
total amount of capacity restrictions on responsible lines [MW]
Example
In the following, a small example with TAG responsibility calculation will be shown.
We have an hour in a system where the WFs in an OBZ have been curtailed by 100 MW. Two lines in the
system have been reduced in capacity and are congested. These lines, their absolute reduction, and ownership
are shown in the table below:
Line
Capacity
reduction
Ownership
1
80 MW
TSO in BZ A: 100%
2
100 MW
TSO in BZ A: 50%
TSO in BZ B: 50%
In this case, the total capacity reduction on the two lines is 180 MW. The TSO in BZ A is considered
responsible for the 80 MW reduction of line 1 and 50 MW of the 100 MW reduction of line 2, while the TSO
in BZ B is considered responsible for the other 50 MW reduction of line 2. Thus, their responsibilities are,
in percentage:
responsibility TSOA = 80MW + 50MW
180MW
= 72%
responsibility TSOB = 50MW
180MW = 28%
Therefore, the TSO of BZ A will compensate 100MW · 72% = 72MW of the curtailed power and the TSO
of BZ B will compensate 100MW · 28% = 28MW.
IV
Scenario details
In this part of the appendix, a table for each scenario is presented. This table includes the power factor(PF)
setpoints of the different groups of renewables in the scenario, and it describes the changes from the baseline
that have been made to any other component of the system.
Scenario 1: Hub-to-shore line restricted
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
PF Sun
0.1
PF water
0.1
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.6
PF NSWFs
0.8
Hub-to-DE
-40%
62
==PAGE:70==
IV
SCENARIO DETAILS
Scenario 2: Several hub-to-shore lines restricted
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
Demand
+15%
PF Sun
0.05
PF water
0.2
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.5
PF NSWFs
0.8
Hub-to-DK
-25%
Hub-to-DE
-25%
Hub-to-NL
-25%
Scenario 3: Internal congestion in Germany
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
Demand
-10%
PF Sun
0.1
PF water
0.1
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.5
PF NSWFs
0.6
RAM on AC line 6 and 9 in DE
-80%
Scenario 4: Internal congestion in Germany plus H2S lines restricted
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
Demand in DE
+5%
Demand in DK
+15%
Demand in NL
+15%
PF Sun
0.1
PF water
0.1
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.6
PF NSWFs
0.75
RAM on AC line 6 and 9 in DE
-80%
Hub-to-shore lines
-20%
Scenario 5: Reduced capacity between Netherlands and Belgium
63
==PAGE:71==
IV
SCENARIO DETAILS
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
PF Sun
0.1
PF water
0.1
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.6
PF NSWFs
0.8
BE-NL line RAM
-30%
Scenario 6: Restrictions between France and Germany
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
PF Sun
0.1
PF water
0.1
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.6
PF NSWFs
0.8
DE-FR line RAM
-31%
Scenario 7: Many restrictions in the system
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
PF Sun
0.1
PF water
0.1
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.6
PF NSWFs
0.8
DE internal lines
-30%
DE-FR line
-20%
DE-DK lines
-25%
DE-NL lines
-20%
DE-PL line
-10%
Hub-DE
-10%
NL-BE line
-25%
Scenario 8: Price collapse but no curtailment
64
==PAGE:72==
IV
SCENARIO DETAILS
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
Demand
+15%
PF Sun
0.05
PF water
0.2
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.5
PF NSWFs
0.8
Hub-to-shore lines
-20%
Scenario 9a: OBZ connection used as interconnector
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
Demand in DE, DK, BE, FR, and PL
-15%
Demand in NL
+25%
PF Sun
0.1
PF water
0.2
PF on wind
0.5
PF off wind
0.5
PF NSWFs
0.5
Bid price of RES in DE
-2 e/MWh
Scenario 9b: OBZ connection used as interconnector, increased hub-to-hub capacity
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
Demand in DE, DK, BE, FR, and PL
-15%
Demand in NL
+25%
PF Sun
0.1
PF water
0.2
PF on wind
0.5
PF off wind
0.5
PF NSWFs
0.5
Bid price of RES in DE
-2 e/MWh
NTC hub-to-hub
+100%
Scenario 10a: Curtailment but no capacity reductions
65
==PAGE:73==
IV
SCENARIO DETAILS
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
Demand
+40%
PF Sun
0.3
PF water
0.1
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.5
PF NSWFs
0.9
Scenario 10b: Curtailment and few reductions leading to TAG 2 payout
Parameter
Change from baseline
/ setpoint
Demand
+40%
PF Sun
0.3
PF water
0.1
PF on wind
0.4
PF off wind
0.5
PF NSWFs
0.9
BE-NL line RAM
-10%
66
