==PAGE:1==
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from
ICESat-2
Master Thesis
Elisabet Hallström
DTU Space
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
Master Thesis
March, 2024
By
Elisabet Hallström
s174494
Supervisor:
Ole Baltazar Andersen
Professor, Department of Space Research and Technology
Assistant supervisor:
Linda Christoffersen
PhD Student, Department of Space Research and Technology
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Determined depths in Shark Bay. Credit for background image: Google
2017, available from http://maps.google.com.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Space Research and Technology, Elektrovej, Build-
ing 327/328, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master Thesis is written as part of a masters degree in Earth and Space Physics and
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. It has been prepared over six
months representing the workload of 30 ECTS.
I would like to thank my supervisor Ole B. Andersen for assistance and guidance during
this project. Your expertise and encouragement have certainly made it easier to come
through the project.
In addition, I would like to thank Xiaoli Deng, Richard Coleman, and Farshad Salagegheh
in Australia for the early morning meetings. Your encouragement has been much appreci-
ated. A special thank to Richard for the regional knowledge of places that are experiencing
bathymetric changes.
I would also like to thank Linda Christoffersen for the idea of investigating bathymetric
changes caused by tropical cyclones.
Lastly, I would like to thank my fellow students for their support, and for providing ideas
and feedback. A special thanks to you for the company over the last few years at DTU.
Kongens Lyngby, 3 March 2024
Elisabet Hallström
s174494
ii
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Two case studies are performed for detecting bathymetric changes in shallow waters with
Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite - 2 (ICESat-2) data. One study area is Moreton
Bay on the eastern coast of Australia, where bathymetry is only possible for 1/5 of the
cycles. The remaining cycles are noisy due to suspended sediments. The other study
area is Shark Bay, which is located on the western coast of Australia. It is home to one
of the largest seabeds in the world, which also results in noisy ICESat-2 data. This study
introduces methods for detecting ICESat-2 bathymetry in noisy conditions, whereas most
previous ICESat-2 studies focus on clear conditions.
Currently, optical conditions in Moreton Bay prevent studies of bathymetric changes. In
Shark Bay, bathymetric changes are investigated using two different methods. Results
strongly indicate bathymetric changes at two nearby locations when applying one of the
methods. Large uncertainties in the bathymetry detection method, ocean tide corrections,
and small longitudinal resolution in combination with the methodology for change detec-
tion are current challenges when detecting bathymetric changes with ICESat-2.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and literature
3
3
Study area and data
7
3.1
Moreton Bay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Shark Bay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
ICESat-2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Applied data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Methods
17
4.1
Detecting bathymetry from ICESat-2 data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Correction for ocean tides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Bathymetry changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Results
33
5.1
Moreton Bay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Shark Bay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.3
Assessment of uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Discussion
47
6.1
Bathymetry in Moreton Bay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Bathymetric changes in Shark Bay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.3
Potential for detecting bathymetry changes with ICESat-2 . . . . . . . . . . 51
7
Conclusions
55
Bibliography
57
A Scientific Paper
61
B Scientific Abstract for COSPAR
69
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The purpose of this study is to investigate temporal bathymetric changes from ICESat-2
data.
To investigate such changes, a detection method is needed. The method needs to be able
to detect the seabed for relevant water conditions. Furthermore, methods for comparing
bathymetry profiles are needed to detect any changes. The comparison of bathymetric
data needs to address various uncertainties, including vertical and horizontal errors.
The project includes two study cases, which are both located in Australia. Moreton Bay is
located right outside Brisbane in eastern Australia, while Shark Bay is in western Australia.
In Moreton Bay, dredging of channels is performed annually [1] to compensate for the
bathymetric changes that are caused by sediment dynamics due to tides [2]. This is done
to make it possible for ships to access the port of Brisbane. Bathymetric changes are
therefore known to exist in Moreton Bay, and they are of great importance to especially
marine navigation. This makes Moreton Bay a great candidate for studying bathymetric
changes with ICESat-2.
There is no documented bathymetric change in Shark Bay for the years considered (2018
- 2023). However, tropical cyclone Seroja hit the region in April 2021. Cyclones have
historically caused changes to the bathymetry in the area [3]. Meanwhile, severe damages
to the region are well documented [4], [5]. As a result, bathymetry in Shark Bay is likely
to have changed from 2018 to 2023, although actual bathymetric changes are yet to be
confirmed.
Due to the severe occurrence of mud in Moreton Bay, the focus of the study case changed
to how to detect any bathymetry in water swamped by mud by ICESat-2. This study
case is presented in a scientific paper, which is enclosed in appendix A. The paper is
submitted to the proceedings of the International Association of Geodesy Symposia for
IUGG, Berlin, Germany which is to be published in 2024. It is currently under review
after being resubmitted after a review by international experts. As the paper is yet to be
published, the results of the paper are included in this report.
The master thesis is part of a greater project, which obtains bathymetric data in the
Australian Exclusive Economic Zone. The project is a collaboration between the Tech-
nical University of Denmark in Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, the University of Newcastle in
Callaghan, Australia, and the University of Tasmania in Hobart, Australia. The project has
been supported by the Australian Government through the Australian Research Council’s
Discovery Project funding scheme (project DP220102969). The scientific paper enclosed
in appendix A is also part of the project. The two study cases included in the master
thesis are chosen based on regional knowledge from the collaboration. The relevance
of the project is highlighted by some results being included in a presentation to be held
at COSPAR 2024 in Busan, Korea in July 2024. The abstract is enclosed in appendix B,
where results from this study are included.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and literature
Bathymetry is of importance for many reasons. Historically, nautical charts have been
used for sailors to navigate the oceans and guide them through shallow waters [6]. With
time, bathymetric maps are digitalised and have become more precise. Especially near
ports bathymetric maps are important for safe ship navigation. Bathymetry is also in-
teresting in environmental sciences. This can be due to water quality, as underwater
currents depend on the bathymetry [7]. Also, some animal species are drawn to spe-
cific types of shallow waters [8]. Bathymetry is also of importance for the fish industry.
Furthermore, near-shore bathymetry is used for some modelling aspects, including hydro-
dynamic model and storm surge modelling [7]. It even plays a role for tsunami models,
since the consequences of a tsunami hitting land are dependent on the coastal shape
and the water depth [9]. For city development, bathymetry becomes important for civil
engineering, when expanding residential areas and adding new infrastructure of various
kinds.
Mapping the coastal bathymetry using single or multi-beam bathymetry mapping from
ships is both expensive and time-consuming. Consequently, alternatives are attractive,
and the interest in satellite-derived bathymetry (SDB) has increased exponentially [10].
Multi-spectral satellite imagery from satellites, e.g. Landsat and Sentinel-2, is used in
several studies, e.g. by Nguyen et al. [11] and Zhang et al. [12]. SDB is both simpler,
cheaper, and quicker than traditional methods. However, it is usually less accurate than
multibeam bathymetry [13]. Since the launch of ICESat and ICESat-2, laser altimetry for
bathymetry mapping has gained momentum [14], [15].
For some regions, e.g. Moreton Bay, the bathymetry is constantly changing due to ocean
currents and tides [2]. It is of great value to be able to detect these changes using SDB,
as it needs to be done on a regular basis [16]. Bathymetric changes can also be caused
by natural hazards, e.g. tropical cyclones [3], [2]. Hence, it will especially be cheaper,
more sustainable, and quicker if one can detect such bathymetric changes using SDB.
ICESat and ICESat-2 have been used for detecting bathymetry in many studies. Most
studies have had the purpose of determining bathymetry from ICESat-2 directly. How-
ever, it has also been used e.g. for determining water storage in lakes. Since ICESat-2
has repeat cycles of approximately 91 days, it makes the satellite a great candidate for
detecting bathymetry in shallow water regions.
Arsen et al. [17] is one of the first studies that use ICESat for detecting bathymetry.
The purpose of the study is to determine water storage and bathymetry in Lake Poopó,
Bolivia. ICESat is mainly used to determine the lake boundaries, although it is also used
to make simple bathymetry profiles of the lake. Parrish et al. [10] introduce a refraction
correction that should be applied to ICESat-2 ATL03 data when determining bathymetry.
The refraction correction is later applied in multiple studies, including Ranndal et al. [18],
Ma et al. [19], and Herrmann et al. [20]. The study by Parrish et al. also shows that
ICESat-2 can be used to determine bathymetry at depths of 40 m. Furthermore, ICESat-2
bathymetry root mean squared errors (RMSE) are from 0.43 m to 0.60 m, when comparing
with reference data, a high-accuracy airborne topo-bathymetric lidar.
ICESat-2 detects photons that are reflected from the sea surface, the water column, and
the seabed. Several methods exist for how to estimate the bathymetry based on these
photons. Ranndal et al. [18] use statistical methods to estimate bathymetry profiles in
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
3
==PAGE:12==
the Arctic and Great Barrier Reef regions based on ICESat-2 data. At first, the photons
reflected from the sea surface and the water column are separated. A moving median of
50 subsurface photons is then applied to determine the bathymetry profiles. A Gaussian
filter is later applied for smoothing the bathymetry profile. The results show RMSEs of
0.28 m to 0.45 m, and it is stated that the errors increase with depth. The concept of
using a moving median is also applied in the study by Arsen et al. [17]. Zhang et al. [12]
use an elliptic filter to determine bathymetry with ICESat-2 at Shanhu Island, Ganquan
Island, and Lingyang Reef in the Xisha Islands of China. The study separates the water
surface from the subsurface photons. The elliptic filter is based on a Gaussian curve
fitting, where noise levels are determined based on the depths of the photons. In that way,
it takes account for the attenuation. The parameters for the elliptic filter are determined
iteratively.
Some studies use machine learning for estimating the bathymetry with ICESat-2 data. Ma
et al. [19] use a clustering algorithm to locate the water surface level and the bathymetry
in Yongle Atoll, the South China Sea, and a lagoon near Bahama. If the number of re-
turned photons exceeds a threshold based on the surrounding noise level, the bathymetry
is determined. The ICESat-2 bathymetry is later used as a priori information for empirical
models and Sentinel-2 images to improve bathymetric maps. The estimated RMSE of
the ICESat-2 bathymetry is 10% of the water depth. In the study, it is also stated that the
algorithm fails to detect most of the ICESat-2 underwater signal for depths greater than
5 m in noisy water. The method has also been applied by Xu et al. [21], who determine
water storage in a lake. Lin and Knudby [22] use a neural network model to identify re-
flected photons that belong to the seabed. The model is trained on manually annotated
data, where the bathymetry photons are identified visually. The study aims to make an
automated extraction of bathymetric photons, which should work globally. Different en-
vironments and locations are investigated. The study shows promising results in clear
water conditions. For noisier data, for which Moreton Bay is mentioned as an example,
the model detects the bathymetry reasonably when the signal from the seabed is strong.
However, the noise close to the surface in Moreton Bay leads to wrongly determined
bathymetry photons. All cycles included in the study are from 2018, i.e. there are no
repeated cycles.
The studies described above mainly demonstrate the success of determining bathymetry
using ICESat-2 data when the weather is good and the water turbidity is low. Less focus
has been on determining bathymetry from ICESat-2 data with high noise levels [15]. Sea-
grass generally causes very noisy ICESat-2 data, since the photons are reflected in many
directions. Hedley et al. [23] determine seagrass densities in the Mexican Caribbean
based on Sentinel-2 images. ICESat-2 data-derived bathymetry is used for validation
purposes only. 239 ICESat-2 data files out of 456 files in total contain useful data for
bathymetry detection in the period 16th of October 2018 to 7th of July 2020. A basic pixel
density algorithm is applied to the ICESat-2 data to identify dense areas of photon returns
in combination with manual drawing tools. The dense areas of photon returns are then
assigned to be the sea surface and bathymetry. Compared to the Sentinel-2 depths, the
results show an absolute error of 1 m, including systematic errors of 0.5 m.
Detecting bathymetry changes with ICESat-2 data is still a new topic. Some studies in-
clude multiple cycles from repeated tracks, e.g. Ma et al. [19] and Zhang et al. [12].
However, it is specifically specified that any potential temporal bathymetric changes are
neglected. Instead, the focus has been on the similarity of bathymetry profiles. Further-
more, the ICESat-2 is used as part of static maps for validation of other data sets. Hence,
no temporal changes are indicated in the studies introduced above, and studies with tem-
4
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:13==
poral changes using SDB are limited [20].
Herrmann et al. [20] detect bathymetric changes in the Northern Gulf of Mexico based
on data collected by ICESat-2 and Sentinel-2. The study is based on the full ICESat-2
ATL03 photon cloud. However, the ICESat-2 product ATL08 is used for surface type clas-
sification, i.e. if the photon belongs to the sea surface, land, seabed, etc. The bathymetry
is then manually verified for each cycle. Two bathymetric maps are created based on
Sentinel-2 and ICESat-2 bathymetry data from before and after Hurricane Sally (2020).
The differences in the bathymetry result from subtracting one map from the other, which
causes interpolation errors. The results of the study are compared to airborne data ob-
served over the same time period. The results show RMSE of 2.1 m to 2.4 m for the
temporal changes between the SDB and airborne data. However, the RMSE decreases
when only investigating the regions near the ICESat-2 tracks.
Garcia et al. [24] investigate possible bathymetry changes in Faure Sill, Shark Bay from
the International Space Station. The study uses data from the Hyperspectral Imager for
the Coastal Ocean (HICO). Nine HICO images are used in the period from November 2011
to August 2012. Results show bathymetric changes in the most shallow parts, i.e. parts
that at times are not covered by water if compared with Playford et al. [25]. The study
mentions that uncertainties are large and often greater than the bathymetric changes.
Several studies implement corrections for ocean tides. This makes repeated cycles com-
parable, and it also makes it possible to compare with other bathymetric data from an
area. The ocean tides correction supplied along with the ICESat-2 data is used for some
studies, while others use external models e.g. Randall et al. [18] and Hedley et al. [23].
Also, tide gauges can be used for tidal corrections [20].
The study of bathymetry changes in Shark Bay by Garcia et al. [24] specifically mentions
the correction for ocean tides or water level as a challenge when determining bathymetry
changes. For the study, two methods have been implemented and compared. In one
method, the water level in two nearby locations, Hamelin Pool and Monkey Mia (located
on the east coast of Peron Peninsula and at the same latitude as the northern coast of
Faure Island) are estimated. (A map of Shark Bay is provided in figure 3.3.) The tide level
in Faure Sill is then determined as the median water level in these locations. The water
levels in the locations have been determined based on a local model, where tide level
data from Carnarvon is used, and phase shifts implemented. The other method for tidal
correction is described as an image-based approach. The median depth of all pixels in an
observation is determined, and observations are then adjusted based on the hypothesis
that the median depth should be the same at all times. The paper states that the first
method is most likely ’inaccurate and does not adequately represent the tidal harmonics
encountered over the Faure Sill’, while the second method at least decreases the errors.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:15==
3
Study area and data
Bathymetry at two locations is investigated in this project. They are Moreton Bay, which is
located on the eastern coast of Australia, and Shark Bay, which is located on the western
coast, see figure 3.1. The two locations are shortly introduced in this chapter. Some of
the information is included for later use. Finally, there is a description of ICESat-2 and a
specification of the applied data from it.
Figure 3.1: A map showing Australia and some of its surroundings. The added locations
are Shark Bay (SB) and Moreton Bay (MB) highlighted in blue and red, respectively. The
main figure is adapted from Wikipedia with credit to Ssolbergj and Roke [26].
3.1
Moreton Bay
Moreton Bay is located outside Brisbane on the east coast of Australia. The port of Bris-
bane is heavily used, and all ships between the port and the Pacific Ocean must pass
through Moreton Bay. The bay covers a water area of 1,500 km2, and the water depth
ranges up to 40 m. The ship routing depends on the dredged channel following the red
line in figure 3.2 (left panel). Moreton Bay is a sandy bay that is constantly being reworked
because of the changes in the patterns of energy dispersal due to storms and tides. As
a result, dredging is performed on an annual basis [1], and the port authority performs
frequent bathymetric surveys, which are costly. Consequently, Moreton Bay could be a
good candidate for detecting satellite bathymetry changes with ICESat-2.
Moreton Bay has a very different coastal environment from typical locations for which
ICESat-2 has been applied to determine bathymetry. Studies, including Eyre et al. [27]
and Lockington et al. [28], show that Moreton Bay is seriously affected by suspended
sediments in the water column, hampering optical visibility. The southern part of the bay
has mainly a mud or sandy mud bottom, which reduces sunlight penetration, while sedi-
ments in the northern part of the bay are mostly clean sand, as described by Lockington
et al. [28]. This study concluded that the presence of mud has increased in Moreton Bay,
especially in the southern half of the bay (800 km2).
The area affected by mud (figure 3.2, right panel) is a consequence of large floods over
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
7
==PAGE:16==
the past 45 years combined with land clearing. Sediment enters the bay via the Brisbane
River estuary [27]. Figure 3.2 (right panel) is used to define a ’mud zone’ with decreased
visibility in the water column.
Figure 3.2: The left panel shows a map of Moreton Bay (adapted from Google [29]). Most
of the ship traffic going between the ocean and the port of Brisbane follows the red line.
The right panel shows the mud zone in Moreton Bay (adapted from [16]).
3.2
Shark Bay
Shark Bay is a shallow water region located in western Australia. It has been a world her-
itage since 1991, known for one of the largest sea-grass beds in the world, which extends
an area of 4800 km2. It is also known for its dugong population and its stromatolites, one
of the first life forms on Earth. The marine life also includes a great number of dolphins,
sharks, turtles, and fish. [8]
There are numerous inner pools and islands inside Shark Bay, which can easily be seen
on the map in figure 3.3. For later parts of this report, especially Faure Island and the
Hamelin Pool are of great importance. However, also L’Haridon Bight, Dirk Hartog Island,
Edel Land Peninsula, and the towns of Carnarvon, Kalbarri, and Denham are mentioned.
8
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.3: A locality map of Shark Bay and the surrounding area. Adapted from Playford
et al. [25].
In western Australia, the air temperatures are the highest from January to March and the
lowest from June to August. The monthly mean minimum and maximum temperatures are
in the range of 10◦C to 35◦C [30]. The mean annual rainfall is 192.8 mm. June and July
are the months with the most precipitation, although there are several examples of days
with more than 90 mm of precipitation from December to March (e.g. 128.8 mm on 14
Mar 2015, 107.4 mm on 17 Dec 2010, and 96.6 mm on 05 Feb 2021). The weather data
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
9
==PAGE:18==
above is taken from the Shark Bay Airport, located on Peron Peninsula at an elevation of
34 m [30]. The sea surface temperatures in Shark Bay also vary with the seasons. As it
appears from figure 3.4, the temperature of the surface water is as expected higher than
in the Indian Ocean during the Australian summer. However, they are lower than in the
Indian Ocean during the Australian winter.
Figure 3.4: Satellite derived sea surface temperatures in Shark Bay and part of the Indian
Ocean taken at two times in 2008; one for summer on January 7th (left) and one for winter
on June 6th (right). Adapted from Playford et al. [25].
Cyclones are estimated to happen once every five years on average in the Shark Bay
region [31]. The cyclones appear in December to May, but they are most common in
February and March. Historically, there have been several destroying, tropical cyclones
in the Shark Bay region, including Hazel in 1979 and Herbie in 1988 [7]. Ocean tides
are not as extreme as on the Northern Coast of Australia, where tidal ranges of 12 m are
reported [2]. However, they are still of importance in Shark Bay [25]. Major bathymetric
changes in the Hamelin Pool can be assumed to be caused by cyclones rather than ocean
tides [3].
On the 11th April 2021, tropical cyclone Seroja hits the Shark Bay region. The cyclone led
to severe damages, and up to 70% of the homes in the town of Kalbarri were reported
destroyed [4]. There is no evidence of actual bathymetric changes in the Shark Bay
region caused by the cyclone. However, the Hamelin Pool boardwalk made for tourists
is reported closed for at least two years after the cyclone [5]. This was due to damages
done by the cyclone, which made it unsafe. Hence, it seems likely that the cyclone has
also caused bathymetric changes in the region.
In general, the best chances for locations to experience bathymetry changes are assumed
to be the tidal channels due to the large water in and outflow. This is especially true for
bathymetry changes due to ocean tides. Also, cyclones are expected to lead to such
changes.
As seen in figure 3.3, Edel Land Peninsula is together with especially Dirk Hartog Island
10
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:19==
protecting the bay from the Indian Ocean, making the water conditions calmer. Some
channels are good candidates for locations experiencing bathymetric changes due to the
large water flow that must pass through the channels with the ocean tides. One example
is the channel near Steep Point. However, this region mainly contains cliffs [29]. Hence,
bathymetry changes are less realistic on a five-year time scale (the period for available
ICESat-2 data). There are also several underwater mountain chains formed in circles in
the larger water bodies. In the northern part of the bay, near the town of Carnarvon, the
water tends to be less clear than in other places in the bay [25]. Additionally, the depth
is greater in this region, which makes it harder for ICESat-2 to penetrate the whole water
column. It has been found that the greatest potential for detecting bathymetry changes
with ICESat-2 is likely to be at Faure Sill, the sand banks near Faure Island, which is on the
edge of Hamelin Pool and L’Haridon Bight. This is also the region of interest in a study
from 2015 [24], which focuses on detecting bathymetry changes from the International
Space Station.
Hamelin Pool is the inner part of the bay, and home to the stromatolites. Faure Island is
located right northwest of it. Faure Island is together with several small sand and seagrass
banks forming Faure Sill. As a result, only a small amount of water flows to and from
Hamelin Pool. The maximum depth in the Hamelin Pool is 11 m, while the depths of
the tidal channels are usually around 6 m [25]. Due to the high evaporation in the area,
Hamelin Pool is a hypersaline basin. The salinity can be up to 75 h because of the high
evaporation. L’Haridon Bight is also reported as a hypersaline basin.
Even though the astronomical tides are smaller in the Hamelin Pool than in the outer
Shark Bay, the ocean tides are greater in the Hamelin Pool than in e.g. Denham. This
is due to the meteorological tides. Figure 3.5 shows the usual tide levels for the Hamelin
Pool. Supertides are said to occur three times a year. Figure 3.6 shows the tide level in
the Hamelin Pool for September 1979, which clearly shows the importance of the meteo-
rological tides, which have longer periods than the astronomical ones.
Figure 3.5: The tide levels for Hamelin Pool. Adapted from Playford et al. [25].
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.6: Tide profiles in Hamelin Pool in September 1979 showing the meteorological
component (black line) combined with the astronomical component (red line). Adapted
from Playford et al. [25].
3.3
ICESat-2
Data from the Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite - 2 (ICESat-2) has been used for
this project. The satellite was launched on 15th of September 2018 and is still operable.
On board ICESat-2 is the Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System (ATLAS).
The main objectives for ICESat-2 are:
- Measure melting ice sheets and investigate how this affects sea level rise,
- Measure and investigate changes in the mass of ice sheets and glaciers,
- Estimate and study sea ice thickness,
- Measure the height of vegetation in forests and other ecosystems worldwide. [32]
The satellite has an orbit with an inclination angle of 92.0002◦, which makes it suitable for
polar research. However, data from ICESat-2 has also been used for studies with other
purposes, e.g. detecting sea ice, and vegetation heights. ICESat-2 is in the Low Earth
Orbit and has a repeat cycle of 91 days, which makes it suitable for detecting changes
over time. [33]
ATLAS has six green laser beams: three strong beams and three weak ones. The beams
are paired, so each pair consists of one strong beam and one weak beam. There are 3.3
km between each pair, and 90 m between the beams within a pair, see figure 3.7. The
beams are named GT1L, GT2L, GT3L, GT1R, GT2R, and GT3R. It differs if it is the ones
containing L or R that are the strong beams. It depends on the direction of the satellite.
About 10 times more photons are returned from the strong beams than from the weak
ones. ATLAS emits about 20 trillion photons per pulse and 10,000 pulses per second,
resulting in a spatial resolution of 70 cm on the Earth’s surface [33]. The beam footprint
is 17 m.
12
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.7: ICESat-2 and its laser beams. Adapted from NASA National Snow and Ice
Data Center [34].
3.4
Applied data
The full photon cloud from the ICESat-2 product ATL03, version 6, is used for this project.
Data is accessed through the NASA National Snow and Ice Data Center website at
https://nsidc.org/data/atl03/versions/6, [34].
The data files include height values above the WGS 84 ellipsoid, timestamps, and latitude
and longitude coordinates for reflected photons. The ATL03 photon cloud is already cor-
rected for solid Earth tides, ocean loading, solid Earth pole tides, and ocean pole tides.
The ICESat-2 data also supplies additional variables for which the data can be corrected
[34]. This includes values for the geoid and ocean tides. However, this needs to be
applied by the user, see section 4.1.1.
There are two tracks from ICESat-2 crossing Moreton Bay. These are Track 474 and
Track 1152 as seen in figure 3.8a, where the latter is used purely for validation of the re-
sults. From October 2018 to July 2023, there are 20 available cycles for both tracks, i.e.
the satellite has passed each of these tracks 20 times in this period. Track 474 crosses
several channels in Moreton Bay, which are easily distinguishable (figure 3.8a). The cor-
responding locations of these channels are shown in the ICESat-2 data from a cycle in
April 2020 in figure 3.8b. Examples from other cycles are shown in figure 3.9. Figure
3.9a is an extremely noisy cycle, which is probably caused by seagrass [23]. However,
the seabed is partly distinguishable. Figure 3.9b is an example of a cycle, where weather
and water conditions are challenging for detecting bathymetry with ICESat-2. For Track
474, the strong beams are GT1R, GT2R, and GT3R, and the weak beams are GT1L,
GT2L, and GT3L.
Additionally, an existing bathymetry map, AusSeabed for the Great Barrier Reef region
[35], with a resolution of 30 m, is used for comparison reasons. An updated version
from 2020 is used. The AusSeabed bathymetry is shown in figure 3.8a with the various
channels used for ship routing indicated.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
13
==PAGE:22==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: (a) shows the AusSeabed bathymetry in Moreton Bay with the ICESat-2 Track
474 (red) and Track 1152 (black) with the beams GT1R (dash-dotted line), GT2R (dashed
line), and GT3R (solid line). The two stars indicate crossing locations for the tracks. The
four grey arrows illustrate from north to south the locations of the ‘Northern Channel’,
the ‘Central Channel’, the ‘Sub-Channel’, and the ‘Southern Channel’, which are also
indicated by figure (b). (b) shows photon data (before any refraction correction) from
track 474 on 26th of April 2020, beam GT3R. The arrow indicates the mud zone (south of
27.23◦S).
14
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:23==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9: Examples of ICESat-2 cycles for Track 474 in Moreton Bay on 29th of July
2019 (a), and 26th of January 2020 (b). Both examples are from beam GT3R. The figures
are shown in reference to the geoid corrected data, see section 4.1.1.
ICESat-2 has several flight-overs in Shark Bay. However, based on section 3.2, the focus
area for this project is on Faure Sill, where Track 986 crosses. There are 19 available
cycles from track 986. They are listed in table 3.1, and their locations are shown in figure
3.10. As it appears from the table, the data file from cycle number 5 is empty, and it is
therefore not included in the further analysis. Additionally, cycle number 15 is nowhere to
be found on the downloading page [34]. Hence, data from cycle 15 is neither included.
Open Altimetry [36] displays ICESat-2 data at given dates. It confirms that there is no
interesting, available data in the region on the dates for cycle 5 and cycle 15. For track
986, the strong beams are GT1L, GT2L, and GT3L. The weak beams are called GT1R,
GT2R, and GT2R. Hence, it is the opposite of Track 474 in Moreton Bay.
Figure 3.10: ICESat-2 laser beams in Shark Bay. The background image is adapted from
Google Maps [29].
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
15
==PAGE:24==
Cycle Number
Date
Time (UTC)
Remarks
01
2018-12-02
05:42:35
-
02
2019-03-03
01:22:36
-
03
2019-06-01
21:02:10
-
04
2019-08-31
16:42:00
-
05
2019-11-30
12:21:50
File contains no data. Not included
06
2020-02-29
08:01:34
-
07
2020-05-30
03:41:24
-
08
2020-08-28
23:21:10
-
09
2020-11-27
19:01:00
-
10
2021-02-26
14:40:52
-
11
2021-05-28
10:20:44
-
12
2021-08-27
06:00:39
-
13
2021-11-26
01:40:35
-
14
2022-02-24
21:20:32
-
15
No file is found. Not included
16
2022-08-25
12:40:20
-
17
2022-11-24
08:19:58
-
18
2023-02-23
03:59:52
-
19
2023-05-24
23:39:26
-
Table 3.1: List of data files from ICESat-2 track 986.
For examples on ICESat-2 cycles from Track 986 in Shark Bay, see figure 3.11. While
a few cycles are from times when weather and water conditions are good (figure 3.11a),
most cycles have scattered photons everywhere (figure 3.11b), which is likely due to sea-
grass.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: ICESat-2 cycles from beam GT2L on the 26th of February 2021 (cycle 10)
(a) and beam GT3L on the 3rd of March 2019 (cycle 2) (b) from Track 986 in Shark Bay.
The figures are shown in reference to the geoid corrected data, see section 4.1.1.
Additional applied data includes maps from Google, [29], and a coastline from GADM [37].
Ocean tides data from Cheng and Andersen [38] is also included. The use of this data is
explained later in the report to ease understanding.
16
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:25==
4
Methods
The following chapter contains explanations of the applied methods in this project. The
first part is about detecting a single bathymetry profile based on ICESat-2 data. It is
followed by a part about ocean tides for which bathymetric profiles need to be corrected
to be comparable. Finally, the bathymetric profiles from all beams are combined to look
at possible bathymetric changes.
4.1
Detecting bathymetry from ICESat-2 data
As mentioned in section 2, there are several methods for detecting bathymetry. While
some studies focus on machine learning for determining bathymetry, this project uses a
statistical approach to determine bathymetry as suggested by Ranndal et al. [18]. How-
ever, some modifications are applied. Firstly, a sea surface height is determined based
on the ICESat-2 photons. Next, a refraction correction is applied. Several filters have then
been applied to determine the bathymetry based on the subsurface photons. Finally, the
implementations for Moreton Bay and Shark Bay are described based on the previous
sections.
Different names are used for the photons at various depths. To ease understanding, a
short overview is presented in table 4.1.
Name
Explanation
Surface photons
All photons that are assigned to be part of the sea
surface. They are omitted in section 4.1.1 so that the
remaining photons can be used in the following.
Subsurface photons
All photons except the sea surface photons, the photons
above the sea surface, and additional photons from
near the sea surface that are removed due to noise.
Near-surface photons
The upper part of the subsurface photons. There is no
clear boundary. Only used for explanations.
Bathymetry photons
The photons that are assigned to be part of the
bathymetry, see section 4.1.5.
Table 4.1: List of names assigned to the photons from various depths.
4.1.1
Sea surface height determination
At first, several corrections are applied to all data to be able to determine sea surface
photons automatically. The corrections are provided along with the photon data in the
ICESat-2 files, although they need to be applied by the user. The sea surface is later
determined based on the sea surface photons.
The data is corrected for the geoid, so all data is now referenced to the geoid. The data
is also corrected for ocean tides. The ICESat-2 data files provide ocean tides, which in-
clude diurnal and semi-diurnal periods. The correction for ocean tides does not include
meteorological tides. As mentioned in section 3.2, meteorological tides are of great im-
portance in Shark Bay, especially in the Hamelin Pool. The correction from ICESat-2 has
been shown to be sufficiently accurate to determine the sea surface height. However, the
meteorological tides are included in a later adjustment, see section 4.2. Also, the dynamic
atmosphere correction from the ICESat-2 files is applied.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
17
==PAGE:26==
The surface photons are defined as the photons that are located within a range around
the sea surface. The size of the span is situation-dependent, and it varies between loca-
tions, and weather and water conditions [18]. By implementing the corrections mentioned
above, the size of the span can be decreased. A smaller span makes the sea surface
height more precise. By including the corrections, the correct classification of surface
photons happens automatically when having multiple cycles, even for smaller spans.
In some cases, it is hard to distinguish between the water surface and the seabed in the
ICESat-2 data. Some photons reflected from the seabed might therefore be included as
surface photons. Decreasing the span of water photons minimises the chances of mis-
taking the seabed for belonging to the sea surface. The span should also be minimised,
so photons reflected from neighbouring land surfaces have minimal impact on the sea
surface height.
For this project, three methods are considered for determining the sea surface height
based on the surface photons. These methods are a moving mean filter, a moving median
filter, and a straight line based on the linear least squares (LLS) method. If the signal from
the bathymetry is strong, the moving median and the moving mean can in some cases be
sensitive to very shallow water cases. It is a typical example of what happens on the water
boundary, although it can exist in other special cases. On the other hand, LLS requires
that the surface can be approximated to a straight line, e.g. no islands should be visible
in the data. The difference between the methods becomes smaller when correcting the
data for the geoid and tides. The moving median is applied as it is evaluated as the best
option. Additional photons within a distance below the sea surface are removed due to the
noise from the surface [18]. Hence, the very shallow water regions in which the moving
median determines the sea surface incorrectly are removed.
4.1.2
Refraction correction
A refraction correction is needed for the subsurface photons when they penetrate the
water [10]. No such correction is applied in the ATL03 data since it is below the sea
surface. In principle, two things happen:
(1). The speed of the ICESat-2 photons is slower in water than in air. Consequently, a
photon reaches a shorter distance in seawater than in air during the same time. Hence,
the photon data needs to be moved upwards with a correction.
(2). Due to the interface between the two media, air and water, the direction of the wave
changes depending on the incidence angle, see figure 4.1. This leads to an additional
geometric correction, both horizontally and vertically. The photons are still slowed down
in the water.
18
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.1: Graphical illustration of the need for applying a refraction correction when de-
tecting bathymetry with ICESat-2. Note that n1 and n2 are examples of refractive indices
for air and water, respectively. They hereby differ from the n1 and n2 that are being used
in equation 4.1. Adapted from Parrish et al. [10].
For (1), the refractive indices are needed for air and seawater. The refractive index for
seawater is heavily dependent on both salinity and temperature [10]. Consequently, it
varies depending on the location on Earth. The refractive index for seawater is calculated
using a formula suggested by Quan and Fry [39]. The refraction index of seawater, nsea is
dependent on the salinity, S (in h), the water temperature, T (in ◦C), and the wavelength,
λ (in nm).
n(S, T, λ) = n0 +
(
n1 + n2T + n3T 2)
S + n4T 2
+n5 + n6S + n7T
λ
+ n8
λ2 + n9
λ3
(4.1)
where
n0 = 1.31405,
n1 = 1.779 × 10−4,
n2 = −1.05 × 10−6,
n3 = 1.6 × 10−8,
n4 = −2.02 × 10−6,
n5 = 15.868,
n6 = 0.01155,
n7 = −0.00423,
n8 = −4382,
n9 = 1.1455 × 106.
(4.2)
The formula applies for 0h < S < 35h, 0◦C < T < 30◦C, and 400nm < λ < 700nm.
As it is clear from section 3.2, the Hamelin pool is a hypersaline basin with salinities on
55h to 75h. Otherwise, a frequently used value for the salinity of seawater is 35h. Some
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
19
==PAGE:28==
possible refractive indices are therefore included in table 4.2 for different salinities and
temperatures. The table is based on equation 4.1, in which λ = 532 nm, the wavelength
of ICESat-2. It is noted that following [39] the formula is valid only in salinity regions of
0h < S < 35h. However, it is applied by e.g. Ranndal et al. [18] for higher salinities as
well. At the same time, the values seem reasonable for higher salinities if compared to
other formulas, e.g. Zhang et al. [40]. Hence, it is assumed to be fairly reasonable also
for higher salinities.
10◦C
15◦C
20◦C
25◦C
35 h
1.3424
1.3420
1.3415
1.3410
55 h
1.3462
1.3457
1.3452
1.3446
75 h
1.3500
1.3495
1.3489
1.3483
Table 4.2: nsea depends on temperature and salinity as calculated using equation 4.1.
The correction is implemented so the corrected height of a photon, Z′, is calculated as
Z′ = Z + c1D
(4.3)
in which c1 = 1−nair
nsea , where the refraction index for air nair = 1.00029 is used [10]. D is the
photon depth, and Z is the height of the photon as measured by ICESat-2. The depth is
simply taken as the distance below the sea surface height, which is determined in section
4.1.1. Note, that the depth is non-negative, while Z (and Z′) might be negative (as in this
case) depending on the coordinate system. Additionally, the depth needs to be based on
the instantaneous distance to the sea surface, i.e. without ocean tide corrections.
The calculated values for c1 corresponding to the values for nsea are shown in table 4.3.
The maximum depth for the investigated region in Shark Bay is approximately 10 m. By
multiplying c1 by 10 m, you therefore get an estimate for the magnitude of the maximal
correction. For Moreton Bay, depths are 30-35 m in the deepest channel.
10◦C
15◦C
20◦C
25◦C
35 h
0.2548
0.2546
0.2544
0.2540
55 h
0.2570
0.2567
0.2564
0.2561
75 h
0.2591
0.2588
0.2584
0.2581
Table 4.3: c1 depends on temperature and salinity.
It appears from equation 4.3 and table 4.3 that the differences between the corrections
depending on temperature and salinity are approximately 5 cm at 10 m depth taken at the
extreme cases for Shark Bay. The differences between different c1 decrease at smaller
depths. Even though it is deeper in Moreton Bay, water conditions are also less varied.
Therefore, it seems like a fair approximation to use one general value at all times for a
given location. Especially since data for the salinity and the temperature profiles would
be needed for the location of interest, which probably requires further approximations.
(2) handles the additional adjustments that are caused by the incidence angles of the
photons when they hit the water surface, figure 4.1. Hence, (1) is for the special case when
the incidence angle is 0◦. The additional, geometrical adjustment results in a horizontal
displacement and an additional vertical displacement. The displacements can easily be
determined by following equations 1 to 11 in [10]. Normally, ICESat-2 has an incidence
20
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:29==
angle of 0◦for the middle beam and 0.38◦for the outer ones. This results in a horizontal
offset of 9 cm in a depth of 30 m, which can be assumed negligible [10]. At times, the
satellite is out of position, which leads to incidence angles of up to 5.0◦, which makes the
horizontal offsets not negligible. The additional vertical correction is always negligible as
it is less than 1 cm.
4.1.3
Filters for bathymetry detection
The bathymetry profile is estimated based on the sub-surface photons that are corrected
for refraction. Based on the idea of using a statistical approach suggested by Ranndal
et al. [18], several filters have been implemented for determining the bathymetry. Even-
tually, the filters are evaluated by visually looking at them and comparing them with the
ICESat-2 photon data. In general, many filters can detect the seabed in good weather and
water conditions. However, there is a greater difference between them in difficult water
conditions.
Moving mean
The moving mean is a very simple method. Windows of different sizes have been tried.
When making the window larger, the profile varies slower and does not necessarily detect
steeper channels. However, a smaller window is more sensitive to noise. In general, a
moving mean is sensitive to outliers. Furthermore, it does not handle very noisy cycles
well.
Moving median
As shown in Arsen et al. [17] and Ranndal et al. [18], the moving median might work
for detecting bathymetry in some weather and water conditions. As a general rule, a
moving median is more robust to outliers than a moving mean, which theoretically makes
it more suited for detecting bathymetry. However, the moving median filter has proven
itself unsuccessful for very noisy cycles.
Moving quantile
The moving median is a special case of a moving quantile of 50%. For the moving median
filter applied in Arsen et al. [17] and Ranndal et al. [18], no explanation is given for the
choice of the exact 50%. However, it makes sense to implement a lower quantile for
cases with high water turbidity. This is because there is probably more noise between the
sea surface and the seabed, than below the seabed. Obviously, the optimal percentage
for the quantile becomes noise-dependent. One can argue that it might also be depth-
dependent.
Moving mode
The moving mode uses the most common depth value for subsurface photons inside a
window. As the photons reach depths from an almost continuous distribution (limited by
the number of digits in the ICESat-2 data), the depths of the photons are rounded to the
nearest 0.1 m. Different numbers have been tried. However, to detect the bathymetry
for especially steeper slopes, 0.1 m has proven the most appropriate. In cases where no
mode can be determined, e.g. due to an even distribution, the depth is assigned a dummy
value. The vertical resolution gets worse when applying the moving mode filter.
Weighted moving mode
Due to attenuation, noise is generally expected to be most present in the near-surface
region. Some studies take the attenuation into account, e.g. Zhang et al. [12]. This
filter attempts to take the attenuation into account by weighting the photons based on
an exponential regression. In that way, the deeper photons are given more weight than
the near-surface ones. For determining the weights, a water column is chosen, where
the bathymetry profile is almost horizontal and relatively deep. All photon depths are
rounded to digits. The concentration of photons is then plotted as a function of depth, and
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
21
==PAGE:30==
exponential regression is made, see figure 4.2. Based on the exponential regression,
all photons in the window are scaled. i.e. the deeper photons get multiplied by a factor
so they will reach the same concentration level as the near-surface concentration. The
moving mode filter from above can then be implemented.
Figure 4.2: The conceptual idea of the weighted moving mode system. The stars repre-
sent the number of photons that are rounded to a number (nearest 0.25). The red line is
a fitted exponential function.
Comparison of filters
A comparison between the main concepts is made to show how they handle different
situations. A cycle with a low noise level is shown in figure 4.3, and figure 4.4 is an
example of a cycle with many reflected photons in the upper water column. Figure 4.5 is
an example of a cycle with a high level of scattering throughout the water column, which
is likely caused by the presence of seagrass. Only the moving mean, moving median and
moving mode are included in this latter figure. For the examples in this section, window
sizes of 51 subsurface photons have been applied for the Shark Bay track, Track 986,
and 181 subsurface photons for the Moreton Bay track, Track 474.
Figure 4.3: Cycle 10 (26th of February 2021), beam GT2L from Track 986 in Shark Bay.
The photons have been corrected for refraction, and the filters moving mean (darker cyan),
moving median (brown), moving quantile at 22% (green), and moving mode (purple) are
applied.
22
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.4: Beam GT3R from the cycle on 26th of April 2020, Track 474 in Moreton Bay.
The photons have been corrected for refraction, and the filters moving mean (darker cyan),
moving median (brown), moving quantile at 22% (green), and moving mode (purple) are
applied.
Figure 4.5: Cycle 2 (3rd of March 2019), beam GT3L from Track 986 in Shark Bay. The
photons have been corrected for refraction, and the filters moving mean (darker cyan),
moving median (brown), and moving mode (purple) are applied.
In general, all filters are decent at detecting the bathymetry profiles for cases, where the
noise level is low in figure 4.3, and the filters are within 1 m at most places.
For cycles with low noise levels, the moving mode and moving median filters agree. The
moving median is, as expected, not as sensitive to the magnitude and number of outliers
as the moving mean, which is also apparent in the southern part of figure 4.3. There
seems to be no case, where the moving mean performs better than the moving median.
The moving quantile, where a low quantile is used, performs better than the moving me-
dian in cases with severe noise near the water surface, figure 4.4. The moving quantile
performs worse for cycles, where noise is everywhere (due to seagrass). Furthermore, it
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
23
==PAGE:32==
deviates systematically from the other filters in clean water, figure 4.3. Hence, the suc-
cess of the moving quantile depends on the set percentage. Obviously, the percentage
depends on the location and water turbidity.
The moving mode filter is the best one at detecting bathymetry for the very noisy cycles
that are due to seagrass (figure 4.5). As it appears from figure 4.6, the filter usually catches
the small, horizontal seabeds in the bottom of channels. However, it does not necessarily
catch steeper slopes, which are often better handled by the moving median (figure 4.6).
This is due to the small density of reflected photons from a vertical perspective. Addition-
ally, the filter at times determines the almost-surface photons as the bathymetry due to a
high concentration of photons in the upper part of the water column (figure 4.4).
Figure 4.6: Refraction corrected photons from cycle 8, beam GT3L from track 986 in
Shark Bay on 28th of August 2020. The applied filters are moving median (brown) and
moving mode (purple).
The weighted moving mode filter is as expected giving the same depths as the simple
moving mode filter in clear conditions. Consequently, the filter is left out of the figures. It
is better at handling cycles where the upper water column is noisy than the simple moving
mode filter. However, the implementation requires that the weighting is performed for that
exact track and cycle, as the noise is time-dependent. In some cases, the weighting must
be made for an exact location in one cycle to be successful. Furthermore, the weights
shall normally be calibrated based on the deepest place in one cycle, preferably with a flat
seabed. The weights also cause problems for the cycles with seagrass. The weighting
procedure should therefore be constrained and more complicated if implemented. Ad-
ditionally, the procedure should happen automatically. The filter is therefore not used
for this study. It is assumed that the moving mean and the moving median can also be
weighted. However, such filters are expected to cause the same challenges.
There are several examples of multipassing in the ICESat-2, where the photon travels
24
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:33==
between the water surface and the seabed twice. Hence, the depth appears as twice
as deep in the ICESat-2 data. Simulations show that the moving mode handles these
cases best because the main signal still comes from the photons that are only reflected
once. For the moving mode filter, the only challenges arising due to multipassing are
the ones, where the actual seabed is removed if the water is extremely shallow. The
multipassing then results in a seabed, where no signal from the subsurface is stronger
than the multipassed ones.
4.1.4
Detecting bathymetry in Moreton Bay
The surface photons are determined in the height range from -1.5 m to +1.0 m relative to
the geoid. The sea surface height is then determined by a moving median of 7001 surface
photons.
Due to noise from reflected photons at the sea surface, reflected photons from the upper
2.0 m of the water column are removed. The increase compared with Ranndal et al. [18],
who remove 0.5 m, is explained by the significant scattering from suspended sediments
in the upper water column, which is special to Moreton Bay.
A refraction correction of c1 = 0.2544 is applied. It equals a case for a salinity of 35h
and a temperature of 20◦C, see table 4.3. Any geolocation error is negligible due to small
incidence angles in the used data.
Figure 4.4 shows that the many suspended sediments in Moreton Bay are best handled
by the moving quantile. Since most outliers are located close to the surface, better re-
sults are obtained than when applying a moving median filter. As it appears from figure
4.4, the moving mode is not optimal for Moreton Bay. This is caused by the number of
photons reflected by suspended sediments being greater than the number of photons re-
flected by the seabed. It seems logical to implement a weighted filter, so the photons from
greater depths are weighted higher. This would partly account for the high attenuation.
However, as stated in section 4.1.3, difficulties occur, when implementing this to happen
automatically. Consequently, a moving quantile filter of the lowest 22% of the closest
181 subsurface photons is applied to estimate the bathymetry profiles in Moreton Bay.
Since the moving quantile does not handle seagrass well, this study does not estimate
the bathymetry profiles for cycles, where seagrass causes additional noise, e.g. figure
3.9a.
Relatively large window sizes are applied in the moving median filter for determining the
sea surface and the moving quantile for determining the bathymetry (compared with Ran-
dall et al. [18]). The window sizes are needed to get stable results. This is due to the
noise level, which is caused by the local water conditions.
Bathymetry estimation in mud region
There is severe scattering from the near-surface photons in especially the southern part of
Moreton Bay (south of 27.23◦S), which is likely due to the mud zone, see figure 3.8. The
applied method has proven itself incapable of detecting the bathymetry for this region.
One can increase the distance of omitted photons from the upper water column. The
moving quantile filter is then applied to the subsurface photons, so the method is carried
out similarly as before.
4.1.5
Detecting bathymetry in Shark Bay
For the sea surface height determination, photons between 0 m and 1.5 m are extracted
as surface photons. A moving median of 1/10 of the number of surface photons has
been applied for the surface photons to determine the water surface. This is done to
automatically determine the SSH independently of the weather conditions and whether
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
25
==PAGE:34==
it is a strong or a weak beam. Since only a small region in Shark Bay is investigated, it
does not cause problems with any potential sea surface slope, since the water surface can
nearly be approximated to a straight line in Shark Bay after the applied corrections. There
are a few cases, where land or islands get wrongly determined by the moving median.
However, that is of no importance to the bathymetry determination since these regions
are omitted in the following.
To remove scattering from the sea surface, the photons from 0.6 m below the SSH are
omitted before further processing. The remaining photons are assigned as the subsurface
photons.
For the refraction correction, the hypersaline water needs to be considered. As the in-
vestigated area is on the edge of the Hamelin Pool, one would expect the salinity to be
at the lower end of the range (of 55 hto 75 h). Based on figure 3.4, it seems realistic to
assume the water temperature to be 20◦C. Additionally, one would think that the highest
salinity appears during the Australian summer, where temperatures are higher leading to
the increased evaporation in the Hamelin Pool. Additionally, there is not much rainwater,
see section 3.2. It indicates a correlation between the salinity and the temperature, which
makes the differences for the refraction correction even smaller than suggested by table
4.3. However, this is not further investigated. Due to the considerations presented above,
the refraction index applied for the Shark Bay location is nsea = 1.3452, which corresponds
to c1 = 0.2564. This happens e.g. when the water salinity is 55 h, and the temperature
is 20◦C. It is expected that the simplification causes a maximum error of ±5 cm based
on seasons and tides. The geolocation errors caused by the incidence angles are easily
neglected. In a few cases, the satellite is out of position resulting in greater incidence
angles, especially for the outer beams. The maximum incidence angle in the applied data
is 2.1◦. The resulting, horizontal displacement becomes 21 cm at 10 m depth by following
equations 1-11 in Parrish et al. [10].
Due to the amount of seagrass in Shark Bay, the noisy cycles with scattered photons
everywhere occur regularly. Even though the amount of scattering changes, it is still of
high value to include many cycles if one wants to study the bathymetry changes. As stated
in section 4.1.3, the moving mode filter is the best option for this. However, the moving
mode leaves some other challenges. Attempts for detecting steeper slopes and improving
the vertical resolution are made and explained in the following. Also, an additional filter is
included, so only the most credible depth values are kept.
Filter optimisation
Even though the moving mode filter seems to be the best option, some challenges, in-
cluding the previously mentioned ones, need to be addressed. At the same time, the filter
should automatically handle whether the determined bathymetry is trustworthy or not.
One challenge is that the bathymetry fluctuates when the signal from the bathymetry (i.e.
the mode) is spread to more than one rounded number. Another case can be that the
actual bathymetry is in the middle of two rounded numbers so it fluctuates. To prevent
this, one can change the moving mode to a moving mode interval so all frequencies of
photons for one depth are added to the frequencies of photons from neighbouring depths.
This has been done so the interval is on 30 cm, e.g. three rounded numbers. Three has
been chosen as it often happens that there are three high frequencies surrounding the
seabed. Hence, it makes sense to assign all these photons as bathymetry photons. It
also appears that the model wrongly determines fewer of the near-surface photons as
part of the bathymetry compared to the simpler moving mode filter. Additionally, this filter
is better at determining steeper slopes.
26
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:35==
To determine the credibility of the modelled bathymetry, all bathymetry photons are as-
signed a number between 0 and 1. Photons for which the mode has not been determined
are automatically assigned to 0. Otherwise, it is a fraction of how many photons are in-
cluded in the most common depth divided by the total number of photons, i.e. 51. Different
thresholds for when the bathymetry is trustworthy have been tried, but it is eventually set
to 0.2. Hence, bathymetry is determined when 20% of the photons within a window are
vertically clustered. Unfortunately, bathymetry from some determined slopes is omitted.
On the other hand, if decreasing the threshold, more near-surface photons are assigned
as part of bathymetry. In general, the model easily detects the very shallow bathymetry,
and it is harder to determine the deeper one. This is especially evident in the very noisy
data. A standard deviation has also been considered to categorise the credibility of the
bathymetry in similarity to Ranndal et al. [18]. However, challenges arise when connect-
ing thresholds and standard deviations, since data from the noisy cycles naturally have
huge standard deviations compared to the relatively clean cycles. An additional constraint
for the bathymetry photons is that the depth of the bathymetry photon is within the range
of the moving interval. The actual depths of the bathymetry photons are therefore used
instead of the rounded ones which cause the bad resolution. An example of bathymetry
photons is shown in figure 4.7.
A final bathymetry profile is determined by applying a Gaussian filter to smooth the bathy-
metry photons. A Gaussian filter with a size of 51 is applied to all subsurface photons with
only the bathymetry photons activated, i.e. they are the only ones counted. This is done
to handle the regions with only a few bathymetry photons correctly. An example is at the
bottom of a very steep channel.
Figure 4.7: The accepted bathymetry photons (magenta) and a Gaussian smoothing
(black). The Gaussian smoothing represents the final bathymetry estimation in Shark
Bay. The cycle is from the 28th of August 2020, Track 986 (beam GT3L).
4.2
Correction for ocean tides
To make comparisons between cycles, corrections for the instantaneous water levels must
be applied. This is also needed to make comparisons with other bathymetric maps. As
described in section 4.1.1, an adjustment for the tides is applied when determining the
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
27
==PAGE:36==
sea surface height. Since all photons are vertically moved in the applied tide correction,
it will cause no change in the distance between the sea surface and the seabed. Hence,
a new tide correction is needed to compare the cycles.
The ocean tide corrections from the ICESat-2 files have been proven sufficient for de-
termining the sea surface height in section 4.1.1. However, the supplied corrections are
only containing the ocean tides that are due to astronomical effects. The meteorological
tides are not negligible in e.g. Shark Bay, especially in the Hamelin Pool, (see figure 3.6).
Therefore, further tide corrections are investigated.
The implemented tidal correction in Moreton Bay is based on observations from the Tan-
galooma tide gauge [41], which is located on Moreton Island inside the bay.
Two different tidal corrections for Shark Bay are implemented depending on the method
for detecting bathymetric changes. No tide gauge is located in Faure Sill, which makes it
a challenge to correct for the ocean tides [24].
One tidal correction applied in Shark Bay is based on the DTU10 model by Cheng and
Andersen [38]. This is applied in section 4.3.1. Tides are taken in the point 25.916667◦S
and 113.916667◦E, which is in the Hamelin Pool. There are data for every ten minutes,
so a cycle is simply corrected for the interpolated tide level so it corresponds to the time
of the ICESat-2 observation. DTU10 is a global ocean tide model, which shows improved
predictions in both the deep and shallow waters compared with previous studies [38].
Its main focus is on the larger water oceans, where it is stated, that the global ocean
tide residuals are expected to be up to a few centimetres. However, the residuals are
larger at high latitudes and in coastal regions. The uncertainty for the Shark Bay region is
therefore unknown, although residuals up to 10 cm are mentioned in the paper for some
larger coastal regions. Unfortunately, DTU10 only goes back in time to 1986, which makes
a comparison with the data from September 1979 in figure 3.6 impossible. However, the
data from the beginning of 2019 to the end of 2020 is shown in figure 4.8. It shows
that the water level varies with a maximum of 63 cm. This is less than the range for
September 1979 shown in figure 3.6, which is up to 1 m. The discrepancy is even larger
when compared with the extreme cases of low and high tide levels reported by Playford
et al. [25] in figure 3.5.
Figure 4.8: The DTU10 ocean tide data [38] shown in the period from the beginning of
2019 to the end of 2020.
28
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:37==
The alternative way of correcting for tides is based on the median depths from different
cycles. This is applied to the method described in section 4.3.2. For a selection of cycles,
the median depth is determined based on the bathymetry profile in each cycle. The mean
of these median depths is then calculated. All bathymetry profiles are then adjusted based
on the mean sea surface level. To successfully implement this correction, the included
cycles need to have similar bathymetry to be comparable. Water conditions can also
cause an unrealistic median depth if no deep bathymetry is detected. It is a modified
method of the median method described in Garcia et al. [24], where images with large
regions are considered.
4.3
Bathymetry changes
As stated in section 3.2, a cyclone hit the Shark Bay region in April 2021. There are
no known bathymetric changes that are caused by the cyclone. However, the cyclone
possibly leads to bathymetric changes as mentioned in section 3.2. This study focuses
on detecting these potential bathymetric changes in Faure Sill, Shark Bay. Therefore,
bathymetric data from after the cyclone is compared to data from before the cyclone with
related uncertainties. The before-cyclone data contains cycles 1-10 and the after-cyclone
data contains cycles 11-19 in table 3.1.
Two methods are used to detect bathymetric changes. The first method uses interpolation
for the bathymetry profiles determined by section 4.1.5. The second method compares
bathymetry profiles from repeated cycles directly.
4.3.1
Method 1: Bathymetric changes based on interpolation
An interpolated map is created for the Shark Bay region based on data from before the
cyclone. Data from after the cyclone is then compared with the interpolated map to display
any changes. The changes need to be considered taking interpolation errors into account.
For the demonstration of the interpolation method, an interpolated map is made for all
cycles, summarised by table 3.1. Data from both weak and strong beams is included.
A simple 2D linear interpolation is shown to be unsuited. This is assumed to be caused
by the number and distribution of points that the interpolation method includes. The res-
olution of detected bathymetry along the ICESat-2 tracks is very high compared with the
resolution in between tracks since the cycles are almost overlapping. An interpolated
value in a random point might then be based on the depths at some not-so-suitable loca-
tions.
To avoid this issue, sparse grid interpolation is used [42]. It can be divided into two steps.
At first, a sparse grid is created. This limits the number of points included for later use.
Secondly, a spline interpolation is made based on the sparse grid.
A two-step interpolation is performed using the software Gravsoft [43].
Based on all
bathymetry profiles, two sparse grids are created, see figure 4.9. The grid shown in figure
4.9a is based on a 0.002◦x 0.002◦averaged depth grid in the region 25.85◦S to 26.00◦S,
and 113.80◦E to 114.00◦E. The grid presented in figure 4.9b is created based on a 0.0005◦
x 0.0005◦averaged depth grid in the same region. All determined depths are estimated
to have uncertainties of 1 m, see section 5.3.
For all figures showing sparse grids, images from Google [29] are included as background
images. For the figures showing interpolated maps, a coastline from GADM [37] is in-
cluded. This might help the reader navigate. The coastline is not related to the data
included in the maps.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
29
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: 0.0020◦(a) and 0.0005◦(b) averaged depth grids in Shark Bay based on the
bathymetry profiles detected by the method in section 4.1.3. Profiles from all beams and
cycles are included. The arrow shows the location for beam GT2L and GT2R, cycle 2.
Collocations of the two grids are performed. For the sparse grid in figure 4.9a, the corre-
lation length is set to 10 km, and the noise level is set to 0.25 m. Only data within 0.05◦
is used. 25 points per quadrant are used. A 0.0005◦x 0.0005◦grid is made for the re-
gion 25.845◦S to 26.050◦S, and 113.750◦E to 114.050◦E. A spline interpolation is then
performed with a window size of 4 x 4. For the settings related to figure 4.9b, the same
settings are applied with a few exceptions. Here, the correlation length is set to 0.5 km,
and the noise to 0.1 m. The 0.0005◦x 0.0005◦grid is created in the region 25.85◦S to
26.00◦S, and 113.80◦E to 114.00◦E. A spline interpolation with a window size of 8 x 8 is
then performed based on the gridded data and the former interpolation.
The determined bathymetry profiles from beam GT2L and GT2R from cycle 2 (3rd of March
2019) only contain small depths (smaller than 2 m), which seems incorrect if compared
with Google Maps [29], figure 4.11b. It can be explained by figure 4.10, where the seabed
is determined in the shallower parts only. This is due to the quality of ICESat-2 data, and
the method described in section 4.1.3. The beams cause an incorrect interpolation and
are therefore excluded from the interpolation process.
Figure 4.10: The refraction corrected photons and estimated bathymetry for beam GT2L
from Track 986, cycle 2 from March 2019.
30
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:39==
The final interpolated map is shown in figure 4.11 along with an image of the area from
Google [29]. The white areas in figure 4.11a are determined as land. The ICESat-2
bathymetry map seems relatively realistic when comparing them. It catches the channel
south of Faure Island that goes from northwest to southeast. Additionally, the narrow,
deeper channel east of Faure Island is also apparent in the interpolated map. The in-
terpolated map has trouble detecting the land areas, although some of Faure Island is
classified as land. Basic statistics related to the sparse grid interpolation are summarised
in table 4.4. One should expect at least the mean and the standard deviation for the data
from before and after interpolation to be similar, and the interpolated map to be visibly
realistic to obtain a successful interpolation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: The interpolated map (a) for Faure Sill, Shark Bay, is based on bathymetry
profiles determined by section 4.1. The map is based on all beams from all cycles (except
for beam GT2L and GT2R, cycle 2 (3rd of March 2019)). The image (b) from Google Maps
[29] is added for comparison.
Mean [m]
Standard deviation [m]
min [m]
max [m]
Sparse grid 1
-2.20
1.70
-8.99
-0.40
Sparse grid 2
-2.02
1.55
-9.00
-0.28
Grid 1
-2.08
1.66
-10.89
0.64
Grid 2
-0.07
0.83
-10.20
5.99
Final
-2.15
1.92
-12.86
3.22
Table 4.4: Statistics for interpolation. Sparse grid data 1 and 2 are corresponding to figure
4.9a and 4.9b, respectively.
For the creation of the interpolated maps that are based on bathymetry profiles from either
before or after the cyclone, the same procedure is followed with the same settings as
above. The beams GT2L and GT2R from cycle 2 are still removed from the data from
before the cyclone.
To decrease the influence of any interpolation error when comparing two groups of data,
e.g. before and after the cyclone, the difference is not based on interpolated maps directly.
Instead, the interpolated map from one group is compared with the sparse grid in the other
group. Hence, the differences between the two groups are only determined at the exact
locations for the cycles from other group.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
31
==PAGE:40==
4.3.2
Method 2: Bathymetric changes based on repeated cycles
Bathymetry profiles from beams that are within a relatively short, longitudinal distance
are assumed to be directly comparable. For this project, beams that are within 30 m are
directly compared to each other. There is a maximum of one usable beam per cycle due
to the relatively short distance.
All cycles are adjusted for the ocean tides, so they become comparable. The median
method from section 4.2 is followed.
The cycles can be divided into groups, e.g. before and after the cyclone in Shark Bay. For
each group, a mean value for the group and standard deviation is then determined along
the latitude. Deviations between profiles of different groups can then be determined.
The different cycles have determined bathymetry with varying latitudinal intervals. The
intervals also vary depending on the cycle, i.e. bathymetry detection is easier for some
cycles than others, which results in different resolutions of the bathymetry profiles. To
make the cycles count equally, a fixed, latitudinal interval/section is set to 0.0005◦(about
50 m). For each cycle, the mean value of the bathymetry profile is determined for each of
the latitudinal sections. In case of no value inside an interval in a cycle, it will be assigned
NaN as the value.
Let Ngroup be the number of cycles in one group. In one group, the mean depth in each
latitudinal section is determined. Only the values that are not NaN are included in the
mean calculation. Similarly, the standard deviation for each latitudinal section is deter-
mined, where values assigned NaN are ignored. Hence, only cycles with determined
bathymetry within an interval are included for that interval. Note that if several cycles
have no determined bathymetry within an interval, the results easily become misleading
since the standard deviation often becomes smaller. To prevent this, one can choose to
only calculate the mean and standard deviation for intervals, where several cycles are
included. For this project, only intervals with bathymetry data from at least three cycles
are included, independent of the size of Ngroup.
The mean depths and standard deviations are determined for each group. The groups
can then be compared with each other.
Similarly to the cycles, interpolated bathymetry profiles, section 4.3.1, can also be ad-
justed to the tide level using the median method.
32
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:41==
5
Results
The results of the study cases, Moreton Bay and Shark Bay, are presented in this chapter.
The results from Moreton Bay are also to be found in the scientific paper, appendix A with
minor modifications. The methods for finding bathymetric changes have been applied for
Shark Bay, following section 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. The chapter also includes a section about
uncertainties when using the methods.
5.1
Moreton Bay
ICESat-2 provides 20 cycles for bathymetry estimation for each of the two tracks covering
the period from October 2018 to July 2023 in Moreton Bay. One-third of the cycles are
found to be completely unusable due to weather, e.g. clouds or water vapour.
The remaining cycles are investigated for bathymetric signal. Some cycles appear ex-
tremely noisy, which can be caused by seagrass. An example of such a cycle is shown in
figure 3.9, in which there is scattering everywhere. Severe scattering can also be caused
by water turbidity.
Due to the problem of atmospheric conditions, the presence of seagrass and water tur-
bidity, a ‘good’ cycle is defined as a cycle in which the central channel, see figure 3.8,
is visible and continuous in the ICESat-2 data. This limits the number of ‘good’ cycles to
three for Track 474 (29th of October 2018, 26th of April 2020, and 24th of July 2021), and
one for Track 1152 (9th of March 2021). The focus of the analysis is the western, strong
beam, GT3R, of Track 474 in figure 3.8. This is shown in figure 5.1 for the cycle on the
26th of April 2020, which is the clearest cycle in Moreton Bay.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.1: The estimated bathymetry from track 474 on 26th of April 2020 showing the
photons after applying the refraction correction (light blue), the modelled bathymetry pro-
file (purple), and the interpolated bathymetry profile from AusSeabed [35].
Figure 5.1 reveals that the bathymetry estimate is in close agreement with the AusSeabed
bathymetry model outside the mud zone (south of 27.23◦S. Both the central and northern
channels (figure 3.8) are seen from ICESat-2 data. The northern channel is particularly
well resolved from ICESat-2. In the northern channel, there is a significant discrepancy
between the location and depth of the channel from the interpolated AusSeabed. This is
despite the ICESat-2 signal appearing strong.
As soon as Track 474 enters the mud zone south of 27.23◦S, the number of scattered
photons in the depth of 0-10 m increases dramatically due to suspended sediments. This
prevents bathymetry estimation for the southern channel region.
Subsequently, bathymetry is estimated for the repeated ICESat-2 cycles in 2018, 2020,
and 2021. All cycles are located within 10 m horizontally in Moreton Bay. There is also a
geolocation error of the same magnitude in the ICESat-2 data. This makes them directly
comparable, as the beam width is approximately 20 m. In figure 5.2, these cycles are
compared with each other and the existing bathymetry model from AusSeabed.
34
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.2: The bathymetry models for the ‘good’ cycles from Track 474 are shown in
blue (2018), purple (2020), and brown (2021), and the interpolated bathymetry profile
from AusSeabed (black).
Figure 5.2 shows that ICESat-2 profiles of 2018 and 2020 generally agree well with the
existing bathymetry for the location of the central channel and mostly agree for the region
between the channels. However, the deeper southern channel is not visible in any of the
ICESat-2 cycles. ICESat-2 bathymetry from the three cycles agrees within 1 meter for
the northern channel north of 27.05◦S, but they differ by up to 10 m from AusSeabed.
This indicates that some errors will likely be found in AusSeabed for at least the northern
channel. South of the northern channel, the 2021 bathymetry estimate differs from the
2018 and 2020 estimates. The 2021 bathymetry does not resolve the central channel at
27.1◦S, nor the sub-channel at 27.2◦S. Increased mud coverage in 2021 in the region
is a likely cause of this. The increased mud level can be seen by counting the number
of subsurface reflected photons from deeper than 10 meters across the central channel
and the sub-channel. For the 2020 profile, 543 of 1283 (42%) subsurface photons are
reflected from water at a depth below 10 m. For 2021, the number of reflected subsurface
photons from water below 10 m has decreased to 415 of 1408 (29%). This indicates that
the mud zone has increased from 2020 to 2021. The optical images from Sentinel-2 in
figure 5.3 classify large parts of Moreton Bay as water in 2020 but as sand/rock in 2021.
This confirms the increased extent of mud in Moreton Bay.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.3: Images from Sentinel-2 from 28th of April 2020 (left) and 24th of July 2021
(right) with an applied Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). Black areas are
classified as water, while brighter colours indicate e.g. rock or sand. Images are obtained
from EO Browser [44].
A comparison is made of the bathymetry profiles in figure 5.2 across the central channel
between 27.13◦S - 27.08◦S. The ICESat-2 bathymetry estimates from 2020 agree with
AusSeabed with a root mean square (RMSE) of 2.1 m. Similarly, the bathymetry estimate
from 2018 agrees with AusSeabed with an RMSE of 2.2 m, while the RMSE is 6.5 m
for the 2021 model and the interpolated AusSeabed. The large difference between the
ICESat-2 estimated seafloor and AusSeabed model may be caused by the interpolation
error of the AusSeabed model. The 2018 and 2020 models agree with an RMSE of 1.5
m within the channel. They agree with the 2021 model with RMSEs of 5.5 m and 5.0 m,
respectively.
It is investigated if it is possible to estimate bathymetry inside the mud zone by gradually
increasing the depth of the surface layer within the mud zone south of 27.23◦S to remove
scattered photons. Increasing the upper surface layer to 5 m reduces the RMSE with
AusSeabed from 4.3 m to 2.3 m in the shallow water region (depth of 5-15 m) south of
27.29◦S. This is shown in the southern section in figure 5.4. It has not been possible to
estimate the bathymetry in the southern channel with any applied method.
36
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: (a) shows the bathymetry estimates from the good cycle from 2021, Track
474, where the photons from the upper 5 meters have been removed in the mud zone.
(b) shows the ICESat-2 bathymetry profiles from 2018, 2020 and 2021 together, where the
photons from the upper 5 meters have been removed in the mud zone (thick solid lines).
The thin lines are the bathymetry models from figure 5.2 that are added for comparison.
In addition to the three cycles mentioned in the section above, it is also possible to detect
some bathymetry in two additional cycles. However, the beams are located differently,
and some of the beams are located on land. The direct comparison is therefore limited
to the three cycles in the repeated track. Based on the limited amount of data, it is not
possible to carry out the interpolation method.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
37
==PAGE:46==
5.2
Shark Bay
The results of bathymetric changes are divided into two separate sections. At first, the
results from Method 1 are presented. This is the method using interpolation. Later follows
the results for Method 2, which focuses on repeated cycles.
5.2.1
Method 1: Bathymetric changes based on interpolation
Possible bathymetry changes caused by the cyclone are investigated by comparing the
data from before and after the cyclone. After dividing the dataset into one dataset before
the cyclone and one after the cyclone, a two-step interpolation is performed on both data
sets. The settings are the same as the ones described in section 4.3.1.
The sparse grid is shown in figure 5.5a for the before-cyclone data and in 5.5b for the
after-cyclone bathymetry. The before cyclone interpolated map is shown in figure 5.5c,
and the interpolated map that is based on data from after the cyclone is shown in figure
5.5d. The interpolation catches the channel south of Faure Island to some extent for both
interpolations, although it appears much clearer in the after-cyclone interpolation. Fur-
thermore, the channel east of Faure Island is not visible in the after-cyclone interpolated
map, while it is too wide in the before-cyclone interpolation if compared with the full inter-
polated map, figure 4.11a. The locations of some cycles are detectable in the interpolated
maps. This is especially true for the eastern part of the after-cyclone interpolated map.
(a) Sparse grid, before cyclone
(b) Sparse grid, after cyclone
(c) Interpolated map, before cyclone
(d) Interpolated map, after cyclone
Figure 5.5: The high resolution sparse grid from before (a) and after (b) the cyclone and
interpolated maps based on data from before (c) and after (d) the cyclone. Background
map (a), (b) adapted from Google Maps [29]. Coastline (c), (d) taken from GADM [37].
38
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:47==
To limit the interpolation errors, the bathymetry maps in figures 5.5c and 5.5d are not
directly compared. Instead, only one of the interpolated maps is chosen, which is the
before-cyclone map (figure 5.5c). It is then compared with the sparse grid from the after-
cyclone data (figure 5.5b). The before-cyclone map is shown with the after-cyclone sparse
grid in figure 5.6. If no bathymetric changes occur and the method causes no deviations,
it will be impossible to distinguish the tracks. However, as it appears from the figure,
especially some tracks from after the cyclone differ from the before cyclone map. The dif-
ferences in the sparse grid points are shown in figure 5.7a. Figure 5.7b shows the smaller
scale differences. The difference is calculated for 4900 points. The mean deviation in the
calculated points is -7 cm. In 22% of the cases, the difference is of a magnitude greater
than 1 m.
Figure 5.6: The interpolated map based on data from before the cyclone with the sparse
grid from after the cyclone illustrated by circles. The figure is a combination of figure 5.5b
and 5.5c.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: The differences between the after-cyclone sparse grid and the before-cyclone
interpolated map showing the large-scale differences (a) and small-scale differences (b).
For figure b, any differences bigger than indicated by the colour bar are automatically set
to the nearest value. The track names T1, T2, and T3 are added for later use.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
39
==PAGE:48==
5.2.2
Method 2: Bathymetric changes based on repeated cycles
Tracks with repeated cycles are further investigated using the method described in section
4.3.2. Three tracks shown in figure 5.8 contain at least three cycles from before the
cyclone, and at least three cycles from after the cyclone. They are named ’R1’, ’R2’, and
’R3’. Only beams that are within a longitudinal distance of 30 m are considered, and only
strong beams are included.
Figure 5.8: The map shows the locations of the tracks R1, R2 and R3 that are further
investigated using the repeated cycles method.
Figure 5.9a shows the repeated cycles on location R1 in figure 5.8. There is a total of eight
cycles: four cycles from before the cyclone in 2021, and four cycles from after the cyclone.
The applied beams are GT1L from cycle 6 (29th of February 2020), GT2L from cycle 8
(28th of August 2020), and GT3L from cycle 3 (1st of June 2019), 10 (26th of February
2021), 11 (28th of May 2021), 12 (27th of August 2021), 14 (24th of August 2022), and 19
(24th of May 2023). The cycles are adjusted for ocean tides based on the median value
of their determined depths. Figure 5.9b shows the mean depth and standard deviation
for the cycles before and after the cyclone. Only cycles with estimated depth data from at
least three different cycles in a group are calculated. Hence, only values, indicated by a
dot, are actually calculated. Any differences between before and after the cyclone, where
at least one of the groups is missing a dot, do not necessarily indicate any bathymetry
changes. The black line shows interpolated data from before the cyclone, figure 5.5c.
The interpolation is taken in the mean track of the cycles from before the cyclone. The
before-cyclone depth is determined at 203 points out of 208 (98%) possible along-track
locations. The depth is determined at 181 locations (88%) for the after-cyclone data. The
after-cyclone mean depth is outside the before-cyclone filled area in 1/3 of the cases.
The cases appear in intervals of the curve. For eight of these intervals, the mean before-
cyclone profile is outside the blue-filled area. In six intervals, the filled areas before and
after the cyclone do not overlap. The largest gaps between the filled areas are around
latitude 25.94◦S, where they are up to 8.5 cm and 17.0 cm apart. The longest section of
40
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:49==
deviation appears south of latitude 25.99◦S.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.9: The repeated cycles for location R1 in figure 5.8 are shown all together (a) after
a tidal correction based on the profiles’ median depths. Bathymetry profiles belonging to
cycles before the cyclone are shown in red colours, and after-cyclone profiles are in blue
colours. Mean depths and corresponding standard deviations (b) are shown before (red)
and after (blue) the cyclone. The black, solid line is the interpolated depth that is based
on the before-cyclone data, figure 5.5c. It is taken in the mean track from the cycles that
are before the cyclone.
Figure 5.10a shows the repeated cycles on location R2. Four cycles from before the cy-
clone and five cycles after the cyclone are included, making it nine cycles in total. The
applied beams are GT1L from cycle 3 (1st of June 2019), 10 (26th of February 2021), 11
(28th of May 2021), 12 (27th of August 2021), 14 (24th of August 2022), and 19 (24th of
May 2023), and GT2L from cycle 9 (27th of November, 2020), GT3L from cycle 7 (30th
of May 2020), and cycle 16 (25th of August 2022). Figure 5.10b shows the mean depth
and standard deviation for the cycles before and after the cyclone. The depth from be-
fore the cyclone is determined in 218 out of 300 (73%) possible points. The depth from
after the cyclone is determined in 216 (72%) points. Most points, where bathymetry de-
tection is not possible, are located in the three channels between 25.91◦S and 25.86◦S.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
41
==PAGE:50==
The figure shows a systematic difference between the mean profiles from before and af-
ter the cyclone. On average, the mean depth before the cyclone is 15 cm greater than
the mean depth after the cyclone. The systematic deviation is caused by cycle number
10 (February 2021), which has not been corrected for the ocean tide to a satisfying level
since the detected bathymetry varies significantly from the other cycles. This makes the
median assumption incorrect for this cycle. It also causes relatively large standard devia-
tions for the before-cyclone data. It is noticeable, that the interpolated profile experiences
oscillations of approximately 10 cm except in the channels. The interpolated profile is
systematically varying compared with the before-cyclone data south of 25.95◦S. Due to
the large standard deviations from the before-cyclone data, the after-cyclone mean depth
is only outside the red-filled area north of 25.95◦S at one location. This is at the channel
located at latitude 25.91◦S.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10: The repeated cycles for location R2 in figure 5.8 are shown all together (a)
after a tidal correction based on the profiles’ median depths. Bathymetry profiles belong-
ing to cycles before the cyclone are shown in red colours, and after-cyclone profiles are
in blue colours. Mean depths and corresponding standard deviations in (b) are shown
before (red) and after (blue) the cyclone. The black, solid line is the interpolated depth
that is based on the data from before the cyclone, figure 5.5c. It is taken in the mean track
from the cycles that are before the cyclone.
42
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:51==
The repeated cycles on location R3 are shown in figure 5.11a. Four cycles from before
the cyclone and four cycles after the cyclone are included, making it eight cycles in total.
The applied beams are GT1L from cycle 8 (28th of August, 2020), and GT2L from cycle 3
(1st of June 2019), 10 (26th of February 2021), 11 (28th of May 2021), 12 (27th of August
2021), 14 (24th of August 2022), and 19 (24th of May 2023), and GT3L from cycle 9 (27th
of November 2020). Figure 5.11b shows the corresponding figure for the mean depth and
standard deviations before and after the cyclone. Out of 154 along-track points, the mean
depths and standard deviations are determined at 137 points (89%) for the before-cyclone
data and at 83 points (61%) for the after-cyclone data. Three mean depth values are
outside the red-filled area, including two points with less than 2 cm in the badly resolved
region for the after-cyclone cycles. The interpolated profile for the before-cyclone data is
outside the before-cyclone standard deviations in 11 points.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11: The repeated cycles for location R3 in figure 5.8 are shown all together (a)
after a tidal correction based on the profiles’ median depths. Bathymetry profiles be-
longing to cycles before the cyclone are shown in red colours, and after-cyclone profiles
are shown in blue colours. Mean depths and corresponding standard deviations (b) are
shown before (red) and after (blue) the cyclone. The black, solid line is the interpolated
depth that is based on the before-cyclone data, figure 5.5c. It is taken in the mean track
from the cycles that are before the cyclone.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
43
==PAGE:52==
5.3
Assessment of uncertainties
Several sources lead to the total uncertainty when determining bathymetric changes with
ICESat-2. For the ICESat-2 photons, there is a geolocation uncertainty of approximately
10 m. In the bathymetry detection method, there is an unknown, vertical error. This
includes the uncertainties of the applied filters and any incorrect refraction adjustment. As
follows from section 4.1.2 and 4.1.5, the latter is likely <5 cm, and most likely correlated
between different cycles. Any incorrect tidal adjustment is assumed to lead to systematic
errors for a cycle. When applying the interpolation map, an interpolation error follows. For
simulations that include repeated tracks, there will be differences in the horizontal location
of the cycles. This leads to additional errors in the estimated depths.
In Moreton Bay, Track 474 crosses Track 1152. The cycle from April 2020 from Track
474 is therefore compared with a cycle from Track 1152 on the 9th of March 2021. Track
474 GT3R crosses Track 1152 GT3R at 27.05◦S, and Track 474 GT3R crosses Track
1152 GT2R at 27.18◦S. The locations are shown as stars in figure 3.8a. Subsections
of the tracks at the crossing locations are shown in figure 5.12. The figure shows that
the estimates agree with each other within 1 m at both crossing locations, but they differ
significantly from AusSeabed, see table 5.1.
27.05◦S
27.18◦S
Track 474
19.1 m
16.7 m
Track 1152
18.2 m
17.6 m
AusSeabed
11.2 m
15.2 m
Table 5.1: Estimated depths from Track 474, Track 1152, and AusSeabed in two positions
in Moreton Bay.
Figure 5.12: Crossing ICESat-2 tracks in Moreton Bay. Track 474 GT3R (first panel)
crosses Track 1152 GT3R (second panel) at 27.05◦S as illustrated by the dotted line in
the two panels. Similarly, track 474 GT3R (third panel) crosses Track 1152 GT2R (fourth
panel) at 27.18◦S.
The difference between the bathymetry estimates at the crossing locations include waves,
44
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:53==
orbital, and ranging errors as discussed by Wang and Sneeuw [45]. Any errors from the
detection method and tides correction are also included. Track 474 and Track 1152 differ
significantly from the existing bathymetry, AusSeabed, by 2 m to 7 m. In figures 5.1, 5.2
and 5.4, the AusSeabed bathymetry is systematically different from all ICESat-2 seabed
profiles, especially at the northern channel. Therefore, it seems reasonable to believe that
errors exist also in the AusSeabed bathymetry. Hence, the 2 m to 7 m deviation above
does not necessarily represent the uncertainty of the ICESat-2 bathymetry.
The detected bathymetry points in Shark Bay are estimated to have uncertainties of 1
m. This includes both systematic and unsystematic errors, i.e. some errors might be
correlated in between cycles. However, they are treated as independent constants. This
is based on uncertainties in other studies presented in section 2, especially Garcia et al.
[24], section 5.1, and figure 5.12.
The interpolation method described in section 4.3.1 and applied to Shark Bay in section
5.2.1 leads to an interpolation error. Figure 5.13 shows the resulting interpolation error for
the interpolation with the data that is from before the cyclone, figure 5.5c. The interpolation
error is the smallest at the locations for the before-cyclone cycles (figures 5.5c). The error
increases with distance from the tracks.
Figure 5.13: The interpolation errors from the interpolated bathymetry map that is based
on data from before the cyclone (figure 5.5c).
For the method that uses repeated cycles (Method 2) for investigating bathymetric changes,
positional errors occur in addition to the normal ICESat-2 positional errors. The errors are
caused by the fact that the cycles are assumed to be located at the same place even
though they are not. As an example, a slope of e.g. 5◦leads to a vertical difference of
87 cm 10 m away. This is further complicated by the along-track resolutions, which vary
for all cycles and also within a cycle. Additionally, all photons have different coordinates.
To compensate for this, the bathymetry profiles are divided into along-track sections. The
along-track variations within one section are then neglected. Furthermore, large parts
of the seabed are indeterminable for some cycles. This leads to along-track gaps be-
tween points, where mean and standard deviation values cannot be calculated. This is
especially visible for the after-cyclone data in figure 5.11 (location R3). The standard de-
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
45
==PAGE:54==
viations shown in figures 5.9 to 5.11 represent the best estimates of the total errors for the
bathymetry at an exact latitude for one group (before-cyclone bathymetry or after-cyclone
bathymetry).
Theoretically, 68% of the data points should be within one standard deviation from the
mean if assuming a Gaussian distribution. Therefore, if the mean of one group of data
is outside the standard deviation of another group of data, it might indicate bathymetric
changes. If there is a gap between the standard deviations, bathymetric changes are more
likely to have happened. The Gaussian distribution assumption is considered challenged
by the fact that the statistics are based on small amounts of data. Hence, the mean depth
and standard deviation are calculated for each section of a track independently, and data
from a maximum of five cycles are included for one group. Summing up, there must be
no obvious cause for a deviation between the bathymetry profiles to be considered as an
actual change.
46
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:55==
6
Discussion
This chapter contains discussions about the results presented in the previous chapter.
This includes a section about Moreton Bay followed by a section on the bathymetric
changes in Shark Bay. Later follows a discussion of the potential of detecting bathymetric
changes with ICESat-2 in general including current challenges.
6.1
Bathymetry in Moreton Bay
Due to difficult weather and water conditions, it is currently not possible to detect bathy-
metric changes in Moreton Bay.
A moving quantile of 22% is applied to the subsurface photons to determine the bathymetry.
The filter partly handles the noise from the upper water column that is due to mud (figure
5.1). Hence, the moving quantile filter is definitely an improvement relative to the moving
median filter applied in previous studies, section 2. Several studies have focused on min-
imising errors in clear water conditions and have had less focus on methods for difficult
circumstances. The case study of Moreton is therefore an indication that more studies
need to be made in this area.
The moving quantile of 22% is assumed to be region-specific, and it is easily seen that it
can e.g. not be directly applied to Shark Bay (section 4.1.3). However, the percentage is
not only assumed to be region-specific but it might depend on temporary weather and wa-
ter conditions as well. Hence, the bathymetry profile in Moreton Bay from 2021 is not well
resolved compared with the profiles from 2018 and 2020. One would think, that the filter
becomes more general if modifications are made by implementing a depth-varying per-
centage for the moving quantile or applying multiple filters by iterating. A weighting filter
in which deeper reflected photons count more than near-surface ones is also a possibil-
ity. However, as stated in section 4.1.3, the implementation of the filter easily becomes
complicated.
The RMSE is decreased in the mud region in Moreton Bay when removing more photons
from the upper water column (figure 5.4). The vertical distance for which photons are
omitted due to noise is assumed to be very specific to the region, and it requires some
prior information about the depth. However, the procedure should be seen as a suggestion
for possible bathymetry estimation in muddy water for future use.
One cannot exclude that bathymetric changes take place in Moreton Bay. However, to
detect them, it requires a significantly improved method for detecting bathymetry in muddy
water. Figure 5.2 shows relative changes between the 2018 and 2020 profiles in the sub-
channel at latitude 27.2◦S. They are both reasonably well determined. However, due to
the mud level and large uncertainties of the methods, it seems incorrect to determine
the deviation between the profiles as actual indications of bathymetric changes. If any
bathymetric changes should be automatically detectable by ICESat-2 in Moreton Bay in
the future, it seems reasonable to expect that such changes are to be detected at single
overlapping cycles. In that way, one can still ignore the many cycles, for which bathymetry
profiles are impossible to estimate. A manually drawn bathymetry based on ICESat-2 data
might help detect bathymetric changes in parts of Moreton Bay. If the detection of changes
should happen automatically, a robust method for uncertainty estimation is needed.
ICESat-2 has proven itself very sensitive to mud. The satellite can possibly assist in the
mapping of mud regions for future use. This might be done by looking at the attenuation or
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
47
==PAGE:56==
counting the number of photons that reach a well-known seabed. However, this requires
further research.
6.2
Bathymetric changes in Shark Bay
Two methods have been used for detecting bathymetric changes in Shark Bay. Whether
the deviations in the bathymetry from before and after the cyclone presented in section
5.2.1 and 5.2.2 are caused by actual temporal changes are discussed in the following. A
comparison between the methods is included in a later section, section 6.3.3.
6.2.1
Bathymetric changes based on interpolation method
In principle, one expects all differences between before and after the cyclone in 2021
(figure 5.7) to be caused by actual changes if the magnitude of the change is greater than
the interpolation error (figure 5.13). However, this seems not to be the case. Possible
reasons can be found by studying the tracks T1, T2, and T3 in figure 5.7b. Please note that
cycles following these tracks are not located at the same exact positions. Furthermore,
T1 and T2 correspond to R1 and R2 in figure 5.8 which is based on Method 2.
The largest differences are at track T3 in figure 5.7 with deviations up to 6 m between
the seabed before and after the cyclone. The differences are likely explained by the
interpolation rather than bathymetric changes although they exceed the interpolation error
(figure 5.13). As it appears from figure 5.5a, there is a before-cyclone cycle that partly
crosses the channel east of Faure Island. One of the after-cyclone cycles passes just west
of the channel, while there is no after-cyclone cycle passing the channel, see figure 5.5b.
Also, there is no before-cyclone cycle that passes just west of the channel. Consequently,
the channel in the interpolated before-cyclone map, figure 5.5c, appears relatively wide.
For the after-cyclone interpolated map, figure 5.5d, the channel is nowhere to be found.
It seems logical to assume that the interpolation method leads to deviations for track
T3 and for all tracks east of T3 in figure 5.7 since no before-cyclones are nearby after-
cyclone tracks. Hence, the method is not applicable far away from overlapping tracks. For
the interpolated map that is based on all cycles, figure 4.11a, the channel width seems
realistic compared with Google Maps [29], due to the combination of the before-cyclone
and after-cyclone cycles.
Consequently, it makes sense to focus on the smaller-scale differences in figure 5.7b.
Therefore, the rest of the tracks are investigated. It becomes apparent that some dif-
ferences are probably caused by an incorrect ocean tidal adjustment. Figure 6.1 shows
some profiles in T1, and it is easily seen that the profiles are systematically deviating from
one another in the vertical direction. Especially the cycle from August 2021 deviates from
the rest by about 20 cm. The figure can easily be compared with figure 5.9a (in Method 2)
where the tide is corrected based on the median depth. Here, the systematic deviation is
smaller. As stated in section 4.2, it is likely that the magnitudes of the applied ocean tide
corrections are too small (up to 40%). Some of the deviations in figure 5.7b are therefore
assumed to be due to the incorrect tidal adjustment.
48
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.1: Bathymetry profiles from cycles near track T1 in figure 5.7b. Both before-
cyclone (red colours) and after-cyclone (blue colours) are included.
Some of the greater differences are located in channels. An example is the three chan-
nels in T2 where two of them are very narrow. As stated in section 3.2, it is likely that
bathymetric changes will appear in such regions. However, when investigating the pro-
files further, there are indications that a few bathymetric profiles are piecewise wrongly
determined in the most narrow channels. In other cases, one large, positive difference
is next to a large, negative one. This is at some scale expected if sediments are moved
from one place to another. However, it may also be due to interpolations.
Based on the discussion above, it seems impossible to conclude that any of the differ-
ences between the bathymetry before and after the cyclone, figure 5.7, that exceed the
interpolation errors, figure 5.13, are due to actual bathymetric changes.
6.2.2
Bathymetric changes based on repeated cycles method
As mentioned in section 5.2.2, there are several deviations between the before-cyclone
and after-cyclone bathymetry profiles. However, some of the differences can be dismissed
as errors. For some regions, there is not a sufficient amount of data for being able to detect
the bathymetry. At times, it leaves larger sections where neither the mean depth nor the
corresponding standard deviation can be estimated. This is especially apparent at R3,
figure 5.11, and in the channels at R2, figure 5.10, where the bathymetry profile from after
the cyclone is only detected 3/5 of the distance. Only values for which there is a dot in
both the before and after profile are therefore compared.
For ltrack R1, figure 5.9b, it is mentioned that there are several locations where the
bathymetry might have changed. It seems logical to assume that any differences, where
only the mean profile from the before-cyclone data is outside the after-cyclone filled area
or the other way around can easily be due to the uncertainties of the method, see section
5.3. This leaves six sections, where bathymetric changes might have happened as men-
tioned in section 5.2.2. Some of these sections have only minor differences, which can
be explained by unnaturally small standard deviations when compared with neighbouring
ones. Hence, at times three cycles might have similar depths accidentally, even if the
uncertainty is bigger. Furthermore, some deviations are very small. That leaves three
sections. The large deviation south of 25.99◦S might be due to positional error, which
might not be fully included by the standard deviation due to the large slope. The devia-
tions also appear as systematic. Hence, for the steeper slopes, one can imagine that the
positional error and deviations result in greater vertical changes. The positional error is
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
49
==PAGE:58==
therefore of great concern when implementing this method. On the other hand, there are
strong indications of actual bathymetric changes at the two edges surrounding the small
channel near 25.94◦S. As mentioned in section 5.2.2, there are 8.5 cm and 17.0 cm be-
tween the standard deviations of the profiles. The deviation is too large to be neglected,
and there is no apparent systematic deviation or unexpected details in the cycles, figure
5.9a, that can explain the differences. However, based on the great uncertainties, it is
impossible to determine the magnitudes of the indicated changes.
None of the deviations in R2 (figure 5.10a) and R3 (figure 5.11a) strongly indicate bathy-
metric changes. Here, the lack of determined bathymetry in the after-cyclone data for
especially R3 (figure 5.11) shows the importance of being able to detect bathymetry every-
where. This includes both the method, which should work under difficult circumstances,
and the weather and water conditions, so some ICESat-2 photons actually reach the
seabed.
Cycle 11 from May 2021 differs from the rest of the cycles at R1, figure 5.9a. It is the first
ICESat-2 observation after the cyclone has taken place. Especially at latitude 25.98◦S,
the shape of the seabed is flatter than for the rest of the cycles, and the seabed is deeper
located. Also, the seabed in the region around 25.96◦S appears flatter for this cycle. This
can indicate a temporary bathymetric change, which is possibly caused by the cyclone.
It seems likely that a cyclone would cause the movement of sediments, especially at the
edges of the channels. After some time, the normal water and tidal currents would make
the seabed restore. However, figure 6.2 shows the cycle from May 2021, and it reveals
that the conditions for detecting bathymetry on this date are challenging. As a result, the
bathymetry is only piecewise detected. Even though the determined bathymetry seems
to be reasonably determined based on the photons, there is no indication of any visibly
distinguishable, continuous seabed in the ICESat-2 data. Due to the challenging weather
conditions and the fact that this pattern is not visible in location R2 (figure 5.10a) or R3
(figure 5.11a), it seems impossible to conclude that these types of bathymetric changes
happened, without further investigations.
Figure 6.2: The refraction corrected photons and determined bathymetry from the cycle
on the 28th of May 2021 in Shark Bay (Track 986, cycle 11, beam GT3L).
It is worth taking notice of the locations of R1, R2 and R3 in figure 5.8 for which Method
2 is applied. These tracks are the tracks that show the smallest differences between the
50
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:59==
depths before and after the cyclone according to the interpolation method (Method 1)
in figure 5.7. Naturally, one explanation can be that it is a coincidence, and the actual
changes for these tracks are smaller than for the other ones. A more likely conclusion is
that the interpolation is relatively realistic for these three tracks due to the quantity of data,
while it is worse for other tracks. Hence, the interpolation errors are small (figure 5.13),
and the interpolated line is likely fitting the data relatively well for this region.
The region north of 25.95◦S in R2, figure 5.10b, and the entire section in R3, figure 5.11b,
show that the interpolated line fits within the standard deviation from the before cyclone
profile. However, oscillations appear in the interpolated profile in figure 5.10b, which is
likely caused by the interpolation. Furthermore, it is seen that especially regions with a
rapidly changing depth are not caught by the interpolated profile, see figure 5.9b. In gen-
eral, some sort of smoothing can be expected when using interpolation, and the deviations
can probably be explained by this. It even happens that the interpolated profile agrees
more with the after-cyclone profile than the before-cyclone profile. This is especially ap-
parent at the underwater hills located near 25.94◦S in figure 5.9b. The likely bathymetric
changes that take place at 25.94◦S and 113.92◦E will therefore not be captured by the
interpolation method, figure 5.7.
6.3
Potential for detecting bathymetry changes with ICESat-2
Several challenges occur when detecting bathymetric changes with ICESat-2. These
are discussed in the following. This includes the challenge of detecting bathymetry from
ICESat-2, where cycles are filled with noise. Also, the tidal adjustment of ICESat-2 has
been proven a challenge. Furthermore, there are several challenges when implementing
the methods that are used to detect the changes.
6.3.1
A global model for bathymetry detection
It is desired to have a bathymetry model that is independent of location, and weather
and water conditions. However, it is easily seen that the moving quantile filter, which is
applied in Moreton Bay, is not directly implementable in Shark Bay, especially for cycles
with seagrass (figures 4.3 and 4.5). However, the moving mode filter, which has been
applied to Shark Bay is not directly implementable in Moreton Bay (figure 4.4). This is
due to the specific situation in Moreton Bay with severe cases of suspended sediments
near the water surface. None of the methods has succeeded in detecting the bathymetry
for the extremely noisy cycles in Moreton Bay, see figure 3.9a, which is why they are not
included.
None of the methods described in section 2 can handle all noise types automatically. As
mentioned, several studies focus on minimising the bathymetry detecting errors in clean
water. In the study by Lin and Knudby [22], challenges for detecting bathymetry in noisy
water are specifically mentioned, and Moreton Bay is used as an example. They state that
challenges when detecting bathymetry appear due to severe noise close to the surface.
However, they experience the most difficulties when detecting bathymetry in very shallow
water cases. Only the northern channel in Moreton Bay seems to be included in the
study. As it appears from figures 5.1 and 5.2, the data for the rest of the channels is even
noisier. The challenges with detecting bathymetry in noisy water are therefore believed
to be greater than indicated by Lin and Knudby [22]. Consequently, a global model for
detecting bathymetry from ICESat-2 is still believed to be far away. Based on this study,
methods require improvements for cases with at least sea grass and extreme cases of
suspended sediments, as well as for combinations of these.
Detecting bathymetry and especially detecting bathymetric, temporal changes are of par-
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
51
==PAGE:60==
ticular interest for Moreton Bay due to the ocean and tidal currents and the amount of ship
traffic to and from the Port of Brisbane. It is likely that challenges of detecting bathymetry
with ICESat-2 occur for the same reasons. Hence, when sediment moves, the visibility for
ICESat-2 clearly decreases. Furthermore, it is due to the amount of sediment transport
that makes Moreton Bay interesting for detecting bathymetry by ICESat-2. One can think
that the same pattern will occur for other shallow-water places that would otherwise be
ideal for ICESat-2 bathymetry. Examples are most places with tidal water, e.g. on the
British coasts. Also, greater ports around the world could be interesting. However, bays
outside ports are often polluted by waste and mud from rivers, e.g. in Rio de Janeiro [46],
and in Buenos Aires [47]. This is only indications based on this study and it has not been
further investigated. On the other hand, it seems more likely that studies of bathymetric
changes can be successfully made for calm areas. This can be of particular interest after
natural hazards, e.g. a cyclone or a tsunami.
6.3.2
Ocean tidal corrections
As follows, from section 6.2.1 and figure 6.1, the adjustment of ocean tides might lead to
misleading bathymetric changes when using the DTU10 model. It might be because the
model is used inside a bay that is outside its applicable range. Even though the median
method removes most systematic errors in the repeated cycle method (Method 2), it is still
only possible to use it because of the repeated cycles. This is exemplified by Shark Bay,
where the median depth is very dependent on the exact location of the cycle, e.g. if it is
inside or outside a channel. In addition, the success of determining bathymetry is spatially
and temporarily dependent. In case there are regions, where no deeper bathymetry can
be detected, it might lead to an incorrect median depth for that cycle.
One should also keep in mind, that higher elevated seabeds might not be included in the
low tide bathymetry profiles. Naturally, the seabed can be above sea level during low
tides. However, as the applied method also removes photons from the upper part of the
water column, it can simply be the case that the bathymetry for a location is included if
a cycle is at high tide, while it does not exist in the low tide cycles. This might prevent
detecting bathymetric changes in extremely shallow water.
As stated in section 2, the correction for ocean tides is also a challenge in the study by
Garcia et al. [24]. The study has greater possibilities for using the median depth cor-
rection due to the different types of data since they use images of the whole region per
observation. Furthermore, the corrections easily become inaccurate if making interpola-
tions or models based on other tidal gauges in the bay (see section 2), which is due to the
tidal variations and the geography of the bay. The tidal water error in Faure Sill, Shark
Bay could easily be minimised using a, so far non-existing, local tide gauge on Faure Is-
land. It is noted that ICESat-2 bathymetry studies usually do not take tidal effects caused
by meteorological tidal effects into account. Hence, the ICESat-2 studies described in
section 2 do not present any suitable solution for cases, where the ICESat-2 ocean tide
correction is insufficient, and there is no useful tide gauge nearby. Furthermore, the water
level might change due to e.g. storm surges. Applying corrections for the temporal, local
water level is, therefore, a remaining challenge, when determining bathymetry changes
using ICESat-2.
6.3.3
Method for detecting bathymetric changes
The two investigated methods for detecting bathymetric changes both have advantages
and disadvantages. Theoretically, there is a strong advantage for the interpolation method
(Method 1) as new cycles do not necessarily need to follow the exact tracks from the
already existing ones. This can be of great value since ICESat-2’s tracks are varying,
52
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:61==
see figure 4.9. The repeated cycle method (Method 2) needs on the other hand exact
ICESat-2 overlaps to decrease the positional error, especially for decreasing the uncer-
tainty/standard deviation. However, section 6.2.1 indicates that even the interpolation
method (Method 1) needs nearby tracks from different periods. This is in agreement with
Herrmann et al. [20] where the importance of nearby ICESat-2 tracks is needed even
though the study also includes Sentinel-2 data.
The repeated cycle method (Method 2) actually detects some deviations between the
before-cyclone and after-cyclone bathymetry profiles that are probably due to actual tem-
poral changes, see section 6.2.2. It seems reasonable to assume that less data is needed
to determine some bathymetric changes when applying this method. This is especially
true if only one cycle deviates from the rest, e.g. cycle 11 (May 2021) in figure 6.2. How-
ever, the cycles need to be closely located.
For robust bathymetric change determination, one can argue that changes should be con-
sequent for several methods. Determining magnitudes of bathymetric changes is also
needed to make satellites useful for detecting bathymetric changes. This requires a more
robust error estimation for ICESat-2 detection of bathymetry profiles as specified by Par-
rish et al. [15]. In the development of such methods, relevant reference data should be
available.
The lack of any detected bathymetric changes can naturally be explained by the uncertain-
ties and the implemented methods as they need further testing and validation. However,
the lack of detected bathymetric changes might also be explained by the fact that no actual
bathymetric changes are to be found in Shark Bay for the investigated period.
For this study, any seasonal changes or general trends are not investigated. At the same
time, the implemented methods do not determine any reasons for bathymetric changes,
e.g. if the cyclone causes bathymetric changes or the changes just happen around the
time of the cyclone. It can be expected that any changes are easiest to detect in the
repeated cycle method (Method 2), as it is the one that has the strongest indications of
changes now. Furthermore, Method 2 requires the least data since an interpolated map
(Method 1) also should be based on data from nearby. It is believed that the interpola-
tion method (Method 1) can be further developed for detecting changes if obtaining an
accurate, high-resolution map for the period. In that way, the position of a random cy-
cle becomes less important which will make the method more usable. The interpolation
method (Method 1) is probably improved if adding more data. This automatically hap-
pens when more ICESat-2 cycles become available. However, it is assumed to be of little
effect due to the low longitudinal resolution. One can also include data from other satel-
lites, e.g. Sentinel-2 as in Herrmann et al. [20]. Naturally, there are still more traditional
methods, e.g. surveys from ships and physical models, that can help to produce a bathy-
metric map over the area, which might be useful in combination with the ICESat-2 data.
The recent release of the satellite Surface Water and Ocean Topography (SWOT) might
also be able to extend the amount of bathymetry data. Additionally, more satellites are
added to space regularly, which also might be helpful. It is also imaginable that several
ICESat-2-like satellites can make the cycle periods shorter.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusions
The purpose of this study is to investigate shallow-water bathymetric changes by ICESat-
2 data. Moreton Bay, located on the eastern coast of Australia, and Shark Bay, located
on the western coast of Australia, are the focus areas of the study.
Severe cases of suspended sediments in Moreton Bay prevent any detection of bathymet-
ric changes. Four-fifths of the ICESat-2 cycles are unusable for detecting bathymetry. The
scattering of ICESat-2 photons, in especially the upper water column, further challenges
seabed detection. No method has been reported to be able to estimate reliable bathymetry
in such conditions. This study applies a moving quantile of 22 % of the subsurface pho-
tons for estimating bathymetry profiles in three ICESat-2 cycles. The bathymetry esti-
mates show that the three cycles closely agree with each other for the northern part of the
bay. Especially the northern channel is well resolved, whereas the ICESat-2 bathymetry
differs from AusSeabed [35], demonstrating the potential of using ICESat-2 to improve
existing bathymetric maps. The southern part of Moreton Bay is seriously affected by
mud. However, the RMSE is reduced by 47% when removing more surface photons from
the calculations.
A moving mode filter is introduced for detecting subsurface photons in Shark Bay where
the presence of seagrass causes noise for many ICESat-2 cycles. Two methods are
introduced for detecting potential bathymetric changes in Shark Bay caused by the tropical
cyclone Seroja in April 2021. In one method, a sparse grid interpolation is used based
on the before-cyclone data. This is compared with a sparse grid based on after-cyclone
data. The results show differences for up to 6 m. However, many deviations are likely
to be due to the applied method caused by the interpolation rather than actual changes.
Some changes appear due to the interpolation if e.g. a channel is not resolved in one cycle
due to bad water conditions. Other changes are probably caused by incorrect ocean tidal
adjustments. Furthermore, the results highlight the need for tracks to be closely located
to be comparable due to complex bathymetry. The other method directly compares cycles
from repeated tracks at three locations in Shark Bay. For these three locations, along-track
bathymetry profiles are created from the data before and after the cyclone, respectively.
The bathymetry profiles include mean depths and standard deviations. The uncertainties
include the ones from the ICESat-2 data, the bathymetry detection method, ocean tidal
corrections, and vertical errors caused by horizontal positional errors from the exact tracks
of the cycles. The comparison is complicated by the fact that the water conditions are too
noisy to detect all bathymetry for some cycles. Most deviations between the before and
after cyclone bathymetry profiles can be explained by the method and relatively large
uncertainties. However, there are strong indications of actual bathymetric changes near
25.94◦S and 113.92◦E. Currently, it is impossible to estimate the magnitude of the changes
due to the uncertainties.
The study clearly shows that several challenges appear when detecting bathymetric chang-
es with ICESat-2. Firstly, methods for detecting bathymetry in noisy cycles need to be
prioritised. This is especially important since bathymetric changes probably happen most
often in regions with high water turbidity. Hence, detecting bathymetric changes is more
relevant for such regions. So far, many studies have focused on minimising the errors
when detecting ICESat-2 bathymetry in clean water. Secondly, correct adjustment for
ocean tides is important. Incorrect adjustments might lead to misleading differences in
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
55
==PAGE:64==
bathymetry profiles that can appear as bathymetric changes. Thirdly, due to large uncer-
tainties when estimating the bathymetry, large uncertainties also follow when comparing
bathymetric profiles. The applied interpolation method is theoretically good for detecting
changes, and bathymetry information from all cycles can be used independently from the
exact locations of the tracks. However, the method especially shows challenges for cor-
rect ocean tide adjustments. Furthermore, the interpolation becomes incorrect, when the
longitudinal resolution is small. Due to the smoothing which is caused by the interpola-
tion, bathymetric changes that happen in channels or at the top of underwater hills, are
not caught by this method. The method with repeated cycles for detecting bathymetric
changes is theoretically only usable for cycles that are overlapping. The latter method
strongly indicates bathymetric changes at two nearby locations.
Summing up, several challenges remain to detect bathymetric changes with ICESat-2
automatically, especially for regions with tidal and ocean currents where it is the most
relevant. Additionally, for satellite derived bathymetry to be useful, magnitudes of bathy-
metric changes should also be determined. Since the results indicate that it is easier to
determine bathymetry in calm water than in tidal regions, it is assumed easier to detect
bathymetric changes caused by natural hazards than tidal or ocean currents.
56
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Queensland Government - Department of Transport and Main Roads. Available
online: https://www.tmr.qld.gov.au/ (accessed on 20 October 2023).
[2]
R. Porter-Smith, P.T. Harris, O.B. Andersen, R. Coleman, D. Greenslade, and C.J.
Jenkins. “Classification of the Australian continental shelf based on predicted sedi-
ment threshold exceedance from tidal currents and sweel waves”. In: Marine Geol-
ogy 211 (2004).
[3]
J. Nott. “A 6000 year tropical cyclone record from Western Australia”. In: Quaternary
Science Reviews 30 (2011), pp. 713–722. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.
2010.12.004.
[4]
M. McGowan. The Guardian. Available on: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-
news/2021/apr/12/cyclone-seroja-leaves-trail-of-damage-and-homes-without-power-
in-western-australia (accessed on 26 February 2024).
[5]
A. Bridges and R. Murphy. ABC. Available online: https://www.abc.net.au/news/
2023- 08- 25/shark- bay- locals- want- boardwalk- repairs- to- protect- stromatolites/
102765612 (accessed on 27 February 2024).
[6]
C.F. Fuechsel. Britannica. Available online: https://www.britannica.com/technology/
navigation-chart (accessed on 27 February 2024).
[7]
A.D. Switzer, J. Christensen, J. Aldridge, D. Taylor, J. Churchill, H Watson, M.W.
Fraser, and J. Shaw. “The utility of historical records for hazard analysis in an area of
marginal cyclone influence”. In: Communications Earth and Environment 4 (2023).
DOI: 10.1038/s43247-023-00844-z.
[8]
UNESCO - World Heritage Convention. Shark Bay, Western Australia. Available
online: https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/578/ (accessed on 04 January 2024).
[9]
A. Tan, A.K. Chilvery, M. Dokhanian, and S.H. Crutcher. “Tsunami Propagation Mod-
els Based on First Principles”. In: Tsunami - Analysis of a Hazard. Ed. by G.I. Lopez.
Rijeka: IntechOpen, 2012. Chap. 6. DOI: 10.5772/50508.
[10]
C.E. Parrish, L.A. Magruder, A.L. Neuenschwander, N. Forfinski-Sarkozi, M. Alonzo,
and M. Jasinski. “Validation of ICESat-2 ATLAS Bathymetry and Analysis of AT-
LAS’s Bathymetric Mapping Performance”. In: Remote Sensing 11 (2019), p. 1634.
DOI: 10.3390/rs11141634.
[11]
V.A. Nguyen, H. Ren, C.Y. Huang, and K.H. Tseng. “Bathymetry derivation in shallow
water of the South China Sea with ICESat-2 and Sentinel-2 data”. In: Journal of
Applied Remote Sensing 15 (2021), p. 044513. DOI: 10.1117/1.JRS.15.044513.
[12]
X. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Le, D. Zhang, Q. Yan, Y. Dong, W. Han, and L. Wang.
“Nearshore Bathymetry Based on ICESat-2 and Multispectral Images: Comparison
Between Sentinel-2, Landsat-8, and Testing Gaofen-2”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 15 (2022), pp. 2449–
2462. DOI: 10.1109/JSTARS.2022.3153681.
[13]
V. Ramnath, V. Feygels, H. Kalluri, and B. Smith. “CZMIL (Coastal Zone Mapping
and Imaging Lidar) bathymetric performance in diverse littoral zones”. In: OCEANS
2015 - MTS/IEEE Washington. 2015, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10 . 23919 / OCEANS . 2015 .
7404574.
[14]
A. Le Quilleuc, A. Collin, M.F. Jasinski, and R. Devillers. “Very High-Resolution
Satellite-Derived Bathymetry and Habitat Mapping Using Pleiades-1 and ICESat-
2”. In: Remote Sensing 14.1 (2022). DOI: 10.3390/rs14010133.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
57
==PAGE:66==
[15]
C.E. Parrish, L. Magruder, U. Herzfeld, N. Thomas, J. Markel, M. Jasinski, G. Ima-
hori, J. Herrmann, T. Trantow, A. Borsa, R. Stumpf, B. Eder, and I. Caballero.
“ICESat-2 Bathymetry: Advances in Methods and Science”. In: OCEANS 2022,
Hampton Roads. 2022, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/OCEANS47191.2022.9977206.
[16]
J. Lockington and C. Fung. The University of Queensland. Available online: https://
www.uq.edu.au/news/article/2016/06/moreton-bay-being-swamped-mud (accessed
on 20 October 2023).
[17]
A. Arsen, J.F. Crétaux, and R.A. Del Rio M. Berge-Nguyen. “Remote Sensing-
Derived Bathymetry of Lake Poopó”. In: Remote Sensing 6 (2014), pp. 407–420.
[18]
H. Ranndal, P.S. Christiansen, P. Kliving, O.B. Andersen, and K. Nielsen. “Eval-
uation of a Statistical Approach for Extracting Shallow Water Bathymetry Signals
from ICESat-2 ATL03 Photon Data”. In: Remote Sensing 13 (2021). URL: https:
//doi.org/10.3390/rs13173548.
[19]
Y. Ma, N. Xu, Z. Liu, B. Yang, F. Yang, X.H Wang, and S. Li. “Satellite-derived
bathymetry using the ICESat-2 lidar and Sentinel-2 imagery datasets”. In: Remote
Sensing Environment 250 (2020), p. 112047.
[20]
J. Herrmann, L.A. Magruder, J. Markel, and C.E. Parrish. “Assessing the Ability
to Quantify Bathymetric Change over Time Using Solely Satellite-Based Measure-
ments”. In: Remote Sensing 14 (2022). DOI: 10.3390/rs14051232.
[21]
N. Xu, Y. Ma, W. Zhang, X.H. Wang, F. Yang, and D. Su. “Monitoring Annual
Changes of Lake Water Levels and Volumes over 1984–2018 Using Landsat Im-
agery and ICESat-2 Data”. In: Remote Sensing 12 (2020), p. 4004. DOI: 10.3390/
rs12234004.
[22]
Y. Lin and A.J. Knudby. “Global automated extraction of bathymetric photons from
ICESat-2 data based on a PointNet++ model”. In: International Journal of Applied
Earth Observation and Geoinformation 124 (2023), p. 103512. DOI: 10.1016/j.jag.
2023.103512.
[23]
J. Hedley, R. Velázquez-Ochoa, and S. Enríquez. “Seagrass Depth Distribution Mir-
rors Coastal Development in the Mexican Caribbean – An Automated Analysis of
800 Satellite Images”. In: Frontiers in Marine Science 8 (2021). DOI: 10.3389/fmars.
2021.733169.
[24]
R. A. Garcia, P.R.C.S. Fearns, and L.I.W. McKinna. “Detecting trend and seasonal
changes in bathymetry derived from HICO imagery: A case study of Shark Bay,
Western Australia”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 147 (2014), pp. 186–205.
[25]
P.E. Playford, A.E. Cockbain, P.F. Berry, A.P. Roberts, P.W. Haines, and B.P. Brooke.
“The geology of Shark Bay: Geological Survey of Western Australia”. In: Govern-
ment of Western Australia, Department of Mines and Petroleum, Bulletin 146 (2013).
[26]
Ssolbergj and Roke. Wikipedia. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Australia (accessed on 24 February 2024).
[27]
B. Eyre, S. Hossain, and L. McKee. “A Suspended Sediment Budget for the Modi-
fied Subtropical Brisbane River Estuary, Australia”. In: Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf
Science 47 (1998), pp. 513–522. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1006/ecss.1998.0371.
[28]
J. Lockington, S. Albert, P. Fisher, B. Gibbes, P. Maxwell, and A. Grinham. “Dramatic
increase in mud distribution across a large sub-tropical embayment, Moreton Bay,
Australia”. In: Marine Pollution Bulletin 116 1-2 (2017), pp. 491–497.
[29]
Google. Available online: http://maps.google.com (accessed from January to Febru-
ary 2024).
[30]
Commonwealth of Australia - Bureau of Meteorology. Available online: http://www.
bom.gov.au/climate/averages/tables/cw_006105_All.shtml (accessed on 04 January
2024).
58
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:67==
[31]
Shire of Shark Bay. Available online: https://www.sharkbay.wa.gov.au/services/
emergency-preparation-and-warnings/cyclones.aspx (accessed on 04 January 2024).
[32]
NASA. Available online: https://icesat- 2.gsfc.nasa.gov/science (accessed on 25
October 2023).
[33]
T. Markus, T. Neumann, A. Martino, W. Abdalati, K. Brunt, B. Csatho, S. Farrell,
H. Fricker, A. Gardner, D. Harding, M. Jasinski, R. Kwok, L. Magruder, D. Lubin,
S. Luthcke, J. Morison, R. Nelson, A. Neuenschwander, S. Palm, S. Popescu, C.
Shum, B.E. Schutz, B. Smith, Y. Yang, and J. Zwally. “The Ice, Cloud, and land
Elevation Satellite-2 (ICESat-2): Science requirements, concept, and implementa-
tion”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 190 (2017), pp. 260–273. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2016.12.029.
[34]
T. A. Neumann, A. Brenner, D. Hancock, J. Robbins, A. Gibbons, J. Lee, K. Harbeck,
J. Saba, S. B. Luthcke, and T. Rebold. ATLAS/ICESat-2 L2A Global Geolocated
Photon Data, Version 6. Available online: https://nsidc.org/data/atl03/versions/6 (ac-
cessed from October 2023 to January 2024). DOI: https://doi.org/10.5067/ATLAS/
ATL03.006.
[35]
R. J. Beaman. High-resolution depth model for the Great Barrier Reef - 30 m. Avail-
able online as part of AusSeaBed: http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/averages/tables/
cw_006105_All.shtml (accessed on 04 January 2024). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
4225/25/5a207b36022d2.
[36]
OpenAltimetry. Available online: https://openaltimetry.org/data/icesat2/ (accessed
on 29 September 2023).
[37]
GADM. Available online: https://gadm.org/download_country.html (accessed on 29
January 2024).
[38]
Y. Cheng and O.B. Andersen. “Multimission empirical ocean tide modeling for shal-
low waters and polar seas”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research 116 (2011).
[39]
X. Quan and E.S. Fry. “Empirical equation for the index of refraction of seawater”.
In: Applied Optics 34 (1995), pp. 3477–3480.
[40]
Y. Zhang, H. Chen, M. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Fan, Q. Chen, and B. Wu. “Simultaneous
measurement of refractive index and temperature of seawater based on surface
plasmon resonance in a dual D-type photonic crystal fiber”. In: Materials Research
Express 8 (2021). DOI: 10.1088/2053-1591/ac1ae7.
[41]
Quensland Government. Available online: https://www.qld.gov.au/environment/
coasts-waterways/beach/tide-sites/tangalooma (accessed on 20 October 2023).
[42]
H.J. Bungartz and M. Griebel. “Sparse Grids”. In: Acta Numerica 13 (2004), pp. 147–
269. DOI: 10.1017/S0962492904000182.
[43]
C.C. Tscherning, R. Forsberg, and P. Knudsen. The GRAVSOFT Package for Geoid
Determination. Continental Workshop on the Geoid in Europe, Prague, May 1992,
327-334. 1992.
[44]
EO Browser. Available online: https://apps.sentinel-hub.com/eo-browser/ (accessed
on 15 January 2024).
[45]
B. Wang and N. Sneeuw. “Crossover adjustment of ICESat-2 satellite altimetry for
the Arctic region”. In: Advances in Space Research 73 (2024), pp. 376–385. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2023.07.041.
[46]
A. Rosati. Bloomberg. Available online: https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2023-
brazil-sinking-ships-rio-guanabara/ (accessed on 01 March 2024).
[47]
Fertimport. Available online: https://www.fertimport.com.ar/content/our-services
(accessed on 01 March 2024).
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
==PAGE:69==
A
Scientific Paper
The paper is submitted to the proceedings of the International Association of Geodesy
Symposia, IUGG, Berlin Germany which is to be published in 2024. Jeffrey T. Freymueller
is Editor-in-Chief, and Laura Sánchez is Assistant Editor-in-Chief. The paper is currently
under review.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
61
==PAGE:70==
1 
Bathymetry estimation from ICESat-2 in a 
region swamped by mud – A case story 
from Moreton Bay. 
 
Elisabet Anne Marie Hallström  
DTU Space, Elektrovej bldg. 327/328, DK-2800, Denmark 
*Ole B. Andersen (oa@space.dtu.dk) 
DTU Space, Elektrovej bldg. 327/328, DK-2800, Denmark 
Xiaoli Deng 
School of Engineering, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, University Drive, NSW 2308, 
Australia  
Richard Coleman  
IMAS/University of Tasmania, Private Bag 129, Hobart, TAS 7001. Australia  
 
 
 
Abstract 
The bathymetry of coastal bay environments, such as Moreton Bay near Brisbane in eastern 
Australia, is constantly reworked because of changes in energy dispersal and related sediment 
transport pathways. Updated and accurate bathymetric models are a crucial component for 
scientific, environmental, and ship safety studies.  
NASA’s Ice, Cloud, and Land Elevation Satellite-2 (ICESat-2) is equipped with a laser detecting 
system (green light) that penetrates the air-water interface. Under optimal conditions, it can 
provide shallow water bathymetry (depths <40 m). We attempted to use ICESat-2 measurements 
to study bathymetry and possible bathymetry changes from repeated tracks across Moreton Bay. 
We found that the water turbidity in Moreton Bay varies with time. More than half of the water 
area is affected by suspended sediment, which makes ICESat-2 difficult to obtain bathymetric 
measurements. In other areas, repeated ICESat-2 tracks performed consistently on the 1-meter 
level. This means that ICESat-2 can be used to update existing bathymetry in the region. We also 
devised a method to determine bathymetry in the shallower parts of the zone affected by mud.  
 
 
Keywords 
Bathymetry; ICESat-2; ATLAS; altimetry; coastal region; coastal bathymetry; Moreton Bay  
 
 
1 Introduction 
Accurate bathymetry is important in ship trafficking and 
safety, fish and marine industries, and coastal management. 
Near-shore bathymetry is important for engineering, coastal 
safety, and environmental monitoring.  
In some regions, the bathymetry changes with time due to 
erosion and sediment transport. This is particularly 
important in shallow water bays containing large harbours. 
For such regions, the bathymetry must be mapped both 
frequently and accurately. Mapping the coastal bathymetry 
requires huge resources when using single or multibeam 
==PAGE:71==
2 
bathymetry mapping from ships. Consequently, optical 
methods are very attractive. Multi-spectral satellite imagery 
from satellites such as Landsat and Sentinel-2 is used in 
satellite-derived bathymetry (Nguyen et al., 2021; Zhang et 
al., 2022). Satellite-derived bathymetry is simpler, cheaper, 
and quicker but is normally less accurate than multibeam 
bathymetry (Ramnath et al., 2015). With the launch of 
ICESat and particularly ICESat-2, laser altimetry for 
bathymetry mapping has gained momentum (Quelliuc et al., 
2021; Parrish et al., 2022).   
Several studies have focused on determining bathymetry 
in shallow water from ICESat and ICESat-2, for which a 
variety of methods have been used. Arsen et al., (2014) 
determined bathymetry in a lake from ICESAT. Parrish et al., 
(2019) showed the importance of applying a refraction 
correction and the capability of ICESat-2 to determine 
bathymetry at depths of ~40 m. Xu et al. (2020) and Ma et 
al. (2020) used a machine-learning method based on a 
clustering algorithm to locate the water surface level and the 
bathymetry. Ranndal et al., (2021) used statistical methods 
to estimate bathymetry profiles. All these studies have 
demonstrated the great value of using ICESat-2 data for 
bathymetry mapping in regions with low water turbidity, and 
the optical properties are favorable.  
In this study, we attempt to apply ICESat-2 data to a 
region with very turbid water, where suspended sediments 
render ICESat-2 problematic. In turbid regions, the ICESat-
2 photons are frequently scattered throughout the water 
column, making the bottom less visible.  
Moreton Bay is located outside of Brisbane on the east coast 
of Australia (Fig 1). The port of Brisbane is heavily trafficked, 
and all ships between the port and the Pacific Ocean must pass 
through Moreton Bay. The bay covers a water area of 1,500 
km2, and the water depth ranges up to 40 m. The ship routing 
depends on the dredged channel following the red line in Fig 
1 (left panel). Moreton Bay is a sandy bay which is constantly 
being reworked because of the changes in the patterns of 
energy dispersal due to storms and tides. As a result, dredging 
is performed on an annual basis (www1), and the port 
authority performs frequent bathymetric surveys, which are 
costly. Consequently, Moreton Bay could be a good candidate 
for detecting satellite bathymetry changes with ICESat-2.  
This paper investigates if NASA’s Ice, Cloud, and Land 
Elevation Satellite-2 (ICESat-2) laser altimeter can assist in 
bathymetry estimation in the bay and its ability to detect 
possible bathymetry changes with time.  
The following section introduces the Moreton Bay region and 
the ICESat-2 data. This is followed by a section on our method 
for the bathymetry estimation and a section presenting our 
results. In the end section, we sum up our conclusions.  
 
 
2 Study area and data  
2.1 Moreton Bay.  
The study case, Moreton Bay, has a very different coastal 
environment. 
Studies, 
including 
Eyre 
(1998) 
and 
Lockington et al. (2017), show that Moreton Bay is seriously 
affected by suspended sediments in the water column, 
hampering optical visibility. The southern part of the bay has 
mainly a mud or sandy mud bottom, which reduces sunlight 
penetration, while sediments in the northern part of the bay 
are mostly clean sand, as described by Lockington et al. 
(2017). This study concluded that the presence of mud has 
increased in Moreton Bay and that the southern half of the 
bay (800 km2) is low. 
Affected (Fig 1 right panel). This is a consequence of 
large floods over the past 45 years combined with land 
clearing. Sediment enters the bay via the Brisbane River 
estuary (Eyre, 1998). We used Fig 1 (right panel) to define a 
“mud zone” with decreased visibility in the water column.  
 
  
 
Fig. 1. The left panel shows a map of Moreton Bay (Google, 2017). 
Most of the ship traffic going between the ocean and the port of 
Brisbane follows the red line. The right panel shows the mud zone in 
Moreton Bay (www2). 
 
An existing bathymetry map, AusSeabed for the Great 
Barrier Reef region (Beaman, 2017), with a resolution of 
30 m, is used for comparison. We used an updated version 
from 2020. The AusSeabed bathymetry is shown in Fig 2 
with the various channels used for ship routing (see Fig 1 
(left)) indicated. 
 
2.2 Icesat-2  
ICESat-2 was launched on 15th of September 2018. ICESat-2 
carries the Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System 
(ATLAS), consisting of six laser beams: three strong and three 
weak beams. A strong beam is paired with a weak beam with 
==PAGE:72==
3 
90 m between them and 3.3 km between each pair. One beam 
emits about 20 trillion photons per pulse and 10,000 pulses 
per second, with a spatial resolution of 70 cm on the Earth's 
surface (Markus et al., 2017). This paper uses the full photon 
cloud from the ATL03 product, version 5. ICESat-2 has a 
repeat period of 91 days, resulting in 16 repeated cycles (until 
October 2022). The data is accessed through the National 
Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) (Neumann et al., 2021), 
including each photon's coordinate and height values. 
There are two tracks from ICESat-2 crossing Moreton 
Bay. These are Track 474 and Track 1152 as seen in Fig 2. 
 
 
Fig. 2. AusSeabed bathymetry with the ICESat-2 Track 474 (red) and 
Track 1152 (black) with the beams gt1r (dash-dotted line), gt2r 
(dashed line), and gt3r (solid line). The four grey arrows illustrate 
from north to south the locations of the ‘Northern Channel’, the 
‘Central Channel’, the ‘Sub-Channel’, and the ‘Southern Channel’ 
used in the following. The two stars indicate crossing locations where 
we compare bathymetry estimates in section 4.  
 
3 Bathymetry determination 
 
We determined bathymetry using a statistical approach, 
based on the subsurface reflected photons.  
To isolate subsurface photons, we initially applied the 
Ranndal et al. (2021) method to determine and remove the 
surface scattered photons. Here, we derive the sea surface 
height (SSH) by a moving median of 7001 photons reflected 
between the heights -1.5 m and 1.0 m relative to the mean 
sea surface (Andersen et al., 2023).  
Next, photons within the surface layer, defined as the 
upper 0.5 m of the water column, are removed following 
Ranndal et al., (2021), due to the noise of the reflected 
photons at the sea surface. In our analysis, we needed to 
increase the surface layer to 2 m for Moreton Bay, due to the 
significant scattering from suspended sediments in the upper 
water column.  
A simple refraction correction is applied (Ranndal et al., 
2021) to account for the refraction that causes the actual 
bathymetry to be slightly shallower compared with the 
ICESat-2 observed bathymetry.  
Ranndal et al. (2021) used a moving median filter with a 
window of 50 subsurface photons to estimate the 
bathymetry, as a moving median is more robust to outliers 
than other filters, e.g., a moving mean. In Moreton Bay, we 
observed that most outliers are located close to the surface 
due to the presence of suspended sediment. Consequently, 
we got better results using a moving quantile filter focusing 
on the lower quantile. We got the best result using a moving 
quantile of the lowest 22% of the closest 181 subsurface 
photons.  
Due to issues with scattering throughout the water 
column that the presence of mud can cause, we found that 
we needed to increase the size of the windows compared 
with Ranndal et al. (2021) to obtain stable results. We found 
that using a moving median with a window of roughly 7000 
photons and a moving quantile with a size 181 subsurface 
photons gave the best estimates for the sea surface and 
bathymetry, respectively. We found that updating the 
moving median to the moving quantile of the lowest 22% 
was particularly important because of mud in the water 
column.  
Moreton Bay has significant tides and associated strong 
tidal currents. We used tidal observations from Tangalooma 
tide gauge, located on Moreton Island inside Moreton Bay 
(Queensland Government, 2023) to correct for tides.  
 
 
Fig. 3. Photon data (before any refraction correction) from track 474 
on 26th of April 2020 beam gt3r, the clearest bathymetry profile seen 
in Moreton Bay. The arrow indicates the mud zone (south of 
27.23S). The locations of the four bathymetry channels are also 
marked in Figure 2. 
==PAGE:73==
4 
 
4 Results 
 
ICESat-2 provides up to 16 possible cycles for bathymetry 
estimation for each of the two tracks covering the period from 
October 2018 to September 2022. We found that 1/3 of the 
cycles are completely unusable due to clouds, water vapor, 
etc. The remaining ‘good’ cycles are investigated for 
bathymetry signals. Due to the problem of atmospheric 
conditions and water turbidity, we defined a ‘good’ cycle as a 
cycle in which the central channel is visible and continuous in 
the ICESat-2 data. This limits the number of ‘good’ cycles to 
three for Track 474 (29th of October 2018, 26th of April 2020, 
and 24th of July 2021), and one for Track 1152 (9th of March 
2021).  
We estimated bathymetry for the western beam gt3r (strong) 
of track 474 in Fig 3. This is shown in Fig 4 for the track on 
the 26th of April 2020, which is the clearest cycle. 
 
 
Fig. 4. The predicted bathymetry from track 474 on 26th of April 2020 
showing the photons after applying the refraction correction (light 
blue), the modelled bathymetry profile (purple), and the interpolated 
bathymetry profile from the AusSeabed (Beaman, 2017) (black).  
 
Fig 4 reveals that the bathymetry estimate is in close 
agreement with the AusSeabed bathymetry model outside the 
mud zone south of 27.23S. Both the central and northern 
channels in Fig 2 are seen from ICESat-2 data. The northern 
channel is particularly well resolved from ICESat-2. In the 
northern channel, there is a significant discrepancy between 
the location and depth of the channel from the interpolated 
AusSeabed. This is despite of the ICESat-2 signal appears as 
strong for the northern channel in Fig 4.  
As soon as track 474 enters the mud zone south of 27.23S, 
the number of scattered photons in the depth of 0-10 m 
increases dramatically due to suspended sediments. This 
prevents bathymetry estimation for the southern channel 
region.  
We subsequently estimated bathymetry for the repeated 
ICESat-2 cycles in 2018, 2020, and 2021. All cycles are 
located within 10 m horizontally in the Moreton Bay. 
Additionally, there is a geolocation error of the same 
magnitude in the ICESat-2 data. This makes them directly 
comparable, as the beam width is approximately 20 m. In Fig 
5, these cycles are compared with each other and the existing 
bathymetry model.  
 
Fig. 5. The bathymetry models for the ‘good’ cycles from track 474 
are shown in blue (2018), purple (2020), and brown (2021), and the 
interpolated bathymetry profile from AusSeabed (black).  
 
Fig 5 shows that ICESat-2 profiles of 2018 and 2020 generally 
agree well with the existing bathymetry for the location of the 
central channel and mostly agree for the region between the 
channels. However, the deeper southern channel is not visible 
in any ICESat-2 cycles. ICESat-2 bathymetry from the three 
cycles agrees to be better than 1 meter for the northern channel 
north of 27.05S, but they differ by up to 10 m from 
AusSeabed. This indicates that some errors will likely be 
found in AusSeabed for at least the northern channel. South of 
the northern channel, the 2021 bathymetry estimate differs 
from the 2018 and 2020 estimates. The 2021 bathymetry does 
not resolve the central channel at 27.1S, nor the sub-channel 
at 27.2S. We found that increased mud coverage in 2021 in 
the area is a potential cause of this. This increased mud level 
can be seen by counting the number of subsurface reflected 
photons deeper and shallower than 10 meters across the 
central and sub-channel. For the 2020 profile, 543 of 1283 
(42%) subsurface photons are reflected from water at a depth 
below 10 m. For 2021, the number of reflected subsurface 
photons from water below 10 m has decreased to 415 of 1408 
(29%). This indicates that the “mud-zone” has increased from 
2020 to 2021. The optical images from Sentinel-2 in Fig 6 
==PAGE:74==
5 
classify large parts of Moreton Bay as water in 2020 but as 
sand/rock in 2021 and confirm the increased extent of mud in 
Moreton Bay.  
 
  
 
Fig. 6. Images from Sentinel-2 from 28th of April 2020 (left) and 24th 
of July 2021 (right) with an applied Normalized Difference 
Vegetation Index (NDVI). Black areas are classified as water, while 
brighter colours indicate e.g. rock or sand. Images obtained from (EO 
Browser). 
 
We compared the bathymetry estimates in Fig 5 across the 
central channel between 27.13S - 27.08S. The ICESat-2 
bathymetry estimates from 2020 agree with AusSeabed with 
a root mean square (RMS) of 2.1 m. Similarly, the bathymetry 
estimate from 2018 agrees with AusSeabed with a RMS of 2.2 
m, while the RMS is 6.5 m for the 2021 model and the 
interpolated AusSeabed. The large difference between our 
estimated seafloor and AusSeabed model may be caused by 
the interpolation error of AusSeabed model. The 2018 and 
2020 models agree with a RMS of 1.5 m within the channel. 
They agree with the 2021 model with RMS of 5.5 m and 5.0 
m, respectively.  
We investigated if it was possible to estimate bathymetry 
inside the mud zone by gradually increasing the depth of the 
surface layer within the mud zone south of 27.23S to remove 
scattered photons. Increasing the upper surface layer to 5 m 
reduced the RMS with AusSeabed from 4.3 m to 2.3 m in the 
shallow water region (depth of 5-15 m) south of 27.29S. This 
is shown in the southern section in Fig 7 and Fig 8. We could 
not estimate the bathymetry in the southern channel, whatever 
method we applied.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. The bathymetry estimate from 24th of July 2021 from track 
474, where the photons from the upper 5 meters have been removed 
inside the “mud zone”.  
 
 
Fig. 8. ICESat-2 bathymetry profiles for 2018, 2020 and 2021, where 
the photons from the upper 5 meters (thick solid lines) have been 
removed in the mud-zone. The thin lines are the bathymetry models 
from Fig 5 that are added for comparison. 
 
As a final validation of the ICESat-2 bathymetry 
estimation, we compared the 2020 model from track 474 with 
the crossing track 1152. In Fig 2, the small stars illustrate two 
locations where the beams of the two tracks cross. Track 474 
gt3r crosses track 1152 gt3r (at 27.05S), and track 474 gt3r 
crosses track 1152 gt2r (at 27.18S). Subsections of the tracks 
at the crossing locations are shown in Fig 9.  
 
==PAGE:75==
6 
 
Fig. 9. Crossing ICESat-2 tracks in Moreton Bay. Track 474 gt3r (first 
panel) crosses Track 1152 gt3r (at 27.05S) as illustrated with the 
dotted line in the two panels. Similarly, track 474 gt3r (third panel) 
crosses Track 1152 gt2r (at 27.18S). The dash lines highlight the exact 
crossover locations. 
 
Fig 9 illustrates that at the crossing locations, both estimates 
disagree with the existing bathymetry from AusSeabed, but 
they agree with each other. At the northern crossing, the 
estimated depths are 19.1 m and 18.2 m from track 474 and 
1152, respectively, versus 11.2 m from AusSeabed. At the 
southern crossing, the estimated bathymetry is 16.7 m and 
17.6 m, respectively, compared with 15.2 m for AusSeabed. 
In both cases, the different bathymetry estimates at the 
crossing location from ICESat-2 agreed to 0.9 meters. Still, 
they disagreed with existing bathymetry (by 2-7 m), 
illustrating the potential to update the bathymetry model using 
ICESat-2 data. The difference between the bathymetry 
estimates at the crossing locations will include waves, orbital, 
and ranging errors, as discussed by Wang and Sneeuw (2023). 
  
5 Conclusions 
 
Moreton Bay is a difficult environment to utilize ICESat-2 
measurements due to a combination of varying ocean and 
river conditions and the presence of sediments in the water. 
We managed to estimate the bathymetry for only three out of 
16 repeated cycles for track 474 due to the difficult conditions 
in the bay.  
Due to high water turbidity, we modified the statistical method 
by Ranndal et al. (2022) and introduced a moving quantile of 
22% for estimating the bathymetry. Results showed that the 
ICESat-2 cycles closely agree in large parts of Moreton Bay. 
The three available cycles agreed on the location of the central 
and northern channels. Interestingly, ICESat-2 disagrees with 
AusSeabed in the location and depth of the northern channel 
region, demonstrating the potential of using ICESat-2 to 
improve bathymetry estimates. 
 
The southern part of Moreton Bay is heavily affected by mud, 
and ICESat-2 could not detect the southern channel. In the 
mud zone south of the southern channel, we devised a 
method to remove surface photons affected by mud to 
enhance the estimation of bathymetry in the shallower parts 
of the mud zone, and the RMS was reduced by 47%.  
Despite these efforts to enhance the bathymetry mapping in 
the shallower part of the bay, the optical conditions in 
Moreton Bay currently prevent us from obtaining consistent 
and reliable results on bathymetric changes. However, the 
results indicate that ICESat-2 can potentially assist in 
mapping mud zones.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
This research was supported by the Australian Government 
through the Australian Research Council’s Discovery Project 
funding scheme (project DP220102969). We want to thank 
NSDIC for providing ICESat-2 data and R. Beaman for 
assistance and advice on existing bathymetry in Moreton 
Bay.  
 
 
 
References 
 
Andersen, O. B., Rose, S. K., Abulaitijiang, A., Zhang, S., and Fleury, 
S. (2023). The DTU21 global mean sea surface and first evaluation, 
Earth 
Syst. 
Sci. 
Data, 
15, 
4065–4075, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-15-4065-2023, 2023 
Arsen A., Crétaux J.F., Berge-Nguyen M., Del Rio R.A. (2014) Remote 
Sensing-Derived Bathymetry of Lake Poopó. Remote Sens. 6: 407–
420. 
Beaman R. J. (2017), High-resolution depth model for the Great Barrier 
Reef 
- 
30 
m. Available 
as 
part 
of AusSeaBed 
from 
https://portal.ga.gov.au/persona/marine.  
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.4225/25/5a207b36022d2 
EO Browser, https://apps.sentinel-hub.com/eo-browser/, Sinergise Ltd 
[accessed on Jan 15th 2024] 
Eyre B., Hossain S., and McKee L. (1998). A suspended sediment 
budget for the modified subtropical Brisbane River estuary. 
Australia. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 47: 513-522.  
Forfinski-Sarkozi N.A., Parrish C.E. (2016). Analysis of MABEL 
bathymetry in Keweenaw Bay and implications for ICESat-2 
ATLAS. Remote Sensing, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 772. 
==PAGE:76==
7 
Google Maps, (2017) Moreton Bay, http://maps.google.com [Accessed 
24 October 2023]. 
Le Quilleuc A., Collin A., Jasinski M., Devillers R. (2021). Very high-
resolution satellite-derived bathymetry and habitat mapping using 
pleiades-1 and ICESat-2. Remote Sensing, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 133. 
Lockington J., Albert, S., Fisher P., Gibbes B., Maxwell P., Grinham A. 
(2017). Dramatic increase in mud distribution across a large sub-
tropical embayment, Moreton Bay, Australia. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin 116 (1-2): 491-497. 
Ma Y., Xu N., Liu Z., Yang B., Yang F., Wang X.H., Li S. (2020). 
Satellite-derived bathymetry using the ICESat-2 lidar and Sentinel-
2 imagery datasets. Remote Sens. Environ. 250: 112047 
Markus T., Neumann T., Martino A., Abdalati W., Brunt K., Csatho B., 
Farrell S., Fricker H., Gardner A., Harding D., et al. (2017). The Ice, 
Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite-2 (ICESat-2): Science 
requirements, 
concept, 
and 
implementation. Remote 
Sens. 
Environ. 190: 260–273 
Moreton Bay (2021) 
https://www.moretonbay.qld.gov.au/Services/Property-
Ownership/Flooding/Flooding-Types [accessed on Oct 20th 2023] 
Neumann T. A., Brenner A., Hancock D., Robbins J., Saba J., Harbeck 
K., Gibbons A., Lee J., Luthcke S. B., Rebold T. et al. 
(2021). ATLAS/ICESat-2 L2A Global Geolocated Photon Data, 
Version 5. ATL03, Boulder, Colorado USA. NASA National Snow 
and Ice Data Center Distributed Active Archive Center. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.5067/ATLAS/ATL03.005. [accessed on Oct 15th, 
2023]. 
Nguyen V.A., Ren H., Huang C.Y., Tseng K.H. (2021). Bathymetry 
derivation in shallow water of the South China Sea with ICESat-2 
and Sentinel-2 data. Journal of Applied Remote Sensing, vol. 15, no. 
4. 
Parrish C.E., Magruder L.A., Neuenschwander A.L., Forfinski-Sarkozi 
N., Alonzo M., Jasinski M. (2019). Validation of ICESat-2 ATLAS 
Bathymetry and Analysis of ATLAS’s Bathymetric Mapping 
Performance. Remote Sens. 11: 1634. 
Parrish C.E., Magruder L., Herzfeld U., Thomas N., Markel J., Jasinski 
M., Imahori G., Hermann J., Trantow T., Borsa A., Stumpf R., Eder 
B., Caballero I. (2022), ICESat-2 Bathymetry: Advances in 
Methods and Science, OCEANS 2022, Hampton Roads, Hampton 
Roads, 
VA, 
USA, 
pp. 
1-6, 
doi: 
10.1109/OCEANS47191.2022.9977206 
Ranndal H., Sigaard Christiansen P., Kliving P., Baltazar Andersen O., 
and Nielsen K. (2021). Evaluation of a Statistical Approach for 
Extracting Shallow Water Bathymetry Signals from ICESat-2 ATL03 
Photon 
Data. 
Remote 
Sensing 
13(17): 
3548, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs13173548. 
Ramnath V., Feygels V., Kalluri H., Smith B. (2015). CZMIL (Coastal 
Zone Mapping and Imaging Lidar) bathymetric performance in 
diverse littoral zones, IEEE OCEANS 2015-MTS/IEEE, pp. 1-10. 
Queensland Government (2023), 
https://www.qld.gov.au/environment/coasts-waterways/beach/tide-
sites [accesses on Oct 20th 2023] 
Wang, B., and Sneeuw, N. (2023). Crossover adjustment of ICESat-2 
satellite altimetry fort he Arctic region. Advances in Space 
Research, in press. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2023.07.041 
Xu N., Ma Y., Zhang W., Wang X. H., Yang F., and Su D. (2020). 
Monitoring Annual Changes of Lake Water Levels and Volumes 
over 1984–2018 Using Landsat Imagery and ICESat-2 Data,” 
Remote Sensing, 12(23): 4004, doi: 10.3390/rs12234004. 
Zhang X., Chen Y., Le Y., Zhang D., Yan Q., Dong Y., et al., (2022). 
Nearshore Bathymetry Based on ICESat-2 and Multispectral 
Images: Comparison Between Sentinel-2 Landsat-8 and Testing 
Gaofen-2. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth 
Observations and Remote Sensing, vol. 15, pp. 2449-62. 
www1 https://www.tmr.qld.gov.au/ [accessed on Oct 20th 2023] 
www2 https://www.uq.edu.au/news/article/2016/06/moreton-bay-being-
swamped-mud [accessed on Oct 20th 2023] 
 
==PAGE:77==
B
Scientific Abstract for COSPAR
Some of the results from this master thesis are to be included in a presentation. The
presentation is to be held at the COSPAR 2024 45th Scientific Assembly in Busan, Korea
in July. The abstract submitted for the presentation is as follows.
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
69
==PAGE:78==
Bathymetry from new generation satellite sensors – Case studies in Australia 
 
Xiaoli Deng1, Ole B. Andersen2, Richard Coleman3, Farshad Salagegheh1, Elisabet Hallström2, and Mao 
Zhou1 
1School of Engineering, The University of Newcastle, Australia 
2Denmark Technical University, Denmark 
3University of Tasmania, Australia 
Australia is a continent surrounded by a 200 nautical mile Australian Exclusive Economic (AEE) 
Zone comprising 8.2 million square kilometres of shallow coastal and deep waters. However, only 
25% of the seafloor in the AEE Zone has been measured, and this is mostly at a sparse spatial 
resolution often to no better than tens or hundreds of km using time-consuming and costly shipboard 
sounder surveys. Satellite altimetry, a remote sensing technique, has significantly changed this 
situation. Using the new generation of satellite altimetry sensors, such as ICESat-2 and SWOT, we are 
investigating and mapping bathymetry in several shallow water bays (e.g., Moreton Bay and Shark 
Bay) and oceans offshore the Western Australia in the Indian Ocean. ICESat-2 data from 2018 to 
present and all available SWOT L2 and L3 data have been used. We found that (1) the ICESat-2 
photon data predict the detailed bathymetry in shallow waters, which is missing in the current 
bathymetry models, and (2) SWOT L3 data products produce more accurate marine gravity anomalies 
than L2 data products.  
==PAGE:79==
Detecting Coastal Bathymetry Changes from ICESat-2
71
==PAGE:80==
Two case studies are performed for detecting bathymetric changes in shallow waters with Ice, Cloud,
and land Elevation Satellite - 2 (ICESat-2) data. One study area is Moreton Bay on the eastern coast
of Australia, where bathymetry is only possible for 1/5 of the cycles. The remaining cycles are noisy
due to suspended sediments. The other study area is Shark Bay, which is located on the western
coast of Australia. It is home to one of the largest seabeds in the world, which also results in noisy
ICESat-2 data. This study introduces methods for detecting ICESat-2 bathymetry in noisy conditions,
whereas most previous ICESat-2 studies focus on clear conditions.
Currently, optical conditions in Moreton Bay prevent studies of bathymetric changes. In Shark Bay,
bathymetric changes are investigated using two different methods. Results strongly indicate bathy-
metric changes at two nearby locations when applying one of the methods. Large uncertainties in
the bathymetry detection method, ocean tide corrections, and small longitudinal resolution in combi-
nation with the methodology for change detection are current challenges when detecting bathymetric
changes with ICESat-2.
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU Space
Elektrovej, Building 327/328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.space.dtu.dk
